Town of Milton – Financial Records and Reports and Sales Tax Revenues (2014M-357) | Office of the New York State Comptroller
Skip to main content
Login
Retirement Online
NYS Payroll Online
Other Online Services
| Subscribe | Translate |
Search
Search
Join Our Team
Translate
Disclaimer
This Google™ translation feature is provided for informational purposes only.
The New York State Office of the State Comptroller's website is provided in English. However, the "Google Translate" option may help you to read it in other languages.
Google Translate™ cannot translate all types of documents, and it may not give you an exact translation all the time. If you rely on information obtained from Google Translate™, you do so at your own risk.
The Office of the State Comptroller does not warrant, promise, assure or guarantee the accuracy of the translations provided. The State of New York, its officers, employees, and/or agents are not liable to you, or to third parties, for damages or losses of any kind arising out of, or in connection with, the use or performance of such information. These include, but are not limited to:
damages or losses caused by reliance upon the accuracy of any such information
damages incurred from the viewing, distributing, or copying of such materials
Because Google Translate™ is intellectual property owned by Google Inc., you must use Google Translate™ in accord with the Google license agreement, which includes potential liability for misuse: Google Terms of Service.
Close
Search
Search
About
Get to know New York
State Comptroller
Thomas P. DiNapoli
Read Bio »
Learn About the Comptroller’s Office
Explore Career Opportunities
Read “2025 Year in Review” Report
Get to know New York
State Comptroller
Thomas P. DiNapoli
Read Bio »
Learn About the Comptroller’s Office
Explore Career Opportunities
Read “2025 Year in Review” Report
Unclaimed Funds
Retirement
New York State and Local Retirement System (NYSLRS)
NYS Common Retirement Fund
Local Government
Agencies
Vendors
Reports
All Reports
Audits
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report
Cash Basis Reports
New York State Budget Analysis and Financial Reporting
New York City Economic and Fiscal Monitoring
Open Book New York
Newsroom
Login
Retirement Online
NYS Payroll Online
Other Online Services
Subscribe
Join Our Team
Home
Local Government
Audits of Local Governments & Schools
Town of Milton – Financial Records and Reports and Sales Tax Revenues (2014M-357)
Search
Search
Town of Milton – Financial Records and Reports and Sales Tax Revenues (2014M-357)
Issued Date
March 20, 2015
read complete report 1.04 MB
Purpose of Audit
The purpose of our audit was to review the Town's financial operations for the period January 1, 2013 through August 31, 2014.
Background
The Town of Milton is located in Saratoga County and has a population of approximately 18,575. The Town is governed by an elected five-member Town Board. Budgeted appropriations for 2014 totaled approximately $5.9 million.
Key Findings
The Town's accounting records were not adequately maintained.
The Town Comptroller has not provided the Board with complete and accurate monthly financial reports and did not file an accurate 2013 annual financial report with the State Comptroller.
The Town improperly budgeted and allocated sales tax revenue, resulting in Town taxpayers with real property located in the Village of Ballston Spa receiving an extra benefit from distributed sales tax revenues at the expense of Town taxpayers with property located outside the Village.
Key Recommendations
Ensure that the Town's accounting records are complete, accurate and maintained in a timely manner.
Provide the Board with monthly financial reports that compare actual revenues and expenditures with the related budget and ensure that the financial information presented in the annual financial report to the State Comptroller is accurate.
Budget and account for sales tax revenues in compliance with statute and determine what remedies are available to address prior taxpayer inequities.
Local Government and School Accountability Contact Information:
Phone : (518) 474-4037;  Email :  [email protected]
Address : Office of the State Comptroller, Division of Local Government and School Accountability
110 State Street, 12th Floor; Albany, NY 12236
OUR OFFICE OUR OFFICE
About Comptroller DiNapoli
About the Comptroller's Office
Career Opportunities
Diversity Management
Intergovernmental and Community Affairs
Procurement Opportunities
TOOLS TOOLS
Fiscal Monitoring
NYS Payroll Online
Open Book New York
Retirement Online
Search for Lost Money
Statewide Financial System
More...
INITIATIVES INITIATIVES
Comptroller's Legislative Program
Investing in New York
Minority- and Women-Owned Business Enterprises (MWBEs)
HELP HELP
Contact Us
Forms and Publications
Freedom of Information Law (FOIL)
Legal Opinions
Report Government Fraud
Thank you for subscribing to the
Comptroller's Weekly Newsletter!
Tell us more about you to receive content related to your area or interests.
ZIP Code (Optional)
Interests
Agriculture
Disability Services
Education
Environment
Gaming
Healthcare
Higher Education
Housing
Infrastructure
Labor
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual & Transgender
Local Government
Minority & Women-Owned Business Enterprises
NYC Budget
Pension Fund Investment
Pension & Retirement
Public Corruption
State Budget
Transportation
Veterans
Submit
Leave this field blank
Close
SUBSCRIBE TO THE COMPTROLLER'S WEEKLY NEWSLETTER
SUBSCRIBE
Leave this field blank
How would you rate our website?
1 star
2 star
3 star
4 star
5 star
Site Index Career Opportunities Contact Us Privacy and Links Policies Regulations Accessibility FOIL
