Join Hartselle PD | Hartselle, AL
Skip to Main Content
Create a Website Account - Manage notification subscriptions, save form progress and more.
Website Sign In
Search
Government
Departments
Doing Business
Community
How Do I...
Home
Departments
Police Department
Join Hartselle PD
Join Hartselle PD
Want to join our team?
For more information email lsheffield@hartselle.org or cporter@hartselle.org
OUR HIRING PROCESS
1. Submit Written Application (Minimum age for consideration is 20 1/2), Current BAT Assessment (within past 5 years) *(See BAT information below), and DD214 if prior military (MUST have Honorable discharge).
2. Physical Agility
This test is composed of two phases, physical agility and physical ability components, and both parts will be administered on the same day. The test is formatted to a pass/fail structure. Failure to successfully complete any part of phase one or two means failure of the entire physical agility and ability test. After failure of any part of the exam, the applicant will be given an opportunity for one (1) retest within forty-eight (48) to seventy-two (72) hours (determined at the test administrator’s discretion).
For Certified Officers, and part time officers, you will only be tested on the Physical Agility Course.
See APOSTC Physical Agility/Ability Examination script that is attached for the specifics of this portion.
3. Interview
With Chief
With Personnel Board
4. Background Investigation conducted by the Criminal Investigation Division
5. Conditional Offer of Employment, at this point you are considered hired contingent on passing the following:
6. Polygraph
7. Psychological Examination (Must be "Recommend for Employment" and other status will revoke the conditional offer)
8. Physical and Drug Screen
*Your BAT assessment can be turned in at any point of the application process, but will be required before you accept an offer to be employed. If you do not have a valid assessment, then you will be required to take and submit your test results. The three components of the test and the passing scores for law enforcement officer applicants are as follows: (1) Reading for Information (Workplace Documents), pass score 4, (2) Locating Information (Graphic Literacy), pass score 4, and (3) Applied Mathematics, pass score 3. See further details on this assessment on the attached handout.*
ALABAMA PEACE OFFICERS STANDARDS AND TRAINING COMMISSION RULES FOR THE PHYSICAL AGILITY/ABILITY EXAMINATION
Physical Agility/Ability Test Outline and “Script”
GENERAL INFORMATION
As an applicant you are required to pass a test of physical agility/ and ability as an entry-level requirement to the law enforcement training academy condition of certification. The test is composed of two phases, physical agility and physical ability components, and both parts will be administered on the same day. The test is formatted to a pass/fail structure. Failure to successfully complete any part of phase one or two means failure of the entire physical agility and ability test. After failure of any part of the exam, the applicant will be given an opportunity for one (1) retest within forty-eight (48) to seventy-two (72) hours (determined at the test administrator’s discretion). The examination will be conducted at the Police Academy during your 480 hours of basic training. The physical agility/ability test is to be administered within the first five class days of the academy. Each event is to be video-taped. This test simulates any number of job-related activities such as jumping down from porches, stairs, walking along walls, rafters, pipes or beams while in foot pursuit or checking buildings for suspects.
PHASE ONE – PHYSICAL AGILITY EXAMINATION
A. PHYSICAL AGILITY.
The physical agility portion of the test simulates certain specific activities routinely expected of a law enforcement officer or correctional officer, and consists of five events designed to measure minimum levels of endurance, strength, agility and coordination. This test simulates any number of job-related activities such as jumping down from porches, climbing stairs, walking along walls, rafters, pipes, or beams while in foot pursuit or while checking buildings for suspects. A period of running is incorporated into each of the events to simulate the apprehension and control of a fleeting suspect. The time limit for the five physical agility events is ninety (90) seconds.
Event 1 – Pushing
This test requires pushing a patrol vehicle a distance of fifteen (15) feet on a paved, level surface with the gear in neutral. A driver will remain inside the vehicle at all times as a safety factor.
This will demonstrate the applicant’s ability to remove or assist in the removal of a stalled vehicle from an intersection in order to eliminate a traffic hazard or restore the flow of traffic.
Event 2 – Climbing
Climbing – This is essentially a wall surmount and is intended to measure agility and coordination. It consists of a fence, six (6) feet in height. One fence is made of wood and one is a chain-link fence. The applicant has the choice of which fence to climb. Only one fence will be climbed. These are typical of the type commonly found around numerous business establishments as well as those found around residences. The applicant is instructed to run a distance of fifty (50) yards and then surmount the fence in any manner they wish so long as it is a solo effort.
Event 3 – Window Entry
The applicant must run a distance of fifty (50) yards to the next position where the applicant will step through an obstacle approximately twenty-four (24) inches square. This ensures that the applicant has sufficient body mobility to step through an obstacle the approximate size of a residential window.
Event 4 – Balance
The balance test requires running a distance of twenty-five (25) yards and then surmounting a six (6) inch by six (6) inch beam suspended one (1) foot in the air and walking a distance of fifteen (15) feet. At the end of the beam, the applicant is required to jump the one foot distance to the ground. The balance beam is a combination test demonstrating the ability to maintain balance while moving forward on a flat surface to a narrow surface and back to a flat surface again. Minimum levels of both balance and coordination are required.
Event 5 – Weight Drag
Weight Drag – The applicant is required to run a distance of twenty-five (25) yards and then lift, pull, or drag a dead weight object (dummy) approximately one hundred sixty-five (165) pounds for a distance of fifteen (15) feet. The applicant will drop the weight at the finish line. This test is designed to gauge the applicant’s ability to extricate a human being from an automobile, burning building, etc.
This concludes the physical agility portion of the exam. After a minimum of a 20 minute rest break, you will proceed to the physical ability portion of the test.
PHASE TWO – PHYSICAL ABILITY EXAM
B. PHYSICAL ABILITY.
Event 1 – Timed Push-ups
On the “Get Ready” command, the applicant will assume the front-leaning rest position (push-up) with the arms straight, elbows locked, hands about shoulder width apart, and palms placed on the floor. The feet may be together or up to twelve (12) inches apart. The body should be essentially straight when viewed from the side, from the shoulders to the ankles. On the “Start Push-ups” command, the applicant begins the push-up by bending the elbows and lowering the entire body until the chest touches the fist of the Test Administrator (the upper arms should be parallel to the ground at this point). The applicant returns to the starting position by raising the entire body until the arms are fully extended. The applicant may rest in the up (elbows locked) position only. The body must remain in a generally straight line and as a single unit for the entire repetition. Failure to perform the required number of repetitions in the time allotted results in failure. Failure to keep the body straight or to properly lower the entire body until the chest touches the Test Administrator’s fist or allowing any part of the body other than the hands or feet to touch the ground results in disqualification. Incorrect movements will not be counted. Each applicant has sixty (60) seconds to complete twenty-two (22) push-ups. After a minimum twenty (20) minute rest, applicants will begin the timed sit-up event.
Event 2 – Timed Sit-ups
On the “Get Ready” command the applicant assumes the starting position by lying flat on their back with knees bent at forty-five (45) degrees. Feet may be together or up to twelve (12) inches apart, resting on the ground and may be stabilized by a partner holding the ankles with the hands only. The applicant’s fingers must be interlocked behind the neck or head. On the “Start Sit-ups” command, the applicant begins raising the upper body to the up position with elbow touching knees. The applicant lowers the body until the upper portion of the back (shoulder blades) touches the mat. The head, hands, arms, and elbows don’t have to touch the ground. The up position is the only authorized rest position. Failing to reach the up position, failing to keep the fingers locked behind the neck or head, arching or bowing the back and raising the buttocks off the ground to raise the upper body, or allowing feet to leave the floor will result in incorrect movements. Incorrect movements will not be counted. Each applicant has sixty (60) seconds to complete twenty-five (25) sit-ups. After a minimum twenty (20) minute rest, applicants will begin the timed 1.5 mile run.
Event 3 – 1.5 Mile Run
At the start, all applicants will be lined up behind the starting line, on a flat, level course. Applicants are instructed to complete the 1.5 mile run and to listen to their finish time. On the command “GO,” the timing clock will be started and the applicants will begin running at their own pace. The Test Administrator timing the event will begin calling off the time in minutes and seconds as the applicants approach the finish line. Each applicant’s time will be recorded after they pass through the finish line. Do not deviate from the course. Do not touch any other applicant during the course. If you feel faint, pain, dizziness, weakness, sustain an injury, or otherwise feel that you cannot complete the test, immediately stop and signal for a Tester. Each applicant must run one and one-half (1 ½) miles within 15:28 (fifteen minutes and twenty-eight seconds).
THIS CONCLUDES THE A.P.O.S.T.C. PHYSICAL AGILITY/ABILITY TEST
ALL YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT THE BAT
(ALSO KNOWN AS ACT WORKKEYS)
In partnership with the Alabama Community College System, the Alabama Peace Officers’ Standards and Training Commission (APOSTC) has adopted the ACT WorkKeys Assessment as the official Basic Ability Test (BAT) for all applicants for Law Enforcement Officer and State Correctional Officer employment and certification. This requirement is effective July 1, 2017.
In addition to possession of a valid high school diploma or General Educational Development (GED) certificate, the BAT is required of all applicants, excepting those applicants who have been previously APOSTC certified and who are required to complete the Refresher training for reinstatement of their Certification, or, those applicants possessing an earned Associate’s Degree or higher Degree from a College or University accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS), or its regional equivalent.
Individuals who do not possess a valid ACT WorkKeys Assessment (BAT) may test at any Alabama Community College within the State. Applicants or their agencies may contact the community college nearest their location for scheduling and other related information.
A fee of $45, payable to the community college, is required prior to testing. Should an applicant fail any segment of the three segment test, the applicant is allowed to re-take that segment for an additional fee of $15 per segment. As the minimum entry level score is based upon a specific job analysis profile and varies for each discipline it is important when scheduling the test that each applicant specify that the test is the ACT WorkKeys Assessment for Law Enforcement Officer.
The ACT WorkKeys Assessment is available nationwide. Subject to the employing agency’s approval, out-of-state applicants may take the ACT WorkKeys Assessment (BAT) in their home state provided proper documentation of a valid test result is submitted to both the employing agency and APOSTC.
For complete information relating to the BAT and ACT WorkKeys Assessment requirements please read the entire text of Chapter Two (2) of the Alabama (APOSTC) Administrative Code, as amended.
BENEFITS OF WORKING FOR THE CITY OF HARTSELLE
Health/Dental Insurance: Single Coverage co-pay is FREE, Monthly Family Coverage co-pay is $240.00 per month.
$25,000.00 Life Insurance
State Retirement. (Retirement age 60 with at least 10 years of service or 25 years of service at any age. Employee pays 7.5%; Fire and Police pay 8.5%.
ACCRUAL OF SICK LEAVE
4 Hours per pay period while in a pay status
ACCURAL OF VACATION
Accrued per pay period while in a pay status
1 – 4 years (two weeks) 3.077
5 – 9 years (three weeks) 4.616
10 – 19 years (four weeks) 6.154
20 and above (five weeks) 7.6925
PAID SCHEDULED HOLIDAYS (13):
New Year's Eve
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Jr. Birthday
President’s Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve
Christmas Day
Employee’s Birthday – Floating holiday
WAGE INCREASES
After 6-month probationary period wage increases will be as follows:
Step Increase (6 Months)
Step Increase on Anniversary (IF BUDGETED)
Percentage Increase October 1st (IF BUDGETED)
ADDITIONAL BENEFITS SPECIFIC TO OUR DEPARTMENT
Generous take home vehicle policy (25 miles)
All equipment provided
Beard and tattoo policies
Options on ballistic vest: (under uniform, uniform style carrier, or outer load bearing carrier)
12 Hour shifts with every other weekend off
CURRENT PAY PLAN AS OF OCTOBER 2025
Non-Certified- $23.02
APOSTC certified with 3 years or less of experience- $23.71
APOSTC certified with 4 years of experience- $24.43
APOSTC certified with 5 years of experience- $25.16
APOSTC certified with 6 years of experience- $25.91
APOSTC certified with 7 or more years of experience- $26.69
Shift differential split shift 12 – 12 = + $0.40/HR; Nights 6pm – 6am = +$0.60/HR
$0.75 an hour incentive for extra assignments of Investigator, Field Training Officer, and Traffic Homicide Investigator. $1.00 an hour incentive if an officer holds two of these positions.
Extra pay for instructors during their instruction hours.
Police Reports
Citizens Police Academy
Divisions
Investigations
Patrol
Community Liaison Unit
Records
Hiring Off-Duty Officers
Municipal Court
Join Hartselle PD
Victim Rights and Resources
Terms of Use for Social Media
School Resource Officer and School Protection Officer Program
Agendas & Minutes
Pay Online
Employment
Notifications
Report a Concern
Aquatic Center
City of Southern Hospitality
611 Chestnut Street NW, Hartselle, AL 35640 | Phone: 256-773-2535 | Email Us
Home
Site Map
Contact Us
Accessibility
Copyright Notices
Privacy Policy
/QuickLinks.aspx
Government Websites by CivicPlus®
Loading
Loading
Do Not Show Again Close
[]
