Scarinci Hollenbeck Represents West Orange in Arbitration
Join our mailing list
Make payment
Attorneys
Services
Locations
Contact us
Home
Firm News
Scarinci Hollenbeck Attorneys Successfully Represent Township of West Orange in Arbitration
Author: Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC
Date: March 21, 2014
Share
Key Contacts
Link to profile of Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC
Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC
The Firm
201-896-4100 info@sh-law.com
Contact now Print article page
Table of contents
Back
We would like to congratulate Scarinci Hollenbeck attorneys, Ramon E. Rivera and Christina M. Michelson , for successfully representing the Township of West Orange in the Interest Arbitration with the PBA Local 25.  This Arbitration Award comes at the heels of the unprecedented agreement reached between the Township and its Fire Unions in April of 2011.  During those negotiations, the Fire Unions agreed to contribute to health benefits before the enactment of Chapter 78, which statutorily required public employees to phase-in contribution.
In the recent Award, Arbitrator James Mastriani provided that the parties’ salary proposals were substantially different as the PBA sought a five (5)year contract with a 3% salary increase and the Township proposed a four  (4) year contract with a two (2) year salary freeze and two percent (2%) increase for the remaining years.  Upon review of the Township’s agreement with the Fire Unions, Arbitrator Mastriani conducted a thorough analysis for parity within the Township’s bargaining units.   Arbitrator Mastriani awarded a four year contract and the Township’s salary proposal of 0%, 0%, 2%, and 2%.  He also added two (2) additional steps for salary guide for new hires.  In addition, Arbitrator Mastriani awarded the PBA a $625 stipend to be paid in 2012 and 2013 so as to mirror the compensation components of the Fire Unions agreements in the most efficient manner.
###
Ramon E. Rivera and Christina M. Michelson are members of the firm’s Labor and Employment Law and Public Law groups and are frequent contributors to the firm’s Government & Law Blog .
Just In
Scarinci Hollenbeck
Practices: Labor & Employment , Public Law
No Aspect of the advertisement has been approved by the Supreme Court. Results may vary depending on your particular facts and legal circumstances.
Related Posts
See all
Mark Tabakin, Donald Scarinci and Don Pepe, Named to NJBIZ's 2026 Power 50 in Law List
Scarinci Hollenbeck Congratulates Partners Mark Tabakin, Donald Scarinci, and Don Pepe for Inclusion in NJBIZ’s 2026 Power 50 in Law List Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC is proud to announce that Donald Scarinci, Founding & Managing Partner, Donald M. Pepe, Partner of the firm’s Commercial Real Estate Department, and Mark A. Tabakin, Partner in the firm’s Public […]
Author: Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC
July 20, 2026
Industry Leadership
Attorney Recognition
Attorney Leadership
Link to post with title - "Mark Tabakin, Donald Scarinci and Don Pepe, Named to NJBIZ's 2026 Power 50 in Law List"
Scarinci Hollenbeck Named a 2026 Best Place to Work in New Jersey by NJBIZ
Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC has been named to the NJBIZ 2026 Best Places to Work in New Jersey, earning recognition in the Medium Companies category (50 to 249 employees). Now in its latest edition, the annual program honors New Jersey organizations that go beyond the paycheck to invest in their employees’ growth and quality of life. […]
Author: Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC
July 9, 2026
Scarinci Hollenbeck
Just In
Industry Leadership
Link to post with title - "Scarinci Hollenbeck Named a 2026 Best Place to Work in New Jersey by NJBIZ"
Angela A. Turiano and Seraphema Menna Elected to New Jersey Women Lawyers Association Board of Directors
Two Scarinci Hollenbeck Attorneys Selected as Committee Directors for the 2026-2028 Term Scarinci Hollenbeck is pleased to announce that two of its attorneys, Angela A. Turiano and Seraphema Menna, have been elected to the New Jersey Women Lawyers Association (NJWLA) Board of Directors for the 2026-2028 term. Angela was selected as a Director on the […]
Author: Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC
June 8, 2026
Industry Leadership
Attorney Recognition
Attorney Leadership
Link to post with title - "Angela A. Turiano and Seraphema Menna Elected to New Jersey Women Lawyers Association Board of Directors"
Mark Tabakin and 6-Attorney Team Join Scarinci Hollenbeck, Advancing Statewide Vision
Tabakin and Team Advance the Footprint of Scarinci Hollenbeck’s Labor & Employment, Litigation, Real Estate, Land Use, and Public Law Practice Throughout New Jersey Scarinci Hollenbeck announced the addition of Mark Tabakin and his team of six attorneys, significantly strengthening the firm’s Labor & Employment, Litigation, Land Use, and Environmental practices for private and public […]
Author: Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC
June 3, 2026
Attorney Leadership
Attorney Hiring
Strategic Expansion
Link to post with title - "Mark Tabakin and 6-Attorney Team Join Scarinci Hollenbeck, Advancing Statewide Vision"
Scarinci Hollenbeck Launches 2026 Summer Associate Program
Rutgers and Seton Hall Law Students Join the Firm’s 8-Week Summer Associate Program. May 27th, 2026 – Little Falls, NJ – Two law students will join Scarinci Hollenbeck’s 2026 Summer Associate Program, which begins Monday, June 1st. Both students will assist with all aspects of the firm’s practice groups throughout their 8-week internship. They will […]
Author: Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC
May 27, 2026
Just In
Congratulations
Welcome
Link to post with title - "Scarinci Hollenbeck Launches 2026 Summer Associate Program"
Scarinci Hollenbeck Attorneys Named 2026 New York Metro Super Lawyers
Three Scarinci Hollenbeck NYC Attorneys Earn Prestigious Honor Legal rankings publisher Super Lawyers has named three lawyers from Scarinci Hollenbeck’s New York office to its 2026 New York Metro Super Lawyers list. The firm congratulates Ryan O. Miller, Angela A. Turiano, and John D. Giampolo for this notable accomplishment. The Super Lawyers patented selection process […]
Author: Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC
May 11, 2026
New York Law
Industry Leadership
Attorney Recognition
Link to post with title - "Scarinci Hollenbeck Attorneys Named 2026 New York Metro Super Lawyers"
No Aspect of the advertisement has been approved by the Supreme Court. Results may vary depending on your particular facts and legal circumstances.
Sign up to get the latest from our attorneys!
Explore What Matters Most to You.
Consider subscribing to our Firm Insights mailing list by clicking the button below so you can keep up to date with the firm`s latest articles covering various legal topics.
Stay informed and inspired with the latest updates, insights, and events from Scarinci Hollenbeck. Our resource library provides valuable content across a range of categories to keep you connected and ahead of the curve.
Subscribe now
Attorneys
Practices
Industries
Careers
Firm Overview
Library
Awards Methodology
Join our mailing list
Core Practices
Bankruptcy & Creditors' Rights
Commercial Real Estate
Corporate Transactions & Business
Education Law
Environmental
Intellectual Property
Labor & Employment
Litigation
Public Law
Tax, Trusts & Estates
Industries
Firm Pages
Firm Overview
Administration
Community Involvement
Diversity
Pro Bono
In Memoriam
Work Life Integration
Office Locations
New York, NY
Little Falls, NJ
Red Bank, NJ
Contact Information
201-896-4100
201-896-8660
info@sh-law.com
Social Media
LinkedIn
Facebook
X/Twitter
ATTORNEY ADVERTISING
No Aspect of the advertisement on this website or any of its pages, including awards and accolades, has been approved by the Supreme Court of NJ or NY.
Prior results do not guarantee a similar outcome. @ 2026 , Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC, all rights reserved
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Disclaimer
Let`s get in touch!
FullName
Business
Email
Phone
Subject
* The use of the Internet or this form for communication with the firm or any individual member of the firm does not establish an attorney-client relationship. Confidential or time-sensitive information should not be sent through this form. By providing a telephone number and submitting this form you are consenting to be contacted by SMS text message. Message & data rates may apply. Message frequency may vary. You can reply STOP to opt-out of further messaging.
“If you would like to submit a file, please email it directly to info@sh-law.com .
I have read the disclaimer Submit form
Sign up to get the latest from the Scarinci Hollenbeck, LLC attorneys!
firstName
lastName
email
Select all topics Clear all topics
Subscribe to Category
Select all Clear all
Subscribe to Services
Select all Clear all
Submit
