San Marcos Unified School District - Negotiations Updates
Skip to main content
Welcome
Home
×
Close
Schools
Quick Links
Home
About Us
Designed for Student Success
Superintendent & Executive Team
Public Records Request
Accountability Report Cards
Local Control Accountability Plan (LCAP)
Wellness Policy
California School Dashboard
Meet the Governing Board
Governing Board
Governing Board Meetings
Board Policies
"By-Trustee" Election Process
Governance Team Handbook
Board Briefs
Departments
Mental Health & Wellness
Family Resources
Student Resources
Employee Resources to Support Students
Employee Wellness Resources
Active and Fit Direct - Staff Login Required
Children and Youth Behavioral Health Initiative (CYBHI)
Measure JJ Bond Program
CBOC - Citizens' Bond Oversight Committee
Meeting Information
Current Bond Rating
Annual Reports and Audits
2010 Bond Program - Prop K
Projects
Current
Completed
Future
Bids, RFQ, RFP
Schools
Quick Links
Schools
Carrillo Elementary School
Discovery Elementary School
Double Peak School
Foothills School
Joli Ann Leichtag Elementary School
Knob Hill Elementary School
La Costa Meadows Elementary
La Mirada Academy
Mission Hills High School
Paloma Elementary School
Richland Elementary School
San Elijo Elementary School
San Elijo Middle School
San Marcos Elementary School
San Marcos High School
San Marcos Middle School
Twin Oaks Elementary School
Twin Oaks High School
Woodland Park Middle School
Quick Links
Students
Current Families
Staff
School Connected/Community Organizations
Public Notices
Search
Home
About Us
Designed for Student Success
Superintendent & Executive Team
Public Records Request
Accountability Report Cards
Local Control Accountability Plan (LCAP)
Wellness Policy
California School Dashboard
Meet the Governing Board
Governing Board
Governing Board Meetings
Board Policies
"By-Trustee" Election Process
Governance Team Handbook
Board Briefs
Departments
Fiscal Services
Fiscal Services Staff Directory
Accounting & Payroll Forms - Staff Login Required
Benefits
Health Plans & Rates
Chiropractic/Acupuncture Plan
Dental Plans
Vision Plan
Group Life Insurance
MetLife Legal Plan
Voluntary Plans - Disability, etc.
403(b) & 457(b) Retirement Plans
Discount Programs Available to All Employees
Employee Well-Being & Mental Health
Retiree Payments & Forms
Human Resources and Development
Business Services
Financial Documents
CFD Disclosure Documents
Fiscal Status Reports
Procedures
Career Technical Education (CTE)
Curriculum and Instruction (TK-12)
Elementary Education (TK-5)
Secondary Education (6-12)
Child Nutrition Services
Child Nutrition Services Home
Menus & Nutrition Facts
Staff & Cafeteria Directory
Information & Documents
Meal Applications and Payments
Medical Diet Accommodations
Smart Snacks/Fundraisers
Wellness Policy Information
Data Analysis
ParentVUE Help | Ayuda con ParentVUE
Educational Services
Organizational Chart
Departments and Programs
Annual Parent Notification Packet Materials
Instructional Leadership and Development
Portrait of a Graduate
Local Control Accountability Plan (LCAP)
Curriculum and Instruction (TK-12)
Elementary Education (TK-5)
Secondary Education (6-12)
Resource Guide
Religious Belief Opt-Out
Independent Study Physical Education (ISPE)
Sexual Health Education
Technology
Technology Department
Technology Support
Submit a Tech Request
Password Reset Instructions
Ed Tech Professional Development
SMUSD 1:1 Parent & Student Information
SMUSD 1:1 Información de Padres Y Estudiantes
Digital Citizenship
Kindergarten Lesson
First Grade Lesson
Second Grade Lesson
Third Grade Lesson
Fourth Grade Lesson
Fifth Grade Lesson
Sixth Grade Lesson
Seventh Grade Lesson
Eighth Grade Lesson
Ninth Grade Lesson
Tenth Grade Lesson
Eleventh Grade Lesson
Twelfth Grade Lesson
Research & Information Literacy
Teacher Lesson Share
Facilities Planning and Development
Attendance Area Maps
Bid Proposal Opportunities
Contractor Information
District Map
Facility Mod. Request - Staff Login Required
Planning and Construction Updates
Completed Projects
Current Projects
Future Projects
Prop K
Public Notices
Residential and Commercial Developer Fees
MySchool Locator: Find Your School
Staff Directory
Health Services (Nursing)
District Nursing Staff
School Immunization Requirements
Allergy Information and Forms (La Informacion)
Diabetes Information and Forms (La Informacion de la Diabetes y Forma)
Head Lice Policy
Medication Policy and Forms (Poliza de medicamentos
Human Resources and Development
Certificated Personnel
Classified Personnel
Management Personnel
HR Staff List
Employment Opportunities
Fieldwork Opportunities
Benefits
Negotiations Updates
Substitute Employees
Employee Handbook
Non-Classified, Short Term Personnel
Walk-on Coach (Athletic/Band/Dance)
Volunteers
Kids on Campus (Extended Day)
News and Announcements
Release Forms
Staff Directory
Financial Assistance, Payment Information & KOC Convenience Fee
EZ ChildTrack Parent Portal
KOC Information and FAQs
2026-27 Childcare Rates
KOC Camps
2026-27 KOC Enrollment
Library Media
Maintenance and Operations
Staff Directory
Facilities Use
Banner Permits
Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
Facility Mod. Request - Staff Login Required
Public Records Request
ParentVUE
ParentVUE Home
Enrollment
Peachjar Eflyers
Peachjar Eflyers Home
EFlyer Approval Guidelines
School Site Peachjar Links
Purchasing
Purchasing Home
Purchasing - SMUSD Staff Resources
Purchasing - SMUSD Staff Resources Home
Amazon and Online Ordering
Contract and Bidding Information
Copiers and Managed Printing
Print Shop
Warehouse Services
Vendor Information
Contractor Registration
Public Auction
BIDS
Risk Management
Certificate of Insurance Request
Drones
Emergency Preparedness and Response
General Insurance Requirements
Heat Illness Prevention and Safety
Injury and Illness Prevention
Keenan Safe Schools Training (KSS)
Report a Safety Concern
Risk Management Forms - Staff Login Required
Voluntary Student Accident Insurance
Workers' Compensation
Special Education
Statewide Resources for Bullying Prevention and Response for TK-12 Neurodiverse Students (SB 939)
Special Education Preschool
Adult Transition Program
Student/Parent Information and Resources
Special Programs
Links to Programs
Translation & Interpretation Services
Parent and Family Engagement
Multilingual and Multicultural Education
Local Control Accountability Plan (LCAP)
Extended School Services (ESS)
Staff Forms-Droplet
Student Services
School Social Workers
Student Wellness
Enrollment
Enrollment Forms (Staff Login Required)
Parent Resources
Homeless and Foster Youth Support Services
Suicide Prevention Resources
SARB
School Safety
Heat Advisory Operations
Bullying Information
Work Permits
TITLE IX
Synergy for Staff
Help! Who do I call?
TeacherVUE on Mobile Devices
SMUSD Synergy Grade Book Resources
Synergy Grade Book ParentVue/StudentVue
SMUSD Synergy Online Help
Transportation
General Education Transportation Services
Special Education Transportation Services
Field Trip / Extra-Curricular Trip Information
Non-SMUSD Customers / Outside Agencies
GPS Student Tracking App
Home to School Transportation Plan
What You Should Know About School Bus Safety
Fleet Maintenance and Vehicle Repair Center
Transportation Safety Plan
District Two-Way Radio Support
Twin Oaks High School Bus Stops & Departure Times
Field Trip Destinations and Pricing
Superintendent's Office
Superintendent News
Communications Office
Business Services
Educational Services
Human Resources
Teacher Residency
Visual and Performing Arts (VAPA)
Volunteers
Volunteer Clearance Requirements
Mental Health & Wellness
Family Resources
Student Resources
Employee Resources to Support Students
Employee Wellness Resources
Active and Fit Direct - Staff Login Required
Children and Youth Behavioral Health Initiative (CYBHI)
Measure JJ Bond Program
CBOC - Citizens' Bond Oversight Committee
Meeting Information
Current Bond Rating
Annual Reports and Audits
2010 Bond Program - Prop K
Projects
Current
Completed
Future
Bids, RFQ, RFP
Schools
Carrillo Elementary School
Discovery Elementary School
Double Peak School
Foothills School
Joli Ann Leichtag Elementary School
Knob Hill Elementary School
La Costa Meadows Elementary
La Mirada Academy
Mission Hills High School
Paloma Elementary School
Richland Elementary School
San Elijo Elementary School
San Elijo Middle School
San Marcos Elementary School
San Marcos High School
San Marcos Middle School
Twin Oaks Elementary School
Twin Oaks High School
Woodland Park Middle School
×
Close
Departments
Human Resources and Development
Negotiations Updates
Negotiations Updates
THE NEGOTIATIONS PROCESS IS INHERENTLY CONFIDENTIAL BY NATURE.  HOWEVER, IN AN EFFORT TO IMPROVE COMMUNICATION WITH EMPLOYEES REGARDING THE NEGOTIATIONS PROCESS, THE DISTRICT HAS ADDED A SEGMENT TO THE HUMAN RESOURCES WEBPAGE TO SHARE UPDATES AS THEY OCCUR.  THE UPDATES PROVIDED WILL BE GENERAL IN NATURE AND WILL SEEK ONLY TO INFORM EMPLOYEES, NOT ATTEMPT TO INFLUENCE THEIR OPINIONS ON ANY MATTER.
Expand All Collapse All
2025-26 Updates
CSEA Negotiations Update
May 10, 2026
On April 27th, the district and CSEA bargaining teams convened for a productive session focused on laying a strong foundation for the current negotiation cycle. The meeting opened with the introduction of new team members, followed by a review of our bargaining norms to ensure a professional and respectful framework for our future sessions. The parties agree on  the vital importance of maintaining collaborative, transparent conversations as we begin work on the specific articles open for discussion this season:
Article 5: Hours of Employment
Article 7: Disciplinary Action
Article 8: Transfers
Article 10: Salary
Article 11: Fringe Benefits
Article 12: Miscellaneous
Following the review of these articles, the teams discussed specific interests related to each topic to provide greater clarity and ensure a better mutual understanding across the table. With this groundwork established, both parties are now ready to begin exchanging formal proposals. Our next bargaining session is scheduled for May 12, 2026.
2024-25 Updates
CSEA Negotiations Update
We are excited to share that the SMUSD and CSEA bargaining teams have reached a tentative agreement on March 7, 2025.
This agreement fairly compensates our dedicated classified staff while maintaining fiscal responsibility amid uncertain funding years.
Key highlights of the TA include:
A retroactive 1% on-schedule increase for the 2024-25 school year and a 1% on-schedule increase for the 2025-26 school year
A shared-cost model for health benefits
Retiree benefits for employees who are 55 or older and provide 15 consecutive years of service to the district
6 weeks of paid maternity leave
Clarification of the employee transfer language article
Revision of the safety article to include classifications of employees who work with heavy equipment
A three-year term, beginning on July 1, 2024, through June 30, 2027, with limited reopeners for 2025-26 and 2026-27
The agreement has been ratified by the CSEA membership and approved by the San Marcos Unified School District Governing Board at the March 13, 2025 board meeting.
The district wishes to extend its sincere appreciation to the negotiating teams for their work.
SMEA Negotiations Update
We are excited to share that, after months of working closely with our San Marcos Educators Association (SMEA) labor partners, we have reached a tentative agreement.
This two-year agreement concludes negotiations for the 2024-25 and 2025-26 school years, and fairly compensates our dedicated staff while maintaining fiscal responsibility amid uncertain funding years.
Highlights of the agreement include:
A retroactive 1% on-schedule increase for the 2024/2025 school year and a 1% on-schedule increase for 2025-26
A shared-cost model for health benefits
Retiree benefits for employees who are 55 or older and provide 15 consecutive years of service to the district
6 weeks of paid maternity leave
TK class sizes will be maintained in accordance with Ed Code and K-12 class size language will remain status quo
A new Special Education article establishing staff caseload caps
A two-year term, beginning on July 1, 2024, through June 30, 2026
The agreement has been ratified by the San Marcos Educators’ Association (SMEA) membership and approved by the San Marcos Unified School District Governing Board at the March 13, 2025 board meeting.
The district wishes to extend its sincere appreciation to the negotiating teams for their work.
CSEA Negotiations Update
February 4, 2025
The District and CSEA teams met for a sixth time on January 31, 2025, to continue negotiations for the current school year.
The full-day session started with the District presenting a counter-proposal on the following Articles: (10) Salary, (11) Fringe Benefits, (15) Safety, and (16) Miscellaneous.  We are pleased to report that the teams reached tentative agreements on Article 3:  CSEA Rights;  Article 5:  Hours of Employment, Article 8:  Transfers,  Article 10:  Salary,  Article 15:  Safety,  and Article 16:  Miscellaneous and had productive discussions regarding the remaining articles. The parties will continue to work collaboratively on the remaining articles, which include  Article 11 (Fringe Benefits),  Article 12 (Leaves), Article 18 (Effects of Layoff),  and  Article 23 (Terms and Renegotiations).
The District looks forward to working with CSEA during our next negotiation session on February 28, 2025.
SMEA Negotiations Update
January 31, 2025
The district is providing this factual and timely update to promote open communication with the community, employees, other educational partners, and interested individuals and to keep everyone informed about the status of its negotiations with the San Marcos Educators Association (SMEA).
The district and SMEA teams met for a full day on January 29, 2025, to continue negotiations for the current school year. This was the eleventh bargaining session between the district and SMEA. The day started with the district providing the Association with a counter-proposal on all articles being discussed and an opportunity to dialogue about those articles.
We are pleased to report that the teams reached tentative agreements on Article IX (Hours) and Article XXIII (Catastrophic Leave Bank).
The teams will continue negotiations on the following: Article X (Salary), Article XI (Employee Benefits), Article XIII  (Class Size), and Article (Special Education)
During our current negotiation cycle, the district has made concessions in the following areas:
Four new, minimum days per school year for TK-5 teachers for grading and report card preparation. This is in addition to PLC release time.
Contract language related to adjunct duties to ensure equitable assignments
Contract language related to training for district Registered Nurses
A Middle School Media Tech stipend
Extended season stipends for Academic League and Flag Football
A shift to a shared cost model for health benefits
An increase to the 2025 health benefits cap equivalent to an ongoing 0.75% salary increase to the SMEA bargaining unit.  It is important to note that the bargaining teams discussed this topic and ultimately agreed to put this increase towards benefits instead of the salary schedule.
Increased contract language related to Teacher Safety
Increased fully paid maternity leave from three to six weeks
An adjustment to the leaves article resulting in a unit member having the ability to take up to 5 personal business leave days at their discretion.
Thus far, SMEA has made the following concessions:
Limiting the Joint Workload Committee topics to one per school year.
Agreement to provide flexible contract language related to elementary school teacher preparation time.
As many of you know, California state budgets are cyclical in nature, with funding for K-12 schools fluctuating between strong and weak years.  This year, we are facing particular challenges with a lower-than-usual Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA) of 1.07%. This, combined with a significant enrollment decline of over 500 students, resulted in a revenue loss of $4.7 million to SMUSD for 2024-25.
In recent negotiation sessions with SMEA, we emphasized our commitment to fair compensation for all employees that can be sustained in the long term through the fluctuations of state budgets. We also shared data from the latest Salary and Benefits Report (SABRE) from School Services of California, which compares SMUSD compensation with that of nine other comparable K-12 districts in San Diego County. These data highlight that SMUSD certificated staff rank #1 in total compensation across various career milestones, including at Step 1 of the certificated salary schedule (with a BA plus 30 units), at Step 10 (with a BA plus 60 units), and for total earnings over a 25-year period.
Over the past three years, the district has implemented a 12.75% increase in ongoing salary and a 2.06% increase in benefits contributions, totaling a 14.81% growth in total compensation. This reflects our goals to maintain fiscal stability while prioritizing competitive compensation for all of our employees.
During negotiations, questions arose regarding the board’s recent decision to acquire real property in North City. It is important to note that this property is being purchased with funds from Redevelopment and Bond Measure JJ, which by law may not be used for any general operating expense, including salaries for administrators or other staff. This was an opportunity to acquire land in a prime location with significant new residential development. Districts rarely have this option, and in the interest of strategic long-term planning, purchasing this property allows us to be agile should enrollment shift in the future and/or to provide the district with options for mitigating the use of leased spaces.
In our recent session, the district also reiterated that budget reserves are used to manage one-time expenditures only and ensure sustained fiscal health. It is a sound school business practice not to use reserves to cover ongoing costs like staff salaries, which aligns with our commitment to prudent financial management.
The district is interested in continuing to bargain in good faith, compensate all employees fairly, and maintain its long-term fiscal stability. As we continue negotiations, our focus remains on navigating these challenging times with transparency and a shared goal of securing a sustainable future for our school community.
The teams are scheduled to meet next on February 25, 2025.
CSEA Negotiations Update
December 16, 2024
The District and CSEA teams met for a fourth time on December 11, 2024, to continue negotiations for the current school year.
The half-day session started with the District providing the Association with a counter-proposal on the following Articles: Hours of Employment, Evaluation, Salary, Fringe Benefits, Holidays, Grievances, and Effects of Layoff. We are pleased to report that the teams reached a tentative agreement on the articles related to Holidays and Grievances and had productive discussions regarding the remaining articles.
The District looks forward to working with CSEA during our next negotiation session on January 17, 2025.
SMEA Negotiations Update
December 4, 2024
To promote open communication with the community, employees, other educational partners, and interested individuals and to keep everyone informed about the status of the district's negotiations with the San Marcos Educators Association (SMEA), the district is providing this factual and timely update about negotiations with the  SMEA.
The district and SMEA teams met for a half day on December 3, 2024, to continue negotiations for the current school year; this was the ninth bargaining session between the district and SMEA. The day started with the district providing the Association with a counter-proposal on all articles being discussed and an opportunity to have some dialogue related to those articles. We briefly describe our negotiation related to those articles below.
Article IX (Hours): The district has offered to continue to provide elementary school teachers with 200 minutes of preparation time per ten-day work period. However, the district is also seeking flexibility as to how that preparation time can be accomplished by removing the requirement that it must be done through physical education (PE) time.
Article X (Salary): Due to declining enrollment, a decrease in LCFF funding of $4.5 million, and our prior agreement with SMEA to increase the amount the district pays toward health benefits (as described in Article XI below), the district is proposing to maintain the status quo with our salary schedules this school year.  The teams have tentatively agreed to add a Middle School Media Tech Advisor stipend and Extended Athletic Season stipends to Flag Football and Academic League. Additionally, the district has proposed to give special education teachers the option of working additional work days paid at their per diem rate (2 per school year for Mild/Moderate Support Needs Teachers and 5 per school year for Extensive Support Needs Teachers).
Article XI (Employee Benefits): The bargaining teams have agreed that effective January 1, 2025, the annual benefits cap will be determined by a shared cost model with the district contributing 88 percent of the total cost of Kaiser medical plans, and dental, vision, and life benefits, and unit members paying the remaining 12 percent. Maintaining this cap in 2025 will result in the district incurring a cost increase equivalent to the value of a 0.75% salary increase (including retirees). The district has also proposed to increase the Dual Coverage Exclusion stipend from $1,500 to $2,500 for eligible employees.
Article  XIII  (Class Size): The negotiating teams have tentatively agreed to separate Transitional Kindergarten (TK) class sizes and staffing from K-3 staffing ratios consistent with Education Code. The district has proposed to adjust K-3 class size site averages, by one student, from 24:1 to 25:1.
Article XXIII (Catastrophic Leave Bank): The most current district proposal ensures unit members who access the catastrophic leave bank while accepting Workers’ Compensation benefits will not receive more than 100% of their regular salary.
Article XXIV (Special Education): The negotiating teams have been discussing a new Article related to Special Education. The teams have tentatively agreed to definitions of “caseload,” and “co-teaching” and contract language related to classroom coverage and IEP Meetings. In its last proposal, the district proposed that for Mild/Moderate Teachers, caseloads would not exceed 26 students; for Extensive Support Needs Teachers, the district has proposed that the caseloads would not exceed a site average of 14 students. Additionally, the district has proposed that caseloads for Speech-Language Pathologists would not exceed a site average of 55 students, and SEAS, BASE, or LAB Teachers would not have a caseload of more than 14 students.
During our current negotiation cycle, the district has made concessions in the following areas:
A total of four, new, minimum days per school year for TK-5 teachers for grading and report card preparation. This is in addition to PLC release time.
Contract language related to adjunct duties to ensure equitable assignments
Contract language related to training for district Registered Nurses
A Middle School Media Tech stipend
Extended season stipends for Academic League and Flag Football
A shift to a shared cost model for health benefits
An increase to the 2025 health benefits cap equivalent to an ongoing 0.75% salary increase to the SMEA bargaining unit
Increased contract language related to Teacher Safety
Increased fully paid maternity leave from three to six weeks
An adjustment to the leaves article resulting in a unit member having the ability to take up to 5 personal business leave days at their discretion.
Thus far, SMEA has made the following concession:
Limiting the Joint Workload Committee topics to one per school year.
The teams are scheduled to meet next on January 15, 2025.
CSEA Negotiations Update
November 18, 2024
The District and CSEA teams met for a third time on November 14, 2024, to continue negotiations for the current school year.
The half-day session started with the Association providing the District with a counter-proposal on the following Articles: Hours of Employment, Evaluation, Salary, Fringe Benefits, Holidays, Grievances, and Effects of Layoff. We are pleased to report that the teams reached a tentative agreement on the articles related to Holidays and Grievances.
The negotiation teams also signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) regarding the salary range adjustment for Noontime Supervisors. The district approached CSEA with an interest in increasing the salary range for this classification in order to remain in compliance with state minimum wage requirements effective January 2025.
The District looks forward to working with CSEA during our next negotiation session on December 11, 2024.
SMEA Negotiations Update
November 13, 2024
The District and SMEA teams met for a half day on November 12, 2024, to continue negotiations for the current school year.
The day started with the Association providing the District with a counter-proposal on all articles being discussed and an opportunity to have some dialogue related to those articles.
The teams reached a tentative agreement on articles related to Teacher Safety (Article XIV) and Leaves (Article XVI).
As a reminder, with the full Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) being open for discussions, we are pleased to report that the District and SMEA have now reached tentative agreements on Articles I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, XII, XIV, XV, XVI, XVII, VIII, XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, XXII, XXV, and XXVI of the current Collective Bargaining Agreement.
The District looks forward to working with SMEA during our next negotiation session on Tuesday, December 3, 2024.
SMEA Negotiations Update
November 4, 2024
The District and SMEA teams met for a full day on October 30, 2024, to continue negotiations for the current school year.
The day started with the Association providing the District with a counter-proposal on all articles being discussed and an opportunity to have some dialogue related to those articles. Towards the end of the day, the district provided its sixth counter-proposal to SMEA.
Today, the teams reached a tentative agreement on articles related to Work Year, Special Education- Extended School Year (ESY), and Job Shares.
As a reminder, with the full Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) being open for discussions, we are pleased to report that the District and SMEA have reached tentative agreements on Articles I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, XII, XV, XVII, VIII, XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, XXII, XXV, and XXVI of the current Collective Bargaining Agreement.
The District looks forward to working with SMEA during our next negotiation session on Tuesday, November 12, 2024.
CSEA Negotiations Update
November 1, 2024
The District and CSEA teams met for a second time on November 1, 2024, to continue negotiations for the current school year.
The half-day session started with the District providing the Association with a proposal on the following Articles: CSEA Rights, Hours of Employment, Evaluation, Disciplinary Action, Salary, Holidays, Grievances, Miscellaneous, Terms and Renegotiation, and Annual Work Days. Thus far, CSEA responded with a counter-proposal on Article 3 (CSEA Rights).
As a reminder, the teams are engaged in negotiations for a successor collective bargaining agreement (CBA), which means that CSEA and the district had an opportunity to initially propose opening any article of the CBA for negotiation.  The teams have communicated interest in negotiating the following articles:
Article 3: CSEA Rights
Article 5: Hours of Employment
Article 6: Evaluation
Article 7: Disciplinary Action
Article 8: Transfers
Article 10: Salary
Article 11: Fringe Benefits
Article 13: Holidays
Article 15: Safety
Article 16: Miscellaneous
Article 18: Effects of Layoff
Article 23: Terms and Renegotiation
Article 24: Annual Work Days
CSEA has also expressed an interest in discussing a potentially new Article related to professional development.
The District looks forward to working with CSEA during our next negotiation session on November 14, 2024.
SMEA Negotiations Update
October 17, 2024
The District and SMEA met for the sixth time on October 16, 2024, to continue negotiations for the current school year. The day started with a collaborative discussion regarding SMEA’s proposed special education article; this discussion provided greater clarity to the district in order to provide SMEA with a counter-proposal.
The District provided the Association with a counter-proposal on all articles being discussed.
We are pleased to report that the groups have reached agreement on 2025 health benefits rates; these new rates will be communicated to all employees shortly and available on the district’s HR website.
As a reminder, with the entire Contract being open for discussions, we are also pleased to report that the District and SMEA have reached tentative agreements on Articles I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, XII, XV, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, and XXII of the current Collective Bargaining Agreement.
The District looks forward to working with SMEA during our next negotiation session on Wednesday, October 30, 2024.
CSEA Negotiations Update
October 14, 2024
The District and CSEA met for the first time on October 9, 2024, for collective bargaining for the current year. Currently, the full SMUSD/CSEA contract is open for negotiations.
The session began with introducing new team members and reviewing negotiation norms. The afternoon continued with the district providing budget information including Local Control Funding Formula revenues, Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA) figures, and the impact of the declining enrollment we are experiencing on our annual budget. The presentation also covered general fund ending balances, reserves, and funds that have been committed for future one-time expenses.  CSEA representatives asked clarifying questions regarding the district’s budget.
The remainder of the afternoon was spent discussing each party’s initially proposed articles to gain more insight into the negotiation process moving forward. The teams also identified which articles might benefit from a hybrid, problem-solving collaborative approach instead of traditional negotiations.
The negotiating teams will meet in future sessions to continue discussions on the following articles:
Article 3: CSEA Rights
Article 5: Hours of Employment
Article 6: Evaluation
Article 7: Disciplinary Action
Article 8: Transfer
Article 10: Salary
Article 11: Fringe Benefits
Article 13: Holidays
Article 15: Safety
Article 16: Miscellaneous
Article 18:  Effects of Layoff
Article 23: Terms and Renegotiation
Article 24: Annual Work Days
CSEA is also interested in negotiating a new article regarding professional development.
The District looks forward to working with CSEA during our next negotiation session on November 1, 2024
SMEA Negotiations Update
October 2, 2024
The District and SMEA met for the fifth time on October 1, 2024, and exchanged proposals.
Today’s session began with the district providing budget information including Local Control Funding Formula revenues, Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA) figures, and the impact of the declining enrollment we are experiencing on our annual budget. The presentation also covered general fund ending balances, reserves, and funds which have been committed for future one-time expenses.
We are pleased to report that the District and SMEA reached tentative agreements on Article I (Agreement, Duration, and Reopeners), Article VI (Negotiation Procedures), Article XX (Miscellaneous), and Article XXIII (Early Retirement Incentive Program) yesterday.
The negotiating teams will meet in future sessions to continue discussions on the following articles:
Article VIII:  Work Year
Article IX:  Hours
Article X:  Salary
Article XII: Employee Benefits
Article XIV: Class Size
Article XIV: Safety
Article XVI: Leaves
Article XXIII:  Catastrophic Leave Bank
Article XXV: Special Education (New Article Proposed)
Article XXVI:  Job Shares (New Article Proposed)
The District looks forward to working with SMEA during our next negotiation session on Wednesday, October 16, 2024.
SMEA Negotiations Update
September 18, 2024
The District and SMEA met for the fourth time on September 18, 2024, and exchanged proposals.
With the entire Contract being open for discussions, we are pleased to report that the District and SMEA have reached tentative agreements on Articles II, III, IV, V, VII, XIII, XVI, XVIII, XIX, XXI, and XXII of the current Collective Bargaining Agreement.
The District’s proposal from today’s session is highlighted below:
Article VIII:  Work Year
The parties continue to discuss potential revisions to this article.
Article IX:  Hours
The District and SMEA agreed to certain language related to adjunct duties.
The District’s proposal seeks flexibility in how the 200 minutes of prep time is provided to elementary teachers.  The District is not seeking to adjust the 200 minutes of prep time stated in the Contract.
Article IX: Extended School Year  (New Article)
The District and SMEA have reached an agreement on this new article.
This article clarifies procedures for ESY site selection and personnel selection and compensation.
Article X:  Salary
The District proposed language for CTE teachers that would be new language within this article; the language is consistent with current salary placement practices.
The parties continue to discuss salary and stipends.
Article XIV: Safety
The District and SMEA made good progress on teacher safety language and will continue discussions related to this article.
Article XVI: Leaves
The parties exchanged proposals related to employee leaves.
The District also proposed clean-up language regarding Leave for Conference Attendance to reflect existing practices.
Article XIX:  Miscellaneous
The District continues to advocate for the removal of certain language due to new structures in place that have facilitated collaboration.
Article XXIII:  Catastrophic Leave Bank
The District proposed clarifying language for this article related to the initial donation period, and the withdrawal requirements.
Article XXVI:  Job Shares (New Article Proposed)
The District and SMEA are working on a new article that will better define and explain the parameters and expectations around potential job share assignments.
The District looks forward to working with SMEA during our next negotiation session on Tuesday, October 1, 2024.
2023-24 Updates
SMEA Negotiation Update, 5.17.24
The District and SMEA negotiation teams met on May 17, 2024, for the second negotiation session of the year.  The meeting began with SMEA providing their first proposal to the District.  The teams agreed to discuss certain articles, as we await further budget information from the State. The District provided a counter proposal, and was encouraged with the progress that was made during the meeting.
While all 23 Articles of the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) are open for discussion, the teams were able to tentatively agree to changes within the following articles:
Article II-Recognition
Article IV-Association Rights
Article V-District Rights
Article VII-Definitions
Article XII-Grievance Procedure
Article XVII-Evaluation Procedure, and
Article XVIII-Professional Dues or Fees, Payroll Deduction, and Organization Security
The tenor of the meeting was positive and collaborative.
The teams are scheduled to meet next on May 31, 2024.
SMEA Negotiation Update, 4.24.24
The district and SMEA negotiation teams met on April 24, 2024 for the first negotiation session of the year. The meeting began with Norm Setting and then the group reviewed SMUSD Financial Data, presented by Assistant Superintendent of Business Services, Erin Garcia. The data included an update on enrollment &  Average Daily Attendance (ADA), the state-funded Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA), and Multi-Year Projections. The group then reviewed the current Collective Bargaining Agreement, or CBA. For this negotiations cycle, the teams are engaged in successor negotiations, meaning the full CBA may be reviewed. The tenor of the meeting was positive and collaborative.
The teams have a second session scheduled May 17, 2024.
2022-23 Updates
CSEA Negotiations Update
June 8, 2023
The district and CSEA negotiations teams met for another bargaining session this afternoon. The teams exchanged proposals and productive dialogue regarding the proposals. CSEA also shared their interest in addressing bilingual stipends and working conditions for staff who provide translation support to our students and families. The negotiations teams engaged in a healthy conversation around this topic and agreed to gather relevant data and input preparation for our next meeting.  The teams are scheduled to meet again on Friday, June 23rd.
May 19, 2023
The district and CSEA negotiations teams meet this afternoon to continue negotiations for the current school year.  CSEA provided the district with a counter proposal on Article 12 (Leaves) which resulted in positive and collaborative dialogue.   The teams look forward to meeting again on June 8, 2023 to continue discussion on the articles that were included in the initial proposals.
April 21, 2023
The district and CSEA negotiation teams met this morning for their first negotiation session of the year. The meeting began with a discussion about group norms and continued with district staff sharing proposed revisions to the leaves article (Article 12) and the rationale behind those proposed changes.  The tenor of the meeting was positive and collaborative. The teams scheduled a second session for May 19, 2023.
SMEA Negotiations Update
October 25, 2022
The District and SMEA met for the fourth time on October 25, 2022, and exchanged proposals. The District also presented a presentation titled: District Comparisons: Revenue, Expense & Certificated Total Compensation.
The details of both SMEA’s proposal as well as the District’s proposal from today’s session are highlighted below. The District appreciated SMEA’s explanation of their proposal which, along with the District’s proposal, included the following:
Article 1: Duration
Both parties are continuing to discuss a two-year agreement. The District is encouraged with the conversations related to a two-year agreement.
Article 7: Work Year
SMEA agreed with the District’s proposed changes to clean up language within Article 7: Work Year. There was a verbal T.A. (Tentative Agreement) with this Article.
Article 9: Hours
SMEA did not provide any counter proposal to the District regarding Article 9. The District’s proposal continues to seek flexibility in how the 200 minutes of prep time is provided to elementary teachers. The District is not seeking to adjust the 200 minutes of prep time stated in the Contract.
Article 10: Salary
The District’s offer for the salary increase for 2022-23 remained at 5.0%.
The District’s updated offer for salary included an on schedule salary increase of 3.75% for the second year of the agreement (2023-24).
SMEA countered the District’s proposal with a salary increase of 5.75% for 2022-23, and 4.75% increase for 2023-24.
Conversations regarding stipends continued.
Article 11: Benefits
The District’s proposal included an increase in the Health Benefits Cap to: Single- $8,836; Two-Party- $16,061; Family- $22,067, and SMEA agreed with the proposed cap numbers for the 2023 year.
The District has proposed increases to the second year that would cover a 2.0% benefits cap increase, and a limited reopener if the Kaiser Plan increased more than 4.0%.
SMEA proposed language that would reopen Benefits for discussion if the Kaiser plan rates increase more than 3.5%.
Article 14: Safety
The District and SMEA exchanged proposals regarding the structure on a site-based safety committee to provide two-way communication regarding site safety concerns. Both parties agreed that there is agreement with the concept, and discussions related to the language will continue.
Article 16: Leaves
The District proposed two (2) weeks of fully paid maternity leave and remains open to a dialogue regarding this new practice.
SMEA’s counter proposal included three (3) weeks of fully paid leave for vaginal birth and four (4) weeks for a Cesarean section birth.
The District acknowledges the significant movement from both parties towards an agreement. Throughout the first four sessions, the District appreciates the positive, collaborative atmosphere of the negotiations environment, and looks forward to working with SMEA during our next scheduled negotiations session on Tuesday, November 15, 2022.
SMEA Negotiations Update
October 14, 2022
The District and SMEA met for the third time on October 14, 2022, and exchanged proposals.  The details of both SMEA’s proposal as well as the District’s proposal from today’s session are highlighted below.  The District appreciated SMEA’s explanation of their proposal which, along with the District’s proposal, included the following:
Article 1:  Duration
The District proposed a two-year agreement in the counter offer provided during this session, and SMEA’s counter proposal also included a two-year deal.
Article 7:  Work Year
SMEA agreed with the District’s proposed changes to clean up language within Article 7:  Work Year.  There was a verbal T.A. (Tentative Agreement) with this Article.
Article 9:  Hours
SMEA did not provide any counter proposal to the District regarding Article 9. The District’s proposal continues to seek flexibility in how the 200 minutes of prep time is provided to elementary teachers.
Article 10:  Salary
The District’s offer for the salary increase for 2022-23 remained at 5.0%.
The District’s updated offer for salary included an on schedule salary increase of 3.5% for the second year of the agreement (2023-24).
SMEA countered the District’s proposal with a salary increase of 7.0% for 2022-23, and 5.0% increase for 2023-24.
Conversations regarding stipends continued, and we agreed that additional conversation was needed regarding stipends.
Article 11:  Benefits
The District’s proposal included an increase in the Health Benefits Cap to:  Single- $8,836;  Two-Party- $16,061;  Family- $22,067, and SMEA agreed with the proposed cap numbers for the 2023 year.
Article 14: Safety
The District and SMEA exchanged proposals regarding the structure on a site-based safety committee to provide two-way communication regarding site safety concerns.
Article 16: Leaves
The District proposed one (1) week of fully paid maternity leave and remains open to a dialogue regarding this new practice.
SMEA’s proposal remained at six (weeks) of fully paid leave.
The District looks forward to working with SMEA during our next scheduled negotiations session on Tuesday, October 25, 2022.
SMEA Negotiations Update
September 27, 2022
The District and SMEA met for the second time on September 27, 2022, and exchanged initial proposals, with the goal of collaborating on a new Master Contract.  During the upcoming season of negotiations, the District will be providing a summary of each session through an email that will include a link to the SMUSD website where all District negotiation communications will be posted.  We hope all employees find these communications helpful.
The District offered the first proposal, which included the following:
The District is seeking a two-year agreement (Article 1).
The District would like to clean up some language within Article 7:  Work Year.  There was a sentence the District believes belongs in a different Article.
The District is seeking flexibility in how the 200 minutes of prep time is provided to elementary teachers.
The District is proposing a 5.0% on-schedule salary increase retroactive to July 1, 2022.
The District is proposing a 3.0% on-schedule salary increase effective July 1, 2023.
The District proposed to add certain coaching stipends within the middle school sports programs to ensure student safety, and provide a positive experience for students.
While the District’s proposal did not include an increase in the Health Benefits Cap (Article 11:  Employee Benefits), the District welcomes the discussion around supporting SMEA members regarding this Article and unit member total compensation.
The District is proposing edits to the formatting of Article 11, with the goal of providing increased clarity and understanding of the Article and codifying existing practices.
The District proposed that SMEA and the District participate in a District Safety Committee.
SMEA transmitted a proposal following the scheduled end to our negotiations session.  Given our scheduling constraint, there was insufficient time to closely review and analyze the proposal.  The District looks forward to SMEA’s detailed presentation of that proposal and hopes to ask questions regarding that proposal at our next scheduled negotiations session on Friday, October 14, 2022.
The District is grateful for the open dialogue of the session, and is encouraged with the progress made.  We look forward to continuing our negotiations October 14, 2022.
SMEA Negotiations Update
September 22, 2022
The District and SMEA met for the first time on September 20, 2022, to begin the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.  During the upcoming season of negotiations, the District will be providing a summary of each session through an email that will include a link to the SMUSD website where all District negotiation communications will be posted.  We hope all employees find these communications helpful.
The District’s Bargaining Team consists of Erin Garcia, Assistant Superintendent of Business Services; Amber Christman, Human Resources Analyst;  Nathan Baker, Assistant Principal at Mission Hills High School;  Bill Singh, Interim Director of Human Resources; and Gary DeBora, Director of Human Resources.
The SMEA Bargaining Team consists of Damon Gidner, Teacher at San Elijo Elementary School;  Dale Pluciennik, President of SMEA;  Marla Rosenthal, Teacher at Discovery Elementary School;  Zac Stevens-Wills, Teacher at San Marcos High School;  Elliot Powell, Teacher at San Marcos Middle School:  Cherryl Baker, Counselor at Mission Hills High School;  Rikki Kuykendall, Teacher at Double Peak School;  Erin Clark, CTA Labor Relations Representative.
The parties met on September 22, 2022, to discuss the District’s current financial forecast and review income and expenditures.  Ms. Garcia presented District data using multiple charts, graphs, and informational spreadsheets that covered a range of topics that included:
Enrollment & Average Daily Attendance (ADA)
Local Control Funding Formula (LCFF) data
Budgeted Expenses
Health Benefits
The District appreciated the collaborative dialogue that included clarifying questions from both parties, and looks forward to our next scheduled session on Tuesday, September 27, 2022.
2021-22 Updates
CSEA Negotiations Update
September 19, 2022
The District and CSEA met again on September 19th to continue the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.
The parties exchanged proposals regarding Article 10:  Salary, and Article 11:  Fringe Benefits.
Significant discussion also took place related to an equality clause within the salary article, fringe benefits, and reopener language in Article 23:  Terms and Renegotiation.
The District and CSEA have agreed to meet again on Thursday, September 22 to continue the negotiations process.
SMEA Negotiations Update March 18, 2022
The District is pleased to announce that a Tentative Agreement has been reached with SMEA to conclude the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.
The modifications included in the new Master Contract include:
The term of this Agreement is the 2021-2022 school year.
Updated language for the scheduling of regular faculty meetings.
Incorporating the current practice of the scheduling of Teacher Prep Days into the Master Contract.
Forming Task Forces to study the assignment of adjunct duties being equitable across the District.
Increasing the Salary Schedule by 3.5% effective July 1, 2021.
Increasing the salaries of beginning Certificated employees.
Adding several new coaching stipends to the Master Contract.
Adding a special program representative to the group of Elementary Grade Level Leaders.
Increasing the Daily Rate to $226 effective July 1, 2022.
Increasing the Hourly Rate to $44.61 effective July 1, 2022. Forming Task Forces for Elementary Grade Level Leader and Secondary Department Chairpersons to more accurately capture the site based  instructional focus of these positions.
Updating the definition of a Grievance.
Increasing the clarity of how an Involuntary Transfer will be implemented, when necessary.
Changing the date for Evaluations for Permanent Employees to 45 days before the school year ends.
Incorporating the current process for the Catastrophic Leave Bank into the Master Contract.
Eliminating outdated information from the Early Retirement Incentive Program.
CSEA Negotiations Update
March 17, 2022
The District and CSEA met again on March 16th to continue the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.
The parties spent a significant amount of time discussing the process for, and effects of, the Classified Layoffs approved by the Governing Board on March 1st.
Significant discussion also took place related to the following articles in the Master Contract:  Disciplinary Action, Salary, Fringe Benefits, and Reclassification.
The District and CSEA have agreed to meet again after Spring Break to continue the negotiations process.
SMEA Negotiations Update March 10, 2022
The District and SMEA met again on March 8th to continue the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.   This session was viewed by many as being highly productive and collaborative on a wide variety of subjects.  Tentative Agreements were reached on Article IX:  Hours; Article XII:  Grievance Procedure; Article XIII:  Class Size; and Article XVII:  Evaluation Procedures.
In addition to the offer to increase salaries by 3% retroactive to July 1, 2021, the District also offered to increase the Annual Benefits Cap for all benefit plans, such that the amount of the 2022 cost increase to the Kaiser plans would be paid by the District beginning in July 2022.
The District and the Association are determining a future meeting date to continue, and hopefully conclude, the negotiations process.
CSEA Negotiations Update March 10, 2022
The District and CSEA met again on March 9th to continue the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.
The parties reached Tentative Agreements on Article 5:  Hours of Employment; Article 8:  Transfer; and Article 13:  Holidays.
The remaining subjects of bargaining include Article 7:  Disciplinary Action; Article 10:  Salary; Article 11:  Fringe Benefits; Article 18:  Effects of Layoff; and Article 26:  Reclassification.
The District and CSEA have agreed to meet again on March 16th to continue the negotiations process.
SMEA Negotiations Update March 3, 2022
The District and SMEA met again on March 2nd to continue the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.
The District  presented a proposal to increase the Certificated Salary Schedule by 3.0% retroactive to July 1, 2021.  In addition, the District’s proposal included an offer to increase the Teacher Hourly Rate and add 3 new and additional stipends to the salary schedule at the middle school level.  The District’s proposal also included an offer to increase the salaries of beginning Certificated employees.
In addition, a Tentative Agreement was reached on Article I:  Agreement, Duration, Re-Openers.
The District is hopeful that progress can be made on the issues of how Elementary Grade Level Leaders and Secondary Department Chairpersons are selected; the time limits implemented when a grievance is filed; and the deadline for when final evaluations must be completed.
The District eagerly anticipates the upcoming March 8th session and is hopeful that an agreement can be reached on that occasion.
SMEA Negotiations Update
February 17, 2022
The District and SMEA met again on February 17th to continue the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.
The District  presented a proposal to increase the Certificated Salary Schedule by 2.5% retroactive to July 1, 2021.  In addition, the District’s proposal included an offer to increase the Teacher Hourly Rate, the Teacher Daily Rate, and the stipends paid to all Elementary Grade Level Leaders and Secondary Department Chairpersons.  The District’s proposal also included an offer to increase the compensation for stipend positions and the salaries of beginning Certificated employees.
Significant progress was made on subjects such as the term of the new Master Contract, the length and number of faculty meetings, the assignment of Adjunct Duties, the number of Elementary Grade Level Leaders, and compensation for class coverage at the Elementary level when an insufficient number of substitutes are available during a surge in the COVID-19 pandemic.
In addition, Tentative Agreements were reached on Article XIV:  Teacher Safety; and Article XXII:  Early Retirement Incentive Program.
The District continues to strive for a collaboratively negotiated agreement and eagerly anticipates the upcoming March 2nd and 8th sessions.
CSEA Negotiations Update February 17, 2022
The District and CSEA met again on February 16th to continue the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.
The parties exchanged proposals on Article 5:  Hours of Employment; Article 8:  Transfer; Article 12:  Leaves; and Article 13:  Holidays.  In addition, a Tentative Agreement was reached on Article 12:  Leaves.  Significant progress was also made on Article 5:  Hours of Employment; Article 8:  Transfer; and Article 13:  Holidays.
The District and CSEA have agreed to meet again on March 9th and 16th to continue the negotiations process.
SMEA Negotiations Update February 4, 2022
The District and SMEA met on January 28th and February 3rd to continue the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.  The parties discussed the following subjects and exchanged proposals related to many of them:
The parties reached a Verbal Tentative Agreement on Article XVI:  Leaves; and Article XXIV:  Catastrophic Leave Bank.
The District presented new proposals on Article I:  Agreement, Duration, Re-Openers; Article IX:  Hours; Article X:  Salary; Article XI:  Benefits; Article XII:  Grievance Procedure; Article XIII:  Class Size; Article XIV:  Teacher Safety; Article XXII:  Early Retirement Incentive Program.
The parties also discussed the recent Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA) funding increase provided to the District.  San Marcos Unified received increased funding in the form of a 5.07% compounded COLA for the 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 school years.  That COLA was intended to assist the District with all of its additional expenditures including increased salaries and benefits, increases to utility costs, increases to supply costs, additional expenditures required to keep our schools properly functioning, etc.  The District utilized some of those funds to increase salaries by 2.0% effective January 1, 2021, and also increase its employee benefits cap.
The District’s proposal would use those same funds to increase the Certificated Salary Schedule again by 1.25% effective July 1, 2022; provide an additional one-time, off-schedule salary increase of 1.0% effective July 1, 2022; increase the Teacher Hourly Rate; increase the Department Chairperson/Grade Level Leader Stipends; and add multiple new coaching stipends.  The State of California is currently considering providing additional funding to public education and the District is committed to exploring how it could utilize those potential new funds to supplement its offer to increase employee compensation.
The parties also discussed the 5.33% COLA that is currently projected for the 2022-2023 school year.  Once that projection is finalized and those funds are received, the District has committed to discussing an additional compensation increase with the Association during the 2022-2023 school year.
The District and SMEA have agreed to meet again on February 17th to continue the negotiations process.
CSEA Negotiations Update February 2, 2022
The District and CSEA met on January 26th to continue the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.
The parties exchanged proposals and reached Verbal Tentative Agreements on Article 6:  Evaluation; Article 18:  Effects of Layoff; and Article 24:  Annual Work Days.
There was significant discussion regarding how to simplify the process when requesting Personal Necessity Leave and it is anticipated that those discussions will continue during future sessions.  Our next session will include discussions regarding Article 5:  Hours of Employment; Article 7:  Disciplinary Action; Article 8:  Transfer; Article 9:  Promotion; and Article 13:  Holidays.
The District and CSEA have agreed to meet again on February 16th to continue the negotiations process.
CSEA Negotiations Update
December 15, 2021
T he District and CSEA met on December 8th and 15th to continue the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.
The parties discussed the following subjects and exchanged proposals related to many of them:
Hours of Employment
Evaluation
Disciplinary Action
Transfer
Promotion
Salary
Leaves
Holidays
Grievances
Effects of Layoff
Terms and Renegotiation
Annual Work Days
Reclassification
Verbal Tentative Agreements were reached on Article 14:  Grievances and Article 23:  Terms and Renegotiation.
The parties also discussed the District’s First Interim Financial Report that was presented publicly at the December 14th Governing Board Meeting, as required by the Education Code.  The updated financial information detailed in this report will impact the conversations taking place at the table and the proposals that are submitted in the future.
The District and CSEA are working together to determine additional meeting dates after Winter Break to continue the negotiations process.
SMEA Negotiations Update
December 9, 2021
The District and SMEA met on December 9th to continue the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.  The parties discussed the following subjects and exchanged proposals related to many of them:
Agreement, Duration, Re-Openers
Hours
Grievance Procedure
Leaves
Evaluation Procedures
Disciplinary Action
Catastrophic Leave Bank
Salary
Employee Benefits
Class Size
Transfers
Early Retirement Incentive
The parties also discussed that the District’s First Interim Financial Report will be presented publicly at the December 14th Governing Board Meeting, as required by the Education Code.  The updated financial information detailed in this report will impact the conversations taking place at the table and the proposals that are submitted in the future.
The District and SMEA have agreed to meet again on January 28th and February 3rd to continue the negotiations process.
CSEA Negotiations Update
December 2, 2021
The District and CSEA met on December 2nd to begin the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.  Both parties “sunshined” their initial proposals at recent Governing Board Meetings in accordance with the applicable Government Code.
Although the most recent Master Contract expired on June 30th, it is important to note that nearly all provisions of that Agreement will remain in effect during the course of the negotiations process during the 2021-2022 school year.
The District presented a detailed budget overview including that it has experienced a significant enrollment decline of approximately 1,200 students since the 2019-2020 school year that will result in an estimated loss of $17M in revenue by next school year.  The District’s estimated General Fund revenues equal $269.4M and estimated General Fund expenditures equal $270.7M for the 2021-2022 school year.  These calculations estimate that the District is projected to deficit spend an estimated $1.3M this school year.  Although required by law to maintain a minimum General Fund reserve of  3%, if the District’s pattern of deficit spending continues without adjustment it is estimated that the District would end next school year with a General Fund reserve of 2.10% and conclude the 2023-2024 school year with a General Fund reserve of -5.86%.
The District and CSEA exchanged proposals related to proposed changes to Master Contract language and discussed the potential impacts of those potential adjustments.
The District and CSEA have agreed to meet again on December 8th and 15th to continue the negotiations process.
SMEA Negotiations Update
November 16, 2021
The District and SMEA met on November 10th to begin the negotiations process for a new Master Contract.  Both parties “sunshined” their initial proposals at recent Governing Board Meetings in accordance with the applicable Government Code.
Although the most recent Master Contract expired on June 30th, it is important to note that nearly all provisions of that Agreement will remain in effect during the course of the negotiations process during the 2021-2022 school year.
The District presented a detailed budget overview including that it has experienced a significant enrollment decline of approximately 1,200 students since the 2019-2020 school year that will result in an estimated loss of $17M in revenue by next school year.  The District’s estimated General Fund revenues equal $269.4M and estimated General Fund expenditures equal $270.7M for the 2021-2022 school year.  These calculations estimate that the District is projected to deficit spend an estimated $1.3M this school year.  Although required by law to maintain a minimum General Fund reserve of  3%, if the District’s pattern of deficit spending continues without adjustment it is estimated that the District would end next school year with a General Fund reserve of 2.10% and conclude the 2023-2024 school year with a General Fund reserve of -5.86%.
The District and SMEA exchanged proposals related to proposed changes to Master Contract language and discussed the potential impacts of those potential adjustments.
The District and SMEA have agreed to meet again on December 9th to continue the negotiations process.
Certificated Personnel
Classified Personnel
Management Personnel
HR Staff List
Employment Opportunities
Fieldwork Opportunities
Benefits
Negotiations Updates
Substitute Employees
Employee Handbook
Non-Classified, Short Term Personnel
Walk-on Coach (Athletic/Band/Dance)
Volunteers
San Marcos Unified School District
Address: 255 Pico Avenue Suite 250 San Marcos, CA 92069
Phone: (760) 752-1299 Email: communications@smusd.org
Annual Parent Notifications
Title IX
Sexual Harassment Policy
Uniform Complaint Procedure
Careers
Site Map
Accessibility
Sign In
Contents © 2026 San Marcos Unified School District
Notice of Non-Discrimination
