Plainfield Twp 2022-2026 PTFFU CBA
AGREEMENT
Between
Plainfield Charter Township
-And-
Plainfield Township Fire Fighters Union Local 3890
Affiliated with International Association of Firefighters, AFL-CIO
January 1 , 20 22
to
December 31, 20 2 6
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE # NAME PAGE
ARTICLE 26 DECLARED STATE OF EMERGENCIES……………. 32
Section 1 Grievance Time Limits…………………………………….. 32
Section 2 Work Assignment………………………………………….. 32
Section 3 Contract Provisions…………………………………………32
ARTICLE 6 DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE………………………. 8
ARTICLE 27 DRIVING RECORD UPDATE………………………….. 32
Section 1 Driving Record Update…………………………………….. 32
ARTICLE 29 DRUG-FREE AND ALCOHOL FREE…………………. 33
Section 1 Purpose……………………………………………………... 33
Section 2 Policy………………………………………………………. 33
Section 3 Rehabilitation……………………………………………….35
ARTICLE 35 DURATION……………………………………………….. 42
ARTICLE 28 EDUCATION……………………………………………...33
Section 1 Educational Reimbursement……………………………….. 33
ARTICLE 24 FIRE DEPARTMENT LIVING QUARTERS………….. 30
Section 1 Living Quarters…………………………………………….. 30
Section 2 Living Quarters Accommodations…………………………. 30
ARTICLE 33 FOOD ALLOWANCE…………………………………… 39
ARTICLE 5 GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE…. 5
Section 1 Grievance Steps……………………………………………. 6
Section 2 Grievance Procedure………………………………………. 6
ARTICLE # NAME PAGE
Section 3 Arbitration Procedure……………………………………… 6
Section 4 Arbitrator's Pow ers and Jurisdiction………………………...6
Section 5 Arbitration Expenses………………………………………. .. 7
Section 6 Arbitration Hearings……………………………………… … 7
Section 7 Time Limits………………………………………………… . 7
Section 8 Grievanc e Settlements…………………………………….....7
Section 9 G rievance Form……………………………………………… 8
ARTICLE 31 GROUP BENEFITS……………………………………… 35
Section 1 Group Insurance…………………………………………… 35
Section 2 Employee Contributions…………………………………… 36
Section 3 Selection of I nsurance Carriers……………………………...37
Section 4 Continuation of Insurance Coverage………………………. 37
Section 5 Retiree Hospitalization Insurance…………………………..37
Section 6 Retirement………………………………………………….. 38
Section 7 Flexible Benefit Program…………………………………... 38
Section 8 Health Insurance for Surviving Spouse……………………. 38
Section 9 Payment In Lieu of Insurance……………………………… 39
Section 1 0 Short and Long Term Disability Program………………. ….3 9
ARTICLE 21 HOLIDAYS……………………………………………….. 25
ARTICLE # NAME PAGE
Section 1 Recognized Holidays………………………………………. 25
Section 2 Holiday Eligibility…………………………………………. 25
Section 3 Holiday Celebration………………………………………... 26
Section 4 H oliday Pay………………………………………………… 26
Section 5 Holiday During Vacation………………………………….. 26
ARTICLE 17 HOURS OF WORK………………………………………. 22
Section 1 Wor k Schedules……………………………………………. 22
Section 2 Work Hours………………………………………………… 23
ARTICLE 9 LAYOFF AND RECALL………………………………… 11
Section 1 Definition…………………………………………………... 11
Section 2 Temporary Layoff………………………………………….. 11
Section 3 Indefinite Layoff…………………………………………… 11
Section 4 Notifica tion of Layoff……………………………………… 11
Section 5 Recall………………………………………………………. 11
Section 6 Notifica tion of Recall……………………………………… 12
Section 7 Employee Recall Data……………………………………… 12
Section 8 Work by Non-Bargaining Unit Employees………………… 12
ARTICLE 14 LIGHT DUTY…………………………………………….. 20
Section 1 Procedure…………………………………………………... 20
Section 2 Medical Determination and Process……………………….. 20
ARTICLE 4 MANAGEMENTS RIGHTS…………………………….. 4
Section 1 Managements Rights………………………………………. 4
ARTICLE # NAME PAGE
Section 2 Policy and Procedures………………………………………5
ARTICLE 32 MAINTENANCE OF STANDARDS……………………. 39
ARTICLE 34 MISCELLANEOUS……………………………………… 40
Section 1 Printing Costs………………………………………………. 40
Section 2 Bulletin Boards…………………………………………….. 40
Section 3 Tobacco Use……………………………………………….. 40
Section 4 Special Conferences……………………………………….. 40
Section 5 Fire Fighter Training……………………………………….. 40
Section 6 Severability……………………………………………….... 4 0
Section 7 Work by Non-Bargaining Unit Employees………………… 41
Section 8 Gender……………………………………………………… 41
Section 9 Limiting Requirements to be Instructor……………………. 41
ARTICLE 18 OV ERTIME AND CALLBACK………………………… 23
Section 1 Overtime…………………………………………………… 23
Section 2 Callb ack……………………………………………………. 24
ARTICLE 15 PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS…………………………..20
Section 1 New Employees……………………………………………. 20
Section 2 Regular Physicals………………………………………….. 20
Section 3 Requests for Examination…………………………………. 20
Section 4 Reasonable Accommodation………………………………. 21
ARTICLE 16 PHYSICAL FITNESS……………………………………. 21
ARTICLE 10 PROMOTIONS, CHANGE OF JOBS, AND ACTING... 12 ASSIGNMENT
ARTICLE # NAME PAGE
Section 1 P romotion……………………………………………………12
Section 2 Change of Job……………………… ……………………….. 14
Section 3 Return t o Classification……………………………………... 14
Section 4 Ac ting Assignment…………………………………………..14
ARTICLE 1 RECOGNITION………………………………………… … 1
Section 1 Bargaining Unit…………………………………………… … 1
Section 2 Bargaining Agent………………………………………… …. 1
ARTICLE 30 RESIDENCY……………………………………………… 35
ARTICLE 25 SAFET Y AND HEALTH COMMITTEE………………. 31
Section 1 Committ ee Appointments…………………………………. 31
Section 2 Committee Responsibilities………………………………... 31
Section 3 Committee Findings……………………………………….. 31
ARTICLE 8 SENIORITY………………………………………………. .9
Section 1 Probatio nary Period……………………………………….....9
Section 2 Loss of Seniority……………………………………………10
Section 3 Seni ority List………………………………………………..10
ARTICLE 7 STRIK ES AND ILLEGAL ACTIVITY………………… 8
Section 1 No Strike Pledge…………………………………………… 8
Section 2 Penalty……………………………………………………… 8
Section 3 Affirmative Action…………………………………………. 9
Section 4 Further Sanctions…………………………………………... 9
Section 5 No Lockout………………………………………………… 9
ARTICLE # NAME PAGE
ARTICLE 19 TRAD E TIME PROCEDURE…………………………... 24
Section 1 Trading of Work Days……………………………………... 24
Section 2 Compliance with Fai r Labor Standards Act……………….. 24
Section 3 Acknowledgement of Good Faith Intent by Union………… 2 4
ARTICLE 12 TYPES OF LEAVE…… …………………………………. 15
Section 1 S ick Leave…………………………………………………. 15
Section 2 Bereavement Leave………………………………………… 16
Section 3 Emer gency Leave………………………………………….. 16
Section 4 Jury Leave…………………………………………………. 17
Section 5 Military Leave……………………………………………… 17
Section 6 Unpaid Leave of Absence…………………………………. 17
Section 7 Legal Action……………………………………………….. 1 8
ARTICLE 23 UNIFORMS………………………………………………. 29
Section 1 Uniforms and Equipment………………………………….. 29
Section 2 Numbe r of Uniforms………………………………………. 30
Section 3 Boot/ Shoe Allowance……………………………………… 30
Section 4 Approved PPE……………………………………………… 30
ARTICLE 3 UNION REPRESENTATION…………………………… 4
Section 1 Investigation and Employee Rights………………………... 4
Section 2 Union Representative Rights………………………………. 4
ARTICLE 2 UNION SECURITY……………………………………… 2
Section 1 Check Off………………………………………………….. 2
ARTICLE # NAME PAGE
Section 2 Collective Bargaining Committee…………………………...2
Section 3 Union Board………………………………………………… 3
Section 4 Release from Work………………………………………… .. 3
Section 5 No D iscrimination……………………………………………3
ARTICLE 21 VACATION………………………………………………. 26
Section 1 Probationary Period………………………………………... 26
Section 2 Probationary Employees…………………………………… 26
Section 3 Non-proba tionary Employees……………………………… 27
Section 4 Past Empl oyment Credits………………………………….. 27
Section 5 Vacat ion Schedule…………………………………………. 27
Section 6 Vacation Usage…………………………………………….. 27
Section 7 Vacatio n Scheduling……………………………………….. 28
Section 8 Vacation Pay……………………………………………….. 28
Section 9 Vacation Paychecks………………………………………... 28
Section 10 Vacation Carryover………………………………………… 28
Section 11 Benefits on Termination…………………………………… 29
ARTICLE 20 WAGES …………………………………………….............25
Section 1 Wages……………………………………………………… 25
Section 2 P aychecks………………………………………………….. 25
ARTICLE 35 WAIVER CLAUSE………………………………………. 4 2
Section 1 Provisions Contrary to Law………………………………... 4 2
Section 2 Amendment and Full Agreement…………………………. 4 2
ARTICLE # NAME PAGE
ARTICLE 11 WORK ASSIGNMENT………………………………….. 15
Section 1 Station Bids………………………………………………… 15
Section 2 Extreme Weather Conditions………………………………. 15
Section 3 Station Maintenance……………………………………….. 15
ARTICLE 13 WORKERS' COMPENSATION………………………... 19
Section 1 Injury and Notification…………………………………….. 19
Section 2 Other Benefits……………………………………………… 19
Section 3 Workers' Compensation Carrier…………………………… 19
Appendix "A-1" Fire Fighter Wage Table…………………………………… 43
Appendix "A-2" Equipment Operator Wage Table………………………….. 44
Appendix "A-3" Lieutenant Wage Table…………………………………….. 45
Appendix “A-4” District Chief Wage Table………………………………….. 46
Appendix B Positions and Classificatio n of the Bargaining Unit……….. 47
Letter of Understanding No. 1……………………………………………………... 48
Letter of Understanding No. 2……………………………………………………... 50
1
AGREEMENT
This AGREEMENT, made and entered into this __ day of _______, 20 21 , by and between the Charter Township of Plainfield (hereinafter referred to as the “EMPLOYER” or “TOWNSHIP”), and the Plainfield Township Fire Fighters Local 3890, affiliated with International Association of Fire Fighters, AFL-CIO (hereinafter referred to as the “UNION”).
The general purpose of this Agreement is to set forth the wages, hours, term and conditions of employment, which shall prevail, for the duration of this Agreement and to promote orderly and peaceful labor relations for the mutual interest of the Employer, the Employees, and the Union.
ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
Section 1. Bargaining Unit
The bargaining unit consists of all regular full-time employees holding positions in the classifications shown in Appendix “B” and those positions or classifications which may be added or changed as hereinafter provided. In the event a new bargaining unit position or job classification is created by the Employer, the Union reserves the right to bargain collectively the terms of rate of pay, wages, hours of employment and other conditions of employment.
A. The Township shall not enter into any Agreement with its employees covered by this bargaining unit, individually or collectively or with any other organization, which in any way conflicts with the provisions hereof without the Union’s consent.
Section 2. Bargaining Agent
The Employer recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive bargaining representative for those employees in the defined bargaining unit for the purpose of collective bargaining with respect to rate of pay, wages, hours of employment and other conditions of employment as required by law.
ARTICLE 2
UNION SECURITY
Section 1. Check Off
A. For current Union members and those who choose to join the Union, the Employer shall deduct once each month all Union dues, fees, and assessments levied and shall continue to do so for such time and on conditions set forth in the authorization for payroll deduction form provided by the Union, regardless of the employee’s continued membership in the Union. The Employer shall transfer amounts deducted to the Union monthly as set forth below.
B. A properly executed copy of the written authorization for payroll deduction form for each employee for whom dues, fees, and/or assessments are to be deducted, hereunder shall be delivered to the Employer before any payroll deductions are made. Authorizations for payroll deduction are valid whether executed in writing or electronically. The Employer will return any authorization that lacks the employee’s signature to the Union.
C. Deductions for dues for any calendar month shall be made from the first (1 st ) pay period of that month, provided the employee has sufficient net earnings to cover the dues, fees and/or assessments. D eductions for any calendar month shall be remitted to the designated representative of the Union not later than the fifteenth (15 th ) day of each month together with an alphabetical list of employee’s names for whom deductions have been made.
D. The union shall notify the Employer in writing of the proper amounts of dues and any subsequent changes in such amounts. In the event more than the required dues are deducted by the Employer and forwarded to the Union, the Union will reimburse the employee for the excess deduction.
E. If a dispute arises as to whether or not an employee has properly executed or properly revoked a written authorization for payroll deduction form, no further deductions shall be made until the matter is resolved.
F. The Employer shall not be liable to the Union by reason of the requirements of this Section of the Agreement for the remittance or payment of any sum other than that constituting actual deductions made from employee wages and the Union agrees to indemnify and save the Employer harmless against any and all claims, demands, suits, liability and any other action arising from this Section or compliance therewith by the Employer.
Section 2. Collective Bargaining Committee
The Employer agrees to recognize not more than three (3) full-time permanent, non-probationary employees covered by this Agreement as a Collective Bargaining Committee. Members of this Committee shall act in a representative capacity for the purpose of collective bargaining negotiations with the Employer. Participation in collective bargaining negotiations is a voluntary activity engaged in on behalf of the Union and the employees, which it represents. Negotiations will generally be scheduled at a time outside the Township Offices regular office hours, and the employer accordingly shall have no obligation to compensate employees for their collective bargaining committee activities. However, if the Employer and the Union shall mutually agree to schedule any collective bargaining Committee activities during an employee member’s regularly scheduled work day, then that employee member’s time of participation during his regularly scheduled work day shall be treated as hours worked.
Section 3. Union Board
Bargaining unit employees covered by this Agreement shall be represented by the Union Board. The Union Board shall consist of the Union President, Vice-President, Secretary and Treasurer, all of whom shall be permanent, full-time employees who have completed their probationary period. The President shall act in a representative capacity as the chief administrator of this Agreement for the Union. The President or his designee shall also act as the chief representative for purposes of processing and investigating grievances. A Station Representative will also be elected to the non-presiding President station(s), unless another Union Board member is assigned to that station, to assist in investigating and processing grievances at said station(s). The Union Board, and Station Representative, while acting in their representative capacity shall not lose time nor pay for time spent in reducing grievances to writing and/or processing grievances that would otherwise be the representative’s normal working hours. If the Union Board abuses any privileges extended by this Agreement, the Employer and the Union will meet in special conference in an attempt to resolve the abuse. If the abuse problem is not resolved, the Employer reserves the right to revoke these benefits. The Union will furnish the Employer in writing, the current names of its Board President, Vice-President, Secretary and Treasurer, and Station Representative, and will notify the Employer, in writing, of any changes that may occur from time to time in such personnel before the Employer shall have any obligation to recognize and deal with such individual representatives of the Union.
Section 4. Release from Work
When it is necessary for a recognized Union Board representative to leave the workstation to handle Union matters within the Township or grievances in accordance with the grievance procedure, he shall request permission from the Fire Chief, or in his absence the immediate supervisor. The Township shall pay the Bargaining Committee members their regular pay when engaging in collective bargaining during their regular working hours.
Section 5. No Discrimination
No bargaining unit member will be discriminated against for membership in the union or participation in legal Union activities.
ARTICLE 3
UNION REPRESENTATION
Section 1. Investigation and Employee Rights
If a meeting is required by the Employer and involves investigation into misconduct of an employee or management reasonably expects the meeting to result in disciplinary action to an employee, a Union Officer shall be present, unless the employee waives such right to representation in writing prior to the meeting. In such case where a waiver is signed, a copy shall be provided to the Union.
Section 2. Union Representative Rights
The Union Representative shall be allowed reasonable time for the activity described in this Section, during working hours without loss of time or pay upon notification and approval of the Fire Chief. There shall be no pay for any union representative who attends such a disciplinary meeting if the union representative is not scheduled to work at the time the meeting takes place.
ARTICLE 4
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Section 1. Management Rights
The Employer retains and shall have the sole and exclusive right to manage and operate the Township in all its operations and activities. Among the rights of management included only by way of illustration and not by way of limitation are as follows:
(a) To determine all matters pertaining to management policy, to the services to be furnished, and the methods, procedures, means, equipment and machines required to provide such services; to determine the nature and number of operations and departments to be operated and their locations; to eliminate, combine, or establish new departments; to establish classifications of work and determine the number of personnel required and the number of hours required in each employee work schedule; to establish and change employee work schedules; to eliminate or combine classifications; to hire personnel; to direct and control operations; to discontinue, combine, or reorganize any part of all of its operations; to maintain safety, order, and efficiency; to continue and maintain its operations as in the past; to determine the suppliers and customers to whom it will deal; to study and use different methods, processes or equipment; to employ new or different machines or equipment; to establish and enforce requirements that employees obtain specific education and training to operate equipment; to require that employees maintain certification to operate equipment; to substitute mechanical or machine operations for human labor; to use outside assistance or engage independent contractors either inside or outside the township to perform any of the Employer’s operations or phases thereof; to establish job descriptions and work standards as deemed desirable and satisfactory; to make judgments as to the skill and ability of employees; to determine work loads, fair production standards and quality standards and enforce them; to provide and assign relief personnel; and in all respects to carry out the ordinary and customary functions of management. All such rights are vested exclusively in the Employer and shall not be subject to the grievance and arbitration procedures established in this Agreement.
(b) The Employer shall also have the right to promote, demote, discipline, discharge, layoff or recall personnel; to establish and revise from time to time work rules and safety rules and to fix and determine penalties or violations of such rules, provided, however, these rights shall not be exercised in violation of any specific provision of this Agreement and as such shall be subject to the grievance and arbitration procedure in this Agreement.
(c) The Union hereby agrees that the Employer retains the sole and exclusive right to establish and administer, without limitation, implied or otherwise, all matters not specifically and expressly limited by this Agreement.
Section 2. Policy and Procedures
The Employer reserves the right to establish reasonable rules, regulations, policies and procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement. Such rules, regulations, policies and procedures shall be available for inspection and review by employees if such rules, regulations, policies and procedures concern working conditions. If the Union believes that any rules, regulation, policy and/or procedure is inconsistent with the terms of this Agreement, a grievance may be filed by the President at Step 2 of the Grievance Procedure set forth in this Agreement within ten (10) calendar days after the establishment or application of such rule, etc., whichever first occurs, and thereafter considered in accordance with the Grievance Procedure.
ARTICLE 5
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
For purposes of this Agreement, a grievance shall be defined as a complaint or dispute by an employee or employees, or an Officer of the Union, covered by this Agreement arising during the term of this Agreement, concerning the application and/or interpretation of a specific provision or provisions of this Agreement as written.
This grievance procedure is not meant to replace ongoing communication between management and employees. To this end, it is the desire of the parties that all disputes or complaints by employees be resolved, if possible, between the employee and the employee’s immediate supervisor before resorting to the formal grievance procedure set forth below.
Section 1. Grievance Steps
Each grievance shall be processed in accordance with the following procedure.
Section 2. Grievance Procedure
Step 1 . The Union shall meet and discuss the grievance with the Fire Chief, (or in his absence his designee). The grievance will be reduced to writing on the approved grievance form , with any attachments, and will be submitted to the Fire Chief, (or in his absence his designee) within ten (10) calendar days of the time the employee or Union knew or should have known of the existence for the event which gives rise to the grievance. The grievance shall be dated and shall list every Article and Section of the Agreement that is alleged to have been violated by the Employer, the remedy requested and the grievance will be signed by the employee or by the Union if it is a right granted to the Union. All efforts will be made to settle the grievance at this step.
Step 2 . If the grievance is not satisfactorily settled at Step 1 of the Grievance Procedure, the grievance shall be appealed to the Township Manager, or his designee, and the two parties will meet as soon as reasonably possible in an effort to settle the grievance. Proper arrangements will be made by the Employer to ensure the Union Board President’s attendance at such Step discussion meeting. Within ten (10) calendar days after such a meeting, the Township Manager, or his designee, shall include a written disposition on the grievance form and shall return it to the employee and the Union.
Section 3. Arbitration Procedure
Within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the Employer’s written disposition in Step 2 of the Grievance Procedure, the Union may file a written request that the grievance be submitted to arbitration. The request shall be in the Arbitrator Request Form, filed with the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS), and a copy of the form shall be delivered to the Employer, FMCS shall supply to the parties a panel of seven prospective arbitrators. The parties, within a reasonable period of time, shall attempt to mutually select an arbitrator from said panel. Absent mutual agreement, the parties shall, with the decision as to who is to strike first being decided by a flip of a coin, each alternately strike an arbitrator until one (1) arbitrator from the panel remains, who shall then consider the grievance. If no written request to arbitrate is filed with the Employer within the ten (10) calendar day time limit, the grievance shall be considered settled based on the Employer’s last written disposition.
Section 4. Arbitrator’s Powers and Jurisdiction
The jurisdiction of the arbitrator and the arbitrator’s powers shall be limited to the application and interpretation of this Agreement as written. The arbitrator shall, at all times, be governed wholly by the terms of this Agreement and shall have no power or authority to amend, alter or modify this Agreement in any respect, either directly or indirectly, nor shall the arbitrator have any power to change any classification, wage rate, work loads or production standards or to rule on any claim arising out of any insurance or pension program under this Agreement or to issue any award or ruling modifying any matter covered by statute, regulation or ordinance, or to consider any statute or laws or other extra-contract agreements not specifically incorporated in this Agreement. If the issue of arbitrability is raised, the arbitrator shall not determine the merits of any grievance unless arbitrability has been affirmatively decided by the arbitrator. Any award of the arbitrator shall not be retroactive to more than ten (10) calendar days prior to the time that the grievance was first submitted in writing. The arbitrator’s decision shall be final and binding upon the Union, the Employer, and the employees.
Section 5. Arbitration Expenses
Each party to the arbitration shall bear the full costs and expenses of its own witnesses and representatives. However, for all purposes, the time off the job to attend an arbitration hearing shall be considered as hours worked. The compensation and expenses of the arbitrator and any costs incurred in connection with the location of the arbitration hearing shall be shared equally by both parties.
Section 6. Arbitration Hearings
The Union President shall be entitled to attend any arbitration hearing. Any employee or witness involved in a grievance may attend that grievance’s arbitration hearing. If the grievance concerns more than one (1) employee and the attendance of the grievant(s) and/or necessary witnesses would unreasonably impair public services, the Employer reserves the right to schedule the hearing during non-work time. The Employer and the Union both reserve the right to excuse any of its own witnesses from the hearing to return to work after the individual’s testimony is completed.
Section 7. Time Limits
The time limits established in the Grievance Procedure shall be followed by the parties hereto. If the time procedure is not followed by the Union or the employees represented, the grievance shall be considered settled on the basis of the Employer’s last disposition. Grievances, which are considered settled, shall be deemed not to be arbitrable under the Grievance and Arbitration Procedure in this Agreement, and no arbitrator shall have any power to review the grievance or issue any award. If the time procedure is not followed by the Employer, the grievance shall automatically advance to the next step, including arbitration. Time limits may be extended by written, mutual agreement of the parties.
Section 8. Grievance Settlements
The satisfactory settlement of all grievances shall be reduced to writing, written on or attached to each copy of the written grievance, and signed by the representative involved. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all such settlements shall be without precedent to any other grievance.
Section 9. Grievance Form
The grievance form shall be prepared in a manner mutually acceptable to the employer and the Union, which coincides with the grievance procedure established in the Agreement.
ARTICLE 6
DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, discipline or discharge shall be for just cause. The Employer and the Union subscribe to basic principles of progressive discipline; however, the Employer may summarily impose discipline up to and including discharge in appropriate cases. Incidents that occur beyond three (3) years previously will not be considered in evaluating discipline or discharge of an employee. The Employee’s personnel record shall be purged of all references in connection with any prior disciplinary action that occurred beyond three (3) years previously.
Any disciplinary hearing, or any investigatory interview conducted by the employer with the employee which could result in discipline of the employee, shall be conducted in conformance with the legal and procedural requirements required by the Public Employment Relations Act, (PA 336 of 1947) and the Compulsory Arbitration o f Labor Disputes in Police and Fire Departments Act, (PA 312 of 1969).
ARTICLE 7
STRIKES AND ILLEGAL ACTIVITY
Section 1. No Strike Pledge.
The Union agrees that during the term of this Agreement neither it nor its officers, representatives, its members nor employees covered by this Agreement will for any reason engage in any strike or any other activities that may result in any curtailment of work or the restriction of or interference with the Employer’s operation. It is expressly agreed that the scope of activity prohibited in this paragraph is intended to include, but not be limited to, such activities as sympathy strikes, unfair labor practice strikes and a refusal of an employee or employees to cross any type of picket line at any location.
Section 2. Penalty
Any employee who violates the provisions of Article 7 shall be subject to discipline by the Employer, up to and including discharge. Any appeal or review of any discipline imposed for a violation of Article 7 shall be limited to the question of whether the employee or employees did in fact engage in any activity prohibited by Article 7, unless the appeal or review establishes that the employee did not violate the provisions of Article 7 in which case, any disciplinary action imposed may also be reviewed. The Union expressly acknowledges that immediate discharge will be appropriate in circumstances involving gross employee misconduct associated with a violation of the provisions of Article 7.
Section 3. Affirmative Action
The Union agrees that it and its officers and representatives will take prompt affirmative action to prevent or stop any activity prohibited in Article 7 by notifying the employees it represents, in writing, with a copy to the Employer, that it disavows such action.
Section 4. Further Sanctions
If Article 7 of this Agreement is violated, the Employer shall have the right; in addition to any action taken pursuant to Article 7, Section 2 and any other legal remedies the Employer may possess, to obtain injunctive relief.
Section 5. No Lockout
During the term of this Agreement, the Employer, in consideration for the promise on behalf of the Union and the employees it represents to refrain from the conduct prohibited by Article 7, agrees not to lock out any employees covered by this Agreement because of a labor dispute between bargaining unit employees and the Employer.
ARTICLE 8
SENIORITY
Seniority shall be defined as the length of full-time continuous paid service with the Employer since the Employee’s last date of hire. An Employee’s “late date of hire” shall be the most recent date upon which he commenced work. Seniority shall commence only after the employee completes the probationary period hereinafter provided. Employees who commence work on the same date shall be placed on the seniority list in alphabetical order of surnames. The application of seniority shall be limited to the preferences and benefits specifically recited in this Agreement.
Section 1. Probationary Period
All new employees shall be considered to be on probation and shall have no seniority for the first twelve (12) months of employment following their first day of work for the Employer, after which time the employee’s seniority shall be retroactive to his hire date. Until an employee has completed his probationary period, he may be disciplined, laid off, recalled, terminated or discharged at the Employer’s discretion and without recourse for termination, to the grievance procedure. Otherwise, the Union shall represent probationary employees for the purposes of collective bargaining in respect to wages, hours and other terms and conditions of the employment.
Despite any language to the contrary in this Agreement, probationary employees will receive the following benefits:
Accrue sick leave at the rate of 12 hours per month
Three days of paid vacation and 30 hours of personal time
Eligible to receive holiday pay
Employer contribution of 7.5% wages into a defined contribution retirement plan (with 5% required employee match)
Section 2. Loss of Seniority
Whenever seniority is lost, the employee and the Union shall be notified within thirty (30) days and a copy placed in the employee’s personnel file. Seniority shall terminate for the following reasons:
A) By voluntary termination or retirement.
B) If the employee is discharged for cause.
C) Absence from work for three consecutive working days without properly notifying the Employer unless giving of notice is impossible due to circumstances beyond the employee’s control.
D) Failure to report for work. If the employee fails to report to work within three (3) working days following notification of recall, unless the Employer mutually agrees to extend this period an additional four (4) working days due to exceptional circumstances.
E) If the employee is on layoff status consecutively for a period of twenty-four (24) months or the employee’s length of seniority at the time of layoff, whichever is the lesser.
F) If the employee fails to return on the required date following a leave of absence or vacation unless mutually extended by both parties due to exceptional circumstances.
G) If the employee is on medical leave for a period of twelve (12) months or the employee’s seniority at the time of the leave, whichever is the lesser unless the Employer mutually agrees to extend this period due to exceptional circumstances.
H) If the employee either obtains or works at any other unauthorized employment while on an approved leave of absence.
Section 3. Seniority List
The Employer shall furnish two copies of an up-to-date seniority list for the bargaining unit to the Union President at each anniversary date of this Agreement. The seniority list will contain the employee’s name, seniority date, classification, and wage rate.
ARTICLE 9
LAYOFF AND RECALL
Section 1. Definition
A layoff shall be defined as a reduction in the work force.
Section 2. Temporary Layoff
A temporary layoff shall be one of five (5) months or less duration. When a temporary layoff is anticipated, the Employer may give employees in the job classification(s) affected an opportunity to volunteer for the temporary layoff. If insufficient employees volunteer, then layoff by particular job classification(s) affected shall be as follows: probationary employees in the classification(s) affected shall be laid off first. Any further reduction shall be in inverse order of seniority among affected employees. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, a junior employee may be retained if the senior employee(s) remaining in the classification do not presently have the necessary skill, ability, training, and reliability to perform satisfactorily the remaining required work and satisfactorily meet the required hours in the remaining work schedule.
Section 3. Indefinite Layoff
When the work force is reduced due to conditions which are anticipated to be of an indefinite nature and it becomes necessary to layoff employees for an indefinite period of time, employees will be laid off as follows, probationary employees in the classification(s) affected shall be laid off first. Any further reduction shall be in inverse order of seniority among employees in the classification(s) affected. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, a junior employee may be retained if the senior employee(s) remaining in the classification do not presently have the necessary skill, ability, training, and reliability to perform satisfactorily the remaining required work and satisfactorily meet the required hours in the remaining work schedule.
Section 4. Notification of Layoff
The Employer will give notice of temporary layoff at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to effective time of the temporary layoff. The Employer will give notice of indefinite layoff at least five (5) working days prior to the effective date of the indefinite layoff.
Section 5. Recall
In the event of a recall from a temporary layoff or an indefinite layoff, employees laid off shall be recalled in inverse order of layoff, provide, however, the Employer may recall a less senior employee if a more senior employee does not have the necessary skill, ability, training, and reliability to perform satisfactorily the remaining required work and satisfactorily meet the required hours in the remaining work schedule. When all seniority employees have been returned to work following a layoff, such employees shall be returned to the classifications and shifts, which they occupied before the layoff.
Section 6. Notification of Recall
Notification of recall from layoff shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the employee’s last known address. Employees who decline recall or who, in the absence or extenuating circumstances beyond their control, fail to respond within two (2) working days following receipt of notification shall be presumed to have resigned and their names shall be removed from the seniority list.
Section 7. Employee Recall Data
It shall be the responsibility of each employee to notify the Employer, in writing, of any change of address or telephone number. The employee’s address and telephone number as they appear on the Employer’s record shall be conclusive.
Section 8. Work by Non-Bargaining Unit Employees
Non-bargaining unit employees may continue to perform such work, as was the normal custom prior to the time this agreement was executed, except as may be specifically provided otherwise in this agreement. The Employer agrees, however, that it will not assign bargaining unit work of more than five (5) workdays duration to any non-bargaining unit employees while a qualified bargaining unit member is on layoff. Non-bargaining unit employees will in no way be used to delay the recall of a bargaining unit employee. Recall pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with this agreement, except in extraordinary situations where the Employer shall be permitted to contact laid off employees by telephone or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the employee’s last known address.
ARTICLE 10
PROMOTIONS, CHANGE OF JOB AND ACTING ASSIGNMENT
Section 1. Promotion
A. When a permanent position or vacancy occurs which would result in a promotion in the bargaining unit, which the Township wishes to fill, the Fire Chief shall post the vacant position on every station’s bulletin board for a period of fourteen (14) calendar days announcing the upcoming opening for which candidates may apply. The posted notice will indicate the shift, department, hours per week, classification title, rank, minimum and any additional desired qualifications.
B. A “permanent” position or vacancy for purposes of this Section is one that is expected to operate more than twelve (12) consecutive months. Positions or vacancies that are expected to operate less than twelve (12) consecutive months (including vacancies occasioned by leaves of absence or vacation) shall not be posted for bid under this section.
C. The Promotional procedure shall consist of a competitive process to determine a pool of the most qualified applicants. The procedure shall include a written examination (may include assessment center) and an oral board examination. If Management proposes to use another means of testing, that other means of testing must be consented to by the Union prior to implementation. A study guide for the written examination shall be provided from the Fire Chief in a reasonable time period prior to the examination. All tests and scores shall be confidential and maintained by the Fire Chief or his designee. In determining each applicant’s score, the written examination shall be weighted fifty percent (50%) and the oral examination shall be weighted fifty percent (50%). A passing score of seventy-five percent (75%) on the written examination is required in order to be considered further in the promotion process.
D. Unless otherwise exempted by the Fire Chief for good cause , a minimum of five (5) years Lieutenant experience is required to take th e promotional exam for District Chief .
E. The oral board shall consist of three to five (3 to 5) individuals determined by the Fire Chief. Records of the oral board shall be kept confidential by the Fire Chief.
F. The three (3) highest-ranking applicants by composite score shall constitute a pool of applicants from which the Fire Chief shall select the person(s) who will be promoted.
1. Following a selection of one (1) candidate, the applicant who had ranked fourth (4 th ), will then be added to the pool list and will be eligible for consideration during the next opening that occurs during the active period of the pool list.
2. The pool list shall remain active for a period of one (1) year from the date that it was posted following the promotional procedure.
G. All promotions will carry a one (1) year probationary period. During this period either the employee or the Fire Chief may make a determination that the employee is not suited for the position. If this is determined, the employee will return to the position held prior to the promotion and the last person hired may be laid off.
H. The Township will strive to promote from within the bargaining unit, however, the Township may solicit and consider applicants from outside the bargaining unit at the same time it considers internal candidates. If any non-union candidates are ranked Number 1, Number 2 or Number 3 in the finalist pool of applicants, the pool will be expanded, and one union candidate shall be added. Internal candidates may be given preference for selection as determined by the Fire Chief in his discretion. Internal candidates will have ten (10) points added to their written score if an external candidate is considered and allowed to take the written test.
Section 2. Change of Job
A. An employee who has been transferred or promoted to a position outside the bargaining unit to a fire service position with Plainfield Charter Township shall continue to accrue seniority credits.
B. An employee who is promoted or permanently transferred to another classification shall be placed in the lowest step of the new classification that will provide the same wage or a wage increase.
C. An employee who is demoted shall be placed in the appropriate step based on the employee’s seniority at the time of the demotion, even if the employee experiences a wage cut.
Section 3. Return to Classification
A. An employee who has successfully completed a probationary period in his present position classification may initiate a written request for voluntary return to the bargaining unit position and pay level, equal to the employee’s years of service, from which the employee has held prior permanent status.
B. The Fire Chief may grant or deny any request for a voluntary return to the previous classification solely at his discretion.
C. Any return made in accordance with this section of the contract shall be permanent and the employee shall have no further right to be reinstated to his/her former position classification and/or pay level.
D. An employee who is returned to their classification shall be placed in the appropriate step based on their seniority at the time of his return to the classification.
Section 4. Acting Assignment
A. The Township, in its sole discretion, shall determine if a vacancy exists which is to be filled under this Section. The Township may temporarily assign any bargaining unit employee to perform a permanent new job or vacancy until the position has been awarded under this Section or otherwise filled by the Township. The employee so assigned shall be paid their regular rate or, if it is a higher rated classification, at the first step on the scale that will result in an increase for the employee.
B. When additional help is needed on a temporary basis to assist another classification, area or shift, the Township reserves the right to make temporary transfers, not to exceed twelve (12) consecutive months.
ARTICLE 11
WORK ASSIGNMENT
Section 1. Station bids
A. Employees that bid a respective station will be assigned to that station for a period of one (1) year. The employer reserves the right to assign the employee to another station temporarily for training purposes or for the purpose of becoming familiar and proficient with the geographic area served by the station, or when the needs of the Department, as determined by the Fire Chief, exist. Under normal circumstances, assignments to another station for training purposes will not exceed a 28-day duty cycle.
B. Station bids for all fire suppression employees will take place in the first week of January each year. All bids for stations must be submitted by December first (1 st ) to be eligible. All requested station bids will be assigned on a seniority basis.
Section 2 Extreme Weather Conditions
Work assignments, excluding emergency activities, and those duties that do not hinder daily operations will not take place outdoors in the event of extreme weather conditions as determined by the Chief.
Section 3. Station Maintenance
Employees shall be assigned duties with respect to the maintenance and repairs of stations, grounds, and administrative offices in the fire stations. Employees will not be required to perform any repair work requiring a licensed professional.
Section 4. Limited Duty Hours
Consideration be given to firefighters’ ability to remain in a state of readiness and perform emergency work functions when called upon; and
Recognition that firefighters are paid for all hours on duty in their 24 -h our shift.
The Fire Chief will schedule work assignments as he deems in the best interests of the Department, the firefighters and the residents of the Township. The Fire Chief shall not abuse his discretion in this regard.
ARTICLE 12
TYPES OF LEAVE
Section 1. Sick Leave
All regular full time employees shall be eligible for sick leave. Employees serving their initial probationary period shall be entitled to these provisions at one-half (1/2) the rate for their probationary year. Sick leave will accrue at a rate of twelve (12) hours per month for 24 hour employees. Non-24 hour employees shall accrue sick leave at a rate per month equal to the number of hours in their normal duty shift. All employees shall have a maximum accumulation determined by multiplying the employee’s sick leave rate as defined above by ninety (90). For employees hired after September 1, 1999, the maximum accumulation shall be 45 days times the employee’s sick leave rate. The Employer will only apply the 45 days maximum if the Township institutes for all Township employees.
A. An employee shall be entitled to use his accumulated sick leave for any absence necessitated by his personal illness or by off-duty injury.
B . An employee shall be entitled to use his accumulated compensatory time in lieu of paid sick leave. In the event an employee is injured or has become ill while using vacation leave the employee may convert vacation leave used to sick leave used upon notice from a physician.
C . Upon separation from employment, employees shall be paid one-half (1/2) of their accrued but unused sick benefits, provided the employee has at least eight (8) years seniority with the Township. At the end of each calendar year, each employee shall be paid for one-half (1/2) accrued but unused sick leave in excess of the ninety (90) day maximum defined above.
Section 2. Bereavement Leave
Upon request a 24 hour employee will be granted up to two (2) working days if the death is within the duty cycle * and one (1) day if the death occurs on a day when the employee is not scheduled to work is out of the duty cycle of paid bereavement leave for the death of an immediate family member. Upon request a non-24 hour employee will be granted up to three working days of paid bereavement leave for the death of an immediate family member. Immediate family shall mean current spouse, parent, grandparent, current father-in-law, mother-in-law, son, daughter, brother or sister, current daughter-in-law or son-in-law, current sister-in-law or brother-in-law, current stepson, current stepdaughter, and grandchildren. Employees who desire more than one/two/three days, or who wish bereavement leave for other than immediate family, may elect to take sick leave or vacation time upon obtaining approval from the Fire Chief. For purposes of this section, all regularly scheduled overtime will be calculated as hours worked.
If the death occurs on a working day, the employee can elect to begin the bereavement period on that day and be paid regular pay for the hours actually worked; however, the employee may elect to use sick leave for the remainder of that day.
* A duty cycle constitutes three consecutive workdays for 24-hour shift personnel. One day on, one day off, one day on, one day off, and one day on. If the death occurs on any day during the duty cycle, the next two (2) scheduled workdays are considered bereavement leave.
Section 3. Emergency Leave
In the event that a member of the immediate family undergoes a medical emergency, defined as a condition which threatens life or bodily functions, upon notification of the Fire Chief, an employee will be granted a leave of absence with pay for a period not to exceed three (3) working days. Any days taken for emergency leave will be deducted from the employee’s sick leave bank. Immediate family is described as in Section 2.
Section 4. Jury Leave
Employees will be given leave of absence with pay for working time lost when called to serve jury duty. Such employees will be paid at their regular rate for all working time lost. In consideration of receiving their regular pay, employees shall assign to the employer all other remuneration received (exclusive of mileage, travel, or meal allowance) for jury duty during the same period. Any employee called to such duty shall return to work promptly when excused from jury duty. Employees will first report to work before reporting to jury duty.
Section 5. Military Leave
Military leaves of absence shall be granted as required by state and federal law. Leave for annual military training for up to two (2) weeks shall be with full pay, less the amount received for military duty. It is the responsibility of the employee to furnish the Township with documentation regarding military pay. The employee shall accumulate seniority during military leave but shall not accumulate any other rights unless required by law.
Section 6. Unpaid Leave of Absence
Except as expressly provided in this agreement all leaves of absence shall be without pay. Fringe benefits (including, but not limited to vacation, longevity bonus, insurance coverage, etc.) shall not accumulate or accrue during any unpaid leave of absence, except as expressly provided in this Agreement. The Employer shall pay insurance premiums as specified under this Agreement through the end of the insurance billing cycle during which an employee commences an unpaid leave of absence. Unless the unpaid leave of absence is terminated before the end of the next succeeding insurance billing cycle, the employee shall be solely responsible for making necessary conversion arrangements to continue desired insurance coverage in effect through the end of the insurance billing cycle during which the employee’s leave of absence is terminated and the employee returns to work. Thereafter, the Employer shall recommence its payment of insurance premiums subject to the carrier’s policies and restrictions. Seeking or engaging in outside employment while on a leave of absence or falsification of the reason for the leave of absence shall constitute just cause for disciplinary action, up to and including discharge.
A. Personal Leave
Personal leaves of absence, without pay not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days, may be granted to regular full time employees at the discretion of the Employer. A request for a personal leave of absence shall be in writing and signed by the employee and shall state the reasons for the leave and its requested duration. If the employee desires to extend an approved personal leave of absence, such extension shall be submitted in writing at least five (5) workdays prior to the expiration of the approved leave. The Employer shall have the sole and exclusive right to determine if the personal leave of absence may be granted or extended and its decision shall not be subject to the Grievance and Arbitration Procedure. Requests for personal leave should be filed at least fifteen (15) working days before such leave is desired, except in emergency situations.
B. Injury, Illness, and Pregnancy Leave
A leave of absence without pay for injury, illness (mental or physical) and/or pregnancy will be granted to employees with one (1) year seniority upon proper written application subject to the Employer’s right to require medical proof of illness or disability. Such a leave shall be granted only after the employee has exhausted all accrued paid vacation credits and accrued sick time under this Agreement. An employee may be on leave for a period of not more than three (3) months. An extension of this period not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days may be granted by the Employer upon proper written application at least five (5) workdays prior to expiration of the approved leave. The Employer may require at any time, as a condition of continuance of a leave of absence, proof of a continuing illness or disability. In situations were the employee’s physical or mental condition raise a question as to the employee’s capacity to perform the job, the Employer may require a medical examination by a physician of the Employer’s choice at the Employer’s expense. If appropriate, the Employer may require the employee to take a leave of absence under this section. Employees who are anticipating a leave of absence under this section may be required to present a physician’s certificate recommending that the employee continue at work, and in all such cases, the employee’s attendance and job responsibilities must be satisfactorily maintained. Employees are required to notify the Employer in writing of any condition that will require leave of absence under this section, together with the anticipated date for such leave. This notice shall be given to the employer by the employee, or his designate, within ten (10) calendar days after the employee is first aware of the condition, or the employee shall be deemed to have waived any right to reinstatement or re-employment at the conclusion of such leave. All employees returning to work for a leave of absence must present a physician’s certificate indicating that the employee is physically and medically able to perform the employee’s job. The Employer will thereafter have two (2) weeks within which to reinstate and place the employee, in accordance with the seniority provisions of this Agreement.
The Employer follows the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), as amended, for eligible employees. Employees desiring FMLA leaves of absence shall provide written notice on the required FMLA form and may be required to provide medical or military certification of the need for the leave in accordance with the FMLA and its implementing regulations.
Section 7. Legal Action
Any employee who is required to appear on behalf of the Township in any legal proceedings during off-duty hours shall be compensated at one and one-half times (1½) their regular rate of pay for such time spent, with two (2) hour minimum. In consideration of receiving their regular pay, employees shall assign to the employer all other remuneration received.
ARTICLE 13
WORKMAN’S COMPENSATION
Section 1. Injury and Notification
A “Duty Injury/Illness Leave” shall mean a leave required as a result of the employee incurring an injury/illness while on duty in the employment of the Township, covered by Michigan’s Workman’s Compensation Act, which the Township will provide. To be eligible for duty injury/illness leave an employee shall immediately report any illness or injury to his immediate supervisor. Exceptions for “immediate notification” will be made for an injury or illness that progressively worsens over a period of time. However, at a minimum, a journal entry must be made in all instances of injury or potential injur y by the end of the shift in which the injury or potential injury occurs.
Section 2. Other Benefits
Employees on duty injury/illness leave shall accrue sick and vacation in the same manner as other employees (up to the first 90 days of worker’s compensation leave and ½ rate for an additional 30 days, and none after 120 days) and continue to accumulate holiday pay in the same manner as other employees not scheduled to work on the day of the holiday. All other benefits not restricted by other contracts or agreements, such as group health care insurance coverage, group life insurance, etc., will be continued and paid by the Township in the same manner as other employees.
Section 3. Workman’s Compensation Carrier
All Workers’ compensation payments will be mailed directly from the Workers’ Compensation Carrier to the employee’s home . The Township will continue to provide the supplemental policy for duty injury/illness that is currently provided. In the event that the current supplemental policy is discontinued, the Township will provide a substantially similar duty injury/illness supplement by self-insurance or the carrier of its choice.
ARTICLE 14
LIGHT DUTY
Section 1. Procedure
The following provisions shall establish the criteria and procedure to be used in determining light duty for an employee who has suffered an off duty illness or injury or is otherwise unable to perform the duties of his regular position. The employee may utilize his benefits of sick leave or other credits in not reporting for regular duty. If the employee wishes, he may make a request to the Fire Chief for performing light duty assignments. The assignment and working hours shall be at the discretion of the Fire Chief. Light duty will not exceed sixteen (16) weeks per calendar year, unless the Chief extends the assignment.
Section 2. Medical Determination and Process
The Fire Chief, based upon the employee’s physician’s determination or the determination of a physician designated by the Township, shall determine the extent and the degree of physical limitation as it relates to the job duties of the employee. If the employee is found to be incapable of performing the required regular job duties, the Fire Chief, shall determine whether or not an employee shall be assigned to light duty, consistent with the limitations of the employee.
ARTICLE 15
PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS
Section 1. New Employees
The Township will require all employees to take and pass a physical examination at the time of hire.
Section 2. Regular Physicals
After completion of probation, all employees will be required to have a physical examination every year. There will be no cost to employees for physicals. The physical exam will be conducted by a contractor designated by the Township. The components of the physical will be consistent with NFPA 1582 as listed in Section 2-4.1.4. The exam must be sufficiently thorough to ensure that the employee can safely and effectively perform all aspects of his job. The physical shall also include one of three (3) cancer screenings with all three (3) being completed on a three (3) year cycle.
Section 3. Requests for Examination
In situations where, in the Fire Chief’s judgment, the employee’s condition raises a question as to the employee’s capacity to perform their job, the Township may require an examination by an appropriate medical practitioner chosen by the Township at the Township’s expense and, if appropriate, require the employee to take a leave of absence pursuant to Article 12 of the Agreement.
Section 4. Reasonable Accommodation
In the event that an employee is not medically certified to perform the duties of a fire fighter as a result of a physical examination and the Township cannot reasonably accommodate that employee’s condition in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, he will be placed on disability leave.
ARTICLE 16
PHYSICAL FITNESS
The Plainfield Fire Department and the Plainfield Township Fire Fighter’s Union agree to continue a Physical Fitness Program for all fire suppression personnel. This Program will serve to promote and evaluate the fitness levels required for fire suppression personnel. All on duty fire suppression personnel shall participate in a one-hour physical exercise workout on each duty shift, 7A-7P.
THE PROGRAM
All fire suppression personnel shall participate in a physical exercise workout for at least 60 minutes, but not more than 90 minutes per shift. Such exercise period shall be scheduled during the course of the activity day with up to 20 minutes following for showering and personal grooming. There is no time limit after 1700 hours.
Once the daily cursory checks are completed, the physical fitness program has precedence over all other details and duties, the exception of emergency response, emergency service, repairs to apparatus or equipment, trainings, or special events such as fire education, station tours, and public relations events. Personnel will coordinate the time they wish to workout with the shift supervisor. Requests will not be unreasonably denied unless it interferes with the exceptions listed above.
The physical exercise workout can either take place at the fire station or a health & fitness club within the district. The health & fitness clubs that are selected will be mutually agreed upon by the Union and the Fire Chief. If available , the Plainfield Fire Department will provide health & fitness club memberships for all on-duty personnel while on duty; all fees related to these memberships will be paid by the Plainfield Fire Department.
All fire suppression personnel will take and complete the existing Physical Ability Evaluation (PAE) on a yearly basis. The results of the PAE will become part of the employee’s confidential medical record and may be used to determine continued employment.
In the event an employee should fail they will be given up to 30 calendar days to retest. If they fail a second time, a meeting will be held between the Fire Chief, the employee, and the employee’s Union representative to discuss the employee’s non-compliance. As a result of this meeting, the employee may be placed on restricted duty performing only non-emergency activities. The restricted duty shall be a 50 hr week Mon thru Friday 7AM to 6PM with a 1 - hour lunch. During the restricted duty they will be provided with up to 2 hrs. per day to perform physical fitness activities. The employee will be given the opportunity to meet with and have a program developed by a physical trainer. The employee may request a retest at any time during the restricted duty period. If after 6 months, the employee is still not able to complete the test in the specified time, the Fire Chief will meet with the employee and the employee’s Union representative to discuss the employee’s employment status with the fire department .
Any changes to the Physical Ability Evaluation shall be mutually agreed upon by the Fire Chief and the Union.
ARTICLE 17
HOURS OF WORK
Section 1. Work Schedules
A. All work shifts, including the number of hours and days in the work schedule shall be established by the Township, consistent with this Section.
The parties currently recognize two ( 2 ) normal work schedule s or “tour s of duty” for all bargaining unit employees:
a) 24 hour shifts. 24 hours on, 24 hours off, 24 hours on, 24 hours off, 24 hours on, 96 (4 days) off. 212 hours in a 28-day cycle.
b) 12 hour shifts. 12 hours on for 4 consecutive days followed by 4 consecutive days off.
c) Alternate schedules, such as ten (10) hours, may be used by the Fire Chief for training purposes. When assigned to a ten (10) hour shift for training purposes, the employee will continue to be paid his 24-hour salary for the duration of the training period.
d) The classifications of Fire Fighter and Equipment Operator may be scheduled either 24 or 12 hour shifts, in the discretion of the Fire Chief. Once scheduled to a 12 or 24 - hour shift, the employee’s shift will not be changed for a minimum of 12 months. The classifications of District Chief and Lieutenant may only be scheduled on a 24-hour basis in accordance with a) above .
Section 2. Work Hours
The shift starting time for personnel assigned to 24-hour shifts shall be 0700 hours to 0700 hours the next day , unless mutually agreed otherwise by the Township and the Union. The shift starting time for personnel assigned to 12 hour shifts shall be 0700 hours to 1900 hours the same day, unless mutually agreed otherwise by the Township and the Union.
Section 3. Fill-In for Other Employee Absences .
The P arties agree that bargaining unit employees will not be forced to change their work schedules to fill-in for another employee’s scheduled absence without 2 weeks ’ prior notice. A non-scheduled absence shall be described as employees taking time off without 24 hours ’ notice.
ARTICLE 18
OVERTIME AND CALLBACK
Section 1. Overtime
The Employer shall endeavor to equalize the opportunity to work scheduled overtime among employees who are capable of satisfactorily performing the required work.
A. Employees will receive time and one-half (1½) their respective regular rates of pay for all hours worked in excess of their respective “normal” work schedules.
B. For purposes of the FLSA 28-day reconciliation period overtime calculation, overtime pay eligibility will include those days when an employee is absent on authorized vacation. The employee shall be considered to have worked the shifts during such vacation. Employees absent on leave other than vacation shall not be considered to have worked during such absence and those hours will not be included in hours worked for purposes of calculating overtime.
C. At the request of any employee eligible for overtime pay, the Fire Chief may provide that, in lieu of cash payments for overtime, the employee may be allowed time off equal to time and one-half the number of hours of overtime worked. Any such time off shall be taken at a time mutually agreed upon by the employee and the Fire Chief during the calendar year in which the overtime was worked. Further deferment of such time off shall be allowed only if requested by the employee and approved by the Fire Chief. In the event that such time off is not taken by the employee within the limiting time, the employee shall be given cash payment for the overtime hours worked at the overtime rate as of December 31 st of the calendar year for which paid.
D. T he Township may utilize non-bargaining unit employees to fill any full time vacancies the Fire Chief determines to fill.
Section 2. Callback
Any employee called back to work after he has completed his regular workday shall be guaranteed at least two (2) hours pay at a time and one-half (1½) the employee’s straight time regular rate, for any call with two station response and as otherwise determined by the Fire Chief . Any employee called back for any other reason after he has completed his regular workday shall be guaranteed at least one (1) hour of pay at time and one-half (1½) the employee’s straight time rate.
ARTICLE 19
TRADE TIME PROCEDURE
Section 1. Trading of Work Days
An employee shall be allowed to trade scheduled days with other full time employees upon application and approval in accordance with the administrative procedures of the Fire Department. Employees shall be allowed to trade, and be “owing” at any one time, a maximum of nine (9) shifts with other employees. If an employee is injured or ill (not related to a Workers Compensation claim) to the extent that he is unable to work, he may trade an unlimited number of shifts with other employees. At the request of Management, an employee will provide documentation from a physician that he/she is unable to work due to injury or illness.
Section 2. Compliance with Fair Labor Standards Act
All trades because they are voluntary by the employee shall not change hours worked as contemplated in the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). Individuals who agreed to work an exchange of time become responsible for this time. In the event they are unable to work this time, for any reason, it will be their responsibility to arrange for someone else to work in their place.
Section 3. Acknowledgement of Good Faith Intent by Union
The Union acknowledges that Management is not responsible for administering or enforcing any agreements involving bargaining unit members regarding Trading of Work Days. The Union will exercise all reasonable efforts to keep any disagreements or disputes regarding Trading of Work Days among its members from involving the Township to the extent that its members may wish to allege a claim against or a responsibility of the Township to enforce a private agreement or to compensate a bargaining unit member.
In the event that the Trading of Work Days procedure results in a claim against the Township or requires an expenditure of monetary resources to address a claim, the Union agrees to meet with Management, according to the provisions of Article 34, Section 2, to negotiate a resolution of the problem.
ARTICLE 20
WAGES
Section 1. Wages.
During the term of this Agreement, wages and classifications shall be as set forth in Appendices “A-1” through “A-4 ”.
Section 2. Paychecks .
Employee paychecks will be paid via direct deposit on a bi-weekly basis.
ARTICLE 21
HOLIDAYS
Section 1. Recognized Holidays
The following days are recognized as holidays:
New Year’s Day
Martin Luther King Jr. Day
2. President’s Day
3. Good Friday
4. Memorial Day
5. Independence Day
6. Labor Day
7. Thanksgiving Day
8. Day after Thanksgiving
9. Day before Christmas (1/2)
10. Christmas Day
11. Day before New Year’s (1/2)
12. Thirty (30) hours of personal time subject to prior approval by the Fire Chief
Section 2. Holiday Eligibility
In order to be eligible for Holiday Pay, an employee must be:
1. A seniority employee who has completed the probationary period;
2. An employee on the active payroll as of the date of the holiday; and not on layoff, leave of absence or suspension; and
3. An employee who is scheduled to work on a recognized holiday but fails to report and perform all required work shall not receive any holiday pay for such holiday.
Section 3. Holiday Celebration
Recognized holidays shall be recognized on the day of the actual holiday .
Section 4. Holiday Pay
Eligible regular full-time employees shall receive ten (10) hours pay for each recognized full day holiday. Five (5) hours pay for each half-day holiday. Holiday pay shall be at the employee’s straight time rate. The person who actually works the holiday gets paid at time and a half for holiday hours worked. An employee who works holiday hours that are not his regularly scheduled shift shall receive double time for such holiday hours worked.
Section 5. Holiday During Vacation
An employee who is on approved vacation on a day that a holiday is observed shall be paid for the holiday, provided that he works his entire scheduled workday prior to leaving on vacation and immediately following vacation.
ARTICLE 22
VACATION
Vacation entitlement full-time employees shall earn leave in accordance with the following schedule.
Section 1. Probationary Period
An employee shall not be entitled to a vacation during their probationary period unless approved by the Fire Chief.
Section 2. Probationary Employees
Following the probationary period an employee is entitled to five (5) days vacation for non-twenty-four (24) hour shift employees and three (3) days vacation for twenty-four (24) hour shift employees of vacation.
Section 3. Non-Probationary Employees
Full-time employees shall join the following vacation schedule on January 1 st following the completion of their probationary period.
Section 4. Past Employment Credits
An employee who has had past continuous employment with the fire department in a paid on-call or part-time position shall have that service time applied to the accumulation of vacation credits at the rate of one (1) year for each four (4) years of continuous employment.
Section 5. Vacation Schedule
Non-24 Hour Shift Employees :
1 year = 5 days 10 years = 18 days
2 years = 10 days 11 years = 19 days
3 years = 11 days 12 years = 20 days
4 years = 12 days 13 years = 21 days
5 years = 13 days 14 years = 22 days
6 years = 14 days 15 years = 23 days
7 years = 15 days 16 years = 24 days
8 years = 16 days 17 years = 25 days
9 years = 17 days
24-Hour Shift Employees :
1 year = 3 days 10 years = 8 days
2 years = 6 days 11 years = 9 days
3 years = 6 days 12 years = 9 days
4 years = 6 days 13 years = 10 days
5 years = 6 days 14 years = 10 days
6 years = 6 days 15 years = 11 days
7 years = 7 days 16 years = 11 days
8 years = 7 days 17 years = 12 days
9 years = 8 days
Section 6. Vacation Usage
Vacation must be taken in full shift or half shift increments. The Fire Chief or his designee may approve lesser increments.
A. Non-24 hour shift employees’ vacation day shall consist of the number of scheduled hours in the employee’s normal shift.
B. 24-hour shift employees’ vacation day consists of a scheduled 24-hour tour of duty.
Section 7. Vacation Scheduling
Employees are encouraged to submit their request on forms provided by the Township, for vacation leave by November 1 st of each year for vacation periods scheduled to occur the following year. The employer will return requests with approval or disapproval by December 1 st of the same year. In the case of conflicts between employees who have properly requested vacation leave under this Section, the employee with the greater seniority shall be given preference. Vacation requests submitted to the Employer during the established scheduling period of each year shall be given priority over those received outside the established scheduling period of each year without regard to the seniority of employees submitting requests outside said period.
A vacation request may be granted any time it doesn’t interfere with a vacation already approved and does not unreasonably interfere with the operation of the Fire Department. Requests submitted outside said period shall be granted on a first come, first serve basis. Approval/Disapproval will be returned as soon as possible. Upon completion of the Department Vacation Schedule, the vacation calendar shall be posted (which may be electronic) and updated. The Fire Chief (or his designee) will schedule relief for vacations.
Section 8. Vacation Pay
Vacation pay shall be at the employee’s regular straight time rate, exclusive of all premiums in effect at the time the employee takes vacation leave. However, all regularly scheduled overtime will be calculated as hours worked for purposes of this section.
Section 9 . Vacation Carryover
An employee may carry over or choose to be paid for up to one (1) week (72 hours for 24-hour scheduled personnel and 50 hours for other non-24-hour shift scheduled personnel) of vacation from the previous year. Any request to carry over or be paid for additional vacation must be in writing, have the written permission of the Fire Chief, and be submitted to the Township Manager by December 1 st each year. Decisions as to grant or deny the request will be made by the Township Manager at his sole discretion. If the employee is deprived of a scheduled vacation by action of the Employer, the employee shall be entitled to priority with respect to rescheduling said deprived vacation. If such deprived vacation cannot be rescheduled during the anniversary year in which it is available, the employee shall be entitled to a three (3) month extension of time in which to reschedule the vacation.
Section 1 0 . Benefits on Termination
Employees whose employment relationship with the Employer ends for any reason will receive pay for accrued but unused vacation leave in any of the following circumstances:
A. If an employee retires in accordance with the retirement plan currently in effect. Employees considering retirement are requested to give a six (6) month written notice to the Township Manager before retiring.
B. If an employee resigns from employment and a minimum of two (2) weeks advance notice is given to the Employer; or the Employer and the employee mutually agree upon less than two (2) weeks notice.
C. If an employee is laid off and request payment of vacation pay, provided however, that such vacation pay shall be designated to the period of the layoff.
D. In the event of the death of an employee, vacation pay shall be paid to the employee’s estate.
E. If an employee is discharged by the Employer.
ARTICLE 23
UNIFORMS
Section 1. Uniforms and Equipment
It is agreed that Management will consult with the Union with respect to the quality of the below listed articles of uniform and protective equipment for the purchases made during the life of this Agreement. Management will furnish the below listed items. It is further agreed that all replacement of said uniforms and protective equipment shall be made on an “as needed” basis. It is the intent of Management that the quality of said uniforms and protective equipment would be such as to provide reasonable and adequate durability and safety protection.
Uniforms and Equipment Listing:
Work Uniforms Four (4) T-shirts
(pants, shirts and name badge) Winter Jacket
Working Gloves (insulated) Spring Jacket
Winter and Summer Hats Sweatshirt
Section 2. Number of Uniforms
Management agrees to provide four (4) sets of work uniforms per employee.
Section 3. Boot/Shoe Allowance
A two hundred fifty ($250.00) per year allowance for shoes and boots and essential items will be paid by the second Monday in April of each year.
Section 4. Approved Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
The Fire Department shall provide PPE that are MIOSH A approved.
ARTICLE 24
FIRE DEPARTMENT LIVING QUARTERS
Section 1. Living Quarters
The Township shall provide and maintain clean, safe and comfortable living quarters at the fire stations. The kitchen and living rooms will not normally be a meeting and gathering place for personnel that are not on shift. Departmental tours scheduled in advance may include any portion of a fire station, except the bunkroom/bedrooms. Areas of the station that are viewed during a scheduled tour will be at the discretion of the person conducting the tour. The bunkroom/bedrooms will be off limits to everyone except on-shift personnel and chief officers.
Section 2. Living Quarters Accommodations
The living quarters shall include a stove, oven, microwave, full size refrigerator, beds, pots/pans, dishes, silverware, linens, chairs, TV and lights. The Township shall retain the discretion to determine the location and configuration of the living quarters in any station.
ARTICLE 25
SAFETY AND HEALTH COMMITTEE
Section 1. Committee Appointments
There shall be established a joint Safety and Health Committee. The Union President shall appoint two (2) members. The Chief shall appoint such members as he deems appropriate. Vacancies shall be filled immediately. The Committee shall meet no less than once every two (2) months to address health and safety conditions and concerns. Meetings may also be called on written request by the appointee of either the Fire Chief or the Union President at times mutually agreed to by both parties. In any event, this shall be no later than fourteen (14) calendar days after written demand in order to discuss urgent issues.
Section 2. Committee Responsibilities
The Committee shall have the responsibility to:
A. Promote safety for all department members.
B. Develop information on accident/injury sources and rates.
C. Investigate Fire Department facilities and equipment to detect hazardous conditions or unsafe work methods including, but not limited to, training procedures.
D. Review and analyze all reports of serious job-related accidents, deaths, injuries, illnesses (exposure to contagious diseases; exposure to hazardous materials).
E. Review all specifications for protective equipment, apparel, or devices prior to letting out bids for new or renewal contracts for the purchase thereof.
F. Study hazardous material issues and equipment.
Members appointed to the committee shall have the authority to recommend:
Change to, addition to, or purchase and specifications of fire fighters’
protective apparel and equipment.
Department rules and procedures concerning health and safety.
Correction of unsafe or harmful working conditions including the setting of a
deadline for the abatement of such conditions.
Section 3. Committee Findings
The Committee’s findings and recommendations shall be advisory only and not constitute any limitation on the managerial prerogatives of the Fire Chief nor the Township.
ARTICLE 26
DECLARED STATE OF EMERGENCIES
In the event a state of emergency is declared to exist in the Plainfield Charter Township by the Governor of the State of Michigan , or the Kent County Board of Commissioners, or the Township Supervisor of Plainfield Charter Township, or in the event the Governor declares the Township a disaster area, the following condition of this Agreement shall, during such period of emergency or disaster, be automatically suspended:
Section 1. Grievance Time Limits
The time limits for either party to file or reply to grievances shall be tolled during periods of declared states of emergency, provided, however, that the time limits shall be reinstated and shall commence running on the date the parties hereto agree that such emergency conditions shall have ceased to exist.
Section 2. Work Assignment
In addition, the Employer reserves the right, during any events specified above, to assign employees to work without regard to their employment classification. The Township recognizes that emergency response shall be the Department’s first priority.
Section 3. Contract Provisions
The provisions of this Article shall apply when members of the bargaining unit are performing work during a declared state of emergency in accordance with the provisions of existing or future mutual aid pacts with other governmental jurisdictions.
ARTICLE 27
DRIVING RECORD UPDATE
Section 1. Driving Record Update
The Township reserves the right to investigate (at least annually) the driving record of all employees whose job description entails the use of road worthy equipment and vehicles. Any employee whose record is unacceptable may be prohibited from further use of vehicles. Employees whose driving privileges are suspended or revoked, limiting their ability to perform their job duties, shall be placed on unpaid leave or otherwise disciplined as determined by the Township. In these situations, the Township may attempt to utilize the affected employee in another capacity if a vacancy exists. Employees shall notify the Township when any restriction is placed on the employee’s driving privileges or upon suspension or revocation of the employee’s driver’s license.
ARTICLE 28
EDUCATION
Section 1. Educational Reimbursement
Employees are encouraged to advance their skills or knowledge related to the fire service. The Township Board, in its sole discretion, may authorize reimbursement for the cost of tuition expenses where recommended by the Fire Chief and when the employee presents satisfactory evidence of a passing grade. The Township Board and the Fire Chief may grant or deny requests for reimbursement solely at their discretion. Employees interested in pursuing such education shall first seek approval from the Fire Chief with respect to the course contents, instruction and tuition expense anticipated. Education pursuant to this section cannot interfere with the employee’s regular employment, without prior written authorization from the Fire Chief.
ARTICLE 29
DRUG-FREE AND ALCOHOL-FREE
Section 1. Purpose
The Township is committed to keeping its work force free of drug and alcohol related problems. Drug and alcohol abuse can have serious consequences in the workplace. Drug and alcohol abuse can imperil the safety and welfare of not only the drug or alcohol abuser, but also co-employees and others. Workplace drug and alcohol abuse is detrimental to our public image, and is contrary to public policy. The Township and each and every one of its employees have a legitimate concern and interest in maintaining a drug-free, alcohol-free workplace.
Section 2. Policy
The policy of the township is that the unauthorized manufacture, distribution, dispersion, possession or use of, or being under the influence of a controlled substance, by any employee while on duty or reporting to duty at a fire station or in uniform is strictly prohibited. Employees participating in any Township program are also strictly prohibited from the use of drugs as noted above. The term “controlled substance” refers to drugs and chemical substances such as, but not limited to, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, heroin, peyote, mescaline, LSD, alcohol, etc.
Plainfield Charter Township has established a policy that strictly prohibits being under the influence of and the unauthorized use, possession and sale or distribution of drugs or alcohol by its employees at a fire station or in uniform while on duty hours or during any work time. Plainfield Charter Township has adopted a drug testing and search policy as a means of enforcing these rules.
Prohibition - Plainfield Charter Township prohibits the use, possession or distribution of drugs/alcohol by its employees at a fire station or in uniform during work time while on duty. The following circumstances are included under this policy.
1. The unauthorized use, possession or sale of prescriptive and/or illegal drugs or
alcoholic beverages
2. The unauthorized use, possession or sale of a controlled substance.
3. Being under the influence, impaired or otherwise affected by drugs, controlled
substances or alcoholic beverages in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion in
the mind of the observer that the employee’s job performance may be negatively affected.
Drug Testing and Policy . Plainfield Charter Township reserves the right to require any employee to submit to the blood and/or urinalysis examination for the purposes of detecting the employee’s use of unauthorized prescriptive drugs, illegal drugs, controlled substances and/or alcohol. Random Drug tests will be administered to all employees assigned to the Fire Department, except the Administrative Assistant. Tests may also be required in the following circumstances:
1. Based on specific objective facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts, Plainfield Charter Township has a reasonable suspicion that the employee in question is under the influence, impaired or otherwise effected by the use of unauthorized prescriptive drugs, illegal drugs, controlled substances and/or alcohol.
2. Based on specific objective facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts, Plainfield Charter Township has reasonable suspicion that the employee in question is currently in possession on Plainfield Charter Township premises while on duty of unauthorized prescriptive drugs, illegal drugs, controlled substances and/or alcohol.
3. Based on specific objective facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts, Plainfield Charter Township has a reasonable suspicion that the employee in question has sold/distributed or has attempted to sell/distribute on Plainfield Charter Township premises, unauthorized prescriptive drugs, illegal drugs, controlled substances and/or alcohol.
Search Policy - Plainfield Charter Township reserves the right to search its property and/or personal effects placed on its property if there exists a reasonable suspicion based on specific objective facts that illegal drugs, controlled substances, alcohol and/or unauthorized prescriptive drugs will be found in a particular place to be searched. Furthermore, as part of this policy, any employee convicted or violating any criminal drug statute related to conduct occurring in the work place must report the same to the Township within five (5) days after the conviction.
Finally, all employees must, as a condition of employment, abide by this policy. Any employee who violates this policy will be immediately terminated.
Section 3. Rehabilitation
Employees who have problems that are in any way related to substance abuse are encouraged to immediately seek professional assistance. Assistance may be obtained through organizations such as the County Health Department. Referrals to other programs and counseling may be obtained through out individual hospitalization policies.
Section 4. Medical and Recreational Marijuana
Recreational Marijuana. On November 6, 2018, voters in Michigan passed Proposal 1, to enact the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act. The new law legalized, with restrictions, the possession, use, and cultivation of recreational marijuana and marijuana products for persons 21 years of age or older. The passage of Proposal 1 does not change the Township’s employment policies and prohibitions surrounding marijuana. The policies and procedures set forth in Sections 1 through 3 of this Article 29 remain fully in effect. Importantly, the Township will continue to prohibit employees from working while under the influence of marijuana and from using or possessing marijuana in the workplace. For purposes of this Policy, a positive test for marijuana on a sample collected pursuant to this Policy will be conclusively presumed to be a violation of this Policy.
Medical Marijuana. A positive test for any prohibited substance (regardless of when actually ingested) constitutes a violation of this Policy. This Policy applies to all employees of the Township, including employees who may be certified to use medical marijuana pursuant to State law. Reporting for work under the influence of marijuana or testing positive for marijuana on a drug test conducted pursuant to this Policy may result in disciplinary action, up to and including discharge, regardless of whether or not the employee is a certified medical marijuana user.
ARTICLE 30
RESIDENCY
All Bargaining unit employees shall reside within a thirty (30) mile radius of the Township Hall. Any questions regarding a particular location shall be determined by the Chief.
ARTICLE 31
GROUP BENEFITS
Section 1. Group Insurance
During the term of this Agreement, the Employer shall pay the premiums (subject to the terms of this Agreement) and other costs of acquiring group insurance coverage:
(a) The Employer will offer regular full-time bargaining unit employees health care insurance coverage provided through one or more plans as provided for by law. The coverage provided by the plan(s) in effect at the execution of this agreement will remain substantially similar for the term of this agreement . The Township reserves the right to change insurance carriers or plans, provided the new plan/carrier provides benefits and access which are substantially similar as the above referenced plan. However, in the event the carrier discontinues the current plan or the plan's premiums increase by 1 5% or more in any plan year, the T ownship and the Union may, with written notice to the other party reopen the contract to collectively bargain with regard to obtaining a different plan or modifying the plan to reduce costs. On an annual basis, the Township and the Union will meet and confer to discuss insurance options for the upcoming year .
(b) Regular full-time employees shall, upon proper written application, be eligible to participate in a life insurance and disability income plan provided by a carrier selected by the Employer.
Life insurance coverage in an amount of $20,000.00 or an amount equal to what is offered other Township employees if that amount exceeds $20,000.00.
Double indemnity for accidental death.
(c) All coverage provided under this Agreement shall be subject to such restrictions, definitions, rules, procedures and other limitations as may be applied from time to time by the Employer’s insurance carriers. The Employer’s liability hereunder shall be limited to tender of premiums for obtainable coverages as specified, and the Employer shall have no obligation whatsoever to pay or provide any benefits or claims that are denied by any carrier. Disputes concerning the interpretation or application of insurance policies or the granting or denial of coverages or benefits (except disputes relating to unjustifiable premiums) shall not be subject to the Grievance Procedure.
(d) Subject to restrictions imposed by the carriers, the Employer shall continue insurance coverage in effect through the end of the insurance billing cycle during which an employee retires or resigns with at least thirty (30) days written notice or commences a layoff or leave of absence. If an employee returns from a layoff or leave of absence before the end of the billing cycle immediately following that during that the layoff or leave of absence commenced, the Employer shall immediately resume payment of required premiums; otherwise, the employee must make arrangements for and bear the cost of continuation of any desired insurance coverages. Employees who are discharged or who quit, resign or retire without proper notice shall immediately forfeit any right to continued insurance coverage.
Section 2. Employee Contributions .
Full time employees will be required to contribute 20% and the Township will contribute 80% towards the premiums for a one-person, a two-person, or a family contract under the Township’s group insurance plan. Each plan year of this Agreement, the Township Board must vote in accordance with the Publicly Funded Health Insurance Act, Public Act 152 of 2011. The Board’s three options each year are: opt out of PA 152, 80-20, or hard cap. If the Township Board votes to opt out of PA 152, the Township will continue to pay 80% of the required premium contributions and the employee will continue to pay 20%. If the Township Board votes to adopt the 80-20 or hard cap in any year, the employees will contribute toward the premiums in accordance with the Township Board’s selection (i.e., hard cap or 80-20). It is understood that if the Board adopts the hard cap option, the Township will contribute the maximum cap allowed by law, as revised annually by the Michigan Department of Treasury. If the Board does not vote to opt out of PA 152 for any Plan year during the term of this Agreement, upon written request of the Union to the Township, this Agreement will open on December 31 prior to the start of that Plan year for the parties to negotiate insurance and the wage increase which will be effective on January 1.
The Township currently provides health care through a high deductible plan paired with a health savings account. The Township reserves the right to modify the deductible, providing the Township funds 100% of the deductible. In addition, the Township reserves its rights to change carriers/plans in the future as set forth in the parties’ Agreement. In each year in which the Employer provides insurance through a high deductible plan, on January 1 the applicable deductible, plus the HSA Supplement amount , will be placed into the HSA for eligible full time employees. This amount will be reduced if required by IRS regulations governing maximum annual contributions to HSA Plans. It is agreed that the HSA Supplement amount is inclusive of and intended to replace the $1,300 which otherwise would have been placed into the employee’s flex plan pursuant to Section 7 of this Article.
The HSA Supplement amount shall be the greater of $1,700.00 or the HSA contribution provided to non-bargaining employees for a given plan year.
Section 3. Selection of Insurance Carriers
The Township reserves the right to select or change the insurance carrier or carriers providing the benefits stated in Article 31, Section 1(a), to be a self-insurer, either wholly or partially, with respect to each and all of such benefits and to select the administrator of such insurance programs, provided, however, that substantially similar benefits are maintained, excluding the administration thereof. The Employer will notify the Union when it solicits bids in anticipation of a possible change in carriers. Upon written request, the Employer will supply the Union with a copy of the bid specifications.
Section 4. Continuation of Insurance Coverage
Group health care insurance benefits shall be paid by the Employer, less the employee premium contribution amount as provided for in this agreement , for a period of three (3) months following the date on which an employee is laid off or is placed on an unpaid medical leave of absence. The Township will continue coverage during the period an employee is on approved workers’ compensation leave. In all other cases where an employee begins an unpaid leave of absence, group health care insurance benefits shall be paid by the Employer , less the employee premium contribution amount as provided for in this agreement, to the end of the month in which the leave begins. Employees indefinitely or temporarily separated from employment and employees who voluntarily quit or are terminated, are otherwise permitted to continue on the group policy (ies), as provided pursuant to federal law, by submitting required premiums to the Township on or before the 22 nd of each month for the succeeding month. Thereafter, or if an employee neglects to make sure timely payment, the employee shall be entitled to exercise a conversion privilege as provided in the insurance carrier’s or carrier policies and procedures.
Section 5. Retiree Hospitalization Insurance
A . Effective upon mutual execution of the 2011-2016 agreement, the Township calculate d $4,000 for each year of full time service (a pro-rata amount for partial years calculated to the day) to be deposited into a Retirement Health Savings Account for each bargaining employee as set forth in this para graph. Years of service were calculated using the full time hire date through the dat e of mutual ratification of the prior settlement agreement. Fifty percent (50%) of the calculated amount was deposited into the Retirement Health Savings Account within 30 day s of mutual ratification of the prior settlement agreement. One tenth (1/10) of the remaining 50% of the calculated amount, plus interest, will be deposited into the Retirement Health Savings Account during the last full week of December for ten (10) consecutive years commencing December 2012. The interest will be calculated at two and one-half percent (2 ½%) per annum on the unpaid principal balance from the last payment date. If an employee who has received the initial 50% payment ceases to be employed by the Township, for any reason, before the last payment is made in December 2021, the Township shall remit the full amount of the remaining balance owed, with accrued interest, to that employee's RHSA account no later than 30 days after employment has ceased.
B . Effective immediately upon mutual execution of this agreement, on a biweekly basis, the Township will contribute 5% of each current bargaining unit empl oyee’s base wage , which shall be deposited into their Retirement Health Savings Account. As long as allowed by the IRS, while an employee is off work due to a duty-related disability, the Township shall continue to deposit its 5% contribution into the employee's Retirement He alth Savings Account .
Section 6. Retirement
The Township provides a retirement plan. An employee becomes eligible upon the completion of probationary period. At least five percent (5%) of the employee’s gross annual wages will be paid by the employee, and the Township’s contribution will be seven and one-half percent (7½%) of employee’s gross annual wages. Any employee desiring to increase his contribution will contact the Clerk. After ten (10) years of regular full-time employment, the Township’s contribution will be ten percent (10%). After 15 years of regular full time employment, the Township’s contribution will be 12½% to the retirement plan.
Section 7. Flexible Benefit Program
Bargaining Unit employees will be covered under the Township’s Flexible Benefit Program, and the Employer will contribute $1,300.00 annually to the account of each employee who does not participate in the Township’s HSA plan. Employees who participate in the HSA plan will have his/her HSA Supplement amount contributed to his/her HSA in accordance with Section 2 of this Article . In addition, employees may contribute up to the IRS maximum pre-taxed annually to their account. Employees that contribute additional funds shall sign a form acknowledging the interest free loan from the Township, promising to repay it, regardless of their employment status. T he employee’s maximum contribution must be consistent with federal health care reform law.
Section 8. Health Insurance for Surviving Spouse
The Township shall provide health insurance coverage for the surviving spouse/dependents in the event of the employee’s death in the line of duty for a period of forty - eight (48) months or remarriage, whichever occurs first.
Section 9. Payment In Lieu of Insurance
Employees furnishing proof of insurance coverage under the policy of a spouse shall receive an annual cash benefit of $2,500 in lieu of coverage offered under this contract. This amount will in future years be increased as the Board determines to increase the amount applicable to other Township employees.
In the event a full time employee has a spouse also employed by the Township on a full time basis, neither spouse will be eligible for the payment in lieu of insurance.
Section 1 0 . Short and Long Term Disability Program
All bargaining unit members shall continue to be covered by the existing Long Term Disability Insurance program, providing benefits of 50% of the employee’s monthly earnings (overtime excluded) up to $1,000/month commencing after 90 days of disability. All bargaining unit members shall also continue to be covered by the existing Short Term Disability Insurance program, providing benefits of 66% of the employee’s weekly earnings (overtime excluded) during the first 90 days of disability (must use sick days first).
ARTICLE 32
MAINTENANCE OF STANDARDS
Management agrees that all conditions of employment not otherwise provided for herein relating to mandatory subjects of bargaining such as wages, hours of work, and general working conditions shall be maintained at the standards in effect at the signing of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 33
FOOD ALLOWANCE
All bargaining unit members shall receive a food allowance of four hundred seventy-five
dollars ($475.00) annually. Annual payments shall be made by the second Monday of April of each year (i.e., payment made at the same time as the boot allowance).
ARTICLE 34
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 1. Printing Costs
The Union agrees to provide a copy of this agreement to each of the bargaining unit members and to bear the cost of the copies.
Section 2. Bulletin Boards
The Employer will provide reasonable space on bulletin boards at the fire stations, which may be used by the Union for posting notices of Union business. It will be the responsibility of the Union to police the bulletin boards and remove any material, which does not qualify for posting based on criteria mutually established by the Union and the Employer.
Section 3. Tobacco Use
There shall be no smoking or use of tobacco products in any Township building, on Township premises (except in designated areas outside the building) or in Township vehicles. There shall be no smoking or use of tobacco products at emergency scenes or public service events. As a condition for all new hires or promotions to any Fire Department Position they shall agree to become or remain nonsmokers and shall not use tobacco products at any time. This prohibition includes the use of e-cigarettes, vaporizers and similar devices .
Section 4. Special Conferences
Special Conferences for important matters may be mutually arranged between the Employer and the Union upon the request of either party. Agreements for such special conferences shall be established in advance, and a written agenda shall be prepared by the soliciting party and submitted to the other party at the time the conference is requested. Discussion will be limited to agenda items unless both parties mutually agree otherwise.
Section 5. Fire Fighter Training
All bargaining unit employees are required to maintain, as a condition of employment, the following licenses and certifications: Firefighter II, Emergency Medical Technician , CPR, Driver’s License, AED, Hazmat operations, plus any that may be required by the State or Federal Government.
Section 6. Severability
If any Article or Section of the Agreement or any addendum thereto should be held invalid by operation of law or by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or if compliance with or enforcement of any Article or Section should be ruled invalid by such tribunal, the remainder of the Agreement and addendums shall not be affected thereby, and the parties shall enter into immediate collective bargaining negotiations for the purpose of arriving at a mutually satisfactory replacement for such Article or Section.
Section 7. Work by Non-Bargaining Unit Employees
The Township reserves the right to hire non-bargaining unit employees to perform bargaining unit work, and these employees shall not be within the recognition granted the Union and shall not be covered by this Agreement. Non-bargaining unit employees will not be used to permanently replace full time bargaining unit employees. In the event a non-bargaining unit employee averages more than 48 hours per week over a six (6) month period, the Union and the Township will meet and confer on the bargaining unit status of that individual.
The Township may use Paid-On-Call employees, Part-Time employees, or off-duty Full-Time employees to fill-in for absences of Full-Time Fire Fighters, Equipment Operators, or Lieutenants, in the discretion of the Fire Chief.
The Township will not utilize paid-on-call or part-time personnel to fill District Chief vacancies. A vacancy occurs anytime a District Chief is absent from work for any reason, or retires, or resigns, or is terminated. It will be the Chief’s discretion to either fill the vacancy by Acting Assignment as described in Article 10 Section 4, or to schedule another District Chief to work the shift for overtime. In addition, the Chief or the Assistant Chief may fill in for District Chief vacancies Monday through Friday at the Chief’s discretion.
Section 8. Gender
Whenever used in this Agreement, the male pronoun shall be deemed to include all gender s .
Section 9. Limiting Requirement to Be Instructor
The Employer shall have the authority to seek volunteers within the bargaining unit, or if no bargaining unit members volunteer, to select bargaining unit members to obtain and maintain CPR instructor certification and to serve as lead instructor for the following: 1) to conduct CPR certification classes for Plainfield Township fire department personnel only, 2) to conduct CPR certification classes sponsored by Plainfield Township which include fire service personnel from other communities and Plainfield Township personnel who are participating in the class to obtain CPR certification or re-certification. The Employer shall pay for all costs related to the bargaining unit members’ obtaining and maintaining CPR instructor certification and for time and expenses related to instruction provided by the lead instructor(s).
Section 10. Supplemental Employment .
Supplemental employment is considered a conflict of interest during a bargaining unit employee’s first year of employment. Supplemental employment is not permitted during this time.
Employees may accept supplemental employment in addition to their work with the Township, provided that this employment shall not constitute a conflict of interest, that it shall not interfere with normal duties, and it shall not occur during regular working hours (unless on approved leave). Employees are required to notify the Township Superintendent and/or their department head in writing prior to engaging in any supplemental employment. Employees may not engage in supplemental employment which conflicts with their normal work hours, duties, and responsibilities of employment with Plainfield Charter Township.
If the Superintendent or Fire Chief approves supplemental employment and subsequently determines that said employment conflicts with an employee’s normal work hours, duties and responsibilities of employment with Plainfield Charter Township, permission for said employment may be withdrawn, and the employee must terminate that supplemental employment or be subject to termination with Plainfield Charter Township.
ARTICLE 35
WAIVER CLAUSE
Section 1. Provisions Contrary to Law
This agreement is subject to the laws of the State of Michigan with respect to the powers, rights, duties and obligations of the Township, the Union and the employees in the bargaining unit, and in the event that any provision of this agreement shall at any time be held to be contrary to law by a court of competent jurisdiction from whose final judgment or decree no appeal has been taken within the time provided therefore, such provision shall be void and inoperative. However, all other provisions of this agreement shall, insofar as possible, continue in full force and effect.
Section 2. Amendment and Full Agreement
The provisions of this agreement can be amended, supplemented, rescinded or otherwise altered only by mutual agreement in writing hereafter signed by the parties hereto. During negotiations, each party has the right to make proposals with respect to all bargaining matters. This sets forth the basic and full agreement between the parties.
ARTICLE 36
DURATION
This Agreement shall be in full force and effect from January 1, 20 22 to 11:59 p.m., December 31, 202 6 . It shall continue in full force and effect from year to year thereafter unless written notice of desire to terminate change or modify the Agreement is served by either party hereto at least sixty (60) days prior to the annual expiration date.
Plainfield Township Fire Fighters
Union Local 3890 Plainfield Charter Township
________________________________ __________________________________
________________________________ __________________________________
________________________________ __________________________________
APPENDIX “A-1”
FIRE FIGHTER
WAGE TABLE
Year
Start
One Year
Two Years
Three Years
Four Years
Five Years
20 22 8.00%
$ 17.88
$ 18.48
$ 19.70
$ 20.52
$21.86
$23.24
20 23 *
20 24 *
20 25 *
202 6 *
* The wage scale above will be effective on January 1, 2022. Commencing January 1, 2023, the wage scales shall be increased each January 1 of this Agreement (January 1, 2023, 2024, 2025 and 2026) by the percentage increase in the Employment Cost Index (ECI) published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for wages and salaries of civilian workers. The 12 month September ECI will be used to calculate the increases for the succeeding January 1. For example, the 12 month September 2022 ECI will be used to calculate the unit increase effective January 1, 2023.
APPENDIX “A-2”
EQUIPMENT OPERATOR
WAGE TABLE
Year
Start
One Year
Two Years
Three Years
Four Years
Five Years
2022 8.00%
$18.42
$19.03
$20.29
$21.14
$22.52
$23.94
2023 *
2024 *
20 25 *
20 26 *
*The wage scale above will be effective on January 1, 2022. Commencing January 1, 2023, the wage scales shall be increased each January 1 of this Agreement (January 1, 2023, 2024, 2025 and 2026) by the percentage increase in the Employment Cost Index (ECI) published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for wages and salaries of civilian workers. The 12 month September ECI will be used to calculate the increases for the succeeding January 1. For example, the 12 month September 2022 ECI will be used to calculate the unit increase effective January 1, 2023.
APPENDIX “A-3”
LIEUTENANT
WAGE TABLE
Year
Start
One Year
Two Years
Three Years
Four Years
Five Years
2022 8.00%
$19.35
$19.98
$20.67
$22.22
$23.62
$25.12
2023 *
2024 *
202 5 *
2026 *
*The wage scale above will be effective on January 1, 2022. Commencing January 1, 2023, the wage scales shall be increased each January 1 of this Agreement (January 1, 2023, 2024, 2025 and 2026) by the percentage increase in the Employment Cost Index (ECI) published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for wages and salaries of civilian workers. The 12 month September ECI will be used to calculate the increases for the succeeding January 1. For example, the 12 month September 2022 ECI will be used to calculate the unit increase effective January 1, 2023.
APPENDIX “A-4”
DISTRICT CHIEF
WAGE TABLE
Year
Start
Two Years
Three Years
20 22 8.00%
$23.92
$25.48
$27.10
2023 *
2024 *
2025 *
2026 *
*The wage scale above will be effective on January 1, 2022. Commencing January 1, 2023, the wage scales shall be increased each January 1 of this Agreement (January 1, 2023, 2024, 2025 and 2026) by the percentage increase in the Employment Cost Index (ECI) published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for wages and salaries of civilian workers. The 12 month September ECI will be used to calculate the increases for the succeeding January 1. For example, the 12 month September 2022 ECI will be used to calculate the unit increase effective January 1, 2023.
APPENDIX B
POSITIONS AND CLASSIFICATION OF THE
BARGAINING UNIT
District Chief
Lieutenant
Equipment Operator
Fire Fighter
PLAINFIELD CHARTER TOWNSHIP
And
PLAINFIELD TOWNSHIP FIRE FIGHTERS UNION, LOCAL 3890
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING NO. 1
Date: April 27, 2000
Subject: Staffing Levels
This Letter of Understanding will set forth the parties ’ mutual intent with respect to future staffing of the Plainfield Charter Township Fire Department. Both the Union and the Township have a common interest in the staffing levels of the Department. It is the Township’s desire to staff the Department in a safe and effective manner so that it can continue to provide fire suppression, fire protection, fire prevention and medical first responder services which are of the highest quality given available resources. It is the Township’s further position that the levels of staffing of its fire stations and the Department are an inherent management right, reserved exclusively to the Plainfield Charter Township Board and are not subject to Act 312 Arbitration. The Township recognizes that the fire fighters employed in the Fire Department and represented by the Union have a strong interest in Department staff levels and that the Union believes that the levels of staffing directly affect the safety of the fire fighters working in the Department and are subject to Act 312 Arbitration.
With these goals in mind, the parties recognize the following:
1. It is the Union’s desire that the “buddy system” be utilized at all stations [1] on a 24- hour basis. The buddy system entails having at least two employees working at each station. It is the Union’s belief that the buddy system provides for enhanced service to the public and a safer working environment for employees both at structure fires and medical first responder calls. It is the Union’s strong preference that such increased staffing at the stations be provided by full time fire fighters.
2. The Township does not believe that the current staffing levels compromise employee safety, provided employees follow Department policy and existing federal and state regulations. However, the Township does believe that increased staffing at the Fire Stations, together with an increase in supervisory staffing, can enhance the quality and level of service the Department can provide to the community.
3. Meeting the Union’s goals will require the Township to hire a minimum of four (4) full time employees (an increase of 50% over the current full time complement of eight (8) full time employees).
4. The Union’s desire to increase staffing at the Fire Stations can be accomplished on an interim basis without the full complement of additional full time staffing by more extensive utilization by the Department of non-bargaining unit employees.
5. The Township Board, upon recommendation of the Fire Chief, has indicated approval in the year 2000 budget for the hiring of one (1) additional full time fire fighter. In addition, the Fire Chief has proposed hiring additional full time fire fighters during calendar year 2001.
WHEREFORE, it is the Township’s intention for the term of this Agreement to continue the process of increasing staffing at the fire stations so that by the end of the term of this Agreement, a minimum of two employees are scheduled at each station on a 24 hour, seven day per week, basis. The type of staffing utilized shall be at the discretion of the Fire Chief.
The Union agrees that conditions or events may necessitate delays or changes in the goals set forth in this Letter of Understanding. This Letter of Understanding shall not be construed as a guarantee of any specific level of staffing at any particular time. It is, however, an expression of the Township’s desire to staff its Fire Stations as may be recommended by the Fire Chief and as consistent with available resources.
PLAINFIELD TOWNSHIP FIRE FIGHTERS PLAINFIELD CHARTER TOWNSHIP UNION, LOCAL 3890
__________________________________ _______________________________
PLAINFIELD CHARTER TOWNSHIP
And
PLAINFIELD TOWNSHIP FIRE FIGHTERS UNION, LOCAL 3890
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING NO. 2
Subject: Staffing Grants
Employees hired by the Township pursuant to a staffing grant are not guaranteed employment after the expiration of the grant period, although such employees may be hired by the Township to fill a permanent vacancy in the bargaining unit or may be hired to fill new positions in the bargaining unit that may occur during the period of the grant. Upon such hire, the employee will cease being covered by this LOU and will be considered a bargaining unit employee for all purposes. Prior to the end of the grant period, the Township will evaluate and determine if grant employees will be offered full or part-time positions with the Department. A grace period of three months will exist at the end of the grant period for the Township to make a final decision on offers to grant employees. Such employees may not be employed by the Township beyond the three-month grace period, unless the employee holds a full or part-time position with the Department.
Employees hired under a staffing grant will start at the two (2) year wage step of the classification designated in the grant. The employee will remain at this wage step for the duration of the grant and continue with their step progression if they are hired by the Township into the bargaining unit after the end of the grant period.
A reasonable attempt will be made to maintain a staffing level commensurate with the indicated level written in the grant application for the duration of the grant.
PLAINFIELD TOWNSHIP FIRE FIGHTERS PLAINFIELD CHARTER TOWNSHIP UNION, LOCAL 3890
__________________________________ _______________________________ ____
1
[1] For purposes of this Letter of Understanding only, “stations” are deemed to be stations number 1 and 3 located in Plainfield Charter Township.
