Sandulli Grace And The Massachusetts Coalition Of Police Win Night Shift Differential Pay For The Community Service Officers In The Braintree Police Officers Association - Sandulli Grace
Follow
Follow
Follow
Follow
Search for:
Our Team
Blog
Contact
617-523-2500
Sandulli Grace And The Massachusetts Coalition Of Police Win Night Shift Differential Pay For The Community Service Officers In The Braintree Police Officers Association
by Sandulli Grace Staff | Feb 2, 2016 | Labor In The News , Sandulli Grace In The News
In contract negotiations between the Town of Braintree and the Braintree Police Officers Association, MCOP Local 365, the Town proposed the new position of Community Service Officer (CSO).  The Town proposed the CSO as a specialty position that could be filled without regard to seniority, an exception to the usual practice. The Town also proposed to “flex” the officers’ schedules, which meant that the officers would only receive overtime if they actually worked more than eight hours in a day – not if they were required to work an entirely different shift because of the needs of the job.
The contract language did not specify how the CSOs would be compensated.   However, the Town agreed that the CSOs would work a flexible schedule “in the same fashion as currently worked by the Narcotics Unit.” This was sufficient to convince the union to agree to the proposal, because the narcotics detectives worked a flexible schedule, and were paid the night shift differential all the time. The night shift differential made up for the negative aspects of the position, and “sold” the proposal to the union.
Once the position was filled, however, the Town refused to pay the CSOs the night shift differential, taking the position that it was not required to do so because the pay rate was not stated in the contract. The union filed for arbitration. On January 20, 2016, the arbitrator issued his award, agreeing with the Union and ordering the Town to pay CSOs the nights shift differential. (The award can be viewed here .)
This is an important victory for the Massachusetts Coalition of Police and the Braintree Police Officers Association. The arbitrator acknowledged that, by agreeing to a specialty position which the Chief could fill without regard to seniority, the union was obviously making a concession, and it would not be reasonable to expect the union to do so without getting something in return. In this case, what the union expected to get in return was the night shift differential. The arbitrator, Timothy Buckalew, showed great respect for the challenges of police collective bargaining. It was a hard-fought and well deserved victory, and I congratulate the Braintree Police Officers Association!
0 Comments
Submit a Comment Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
Comment *
Name *
Email *
Website
Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
Submit Comment
Δ
Recent Posts
Sandulli Grace Announces The Retirement Of Long-Time Partner Amy Laura Davidson
Appeals Court Finds that Firefighter Is Entitled to Additional Pay for Military Service
Massachusetts Superior Court Rules: A Public Employee Who Forfeits His Pension by Criminal Conviction is Forever Barred from Receiving Public Pensions in Massachusetts
DALA Confirms That Detail Pay Counts Towards the $5,000 Earnings Threshold in State Retirement Statute
SJC Finds Newton Retaliated against MCOP Local President because of Union Activity
Posts By Category
Collective Bargaining
Contract & Interest Arbitration
Employment Discrimination
Great Moments In Labor History
In Our Opinion…
Labor In The News
Litigation
Negotiation and Severance Agreements
Representing Injured Public Employees
Sandulli Grace In The News
Strategic Advice
Twitter
Uncategorized
Unfair Labor Practices
Union Election Law
Subscribe To Our Newsletter
Join our mailing list to receive the latest news and updates about the Massachusetts labor community from the staff at Sandulli Grace.
SUBSCRIBE!
You have Successfully Subscribed!
 617-523-2500
  617-507-5676
 Send Us An Email
Sandulli Grace, P.C.
44 School St. Suite 1100
Boston, MA 02108
Directions To Our Office
Material presented on the Sandulli Grace, P.C. website is intended for information purposes only. It is not intended as professional advice and should not be construed as such.
Privacy Policy – Terms Of Use
Copyright ©1998 - 2026 except where noted. All rights reserved.
Website Design/Build by Burbul.com
