CITY OF GROSSE POINTE WOODS
and
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICERS

TENTATIVE AGREEMENT
IT IS HEREBY AGREED between the City of Grosse Pointe Woods ("the City") and
the Fraternal Order of Police, Public Safety Officers ("the Union") that, in tentative
settlement of all outstanding issues under negotiation, the parties bargaining
teams agree, and agree to recommend ratification to their respective principals, as
follows:
1. The parties agree to a four (4) year contract, July 1, 2022 through June 30,
2026.
2. The parties' new agreement shall be the same as the existing agreement,
except as modified herein in this Agreement.
3. The wage schedule contained in Appendix A shall be increased as follows:
7/1/22: 3%
7/1/23: 3%
7/1/24: 2.5%
7/1/25: 2%
Wage increases shall be retroactive to July 1, 2022.
4. Full-time employees in the bargaining unit shall receive an Employee
Recognition bonus of $1000; part-time employees in the bargaining unit shall
received a Employee Recognition bonus of $250. This Covid relief bonus shall
be a one-time, off-schedule payment, not included in FAC. This Employee
Recognition bonus shall be paid in the first pay period following ratification
of the Agreement by both parties.
5. The parties agree to an EROP program, attached.

6. Language changes, per the attached.
7. Article 76.4 shall be deleted in its entirety and the remaining sections shall
be renumbered.
8. Article 82.1 shall be amended as follows:
82.1 The granting of compensatory time shall not put the shift below
minimum at the time of the request.
The 104 hour referenced in Article 31.1 shall be treated as follows: Twentyfour (24) hours to be used as time off between July 1st — June 30th under the
provisions of Article 31, Section 31.1 or, if unused, will be paid the last day of
June to be implemented June 2020; eighty (80) hours to be used as time off
between July 1st —June 30th under the provisions of Article 31, Section 31.1
[no other changes]
9. Employees will be eligible for a night shift premium of $200, with a maximum
stipend per year of $400 ($200 for each six month rotation on night shift, to
be paid at the end of each rotation). Shift differential stipend shall not count
towards FAC.
10.The parties withdraw all other proposals.
11.The Union shall ratify this Tentative Agreement first, and will notify the City
in writing when it has so ratified.

Dated: August 15, 2022
THE CITY

THE UNION

EMPLOYEE RETENTION OPTION PLAN (EROP)
A.

OVERVIEW

Effective
, 2022, any Employee who is a member of the Police Officers Labor
Council Grosse Pointe Woods Command Officers Association ("Command Officers Association")
may at any time voluntarily elect to participate in the Employee Retention Option Plan (the "EROP")
after attaining; (a) age 50 with 25 years or more of service credit; or (b) age 55 with 20 or more years
of service credit. Upon commencement of EROP participation, the Participant's EROP Benefit shall
be 85% of the dollar amount of his or her monthly pension benefit computed by using the contractual
guidelines and formula(s) that are in effect on the EROP Date. During EROP participation, the
Participant continues with full employment status and receives all future promotions and
benefit/wage increases and is considered an employee of the City, not a retiree. The Participant's
EROP Benefit shall be credited monthly to the Participant's EROP Account that shall be established
within the Defined Benefit Plan of the City of Grosse Pointe Retirement System (the "Retirement
System" or "Plan"). The Participant's EROP Account shall be maintained and managed by the
Board of Trustees of the Retirement System (the "Retirement Board"). Upon termination of
employment, the retiree shall begin to receive payment(s) from his or her individual EROP Account
as described herein. The EROP payment(s) are in addition to all other contractual pension benefits.
The Participant is solely responsible for analyzing the tax consequences of participation in the
EROP.
B.

ELIGIBILITY

Effective
, 2022, any member of the Command Officers Association may
voluntarily elect to participate in the EROP at any time after attaining; (a) age 50 with 25 years or
more of service credit; or (b) age 55 with 20 or more years of service credit. The member's election
to participate in the EROP shall not operate to change or in anyway modify the Retirement System's
minimum requirement for a normal service retirement/pension.
C.

PARTICIPATION PERIOD

The maximum period for participation in the EROP is five (5) years (the "Participation
Period"). There is no minimum time period for participation. An Employee must cease employment
with the City of Grosse Pointe Woods Public Safety Department within five (5) years from the date
of entering the EROP. The election to participate in the EROP is voluntary; however, an employee's
application and election to participate in the EROP shall constitute an irrevocable election to
terminate employment and retire no later than five (5) years after his or her effective EROP date.
Upon termination of employment, the retiree shall commence receipt of 100% of the dollar
amount of his or her monthly pension benefit computed by using the contractual guidelines and
formula(s) that are in effect on the EROP Date (i.e. the date of EROP Participation commencement),
unless an Optional form of benefit is elected pursuant to Subsection E. Failure to terminate
employment at the expiration of the EROP Participation Period shall result in forfeiture of the
Participant's monthly pension benefit otherwise payable to his or her EROP Account until
termination of employment. The foregoing statement shall not be interpreted as allowing the EROP

Participant the option of continuing employment after the expiration of his or her EROP
Participation Period. Interest on the EROP Account however, will continue to accrue during such a
forfeiture period, pursuant to Subsection G.
D.

ELECTION TO PARTICIPATE

Once commenced, EROP Participation is IRREVOCABLE (except as specifically provided
in Subsection L herein). An Employee who wishes to participate in the EROP, shall complete and
sign such application form or forms as shall be required by the Retirement Board no less than 30
days or no more than 90 days prior to his or her intended EROP Date. The Retirement Board shall
review the application within a reasonable time period and make a determination as to the
Employee's eligibility for participation in the EROP. On the Employee's effective EROP Date, he or
she shall become an EROP Participant and shall cease to accrue additional retirement benefits
otherwise credited to active members of the Retirement System. The amount of credited service,
multiplier and average final compensation shall be fixed as of the Participant's EROP Date.
Increases in compensation and accrual of additional service during EROP Participation will NOT be
factored into the pension benefits of active or former EROP Participants (except as specifically
provided in Subsection L). A Participant's EROP Date only applies to the Employee's retirement
benefit provisions as provided herein and not to any other contractual benefits or retiree medical
benefits in effect or accruing after a Participant's EROP Date.
Except with regard to the retirement benefits expressly provided herein, EROP Participants
will continue with full employment status with all rights and privileges afforded to employees of the
Public Safety Department and this bargaining unit, including, but not limited to, future promotions,
benefit/wage increases, union membership and representation, as well as Retirement System
membership and Retirement Board representation.
E.

EROP BENEFIT

The Participant's EROP Benefit shall be 85% of the regular monthly retirement benefit to
which the Employee would have been entitled if the Employee had actually terminated employment
and retired on the EROP Date (less the annuity withdrawal reduction as set forth in Subsection F
and/or actuarial reductions as a result of the Employee electing an Optional form of benefit under the
Plan, if applicable).
The calculation of the Employee's "Average Final Compensation" ("AFC") shall be based
upon the contract provisions in effect on the Employee's EROP Date and to the extent applicable,
shall include all monies which, if the Employee had terminated employment on his or her EROP
Date, would have otherwise been included in calculating the Employee's AFC. For avoidance of
doubt, the City's payment of "separation buyout monies" which are typically paid upon retirement
and termination of employment shall be paid upon termination of EROP Participation and
termination of employment. All vacation, sick, compensatory or personal time accruing after a
Participant's effective EROP Date shall accrue and be governed by the provisions of the employee's
applicable collective bargaining agreement.
The cost of living adjustment (COLA) as provided in Section 2-323 of the Retirement
Ordinance shall not be applied to the EROP Benefit but shall commence as of the January Pt which

is at least 12 full months following the effective date of retirement and termination of employment.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all employees hired on or after July 1, 2016 shall continue to be
ineligible for a post-retirement redetermination of their retirement allowance (COLA).
The Participant's EROP Benefit shall be credited monthly to the Participant's individual
EROP Account. An EROP Participant may, either prior to his or her EROP date or at the time of his
or her termination of employment; elect to receive his or her benefit in the form of the Plan's Option
I, Option II or Option III benefit and nominate a named beneficiary in accordance with the
Retirement System provisions. A Participant's EROP Benefit that is credited monthly to the
Participant's EROP Account shall not change during the Participant's EROP Participation. A
Participant desiring to change his or her form of benefit at termination of employment, must make
such election prior to termination and will receive the actuarially computed revised benefit
commencing on the Employee's effective date of termination.
F.

ANNUITY WITHDRAWAL

An Employee who elects to participate in the EROP (and correspondingly ceases to accrue
additional retirement benefits otherwise credited to active members of the Retirement System) may
elect the Annuity Withdrawal Option provided by Section 2-304(c) of the Retirement System
Ordinance at the time of electing EROP participation.
Such election shall be made commensurate with the Participant's EROP election, but not
thereafter, and will be utilized to compute the actuarial reduction of the Participant's EROP Benefit,
as well as his or her monthly retirement benefit from the Retirement System after termination of
employment. EROP Participants who do not elect the Annuity Withdrawal Option shall have their
full unreduced benefit credited to his or her EROP Account. If the Participant, pursuant to
Subsection E, elects an Optional form of benefit upon termination of employment, the Annuity
Withdrawal reduction shall be re-determined and the retiree's monthly retirement benefit adjusted
accordingly.
The Annuity Withdrawal Amount (accumulated contributions) shall be withdrawn from the
Retirement System at termination of employment. All withdrawal provisions and options under the
Retirement System which are available to Members shall be available to the EROP Participant at
termination of employment. During EROP Participation, the Annuity Withdrawal Amount shall
continue to be credited with interest in the same amount and in the same manner as the accumulated
employee contribution accounts of non-EROP participants in the Retirement System.
At the time of the Annuity Withdrawal Option election, if an Employee is electing a straight
life form of benefit with no qualifying spouse, the Annuity Withdrawal reduction computation is
based in-part upon the actuarial life expectancy of the Employee (rather than the life expectancies of
both the Employee and a qualified spouse). There shall be no adjustment to the benefits payable to
the EROP Participant upon the Participant's subsequent marriage to a qualifying spouse unless the
Participant selects an Optional form of benefit at termination of Employment (Subsection E). In the
event such spouse (i.e. qualified after calculation of the annuity withdrawal election) subsequently
qualifies for benefits payable by the Plan, said benefits shall not be adjusted based upon the
Employees' annuity withdrawal election.

G.

EROP ACCOUNTS

For each EROP Participant, an individual EROP Account shall be created in which shall be
accumulated at EROP Interest the Participant's EROP Benefits. All EROP Accounts shall be
notional accounts maintained for the benefit of each EROP Participant and will be managed by the
Retirement Board in the same manner as the primary pension fund. EROP Interest for each EROP
Participant shall be at a fixed rate of 3.0% per annum with interest credited on the first day of each
month on the prior month's principal and interest balance.
The Retirement Board shall provide each EROP Participant with an annual statement of his
or her notional account activity. The reference to individual EROP Accounts shall be interpreted to
refer to the accounting records of the Retirement System and not to the actual segregation of moneys
in the funds of the Retirement System.

H.

CONTRIBUTIONS

The Employee's otherwise mandatory contributions to the Retirement System shall cease as
of the Participant's EROP Date for each Employee entering the EROP. The payroll of EROP
Participants will be included in the covered compensation upon which regular City contributions to
the Retirement System are based. Employer contributions shall be credited to the Retirement System
and not to any individual's EROP Account.
I.

DISTRIBUTION OF EROP FUNDS

Upon termination of employment, the former EROP Participant must choose one, or a
consistent combination of, the following distribution methods to receive payment(s) from his or her
individual EROP Account:
1)
2)

A total lump sum distribution to the Participant/recipient.
A lump sum direct rollover to another qualified plan to the extent allowed by federal
law and in accordance with the Retirement Board's rollover procedures.

Lump sum or partial lump sum distributions which would exceed Internal Revenue Code
Section 415 limits will not be authorized. Any and all distributions from Participant's EROP
Account shall not be subject to offset by any workers' compensation wage loss payments received by
the Participant, including any redemption amounts.
J.

DEATH DURING EROP PARTICIPATION

Except as otherwise provided in Subsection L, if an Employee participating in the EROP dies
either before retirement (i.e., before termination of service), or during retirement (i.e., after
termination of service), but before the EROP account balance has been fully paid out, the
Participant's designated beneficiary(ies) shall receive the remaining balance in the Participant's
EROP Account in the manner in which they elect from the previously mentioned distribution
methods (Subsection I). In the event the Participant has failed to name a beneficiary, the EROP
account balance shall be payable to the Participant's beneficiary of benefits from the Retirement
System. If there is no such beneficiary, the EROP account balance shall be paid in a lump sum to the

Participant's estate. Benefits payable from the Retirement System shall be determined as though the
EROP Participant had separated from service on the day prior to the Participant's date of death.
K.

DISABILITY DURING EROP PARTICIPATION

Except as otherwise provided in Subsection L, in the event an EROP Participant becomes
totally and permanently disabled from further performance of duty as a police officer in accordance
with the provisions of the Retirement System, the Participant's participation in the EROP shall cease
and the member shall receive such benefits as if the member had retired and terminated employment
during the Participation Period.
Application and determination of disability shall be conducted in accordance with the
Retirement System provisions; however, the Participant shall not be eligible for disability benefits
from the Retirement System, except as specifically provided in Subsection L.
L.

SPECIAL PROVISION FOR DUTY DISABILITY AND DUTY DEATH

An EROP Participant who is found by the Retirement Board, in accordance with Retirement
System provisions, to be totally and permanently incapacitated for duty by reason of a personal injury
or disease occurring as the natural and proximate result of causes arising out of and in the course of
the Employee's employment with the City, may retroactively revoke the Participant's EROP election
if the revocation occurs before the payment of a distribution to the Employee from the Participant's
EROP account or payment of disability or retirement benefits to the Employee from the Retirement
System.
If an EROP Participant dies in the line of duty while in the employ of the City, the EROP
Participant's eligible survivors (i.e., survivors qualified under Section 2-310 of the Retirement
System Ordinance and the Participant's applicable collective bargaining agreement) and the
Participant's eligible EROP beneficiary(ies) may, by unanimous agreement, retroactively revoke the
Participant's EROP election if the revocation occurs within 90 days of Participant's date of death and
before payment of a distribution from the Participant's EROP account or payment of benefits from
the Retirement System.
If an EROP election revocation is made as prescribed by this Subsection, the Participant's
EROP Account is not distributed, and the Participant or the Participant's beneficiary(ies), as
applicable, is entitled to all benefits provided by the Retirement System as if an EROP election had
not been made. In the event of revocation of EROP participation as provided herein, there shall be
no requirement for retroactive payment of employee contributions which would otherwise have been
paid by the Employee to the Retirement System and the Employee shall receive service credit for all
service rendered during EROP participation or as otherwise provided in the applicable collective
bargaining agreement.
M.

PROMOTION

In the event a member of the Command Officers Association is promoted to a position out of
the bargaining unit, but to a position covered by the Retirement System, EROP eligibility, EROP
Participation and membership in the Retirement System shall continue under the same terms and

conditions as stated herein including the Participation Period pursuant to Subsection C above. In
such instance, the City Council may, in its sole discretion, elect to extend such member's EROP
Participation Period.
N. SUNSET
It is the intention of the parties that the benefit provisions of the EROP be essentially cost
neutral to the Retirement System. The parties hereby agree to termination of the program in the
future in order to effectively evaluate the cost neutrality, Accordingly, the ability of eligible
employees to elect EROP Participation shall expire ten (10) years after the effective date of the
EROP. Any EROP Participant then participating in the EROP shall be allowed to continue
participation until completion of their EROP Participation Period. Upon agreement of the parties in
writing the EROP may be extended or modified as deemed appropriate.
N.

INTERNAL REVENUE CODE COMPLIANCE

The EROP is intended to operate in accordance with Section 415 and other applicable laws
and regulations contained within the Internal Revenue Code of the United States. Any provision of
the EROP, or portion thereof, that is found by the Retirement Board to be in conflict with an
applicable provision of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States is hereby declared null and
void.
The EROP Account herein discussed shall be established as part of the Defined Benefit Plan
of the Retirement System or such other plan as the Retirement Board and the Command Officers
Association shall agree upon (i.e., I.R.C. Section 415(m) benefit plan) after consultation with
appropriate legal counsel.
