07/25/2022
3178-01
22-MED-04-0419
41864

AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE CITY OF BROOKVILLE, OHIO AND
OHIO PATROLMEN'S BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION

SERB CASE NO. 2022-MED-14-0419

Effective July 1, 2022
through June 30, 2024

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE
NUMBER

l

2

TITLE

PAGE
NUMBER

Union Agreement ........................................................... ........................................... 1
Management Rfghts .................................................................................................. 1
Recognition............................................. ................................................................... 1

3
4
5
6
7

Scope of Bargaining ................................................................................................... 2
Nondiscrimination ..................................................................................................... 2
Associat ion Dues ....................................................................................................... 2

8

Hours of Work ........................................................................................................... 4
Premium Pay ............................................................................................................. 5
Holidays ... .................................................................................................................. 7
Uniform Allowance ................................................... ................................................ 7
Severability ...... .......................................................................................................... 8
Waiver ....................................................................................................................... 9
Sick Leave .................................................................................................................. 9

9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

Grievance Procedure................................................................................................. 2
Layoffs and Restoration ............................................................................................ 4

Tuition Reimbursement......... .................................................................................. 12
Insurance ................................................................................................................. 13
Vacation................................................................................................................... 14
Bereavement Leave ................................................................................................ 15
Injury Leave ......................................- ..................................................................... 15
Miscellaneous Provisions ........................................................................................ 15
Wages...................................................................................................................... 18
Plus Rating............................................................................................................... 18

23
24
25

Application of Civil Service ...................................................................................... 19
Waiver in Case of Emergency.................................................................................. 19
No Strike/No Lockout ................................................... ........................................... 19

26

Drug/Alcohol Testing & Fitness ForDuty Evaluation ............................................... 20
Probationary Periods .............................................................................................. 20
Seniority .................................................................................................................. 21

27
28
29

Duration .................................................................................................................. 22
Signature Page .............................................................................................. ,......... 23

UNION AGREEMENT

THIS AGREEMENT is entered into between the City of Brookville, Ohio (hereinafter referred to as
''City") -and the Brookville Bargaining Unit, Ohio Patrolmen's Benevolent Association (hereinafter
referred to as the "Union"), for and on behalf of the Union and the employees now or hereinafter
described.
The parties recite and declare that:
This Agreement shall be implemented consistent with Ohio Revised Code Chapter 4117, and the
legislative authority of the City of Brookville, Ohio.
Both parties to this Agreement desire to improve employee efficiency and the quality of service
rendered by the employees to employer, the City of Brookvllle, Ohio, and the public, to promote
harmonious relations between the City and the Union and employees, and toenter into an agreement
covering rates of pay, hours of work, and other terms and conditions of employment.
For the reasons set forth above and in consideration of the mutual covenants and promises of the
parties hereto, the City and the Union covenant and agree as follows:

ARTICLE 1
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

EXCEPT AS SPECIFICALLY LIMITED HEREIN, t he City shall have the exclusive right to manage the
operations, control t he premises, direct the working forces, and maintain efficiency of operations.
Specifically, the City's exclusive management rights include, but are not limited to, the sole right to
hire, discipline and discharge for just cause, lay off, and promote; to promulgate and enforce
employment rules and regulations; to reorganize, discontinue, or enlarge any department or division;
to transfer employees (including t he assignment and allocation of work) within the department; to
introduce new and/or improved equipment method's and/or facilities; to determine work methods;
to determine thesize and duties of the work force, t he number of shifts required, and work schedules;
to establish, modify, consolidate, or abolish jobs (or classifications); and to determine staffing
patterns, including, but not limited to, assignment of employees, numbers employed, duties to be
performed, qualifications required, and areas wor.ked, subject only to the restrictions and regulations
governing t he exercise of these rights as are expressly provided herein and as permitted by law.

ARTICLE 2
RECOGNITION

The City recognizes the Union as the exclusive bargaining agent for al I employees .in the bargaining
unit described in SER B's Order of July 5, 2001, in Case No. 0l-REP-04-0095, which is certified and
on file with the State Employment Relations Board. The bargaining unit consists of all full time
Patrol Officers. Patrol Officers ~fter completing six (6) months full time service of their
probationary period, have the option to join the Union, but until satisfaction of one (1) year
probation period, will not receive final appointment. Members of the bargaining unit shall
hereinafter be referred to as Employees.

ARTICLE 3
SCOPE OF BARGAINING

The Union has sole and exclusive bargaining rights for the employees covered hereunder on the
following subjects:
Wages
Hours
Fringe Benefits
Working Conditions

ARTICLE 4
NONDISCRIMINATION

Neither the City nor the Union shall discriminate against an employee because ofthe employee's
race, color, relfgion, sex, age, disability, natural origin or political affiliation.
It is mutually agreed that neither the City nor the Union or its members shall interfere with,
restrain, coerce or otherwise discriminate against any employee in the employee's right to join
or assist, or refrain from joining or assisting any labor organization orto participate in any lawful
union activity.

ARTICLES
ASSOCIATION DUES

The City shall deduct Union membership dues from the pay of those employees in the bargaining
unit who individually requestin writing such deductions from pay. The amount to be deducted shall
be certified to the City by the Union and the aggregate deductions, together with a list of
employees for whom deductions were made, shall be promptly remitted to the Union.
Employees wishing to cancel Union membership dues must do so in writing. The deductions will be
canceled the month following the month in which the request was received.

ARTICLE 6
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

There shall be an earnest, honest, and prompt effort to settle differences. If any controversy or difference
arises between an employee or group of employees and the City with respect to the interpretation or
application of this Agreement, such controversy shall be handled as follows:
STEP 1.

Tne employee shall present the complaint in writing to the Police Chief, stating the exact
nature of the grievance and the Article(s) of this Agreement alleged to be violated within
ten (10) days of the date the employee knew or reasonably should have known about the
event or occurrence which is the basis for the grievance.

2

The Chief, or his designated representative, shall meet wlth the employee, who may be
accompanied by a Union representative if he chooses, in an effort to resolve the matter.
Witnesses may be called by either party.
The Chief, or his designated representative, must meet with the grievant and respond in
writing to the grievance within ten (10) working daysofreceipt ofthe grievance.
If the grievant does not refer the grievance to the next step of the grievance procedure
within five (5) working days of receipt of the Chiefs response, the grievance shall be
considered to have been satisfactorily resolved.

STEP2.

The employee shall refer the grievance and the relevant material concerning the grievance
to the City Manager, who shall convene a meeting between the grievant, his
representative, the Chief, and such witnesses as he deems appropriate w ithin seven (7)
working days of the receipt of the grievance. The City Manager shall respond to the
grievance in writing within seven (7} working days of the hearing.
If the grievant does not refer the grievance to the next step of the grievance procedure
within seven (7) working daysofreceipt ofthe City Manager's answer, the grievance shall be
considered to be satisfactorily resolved.

STEP 3.

The Union, through its Director, shall notify the City Manager of its intent to appeal the
matter to arbitration. Such notice must be received within fourteen (14) days of the receipt
of the City Manager's answer. Within fifteen (15) days thereafter, the parties shall jointly
request a panel of not less than seven (7) persons from the American Arbitration
Association ("AAA"). The parties shall request thatthe panel consist of Ohio arbitrators
only. Upon receipt ofthe panel, t he parties shall make a selection using the alternate
strike method.
The costs associated with arbitrations, except for the costs of the parties' respective
representatives, shall be shared equally by the parties and the arbitrator shall have no
authority to add to or subtract from or modify any of the terms of this Agreement nor
shall any award issued by the arbitrator be cont rary to law. Further, the award shall be
based exclusively on the evidence presented at the arbitration hearin,g,

The arbitrable forum herein established is intended to resolve disputes between the
parties only over the interpretation or application of matters which are specifically
covered in this Agreement and which are not excluded from arbitration. The decision
of the arbitrat or shall be final and binding on all parties and individuals involved. Appeals
from binding awards may be appealed exclusively through R. C. Chapter 2711.

3

ARTICLE 7
LAYOFFSAND RESTORATION

If it becomes necessary, through lack ofwork orfunds orfor causes otherthan disciplinary reasons, to
reduce the work force in the bargaining unit, the youngest employee in point of service shall be the
first laid-off. Laid-off employees shall retain recall rights for eighteen (18) months from date of lay-off.
Recall shall be in inverse order of lay-offs. Employees recalled shall have seven (7) days following
receipt of notice to indicate in writing their desire to return and must return to work within fourteen
(14) days of receipt of notice. Notification shall be by registered letter to the last known address of
the employee. A copy of the recall notice shall be simultaneously sent to the Union.
Recall shall be in inverse order of lay-offs. Employees recalled shall have seven (7) days foll'owing
receipt of notice to indicate in writing their desire to return and must return to work within fourteen
(14) days of receipt of notice. Notification shall be by registered letter to the last known address of
the employee. A copy of the recall notice shall be simultaneously sent to the Union.
Employees shall notify management of any change of addresses during this time period.

ARTICLE 8
HOURS OF WORK

The normal work period for employees shall consist ofeighty{80) hours per pay period. Variations from
this schedule due to shiftchanges, rotating work schedules (e.g., 6-3 rotation), and the need for twentyfour (24) hour coverage shall not be cause for premium pay. In order to eliminate fluctuation in
employee paychecks for those employees on a 6-3 schedule who are working 8.5 hour days, these
employees shall receive bi-weekly paychecks computed on the basis of eighty (80) hours per pay
perfod, at the employee's regular hourly rate of pay. Friday's following the end of each two (2) week
period will be normal pay day. All regular shifts are to be scheduled at least four (4) weeks in advance,
and the schedule made available to employees.
Employees shall be afforded choice of available shifts in the order of their seniority when shift
changes are mandated by management. Employees will be permitted to bid their shifts once a year.
During the life of the Agreement, employees will be required to work each shift twice. Although
employees may be permitted to work consecutive shifts, they will not be permitted to do so during
the same calendar year. Either party may request to re-open/discuss shifts during the life of the
Agreement. A representative of the employees shall advise management at least five (S) working
days in advance of a shift change with a list of their shift preference. No employee will be placed in
the same shift more than one (1) out of every three (3) shift changes, this allowing others an
opportunity to work preferred shifts. The parties intend to maintain the existing practice regarding
scheduling. In the event the City wishes to change the existing practice, it shall provide thirty (30)
days advance notice of the change, so the parties may meet and discuss the change.

4

ARTICLE 9
PREMIUM PAY

OVERTIME
1. Patrol Officers will be paid their regularstraight-time salary for all hours worked. Members who
work in excess oftheir regularly scheduled shiftorworkschedule shall be compensated at a rate
of one and one-half (1½), or may by mutual agreement with the City, "Flex" his/her work
schedule within the same work period. Actual hours worked shall include Vacation, Personal
and Bereavement leave, if such paid leave time has been pre-scheduled and pre-approved
by the Chief or his authorized representative. Sick 'leave hours will not count as hours worked
in computing overtime.
2. Any time overtime is created byan officer utilizing a pre-scheduled and approved vacation day
or personal day it shall be posted in the police squad room as soon as possible. Full-time
patrolmen will have the first opportunity to sign up for the available shifts for five (5 days) days
after the initial posting. Shifts not signed up for by full-time patrolmen within five (5) days of
posting will then be available to supervisors, part-time and auxiliary officers at that time.
Conflicts in which two (2) ormore patrolmen wish the same shift shall be granted by seniority.
This seniority does not include supervisors, part-time and/or auxiliary officers. While
members may volunteer to work a full overtime shift, no member will be mandated to work
a full overtime shift, except in cases of emergency or scheduling hardship. It does not,
however, mean that mandatory overtime is required as long as the shift is covered by two
personnel.
In the event of unforeseen overtime, which is overtime that results from sick leave or any
other emergency thatoccurs with eight(8) hours or less notice tothe Employer from the start of
the shift that is required to be covered, the overtime shall first be offered, by seniority, to any
bargaining unit members who are already present on the shift previous to the open shift.
If no member who is already present voluntarily accepts the overtime or accepts only a
portion of the unforeseen overtime, it shall then be offered to the on-coming bargaining unit
rnembersalready scheduled toworktheshiftsubsequent to the overtime hours, byseniorrty. If
none of the off-going or on-coming members accepts the overtime, it shall be offered to all
other bargaining unit members, by seniority. In the event that the overtime cannot be filled
pursuant to the foregoing process. the least senlor bargaining unit employee present shall be
ordered to work the unforeseen overtime.
In the event a full-time bargaining member works an overtime shift, or an overtime
assignment, and an unforseen event occurs which would force the employee to work
additional overtime, the bargaining unit member who is already present on the shift duty day
(not overtime) would work the overtime, regardless of seniority, unless the employee
willingly accepts the overtime.
3. Employees called in and required to work at a time disconnected to their regular scheduled
hours of work shall be comp~nsated at the rate of time and one-half (1½), but at a minimum
shall receive three {3) hour's- pay at time and one-half {1½).
Subsequent call-ins shall be similarly compensated ifthe subsequent calH ns are made after the
three (3) hour time span covered by the original call-in.

5

4. ~argaining unit members who are scheduled for overtime for special events, i.e., parades, walks,
etc. will be required to stay on duty until the conclusion of the event, and not leave and come
back for the event unless approved by Management. The bargaining unit member will be paid
according to the overtime rate set within this contract.
COURT TIME
1.

Whenever it is necessary for an off-duty employe,e to appear in court on matters pertaining
to or arising from City of Brookville business, or to appear before the prosecutor for a pretrial conference, the employee will prepare an Absence and Overtime Form, as currently
used, attach the Court Subpoena and submit itto the employee's supervisor for approval as
required.
In cases where no subpoena was issued, the employee will attach a paper that states who
requested the employee's presence, the date, start and finish time, and signature of the
Prosecutor. This paper w ill then be attached to the employee's Absence and Overtime Form
and submitted to the employee's Sl.lpervisor.
Court time that is on the employee's scheduled day off will be paid a minimum of three (3)
hours overtime pay. However, the employee will contact the Prosecutor twenty-four (24)
hours in advance to ensure that employee is still needed. If not, no compensation is due. In
the event the employee is told he/she is needed after calling the Prosecutor, the Employer
will pay a minimum of three (3) hours overtime pay.
Court time scheduled on an employee's duty day that begins or ends before or after the
employee's normally scheduled duty hours will be compensated at a rate of three {3) hours
overtime pay. However, the employee will call the Prosecutor twenty-four (24) hours pr,ior to
the subpoenaed court time. If the employee is not needed, no compensation is due.
However, employees shall not be eligible for court time pay if their court appea rance abuts
their regularly scheduled hours, occurring within one (1) hour of either the employees
regularly scheduled start time or end time. In the event an employee's court time abuts
their regularly scheduled hours, the employee will be paid the appropriate hourly rate.

TRAINING
1. When reasonably possible, training will be scheduled on duty time. When not possible,

employees w ill be compensated for departmentally approved training at one and one half (1½) time the employee's normal rate of pay. Necessary books. materials and tuition
will be paid by the City.
Training in rain showers is not cause for canceling t raining; however, thunderstorms,
tornado watches and warnings, heat index warnings and temperatures of thirty degrees
Fahrenheit (30°) or below, will be cause for cancellatlon of any outdoor training.
PYRAMIDING
1.

There shall be no pyramiding of premium pay.

6

ARTICLE 10
HOLIDAYS

As used in these policies, Personal Days shall mean scheduled work p eriods during which regular
and probationary Police Department employees, excluding the positions of secretary and
Command Staff, are not required to work, but for which they are paid their regular rates o f pay,
and which are in lieu of holidays.
Personal Days shall be scheduled subject to the manning requirements of the City as determined
by the Police Chief. An employee's request for a personal day made at least ten (10) days prior to
the day requested will be acted upon within three (3) working days after receiving the request.
Two (2) of the granted thirteen (13) persona l days will be permitted with folir (4) hours
notice, as long as the personal day does not fall on a city recognized holiday, and no
more than one (1) four (4) hour notice in a month. No more than two (2) Personal Days
shall be grant ed during a month. Requests for use of personal days made in accordance with t his
provision shall not be unreasonably denied.
Regular employees shall be granted t hirteen (13) Personal Days for each year. Probationary
employees shall be granted one (1) Personal Day for each month of service, up t o atotal of thirteen
days for the year. Personal Days will be granted each calendar year, must be used by the last pay
period of each calendar year, and none shall be carried over intothe following year.
In addition to the 13 Personal Days granted to each employee each year, employees can earn an
additional Personal Day for nominal use of sick leave as follows: 0-2 total days of sick leave used
in the prior year. No more than two (2) total days of sick leave= one (1) p ersonal leave day.
All regular full-time Police Patrol Officers ofthe City shall be eligible to convert all or any portion oftheir
full days of unused personal days to which they are entitled to, to a cash payment at a regular hourly
straight pay rate minus all normal deductions. In the event that the Police Officer(s) desires to make
such a conversion, theyshall not ify the Director of Police oftheirdecision, inwritihg before November 1
of each calendar year. The notification shall include the specific number of days that they wish to have
converted to a cash payment. The payment shall be made with the second pay period end ing check
in November of that year only. Upon an employee's termination of employment with the City of
Brookville, the unused Personal Days will be prorated for cash-out purposes at the rate of one per
each month worked for that year.

ARTICLE 11
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

The City shall assume the cost of furnishing new employees with a complete new uniform for the first
ye.a r's service. Aftet: the first year of employment, uniform allowahces will be Nine Hundred Dollars
($900.00) payable semiannually in January and July. After one (1) year ofemployment, employees will
receive a prorated uniform allowance of one-twelfth (1/12) of the total yearly uniform allowance per
each full month of service until the nextsemiannual payment All uniformed employees are subject to
daily and any specially ordered inspections by supervisors orthe Chief as to the cleanliness and overall
condition of uniforms and equipment. Employees found with unclean or unpresentable uniforms and
equipment are subject to disciplinary action. Initial changes of uniform resulting from promotion
shall be paid by the City. All uniform leather gear will be replaced when deemed necessary by
management.
7

Articles of clothing (uniform) shall become the property of the employee. Ballistic vests will be
considered anarticleofequipment and will befurnished toemployeeswho requestand/oris required to
wearthem and will be replaced when deemed necessary by management. The Employer agrees to
provide a second carrier for the employee's vest at no cost to the employee. Equipment articles shall
remain the property of the City and shall be returned to the City upon resignation, discharge, or
retirement in the same condition as when received, less the normal wear and tear.
Articles of clothing to be issued initially to the employee by the City, and to become the property of
t he employee is as follows:
Three (3) long sleeve shirts
Three (3) short sleeve shirts
Three (3) pair trousers
One (1) lightweight jacket with removable liner
One (1) summer hat
One (1) winter hat
One (1) pair uniform shoes
One (1) uniform tie
All other equipment issued by the City will remain the property of the City while in the custody of the
employee.
Equipment articles lost or stolen through negligence shall be replaced by the employee. Equipment
articles needing repair or replacement due to job related wear and tear shall be repaired or replaced
by the Cfty. The City shall replace, or repair glasses and watches damaged in the line of duty, up to a
maximum of one hundred dollars ($100), provided that such damage is not due to the negligence of
the employee and the damage is immediately reported to the Police Chief, or his designee.
When uniform changes are mandated by the City, the initial change shall be paid for by the City.
When the uniform changes are requested by the Union, additional changes will be paid by the
employee. Such request by the Union would need approval by the City.
The City shall report the clothing allowance as required by IRS regulations. Each employee may retain
copies of their receipts of their purchase of items for their own tax purposes.

A RTICLE 12

SEVERABILITY

If, during the life ofthis Agreement, there exists an applicable law or any applicable rule, regulation or
order issued by governmental authority which shall render invalid or restrain compliance with or
enforcement of any provision of this Agreement, such provision shall be immediately suspended, and
be of no effect hereunder, so long as such law, rule, regulation, or order shall remaih in effect. Such
invalidation ofa part or portion ofthis Agreement shall not invalidate any remaining portions, which
shall contil"\ue in full force and effect.

ARTICLE 13
WAIVER

The parties acknowledge tnat duri ng the negotiations which resuited fn this Agreement, each had the
right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with respect to any subject or matter not
removed by law from the area of collective barga ining, and that the understandings and agreements
arrived at by the parties hereto after the exercise ofthose rights and opportunities are set forth in this
Agreement.
Provisions ofthis Agreement may be amended, modified or supplemented at any time, but only by
mutual consent of the parties.
Any such discussion shall not in any way affect the remaining provisions of this Agreement.
ln theabsenceofsuch mutual consent, this Agreement represents the negotiated result ofthe parties
on all matters subject to negotiation,

ARTICLE 14
SICK LEAVE

All employees shall accrue sick leave attherateof 4.6hours foreach completed 80 hours ofservke. Such
leave is a privilege extended to employees, in case of illness, so they will not lose their regular pay.
Overtime hours shall qualify for accrual of sick leave hours. Sick leave accrued, but not used or
converted as hereinafter provided in any year, shall be cumulative without limit in succeeding years.
Employees hired after February 1, 2008 may notaccumulate more than 1,600 hours ofsick leave. The
timing of the payment of unused sick leave upon retirement shall be paid in accordance with the
Employee Personnel Manual.
When sick leave is used, itshall be deducted from the employee's credit on the basis of one (1) hour for
every one (1) hour of absence from previously regular scheduled work period. Employees shall be
compensated at their regLtlar hourly rate for all authorized sick leave.
In order to qualify for payment of accrued sick leave, the employee must report the illness at least
one and one-half (1½) hours before,the start of the shift to the department head, or designee, and
on each succeeding day of absence un1ess other arrangements are made with the city.
Sick leave may be used for the following reason:
In case of his/her illness, injury, childbirth, or exposure to a contagious disease.
For medical, dental, oroptical examination ortreatment. (Such leave shall be limited to the actual hours
necessary for such medical, dental or optical examination or treatment, including reasonable travel
time and not to exceed four (4) hours unless excused by written permission of physician or dentist
indicating that treatment rendered required employee to take off for a longer period of time).
Enforced quarantine of the employee in accordance with community health standards.
Sick leave usage for the purpose of illness/injury of a member of the employee's immediate family
(wherein the employee's presence is required) shall be limited to a total of forty (40) hours per

9

calendar year, or fifty-one (51) hours for those employees working a6/3schedule. Such usage may be
taken in increments ofas few as one (1) hour per incident. In the event an employee should requ ire
additfonal time ln excess of the allowance established or for reasons other than t hose noted above,
such additiona'I time may be charged against Vacation or Personal leave w ith the approval of the
employee's supervisor.
Immediate family as used above shall mean spouse, child, parent or other relative if that relative
actually resides in the home of the employee.
Exempt from sick leave "use" shall be any leave that qualifies for Family Medical Leave for the serious
health condition of a spouse, parent orchild consistent with the Family Medical Leave Act. Employees
shall be permitted to utilize sick leave for any sick leave occurrence that is Family Medical Leave
qualifying.
Elective surgery will be scheduled at the convenience of the City.
Full-time employees who use NO sick leave from January 1 to June 30 will receive a $250 Perfect
Attendance Bonus no later than the second pay in July and full-time employees who use NO sick
leave from July 1 to December 31 will receive a $250 Perfect Attendance Bonus no later than the
second pay in January of the following year.
In case ofan absence of more than two (2) days, the Chief may require thata physician's statement be
submitted to justify the use of sick leave. If the Chief requires a physician's statement for use of sick
leave for less than three (3) working days, the City wil l incur the cost of the examination l)rovlded
that the physician authorizes the absence from work due to illness or injury. If sick leave abuts a
scheduled Personal or Vacation Leave, a physician note may be required at the employee's expense,
unless the use of such leave is otherwise FMLA-qualifying.
F,xchange ofSick Leave:
Exchange, of Sjck Leave to Vacation
All full-time City personnel may, ifthey so desire, convert sick leave time into vacation time as follows:
0-264 accumulated hours: no vacation conversion,
265-720 accumulated hours: 32 sick leave hour's converts to eight (8) vacation hours.
Over 720 accumulated hours: 24 sick leave hour's converts to eight (8) vacation hours.
After any conversion, the employee must maintain a minimum of 240 hours of sick leave.
A maximum of 40 hours for vacation can be converted from sick leave hours in any one (1) calendar
year, and these days off shall be scheduled at the discretion of the department heads.
Exchange of Sick Leave to Pav
If an employee has a Sick Leave balance of 600 hours or more in anyone calendar year, Sick Leave
accrued may be exchanged for additional pay at a ratio of 3 to 1. A maximum of 120 hours of Sick
Leave may be exchanged for 40 hours of additional pay each calendar year with a 30-day notice.

10

Employees may only be granted one exchange plan (to vacation or pay) during any calendar year and
may not receive the benefit of both exchange plans in the same calendar year.
Any full-time City personnel with 20 years ofcontinuous service regardless of age who retires w1th an
age and service retirement through the applicable public retirement system, may, at his option,
convert their unused sick leave time to a single lump sum cash payment for 25% of the unused sick
leave time based on the retiring employee's rate of pay at the time of retirement. Should an
employee be retiring at the age of at least 48 years, the employee may exercise this option with only
ten (10) years of continuous service with the City. Only one quarter(¼) of the accumulated but
unused sick leave, shall be so converted; it being expressly understood that those hours have been
accumulated while being employed by the City. All time ofpublic service referred to in this section shall
be limited to continuous years of service with the City only.
When an employee has been medically diagnosed pregnant, she shall notify her supervisor, in writing
and in a timely fashion, of her condition and the estimated date of birth. An employee may use sick
leave and vacation time and be fully covered by insurance during leave for maternity. When other
leaves, including FM LA leave, are exhausted, theem ployee may apply for LeaveofAbsence without pay,
which may extend upto asix(6) week period ofdisability after birth. After that, ifan employee does not
return to work, but is not medically disabled, benefits (insurance, sick and vacation leave, etc.) do not
accrue.
Sick Leave Donation:
All members of the bargaining unit shall be eligible for donated sick leave benefits, subject to t he
terms of this Article, to relieve hardship resulting from an extraordinary and extended illness,
When an employee's sick leave hours are about to be exhausted, he/she or the OPBA representative
shall request, in writing, to the Chief of Police, consideration for receipt of donated sick leave hours
from other bargaining unit members.
The Chief of Police, subject to the approval of the City Manager, has sole decision- making authority
for recipients of this program. The decision regarding applications is not subject to the grievance or
arbitration procedure.
Upon application, the Chief of Police will respond to the employee within ten (10) business days.
Upon approval of the request, the Chief of Police will post a sick leave donation request
announcement for the employee.
Only non-probationary employees are allowed to participate, both in receiving and providing sick
leave hours. However, probationary employees may receive up to forty (40) hours of donated sick
leave, or fifty-one (51} hours of donated sick leave if they are working a 6/3 schedule.
Any employee provid ing hours must have a minimum of 300 hours to participate. Only hours above
the 300 level may be used.
Donation ofsick leave hours must be in40-hour blocks (minimum and maximum), except for employees
with less than 340 hours.
Donated hours are deducted from an employee's available number of days to use each year. Example
- 40 hours donated, 120 days - 5 days= 115 days left.
11

Each employee may donate sick leave hours only once in a calendar year.
This program is used only when the employee exhausts all other leave (earned Vacation and Personal
days).
Once hours are donated to an employee, he/she retains that number of hours. If an employee returns
to work before the hours are exhausted, the employee retains all' unused, donated hours.
Abuse of Sick Leave:
In the event that an employee is suspected of abusing sick leave, the City may require the employee to
justify his, or her use of sick leave by obtaining a physicians' certificate at the employee's own
expense, or other verification of illness or injury acceptable to the Chief, for any or all future absences
for which sick leave is claimed within a period of six (6) consecutive months.
Grounds for suspicion of abuse shall include, but not limited to, information received by the City in
writing signed by complainant that the etnployee is, or was, dudng any time for which sick leave is
claimed:
Engaging in other employment;
Engaging in strenuous physical exercise of recreation, including work around the home, other that as
ordered or recommended by a doctor;
Present in a tavern or other place inconsistent with a claim of illness ori njury;
Pattern of absences.
Any employee who is suspected of abusing sick leave shall be confronted with such suspicion by his
supervisor and given an opportunity to explain his use of sick leave prior to being required to produce
a physician's cert1ficate for future absences as set forth above.
If sick leave abuts a scheduled Personal or Vacation Leave, a physician note may be required at the
employee's expense, unless the use of such sick leave is otherwise FM LA-qualifying.
While on paid sick leave, etnployees are not authorized to work at other jobs without the written
permission of the City Manager.

ARTICLE 1S
TUITION REIMBURSEMENT

Except as noted in paragraph six (6) below, the City agrees to reimburse each full-titne Patrol Officer for
tu ition up to $1,000 per calendar year, subject to the approval of the City Manager, which approval will
not be unreasonably denied and provided the following conditions are met:
The subject matter of the course must contribute to the employee's ability to improve his or her
performance on the job and should enhance the employee's value to the City.
The course must be offered through an accredited college, university, technical institute, business school,
or related educational school or institution.

12

If the employee fails to complete or pass the course, with at least a C (2.0) grade point average, or if he or
she resigns or is removed from his or her position with the City within one year of completion of the course,
the employee must repay the City all tuition, fees, books, or other expenses the City paid for t he course.
A grade report, certificate, or other proof of completion and receipt for payment of the course must be
submitted to the Department Director before reimbursement will be made.
An employee who intends on taking college courses must submit a Memorandum to the Police Chief no
later than October 1 ofeach year for the next calendar year. If a Memorandum ls not provided tothe Police
Chief by October 1 of each year for the next calendar year, reimbursement will not be made.
In the event only one bargaining unit employee submits a Memorandum to the Police Chief no later than
October 1 of each year for the next calendar year, then that employee will be eligible for reimbursement
of up to $3,000 for the calendar year. In the event two bargaining unit employees submit a Memorandum
to the Police Chief no later than October 1 of each year for the next calendar year, then the employees
will be eligible for reimbursement of upto $1,500 each for the calendar year.
Any bargaining unit member who possesses a two (2) year degree in Criminal Justice/Law Enforcement, a
Bachelor of Arts or Bachelor of Sciences degree from a four (4) year program at an accredited college or
university, or a Master's degree and who has successfully passed their probationary period as a full-time
City of Brookville Police Officer shall receive the following additional pay supplement:
Degree
Job Related As·sociate's Degree
Job Related Bachelor's Degree
Job Related Master's Degree

Amount
$0.24/hour
$0.36/hour
$0.48/hour

ARTICLE 16
INSURANCE

The City shall have a plan of Health and Dental care available toemptoy.ees covered hereunder and such
plan of benefits shall be uniform for all full-time employees of the City. The City shall contribute 85%
of the applicable monthly cost for coverage for any enrolling employee who contributes, via payroll
deduction, 15% of such monthly applicable cost for Health insurance. The City agrees to pay the
entire prem ium cost for Dental insurance.
Employees may "opt-out" of the City's major medical and pharmaceutical coverage for the emp·\oyee,
spouse and a11 eligible dependents, provided that the employee demonstrates current coverage by
the spouse forthe employee, spouse and all eHgible dependents. The City shall pay the sum of $200 per
month for a family plan; employees on health plans other than a family plan will be paid a
proportional: amount based on the monthly premium of their current health plan to the family plan.
The employees who opt out will be paid annually on or about December 1 a-dwill be fully taxable.
All employees covered hereunder shall be provided $50,000 of Life and Accidental Death and
Dismemberment (AD&D) Insurance. Such face amount of insurance shall be reduced 50% upon the
employee's attainment of age 70. The City agrees to pay the entire premium cost for such insurance.
Medical benefits herein described shall be subject to coordination of benefits in accordance with the
provisions of the Master Plan/Agreement.
13

The type of insurance and method of provldihg the above-described insurance coverage, and/or the
choice of insurance carrier, sha ll be solely within the discretion of the Employer.
Medical coverage continuation shall be ln accordance with the COBRA Act.

ARTICLE 17
VACATION

All fu ll,time City personnel shall be eligible for paid vacation after the completion of six (6) ful l
months of service and having accumulated vacation time. Vacation time shall accrue on the following
schedule, based on regular hours of service. Overtime hours (more than 80 hours per pay period) of
service shalt not qualify for vacation time .

At least

But Less Than

Accrual Rate

Earned Per Vear

5 Years

10 Years

.00 Hours@ 80 Hours

104 Hours

'10 Years

lS Years

.60 Hours@ 80 Hours

120 Hours

15 Years

20 Years

6.16 Hours@ 80 Hours

160 Hours

6.92 Hours@ 80 Hours

180 Hours

20 Years

Personnel may at their option accrue up to 15 days (120 hours) of vacation over their yearly earned
allotment, with ahyadditional amountoverthi.s needing signed approval by the City. Personnel who
have accrued three (3) weeks (120 hours) or more weeks of vacation, may request to receive one (1)
weeks regular wages in lieu of one (1) weeks vacation time. This w ill be permissible once in any
calendar year with at least one (1) weeks written notice requesting the pay. This payment will be
included on the next regular pay day if approved by the City Manager.
Vacations shall be scheduled subject to the manning requirements of the city as determined by the
Chief of Police. No more than one (1) bargaining unit employee per shift will be permitted to take a
vacation and/or personal day, and no more than two (2) bargaining unlt employees can be off on the
same day. The Command Staff will not be counted as employees off.
Vacation requests must be made in writing at least ten (10) calendar days before the start of proposed
vacation. !n case of conflicting requests, and subject to manning requirements, vacations shall be
scheduled on the basis of senlority. However, vacation reejuests shall not be unreasonably denied .
Employees wi ll have the opportunity to obtain pre-scheduled vacation approvals on a seniority-based
priority to the date of February 15 ofeach calendar year. Thereafter, vacations should be scheduled on
a first come, first serve basis.

14

ARTICLE 18
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

Up to three (3) days paid leave shall be granted to an employee for any workdays m issed owing to the
death of his or her father, mother, child, spouse, brother, sister, parent-in-law, grandparent, spouse's
grandparent, step-children, stepparents, or stepbrothers or sisters, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law,
grandchild, aunt or uncle. Any funeral leave beyond three (3) days shall be at the sole discretion of
the City Manager, or, in the absence of the City Manager, the Chief of Police and will not be
unreasonably denied.

ARTICLE 19
INJURY LEAVE

Injury leave up to a maxi mum of one hundred sixty (160) work hours shall be granted to an employee
as a result of an accident arising out of, and in the course of the employee's normal performance of
duties, and if allowed as a claim by the Industria l Commission. In order to be eligible for such inj ury
leave, the employee must apply for disability payments under the Worker's Compensation Act, and
immediately upon receipt of such benefits, tum same over to the Finance Director. Injury leave
payments hereunder shall be paid at 100% of the employee's regular rate of pay.
Light Duty
I. If an employee is unable, for a work related illness or injury, to perform regular duties, and if the
employee is able to perform some other types of work, then the employee will be required to work
Light Duty, if such work ls available up to a maximum of three hundred twenty (320) work hours.
2. The employee must obtain and provide to the Chief or his designee, a completed physician's light
Duty Release Form. The form must be completed and signed by the employee's at tending physician.
The doctor must state- that there is reasonable medical probability that the employee w ill be able to
return to full duty at a specified date in the future and authorize the employee to return to work in a
light duty position and out line the parameters within which the employee may work. If there exists
a reasonable basis to question the physician's evaluation, the City Manager reserves the right to have
the employee examined at City expense if necessary to determine the extent of injury and
entitlement to light duty.

ARTICLE 20
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
MILEAGE
The City shall reimburse an employee for the use of his privately owned vehicles when they are
required and/or approved for use while acting in the interest of the City. The rate for such use will be
at the current Internal Revenue Service standard mileage rate.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE
Leaves ofabsence without payfor personal reasons may be granted by the City for a limited period not
to exceed three (3) months. Such leaves may be extended for upto one hundred sixty (160) work hours
at the discretion of the City Manager. The Employer shall comply with the provisions ofthe Family and
Medical Leave Act for qualifying leaves.
15

MILITARY LEAVE
Employees who are members of the Ohio National Guard, or a reserve component of t he Armed
Forces ofthe United States, shall be entitled to leave of absence from their City duties f or such time as
they are'ln military service, or field traini'ng, or active duty in accordance w ith State and Federal law.
UN!ON BUSINESS
The Union is authorized to select one (1) representative to investigate grievances, consult wit h the
Chief in processing a grievance, or to assist in the settlement of disputes. If prior permission is
received, such representative shall be allowed reasonable time off without loss or gain in pay for
such purposes. Such permission shall not be unreasonably denied.
The Union shall provide the Employer with the name of such designated representative and shall
ensure that the Employer i.s timely advised of any change in the designated representative.
The Union representative will provide the Police Chief, or designee, with forty-eight (48) hours
written notice in advance of the Union Meeting. Union Meetings will not exceed two (2) hours for
those members scheduled to work at the time of the Union Meeting.

POLICE AUXILIARY
All regularly scheduled duty shifts will be covered by full-time employees with the following
exceptions:
If, aftercomplying with Article IX (Premium Pay), no full-time employee w ishes the assignment, it may
be offered to a part time officer and/or an auxiliary officer.
When full-time employees are off for more than two (2) days, part time officers and/or auxiliary
officers may be assigned to the shift.

SAFETY
It is the responsibility of Management, with the cooperation of the Union and employees, to provide
safe working conditions, equipment and working methods for Its employees and to attempt to
provide two (2) man minimum staffing at all times.
DISCIPLINE
An employee may only be disciplined for j ust cause and where appropri'ate, the principles of
progressive discipline will be used.
All disciplinary actions shall be removed from the employee file twenty-four (24) months from the date
of issue. Disciplinary actions over twenty-four (24) months shall have no force and/or effect upon
current disciplinary proceedings.
Any time that a written disciplinary action is placed in an employee's personnel file, the employee may
attach an explanatory memorandum to the disciplinary action detailing the employee's explanation
of the circumstances surrounding the disciplinary action.
Discipline shall be removed from the Personnel file and cease to have force and effect in the
progressive disciplinary scheme in accordance with the following language:

16

A. Reprimands. Records of reprimands shall cease to have force and effect or be consi.dered in
future discipline matters twelve (12) mont hs after their effective date, providing there are no
intervening disciplinary actions taken during that time period.
B. Suspension Records. Records of suspension shall cease to have force and effect or be
considered in future disciplinary matters two (2) years after their effective date, providing
there are no intervening disciplinary actions taken during that time period.
Letters of caution are not discipline and shall remain in effect for purposes of the current evaluation
period.
Before any bargaining unit member may be disciplined which may result in loss of pay or termination,
a pre-disciplinaryconference must be convened to give the members an opportunity to respond to the
allegations.
Disciplinary actions resulting in a loss of pay may be grieved through the binding arbitration process.
LABOR/MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE M EETINGS
The parties shall establish a Labor/Management Committee which shall meetannually, or more often If
mutually agreed by the parties, to discuss matters of mutual concern, including but not limited to the
administration of this Agreement. The Union may designate two (2) individuals to act as its
representatives on the Committee. The City's representatives will be t he Chief of Police or designee, the
City Manager or Assistant City Manager, and up to one (1) additional individual, at the Employer's
discretion.
PAYMENT FOR EARNED LEAVE UPON DEATH OF EMPLOYEE
In the case ofdeath ofanactive employee, any Vacation and Personal Leave balanceattimeofdeath and
25%of theSick Leave balance at time ofdeat htowhichtheemployee would have been entitled, shall be
paid directly to the designated beneficiary, or the employee's estate, if no beneficiary is named.

SHIFT TRADES
All full-time bargaining unit members, excluding the posit ion of Detective and Command Staff, will be
entitled to trade work hours not to exceed their regularly scheduled shift in any one pay period with
any other qualified employee on a "no loss/no gain" basis. No employee is entitled to overti me during
the period for which he or she is substituting for another employee pursuant to a trade of work hours
under this section. All trades must be totally completed w ithin the same pay period in which they are
initiated. All shift trades must have prior approval from the Police Chief or his designee. Shift trades
will not be unreasonably denied.

17

ARTICLE 21
WAGES

The following pay schedu le 1s to be adopted on the effective date of this Agreement for al I full-time
commissioned officers with the Brookville Pol ice Department.
WAGE SCALE
EFFECTIVE THE PAY PERIOD INCLUDING JULY 1, 2022

HR$

A

B

C

D

26.70

28.04

29.44

30.91

I

E

F

32.46

34.08

This represents a three percent (3%) increase.
WAGE SCALE
EFFECTIVE THE PAV PERIOD INCLUDING JULY 1, 2023

HR$

A

B

C

D

E

F

27.23

28.60

30.03

31.53

33.10

34.76

rrhis represents a two percent (2%) increase.
WAGE SCALE
EFFECTIVE THE PAY PERIOD INCLUDING JANUARY 1, 2024

HR$

27.78

29.17

30.63

32.16

33.77

35.46

his represents a two percent (2%) increase.

The schedule above consists of six (6) steps. Norma l progression from Step A to Step B shall be
upon the one (1) year probationary period . However, based on satisfactory performance after six
(6) months full-time employment, one-half(½) of the Step A t o Step B ihcrease may be grahted.
Progression through the remaining steps shall be on an annual basis. Progression through the
steps wi ll be based on satisfactory performance as determined by the Chief through periodic
perform anee review. Any recommendation fo r denia I of a step increase must be approved by the
City Manager.

ARTICLE 22
PLUS RATING

When a Designated Officer-In-Charge covers for a supervisor who is hot on duty, the Designated
Office r-In-Cha rge will rece ive an additional $1.45 per hour while perfo rmi ng supervisory duties while
working as the Officer-I n-Charge . The Designated Officer-I n-Cha rge pay will also be paid to the
individual who is so des ignated on Saturdays and/or Sundays (for the da lly work hours the Ch ief is
normally scheduled t o work on weekdays), not to exceed eight (8) hours .

18

Any individual who is required to train a new employee shall receive an additional $1.45 per hour for
those hours during which such individual is actually training the new employee.
SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL:

8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. - No additional pay,
Full-timecommissioned officerswhosescheduledshiftassignmentfallsbetweenthe hours of4:00 P.M.
and 8:00 A.M. shall receive a shift differential in the amount of $0.40/hour for all hours so worked.
This will be in addition to the applicable hourly rate of pay. This shift differential shall be paid hourly
for all hours worked.

ARTICLE 23
APPLICATION OF CIVIL SERVICE

Whereasthis Agreement may address subjects also addressed bytheCivil Service lawsand/or Rules and
Regulations of the Brookville Civil Service Commission, the parties hereby mutually agree that this
Agreement shall take precedence over any conflicting Civil Servke provision and except as otherwise
specifically provided herein the Civil Service Commission shall have no jurisdiction to receive or
determine any appeals relating to the interpretation or application of this Agreement.
In accordance with the provisions of Ohio Revised Code Section 4117.l0(A), all provisions listed in the
index of this Agreement are intended to supersede and/or prevail over conflicting and/or additional
subjects found in ORC Sections 124.01 through 124.56.

ARTICLE 24
WAIVER IN CASE OF EMERGENCY

In cases of emergency declared by the President of the United States, the Governor of the State of
Ohio, the Sheriff, or the Federal or State legislature, such as acts of God or civil disorder, the following
conditions of this Agreement may be temporarily suspended by the Employer;
1. Time limits for the processing of grievances; and
2. Work rules and/or agreements and practices relating tothe assignment ofemployees.
Upon the termination of the emergency should valid grievances exist, they shall be processed in
accordance with the provisions outlined in t he grievance procedure of this Agreement and shall
proceed from the point in the grievance procedure to which they, the grievance(s), had properly
progressed, prior to the emergency.

ARTICLE 25
NO STRIKE/ NO LOCKOUT

The Employer and the Union agree that the services performed by employees are essential to the
public's health, safety, and welfare. Therefore, during the period thisAgreement remains in effect, the
Union shall not authorize, instigate, aid, condone, encourage, participat e, or otherwise engage in any
strike, work stoppage, or slowdown, or other job action or inaction by employees which interrupts
IC}

or interferes with the operations of the Employer. The Employer shall not lock out employees from
the performance of their job duties in violation ofSection 4117 .11 (A)(7), R.C.
During the period this Agreement remains in effect, no employee shall instigate, aid, condone,
encourage, participate, or otherwise engage in any strike, work stoppage or slowdown, or other job
action or inaction by emp.l oyees which interrupts or interferes with t he operations of the Employer.
This Article specifically prohibits any employee from refusing to reportforworkorrefusing to work due
to the existence of picket line.
The Union agrees to take affirmative steps to bring about an immediate resumption of work in the
event of any strike, work stoppage, or other job action or inaction by employees in violation of this
Article. In the event of any strike, work stoppage, or other job action or inaction by employees which
violates this Article the Union shall:
Notify all employees immediately in the event of an interruption of work that is unauthorized and in
violation of this Agreement; and
State in writing addressed and delivered to all employees that the work interruption is in violation of
this Agreement; and
Make every other possible and reasonable effort to have employees cease violations of this Article.
In addition to any other rights and remedies prescribed by law, the Employer shall have the right to
discharge or otherwise discipl ine any employee violat ing this Article.
Nothing in this Article shall prevent any party from seeking such relief as it may be entitled to from any
court of competent jurisdiction in the event of a violation of this Article.

ART ICLE 26
DRUG/ALCOHOL TESTIN G AND FITNESS FOR DUTY EVALUATION

Drug free Workplace
All employees shall be subject to the provisions set forth in the Fitness for Duty Policy of the City
Personnel Policies Manual as implemented June 1, 1996.
Fitness for Duty Evaluation
An employee may request, or based upon reasonable susp1c1on, the City may require an
employee to submit to a fitness for duty evaluation by a qualified practitioner, which may include
both physical and mental fitness at the City's cost.

20

ARTICLE 27
PROBATIONARY PERIODS

All probationary periods for positions in classifications covered by this Agreement shall be for a
period of one (1) year.
When a change in classification occurs, the affected employee will serve a probationary period .
Every newly hired employee will be required to successfully complete a probationary period. The
probationary period for new employees shall begin on the first day for which the employee
receives compensation from the Employer. A newly hired probationary employee may be
terminated any time during his probationary period without recourse to the grievance or
arbitration procedure ortheState Personnel Board of Review.

ARTICLE28
SENIORITY

Seniority shall be defined as follows:
City-wide Senior ity shall be defined as the duration of time an employee has been employed with
the City of Brookville;
Department Seniority shall be defined as the duration of time an employee has been employed
w ith the City of Brookville Police Department;
Classification Sehiority shall be defined as the duration of time an employee has been ernployed
as a Police Officer with the City of Brookville Police Department; and
City-wide seniority pertains to rights as it relates to vacation and sick leave accrual. Departmental
seniority shall applyforall other purposes in this Agreement unless specifically set forth otherwise.
Continuous service shall reflect the uninterrupted service of a member as calculated by years/days of
service. Continuous service shall be interrupted only when a "break in service" occurs. A "break in service"
only occurs in the following instances:
Separation because of resignation, excej:)t where a memberis rehired within one year of resignation;
Promotion or transfer to a position outside the bargaining unit covered by the Agreement, except
where a member returns to the bargaining unit within three hundred sixty-five (365) days of the
promotion or transfer;
Removal which has not been overturned by the appropriate authority;
Failure to return from an unauthorized leave of absence; and
Failure to respond to a notification of recall from layoff.
Seniority shall commence on the date an individual becomes employed.

2]

ARTICLE 29
DURATION

This Agreement shall be in effect July 1, 2022 and shall remain in full force and effect through June 30,
2024, unless otherwise modified, amended, or terminated as provided herein below.
If either party desires to modify, amend, or terminate this Agreement, or to negotiate a successor
agreement, it shall give written notification of such intent to the other party noearlier than ninety
{90) days, nor later than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of this Agreement. In the event no
such timely notification is given, this Agreement shall automatically renew for periods of one (1) year,
with the notification period always beihgno earlier than ninety (90) days, nor later than sixty (60) days
prior to the expirat ion of said Agreement in any renewal year. Such notification shall be by regular
mail with return receipt requested. The parti es shall commence negotiatlons within two calendar
weeks upon receiving such notification, unless otherwise agreed.

22

SIGNATURE PAGE

IN WITNESS WHERE.OF, the parties have hereunto signed by their authorized representative this

day of July 20, 2022.

FOR THE &:ITV

Sonja ~ t o n
City Manager

~ 'SrwtMicheUe Brandt
Finance Director

amln s. Albrecht, Esq.
Designated Representative

~

k,~~. . t...
erv

es er e, e
