COLLECTIVE

BARGAINING

AGREEMENT

between
TOWN

OF PLAINVILLE
and

PLAINVILLE POLICE UNION
LOCAL #1706, COUNCIL 4, AFSCME, AFL-CIO

July 1, 2023 — June 30, 2026

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREAMBLE sisesssccisissarnernmnremsnraninmirninnnrncnsnnaniesnnennnanccsvevs 1
ARTICLE I

RECOGNITION sss

emma

ARTICLE II

DUES DEDUCTION... ccccccceeseseereteeeseeeeenesesesseenecseenenesenerenseenenereeeeseees 1

ARTICLE III

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS 1.0... ccccscceeseeseeesesesessesesescsseeeeeseneneesenseesenenessesee 2

ARTICLE IV

NO DISCRIMINATION vecsessssorvsossnssevsearsseverssesscsonannsneconscoretecwuseiicranssesetiens 3

ARTICLE V

NO STRIKE--NO LOCKOUT wessessisstssssevsevesisvessescsssisvassevesnsvsssevoveviersvaveeses 3

ARTICLE VI

SENIORITY sescsssmnmenereccnnnn anninnemmnnnnnnanwannmmnneas: 3

ARTICLE VII

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

ARTICLE VIII

HOURS OF WORK (0. .ccccccccsceccscesesesesescscseeseesesesssssssescecseessessseescaneeseneees 7

ARTICLE IX

OVERTIME ....ecececsscssscseseseecseeesesesssescsssssesescseseecscsesessesessscessesessseeeesseeeeeey 10

ARTICLE X

EXTRA OR. SPECIAL: POLICE: DUTY ‘wessivsssesesssssosracscassavseanaserasvsiessceses 12

ARTICLE XI

HOLIDAY'S scsssssssavoueessernanssonrnsncmnmenaasieercremeeninensenneececerseeseaers 14

ARTICLE XII

VACATIONS

ARTICLE xii

SICK LEAVE oiu.ceeecsceccssesssseseeeessscssescsesesesessscsesssesesesessnessssssssssasssenesssseesaees 18

ARTICLE XIV

FUNERAL LEAVE wu...cccsecscseseseecseeesescsesescanscecsesescscssscesesecsseesssseseseneeeeesa 22

ARTICLE XV

DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES AND PRIVILEGES .......ccsseseteseeeees 22

ARTICLE XVI

UNION BUSINESS LEA VE wsscscsssscssiseensvsinnnenrevessuseravivessvoisisvcetsssescersesoes 23

ARTICLE XVII

MILITARY LEA VE vsietsvscscsssisennnstevccssaecorsaaneevenrnaveriaapecesaereteieuecsierss 24

ARTICLE XVIII

HOSPITALIZATION AND INSURANCE

ARTICLE XIX

COURT TIME ....ccccceccccecsesceeeeseesesneseseessesesesssssssesesssscsssaesssessesssssenssanenesees 30

ARTICLE Xx

UNIFORMS AND CLOTHING 1... ceccccecceeescsesseeseeeeeteseseseeesesenesenenaes 31

sssnssconerennenn ssn

0...

1

15

eee ee es eseeneeeeeeeeee 25

ARTICLE XXI

SAVINGS: CLAUSE ssccvsscsssaasssvssnssssssavssreccetoevanstencccunssvensteeoneavasterssnanenoren 31

ARTICLE XXII

SALARIES weisssssnresceressmieesemnuenanreresnmneeensecrntenstssavameasseaveiee 32

ARTICLE XXIII

PROMOTIONS ssvwssecrssssnsrssemeseemserneancaneeaenamer
mamas 32

ARTICLE XXIV

GENERAL PROVISIONS ........ccssesssssssssesscsessesssssseceessersesesesseeesesesasoasaneses 34

ARTICLE XxXV

SUBSTANCE ABUSE TESTING w...ccccecccesseseseseecesesesseseseenesesesneneseseaneee 35

ARTICLE XXVI

EDUCATION INCENTIVES 3. c:ssstsavssssseseussssvcessusossecrnsssusssseasassassvactsaseaes 42

ARTICLE XXVII

PENSIONS

ARTICLE XXVIII

DURATION
issssssuesseospsecssserets
esas
nemrnnimancmmeneraenerreneramiesreced 43

ARTICLE XXIX

APPENDIX A - WAGE & SALARY PLAN .....cccscecsssssssssesesessseeseesssaeenae 44
APPENDIX B — SIDE LETTER - RETIREMENT PLAN

...........eeee 46

APPENDIX C — 2022 SIDE LETTER — RETIREMENT PLAN ............. 52

PREAMBLE
THIS AGREEMENT,

entered into by the TOWN

OF PLAINVILLE,

hereinafter referred to

as the Town, and the PLAINVILLE POLICE UNION, LOCAL #1706, COUNCIL #4, AMERICAN
FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES, AFL-CIO, hereinafter
referred to as the Union, has as its purpose the promotion of harmonious relations between the Town
and the Union; the establishment of an equitable and peaceful procedure for the resolution of
differences; and the establishment of rates of pay, hours of work, working privileges, working
conditions or benefits or any other matters that come within the general meaning of the terms,
working conditions or conditions of employment.
ARTICLE I
RECOGNITION
Section 1.

The Town recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent

for all full-time uniformed members, including probationary employees and investigatory members
of the Police Department with authority to exercise police powers, and Animal Control Officer,
exclusive of the Chief and the Captain.
ARTICLE I
DUES DEDUCTION
Section 1.

Union Membership is voluntary and is not a condition of employment.

The

Town agrees to deduct union membership initiation fees, assessments, and dues from the pay of
those employees who individually and in writing authorize such deductions.

The amounts to be

deducted shall be certified to the Town by the Treasurer of the Union and the aggregate deductions
of all employees shall be remitted, together with an itemized statement, to the Treasurer of the Union
once every six (6) months.

Section 2.

These deductions will be made on the normal payday as specified by the

Town and agreed to by the Union.
Section 3.

In the event an employee receives no pay on the payday on which Union dues

are deducted, no deduction shall be made for that week.

Section 4.

When a member's dues are not deducted by reason of the conditions described

in Section 3 of this Article or by reason of an extended absence from the Department, during which
time the member is not paid, and such member returns to active duty, it shall be the responsibility of
the Town to reactivate the deduction of their dues.

Section 5.

Neither any employee nor the Union shall have any claim against the Town

for errors in the processing of deductions unless a claim of error is made in writing to the Town
within sixty (60) calendar days after the date such deductions were or should have been made.

The

obligation of the Town for funds actually deducted under this Article terminates upon the delivery
of the deductions so made of the Treasurer of the Union.
Section 6.

The Union agrees to indemnify, save, and hold the Town harmless from any

claims, suits, losses, damages, or expenses arising out of or in any respect related to the application
or operation of this Article.
ARTICLE II
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Section 1.

Except as specifically abridged or modified by a provision of this Agreement,

the Town will continue to have, whether exercised or not, all of the rights, powers and authority
heretofore existing, including but not limited to the following; determine the standards of services to
be offered by the Police Department,

and Animal

Control

Officer, determine

the standards of

selection of employment; direct its employees, take disciplinary action; relieve its employees from

nN

duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons; issue rules and regulations; maintain

the efficiency of governmental operations; determine the methods, means, and personnel by which

the Town's operations are to be conducted; determine the content of job classifications, exercise
complete control and discretion over its organization and the technology of performing its work; and
fulfill all of its legal responsibilities. The above rights, responsibilities and prerogatives are inherent
in the Town Council and Town Manager by virtue of statutory and Charter provisions and cannot be
subject to any grievance or arbitration proceeding except as specifically provided for in this
Agreement.

ARTICLE IV
NO DISCRIMINATION
Section 1.

The provisions of this Agreement shall be applied equally to all employees in

the bargaining unit without discrimination because of age, sex, marital status, race, color, creed,

national origin, political affiliation or union membership.
ARTICLE V
NO STRIKE--NO LOCKOUT
Section 1.

The Union agrees that it will not call or support any strike, work stoppage,

work slow down or any other action against the Town that would impede the proper functioning of
the Town government and the public safety of the community.

The Town agrees that it will not lock

out any employees at any time.

ARTICLE VI
SENIORITY
Section la.

The seniority rights of all members of the Department shall be based upon

length of service in the Department and shall be determined from the day such member or members
were officially appointed to the Department.

Section 1b. | The Animal Control Officer shall have seniority rights based on their date of
hire with the municipality only within the classification of Animal Control Officer.

The full time

Animal Control Officer shall serve a probation period of twelve (12) months from the date of hire.
The retention of the employee during this period of time shall be at the sole discretion of the Town.

Upon successfully completing the probationary period the Animal Control Officer shall acquire
seniority as of the date of their employment.
Section 2.

Whenever more than one person is appointed to the Department on the same

day, the seniority of each individual as it relates to others appointed the same day, shall be determined
by their relative position on the entrance examination, with the greatest seniority being granted to
the individual standing highest on the list amongst those appointed and so on down in that order.
Section 3.

Seniority shall not be broken

by vacations, sick time, suspension

or any

authorized leave of absence or any call to military service for the duration.

Section 4.

Employees who may resign voluntarily, or who may be discharged for just

cause, shall lose all seniority.

Section 5.

Rank seniority is defined as the total length of continuous service as a

permanent appointee to a given rank.
Section 6.

In the event of reduction in the force, layoff shall be in inverse order of hiring

and any recall to work shall be by seniority, as defined in Article VI.
Section 7.

Rank seniority shall prevail in the selection of holidays.

Section 8

New employees shall serve a probationary period of twelve (12) months after

having achieved full POST Academy certification and shall have no seniority rights during this time.
The retention of the employee during this period of time shall be at the sole discretion of the Town.
All employees

who have successfully completed their probationary periods shall be full-time

employees and shall acquire seniority as of the date of their employment.

ARTICLE VII
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Section 1.

Purpose.

The purpose of the grievance procedure shall be to settle

employee grievances on as low an administration level as is possible and practicable, so as to insure
efficiency and employee morale.

Section 2.

Definition.

A grievance

for the purpose

of this procedure

shall be

considered to be an employee or Union complaint concerned with:
(a)

Discharge, suspension or other disciplinary action;

(b)

Matters

relating to the interpretation and application of the Articles and

Sections of this agreement.
Section 3.

(a)

Procedure.

Any employee may use this grievance procedure with or without Union
assistance.

Should an employee process a grievance through one or more of

the steps provided herein prior to seeking Union aid, the Union may at its
discretion process the grievance anew from the first step or from the next
succeeding steps following that which the employee has utilized.

(b)

No grievance settlement as a result of an individually processed grievance
shall contravene the provisions of this Agreement.

STEP ONE
The aggrieved employee, who may be represented by a Union representative shall reduce the
grievance to writing and submit it to the Chief
of Police or designee, within twenty-one (21) calendar
days of the date of occurrence.

The Chief or designee shall attempt to adjust the matter and submit

their decision in writing to the aggrieved employee and their representative, if represented, within
twenty-one (21) calendar days receipt of the grievance.

STEP TWO

If the grievance has not been settled, it shall be presented in writing by the employee or their
representative, to the Town Manager within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the Chief's, or Chief’s

designee’s decision. The Town Manager shall attempt to adjust the matter and submit their decision
in writing to the aggrieved employee and the employee’s

representative within twenty-one (21)

calendar days of receipt of the grievance.
STEP THREE
If the aggrieved employee is not satisfied with the decision rendered in Step Two, the Union
shall notify the Town Manager and file the notice of appeal with the State Board of Mediation and
Arbitration within twenty-one (21) calendar days after receipt of the decision. The State Board of
Mediation and Arbitration shall act on such request in accordance with its rules and procedures. The
Arbitrator shall be limited to the express terms of the contract and shall not have the power to modify,
amend

or delete any terms or provisions of the Agreement.

The decision of the Arbitrator or

Arbitrators shall be final and binding upon both parties. Each party shall be responsible for paying
their own filing fee. The Town and Union shall also share equally the expenses of any and all
mutually agreed upon services considered desirable or necessary in connection with the proceedings.
Section 4.

Mediation.

The mediation services of the State Board of Mediation and

Arbitration may be used in second or third step negotiations provided both parties mutually agree on

the desirability of this service.
Section 5.

Meetings.

If either of the parties related to the grievance process desire to

meet for the purpose of the oral discussion, a meeting shall be requested and scheduled in accordance
with Steps One, Two and Three.

Section 6.

Time Extensions.

Time extensions beyond those stipulated in this grievance

procedure may be arrived at by mutual agreement of both parties concerned and in writing.
Section 7.

Recording of Minutes or Testimony.

Either party shall have the right to

employ a public stenographer, or use of a mechanical recording device at any step in this procedure.
Section 8.

Police Union as a Complainant.

The Police Union shall be entitled to

submit grievances in the name of the Police Union in the same manner as is provided herein for
employees.
Section 9.

Representation.

Employees and the Police Union shall have the right and

choice of representation whenever representation is desired by either an employee or the Police
Union.
Section 10.

Step

Three

Grievances.

Grievances

involving

discharge,

demotion

or

suspension of more than three (3) days may be processed beginning at Step Three.
Section 11.

A suspension of more than three (3) days will not be implemented until a

decision has been rendered at Step 2 of the grievance procedure. Any suspension of more than three
(3) days, some or all of which is upheld at Step 2, shall be implemented as the Chief directs.

Ifa

grievance of any suspension of more than three (3) days is processed beginning at Step 3, the

suspension shall be implemented, as the Chief directs.
ARTICLE VU
HOURS OF WORK
Section 1.

The regular work week shall be a 4-2 work week schedule involving four (4)

consecutive work days with two (2) consecutive days off within any calendar week.
shall be eight (8) consecutive hours per day.

The work day

Section 2.
arises,

the

A work cycle shall consist of four (4) calendar months.

Department

shall

maintain

three

(3)

such

work

shifts

with

Unless an emergency
each

of such

shifts

encompassing the following hours and designated in the following manner:
(a)

12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m.

(b)

8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.

(c)

4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight.

Section 3.

All work schedules shall be completed and posted on Departmental bulletin

boards not later than ten (10) days in advance of the date when the working period changes.
Section 4.

Patrol Division employees shall be required to work only the hours of the

work shift to which they are assigned for each four (4) calendar month cycle.

Personnel who may

be assigned to another division or promoted shall be an exception to this Section.
Section 5a. _ Personnel assigned to the Detective Division or any other administrative shift
shall work a 5-2 (Monday — Friday), 5-2 (Monday — Friday), 4-3 (Monday — Thursday) workweek.

Personnel assigned to the Detective Division shall work from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Detectives shall
stagger their 4-3 work week so that no more than one (1) Detective will be off on a Friday at a time.
If staffing in the Detective Division exceeds the number allowable by this rotation, then two (2)
Detectives may have the same Friday off.

Section 5b.

Notwithstanding

any

other provisions

of this Article,

Animal

Control

Officers shall work 40 hours Monday through Friday, 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., except the following
holidays: New Year’s Day, Easter Sunday, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day, and Christmas Day.
one (1) hour for lunch.

During each eight (8) hour day, Animal Control Officers shall be allowed

Section 5c.

There shall be one or more officers assigned to the Detective Division. These

assignments shall be made at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

To qualify for an assignment to

the Detective Division, individuals must have a minimum of two (2) years of experience as a patrol
officer.

In the event that no officer with at least two (2) years of experience is available, the Chief

may assign an officer who the Chief deems otherwise qualified.
Section 6.

During each eight (8) hour tour of duty, all employees shall be allowed one-

half (1/2) hour for lunch.

The Department shall prescribe the lunch periods for all beats and cars.

Each employee shall call the station when he goes out for lunch and when he returns to duty.
record shall be maintained by the desk officer or dispatcher.

A

In addition, officers shall not work

more than sixteen (16) consecutive hours without taking at least six (6) hours off before returning to
duty, whether regular or private duty, except in emergency circumstances as determined by the Chief

of Police.
Section 7.

Once designated, and in the manner provided for in Section 5 of this Article,

an employee's regular day(s) off shall not be changed during the work week, without the express
written approval of the employee.

Section 8.

Once an employee is assigned their four (4) calendar month work cycle, they

shall not be transferred or assigned to any other work cycle other than the work cycle which would
have normally been assigned to them unless the Union, employee and Police Chief agree, in writing,
to change the work schedule.

Section 9.

Employees shall bid their shifts by seniority. Such bid shall be for a four (4)

calendar month work cycle, provided that the Chief shall have the right, one time during each fiscal
year, to change an employee's shift for one (1) work period of four (4) calendar months, thereafter

the employee shall again revert to bidding their shift by seniority.

ARTICLE IX
OVERTIME
Section 1.

All overtime duty shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half for all hours

or any portion thereof in excess of eight (8) hours on a regular work day or all hours in excess of the
regularly scheduled work week.

Section 2.

Employees required to work on their regular day(s) off whether for a full eight

(8) hour shift or less (as outlined in Article VIII, Section 2a) shall be paid not less than a full day's

pay at the rate of time and one-half with the exception of the Animal Control Officer who will receive
not less than two (2) hours at rate of time and a half.

Section 3a. | When an employee is required to return to duty to perform over-time duties
on a regular working day and when the overtime hours so worked are not continuous with the

employee's regular duty hours, the employee shall be paid not less than four (4) hours at the rate of
time and one-half.
Section 3b. | When the Animal Control Officer is required to return to perform overtime
work on a regular working day and when overtime hours so worked are not continuous with the

employee's regular work hours, the employee shall be paid no less than two (2) hours at the rate of
time and one half.
Section 4.

Overtime pay shall not be subject to the minimum hour provisions when such

overtime results from extending a tour of duty on any shift to properly complete an investigation or
work assignment.

Section 5.

Employees who perform overtime duty for the major portion of fifteen (15)

minutes beyond the terminal hour of their tour of duty shall receive fifteen (15) minutes of overtime

10

pay and for each fifteen (15) minutes thereafter that they work the major portion of such additional
units of fifteen (15) minutes, they shall be paid for all such additional time.
Section 6.

In cases

of absences

by

sergeants,

ranking

officers

and

patrol

officers,

vacancies will be filled by an employee of the same rank as the absentee, except for vacancies in
corporal rank, and they will be filled by the overtime list.

If an employee of the same rank is not

available for the replacement, the replacement will be taken from the next lowest rank. Probationary
officers who have completed P.O.S.T.C. Certification will be eligible for assignment on the overtime
list. The provision shall not apply to the Detective Bureau.
Section 7.

All overtime shift work shall be assigned on a rotating seniority basis except

that no employee shall be assigned overtime until the employee has passed Field Training.
Section 8.

Employees shall be allowed to work overtime shifts while on vacation.

Section 9.

Any employee assigned to work in a higher capacity, i.e., acting sergeant or

acting lieutenant, shall receive for the hours so worked, the rate of pay for such higher capacity so
worked.

Section 10.

| Employees will be given a minimum of four (4) hours of compensatory time

off for the time spent giving lectures or speeches at the request of an outside organization providing
that the employee is off duty and such request has been approved in advance by the Chief, and further
provided that the employee receives no compensation for such lecture or speech from the requesting
party.
Section 11a.

Commencing each July 1“, employees attending training while on overtime

shall receive compensatory time for the first twenty-four (24) hours they are in training, in lieu of
overtime payment.

Compensatory time is paid at 1.5 hours for each one (1) hour in training.

11

Section 11b.

Employees shall have the option of taking compensatory time as payment for

any training throughout the year. Employees’ compensatory time shall be entered and managed
through the Department’s scheduling program. Employees are allowed to carry over a maximum of
forty (40) hours of compensatory time from one fiscal year to the next. Compensatory time can only
be used to take time off when it does not cause overtime and can be used in one (1) hour blocks of
time.

When an employee retirees, they will be paid out in cash for any compensatory time left in

their bank.
Section 12.

Officers shall receive $20.00 per day meal allowance when attending training

outside of the Town of Plainville.
ARTICLE X
EXTRA OR SPECIAL POLICE DUTY
Section 1.

The terms “Extra Police Work” or “Extra Police Duty”, for the purpose of the

Article shall mean Police Duty for which the Town is reimbursed by some other party, other than

the Town of Plainville.

No employee shall be assigned extra police work/private duty until the

employee has obtained P.O.S.T.C. Certification. The Animal Control Officer shall be excluded from
this Article.
Section 2.

All extra duty assignments shall be made by the Chief, Captain, Lieutenant

or their agent.
Section 3.

Payment for Extra Duty assignments shall be made at the rate of time and

one half (1-1/2x) the top (Sergeant) rate then in effect, with a minimum of four (4) hours payment

for each assignment.

The above rate shall be increased to double times (2x) the top (Sergeant) step

rate for work performed on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. All assignments between the hours of
12:00 a.m. (Midnight) and 6:00 a.m. shall be paid at the rate of two times the top (Sergeant) rate.

This rate shall not apply to those special or extra duty assignments addressed in Section 9.

12

Section 4.

Whenever an employee works more than eight hours (8) hours in any one day

for the same employer, the employee shall be paid overtime at the rate of double time (2x) the top
Sergeant step rate for those hours over eight (8), calculated to the nearest one quarter (1/4) hour.
Section 5.

basis.

Extra Police Work assignments

shall be allocated on a rotating seniority

Every regular, full-time employee shall be offered an Extra Duty assignment when one is

available, starting with the senior man and continuing down the line to the newest man.

Excess

assignments shall be allocated in the same manner. Any employee who continually turns down Extra
Duty assignments without legitimate reasons shall be placed at the bottom of the list.
Section 6.

Whenever four (4) or more officers are assigned to an Extra Duty job to work

the same hours, a sergeant or a lieutenant shall be included whose function shall be to supervise only.
Section 7.

When available, only Union members shall be assigned to jobs where the

project being serviced is a Union job.
Section 8.

Construction work shall be paid in accordance with Section 3 of this Article,

with the exception that assignments of more than four (4) hours shall be paid a minimum of eight
(8) hours.
Section 9.

All extra or special duty for which any Board, Commission,

Department,

Agency or Division of the Town Government pays for the services of Police shall not be more than
1-1/2 times rate of top patrol officer on any day of the week.

This shall not apply to construction

jobs that are contracted to outside companies by any Board, Commission, Department, Agency or

Division of the Town Government. The construction jobs that are contracted to outside companies
shall follow pay rates and procedural language set forth in Section 3 of this Article.

13

ARTICLE XI
HOLIDAYS
Section 1.

The following holidays shall be granted to all members

in the

form of compensatory time off as provided for hereinafter:
New Year's Day

Dr. Martin Luther King's Birthday
Presidents Day
Good Friday
Easter Sunday
Memorial Day
Fourth of July
Section 2.

Labor Day

Columbus Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
1/2 Day before Christmas
Christmas Day
1/2 Day before New Year's Day

Employees who are off duty on any of the approved holidays by reason of

vacation or a scheduled day off, shall receive a compensatory time off day.

Employees who are on

sick leave, Workers’ Compensation or otherwise unscheduled to work due to a leave shall not receive
a compensatory time off day. Also, employees who are on paid administrative leave shall not lose a

compensatory holiday that occurs during such leave.
Section 3.

If an unanticipated holiday occurs, whereby the Town Hall is legally closed,

only those police officers actually working on that day shall receive one additional day's pay.
Section 4.

Upon the death, retirement, or resignation of an employee, the amount of

holiday pay accrued by the employee shall be paid in the event of such death, retirement or
resignation in the pay period following the date of such death, retirement or resignation.
Section Sa =

Any employee who is scheduled to work and who does work on the following

holidays shall be paid at the rate of one and one-half (1-1

Section 5b.

1/2x) their regular rate:

New Year's Day

Good Friday

Fourth of July

Labor Day

Memorial Day

| Any employee who is scheduled to work and who does work on the following

holidays shall be paid at the rate of two times (2x) their regular rate:

Thanksgiving Day — Christmas Day
Section 6.

Easter Sunday

All employees required to work on Easter, July 4th, Thanksgiving, Christmas

and New Year's Day shall be allowed a one (1) hour lunch period.
Section 7.

Any employee who has not taken all of their holiday leave during the fiscal

year, shall, at the employee’s request, receive a lump sum of money equal to one (1) days' pay for
each day of holiday leave not taken, up to a maximum of five (5) days per year. The Town Manager

can approve payments for days beyond the five (5) days, but such decision shall be at the Town
Manager’s discretion and shall not be subject to the grievance procedure.

Such request for holiday

leave shall be made not later than June 1‘ and the payment shall be made in the last pay period of
the fiscal year and shall be paid in a separate check.
ARTICLE XII
VACATIONS
Section la.

| Employees hired before March 8, 2002 shall be granted time off with pay for

vacations according to the following schedule:
2 weeks after one (1) years’ service
3 weeks after five (5) years’ service
4 weeks after ten (10) years’ service
After seventeen (17), nineteen (19), twenty-one (21), twenty-three (23) and twenty-five (25)
years of service, one (1) additional day shall be granted accumulative to a maximum

of five (5)

weeks vacation after twenty-five (25) years of service.

Section 1b. | Employees hired after March 8, 2002 shall be granted time off with pay for
vacations according to the following schedule:
2 weeks after one (1) years' service
3 weeks after five (5) years' service

i)

4 weeks after ten (10) year’s service
After six (6) months service, an employee may use five (5) vacation days out of the ten (10)

days which the employee shall earn upon the completion of their first year of service.
After twenty (20) years of service, one (1) additional day shall be granted per additional year
of service to a maximum of five (5) weeks of vacation after twenty-five (25) years of service.

Section 2.

All requests for vacation taken one day at a time must be submitted forty-

eight (48) hours in advance and subject to the approval of the Police Chief.

Any employee who is

eligible for three or more weeks vacation, may not use more than five (5) single days for vacation,

without the approval of the Chief or the Chief's agent.
Section 3.

Rank seniority shall prevail in the selection of vacations.

Section 4.

The vacation period shall be based on the employee’s anniversary date of hire

and each employee shall be required to take all but five (5) vacations days during the year.

These

five (5) days are not accumulative and shall be used during the carry-over year from the anniversary

date of hire.

No vacation shall be accumulated beyond five (5) days without the approval of the

Town Manager.

Employees shall have the right to carry-over the previous year’s vacation upon the

year of their retirement.
Section 5.

An

employee

who

is separated, dismissed,

retired or resigned through

disability shall be paid the total of their vacation leave in the pay period following the date of such
separation, dismissal, retirement or resignation.
Section 6.

In the event of death of an employee, the employee's accrued vacation shall

be paid for, to the employee's dependents and survivor (s).

Section 7.

A vacation schedule shall be posted by the Chief, Captain, Lieutenant or their

agent, no later than April 1st of each year.

Employees shall indicate their preference of vacation

16

time by no later than the last day of April of each year. Employees not signing this list by the required

time shall relinquish their right of seniority in selecting their vacations.
employees

No more than two (2)

per shift shall be approved to take paid leave of a full week or more

utilizing any

combination of paid vacation and/or other paid leave.
Section 8a.

Each officer working the patrol schedule shall be given a bank of nine (9)

preference days commencing each July 1*. School Resource Officers assigned to patrol shall be
given a bank of two (2) preference days.

Preference days cannot be carried over to the next fiscal

year.
Section 8b. | With the exception of four (4) or more consecutive vacation days, holidays

or personal days, Preference Days shall be used whenever an officer wants to use a vacation day(s),
holiday(s) or personal day(s) when that day off will cause overtime.

(An overtime situation arises

when the shift strength falls below one (1) sergeant and/or three (3) patrol officers).
taken as a Preference Day cannot be denied.

Any day off

Preference Days shall be entered and managed through

the Department’s scheduling program.
Section 8c.

The

following

holidays

are

exempt

from

the

Preference

Day

rules.

Employees wishing to take a day off on one of the following days will not have to use a Preference

Day but will not be able to get the day off unless another employee voluntarily works the shift:
Fourth of July, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, Easter Sunday and Memorial
Day.

Section 9.

Newly hired Certified Police Officers shall begin employment with a bank of

ten (10) vacation days. All other specifications under this Article shall apply.
Section 10. | Any employee who has not taken all of their vacation leave during the fiscal
year, shall, at the employee’s request, receive a lump sum of money equal to one (1) days’ pay for

each day of vacation leave not taken, up to a maximum of five (5) days per year. The Town Manager

can approve payments for days beyond the five (5) days, but such decision shall be at the Town
Manager’s discretion and shall not be subject to the grievance procedure. Such request for payment
of vacation leave shall be submitted no later than thirty (30) days prior to the employee’s anniversary
date and payment shall be made within fifteen (15) days of the employee’s anniversary date and shall
be paid in a separate check.

ARTICLE XII
SICK LEAVE
Section 1.

Sick leave shall be considered to be the absence from duty, with pay for the

following reason:
(a)

Illness or injury, except where directly traceable to employment

by an employee

other than the Town of Plainville;

(b)

When the employee is required to undergo medical, optical or dental treatment and
only when this cannot be accomplished on off-duty hours; or

(c)

When the serious illness of a member of the employee's immediate family requires
the employee’s personal attendance, if supported by a medical certificate.

Section 2.

An employee who is unable to work due to injuries, sickness or contagious

disease sustained in the line of duty for which the employee is entitled to compensation under the
Workers’ Compensation Act, shall be permitted to use paid sick leave up until the time that the
workers’

compensation

carrier accepts the claim.

Once the claim

is accepted and payment

of

workers’ compensation benefits begins, any such paid sick leave used shall be restored and the Town

will supplement the workers’

compensation

payments

payable to such individual so that the

employee is paid their regular base wages for up to a maximum of six (6) months.

is intended to affect an employee’s rights under the Workers’ Compensation Act.

Nothing herein

Section 3.

(a)

Sick Leave Allowance

Sick leave allowance shall be earned by each employee at the rate of one and onehalf (1-1/2) working days for each calendar month of service, the total of which

shall

not exceed eighteen (18) working days in any twelve (12) month period. Sick leave
eamed in any month of service shall be available at any time during any subsequent

month.

No sick leave with pay in excess of the leave accumulated to an employee's

credit may be used unless authorized in advance and in writing by the Town Manager.
Such authorization shall not exceed one year's sick leave allowance.

In order to be

eligible to accrue sick leave, an employee must be actively at work or on paid
administrative leave or paid vacation.

An employee on a leave of absence for

whatever reason, which leave extends beyond a calendar month, shall discontinue
accruing sick leave until the employee returns to regular duty.

(b)

Notwithstanding the first sentence of Section 3 (a), employees hired after March 8,

2002 shall earn sick leave allowance at the rate of one and one-quarter (1.25) working
days for each calendar month of service, the total of which shall not exceed fifteen
(15) working days in any twelve (12) month period.
shall pertain to such employees.

All other terms of Section 3(a)

Newly hired Certified Police Officers shall begin

employment with a bank of five (5) sick days. Newly hired Certified Police Officers
shall accrue sick time pursuant to Section 3(b) above, however, they are permitted to
exceed fifteen (15) sick days accumulated during the first twelve (12) months of

employment. All other specifications under this Article shall apply.
Section 4.

Sick Leave Accumulation.

(a)

All unused

sick leave of any employee

during continuous

employment

may

be

accumulated up to a maximum benefit of two hundred thirty (230) days.

(b)

Notwithstanding the foregoing language of Section 4(a), all unused sick leave of any
employee hired after March 8, 2002 during their continuous employment, may be
accumulated up to a maximum benefit of two hundred (200) days.

(c)

No credit towards accumulated sick leave shall be granted for time worked by an
employee in excess of their normal work week.

(d)

Sick leave shall continue to accumulate during leaves of absence with pay and during
the time an employee is on authorized sick leave, injury leave, or vacation time.

(e)

Sick leave shall not continue to accumulate during leaves of absence without pay.

Section 5.

A medical certificate may be required for:

(a)

Any period of absence consisting of more than three (3) consecutive working days.

(b)

When it is reasonably presumed that a member of the immediate family is suffering
from a contagious disease which may endanger the health of other employees of the
Department.

(c)

The medical certificate shall show the nature of the illness or injury and its expected
duration.

Section 6.
(a)

Redemption of Accumulated Sick Leave at Retirement or Death.

Employees who retire after the required number of years of service, or employees
who retire due to disability and when such disability is service connected, shall be

paid a lump sum of money that is equal to the number of sick days due such employee
not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days times the prevailing day rate of pay

received by such employee on the date of such retirement.

Those employees hired

after July 1, 1978 shall receive a lump sum of money that is equal to one (1) day's
20

pay for each three (3) day's accumulated sick leave to a maximum of sixty (60) days
times the prevailing rate of pay received by such employee

retirement.

on the date of such

Notwithstanding any other provision, the Animal Control Officer who

retires after the required number of years of service shall receive one (1) day's pay
for every three (3) days of unused sick leave, not to exceed fifty (50) days, at the

prevailing day rate of pay received by the Animal Control Officer on the date of such
retirement.
(b)

Upon the death of an employee, the amount of sick leave time due such employee
shall be payable to their survivor(s) in the same manner as provided for in Item A of
this Section.

Section 7.

The Department shall maintain a record for each employee of all sick leave

accumulated and taken.

Employees shall receive one (1) personal day for each 90 days of perfect

attendance. The 90-day cycle shall begin on the first day the employee returns to work after the use
ofa sick day. The use of a compensatory time, vacation, holiday or personal day, in lieu of returning
to work shall also begin the 90-day cycle. Upon completing the 90-day cycle, the employee has 30
days to notify the personnel office or designee by email requesting to be credited with the personal
day.

If the employee does not make the notification within the 30 days, the employee forfeits this

personal day. This forfeit in no way prohibits the employee from earning further personal days, nor
does it interfere with any credit towards the next 90-day cycle.
discretion of the officer.
notifies the personnel

This day is to be taken off at the

Any employee who has a perfect attendance for a revolving year and

office or designee

additional personal leave day.

within thirty (30) days of such, shall receive one (1)

The maximum amount that an employee may accumulate shall not

exceed five (5) days.

21

ARTICLE XIV
FUNERAL LEAVE
Section 1.

Special leave of five (5) working days with pay from the date of death shall

be granted employee in the event of death of the employee’s:
Spouse

Mother

Father

Brother

Child
Section 2.

Sister

Special leave of three (3) working days with pay from the date of death shall

be granted an employee in the event of death of the employee’s:

Father-in-law
Mother-in-law

Relative domiciled in employee's household

Section 3.

Special leave of one (1) working day with pay, for the purpose of attending

the funeral, shall be granted an employee in the event of death of the employee’s:
Grandchild

Grandmother
Aunt
Brother-in-law
Section 4.

Niece or Nephew

Grandfather
Uncle
Sister-in-law

Under extenuating circumstances, two (2) additional days with pay may be

granted under Sections 1, 2 and 3 above, with the written approval of the Town Manager.
ARTICLE XV
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES AND PRIVILEGES
Section 1.

Any

employee

who

has

been

disciplined

or

discharged

and

who

is

subsequently reinstated by an arbitrator pursuant to the contractual grievance procedure, shall be
reinstated in accordance with the terms of the arbitration award.
Section 2.

Any member facing departmental charges shall be provided with a written

nN
NO

copy of the original complaint not later than three (3) days prior to the date of the hearing.

Section 3.

No

employee

shall

otherwise disciplined except for just cause.

be discharged,

terminated,

suspended,

demoted

or

Any employee so disciplined shall have the right as

provided in Article VII, to appeal immediately to Step 3 of the Grievance Procedure.
Section 4.

Members

under departmental

charges

shall have

and enjoy

the right of

rescheduling their hearing date upon showing just cause.

Section 5.

Employees shall be indemnified by the Town in accordance with Connecticut

law for claims related to conduct which arises out of their performance of their assigned duties.
ARTICLE XVI
UNION BUSINESS LEAVE
Section 1.

The three (3) members of the Union Negotiating Committee shall be granted

leave from duty with full pay for all meetings between the Town and the Union for the purpose of
negotiating the terms of contract when

such meetings take place at a time during which

such

members are scheduled to be on duty.
Section 2.

The two (2) members of the Union Grievance Committee shall be granted

leave from duty with full pay for all meetings between the Town and the Union for the purpose of
processing grievances, when such meetings take place at a time during which such members are

scheduled to be on duty.

leave

Section 3.

Officers of the Union, as may be designated by the Union, shall be granted

from

full pay

duty with

for Union

Business,

such

as attending

labor conventions

and

educational conferences, provided that the total leave for the bargaining unit for the purpose set forth
in this Section shall not exceed an aggregate of twelve (12) working days in any fiscal year.
Section 4.

The Town

Manager,

upon written approval, may extend the provision of

Section 3 by adding no more than three (3) days within any fiscal year.

23

ARTICLE XVII
MILITARY LEAVE
Section 1.

Any permanent employee who leaves the service of the Town to join the

military forces of the United States of America, during time of war or other National Emergency, or

who is inducted by the Selective Service, shall be placed on military leave without pay.
Section 2.

Such leave shall extend for a period of service with the military forces and

for 90 days after discharge from the armed forces.
Section 3.
Department

Any employee on military leave who applies for reemployment to the Police

within 90 days

from the date of the employee’s

discharge, which

is other than

dishonorable, shall be entitled to the position the employee held at the time their leave was granted,
provided the employee meets the minimum physical requirement of the job in effect at the time of
their original employment.
Section 4.

Employees returning to Police Department employment from Military leave

shall be granted all reemployment rights provided under the Selective Service Act.
Section 5.

Any vacancies resulting from employees entering the Armed Forces shall be

filled on a durational basis.
Section 6.

Time

so

spent

on

military

leave

shall

be

considered

as

continuous

employment with the Town.
Section 7.

Military leave shall be granted, not to exceed two (2) weeks, to permanent

employees when ordered to serve on active reserve or National Guard duty. During this period, the
employee shall be paid the difference, if any, between the employee’s regular police pay and military
pay.
Section 8.

Leave

vacation time or sick time.

provided

for in Section

7 shall not be charged

to the employee's

ARTICLE XVIII
HOSPITALIZATION AND INSURANCE
Section 1.

The

Town

of

Plainville

agrees

to

offer

the

following

program

of

hospitalization, surgical, and medical insurance on terms set forth below.
(a)

The

only

medical

insurance

plan

offering

shall

be

the

State

of Connecticut

Partnership 2.0 Plan (“SPP”), including any subsequent amendments or modifications made to the
SPP by the State and its employee representatives, or one that is comparable in accordance with the
contract terms.

The premium rate, terms and administration of the SPP shall be as established by

the SPP and any changes to those shall be applicable to all bargaining unit employees.
The

SPP

contains

a Health

Enhancement

Plan

(HEP)

component.

participating in the SPP are subject to the terms and provisions of the HEP.

All

employees

In the event SPP

administrators impose the HEP non-participation or noncompliance $100 per month premium cost

increase or the $350 per participant to a maximum of $1400 family annual deductible, those sums
shall be paid 100% in their entirety by the non-participating or non-compliant employee insured.

No portion or percentage shall be paid by the Town. The $100 per month premium cost increase
shall be implemented through payroll deduction, and the $350/$1400 annual deductible shall be
implemented through claims administration.

The Union shall hold the Town harmless for any

errors the SPP administrators may make in administering the HEP.
(b)

Employees shall contribute to medical insurance premium costs as follows:
(1)

Effective July 1, 2023, each employee shall contribute nineteen and one-half

percent (19.5%) of the premium cost of the foregoing applicable insurance
coverages, by payroll deduction.

25

(2)

Effective July 1, 2024, each employee shall contribute twenty percent (20%)
of the premium

cost of the foregoing applicable

insurance coverages, by

payroll deduction.
(3)

Effective July 1, 2025, each employee shall contribute twenty percent (20%)
of the premium cost of the foregoing applicable insurance coverages, by
payroll deduction.

Employees shall contribute towards the cost of individual employee
dental insurance premiums

at the same

rate as they contribute towards

Delta Dental Plan

the cost of employee

medical insurance premiums as set forth above, as those premium cost shares may change from
year to year.

Dependent coverage will be made available at the employee’s expense.

Employees shall have the opportunity to enroll in the vision care benefits offered through
EyeMed, and contribute towards the cost at the same rate as they contribute towards cost of
employee medical

insurance premiums

as set forth above, as those premium

cost shares may

change from year to year.
Should alternative health insurance become available through the State of Connecticut, the
Federal government, or a similar pooling concept which would provide substantially comparable
coverage in terms of level of benefits, number of providers, and at a lower cost to the Town and

employees, then at the request of either the Town or the Union the parties shall meet to discuss
possible inclusion into such a plan. Such a discussion shall not constitute a contract reopener under
the Municipal Employee Relations Act (“MERA”).
Section 2.

Payments of employee premium contributions will qualify under the Town

of Plainville Flexible Benefits Plan (IRS Section 125).

Section 3.

A life insurance policy in an amount equal to the base salary, rounded up to

the nearest thousand dollars, up to a maximum of $100,000, is extended to the employee without
cost to the employee.

Coverage amounts will be reduced in conformance with an ADEA

reduction schedule.
Section 4.

The Town shall provide and pay for an Accidental Death and

Dismemberment policy covering one times (1xs) base salary up to a maximum of $100,000.
Section 5.

The Long-Term

Disability benefit will be 66 2/3% of base salary with a

maximum benefit of Two Thousand and 00/100 ($2,000.00) Dollars per month, only for employees
who have not achieved fifteen (15) years of service.
Section 6.

The Town shall have the right to change any insurance carriers in this Article

so long as substantially comparable coverage and benefits are maintained.
Section 7.

The Town reserves the right to institute cost containment measures relative

to insurance coverage, so long as the level of insurance benefits remain substantially comparable to
the insurance coverage in effect immediately prior to such change.

Such changes may include, but

are not limited to, mandatory second opinions for elective surgery, pre-admission and continuing
admission review, preferred provider provisions, prohibition on weekend
emergency

situations,

mandatory

out-patient

elective

surgery

for certain

admissions except in
designated

surgical

procedures, and some or all of the requirement of the managed benefits program.
Section 8.

Members

of the bargaining

unit who

coverage may voluntarily elect to waive such coverage.

are eligible

for health insurance

Employees shall receive the following

amounts if they are eligible for said coverage at the time of the annual application for the waiver:
$1,500 for waiver of individual coverage; $2,000 for waiver of employee plus one coverage; and
$2,500 for waiver of family coverage. If the employee must re-enroll in the Town’s insurance, the

27

waiver payment shall be prorated.

If the employee leaves employment during the fiscal year in

which a waiver payment was received, the waiver payment shall be prorated and the Town shall
be reimbursed through the payment the employee receives for unused, accrued paid benefits and

if those funds are insufficient any remaining amount shall be offset by the employee’s last
paycheck with the Town.

An employee who opts out for the first time on or after July 1, 2023

shall not be entitled to this payment if by waiving the insurance the employee is still covered under
health insurance provided by either the Town of Plainville or the Plainville Board of Education.
Section 9.
on or after July

Retiree Medical Insurance - For any Plainville Police Union member retiring
1, 2015,

the May

4,

1993

Medical

Insurance

Side

Letter Agreement

shall not

control and such retiree medical insurance benefits shall be controlled exclusively by the terms
contained in this provision.
Any retired employee who becomes eligible for Medicare coverage must participate in that
program.

The Town will provide retired members of the Plainville Police Department, who in

retirement, with the exception of the availability of the state exchange through the Affordable Care
Act, do not have insurance coverage from another source, with the same single coverage medical
insurance benefits that are provided to active employees, as those benefits may change from time to

time through negotiation. The retiree’s premium contribution shall be fixed at the percentage it was
at the time of retirement. The retiree may elect coverage for the retiree’s spouse or other dependents,
as defined by the medical

expense.

insurance carrier, at the Town’s

group rate, and at the retiree’s sole

The retiree’s contribution shall be payable on the 20'" day of preceding month for the

following month’s coverage. The Town will notify the retiree of any increase in the cost of coverage.

If a High Deductible Plan is in effect, the Town shall make a payment to the retiree equal to the
Town’s deductible contribution that is made to active employees, and on the same schedule as the

28

deductible contribution is made to active employees, and this contribution shall be offset by the
retiree’s premium contribution.
The Town will notify the retiree of any increase in the cost of coverage.
The Town reserves the right to change medical insurance carriers so long as equal coverage
and service is maintained.
In lieu of a retiree’s election to continue medical insurance coverage during their retirement
under paragraph 1, a retiree may elect, at the time of their retirement, to receive a fixed annual
payment equal to 50% of the cost of the retiree-only premium determined at the date of retirement.
This annual payment will not increase but will remain fixed during the period of retirement.

This

annual payment will be payable only to the retiree, and shall not be payable to any beneficiary,
spouse, or other survivor. This payment shall not be available where the employee accepts another
position with the Town of Plainville or Plainville Board of Education where insurance is available
to the individual. Once the employee is no longer an employee of either Town of Plainville or the
Plainville Board of Education, the employee shall become eligible for this payment.
Section 10.

—_ In the event an officer is killed in the line of duty with the Town of Plainville,

their spouse and any eligible dependents will receive continued medical insurance coverage for up
to a maximum of five (5) years following the officer’s death on the following terms: (1) The medical

insurance coverage shall be that which is offered to active employees as that coverage may change
from time to time through negotiation with the Union; (2) The widowed spouse shall pay the same

premium contribution percentage that was in effect when the officer died and such contribution shall
remain unchanged

for as long as the widow

remains on the Town’s

insurance; (3) Dependents

coverage shall terminate either in accordance with law, currently on the last day of the month in
which the dependent reaches twenty six (26) years of age or after five (5) years following the

29

officer’s death, whichever is earlier; and (4) The widowed spouse’s coverage shall terminate if the

widowed spouse remarries, becomes covered under any other health benefit plan, premium
contributions are not paid in a timely manner or the individual becomes entitled to Medicare. Killed
in the line of duty is defined as the death of an active-duty officer by felonious or accidental means
during the course of performing police functions while on duty.

In the event an officer dies while employed by the Town, but not in the line of duty, their
spouse and any eligible dependents will receive continued medical insurance coverage for up to a
maximum

of one (1) year following the officer’s death on the same conditions as that described

for an officer who dies in the line of duty.
ARTICLE

XIX

COURT TIME
Section 1.

Employees who may be required to attend Court or meet with Court officials

for any purpose during their off duty hours, shall be paid a minimum of four (4) hours at one and
one-half (1-1/2x) times their regular rate of pay. If employees are relieved from court duty prior to
the end of the four (4) hour period, such employee shall be required to return to duty for the remainder
of such period.

Section 2.

Employees required to attend any State or Federal Court or hearing conducted

by state or federal agencies on their days off or any other previously authorized leave, shall be paid
one (1) day's pay at the rate of time and one-half of their regular rates of pay.
Section 3.

The Town shall only be required to pay the difference between the hours paid

for by the State or Federal Government and the pay prescribed in Section
Article.

30

| or Section 2 of this

ARTICLE XX
UNIFORMS AND CLOTHING
Section 1

All members of the Department shall receive a clothing allowance of One

Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500) per year. One half of said allowance shall be paid no later
than the last payroll in July and the last payroll in January annually.

In the event that an employee leaves the service of the Town during any six (6) month period
without having earned the full clothing allowance benefit already paid out, the Town shall have the
right to withhold from the employee’s final paycheck or other monies due such employee the prorated value of the overpayment for uniforms and clothing.
This provision shall not apply to officers who retire from the Town with twenty (20) or more
years of service to the Town.
All employees shall be required to wear soft body armor, or its equivalent that is provided
(and paid for) by the Town.
The Town shall provide new members of the Department with appropriate uniforms and
clothing upon hire and such uniforms and clothing shall be provided in lieu of any allowance
provided for above during the new employee’s first full year of employment.
Section 2.

Uniforms and clothing for the Animal Control Officer shall be provided

through the Quartermaster system administered by the Chief of Police.

ARTICLE XXI
SAVINGS CLAUSE
Section 1.

Ifany Article or any Section of this contract is declared invalid for any reason,

such declaration of invalidity shall not affect the other Articles and Sections or portions thereof
which shall be valid.

31

ARTICLE XXII
SALARIES
Section 1.

Effective July

1, 2023,

all wages

in effect as of June 30, 2023

shall be

Effective July

1, 2024, all wages

in effect as of June 30, 2024

shall be

increased by 3.0%.
Section 2
increased by 3.0%.

Section 3

Effective July 1, 2025, all wages in effect as of June 30, 2025 shall be

increased by 3.0%.

Section 4

Payment of Wages.

The Town shall pay employees their wages bi-weekly

(every two weeks) through electronic direct deposit to a bank account designated by the employee
and on file with the Town.
Section 5

The starting salary for a newly hired Certified Police Officer with less than

three (3) years of previous law enforcement
job experience shall be the salary listed in the Appendix
as “1 YEAR”.

The starting salary for a newly hired Certified Police Officer with more than three

(3) years of previous law enforcement
job experience shall be the salary listed in the Appendix as “2
YEARS” Town shall pay employees their wages bi-weekly (every two weeks) through electronic

direct deposit to a bank account designated by the employee and on file with the Town.
ARTICLE XXII
PROMOTIONS
Section 1.

All promotions shall be by examination. There shall be a written and an oral

examination which shall be conducted by an independent testing authority.

Scoring will consist of

forty-five percent (45%) for the written examination, forty-five percent (45%) for the oral test and
ten (10) points for seniority. Seniority will be calculated at a rate of % point per year with a maximum
of ten (10) points awarded. Employees must pass the written examination before being eligible to

participate in the oral examination and must pass both examinations before being placed on the
eligibility list for promotion.

The passing grades for the written examination and for the oral

examination shall be stated in the examination announcement.

Employees shall take the promotional

examination on a voluntary basis and seniority shall be applied only after a passing grade on the
written and oral examination has been obtained.

Members shall be entitled to seniority credits on

the basis of one-half point for each full year of service provided, however, that a total of ten (10)
points shall represent the maximum seniority points allowed under this Article.
Section 2.

The

Town

Manager

shall determine

the eligibility

requirement

for any

promotional examination.
Section 3.

All promotions shall be made from the rank of the Town of Plainville Police

Department, with the exception of the Chief of Police and the Captain and the Animal

Control

Officer, which position shall be excluded from the promotion Article.
Section 4.

Whenever a promotional eligibility list is established, such list shall remain

in effect for two (2) years from the date such list was established.
Section 5.

The promotional test vendor, in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall

select the oral board participants from police departments not contiguous to the Town of Plainville.
The Town of Plainville Human

Resources Director or their designee shall physically monitor the

written and oral examinations.
Section 6.

A list of the names of the passing candidates shall be submitted to the Town

Council for review.
Section 7.

The Town shall choose employees for promotion from among any of the top

three (3) highest ranked candidates, consistent with past practice.

33

Section 8.

If an employee is working at the time of the promotional examination, the

employee will be permitted to take the promotional examination during the employee’s scheduled
working time and shall not be required to take paid leave time to take said exam.

Where an officer

is taking the promotional examination at a time when the officer is not scheduled to work, the officer
cannot apply for overtime to take the examination.
ARTICLE XXIV
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1.

The Police Department will continue to furnish officers with such equipment

as it has customarily furnished in the past, and wherever possible furnish such additional equipment
that will promote the efficient performance of their duties.
Section 2.

Any and all property of an employee damaged, stolen or destroyed in the line

of duty, if such was reasonably secured shall be repaired or replaced by the Town.
Section 3.

The Town shall assume

full responsibility for any officer sued for alleged

false arrest and/or abuse of power and shall furnish the services of the Town Counsel and their staff
to act in the officer’s behalf.

If the Town and the Union mutually agree that it is in the best interest

of both parties to engage another attorney other than the Town Counsel, such counsel shall be hired

and paid for by the Town.
Section 4.

The Town shall give to each employee, and to each new employee when the

employee is hired, a copy of this contract, an identification card, and a copy of the Rules and
Regulations of the Department.
Section 5.

The Town shall designate one bulletin board on the premises of the Police

Department for the purpose of posting notices concerning Union business and activities.

Section 6.

Employees shall be allowed two, fifteen (15) minute coffee breaks during

each eight (8) hour tour of duty.

Section 7.

The Town will reimburse all funeral and related expenses for any police

officer killed in the line of duty not to exceed the sum of $10,000.

Section 8.

The Town

will indemnify and defend any police officer in any action

involving emergency treatment or care occurring during the official performance of that officer's
duties.

Section 9.

As a condition of employment, employees shall be nonsmokers and shall

remain non-smokers for the duration of their employment.

The Animal Control Officer on duty on

July 1, 1990 shall not be subject to this section, but shall be subject to any other policy or practice
within the Department regarding smoking. Failure to do so will be grounds for progressive discipline
as follows:
First Infraction

-

Verbal reprimand
Written reprimand

Second Infraction

Third Infraction

-

Fourth Infraction

Five Day Suspension

Fifth Infraction

Ten Day Suspension

Sixth Infraction
Section 10.

One Day Suspension

-

Termination

| Mileage reimbursement for use of personal vehicles, when authorized by the

department, shall be the prevailing IRS rate.

ARTICLE XXV

SUBSTANCE

Section 1.
A.

ABUSE TESTING

The purposes of this policy are as follows:

To establish and maintain a safe, healthy working environment for all sworn

employees and to protect the public;

35

B.

To insure the reputation of the Town of Plainville Police Department and its police

officers as good, responsible citizens worthy of the public trust;
GC.

To reduce the incidents of accidental injury to person or property;

Dz.

To reduce absenteeism, tardiness and indifferent job performances; and

E.

To provide assistance toward rehabilitation for any employee who seeks help in

overcoming any addiction to, dependence upon, or problem with alcohol or drugs.

Section 2.
A.

Definitions

Alcohol or alcoholic beverage - means the intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol,

ethyl] alcohol, or other low molecular weight alcohol, including methyl! and isopropyl alcohol.
B.

Drug - means

any substance (other than alcohol) capable of altering the mood,

perception, pain level or judgment of the individual consuming it.
ce.

Prescribed drug - means any substance prescribed for the individual consuming it

by a licensed medical practitioner.
D.

Illegal drug - means any drug or controlled substance, the sale, possession or

consumption of which is illegal.
EB.
employee’s

Supervisor - means

any officer with the rank of Sergeant or above

who

is the

immediate supervisor or a supervisor in the employee’s chain of command,

or the

Chief of Police or his designee.
F.

Abuse ofa legally prescribed drug - means use ofa prescribed drug to the employee

when a valid prescription is not in effect.
Section 3.
A.

Basis for testing

Random drug testing- The Chief
of Police shall determine the number of employees

to be randomly tested on an annual basis and it shall not exceed 50% of the number of employees

in the bargaining unit. This does not mean that 50% of the bargaining unit members will actually

be tested, but rather the total number of random tests that shall occur shall equal 50% of the total
number of employees in the bargaining unit. An independent testing agency shall select employees
to be tested by a computer generated process (such as by driver’s license numbers or some other
method where the identity of the bargaining unit member remains anonymous) and shall occur not

more than four times per year.
B.

Reasonable suspicion testing - an employee may be required to undergo testing

based on “reasonable suspicion”.

Reasonable suspicion shall mean when objective facts and

observations are brought to the attention of a supervisor, based on the reliability and weight of
such information, such that the supervisor can reasonably infer that, or suspect that, the employee
is using illegal drugs, is abusing prescribed drugs, or is reporting for duty (or on duty) under the
influence of alcohol or drugs. Reasonable suspicion must be supported by specific facts which may
include, but are not limited to: the appearance, speech, behavior, body odors, of the employee;

reports and observations of the employee’s drug related activities, such as purchase, sale or
possession of illegal drugs; knowingly associating with known

illegal drug dealers or users

(exception for immediate family members); observation of the employee at known illegal drug or

suspected illegal drug related locations; an otherwise unexplained change

in the employee’s

behavior or work performance; an observed impairment of the employee’s ability to perform his
or her duties.
If the employee is ordered to undergo a reasonable suspicion drug and/or alcohol test he
shall be given a brief verbal statement of the basis for the reasonable suspicion. A verbal directive
to submit to such test shall be confirmed in writing, but the testing shall not be delayed pending
the issuance of the written directive.

37

Section 4.

Time

spent

Testing procedures

by an employee

undergoing

tests required

by this Agreement

shall be

compensated at the employee’s regularly hourly rate of pay for time spent in test, except for
required testing as part of rehabilitation, which shall be performed either on the employee’s own
time or by using accumulated sick and vacation leave.

If an employee is on vacation, holiday, sick

leave or any other day off and they are selected for random testing, another name will be selected.
Testing shall be performed by a licensed laboratory.

Testing will be done with due regard for

chain of custody and for the employee’s right to privacy, subject to standard testing protocols to

insurance a valid sample.

An employee shall have the right and shall not be denied the right to

Union representation provided that such representation does not otherwise interfere with and/or
unreasonably delay the testing during any part of these testing procedures.
Testing for alcohol shall be by breathalyzer and/or intoxilyzer.
re-confirmed test after fifteen (15) minutes.

If positive, there shall be a

The Town reserves the right to only test for alcohol

by urine testing instead of breathalyzer and/or intoxilyzer.

Testing for drugs shall be by urine

testing.

For urine testing, the sample will be split into two parts.

An employee whose drug test

results in a positive report may, within forty-eight (48) hours of receiving notification of such
result, submit in writing to the Chief of Police that the second part of the sample be made available

for re-testing at a licensed laboratory in such a manner as to insure the proposer chain of custody.
The second test performed at the employees’ request, shall be at the employee’s expense.

If the

second test is negative, the positive test shall be null and void, the test shall be reported as negative
and the Town shall reimburse the employee for the cost of the second test and any loss of pay due

to suspension.

A negative dilute shall be subject to retest and if the second test is negative the test

shall be reported as negative.
Section 5.

Interference with or refusal to submit to testing

Any alteration, switching, substituting or tampering with a sample or test given under this
policy by any employee shall be grounds for immediate suspension and subsequent disciplinary

action which may include discharge.

The refusal by an employee to submit to a drug or alcohol

screening test pursuant to the provisions of this policy, or to cooperate in providing information to
the testing agency needed in connection with the testing, shall result in the employee’s immediate

suspension without pay and subsequent disciplinary action which may include discharge.
Section 6.

Rehabilitation

The opportunity for rehabilitation (exempting an employee from the disciplinary action
found in section 7 below) shall be granted once for any employee who:
A. Voluntarily admits to alcohol or abuse of a legally prescribed drug prior to testing, or
B.

Tests positive for alcohol or abuse of legally prescribed drugs for the first time.

The employee shall use accumulated sick or vacation leave for the period of any absence
for the purpose of rehabilitation. All treatment will be at the sole expense of the employee, to the
extent that it is not covered by the employee’s health insurance.
employee

poses a safety concern,

the employee

If it is determined that the

will be referred to EAP.

As part of any

rehabilitation program, the employee may be required to undergo periodic screening for drugs
and/or alcohol for a period of 36 months (up to 48 months if recommended by the Substance Abuse
Professional) after his return to duty.

The frequency of this testing will be at the discretion of the

Chief of Police. This testing is in addition to random testing which the employee will continue to

39

be subject to.

If after screening, the employee tests positive, he will immediately be suspended

without pay and will be terminated from employment.
Nothing in this policy shall preclude disciplinary action against an employee who is under
criminal investigation for drug/alcohol related misconduct.
Section 7.

Consequences of a positive test-the consequence of a positive test shall be

as follows:
A.

For use of an illegal drug — at least 30 days unpaid suspension and the possibility

of discharge.
B.

For use of a drug prescribed to someone other than the employee — Up to a 30 day

unpaid suspension and compliance with all prescribed rehabilitation; subsequent offense - 60 day
suspension without pay up to discharge.
Cc.

For abuse of a legally prescribed drug to the employee - first offense - Up to a 15

day unpaid suspension and compliance with all prescribed rehabilitation. Subsequent offense - 60

day suspension without pay up to discharge.

If there is no subsequent offense in five (5) years

following the offense, any offense thereafter is considered a new offense.

D.
suspension

For alcohol (at the level of .04 or greater) - first offense - Up to a 15 day unpaid
and

compliance

with

all prescribed

rehabilitation.

Subsequent

offense

- 60

day

suspension without pay up to discharge. If there is no subsequent offense in five (5) years following
the offense, any offense thereafter is considered a new offense.
Section 8.

The drug testing thresholds are described on the next page.

40

DRUG CLASS

INITIAL TEST

AMPHETAMINES

500 ng/mL

BARBITURATES

300 ng/mL

Amphetamine
Methamphetamine
Amobarbital

LEVEL

BENZODIAZEPINES

300 ng/mL

COCAINE METABOLITES
MARIJUANA METABOLITES
METHADONE
METHAQUALONE
MDA-ANALOGUES
MDA
MDMA
MDEA
OPIATES

150 ng/mL
50 ng/mL
300 ng/mL
300 ng/mL

2000 ng/mL

OPIATES (SEMI-SYNTHETIC)

300 ng/mL

OXY CODONES

100 ng/mL

Alprazolam Metabolite
Oxazepam

Codeine
Morphine

Hydromorphone
Hydrocodone
Oxymorphone
Oxycodone

PHENCYCLIDINE
PROPOXYPHENE

CONFIRMA’
METHOD
MS
MS

Butalbital

Pentobarbital
Phenobarbital
Secobarbital

CONFIRMATORY
TEST LEVEL

500 ng/mL

200 ng/mL,

200 ng/mL
200 ng/mL
200 ng/mL
200 ng/mL

MS
MS
MS
MS
MS

200 ng/mL
200 ng/mL
100 ng/mL
15 ng/mL
200 ng/mL
200 ng/mL

MS
MS
MS
MS
MS
MS

250 ng/mL

250 ng/mL,
250 ng/mL

MS
MS
MS

2000 ng/mL
2000 ng/mL

MS
MS

300 ng/mL
300 ng/mL

MS
MS

100 ng/mL

MS
MS
MS
MS

100 ng/mL

25 ng/mL
200 ng/mL

25 ng/mL
300 ng/mL

41

ARTICLE XXVI
EDUCATION INCENTIVES
Section 1

Each employee, with the exception of Animal Control Officer, who attends

an accredited college to advance their efficiency as a police officer by taking job related courses, and
receiving a grade of “C” or better, shall be reimbursed 100% of the cost of textbooks and tuition
upon presentation of receipts and transcripts for them, not to exceed $2,000

per employee

per

contract year.

Section 2

Each employee, with the exception of Animal Control Officer, who

holds

an Associate’s degree from an accredited college shall be paid an annual stipend of $1,000.00.

Each

employee who holds a Bachelor’s degree from an accredited college shall be paid an annual stipend
of $1,500.00. These stipends shall be paid by the last payroll in July of each contract year.
ARTICLE XXVII
PENSIONS
Section 1.

The Pension Agreement between the Town of Plainville and the Union which

was initially adopted on December 21, 1970 and most recently amended and restated as of July 1,
2014 and modified by a June 6, 2022 Side Letter Agreement shall become part of this contract and

which is attached as Appendix C. The Animal Control Officer shall be a member of the Pension
Agreement as of July 1, 1990, and shall be a new employee as of that date for purposes of the
Agreement.

ARTICLE XXVUI
DURATION
Section 1.

Except as otherwise provided herein, this agreement shall be effective upon

signing and it shall remain in effect through June 30, 2026.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused their names to be signed on this

a4
ae

of Septeabe , 2023.
FOR THE TOWN OF PLAINVILLE

FOR LOCAL 1706, COUNCIL 4
AFSCME (POLICE)

a

Nx — hy Ye (Av Aw

Signed:

Town Manager

CL?

Signed:

43

Union President

day

APPENDIX A
ARTICLE XXIX
WAGE & SALARY PLAN
CONTRACT PERIOD JULY 1, 2023 - JUNE 30, 2026
Section 1: Effective and retroactive to July 1, 2023, a THREE

PERCENT (3.00%) increase:
3 Years or

Job Title

Start

1 Year

2 Years

more

Animal Control

61,360

63,811

66,361

69,017

Patrol Officer

68,997

76,928

81,300

90,910

Corporal

93,065

Sergeant

96,605

Lieutenant

115,191

100,097

During 2023 - 2024, all eligible employees shall advance a step on the salary schedule.
Section 2: Effective July 1, 2024, a THREE

PERCENT

(3.00%) increase:
3 Years or

Job Title

Start

1 Year

2 Years

more

Animal Control

63,201

65,725

68,352

71,088

Patrol Officer

71,067

79,235

83,739

93,637

Corporal

95,857

Sergeant

99,503

Lieutenant

118,647

103,100

During 2024 - 2025, all eligible employees shall advance a step on the salary schedule.

44

Section 3: Effective July 1, 2025, a THREE

PERCENT (3.00%) increase:
3 Years or

Job Title

Start

1 Year

2 Years

more

Animal Control

65,097

67,697

70,402

73,220

Patrol Officer

73,199

81,613

86,251

96,446

Corporal

98,732

Sergeant

102,488

Lieutenant

122,206

106,193

During 2025 - 2026, all eligible employees shall advance a step on the salary schedule.

45

APPENDIX B
TOWN OF PLAINVILLE
PLAN FOR POLICE OFFICERS
RETIREMENT
Re: Disability Benefits

SIDE LETTER TO
TOWN _OF PLAINVILLE
RETIREMENT PLAN FOR POLICE OFFICERS
Re:

Disability

Benefits

Definitions:
On

the

when

Job

an

Disability:

the

Job

Disability

occurs

employee

is

permanently

disabled

by

any

injury

sustained

from

the

performance

of

his/her

duties

Department
preclude
of
b.

On

a

and

a

member

when

the

him/her

from

of

the

Disability:

occurs

Job

when

the

an

injury

suffered

of

Plainville

Police

is

such

to

required

is

Job

a

and

as

to

duties

Disability
disabled

ee

duties” x

him/her
a

the

as

such

Department.

permanently
than

Police

required

Police

Department

of

is

the

Off

other

preclude

Plainville

disability

his/her

duties

the

Plainville

employee

performance

of

performing

member

Off

any

as

actual

actual

member

of

the

disability

when
from

of

by

performing
Plainville

the
the

member

of

the

Police

Job:

An

employee

is

eligible

coverage

upon

beginning

the

Plainville

Department.
c.

Bligibility
for

on

the

employment
Police

-

On

the

job

disability

as

a

full-time

member

of

Department.

Eligibility

-

Off

the

Job:

An

for

off

the

job

disability

the

date

of

the

15th

a

full-time

appointment

as

employee

is

eligible

coverage

upon

reaching

of

his/her

anniversary

46

member

of

the

Plainville

Police
e.

Department.

Retiirenent

Commission:

Commission

consist

of

a

3-member

panel

member

designated

by

the

one

member

by

the

Union,

one. member

agreed

upon

jointly

the

Town

members

of

the

Retirement

ten-year

term

and

vacancies

portion

of

this

section.

and

‘and

Union.

shall

shall

be

filled

term

in

the

for

Retirement

Commission.

the

shall

selected

employee

The

majority

be

the

to

the

disability.

The

Commission

may,

Participant's

third
of

physician

by

Responsibility

of

employee

disability
for

Commission

has

disability

request.

Any

shall

be

that

date

vote

that

the

employee

Prior

to

the

Commission

until

decision

work

performed

47

Commission's

is

a

result

in

its
the

who

compensation

rendered

shall

by

to

in

examine

disability

determines

An

work

of

as

Commission

determination

vote

binding

date

Determination:

the

and

a

the

by

final

The

Article

end,

the

employee.

any

by

by

Town.

the

determined

one

choose

perform

that

be

one

discretion,

disabled.

To

shall

by

employee's

--

of

is

above

one

designated

An

physicians

determination

the

in

two

shall

when

above

by

and

Commission

described

defined

including

unexpired

Disability:

as

employee

a
the

of

disability

examined

Town,

The

serve

manner

Determination

this

Retirement

shall

Commission

be

The

the

such

seeking

a

shall

not

time

upon

in

as

his/her

violation

employee

the

of

being

ineligible

shall

for

render

a

disability

pension.

a decision

within

120

required

submission

of

the

claim

and

Amount

of

On

the

Disability

determination

of

an

job

benefits

disability

receive

yearly

66-2/3%

of

collective

any

payments

employee's
by

disability

his/her

the

Job

Long-Term

Disability

Security,

or

personnel

heart

from

Revision

of

1958,

as

benefits
of

such

first

the

disability.

contravene

section

Statutes,

Revision

Contract;

Social

The
is

annual
from

those

base
any

of

to

then

in

the

on

to

shown

effect

.insurer

in

less
Town's

Social
for

police

disability

under

General

be

monthly

month

following

the

Nothing

in

this

payable

shall

amount

the

shall

Statues,
on

the

job

commencing

determination

of

section

shall

the

Connecticut

General

As

Amended;

Workers!

Long-Term

Disability

Insurance

of

1958,

Security.
benefit

received

under

total

compensation

up

bring

pay.

If

the

other

benefits

for

as

Such

Town's

disability

intended

pay

Amended.

of

the

in

of

hypertension

7-433c

Compensation;
or

its

Connecticut

the

the

Contract,

or

of

the

or

of

Upon

he/she

Compensation,

disease

7-433c

on

contract

Town

Section

disability

rate

date

documentation.

equal

Insurance

the

the

Commission,

annual

Workers!

of

eligibility

the

bargaining

Commission

Benefit:

benefits

basic

from

all

days

The

equal

an

employee

programs

or

exceed

48

is

to

the

of

benefits

above,

of

section

66~-2/3%

receiving

mentioned

66~2/3%

this

and

if

employee's

annual

base

pay,

disability

is

benefits

receiving

above,

base

the

in

amount

the

which

Off

the

of

employee's

an

Job

benefits

yearly

benefits

his/her

basic

annual

“payments

bargaining
from

Term

Disability

from

the

Town

disease
of

or

or

its

hypertension

Connecticut

Amended.

Such

payable

monthly

following

the

is

annual

disabled

of

his/her

66-2/3%

Benefit:

amount

pay

as

then

in

for

job

the

less

any

Town's

Security,

heart

Section

7-433c

1958

disability

benefits

shall

first

the

Revision,

of

such

disability.

received

under

employee

other
equal

programs
or

exceed

is

of

up

of

be

month

section

to

50%

of

benefits

above,
the

as

this

receiving

mentioned
50%

or

personnel

determination

the

Long-

Statutes,

If

benefits

in

under

pay.

those

shown

Social

compensation

any

shall

of

the

total

from

the

50%

the

an

off

to

on

benefit

the

for

effect

police

of

Upon

he/she

in.

to bring

base
of

the

commencing

disability

intended

the

bring

disability

General

off

amount

Contract,

insurer

annual

that

Compensation,

Insurance

the

The

contract

Workers!

his/her

Commission,

of

employee

mentioned

eligibility

equal

for

for

to

the

rate

an

programs

Disability

by

eligible

If

of

will

compensation

receive

collective

the

eligible

pay.

disability

of

is

annual

job

any

employee

total

determination

from

be

section.

66-2/3

employee's

of

this

not

than

payments

base

will

less

disability

Amount

under

benefits

an

pay,

employee

and

if

employee's

annual

base

pay,

disability
is

benefits

receiving

above,

in

pay,

the

employee

payments

employee's

total

on

or

earned

by

the

the

eligible

this

section.

If

an

any

of

the

programs

50%

of

his/her

annual

base

for

that

amount

of

less

than

is

eligible

will

for

employee
mentioned

bring

the

to

50%

his/her

annual

no

event

shall

payments

tities,

‘plus

any

employee
base

of

will

payments

will

event,

of

the

from

rate

any

of

of

normal

based

disabled

the

than

receiving

as

disability
of

annual

basis,

Service

form

in

order

addition,

at

the

of

the

time

that

the

such

disability.

the

eligible

and

benefits

employee's

date,

disability

retirement

annuity

of

credited

service

determination.
annuity

amount

Disability

to

100%

retirement
the

disability

exceed

at

years

will

less

a

upon

disability

be

required

cease

wages

job

retirement

of

received

Continuation

pay

Upon

immediately
begin

other

determined

his/her

however,

shall’ be

Aigatd

Benefits:

date

receives

In

job

Commission

benefits
to

Benefits:
the

employee's

attainment

In

be

which

of

Cessation

who

not

compensation

off

Retirement

up

will

pay.
Limitation

for

from

amount

disability
base

under

benefits

an

the

employee

under

In

no

payments

the

employee

this

side

letter.

Any

employee

Bénefits:

payments

under

file

the

Commission,

U.S.

Internal

Revenue

receive

benefits.

with

(1040-1040A)
to

continue

Town's

50

to

expense,

this

side

was

he/she

letter
on

may

an

be

required
as

to

submit

determined

a

by

the

determining

his/her

disability

payments.

3

Source
by

of

pension

fund

or

from

the

Town.

TOWN

OF

continuing

eligibility

the

FOR

THE

Town

Tyne
Mit:
Manager

a

for

General

from

by

Commission

Disability

Town

of

evaluation

Payments:

the

discretion

medical

any

PLAINVILLE,

other

purposes

benefits

Fund,

physician

for

may

directly

source

at

paid

from

the

sole

PLAINVILLE
POLICE UNION,
LOCAL
1706,
CO. 15,
AFSCME,
AFL-CIO,

Pl leranhtr

President

i]

“Witness

be

the

fy

VAeecseta tl Lnrcke Lu AS

of

Co,

15

51

Representative

$3

APPENDIX C

Side Letter to Town of Plainville Retirement Plan and Agreement for
The Plainville Police Union
Amended and Restated Effective 6/6/2022

This agreement is entered into by and between the Town of Plainville (“Town”) and
Plain ville Police Union, Local #1706, Council 4, AFSCME, AFL-CIO (“Union”).

WHEREAS, the Town and Union are parties to a Retirement Plan and Agreement

Amended and Restated Effective 6/6/2022 and the parties wish to memorialize their

understanding of the benefit percentage (commonly called the multiplier) and pension
benefit cap going forward;
NOW

THEREFORE, the parties hereby agree to modify this language as follows:

Article 3.1 Each participantwill accrue a benefitof $ve-percent{2%) two and.one-quarier
percent (2(2:25%)
Service.

of the

Participants Annual

Eamings

multiplied by

his/her Credited

Article 3.2 Notwithstanding the foregoing, the benefitto be provided to a Participant who

retires on or after his/her Normal Retirement Date will be equal to ’ve-and-orne-quarler
percent{2.25%) two and sixty-five hundredths percent(2,65%) of the Participant's Annual
Earnings multiplied by his/her Credit Service as of his/her Normal

Retirement Date.

Article 3.3 The amount of the unreduced early retirement benefit to be provided to a
Participant who retires on an Early Retirement Date will be equal to the sum of: (a) Fwe

Two and one-quarter percent (2.25%) of the Participant's Annual Eamings
multiplied by his/her Credited Service (maximum twenty (20) years), plus (b) -Fwe-and

Two and sixty five hundredths percent (2.65%) of the

Participant's Annual comics multiplied by his/her Credited Service, if any, in excess of
twenty (20) years.

Article 3.5 In no event shall the late retirement benefit exceed seventypercent (70%)
severity-five percent (75%) of the Paiticipant’s Annual Earnings.
Article 7.1 Effective July+,1983, Paricipants are-requiredto-contribute sixpe FEeAL{6%}

al-E
- Effective 07/01/2022, Participants ara required’ to contribute seven
percent (7%) of Annual Eamings.

The parties have reached this agreement as of June 6, 2022.

-Page 1 of 2-

For the Town of Plainville,

fA.

Plainville Police Union,Local 1706,
Council 4, AFSCME,

aa

Town Manager

Tel-dd

Vee 1) Faden

Witness J go

53
