MINUTES OF A REGULAR MEETING OF THE ZION CITY COUNCIL HELD ON TUESDAY,
APRIL 16, 2019 AT 7:07 P.M. IN THE CITY COUNCIL CHAMBERS, CITY HALL, 2828
SHERIDAN ROAD, ZION, ILLINOIS
Mayor Hill called the meeting to order.
On call of the roll the following answered present:
DeTienne and Mayor Hill. A quorum was present.

Commissioners McDowell, Fischer, McKinney,

Also present: Chief of Police Steve Dumyahn, Fire/Rescue Chief John Lewis, City Administrator David
Knabel, Public Works Director Ray Roberts, Building/Zoning Director Richard Ianson and City Attorney
Paula Randall.
Mayor Hill led in the Pledge of Allegiance to the flag.
AGENDA CHANGES
It was moved by Commissioner McKinney, seconded by Commissioner Fischer to accept the City Council
meeting agenda with the following change:
-

Add pending litigation to Item 12, Closed Session - (Pursuant to 5 ILCS 120/2 “Open

Meetings”) for the discussion of collective bargaining, personnel

The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye;
and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
CITIZEN COMMENTS
Mary Lou Hiltibran, Zion, thanked Commissioner DeTienne and Mayor for their service to the City. She
stated they both have given years to the City in multiple ways and have done the best they could to make
things better for Zion.
Jackie Grana, Winthrop Harbor, stated she purchased her home in October, 1998 primarily because of the
location and enjoyed living in the area. They also experience issues with the landfill. They considered
moving to get away from the landfill but would not be able to match what they have now. She spoke with a
realtor and discovered the properties on the block are worth less than homes in other neighborhoods. She
wonders why the landfill was every approved being so close to an established neighborhood. No one is
holding the landfill accountable for all the problems they have caused.
Joe Mabbett, Winthrop Harbor, stated he believes the annexation meetings regarding the landfill have gone
well. He appreciates the Council hearing the concerns of the citizens. He understands that Zion needs the
revenue. He also understands there must be a place to put all the garbage, but the landfill operates
recklessly with no regard for the surrounding neighbors. He stated things got worse after the last expansion
and his life is affected daily. He used to have parties but was embarrassed by the smell and condition of the
property. He has complained to the Health Department many times and was told he should try and co-exist
with the landfill. He stated the landfill does whatever they want. They have done nothing about the current
problems and now they want to expand the problems for another 30 years.
Kurt Andrews, Winthrop Harbor, stated that he recently added the Council to the landfill complaint list
along with the EPA, Lake County Health Department and Advanced Disposal and the Collins Law Firm.
He stated since adding the Council to his list he has received two phone calls from Jim Lewis from
Advanced Disposal. They have been coming by to pick up garbage and feels it’s only because of the
annexation. He recited excerpts from the previous property value protection agreement. He hopes the new
agreement is better than the current one. He stated Advanced Disposal was recently purchased by Waste
Management for $2.9 billion.
Kerry Johnson, Winthrop Harbor, stated he lives on the east side of the landfill. She stated from 2015 to 2017
she kept a hand written log that contained disturbances in their lives every day due to the landfill. She began
emailing the Health Department and Advanced Disposal on landfill disturbances. The Health Department
came out to her property and suggested that she ask Winthrop Harbor to move the entrance to their
subdivision to Lewis Ave so as not to see the landfill as they entered the subdivision. Last summer she added

4/16/19
the EPA to her email list but not once has she been acknowledged. She stated in 2017 she sent 61 emails in six
months and in 2018 she sent 84 emails. She stated it smells so awful that she is unable to enjoy her daily life.
Diane Florio, Winthrop Harbor, stated she lives on the east side of the landfill. She recited sections of the
Siting Hearing transcripts from May 2010.
Patti Gembarski, Winthrop Harbor, stated she lives east of the landfill west of Lewis Avenue. She has lived in
Lake County for 40 years. She sent out an email this afternoon of an odor and noise log beginning from last
July to today. She has contacted the Lake County Health Department 10 times and made 150 complaints in a
one and a half year timeframe and nothing has been done. The noise from the landfill continues to wake her
up. She was told by the Lake County Health Department as the landfill gets higher nothing can be done. She
stated the Council has an important vote to cast. The annexation can potentially have a negative impact on the
surrounding communities.
Shawn Collins, Attorney, Collins Law Firm, stated he sent the City attorney a letter last week which he hopes
was passed on to the Council. He will answer any questions they may have regarding the letter. He is the
attorney for the people. They have heard some tough stories over the last couple of weeks. In 2010 the City
was deceived by promises that were not kept. The City needed the money so bad they allowed the expansion.
Now the landfill is dangling money in front of the City again to get them to agree to 30 more years of a
landfill. The people don’t vote for the elected officials or pay taxes in Zion. The easiest thing for the Council
to do is take the money, but will they do the same thing to the people again. It is up to the Council to find a
way to get their $2 million and make sure the people are treated decently.
Linda Beasley, Zion, stated she was attending the meeting to share the inappropriate and unprofessional
behavior she and her mother recently experienced with the Zion Fire/Rescue Department. Her mother was not
feeling well and asked her to call 911. On this day there was a snow storm. When the paramedics arrived the
Lieutenant asked why they couldn’t have waited to call them until after the snow storm for just a cold. She
was put off by his comments. She stated her mother uses the aid of a walker but was not given any assistance
from the paramedic. She stated her father was a Captain of the Zion Fire Department and would have never
treated a patient like they were being treated. She was told by the paramedic it was clear that she was not in
distress, yet no vitals were taken. She became more agitated and angered with the paramedic. He expressed to
her mother that it was an inappropriate time to call Fire Rescue during a snow storm. Ms. Beasley told the
paramedic that he was being inappropriate and unprofessional in his behavior. She was asked who would be
accompanying her mother to the hospital. They put her mother in the ambulance and then left without a family
member. She stated it was necessary that a family member stay with her mother as she was unable to answer
questions. She has reached out to some of the Commissioners because she does not believe any citizen should
be treated like that. She has learned that the paramedic has previously been reprimanded for this and is still in
Zion’s employment. She stated the incident was highly inappropriate and felt compelled to come to the
meeting and express her thoughts. She stated although the paramedic claimed her mother was not in distress
she was admitted to the hospital and is currently still in the hospital. Commissioner McDowell stated he called
the acting Battalion Chief and he assured him he would call her to apologize. Ms. Beasley spoke with the shift
Commander and he did apologize and expressed his regret on how they were treated. Chief Lewis informed
Ms. Beasley it was an isolated incident and should not have happened. He stated the paramedic is being dealt
with accordingly. Mayor Hill apologized on behalf of the City. He stated the paramedic is in the process of
being disciplined. He stated they must deal with unions and have a specific disciplinary procedure they must
follow and are taking the appropriate steps.
Bill Tessen stated he lives in unincorporated Benton Township. He is concerned about the proposed
annexation. He stated people were not made aware of the last annexation and was done by misleading the
people. He stated four years ago he met with Jim Lewis and expressed his concerns about the litter and
debris. He asked Mr. Lewis if Advanced Disposal would be interested in purchasing his property. Mr. Lewis
stated they were not purchasing properties on the east side of Kenosha Road. Mr. Tessen asked about the
property that he knew was previously purchased. He stated Mr. Lewis finally admitted additional properties
were purchased or under contract. Disclosure agreements were signed as to not discuss the contracts. He
stated the landfill cannot be trusted they tell you one thing but do another. He stated it is the same company
that is asking for an annexation and will operate under the same poor conditions. The previous Council was
not educated on the on the problems with the landfill and the impact it would have on the citizens. He hopes
this Council will not make the same mistake. They have the power and ability to make sure the same things
will not happen again. The Council has a moral and ethical obligation to protect the citizens.

2

4/16/19
Bob Waldon, Winthrop Harbor, stated he moved here in 1977 and has long ties in the area. He moved in his
home and planted trees and enjoyed him home. He was told in 1985 that the dump was closed. That did not
happen. They tried to stop the last landfill expansion and that didn’t happen. He stated they are all part of one
community and hopes that the Council will act accordingly.
Janet Jones, Zion, stated she is in support of the Zion Fire Department. She is concerned of the possibility of
layoffs. She understands it is a difficult decision but it is an important decision regarding life and death. She
spoke with Commissioners McDowell and McKinney and asked them for other ways to find money. She has
worked in the City for many years. She would like to see consolidation and elimination of the Township be
considered. The City must live within their means and something needs to be done to handle the problems.
Mayor Hill stated at the last meeting he asked the three groups to compile a list of questions and to schedule a
meeting and try and come to a mutual agreement on how to move forward. It has been discussed that residents
are looking for compensation. He spoke with Advanced Disposal and they cannot meet with the residents
directly because of ongoing litigation. They did indicate that the attorneys can meet and discussion a solution
with possible compensation. He asked that they discuss compensation moving forward. He stated this is an
issue between private citizens and a private company that the City cannot get involved in. The same thing
applies to Benton Township. He is hoping all parties can get together and come up with a solution.
CONSENT AGENDA
It was moved by Commissioner McKinney, seconded by Commissioner DeTienne, that the Consent
Agenda be approved as follows:
(a)

APPROVAL OF MINUTES: approval but not release of Closed Session Minutes of a
meeting held on March 19, 2019 at 8:25 p.m.; a Regular Meeting held on April 2, 2019 at
7:00 p.m.; and approval but not release of Closed Session Minutes of a meeting held on
April 2, 2019 at 8:28 p.m.

(b)

BILLS: Vouchers 131764 through 131843 drawn on Huntington National Bank, N.A.,
Total: $275,113.52

Approved by omnibus vote as follows: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney,
DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
RESOLUTION/WEBSITE MAINTENANCE SERVICE AGREEMENT/GOFLO, INC.
Administrator Knabel stated he is recommending renewal of the annual maintenance agreement with
GoFlo, Inc. for City websites. He stated that the agreement extends from May 1, 2019 through April 30,
2020 and covers unlimited maintenance and updates, in the total amount of $23,980. He stated GoFlo, Inc.
has not increased its rate in many years. The City recently implemented the online bill pay for water billing
and GoFlo worked closely with Computer Help Key to get it up and running.
It was moved by Commissioner McKinney, seconded by Commissioner Fischer that a Resolution (19-R-6)
be passed authorizing the renewal of the annual website maintenance service agreement with GoFlo, Inc.
from May 1, 2019 through April 30, 2020, in the total amount of $23,980. The vote on roll call was:
Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion
carried. Resolution passed.
RESOLUTION FOR STREET LIGHT MAINTENANCE - MFT FUNDS
A memo (19-DOC-17) was received from Director Roberts stating that the City is required to file a
Maintenance Resolution with IDOT for our estimated costs for routine maintenance items using Motor Fuel
Tax Funds. He stated the estimated cost of $45,000 is for Street Light Maintenance, which has been
budgeted for in the MFT Account.
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McKinney that a Resolution (19-R-7)
be passed for routine Street Light Maintenance using Motor Fuel Tax Funds in the amount of $45,000.

3

4/16/19
The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye;
and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried. Resolution passed.
IDOT RESOLUTION/MFT FUNDS/TRAFFIC SIGNAL MAINTENANCE
A memo (19-DOC-18) was received from Director Roberts stating that the City is required to file a
Maintenance Resolution with IDOT for our estimated costs for routine maintenance items using Motor Fuel
Tax Funds. He stated the estimated cost of $5,000 is for Traffic Signal Maintenance, which has been
budgeted for in the MFT Account.
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McKinney that a Resolution (19-R-8)
be passed for Maintenance of Streets and Highways by Municipality under the Illinois Highway Code,
MFT Funds, for 2019 Traffic Signal Maintenance in the amount of $5,000. The vote on roll call was:
Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye.
Motion carried. Resolution passed.
RESOLUTION FOR PARKWAY TREE MAINTENANCE - MFT FUNDS
A memo (19-DOC-19) was received from Director Roberts stating that the City is required to file a
Maintenance Resolution with IDOT for our estimated costs for routine maintenance items using Motor Fuel
Tax Funds. He stated the estimated cost of $20,000 is for Tree Maintenance, which has been budgeted for
in the MFT Account.
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McDowell that a Resolution (19-R-9)
be passed for routine Tree Maintenance using Motor Fuel Tax Funds in the amount of $20,000. The vote
on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor
Hill, aye. Motion carried. Resolution passed.
ORDINANCE/ANNEXATION AGREEMENT/SOUTH OF RUSSELL ROAD AND WEST OF
KENOSHA ROAD
Commissioner McDowell stated there are still many unanswered questions regarding the annexation. He is
still looking for answers from the attorneys. He feels the agreement can be modified to make everyone
happy. He stated he is not ready to vote on the Annexation Agreement and would like to table the item.
Mayor Hill stated he would like to get things done quickly. He urged everyone to get together and solve the
issues. The annexation needs to be determined in the next few months. He stated when the ordinances do
come back to the Council for a vote the prospective parties should be notified.
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell seconded by Commissioner DeTienne that an ordinance
authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement relative to the property located south of Russell Road
and west of Kenosha Road be tabled. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer,
nay; McKinney, nay; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
ORDINANCE/ANNEXING CERTAIN TERRITORY TO THE CITY OF ZION
Commissioner McDowell stated in the annexation agreement it states agreeing to the annexation does not
constitute an approval of the Siting. He stated Attorney Collin’s letter will be discussed at the Siting. The
Council must first act on the annexation before any issues can be addressed. Mayor Hill stated the present
discussions should not include Siting issues. Commissioner McDowell stated some of the issues in the
agreement appear to be Siting issues. He wonders if certain language should be removed from the
annexation agreement and included with the Siting agreement. He feels the annexation agreement may need
to be cleaned up. Attorney Randall stated that Adam Simon from Ancel, Glink has been working with
Advanced Disposal on the agreement. Commissioner McDowell feels the language regarding the
disconnection of the annexed property should be removed. He stated the property should be annexed
regardless whether the landfill is approved or not. Mayor Hill stated the matter of de-annexation is to
protect the property so it may be used for other things. Commissioner McDowell stated he would prefer to
have the property become Zion property. He stated he would like to consider removing some sections of
the agreement. He would like to review a copy of the first amendment and the property protection
agreement. He still has questions which makes it difficult to make decisions. He stated Advanced Disposal

4

4/16/19
should be evaluating the frequencies of the complaints and identifying the patterns. He would like more
specifics on how the complaints are compiled and prevented. Attorney Randall stated those are issues that
are typically addressed at the Siting hearing. Mayor Hill suggested Adam Simon attend the May 21st
Council meeting to answer questions. He is an expert that deals with landfills. Commissioner McDowell
stated his fear is that the property will not be annexed because Advanced Disposal believes the City is
requesting so many changes to the agreement. They may choose to work with the County on the expansion
instead leaving the City with no say in what happens. Commissioner Fischer stated that is also his concern.
If they do not receive control through the annexation they will have no leverage on any demands with the
siting permit. Commissioner McDowell stated he would like to be the voice for the citizens but if they do
not start moving forward with things and get to a siting agreement it will be out of the City’s hands At that
point, the citizens will be dealing with another government body. Mayor Hill stated he is proud of the fact
these discussions are taking place in public and not behind closed doors. The public will be aware of the
discussions and decisions of the Council.
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McKinney that an ordinance be
passed annexing certain territory to the City of Zion. Attorney Randall stated this ordinance cannot be
passed as the prior ordinance was tabled. She stated all three ordinances regarding the annexation are
relative to one another. Due to the fact the first ordinance was tabled, all three must be tabled.
Commissioner Fischer withdrew his motion and Commissioner McKinney withdrew his second.
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner DeTienne to table the ordinance
Annexing Certain Territory to the City of Zion be tabled. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners
McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
ORDINANCE/SECOND AMENDMENT/HOST AGREEMENT/ADVANCED DISPOSAL
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner DeTienne that an ordinance
authorizing the execution of a Second Amendment to the Host Agreement with Advanced Disposal
Services Zion Landfill, Inc. be tabled. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer,
aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
ABATING TAX/GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS – SERIES 2012
Administrator Knabel stated there has been an oversight on his part regarding the 2015 and 2017 General
Obligation Bonds. He was notified by the County that the numbers abated for the bonds did not match the
amounts levied. In order to correct the error, he is requesting passing amending ordinances with corrected
amounts. The third bond, the 2012 series was simply overlooked. He stated when the City issues bonds
they are required to provide collateral for the financing. That is done in the form of pledging certain
revenues such as water billings, motor fuel taxes and sales taxes. They are also required to pledge their
taxing authority as backup collateral in case the revenues pledged aren’t sufficient to pay the principal and
interest
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner McKinney that an Ordinance (190-11) be passed abating the tax levied for the Year 2018 to pay the principal of and interest on $2,500,000
Taxable General Obligation Bonds, Series 2012, (Alternate Revenue Source) of the City of Zion, Lake
County, Illinois. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye;
DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried. Ordinance passed.
ABATING TAX/GENERAL OBLIGATION REFUNDING BONDS – SERIES 2015
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner Fischer that an Ordinance (19-012) be passed abating the tax levied for the Year 2018 to pay the principal of and interest on $1,175,000
General Obligation Refunding Bonds, (Waterworks and Sewage System ARS), Series 2015, of the City of
Zion, Lake County, Illinois. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye;
McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried. Ordinance passed.
ABATING TAX/GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS – SERIES 2017
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner McKinney that an Ordinance (190-13) be passed abating the tax levied for the Year 2018 to pay the principal of and interest on $3,140,000

5

4/16/19
Taxable General Obligation Bonds, (Alternate Revenue Source) Series 2017, of the City of Zion, Lake
County, Illinois. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye;
DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried. Ordinance passed.
ORDINANCE/FIRST READING/AMENDING ZION MUNICIPAL CODE/
FEE INCREASES
Administrator Knabel stated during the budget workshops it was discussed that as part of addressing the
2019/2020 deficit the City would make about $2 million in proposed expense cuts and increased revenue
sources. He stated part of the new revenue source would come from an increase in permits, fines and fees.
It was proposed to increase fees by 10%. Of the $2 million only $300,000 will be coming from new
revenue and the other $1.7 million will come from expense cuts. He stated each department reviewed their
sections of the Code and made the proposed changes. He recommends the increase in fees as submitted
with the exception of two items. 1) Section 94-359 – Discontinuing service for nonpayment, currently this
amount is $50.00 to turn the water off and on. This amount was increased not long ago and is not a General
Fund revenue item. 2) Notary fee – Currently the notary fee is $1.00 and the proposed increase is $2.00.
This amount is capped at $1.00 per state statue. He stated this is the first reading of the proposed ordinance
and will on the May 7th meeting for final approval. Administrator Knabel stated both the fee and fine
increases are addressed in the packet provided but will be voted on separately. He recommends approval of
the items presented with the exception of the two items. Commissioner McDowell stated during the budget
workshops he voiced his opinion about not being in favor of fee increases but would support an increase in
penalties, fines and violations.
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McKinney that the First Reading of an
Ordinance be passed amending various Zion Municipal Code Sections regarding increasing fees as
presented with the exception of Section 94-359 and the increase of the notary fee. The vote on roll call was:
Commissioners McDowell, nay Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion
carried.
ORDINANCE/FIRST READING/AMENDING ZION MUNICIPAL CODE/
FINES AND PENALTIES INCREASES
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner Fischer that the First Reading of an
Ordinance be passed amending various Zion Municipal Code Sections regarding fines and penalties as
presented. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye;
DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
Mayor Hill stated that the Second Reading of this amending ordinance will be considered for final action at
the March 1, 2016 City Council meeting.
BUDGET/STREET AND BRIDGE FUND/MOTOR FUEL TAX FUND
Administrator Knabel stated due to the timing of some of the items that must go out for bid for projects in
the Street and Bridge and Motor Fuel Tax funds, he does not want to hold up approval of the funds that
they can move forward with. The Street and Bridge fund is funded by property taxes and grants. He stated
the levy was adopted in December, 2018 addressing how much revenue would come in for the Street and
Bridge fund and has been pre-set. Motor Fuel Tax funds are allocated by the State which the City has no
control over. He recommends approval of Street and Bridge and Motor Fuel Tax fund budgets for fiscal
year 2019/2020 as presented.
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McKinney approve the budget for the
Street and Bridge Fund and the Motor Fuel Tax Fund for Fiscal Year May 1, 2019 through April 30, 2020.
The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye;
and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
DEPARTMENTAL COMMENTARY
Administrator Knabel reminded citizens City Stickers are currently on sale. Current stickers expire on April
30th.

6

4/16/19
Commissioner McKinney stated it was stated earlier that the City is not living within its means. He feels
there is a misperception that the City is over spending and that is not the case. In addition to that, there was
a comment about getting rid of the Township. He stated they have explored that option several years ago
and it was discovered that it was not feasible or legal nor would it save the money people thought it would.
He stated as comments occur they must be mindful as a Council to be sure to give out correct information.
Mayor Hill stated if the Township merged with the City and kept the same services, the savings would be
between $40,000 and $50,000. Commissioner McKinney stated the consolidation of taxing bodies is out of
the City’s control.
ANNOUNCEMENTS
May 7

7:00 p.m.

Zion City Council Meeting and
Swearing In Ceremony

May 21

6:00 p.m.
6:15 p.m.
7:00 p.m.

Zion Town Board Budget Hearing
Zion Township Board Meeting
Zion City Council Meeting

CLOSED SESSION
It was moved by Commissioner McKinney, seconded by Commissioner Fischer that the Council recess to
Closed Session at 8:50 p.m., pursuant to 5 ILCS 120/2 “Open Meetings”, for the discussion of collective
bargaining and personnel. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye;
McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McDowell to reconvene the Regular
Council meeting at 9:26 p.m. with all members present. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners
McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
FOP/SERGEANTS CONTRACT AGREEMENT
Administrator Knabel stated a lot of the contract language is the same in both the Sergeant contract and the
Patrol contract. Sergeants have agreed to an increase of 2.5% within the third year on the May 1st of that
year and another 2.5% on April 30th of the final day of the contract. They are also agreeing to concessions
that; in year two and three of the contract they will pay an additional 2.5% of their salary towards
insurance, give back a day of personal time and eliminate the minimum staffing requirements.
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner McKinney to approve the contract
agreement as presented with Fraternal Order of Police, David M. Parker Memorial Lodge No. 91 and the
Illinois FOP Labor Council, for May 1, 2018 through April 30, 2021 for Sergeants. The vote on roll call
was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye.
Motion carried.
RETIREMENT AGREEMENT/CHIEF DUMYAHN
Administrator Knabel stated as discussed during the budget workshops, they are looking to go to a single
chief model in both the Fire Department and Police Department. This offer is to incentivize retirement in
order to get the savings in the Police Department.
Commissioner McDowell stated he has not worked with a finer Chief and he will miss him. He has done
well for the department for the last 33 years and is a dedicated City servant that is very dedicated.
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner McKinney to approve the
retirement agreement for Chief Dumyahn for purposes of department reorganization. The vote on roll call
was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye.
Motion carried.

7

4/16/19
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING/IUOE LOCAL 150/CLERICAL
Administrator Knabel stated the MOU is an addendum to the existing Clerical contract in order to avoid
layoffs. They have agreed in May 2019 to a salary freeze for those at the top step and have agreed to fill a
full time position with two part time positions.
It was moved by Commissioner McKinney, seconded by Commissioner Fischer to approve a Memorandum
of Understanding between the City of Zion and IUOE Local 150 for Public Employee Division Union for
Clerical Employees. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney,
aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING/IUOE LOCAL 150/BUILDING
Administrator Knabel stated the MOU is an addendum to the existing Building contract. They have agreed
to freeze step increases and wages increases for fiscal year 2019-2020. Employees will also be taking four
(4) hours of furlough per month.
It was moved by Commissioner McKinney, seconded by Commissioner McDowell to approve a
Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Zion and IUOE Local 150 for Public Employee
Division Union for Building Department Employees. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell,
aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
WAGE INCREASES/NON UNION
Administrator Knabel stated non-union employees did not receive a pay increase for the 2018/2019 year.
He is proposing a 2.5% wage increase for two years for non-union employees with the condition that the
amount be paid back in additional insurance contributions. This would result in a net “0” increase and take
home but will help preserve salaries for pension purposes. The amount to “give back” will be based on
salary. He is hoping the concessions will be temporary. If finances improve in the future, they hope to
remove some of the concessions.
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner McKinney to approve a wage
increase of 2.5% for non-union employees with the condition that the amount be paid back in additional
insurance contributions. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye;
McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
REDUCTION/FULL-TIME FIREFIGHTER PERSONNEL
Commissioner McDowell stated this item will be deferred to the Council meeting on May 7th and will be
voted on under Old Business with the current Council. Mayor Hill stated it would not be fair for two new
Council members to make a decision on an item that the current Council has been working on for months.
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner Fischer to continue the approval of
reduction of full-time firefighter personnel to the May 7, 2019 City Council meeting. The vote on roll call
was: Commissioners McDowell, aye; Fischer, aye; McKinney, aye; DeTienne, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye.
Motion carried.
ADJOURN
There being no further business to come before the Council at this time, it was moved by Commissioner
Taylor, seconded by Commissioner DeTienne and unanimously approved the meeting be adjourned at 9:17
p.m. Motion carried.

_____________________________________________
City Clerk

8

9
