MERCEDES CITY COMMISSION
BUDGET WORKSHOP
JULY 13, 2024 – 9:00 A.M.
MERCEDES CITY HALL – COMMISSION CHAMBERS
MEMBERS PRESENT:

Oscar D. Montoya Sr.
Dr. Ruben J. Saldana
Joe Martinez
Armando Garcia

Mayor
Mayor Pro-Tem
Commissioner
Commissioner

MEMBERS ABSENT:

Dr. Jacob C. Howell

Commissioner

STAFF PRESENT:

Alberto Perez
Martie Garcia-Vela
Joselynn Castillo
Javier Ramirez
Meredith Hernandez
Michael Rocha
Juan Vasquez
Kristine Longoria
Francisco Sanchez
Javier Campos
Marisol Vidales
Tom Villagomez

City Manager
City Attorney (Virtual)
City Secretary
Asst. City Manager
Interim Finance Director
I.T Specialist
I.T Specialist
Human Resources
Police Chief
Fire Chief/EMC
Library Director
Public Works Director

1. CALL MEETING TO ORDER
Mayor Montoya welcomed everyone and called the meeting to order at 9:00 A.M.
2. ESTABLISH QUORUM
Four members of the Commission were present which constitutes a quorum.
Commissioner Howell was absent.
3. INVOCATION
Commissioner Martinez said the invocation.
4. PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
Commissioner Garcia led in the pledge of allegiance.
5. OPEN FORUM
There were no comments during open forum.
6. DISCUSSION REGARDING THE BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024-2025.
Mayor Montoya explained the budget process and the importance of having the budget to
meet the needs of the city throughout the year.
Fire Chief Campos presented to the Commission the budget for Fire/EMS. Chief
Campos informed that EMS expenditures increased from $500,000 to $682,763.00. This
increase is primarily due to the need to replace the chassis of one of the ambulances. The
replacement process for he chassis is expected to take about three months. Meanwhile,
the city has three other ambulances on shift. The Fire Department has 18 full-time
firefighters, 9 of whom are paramedics, 2 advanced EMT’s and 7 basic EMT’s. Personnel

costs for full-time employees increased from $101,000 to $120,000 to account for fire
certification pay. Chief Campos highlighted the need for additional staff due t the high
volume of calls. He requested three additional personnel to ensure one per shift and a
part-time employee to assist the Fire Marshal. In response to a question about revenues,
Chief Campos explained that the Fire Department has a mutual aid agreement wit the
County to service the rural areas of Mercedes. The City invoices the county for any calls
attended outside city limits. Chief Campos proposed establishing a training facility. The
facility would provide opportunities to acquire equipment from South Texas College and
potentially host a fire academy. Chief Campos outlines his capital outlay requests,
including the purchase of a new brush truck for $183,413 from the CO funds for 2025
and new radios. The Fire Department’s budget increased from $1.5 million to $1.9
million to cover personnel and volunteer expenses. There was discussion about
establishing a substation for the Fire Department. Chief Campos suggested that the
substation could be beneficial on Mile 2 West and North of Mile 9, given the high
volume of calls form that area.
Police Chief Sanchez requested an increase in the overtime budget. He explained the
schedule change to 12-hour shifts with a 4-day work week, which impacts overtime
needs. The increase also covers costs for active response training. There was a discussion
about establishing a shooting range, highlighting that the city’s central location in the
valley makes it an ideal spot. The budget also reflects an increase in ammunition costs for
training purposes. Mr. Perez discussed a two-step approach for adjusting police
department salaries to remain competitive with neighboring cities. There was discussion
about parking issues for staff and the police department, including the need for security
cameras and improved lighting in the parking lot. Animal control currently has two
employees, with no changes proposed to their budget. Mayor Montoya expressed interest
in organizing an event for spaying/neutering, vaccinations, and tagging. Mr. Perez
emphasized the need for the animal shelter and the 24/7 operation to adequately care for
the animals.
I.T Specialist Michael Rocha addressed the Commission about the I.T Budget for all
departments. Mr. Perez commended the I.T staff for their efforts in cyber security
training. Mr. Rocha highlighted the implementation of the KnowBe4 training program,
which costs $7,000 per year for three years. He added that H2O is the licensing software
used for Utility Billing. Mayor Pro-Tem Saldana expressed the desire for the city’s
website to be updated. He suggested that each department should manage their respective
pages to ensure current and accurate information. Mayor Montoya inquired if every
Police Department unit has in-car laptops and connectivity. Mr. Rocha confirmed that all
units are equipped with these technologies. Mr. Rocha included in the budget the
installation of camera for City Hall, the library, and public works. VTX1 offered to place
an access point in the back parking lot along with a camera for enhanced security and
connectivity.
Mayor Montoya called a 5-minute recess at 11:00 a.m. Mayor Montoya called the meeting back
to order at 11:12 a.m.

Planning Director Ramirez informed the Commission about the budget changes and
increases. Material testing has a increased costs, which is reimbursable to the city.
Contractual Services had an increase of $5,000 for GIS software maintenance. Mr.
Ramirez proposed to add an inspector/code enforcement/ GIS mapping employee for
fieldwork. Subscriptions and Travel and Training increased due to necessary licenses for
the Planning Director, Building Official and Inspector. Mr. Ramirez stated the city has
one antenna for GIS surveying with centimeters accuracy. Capital Outlay also increased
to purchase a vehicle for the new inspector/code enforcement/GIS mapping employee.
Mayor Montoya suggested starting a program to educate the public about new
regulations, such as brush placement dates and pick-up schedules. Commissioner
Martinez recommended having staff register people at community events. Mayor
Montoya also recommended using utility bills to sign up every household for CodeRed,
allowing them to opt out if desired. Mr. Ramirez stated that 8 businesses will be brought
before the Building and Standards Commission to either work with them or condemn the
properties. Mr. Ramirez stated the Urban County budget will be allocated to street
improvement for 10th street. He added that the waterline on 10th street has been relocated,
and paving is expected to start next week and the school and residents will need to be
notified. Mr. Ramirez informed the commission about the software the planning
department uses to help improve their process for permits. Mr. Ramirez discussed the
grants and projects which included water well grant, FEMA Dome Project, Mercedes
Lateral, a crossing at Maryland and 14th Street upgrade, and the EPA Grant.
Mayor Montoya called for a 30-minute recess at 12:12 p.m. for lunch. Mayor called the meeting
back to order at 12:32 p.m.
Library Director Marisol Vidales addressed the Commission about requesting one
additional staff member to support the department. Ms. Vidales added funds to travel and
training for the Historical Committee and to send more staff members to various
trainings. She increased the budget to include a book repair machine and diaper changing
tables for the restrooms. The budget increased to purchase software and licenses for
reading challenges, which can be used for summer reading or throughout the year. Ms.
Vidales increased funding by $2,000 for the purchasing of new books. She went on to
explain the criteria and process for selecting books for the library collection.
Public Works Director Tomas Villagomez informed of the departments plan to
purchase a John Deere Tractor, fuel tanks, a truck for the streets division, a 4-seater
Gator, a line striper, a backhoe and a new trailer for the parks division. Mr. Perez
mentioned the projects on street improvements which included Mile 1 E. Project, Dakota
Street, and Mile 2 W to Llano Grande. Mr. Villagomez recently purchased a hotbox
machine to assist with paving repairs. He spoke about the irrigation efforts to install pipes
in the park. However, watering has been minimized due to water restrictions. There was
ongoing discussion about the needs and conditions of parks and playground equipment.
Interim Finance Director Meredith Hernandez stated the budget has increased from $15
million last year to $17 Million this year. There is a projection of $7 million increase in
reserves. The Enterprise Fund in previous years had a balance of $0 and the general fund
was subsidizing the expenditures. Last year the enterprise fund saw a increase in revenues

of $600,00 and this year is projected to end in a balance of $2 million. Both last year and
this year, the Utility fund repaying the general fund $300,000. Water rates are scheduled
to increase again on October 1, 2024.
Commissioner Martinez thanked management and staff for all their hard work.
7. ADJOURNMENT
Commissioner Martinez motioned to adjourn. Commissioner Garcia seconded. Upon a
called vote, the motion passed unanimously. The meeting adjourned at 12:58 p.m.
