MINUTES OF A REGULAR MEETING OF THE ZION CITY COUNCIL HELD ON TUESDAY,
NOVEMBER 6, 2018, AT 7:00 P.M. IN THE CITY COUNCIL CHAMBERS, CITY HALL, 2828
SHERIDAN ROAD, ZION, ILLINOIS
Mayor Hill called the meeting to order.
On call of the roll the following answered present: Commissioners McKinney, McDowell, DeTienne, Fischer, and
Mayor Hill. A quorum was present.
Also present: Deputy Police Chief Kirk Henderson, Fire Chief John Lewis, Public Works Director Ray Roberts, City
Administrator David Knabel, Building & Zoning Director Richard Ianson and City Attorney Paula Randall.
Mayor Hill led in the Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag.
AGENDA CHANGES
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McDowell to accept the City Council meeting
agenda as presented.
The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer, aye; and Mayor
Hill, aye. Motion carried.
SPECIAL PRESENTATION/ENTERPRISE ZONE APPLICATION
Warren Ribley, WCR Enterprises presented the Council with an update on the City’s Enterprise Zone application.
Mr. Ribley stated he has diligently been working on the application for a few months. The deadline for the
application is December 31, 2018. He stated there will be two ordinances that will be presented to the Council for
approval at the next meeting; 1) to establish the Enterprise Zone in the City of Zion, Beach Park and Winthrop
Harbor 2) to encourage the development of business entities and the hiring minorities, women and persons with
disabilities within the Zion Enterprise Zone. He stated the application is judged by an Enterprise Zone Board who is
made up of members appointed by the Governor. The application is judged on an eleven point criteria point system.
He believes it was advantageous to ask Winthrop Harbor and Beach Park to join as it strengthens the application
from a scoring standpoint. The Enterprise Zone Act encourages bringing communities together. The Enterprise can
be larger if three or more communities join together. The map of the proposed zone consists mostly of the City of
Zion, parts of Winthrop Harbor near the Marina and a small part of Beach Park near Wadsworth and Lewis Avenue.
It contains 9 ¼ square miles but can go up to 13 square miles. He stated it affords the ability to add flexibility. He
stated the Enterprise Zone is designed to maximize point values under each criteria. He presented the Enterprise
Zone qualifying criteria for 2018 and the number of points awarded for each qualifying factor as well as the points
awarded to the application the City submitted in 2016. He stated it is a competitive process but feels good where
they are with the application. The business community has been very cooperative. The awards will take place on
September 19, 2019. He stated there are a few Enterprise Zones that will be expiring and believes there may be
between 6-12 Zones that will be awarded. Mayor Hill stated the ordinances will be approved at the November 20th
meeting and the application will be approved at the first meeting in December. Mr. Ribley stated the
intergovernmental agreement with Beach Park and Winthrop Harbor will be incorporated with the ordinance.
CITIZEN COMMENTS
William Bremner, Zion, asked that the City recognize the 243rd Birthday of the United States Marine Corps on
November 10, 2018 by sending birthday wishes to the Commandant of the Marine Corps in Washington DC.
CONSENT AGENDA
It was moved by Commissioner McKinney, seconded by Commissioner McDowell, that the Consent Agenda be
approved as follows:
(a)

APPROVAL OF MINUTES: of a Regular Meeting held on October 16, 2018 at 7:00 p.m. and
approval but not release of Closed Session Minutes of a meeting held on October 16, 2018 at
7:47 p.m.

11/6/18
(b)

BILLS: Vouchers 130612 through 130717 drawn on, Huntington National Bank N.A., Total:
$712,966.19

Approved by omnibus vote as follows: Commissioners McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer,
aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
RESOLUTION/ANIMAL CONTROL COMMISSION
A memo (18-DOC-78) was received from Commissioner McDowell regarding the creation of an Animal Control
Commission. He stated on July 17, 2018 the Council was made aware that a group of animal health advocates were
concerned with how the City was addressing the processing, handling, and temporary holding of dogs and cats in the
City. He stated the City was thankful to the group of advocates for bringing some additional issues and concerns to
the forefront. Because of their willingness to help the City, many improvements have been made over the last three
months. He shared the list of those improvements. He stated also submitted for approval of a contract that will move
quite a few of the animal control services to Lake County Animal Control. It will address many of the concerns and
issues that the City has previously faced. Lake County is an updated facility with veterinary resources and other
resources that Zion doesn’t have the bandwidth for at this time. The City will continue to use the Community
Service Officers to pick up animals running at large in the City and enforce the animal control ordinances. If animals
cannot be immediately returned to their owners, they will then be picked up by Lake County Animal Control. While
contracting with Lake County does not solve a lot of the immediate issues, the City wants to continue to build on
what they have accomplished so far. He proposed that the City create an Animal Control Commission for Zion. The
proposed membership will be made up of knowledgeable and concerned citizens who have the best interest of the
residents and the animals that live in the City at heart. The proposed commission members have spent a great deal of
time thinking about the welfare of the residents and animals and are already helping make some significant decisions
for improving the animal control services. He thanked all those who had a part in guiding the efforts in putting the
commission together for the betterment of the residents; human, canine and feline.
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner McKinney that a Resolution (18-R-22) be
passed creating the Animal Control Commission. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McKinney, aye;
McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried. Resolution passed.
ORDINANCE/AMENDING ZION MUNICIPAL CODE/SOLICITORS
Deputy Chief Henderson stated the police department has received complaints throughout the year regarding the
hours for solicitation. It is recommended solicitation not be permitted after 5:00 p.m. on any weekday or Saturday.
Solicitation is currently not permitted on Sunday or a state or national holiday.
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner DeTienne that an Ordinance (18-O-49) be
passed amending Zion Municipal Code, Section 14-112(9)(a), Limitations on soliciting and Section 62-336, Hours;
permits to use city property to amend solicitation hours to begin no earlier than 10:00 a.m. and end no later than 5:00
p.m. on any weekday or Saturday. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye;
DeTienne, aye; Fischer, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried. Ordinance passed.
INVOICES/EMERGENCY SANITARY MANHOLE AND STORM SEWER REPAIR/
CAMPANELLA AND SONS
A memo (18-DOC-79) was received from Director Roberts requesting permission to pay two invoices from
Campanella and Sons of Wadsworth, Illinois for emergency sanitary manholes and storm sewer repair. The memo
stated that on September 18, 2018 residents of the 2800 block of Bethel reported that they were experiencing
backups. Two sanitary manholes required replacement in the amount of $26,175.95. On September 24, 2018 sink
holes were reported near 3106 20th Street. The storm sewer was collapsing in several areas. Replacement of a 36”
storm sewer was required in the amount of $24,251.74. Due to the size and depth of the excavation as outside
contractor was needed to make the necessary repairs.
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McKinney to approve payment of two invoices
from Campanella and Sons of Wadsworth, Illinois in the amount of $26,175.95 for replacement of emergency
sanitary manholes at 2800 block of Bethel Blvd. and $24,251.74 for storm sewer replacement at 20th Street. The
vote on roll call was: Commissioners McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer, aye; and Mayor Hill,
aye. Motion carried.

2

11/6/18
2018/2019 RENEWAL/WORKERS COMPENSATION/CRIME/EQUIPMENT/LAW ENFORCEMENT
LIABILITY INSURANCE
City Administrator Knabel stated that the City’s current insurance policies are set to expire in December. The
insurance brokers went to market for insurance quotes for the 2018/2019 workers compensation, crime, equipment
and law enforcement insurance renewal. The goal is to get all policies on a fiscal year basis. The provider has
agreed to bridge the workers compensation and crime policies from December to May. He recommends renewing
the workers compensation for $249,264 and equipment for $530 until May 1, 2019, and crime and law enforcement
liability until 12/1/19. He stated workers compensation is trending downwards and law enforcement liability stayed
flat.
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner Fischer to approve renewal of workers
compensation and crime insurance from December 15, 2018 to May 1, 2019 and equipment and law enforcement
liability insurances from December 15, 2018 to December 12, 2019, as presented in the premium summary
provided. The vote on roll call was: McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer, aye; and Mayor Hill,
aye. Motion carried.
AGREEMENT/LAKE COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT/ANIMAL CARE & CONTROL PROGRAM
Mayor Hill stated Commissioner McDowell briefly discussed contracting with Lake County Animal Control. Mayor
Hill asked if there would be a charge for the services. Commissioner McDowell stated there would not be a charge
for dogs or other animals but there would be a fee for cats. The existing CSO will provide help with the program.
Mayor Hill asked what will be different with the new agreement. Commissioner McDowell stated the animals will
immediately be transferred to Lake County. Lake County will come and pick up the animals and take them to the
facility in Libertyville. Lake County will chipping the animals which will help in getting the animals back to their
owners.
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner McKinney to approve the service agreement
between the Lake County Health Department and the City of Zion for an animal care and control program and that
an ordinance be prepared accordingly. The vote on roll call was: McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye;
Fischer, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
APPOINTMENTS/ANIMAL CONTROL COMMISSION
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner McKinney to approve the following
appointments to the Animal Control Commission:
Chris Szymanski
Madeline Santana
Noelle Harris
Lisa Weikle
The vote on roll call was: McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye.
Motion carried.
BY-LAWS/ANIMAL CONTROL COMMISSION
Commissioner McDowell stated a Resolution was passed earlier in the meeting creating a Zion Animal Control
Commission. By-laws (18-DOC-80) have been created that contain the structure as well as responsibilities and
policies of the commission. He stated on the recommendation of the attorney a few language changes have been
made to the by-laws.
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner Fischer to approve the Animal Control
Commission By-laws with changes as presented. The vote on roll call was: McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye;
DeTienne, aye; Fischer, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.

3

11/6/18
JANUARY 1, 2019 COUNCIL MEETING
Mayor Hill stated the first regular City Council meeting in January 2019, would fall on January 1st. Due to January
1st being a holiday, the Council may choose to reschedule the meeting to another day. He stated there will not be
much City business between the last meeting in December and the first meeting on January. He asked the Council if
they would like to re-schedule the meeting to January 2, 2019 or choose to eliminate the first meeting in January.
It was moved by Commissioner McDowell, seconded by Commissioner DeTienne to approve the elimination of the
first meeting of January 2019. The vote on roll call was: McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer,
aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
DEPARTMENTAL COMMENTARY
There were no Departmental Comments
ANNOUNCEMENTS
November 14

12:00 p.m.

Ahmadiyya Muslim Community
Appreciation Lunch

November 20

6:15 p.m.
7:00 p.m.

Zion Township Board Meeting
Zion City Council Meeting

November 22 & 23
December 4

City Offices closed for
Thanksgiving Holiday
7:00 p.m.

Zion City Council Meeting

CLOSED SESSION
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McKinney that the Council recess to Closed
Session at 7:53 p.m., pursuant to 5 ILCS 120/2 “Open Meetings”, for the discussion of collective bargaining and
personnel. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer, aye;
and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
It was moved by Commissioner McKinney, seconded by Commissioner Fischer to reconvene the Regular Council
meeting at 8:24 p.m. with all members present. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McKinney, aye;
McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
PUBLIC WORKS/IUOE BARGAINING UNIT CONTRACT AGREEMENT
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McKinney to approve the IUOE bargaining
unit contract agreement between Zion Public Works Department and the International Union of Operating
Engineers, Local 150, and the City of Zion, for May 1, 2018 through April 30, 2021. The vote on roll call was:
Commissioners McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
BUILDING DEPARTMENT/IUOE BARGAINING UNIT CONTRACT AGREEMENT
It was moved by Commissioner McKinney, seconded by Commissioner Fischer to approve the IUOE bargaining
unit contract agreement between Zion Building Department and the International Union of Operating Engineers,
Local 150, and the City of Zion, for May 1, 2018 through April 30, 2021. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners
McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.

4

11/6/18

CLERICAL/IUOE BARGAINING UNIT CONTRACT AGREEMENT
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McDowell to approve the IUOE bargaining
unit contract agreement between Zion Clerical Employees and the International Union of Operating Engineers,
Local 150, and the City of Zion, for May 1, 2018 through April 30, 2021. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners
McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer, aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
NORTHWEST FIREFIGHTERS BENEFIT TRUST HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN PROPOSAL
It was moved by Commissioner Fischer, seconded by Commissioner McDowell to approve the health insurance plan
proposal from the Northwest Firefighters Benefit Trust contingent on the adoption of a Memorandum of
Understanding. The vote on roll call was: Commissioners McKinney, aye; McDowell, aye; DeTienne, aye; Fischer,
aye; and Mayor Hill, aye. Motion carried.
ADJOURN
There being no further business to come before the Council at this time, it was moved by Commissioner McDowell,
seconded by Commissioner McKinney, and unanimously approved the meeting be adjourned at 8:20 p.m. Motion
carried.
_____________________________________________
City Clerk

5
