COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE BOARD OF EDUCATION OF MOUNT PROSPECT SCHOOL
DISTRICT 57
AND
THE MOUNT PROSPECT EDUCATIONAL SUPPORT
PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATION, IEA-NEA

2024 - 2025
2025 - 2026
2026 - 2027
2027 - 2028
2028 - 2029

ARTICLE I - RECOGNITION

3

ARTICLE II - ASSOCIATION RIGHTS

4

2-1 New Employee Onboarding

4

2-2 Association Dues Deduction

4

2-3 New Employee Information

4

2-4 Information Regarding School Board Meetings

4

2-5 Use of School Facilities

5

2-6 Communications Council

5

2-7 Association Leave

5

2-8 Hold Harmless Provision

6

ARTICLE III - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

7

ARTICLE IV - EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

8

4-1 Probationary Period

8

4-2 Discipline

8

A. Discipline and Dismissal

8

B. Right of Representation

9

4-3 Seniority

9

4-4 Years of Service

10

4-5 Reduction in Force (RIF)

11

ARTICLE V - EVALUATIONS & FILES

12

5-1 Evaluations

12

5-2 Personnel Files

12

ARTICLE VI - WORKING CONDITIONS

14

6-1 Employee Workday and Work Year

14

6-2 Duty-Free Meal Break

15

6-3 Paid Breaks

15

6-4 Emergency School Closings

15

6-5 Paid Holidays

15

6-6 Overtime

16

6-7 Vacancies, Transfers & New Positions

16

6-8 Additional Work

17

6-9 Extra Duty Stipend Assignments

18

6-10 Classroom Subbing

18

6-11 Electronic Access

19

6-12 Travel Compensation

19

6-13 Custodial Maintenance Work Uniforms

20
1

6-14 Emergency Call-in

20

6-15 Safety in the Workplace

20

6-16 Mentor Program

21

6-17 Continuing Education Funding

21

ARTICLE VII - LEAVES

22

7-1 County Paid Leave Ordinance Waiver

22

7-2 Leave - Sick/Personal Leave

22

7-3 Leave - Vacation

24

7-4 Leave - Military Obligation

25

7-5 Leave - Jury Duty

25

7-6 Leave for Part-Time Employees

25

7-7 Leave - Catastrophic

25

7-8 Leave - Bereavement

26

7-9 Leave - Family and Medical Leave (FMLA)

26

ARTICLE VIII - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

29

8-1 General Deﬁnition of Grievance

29

8-2 Additional Deﬁnitions and Understandings About the Grievance Process

29

8-3 Procedural Requirements for Filing a Grievance

30

ARTICLE IX - COMPENSATION

32

9-1 Wages

32

9-2. Stipends

34

9-3 Special Increments
9-4 Payroll

35
35

9-5 Final Pay

36

9-6 Insurance Eligibility

36

ARTICLE X - EFFECT OF AGREEMENT

38

10-1 Savings Clause

38

10-2 Complete Understanding

38

10-3 No Strike Clause

38

10-4 Negotiations

38

10-5 Term of Agreement

39

Appendix A

40

Appendix B

41

2

ARTICLE I - RECOGNITION
The Board of Education of the Mount Prospect School District 57, Cook County, Mount Prospect,
Illinois, hereinafter referred to as the "Board," recognizes the Mount Prospect Educational Support
Professional Association, IEA-NEA, hereinafter referred to as the "Association," as the exclusive
bargaining agent for wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment for all non
certiﬁcated staff, including Kids' Comer staff, hereinafter referred to as "Employee". Excluded from
this unit are all supervisors, managerial, and conﬁdential employees as deﬁned under the Illinois
Educational Labor Relations Act (IELRA).

3

ARTICLE II - ASSOCIATION RIGHTS
2-1 New Employee Onboarding
The District will provide new Employees with an electronic copy of the Collective Bargaining
Agreement. Upon request, new Employees will be provided a printed copy. The District will also
provide time for the Association to speak at District-sponsored new Employee onboarding events.

2-2 Association Dues Deduction
The Board will deduct the current dues of the Association from the pay of any Employee who has
executed an annual authorization for dues deduction. The Association will annually certify the
amount of the dues. The Association will furnish the authorization form which will include a hold
harmless clause exempting the Board from liability to the individual or the Association for any
omissions of deductions. The Board will notify the Association in writing of the receipt of any
revocation and the Association shall promptly notify the Board of any revocation notice it receives.
Upon receipt of a revocation notice from either the Employee or the Association, the Board shall
cease making deductions from the Employee’s pay and shall cease remittance of such deductions to
the Association beginning with the ﬁrst full pay period following the revocation. All dues deducted
by the Board will be remitted to the Association within twenty-one (21) days of that deduction.

2-3 New Employee Information
Within ﬁve (5) work days of the date of Board of Education approval of hire, the District will provide
the Association with the names, addresses, phone numbers, email addresses, positions, job
locations, and wage placements of newly hired Employees. Within ﬁve (5) work days of Board of
Education approval of separation, the District will notify the Association of the names of
individuals no longer employed.

2-4 Information Regarding School Board Meetings
The Administration will provide the Association President or designee with written notice of all
regular meetings of the School Board, a copy of the agenda and the public information media
packet prior to the scheduled time of the meeting.

4

2-5 Use of School Facilities
A. The Association may use the District mail service, e-mail and internet service in compliance
with the Board's Acceptable Use Policy, mailboxes, and bulletin boards for the following
purposes: Notices of Association meetings, minutes of Association meetings, elections,
results of elections, appointment of ofﬁcers and committees, general information letters,
and social, educational, and recreational activities of the Association.
B. The Board will designate a bulletin board at each work site for Association use.
C. The Board will provide space for an Association supplied secure storage cabinet for
Association materials.
D. Upon request by the Association President, the Board will allocate time for Association
business at each regularly scheduled District-wide meeting with Employees. Such time will
include at least ten (10) minutes at such meetings.

2-6 Communications Council
The Superintendent and Association President will conduct monthly communication meetings,
when possible, for the purpose of maintaining ongoing communications and discussing issues that
affect Employees.

2-7 Association Leave
The Association President or President’s Designee(s) will be granted up to ten (10) days a year of
paid leave for Association business.
The Association will request approval from the Superintendent for any Association leave days.
Application for use of these days must be ﬁled as soon as practical with the Superintendent for
approval.

5

2-8 Hold Harmless Provision
In the event any legal action against the Board is brought in a court or administrative agency
because of its compliance with this Article, the Association agrees to defend such action, at its own
expense and through its own counsel, provided:
A. The Board notiﬁes the Association promptly in writing and permits the Association to
intervene as a party if it so desires.
B. The Board gives full and complete cooperation to the Association and its counsel in
securing and giving evidence, obtaining witnesses and making relevant information
available at both trial and all appellate levels.
C. The Association will indemnify and hold harmless the Association, its members, ofﬁcers,
agents and Employees from and against any and all claims, demands, actions, complaints,
suits, or other forms of liability that shall arise out of or by reason of action taken by the
Board for the purposes of complying with the above provisions of this Article, or in reliance
of any list, notice, certiﬁcation, afﬁdavit, or assignment furnished under any of such
provisions.
It is expressly understood that this Hold Harmless Provision will not apply to any claim, demand,
suit or other form of liability which may arise as a result of willful misconduct by the Board.

6

ARTICLE III - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
The Board hereby retains and reserves unto itself all powers, rights, authority, duties and
responsibilities, subject to the terms of the collective bargaining agreement, conferred upon it and
vested in it by the laws and Constitutions of the State of Illinois and the United States of America,
including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the right:
1. To the exclusive management, organization, and administrative control of the District and
its properties and facilities;
2. To direct the work of its Employees, and determine the kinds and levels of services to be
provided and the methods and means of providing those services including entering into
Agreements with private vendors for services;
3. To hire all Employees, and subject to the provisions of law, to determine their qualiﬁcations
and the condition for continued employment;
4. To establish educational policies, goals and objectives; to ensure rights and educational
opportunities of students; to determine stafﬁng patterns, to determine the number,
deployment and kinds of personnel required in order to maintain the efﬁciency of District
operations; and
5. To build, move or modify facilities; establish budget procedures and determine budgetary
allocation.

7

ARTICLE IV - EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

4-1 Probationary Period
The ﬁrst twelve (12) calendar months of employment for an Employee (regardless of work year, i.e.,
12 months, 11 months, or 10 months) will be a probationary period. The twelve (12) month
probationary period will begin on the Employee's ﬁrst day of work. During the probationary period,
the Board will have the sole and absolute right to discipline, suspend or dismiss an Employee for
any reason, with or without just cause. Re-employment and discipline of a probationary Employee
are not subject to the grievance procedure in Article VIII.

4-2 Discipline
A. Discipline and Dismissal
Suspension without pay and dismissal from employment for disciplinary reasons will be for just
cause. This provision does not apply to dismissal or changes in employment status which occur for
non-disciplinary reasons, such as a reduction in force.
Employee discipline will, in the usual case, follow progressive discipline concepts, with the
disciplinary steps being:
1. Verbal warning and/or written reprimand, depending on the severity of the incident as
determined by the administration
2. Suspension without pay
3. Discharge
The disciplinary steps may be used and initiated at the appropriate level within the context of any
initiating incident or set of behaviors deemed inappropriate. All disciplinary action will remain in
the Employee's personnel ﬁle and be considered, as appropriate, if and when future incidents occur.
Where, in the Superintendent's or designee's judgment, the circumstances of a particular case
and/or the seriousness of a particular offense make the application of progressive discipline
inappropriate, the appropriate disciplinary step to be used will be determined by the
Superintendent or designee. As related to Employee discipline, only suspension without pay and
discharge are subject to the Grievance Procedure in Article VIII.

8

B.

Right of Representation

Employees will have the right to be accompanied by an Association representative at any
investigatory interview. An investigatory interview is a meeting called by the Administration or the
Board for the purpose of questioning an Employee to obtain information and the Employee
reasonably believes that discipline may result. It will be the responsibility of the Employee to
request a representative, and to ensure the representative's attendance. Evaluation meetings
and/or conferences are not considered disciplinary in nature and Employees are not entitled to an
Association representative at these meetings.
Any Employee required to attend a conference called for the purpose of written reprimand, suspen
sion or dismissal is entitled to be accompanied by an Association representative.

4-3 Seniority
The Board will maintain and furnish to the Association a bargaining unit seniority roster by
February 1 annually. As used in this Agreement "seniority" means continuous employment by the
Board. As long as Employees are employed in their position for the full work year, they will earn
one (1) year of seniority regardless of full-time or part-time status. (Seniority for an Employee
working less than the full work year for his/her position will be computed on a pro-rata basis.)
Seniority will not accrue during any leave-of-absence without pay. Seniority will not be interrupted
due to excused absence. No employee will lose seniority when transferring to a different position in
the bargaining unit.
Seniority categories are listed as follows:
1. Administrative Assistant Specialist – Administration Building, to include:
● Administrative Assistant Specialist for Teaching & Learning
● Administrative Assistant Specialist for Student Services
● Administrative Assistant Specialist for Purchasing/Transportation
2. Administrative Assistant – School Building, to include:
● 12-month Building Secretary
● 11-month Building Secretary
● 10-month Clerical Assistant (to include transportation and curriculum)
3. Building Technology Assistant, to include:
● 12-month BTA
● 11-month BTA
4. Facility Supervisor, to include:
● Facility Supervisor
● Maintenance Courier
9

5. Custodian
6. Nurse, to include:
● Building Nurse
● District Nurse
7. Health Assistant
8. Instructional Assistant
9. Kids' Corner Supervisor
10. Kids' Corner Assistant
11. Occupational Therapist
12. Physical Therapist
13. Board Certiﬁed Behavior Analyst
For the purpose of determining seniority an Employee's start date is synonymous with the ﬁrst date
of paid employment.
Ties in seniority will be broken by the date the Board took action to hire the Employees. If the
Employees have the same Board action date, the tie will be broken by the ﬁrst day on the job. In
the event there is still a tie, seniority will be broken by lottery.

4-4 Years of Service
For the purpose of determining years of service for beneﬁts which are not otherwise provided for
within the contract, a year of service credit will be granted on July 1 after the initial year of work
(provided no circumstances involving prolonged unpaid break in service.)If an Employee starts work
on or after July 1 and on or before December 1, the Employee will receive a ﬁrst year of service
credit for beneﬁts on the following July 1.
If an Employee starts work on or after December 2 or on or before June 30, the Employee will not
receive a ﬁrst year of service credit for beneﬁts until after completing the following work year.
For example:
1. If an Employee starts work on October 30, 2020, the Employee would receive the ﬁrst year
of service credit on July 1, 2021.
2. If an Employee starts work on February 1, 2020, the Employee would receive the ﬁrst year
of service credit on July 1, 2022.
3. For the purpose of determining service credit an Employee's start date is synonymous with
hire date.

10

4-5 Reduction in Force (RIF)
A. If it is necessary for the District to reduce the number of Employees, this reduction shall be
done according to Section 10-23.5 of the Illinois School Code. Probationary Employees will
be released ﬁrst, part-time Employees will be released second, and full-time Employees will
be released last in order of least senior to most senior.
B. The order in which vacancies are offered to honorably dismissed Employees shall be in
order of seniority within each category of position (most senior recalled ﬁrst) as set forth in
Section 4-3. Notices of all vacancies shall be sent by the District. Within the affected
category of position dismissed Employees being recalled will be contacted by the District
via the most recent and up-to-date email and phone number provided to the District by the
Employee. The Employee being recalled shall notify the District of acceptance of an
available job position within two (2) business days (e.g., if the District notiﬁes the Employee
on Monday, the Employee must respond to the District by the close of business on
Wednesday). If the Employee being offered the recall position does not accept within two
business days, the District may move to the next most senior Employee.

11

ARTICLE V - EVALUATIONS & FILES
5-1 Evaluations
Every Employee will be evaluated at least once every two (2) years. Such evaluation will be
completed by May 15. If the Board evaluates an Employee more than once every two (2) years, the
Board will notify the affected Employee. Evaluation is based on the premise that feedback is
essential for improvement in job performance. Evaluation is a continuing process of identifying and
monitoring behaviors which are related to successful performance. Throughout the evaluation
process, the administrator, immediate supervisor and Employee will work together in a cooperative
relationship and will focus on opportunities for improvement. Hearsay, unsubstantiated claims, or
anonymous communications shall not be part of the evaluation process. Employee evaluations are
not subject to the Grievance Procedure in Article VIII.
The positions of occupational therapist and physical therapist, nurses, and board certiﬁed behavior
analyst will be evaluated per the MPEA CBA as outlined in Section 4.4.
The District will meet with the Association for agreement prior to the implementation of any
changes to the above evaluation process. The content of the evaluation instrument shall be subject
to the discretion of the District with input from the Association.

5-2 Personnel Files
A. Only one personnel ﬁle shall be kept for each Employee in the District, and such ﬁle shall be
maintained by the Ofﬁce of the Superintendent. References to the sole personnel ﬁle will include
both hard copies and computer records. The individual Employee may have access, upon request
and at a mutually agreed time, and may add comment(s) to the ﬁle upon any of the material
contained therein. Any time a document is placed in the Employee’s ﬁle, the Employee shall
receive a copy of that document. However, routine onboarding records and records that are not
disciplinary, investigatory or evaluative records are not necessary to be automatically disclosed to
the Employee. Any Employee may request and receive a copy of such records at any time.
B. Any time a personnel ﬁle document is to be disclosed to the Employee, proof of such disclosure
shall be included in the ﬁle by either: (1) the Employee shall sign and date the written material
when shown; however, the signature will not necessarily indicate agreement; or (2) the District
shall include a copy of the email notiﬁcation to the Employee in the ﬁle. The Employee shall have
the right to attach dissenting material to any item in the ﬁle. If the general subject of a complaint

12

from a parent is not repeated from any source for a year, the complaint shall be removed from the
ofﬁcial ﬁle at the request of the Employee.
C. Administrators and principals shall take all reasonable precautions to ensure the conﬁdentiality
of employee records, positive documents or commendations, disciplinary notices, grievance
documents, and any other material not generally accessible to staff, parents, or members of the
community.
D. Anonymous communications may not be entered in the ofﬁcial personnel ﬁle.

13

ARTICLE VI - WORKING CONDITIONS

6-1

Employee Workday and Work Year

See Appendix A.
A. Variations in the annually approved School Calendar (e.g., staff institute days and half days)
may create ﬂuctuation in hours worked per week, which will be reﬂected in pay for
Employees compensated on an hourly basis. The supervising administrator may modify an
Employee's work schedule within the parameters of the "Paid Hours Per Week" column in
Appendix A (e.g., scheduling a custodian four IO-hour days per week instead of ﬁve 8-hour
days). If the duration of the schedule modiﬁcation will exceed one (1) work week, the
supervising administrator will provide Employees with notice of the modiﬁcation thirty (30)
days in advance. The supervising administrator may require Employees to work additional
hours when necessary.
B. Employees in the positions of Occupational Therapist, Physical Therapist, Board Certiﬁed
Behavior Analyst, and Nurses are paid on a salary basis. Employees in all other positions are
paid on an hourly basis.
C. With notice to the Association by May 1 prior to the winter break closure, the
Superintendent may close buildings during the week between Christmas and New Year's
Day for a maximum of three (3) workdays. Employees must declare by June 30 (via email to
Human Resources Coordinator) use of personal and/or vacation days during this closure or
the days will be designated as unpaid.
D. Employees will be given access to their assigned buildings for work related purposes.
Building administrators will facilitate an Employee’s access to a building at a time other
than the Employee’s scheduled work time.
E. Required Trainings:
a. All Employees will be given time during their normal workday to complete online
District-required trainings.
b. All Employees will participate in building-speciﬁc safety trainings. If a safety
training occurs at a time outside an Employee’s normal workday, the Employee will
be invited to the training and compensated at their regular rate of pay for
attendance. If the Employee is unable to attend the training outside of the
Employee’s normal workday, and it is not feasible for the District to replicate the
training during the Employee’s normal workday, the Employee will be provided with
an alternative training option during the Employee’s normal work hours.

14

6-2 Duty-Free Meal Break
See Appendix A.

6-3 Paid Breaks
All ESP Employees who work at least eight (8) paid hours per workday will receive two (2) ﬁfteen
(15) minute paid breaks per workday. Central ofﬁce and custodial Employees who work more than
four (4) paid hours but less than eight (8) hours per workday will receive one (1) ﬁfteen (15) minute
paid break per workday. Paid breaks may not be used to delay the start or accelerate the end of the
workday. Paid breaks are optional, but break time is lost if not utilized. Employees may combine
paid breaks to extend their lunch period.

6-4 Emergency School Closings
If the Superintendent or designee closes the District or speciﬁc building(s) due to an emergency,
the Superintendent or designee will determine which Employees are required to report to work.
Twelve-month Employees who are not required to report to work on-site will be paid for a normal
day’s work. Twelve-month Employees who are required to report to work on-site during an
emergency closing due to dangerous winter weather will be paid at 1.5 times their normal rate of
pay. Employees who are not required to report to work on-site during an emergency closing will be
permitted to work on-site with supervisor approval; in such cases, the Employee will be
compensated at their normal rate of pay. In the event a twelve-month Employee is required to
report to work on-site during an emergency closing and is unable to report to work, the Employee
may use personal days or vacation leave to avoid being "docked" pay for the day. For all other
Employees, a make-up day will be scheduled by the Superintendent or designee as the ﬁscal year
allows.

6-5 Paid Holidays
See Appendix A.
Holiday pay will be based on the Employee's normal workday and paid at the Employee’s normal
daily rate of pay, to include Instructional Assistant stipends (e.g. personal care and high need).

15

●
●
●

All ten (10) month Employees will receive nine (9) paid holidays.
All eleven (11) month Employees will receive ten (10) paid holidays.
All twelve (12) month Employees will receive sixteen (16) paid holidays.

Each year the District will designate which holidays are paid via distributed staff calendars.
To qualify for a paid holiday, an Employee must work on the last workday before the paid holiday
and the ﬁrst workday after the paid holiday, unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent or
designee.
If an Employee is sick on the day before or after a holiday, he/she may be required to furnish the
District with a doctor’s statement in order to receive holiday pay.
Regardless of calendar changes, there will be no diminishment in the total number of yearly paid
holidays.

6-6 Overtime
Overtime work is all work performed in excess of forty (40) hours per week. The "week" begins on
Sunday and ends on Saturday. Hours actually worked count toward the forty (40) hours. Paid leave
time (e.g., vacation, sick leave, personal leave, jury duty, etc.) and paid holidays count toward the
forty (40) hours.
No overtime will be performed by an Employee without prior, speciﬁc written authorization by the
supervising administrator or designee. Overtime may be assigned at the discretion of the
supervising administrator.
Overtime is paid at "time and one-half' of an Employee's hourly rate.

6-7 Vacancies, Transfers & New Positions
Vacancies
The Board has the right to determine whether to ﬁll Employee vacancies as they occur. A vacancy is
deﬁned as a position within the bargaining unit that is unﬁlled, including newly created positions,
after all Employees have been assigned. If the Board chooses to ﬁll a vacancy, a vacancy notice will
be posted by email to all Employees. Any Employee interested in transferring to the open position

16

must apply for the position as described in the posting. All postings will be held open internally for
ﬁve (5) business days, except in emergency situations. Current Employees who apply for a vacancy
will receive an interview, except in emergency situations. The Board will consider performance,
ability, and the best interest of the District when ﬁlling a vacancy.
Emergency Situations
In an emergency situation, the District can immediately ﬁll any emergency vacancy for a maximum
of thirty (30) workdays. During this time the District will post the vacant position. After the thirty
(30) workdays, the District will ﬁll the position through a new hire, voluntary transfer, or
involuntary transfer.
Voluntary Tranfers
Voluntary transfers are those transfers that are requested by the Employee or otherwise freely
accepted by the Employee.
Involuntary Transfers
It will be within the District's inherent managerial authority to involuntarily transfer Employees
within the bargaining unit.
An involuntary transfer pursuant to this Section is deﬁned as the reassignment of an Employee
member from one job to another anywhere in the District. Should it become necessary to transfer
Employees, the following procedure will be followed:
1. Volunteers will ﬁrst be requested. If more volunteers apply than are necessary for a transfer,
the District will select the applicant based on the most qualiﬁed Employee.
2. Involuntary transfers will be decided based on the Superintendent's determination of the
most qualiﬁed Employee to ﬁll the position.
3. In the case of an involuntary transfer due to a mid-year separation or additional staff need,
the District will make a good-faith effort to return the Employee to their original position
except where the best interest of the students requires otherwise as determined by the
District.

6-8 Additional Work
A. Summer Work Opportunities
1. Summer work opportunities will be offered to ten or eleven-month Employees
currently working in the same job position as the summer work opportunity. If there
are not enough positions to accommodate interested Employees working in the
17

same job position, stafﬁng decisions for the summer work will be based on
performance and any ties will be broken by seniority. If an insufﬁcient number of
Employees currently working in the same job position volunteer for the available
summer work, the Board will post the vacancies to all other Employees and external
applicants.
2. Employees who perform summer work will be paid at their regular rate of pay or the
new hire rate of pay for the summer job position, whichever is higher.
3. Twelve-month Employees will continue to work their normal job position at their
normal rate of pay during summer months.
B. Additional Work for Salaried Employee
Salaried Employees who are exempt from the Fair Labor Standards Act when
performing work directed by the Superintendent or his/her designee on days not on
the regular school calendar (weekends, and winter, spring or summer breaks) will be
paid at the curricular rate of pay as deﬁned in Section 5-13 of the MPEA contract.

6-9 Extra Duty Stipend Assignments
1. Once certiﬁed staff have been given right of ﬁrst refusal for extra duty stipend assignments
(consistent with the Mount Prospect Education Association (MPEA) Agreement), the District
will post open extra duty stipend assignments internally for ﬁve (5) working days. The
District reserves the right to assign any and all extra duty stipend assignments.
2. Any Employee who performs extra duty/stipend work outside of his/her normal workday
will be paid in accordance with the MPEA Agreement if the work is ongoing. If the
District-requested work is occasional and temporary, an Employee will be paid at his/her
regular rate of pay via a timesheet.
3. When an Employee is unable to fulﬁll an extra duty assignment due to an extended leave of
absence of the assignment, a prorated adjustment will be made to their stipend.

6-10 Classroom Subbing
Employees who are directed by an administrator to substitute teach will be paid at the rate of
$36/hour to be paid in 15-minute increments by time sheet.

18

6-11 Electronic Access
1. Employees will be provided a District-issued email account and access to the District
computer network. Employees are not required or expected to check their email or perform
District work on an electronic device during non-working hours.
2. The District will ensure every Employee has access to a District computer which is located
in a secure and private location (e.g. staff lounge or staff work room).
3. An Employee may request the District provide a personal computing device for work
purposes. If the District is unable to accommodate the request, the District will provide a
written explanation for the denial of the request to the Employee and the Association.
4. When an Employee separates from the District, the Employee will return all District-issued
personal computing devices to the District.

6-12 Travel Compensation
A. For Employees other than the District Nurse, expenses for regularly assigned in-district
travel shall be reimbursed on an annual basis for within workday travel between schools as
follows
2 schools each workday - 5 days a week $255
2 schools each workday - 4 days a week $205
2 schools each workday - 3 days a week $155
2 schools each workday - 2 days a week $105
2 schools each workday - 1 day a week $55
3 schools each workday - 5 days a week $305
3 schools each workday - 4 days a week $255
3 schools each workday - 3 days a week $205
3 schools each workday - 2 days a week $155
3 schools each workday - 1 day a week $105
4 schools each workday - 5 days a week $355
4 schools each workday - 4 days a week $305
4 schools each workday - 3 days a week $255
4 schools each workday - 2 days a week $205
4 schools each workday - 1 day a week $155

19

B. Employees required to travel during the workday shall be allowed to travel exclusive of
planning time and lunchtime.
C. Travel expenses, when approved in advance, shall be reimbursed in accord with IRS
regulations in effect at the start of each contract year.
D. The District Nurse shall receive $255 annually as a travel stipend.

6-13 Custodial Maintenance Work Uniforms
Custodial Maintenance Employees are eligible to receive ﬁve (5) complete uniforms consisting of
shirts and pants each ﬁscal year (July 1 to June 30). After the regular student attendance school
year is completed, custodial maintenance employees are required to wear their uniform shirt and
are allowed to wear pants or shorts of their choosing.
Custodial maintenance employees may request in writing the District purchase additional apparel
items necessary for the completion of their duties, including protective footwear, and such requests
shall be granted at the discretion of the District. Employee notiﬁcation of approval, denial, or the
need for additional time of an Employee request will occur within ﬁve (5) working days of the
request. If a request is denied, the District will provide the Employee and Association with written
notiﬁcation of the reason for the denial.

6-14 Emergency Call-in
If an Employee is called into work on-site for emergency reasons at a time other than their normal
workday, they shall be guaranteed a minimum of three (3) hours pay at 1.5 times their regular rate
of pay.

6-15 Safety in the Workplace
1. The Board recognizes its obligation to maintain a safe and healthy environment in
compliance with applicable law. In the event that Employees should become aware of an
unsafe or hazardous condition, they should report it to administration.
2. Employees shall be provided a copy of the District’s crisis intervention plan within the ﬁrst
two (2) weeks of the school year or the date of hire. This may be in written or electronic

20

format. The administration shall review the plan annually with Employees and any changes
made will be shared with Employees in printed or electronic format.
3. The District will maintain and publish a District and building emergency plan in conjunction
with the Village of Mount Prospect. This may be in written or electronic format.
4. Employees who experience any type of fall or injury should report the incident to the
school ofﬁce and ﬁll out an injury report as soon as possible.
5. Employees have the rights as referenced in the Student Code of Conduct located in the
District Handbook, which is updated annually by a committee of administrators, MPEA, and
the Association and approved by the Board of Education.

6-16 Mentor Program
The District and the Association are committed to the mentorship of our Employees. The mentor
program will minimally include four (4) hourly Employees who are identiﬁed as Mentors by an
application process. The Association and the District will create the responsibilities of Mentors,
and each Mentor will be paid an extra duty stipend of $600/year.

6-17 Continuing Education Funding
1. Only Occupational Therapists, Physical Therapists, Nurses, and Board Certiﬁed Behavior
Analysts (BCBA) are eligible to receive District funding for continuing education
reimbursement. To receive District funding, the Employee must:
a. Receive prior approval from the District
b. Demonstrate the proposed continuing education coursework is directly tied to
maintaining the Employee’s professional licensure.
2. If funding is not approved by the District, the District will provide a written rationale to the
Association and Employee with the reason(s) for the denial.
3. Occupational Therapists, Physical Therapists, Nurses, and Board Certiﬁed Behavior Analysts
(BCBA) will be reimbursed for annual professional organizational dues up to $50.

21

ARTICLE VII - LEAVES
7-1 County Paid Leave Ordinance Waiver
The Parties to this Agreement have negotiated various leave beneﬁts, including but not limited to
sick leave, personal leave, bereavement leave and vacation leave. The parties do not wish to adopt
or incorporate any other forms of leave. The parties fully waive all requirements of the Cook
County PAID Leave Ordinance, which they have reviewed with the assistance of counsel.

7-2 Leave - Sick/Personal Leave
A. Deﬁnition of Sick/Personal Leave
1. Sick leave may be used for personal illness, quarantine at home, serious illness or
death in the immediate family or household, for birth, adoption or placement for
adoption, or as otherwise deﬁned by the Illinois School Code. The deﬁnition of
"immediate family" includes parents, spouses and partners in a legally recognized
civil union, brothers, sisters, children, grandparents, grandchildren, parents-in-law,
brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, and legal guardians.
Sick leave for birth is limited to thirty (30) workdays, unless otherwise certiﬁed by a
physician. Sick leave for adoption or placement for adoption is limited to thirty (30)
workdays.
2. Personal leave days may be used for any purpose including sick leave, with the
exception of “blackout” workdays which require Superintendent or designee special
approval. A blackout workday is the day immediately before or immediately after a
holiday, winter break, spring break, or Thanksgiving break. Examples of blackout
workday events which require special approval from the Superintendent or designee
in order for an Employee to receive paid personal leave, include but are not limited
to the following:
emergency events (such as burst pipes), uncontrollable
circumstances, attendance at a religious occasion, wedding, graduation, college
move-in/move-out, or funeral not covered by bereavement leave.
3. Sick/Personal leave days must be taken in one-half (1/2) day or full day increments.

22

B. Annual Allocation of Sick/Personal Leave
1. The following schedule applies to sick leave and personal leave allocation for all
twelve (12) month and eleven (11) month Employees who qualify for IMRF:
Years of Service
1
2
3
4
5
6+

Sick Leave
10
11
12
13
14
15

Days Per Year
Personal Leave
3
3
3
3
4
4

Total
13
14
15
16
18
19

2. The following schedule applies to sick leave and personal leave allocation for all
ten (10) month Employees who qualify for IMRF.
Years of Service
1 -4
5-9
10 +

Sick Leave
12
14
15

Days Per Year
Personal Leave
2
4
4

Total
14
18
19

C. Notiﬁcation of Use of Sick/Personal Leave
Employees will submit an absence using the District’s absence management
system as soon as possible. In the event an Employee is unable to access the
absence management system, the Employee must contact their administrator
or designee before the Employee is scheduled to report to work.

D. Documentation of Sick Leave
The District may require documentation from a physician licensed to practice medicine, or a
properly authorized physician assistant, as a basis for pay during sick leave after an absence
of three (3) consecutive days for personal illness or injury, or as it may deem necessary in
other cases.
E. Unused Sick/Personal Leave

23

Unused sick/personal leave days may be accumulated to a maximum carryover of two
hundred and forty (240) sick leave days.
F. Proration of Sick/Personal Leave
1. A full-time Employee who is hired after the start of the work year for his/her
position will receive a prorated amount of sick/personal leave days equal to the
percentage of workdays remaining in the Employee's work year.
2. Sick/personal leave days will be prorated for Employees who do not work full time.
G. Sick/Personal Leave During a Leave of Absence
Employees will not accrue sick/personal leave while on a leave of absence.

7-3 Leave - Vacation
Each twelve (12) month Employee will receive vacation days based on years of service in
accordance with the following:
Years of
Service
1 -5
6 - 10
11 +

Days Per Year
10
15
20

Vacation days must be taken in one-half (½) day or full day increments. Vacation leave must be
approved by the Employee's immediate supervisor at least ten (10) days in advance of the proposed
vacation.
During the ﬁrst year of employment in a twelve (12) month position and until an Employee has
worked a full ﬁscal year (July 1 through June 30), each twelve (12) month Employee will accrue two
and one-half (2 ½) days of vacation every three (3) months. For example, an Employee who begins
employment on March 1, 2024, will accrue vacation days at a rate of two and one-half (2 ½) days
every three (3) months until July I, 2025.
During the summer months of nonstudent attendance (excluding ESY), custodians may not take
more than six (6) vacation days except with Superintendent or his/her designee approval.

24

Vacation days may not be carried forward to the following year. Vacation days, however, from one
ﬁscal year can be used through July of the subsequent ﬁscal year (e.g. an Employee with three
unused vacation days on June 30, 2025 may use those three days through July 31, 2025)

7-4 Leave - Military Obligation
Absence for involuntary military service will be granted. The Employee's seniority in position and
other beneﬁts in the school system will continue during military service. Upon release from military
service, the Employee will be returned to his or her original position or an equivalent position, and
receive compensation of equal remuneration, provided such application is made within the time
limits then in effect under federal law.
Pursuant to Section 8-2, this Section of the Agreement is not subject to the grievance procedure.

7-5 Leave - Jury Duty
In the event an Employee is selected to serve on a jury during the school year, the Board will
continue to pay the Employee's regular rate of pay for the period the Employee is on jury duty.

7-6 Leave for Part-Time Employees
Part-time Employees qualifying for beneﬁt leave must take such leave in accordance with their
regularly scheduled workday. Scheduled workdays will not be altered in lieu of leave time.

7-7 Leave - Catastrophic
In the event of a catastrophic illness, (deﬁned as a prolonged, serious, personal illness, afﬂiction, or
incapacitation requiring veriﬁcation via medical documentation) and upon written application to
the Superintendent for use of catastrophic leave, Employees may use additional sick days which are
granted by the Board of Education immediately after the depletion of their own personal/sick and
vacation days. Employees are eligible for catastrophic leave after two years of employment with
the District. Eligible Employees may request up to one hundred (100) workdays per event. The
Superintendent and the Association President will jointly recommend approval or denial of each
request. In the event the Superintendent and Association President cannot come to consensus, the
request will be heard by the Board of Education for ﬁnal determination.
25

7-8 Leave - Bereavement
In addition to sick leave, an Employee shall be allowed, at his/her option, up to three (3)
bereavement days per occurrence without loss of pay for an absence due to death in the immediate
family or an individual sharing the Employee's residence on a permanent basis.
For purposes of this Section, immediate family is deﬁned as parents, spouse, brothers, sisters,
children, aunts/uncles, nieces/nephews, grandparents, cousins, grandparents-in-law, grandchildren,
parents-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, daughters-in-law, sons-in-law, party to a civil union
as deﬁned by Illinois law and legal guardians (of and for).
An Employee shall be permitted to use sick leave days for the purpose of essential traveling
obligations directly related to the death causing the use of such sick leave for bereavement.

7-9 Leave - Family and Medical Leave (FMLA)
The following is a synopsis of FMLA law.
contractual beneﬁts provided to Employees.

This language does not diminish or replace any

A. Full-time Employees are eligible for medical and/or family leave in accordance with the
provisions in the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) IL PA 102-0335, and Illinois School
Code. Such leave is available to a full-time Employee who has been employed for at least
one year and has at least 1,000 hours of service with the Board during the previous twelve
(12) months. FMLA leave is unpaid unless accumulated sick leave or personal leave is
available. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the Employee from use of accumulated
sick leave as provided for in this Agreement during the FMLA leave. The Board of Education
may require the use of available sick leave and personal leave during FMLA leave. The total
FMLA leave, paid or unpaid under this provision, cannot exceed twelve (12) weeks during
any ﬁscal year (July 1 through June 30), except where longer leaves are provided under the
FMLA for certain military related reasons. A written medical certiﬁcation may be required,
and a second medical opinion may be requested and paid for by the Board of Education.
The FMLA leave should be requested thirty (30) days in advance of the ﬁrst day of absence
for the leave or as soon as reasonably practicable.

26

The following reasons are eligible for FMLA leave:
1. the birth of a child and to care for the newborn child, provided the leave is completed no
later than twelve (12) months after the birth of the child;
2. the placement of a child with the Employee for adoption or foster care, provided the leave
is completed no later than twelve (12) months after the placement of the child;
3. because the Employee is needed to care for the Employee’s spouse, child under 18 years old
(unless the child has a mental or physical disability and is incapable of self-care), or parent,
with a serious health condition; or
4. the treatment of a serious health condition that makes the Employee unable to perform the
functions of the job.

B. An Employee on FMLA leave will continue to be covered under the District’s health and
dental insurance plans under the same terms as if the Employee had been continuously
working during the leave period, provided that:
1. Coverage shall end when the Employee notiﬁes the District of their intent not to
return to work, fails to return on the scheduled date or exhausts their FMLA leave
rights under this provision;
2. The Employee will be required to pay their share of applicable premium payments
at the same time as such payments would be made if by payroll deductions.
Coverage may lapse if an Employee’s premium payment is more than thirty (30) days
late;
3. The District may recover its premium cost if the Employee fails to return to work
following an approved, unpaid leave unless the reason for the failure to return is a
serious health condition of the Employee, spouse, parent or child or other
circumstance beyond the Employee’s control. In this event, the District may require a
certiﬁcation of the existence of a serious health condition which the Employee must
provide within thirty (30) days of the request.

C. Upon conclusion of an FMLA leave, the Employee will be restored to their former position
or to an equivalent position as established by school board policies and practices and this
Agreement (with respect to pay, beneﬁts and other terms and conditions of employment)

27

with any general pay increases or beneﬁt enhancements granted during the leave, provided
that:
1. An Employee will be required to submit a physician’s release prior to returning from
a personal medical leave;
2. An Employee returning from FMLA leave has no greater rights to a position than
had he/she been continuously working during the leave period (e.g. in case of RIF);
3. Where the Employee seeks an intermittent/reduced schedule medical leave, the
District may temporarily transfer the Employee to an available alternative position
with equivalent pay and beneﬁts for which the Employee is qualiﬁed if the transfer
better accommodates the requested recurring periods of leave; and
4. An Employee on an approved FMLA leave may not perform work for another
educational employer during the leave.

28

ARTICLE VIII - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

8-1 General Deﬁnition of Grievance
A grievance is deﬁned as a complaint by any Employee in the bargaining unit based on an event or
condition that is claimed to be or considered a violation, misinterpretation, or misapplication of
this Agreement.

8-2 Additional Deﬁnitions and Understandings About the Grievance Process
A. It is agreed that no grievance will be presented hereunder which occurred prior to the
effective date of this Agreement.
B. A grievance may be withdrawn at any level without establishing precedent.
C. The failure of the aggrieved to act within the time limits set forth will preclude further
appeal of the grievance.
D. Time limits set forth in this procedure may be extended by mutual agreement.
E. Days are deﬁned as days the District Ofﬁce is open.
F. Re-employment or discharge of probationary Employees 1s not a proper subject for
grievances under the Grievance Procedure (non-retention).
G. Matters covered by statute and governmental agencies are not subject to the Grievance
Procedure.

29

8-3 Procedural Requirements for Filing a Grievance
The parties acknowledge that it is most advantageous that an Employee and his or her immediate
supervisor resolve problems through free and informal communication. If, however, this process
does not resolve the issue(s) to the satisfaction of both parties, a grievance may be processed as
follows:
Step 1
The grievant or the grievant and the Association will present a written statement of the
alleged violation and remedy requested to the appropriate supervising administrator within
ﬁfteen (15) days of the alleged violation. The administrator will, within ten (10) days of the
receipt of the grievance, confer with the grievant and/or his/her representative to try to
resolve the grievance. Within ten (10) days after the completion of the conference, the
administrator will give his/her written decision. A copy of this decision will be given to the
grievant and to the Association.
Step 2
In the event the grievance has not been resolved at Step 1, the Association may appeal to
the Superintendent or designee. The appeal will be made within ten (10) days after the
receipt of the administrator's Step 1 decision. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the
appeal, the Superintendent or designee will confer with the grievant or the grievant and the
Association in an effort to resolve the grievance. The Superintendent or designee, within
ten (10) days following the conference, will ﬁle his/her written decision with the grievant
and the Association.
Step 3
If the grievance is not resolved satisfactorily at Step 2, the Association may advance the
grievance to binding arbitration. The Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service ("FMCS")
will act as the administrator of the proceedings. In the event FMCS is, in the opinion of the
parties to this agreement, unable to administer the proceedings, the parties agree to utilize
the services of the American Arbitration Association (AAA) and proceed under the rules of
the AAA. The demand for arbitration must be submitted in writing to the Superintendent
within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the Step 2 decision. The parties may agree on a
mutually selected arbitrator within seven (7) days ofreceipt of the demand. If the parties fail
to reach agreement on an arbitrator within seven (7) days, the grievance will be submitted
to FMCS and the parties will select an arbitrator using the striking method. The Association
will be responsible for the initial FMCS fee. Each party may request one (1) new panel
30

during the arbitrator selection process and the other party will agree. The party requesting
the new panel will be responsible for the fee associated with a new panel. Each party will
bear the cost of its representation in the arbitration. Both parties will share the cost of the
arbitrator.
The arbitrator's decision will not amend, modify, nullify, ignore, or add to the provisions of
this Agreement. The arbitrator's authority will be strictly limited to deciding only the issue
or issues presented to him/her in writing by the Board and Association. The decision must
be based solely upon the arbitrator's interpretation of the meaning or application of the
express relevant language of the Agreement.

31

ARTICLE IX - COMPENSATION
9-1 Wages
1. New Employees will receive the starting wage for the appropriate wage category
a. Year one starting wages (beginning July 1, 2024) are listed as follows:
●

●

●

Category A = $22.50/hour. Includes:
○

District Ofﬁce Administrative Assistants.

○

Facility Supervisors

○

Purchasing Agent

○

Maintenance Courier

Category B and C = $21/hour. Includes:
○

BTA

○

Custodian

○

Secretary

Category D = $19.50/hour. Includes:
○

Clerical Assistants

○

Kids’ Corner Supervisors

●

Category E = $18.70/hour (Kids’ Corner Assistants)

●

Category F = $18.80/hour (Instructional Assistants and Health Assistant)

●

Category G = $30/hour

●

○

1,295 FTE hrs/yr for Building Nurse

○

1,387.5 FTE hrs/yr for District Nurse

Category H = $61.19/hour (1,281 FTE hrs/yr for OT, PT & BCBA). Starting
wages for the BCBA in 2024-25 will be $60/hour. In 2025-26 the BCBA
starting wages will be the same as for all Employees in this category.

32

b. Beginning July 1, 2025, and continuing every July 1 thereafter, starting wages will
yearly increase at half the rate (50%) of the yearly wage increase.
c. Hard to Staff Positions: After ﬁrst consulting with the Association, the District may
increase a new Employee’s starting salary in the amount of 1% per year of
experience up to a maximum of 5%.
2. Longevity (to be allocated in 2024-25 year)
a. Longevity Bands
●

1-5 Years Worked in District = $0.05 for each year worked (years 1-5)

●

6-10 Years Worked in District = $0.15 for each year worked (years 1-10)

●

11+ Years Worked in District = $0.17 for each year worked (years 1-15,
maximum of 15 years credit)

b. If an Employee is hired by April 1, the year will count as part of the longevity pay.
Prior to the ﬁrst payroll distribution occurring during year one of this Agreement,
the District and Association will meet to conﬁrm appropriate longevity band
placement for each Employee.
3. Yearly Wage Increase for Existing Employees
a. 2024-2025
follows:

2%. Pay retroactive to July 1, 2024. Wages will be calculated as

●

STEP ONE. Calculations for wages of existing Employees will be based upon
the new base rate of pay or the Employee’s 2023-24 rate of pay, whichever is
higher.

●

STEP TWO. Calculations for longevity (listed in 9-1.2 above) will be added to
existing Employee rate of pay as shown in step one above.

●

STEP THREE. Calculations for 2% increase will be added to Employee rate of
pay as shown in step two above.

b. 2025-2026

3.25%

c. 2026-2027

3%

d. 2027-2028

3%

e. 2028-2029

2.5%

33

4. Employees starting work between April 1 and June 30 of any ﬁscal year (beginning in 2025)
will receive the new hire rate of pay increase on July 1 (which is the start of the next ﬁscal
year.) After the affected Employee has worked a complete ﬁscal year, the Employee will
receive subsequent negotiated yearly wage increases consistent with this Agreement.
5. If an Employee moves between job categories the Employee’s salary will be increased or
decreased by the percent difference of the two base salaries or be matched to the starting
wage of the new job category, whichever is higher.
6. All salary increases for the 2024-2025 school year for all Employees will be retroactive to
July 1, 2024.

9-2. Stipends
A. Translation Service Stipend
If a Building Administrator requests that an Employee provide language translation services
during his/her regular workday, the Employee will be paid an additional ﬁfty cents ($.50)
per minute for language translation services.
If a Building Administrator requests that an Employee provide language translation services
outside of his/her regular workday, the Employee will be paid at his/her normal rate of pay
or thirty dollars ($30.00) per hour, whichever is higher.
B. Custodian Stipend
A stipend of $2,000 will be paid annually to the Custodian designated to be a middle school
Lead Night Custodian. The assignment of Lead Night Custodian will be assigned at the
discretion of the Superintendent and is not subject to the grievance procedure. For an
Employee in the position for less than the full ﬁscal year, the stipend will be prorated
accordingly.
C. Instructional Assistant Stipends
1. High Needs/Personal Care Stipend
a. Received by either:

34

1. Instructional Assistants assigned as a 1:1 on a regular basis and who
have duties that require them to provide “personal care” to students
that includes performing one of more of the following duties at least
three times per week; catheterization, diapering, tube feeding, oral
feeding, oxygen monitoring, body repositioning/turning/lifting, and
toileting (beyond support typical for the child’s age/grade)
2. Instructional Assistants assigned to provide services for special
education students in high needs classrooms which include all Early
Childhood and SOAR programs.
b. Employees will receive the high needs/personal care stipend of an
additional $1.50/hour beyond the Employee’s base rate of pay.
2. Instructional Assistant Stipends are included in the Employee’s normal rate of pay
as used for contractual beneﬁts (e.g. sick leave, personal leave, paid holidays).
3. Reassignments
a. If an Instructional Assistant receives a stipend and is involuntarily
reassigned during the school year to a position without a stipend, the
Employee will retain the stipend for thirty (30) calendar days.
b. If an Instructional Assistant receives a stipend and voluntarily transfers to a
non-stipend position during the school year, the Employee will not retain
the stipend.

9-3 Special Increments
The Board may award special increments to Employees for special duties, services, or competencies
pre approved by the Superintendent.

9-4 Payroll
Pay will be on the 15th and ﬁnal day of the month. In the event the payday falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or a day when the District's Business Ofﬁce is not open, the pay will be issued on the
business day prior thereto.
Employee pay and standard payroll deductions (e.g., income taxes, health insurance premiums and
IMRF contributions) will be equalized over the Employee's work year, as follows:
35

1. Twelve (12) month Employees will be paid over 24 pays with the ﬁrst payment on July
15 and the last payment on June 30.
2. Ten (10) and Eleven (11) month Employees will be paid over 24 pays with the ﬁrst
payment on August 31 and the last payment on August 15. The ﬁrst pay period of the new
school year (August 31) will reﬂect any new pay increase.
All hourly Employees are required to submit timesheets if there is a deviation from the normal
work schedule (e.g., additional/reduced hours or certiﬁed substitutions). These adjustments will be
processed by the Business Ofﬁce in accordance with the annual payroll schedule.
Payroll will be directly deposited into the bank account designated by the Employee at no charge
to the Employee.
No later than May 15 of each year, the District will provide every Employee with a statement which
includes the Employee’s anticipated hourly wage, anticipated annualized pay, and anticipated
equalized pay calculation for the following school year.

9-5 Final Pay
Final pay shall be in the form of a direct deposit. The ﬁnal pay is calculated by counting the
number of days worked times the daily rate minus what has previously been paid (based on a ﬁscal
year July through June). For Employees who receive vacation days, vacation days earned but not
used will be paid at the Employee’s regular daily rate of pay.

9-6 Insurance Eligibility
A. The District will provide health insurance and other insurance beneﬁts as set forth in this
Article 9-5 for Employees who are employed by the District thirty (30) hours or more per
week, which will include a medical, dental, and prescription drug plan. The terms and
conditions of the plan(s) and the contribution rates shall be equivalent to those set forth in
the MPEA CBA. The MPEA health insurance plan(s) and rates will be the basic plan(s) for all
Employees in this Agreement and may change from time to time as determined during
negotiation of the MPEA CBA.

36

B. All insurance coverage will begin the ﬁrst day of the ﬁrst full month of employment and
will end on the last day of the month in which the Employee separates from the District.
C. The District will pay the cost of an individual $50,000 life insurance policy. This life
insurance coverage is subject to the speciﬁc requirements of the carrier.
D. The District will make available a Flexible Beneﬁt Plan (IRS 125) as set forth in the MPEA
CBA and may change from time to time as determined during negotiation of the MPEA CBA.
E. Individuals may not continue insurance coverage with the District after retirement except as
required by law.
F. The District 57 Insurance Committee representing all Employees covered by the District's
health insurance, the administration and the Board of Education will confer to develop
recommendations for plan design and premium changes. Each representative will have one
vote on committee recommendations. Such recommendations will require approval by the
MPEA President, the MPESPA President and the Board of Education, and will be
communicated to Employees within 30 days of notiﬁcation by carrier.

37

ARTICLE X - EFFECT OF AGREEMENT
10-1 Savings Clause
Should any article, section, or clause of this Agreement be declared illegal by a court of competent
jurisdiction, then that article, section, or clause will be deleted from this Agreement to the extent
that it violates the law. The remaining articles, sections and clauses will remain in full force and
effect.

10-2 Complete Understanding
The terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement represent the full and complete
understanding between the parties. The terms and conditions may be modiﬁed only through
written mutual consent of the parties. The Association and the Board retain all rights granted to
both by the IELRA.

10-3 No Strike Clause
The Association will not strike during the life of this Agreement.

10-4 Negotiations
In the year in which the Agreement is due to expire, negotiations for a successor agreement will
begin within sixty (60) days from the receipt of a request by either the Board or the Association to
commence negotiations.

38

Appendix A
`

40

Appendix B

41
