It is expected that a Quorum of the Administration Committee, Board of Public Works, and Common Council will be
attending this meeting: (although it is not expected that any official action of any of those bodies will be taken)

CITY OF MENASHA
PERSONNEL COMMITTEE
First Floor Conference Room
100 Main Street, Menasha
March 4, 2019
7:00 PM
Or immediately following the Board of Public Works
AGENDA
A. CALL TO ORDER
B. ROLL CALL
C. MINUTES TO APPROVE
1. Personnel Committee, 1/21/19
D. DISCUSSION/ACTION ITEMS
1. Tentative Agreement between City of Menasha and Menasha Professional Policy
Union, January 1, 2019 – December 31, 2020.
E. ADJOURNMENT

"Menasha is committed to its diverse population. Our Non-English speaking population and those with disabilities
are invited to contact the Menasha City Clerk at 967-3603 24-hours in advance of the meeting for the City to
arrange special accommodations."

CITY OF MENASHA
PERSONNEL COMMITTEE
First Floor Conference Room
100 Main Street, Menasha
January 21, 2019
MINUTES

DRAFT

A. CALL TO ORDER
Meeting called to order by Chairman Ted Grade at 8:00 p.m.
B. ROLL CALL
PRESENT: Aldermen Rebecca Nichols, James Taylor, Stan Sevenich, Mark Langdon,
Steve Krueger, Tom Grade, Ted Grade, Randy Ropella, Mayor Merkes.
ALSO PRESENT: CA Captain, PC Styka, ASD Jacobs, PHD McKenney, LD Lenz,
Clerk Galeazzi.
C. MINUTES TO APPROVE
1. Personnel Committee, 1/7/19
Moved by Ald. Krueger seconded by Ald. Sevenich to approve minutes.
Motion carried on voice vote.
D. DISCUSSION/ACTION ITEMS
1. FICA Alternative Retirement Plan/Precision Retirement Group
ASD Jacobs explained a fringe benefit program by Precision Retirement Group that can be
offered to employees that work under 1200 hours annually and are not eligible for Wisconsin
Retirement benefits. Instead of the employee and employer each paying 6.2% of wages to
Social Security, the employee could contribute 7.5%, pre-taxed, into a retirement program
through Precision Retirement Group. The employer (City) would not be required to contribute
to Social Security for the employee. ASD Jacobs estimates a $15,000 to $31,000 annual
savings in the City’s share of social security taxes. The alternative plan would be mandatory
for new or returning employees who are not presently active employees and it would be
optional for existing active employees. Cities of Neenah and Appleton offer this program to
their part-time and temporary employees.
LD Lenz stated she has mentioned this program to some of the part-time employees at the
Library, and they showed an interest in taking advantage of the program.
PC Styka stated some of the part-time employees at the Police Department may elect to opt
out of the program, since it would not be as much of a benefit to them.
PHD McKenney stated her concern of recruiting and retaining qualified part-time people in
the Health field since many of them only want part-time employment and are expecting
social security benefits.
CA Captain mentioned the impact of not paying into social security for those who may qualify
for disability benefits.
Moved by Mayor Merkes seconded by Ald. Ted Grade to approve the City of Menasha
continuing in the traditional Social Security Administration program without participation in
the FICA Alternative Retirement Plan.

Personnel Committee Minutes
January 21, 2019
Page 2

DRAFT

General discussion ensued on:
 impact to employees’ retirement and social security benefits;
 manipulating the system;
 employees impacted by this change;
 may be detrimental to retaining qualified employees;
 treating all employees fairly;
 some people rely on social security benefits.
Motion fails on roll call 4-5.
Ald. Nichols, Krueger, Ropella, Mayor Merkes voted yes.
Ald. Taylor, Sevenich, Langdon, Tom Grade, Ted Grade voted no.
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Langdon to approve City of Menasha participating
in FICA Alternative Retirement Plan/Precision Retirement Group.
General discussion ensued on offering the employee the option to opt out of the alternative
plan.
Moved by Ald. Nichols seconded by Ald. Sevenich to amend, to include an effective date of
March 2019 and the ability to opt out of the alternative plan.
Motion on amendment carried on roll call 8-1. Mayor Merkes voted no.
Motion as amended failed on roll call 3-6.
Ald. Taylor, Sevenich, Langdon voted yes.
Ald. Nichols, Krueger, Tom Grade, Ted Grade, Ropella, Mayor Merkes voted no.
E. ADJOURNMENT
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Langdon adjourn at 8:56 p.m.
Motion carried on voice vote.
Deborah A. Galeazzi, WCMC
City Clerk

DATE:

February 26, 2019

TO:

Members of the Personnel Committee

FROM:

City Attorney Pam Captain, Administrative Director John Jacob and
Police Chief Tim Styka

RE:

Tentative Contract Agreement for Contract Years 2019-2020 with
WPPA/LEER Local 602 the Menasha Professional Police Union

We are pleased to announce a tentative agreement with Local 602, the Menasha
Professional Police Union for a 2 year extension of the contract with the City of
Menasha. A copy of the entire tentative agreement is attached to this memo.
The following is a brief summary of the major points to the agreement:
Duration:
2 year contract commencing 1/1/2019 and expiring on 12/31/2020.
Wages:
2019: 2% wage increase effective 4/7/2019, 1% wage increase effective
10/6/2019
2020: 3% wage increase effective 12/29/2019
The overall impact of this agreement on wages in the first year equates to a cost
2.25%, which corresponds to the budgeted amount. The 3% increase will be
offset by an increase in the amount employees will pay in health insurance
premiums.
Vest Incentive – Physical Fitness Incentive
The current language which pays 1% to officers who certify they have worn their
body armor will be removed. In its place, a voluntary physical fitness incentive
will be created. Officers who choose to participate in this incentive will be paid
$1,400 upon successful completion of the testing. Officers who have achieved
full employment status prior to 1/1/2019 will have the option to elect not to
participate in the program and if they certify they have worn their body armor
during the year will be paid $500.
Physical fitness programs are becoming more popular in law enforcement due to
the tremendous benefit to both the employees and the employer. Studies have

430 First Street ● Menasha, Wisconsin 54952-3143 ● Phone (920) 967-3500 ● Fax (920) 967-5145
www.menashapolice.org

shown that 50% of police officers have 3 of 5 major risk factors for coronary heart
disease. Promoting physical fitness throughout an officers career can reduce
absenteeism, lower health insurance costs and increase the life expectancy of
officers in retirement.

Health Insurance Premiums
Members will contribute 8% to their health insurance premiums in 2019 and 10%
in 2020. Currently other City employees pay 7.5% of the health insurance
premium.
Compensatory Time
The amount of time which can be booked in a year would increase from 50 to
150 hours. However, only 50 of those hours can be carried over and those hours
can only be used for time off and they are not eligible for payout in a subsequent
year.
Grievance / Arbitration Process
The timeframes included in the grievance and arbitration processes will be
changed to 10 days for all steps in the procedures. This was done to simplify the
process and avoid any confusion with different timeframes in each step.
Conclusion
We believe this agreement represents a fair and equitable result that fairly treats
both the City and the Union.
