AGREEMENT
BY AND BETWEEN
THE BOARD OF CLEARCREEK TOWNSHIP TRUSTEES
AND

OHIO PATROLMEN'S BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION
(SERGEANTS)
FROM

JANUARY 1, 2021
THROUGH

DECEMBER 31, 2023

01/25/2021
2482-02
20-MED-10-1189
39913

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TITLE
PREAMBLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE

PAGE
3

1
2
3
4
5
6

7
8
9

10
11

12
13

14
15
16
17
18

19
20

21
22

23
24
25
26
27
28
29

30

31
32
33
34

35

RECOGNITION...................................................
INTEGRITY OF AGREEMENT ·······················--···
MANAGEMENT'S RIGHTS············- ················•·EMPLOYEE'S RESPONSIBILITY............................
NO STRIKES••·····························--··········•····- ·····
NON-DISCRIMINATION..................................... .
DUES DEDUCTION.............................................
PROBATIONARY PERIOD·······-····················.......
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE...................................
DISCIPLINE .......................................................
EDUCATION···-·················-···························-·
HOLIDAYS..........................................................
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME .................. ..
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE ·······················--···.......
SHIFTS
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE .................................... ..
WAGES................- ...........................,........ .,.....
SENIORITY ........................................................
LAYOFFS AND RECALL .......................................
VACATION............... ..................................... ,.. ..
MEDICAL AND LIFE INSURANCE.........................
SAVINGS CLAUSE...............................................
SICK LEAVE··- ··•·••························•···•················
CALL·IN AND COURT TIME.................................
USE OF LEAVE ................................................. .
PERSONAL DAY LEAVE.......................................
OPBA REPRESENTATION................................... .
REIMBURSEMENT ............................................
PERSONNEL FILES .............................................
OCCUPATIONAL INJURY LEAVE
ALCOHOL AND DRUG TESTING POLICY ............ .
SUBCONTRACTING............................................
PHYSICAL FITNESS AND WELLNESS................... .
PAST PRACTICE..................................................
TERMS OF AGREEMENT ...................................

3
3
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
9
10
11
13
13

15
15
16
16
16
17
18

19
19
21
22
22
23
23
24
25
26
33

33
34
34

2

PREAMBLE
This Agreement is entered into by and between the Trustees ofClearcreek Township, hereinafter
referred to as "the Township", and the Ohio Patrolman's Benevolent Association, hereinafter
referred to as "the Union" or the OPBA.

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
SECTION 1.1- RECOGNITION
The Township recognizes the Union as the so le and exclusive representative &nd bargaining agent
of all foll-time police sergeant employees of the Department as set forth in the certification of
the State Employment Relations Board in Case umber 201 l-REP-09-0080 for purpose of
col'lective bargaining with respect to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of
employment.

SECTION 1.2 - MALE PRONOUN
Whenever the male pronoun or adjective is used in this Agreement, it shall be deemed to also
include the female, unless otherwise indicated.

ARTICLE2
INTEGRITY OF AGREEMENT
SECTION 2.1 - SUPERSEDES ALL PREVIOUS AGREEMENTS
The Township and the Union agree that the tenns aud provisions contained in this written
Agreement cohstitute the entire agreement between the parties and supersede all previous
communications, understandings, or memoranda of understandings, pertaining to any matters set
forth in this Agreement, or to any other matter. This Agreement expresses alJ obligations and
restrictions imposed on each of the respective parties during its term. Any Memorandum of
Understanding not renewed with this Agreement is null and void.

SECTION 2.2 - INTEGRITY
The Township and the Union agree that during the negotiations which preceded this Agreement,
each party had the unlimited right to make any demands or proposals and to bargain about each
and every proposal made. The results of such negotiations are contained herein .

3

ARTICLE 3
MANAGEMENT'S RIGHTS
SECilON3.1-MANAGEMENTS RIGH1S

The Township shall retain a11 of the rights, powers and authority vested in it prior to the date or
this Agreement. Unless the Township has specifically set forth in this Agreement a limitation upon
the Township's or the Police Chiefs right or duty to manage the Police Department, the Township
shall retain all rights imposed upon it by law, to carry out the admin istration ofthe Township and
the Police Department. The right to manage shall include, but not be limited to:
A.

The right to dfrect, supervise, hire, promote, demote, suspend, discipline, or
discharge, for just cause; transfer, assign, schedule and retain employees.

B.

The right to relieve employees from duty and determine the number ofpersonnel
needed in the Police Department, or to perform any function; determine the
services to be rendered, the operation to be perfonned, utilization of technology,
and overall budgetary matter.

C.

The right to purchase equipment, material or services, or to contract for services
if necessary for the efficient management ofthe Police Department.

D.

The right to determine the appropriate job duties and personnel by which
operations are to be conducted; determine the overall mission of the Police
Department; maintain and approve the efficiency and effectiveness of the Police
Department, and the Township.

E.

The right to make teasonable rules to regulate the Police Department, and to
establish and amend policies and procedures, and necessary rules relating to the
operation of the P0lice Department in regard to any matter.

F.

The right to take any necessary actions to carry out the mission of the Police
Department and to take whatever actions may be necessary to carry out the wishes
ofthe public not otherwise specified above.

G.

The right to determine equipment to be used; the processes, techniques, methods
and means of operations, schedules of shifts and working hours, maintain and
amend occupational classifications and job descriptions and establish working
rules, regulations, policies and procedures governing the conduct ofthe employees.

H.

The power to determine the geographical location of Township facilities, to
establish new units and relocate or eliminate existing units or facilities in part or in
total.

I.

The authority to assign shifts and duties.
4

J.

The right to determine the methods, means and number of personnel needed to
carry out Departmental responsibilities.

K.

The right to take such actions as may be necessary to carry out services as
determined by the Township or the Chief of Police and/or his designee.

L.

The right to introduce new or improved methods, operations, equipment of facilities.

M.

The right to schedule overtime work as required.

N.

The right to determine the need for additional educational coui:-ses, lTaining
programs, on-the-job training and cross-training.

The parties agree where a management right is listed more than once such listings are interchangeable.

SECTION 3.2 - EXTENT OF MODIFIED RIGHTS
Where the rights, powers, and authority itemized above are modified or limited by the terms and
provisions of this Agreement, they shall only be modified or limited to the extent specifically
provided herein.

ARTICLE 4
EMPLOYEE'S RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION 4.1-EMPLOYEE'S RESPONSIBILITY
The Union recognizes that the delivery of services in the most efficient and effective manner is
of paramount importance and interest to both the Township and the Union. Maximum service to
the community is recognized to be a mutual desire of both parties within their respective roles
and responsibilities. Work procedures, schedules, and assignments for improving services may
be established and/or revised from time to time, in accordance with the management rights
provision of this Agreement, so long as no right guaranteed under the Agreement is violated.
Each employee covered by the Agreement has the primary responsibility to render the utmost in
efficient service to the Police Department and the Township.

ARTICLES
NO STRIKES
SECTION SJ - NO STRIKES
The Union agrees that during the term of this Agreement, there shall be no strikes, work stoppages,
slow-downs, picketing, job actions, including any concerted activity. Union officers, stewards, and
employee representatives will continue to carry out their duties as employees and will take positive
action to bring the concerted activity to an end.

5

ARTICLE6
NON-DJSCRIMINATION
SECTION 6.1 - NON-DISCRIMINATION

The Township and the Union agree that there should be no discrimination against any employee
relating to employment on the basis of race, color, creed, national origin, age, sex or disability.
The parties further agree that there shall be no discrimination in regard to membership or nonmembership in the Union or because of participation or non-participation in any lawful activity
on behalf ofthe Union.
ARTICLE7
DUES DEDUCTION
SECTION 7.1 - MEMBERSHIP

The Township agrees to deduct OPBA membership dues and fees in the amount certified to be
correct by the OPBA to the Township from the pay ofthose employees who are in the bargaining
unit. The Township agrees also to deduct OPBA initiation fees and assessments in an amount
certified to be correct by the OPBA to the Township from the pay ofappropriate OPBA members.

SECTION 7.2 - DEDUCTIONS

One twenty-sixth (1 h6) ofthe total, annual deduction shall be made from each pay period, which
results in an equal amount being withheld during each pay period. The Township agrees to
furnish the OPBA office in North Royalton, Ohio once each calendar month, a check in the
aggregate amount ofthe deductions made for that calendar month together with a list ofmembers
from whom deductions were made.
SECTION 7.3 - TOWNSHIP HARMLESS FOR DUES DEDUCTION

The OPBA agrees to hold the Township harmless from all claims or lawsuits arising out of
deduction of such dues.
SECTION 7.4 -TERMlNATION OF PAYMENT

The Township shall be relieved from making such individual deductions upon an employee's: ( /)
termination of employment, (2) transfer to a job other than the one covered by the bargaining
unit, (3) layoff from work, (4) any pay period during which the employee does not earn enough
wages for the OPBA dues to be deducted after all other deductions are made.

6

ARTICLES
PROBATIONARY PERIOD
SECTION 8.J - PROMOTIONAL PRO BATJON
The probationary period for any promoted position within the bargaining unit shall be six (6)
months. The Chief of Police has authority to extend the probationary period beyond that period
for any employee for three (3) months increments, not to exceed six (6) months, if the Chief feels
additional time is necessary to sufficiently evaluate and/or to adequately train the employee for
the position promoted to. A new hired supervisor not currently employed by the Clearcreek
Township Police Department, shall have a probationary period of not less than six. (6) months
and at the option of the Chief, up to but not more than one (I) year.
ARTICLE9
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
SECTION 9.1 - DEFINITION AND STEPS
A. DEFIN1TION:

A grievance is defined as an allegation that the terms of this written
Agreement have been violated. Resolution of grievances shall be pursued
in accordance with the following steps:
STEPI

An employee who has a grievance may discuss the grievance with his or her immediate supervisor
if an oral discussion may be conducive to resolving the matter. An oral discussion will, however,
not relieve the employee from the obligation of filing a written grievance within the time period
set forth herein. A grievance shall be reduced to writing and set forth the details of the grievance
(i.e., the facts upQn JJJhich it is based, the app1vximatc time ofthe occumnce, the reliefor remetjy requested),
and shall be submitted to the immediate superv isor within ten (JO} calendar days after the
grievance, became known or should have been known. The day following the date of the
occurrence or discovery of occurrence shall be considered the first day of the ten (LO) day period.
The immediate supervisor should give a response in writing to the Grievant within five (5)
calendar days after the grievance was presented.

STEP2
If the grievance is not resolved at STEP l to the satisfaction of the Grievant it shall be presented
by the Grievant to the Chief of Police (or designee) within five (5) calendar days of the decision
of the immediate supervisor. If the immediate supervisor has failed to respond -to STEP I the
grievance must be submitted to the Chief of Police (or dmgnee) within ten (/0) calendar days of
the date it was submitted to Step L The Chief of Police (or dcsig11ec), after conferring with the
Assistant Administrator should respond in writing within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date
of the receipl of the grievance.

7

STEP3
Should the Grievant after receiving the written response to their grievance at STEP 2 of this
procedure still feel that the grievance has not been resolved satisfactorily, then the grievant may
appeal in writing within ftve (5) calendar days to the Township Administrator. The Township
Admini!;itrator shall respond in writing within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the
grievance.

STEP4
Should an employee/grievant, after rece-iving lhe written response to the grievance at STEP 3 of
the Grievance Procedure still fee l lhat the grievance bas not been resolved to his or her satisfaction
may, through the OPBA, move the grievance to be heard by an Arbitrator. The OPBA shall notify
the Trustees of the intent to arbitrate within fifteen days of receipt of the written response from
STEP 3 . Within fifteen (15) days following the Trustees receipt of the OPBA's notification for
arbitration, the Trustees and a OPBA representative will attempt to select ru1 impartial arbitrator
by mutual agreement. Jf no agreement is reached, a joint letter will be issued requesting the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service to provide a list of nine (9) arbitrators. Upon receipt of such
list, the OPBA and the Trustees shall alternately cross off one name until one name remains, that
person being selected as Arbitrator. A date will be set as soon as possible in accordance with the
wishes of the Trustees, the OPBA, and the availability of the Arbitrator. The decision of the
Arbitrator shall be binding on all parties. The cost of the arbitration shall be equaJly shared by the
Township Trustees and the OPBA. The expense of expert witness shall be paid by the party
producing the same. The employee filing the grievance shall have the right to have representation
ofthe OPBA at any time after STEP 1 ofthe Grievance Procedure.

SECTION 9.2 - TIME LrMITS
The time limits imposed in this Article may be extended at any step by mutual written consent
ofthe parties in that step.
The time limit set forth in this grievance procedure may be waived by mutual agreement of the
parties in writing. Unless such time restrictions are waived, the.y shall be strictly applied. The
burden of complying with the time restrictions falls upon the grievant and the Union pursuing
the grievance. Failure by the grievant to comply with the time limits set forth in this procedure
shall result in the termination of the grievance. The events or acts of the Township giving rise to
the grievance shall be deemed to have been within the proper authority of the Township, and not
in violation of the terms of this Agreement. Failure on the part of any supervisor, the Chief of
Police (or de.~ignee), the Township Administrator, or the Trustees, to respond within the time
limits set forth in this Agreement, shall be the equivalent of a denial of the grievance, and shall
not be construed as a default or a granting ofthe reliefrequested.

SECTION 9.3 - CLASS ACTION
In any grievance filed by a class of employees, that class shall select one employee to represent
it.
8

SECTION 9.4 - EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATION
All grievances shall be brought exclusively through the union by its designated representatives.
The employees covered hereunder and the township shall be bound by any decision,
detenninations, agreements, or settlements which may be effectuated pursuant to invoking the
grievance-arbitration procedure including any detenn.inations as to the merits or arbitrability of
a grievance, as shall be made by the authorized representatives who are employees covered by
this Agreement handling the grievance provided however, that such determinations regarding
arbitrability or merits shall be made upon the facts with which the authorized representatives are
confronted.

SECTION 9.5 - GRIEVANCE AND/OR COMPLAINT RESOLUTION
With respect to grievances or complaints which arise under this Agreement, this Agreement is to be
used exclusively in the resolution of a grievance or complaint in Heu of the Township Complaint
Resolution Procedure described in the Employee Handbook.

ARTICLE to
DISCIPLINE
SECTION 10.1 -DJSCIPLINARY ACTION
The Township, or designee, may take disciplinary action against any employee covered by this
Agreement for just cause. The normal progression ofdiscipline shall be verbal reprimand (written
documentation), written reprimand, suspension, demotion, and tennination. Nothing -in this
Agreement shall restrict the right of the Township to impose any penalty, including temiination,
if the offense merits a greater pena]ty than the disciplinary steps set forth above. Employees
demoted pursuant to this Section shall not be eligible for promotion for a period of one ( 1) year
following the demotion .
The exclusive means of appeal of a suspension, demotion, or tennination shall be the grievance
procedure set forth in Article 9, and shall begin at Step 3. An employee who is disciplined under
this Article may waive the initial steps of the grievance procedure and proceed directly to Step 3
of the grievance procedure. Discipline less than a suspension may not be appealed beyond Step
3 of the grievance procedure.
The Chief shall approve all discipline regardless of the level of discipline. The Chief shall have the
authority to institute all levels of discipline up to and including termination without the approval
of and without a hearing before the Board of Trustees.

SECTION 10.2 - DISCIPLINARY PROCESS
When the Township, or designee, commences a disciplinary action that may result in a
suspension, demotion. or termination the following process shall be utilized:

9

(1) Pre-disciplinary Hearing.

A pre-disciplinary hearing shall be scheduled to detennine the merit of the allegations
against the employee. The pre-disciplinary hearing wiJI be conducted by the Chiefor his designee.
The Chief, or his designee, shall begin the pre-disciplinary hearing by informing the employee of
the charges against him. The pre-disciplinary hearing is not intended as an evidentiary hearing but
only as an opportunity for the employee to present his side of the facts and to prevent mistaken
initial detenninations ofthe employee's misconduct. The employee has the right to appear in person
at the pre-disciplinary hearing and to be represented by counsel or a union representative; provided,
however, that the employee's counsel or union representative shall not hinder the finding of facts
in any way. The Chief, or his designee, shall set a date for the pre-disciplinary hearing within
twenty-one (21) calendar days of the Chief receiving the investigation report, which. sets forth the
allegations against the employee. All time limits on the grievance procedure will be held in
abeyance pending the conclusion ofthis procedure. Any time prior to the pre-disciplinary hearing,
the employee may elect in writing to waive his opportunity to have a pre-disciplim~ry hearing. The
employee shall be given a copy ofthe investigation report, which sets forth the allegations against
him at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the pre•discrplinary hearing.
The Chief may issue discipline, up to and including termination, at the conclusion of the
disciplinary hearing or within seven (7) calendar days.
During the disciplinary process established in this Section, the Chiefmay, at his discretion, place
the employee who is subject to potential discipline on administrative leave, with or without pay,
until the conclusion of the disciplinary process. Administrative leave without pay will only be
used in circumstances where the employee is charged with a criminal offense.
ARTICLE 11
EDUCATION
SECTION 11.l - ANNOUNCEMENTS
Announcements for all pol ice training schools, seminars, classes or academies that come to the
attention of the Township shall be posted in a common location upon receipt for inspection by
full time employees.
SECTION 11.2 - MINIMUM
During each calendar year a minimum of sixteen (16) hours of continuing education at the
employee's choosing shall be available for each employee. Requests for continuing education
shall be submitted in writing to their immediate ranking supervisor as far in advance of the
training as possible. Such request shall incl.ude, all costs itemized with the greatest reasonable
accuracy. The Train ing Officer has the authority to determ inc the need for additional educational
coursl:!s, training programs, lm-lhc.::-jub Lrai11i11g aml l:russ l1ai11i11g.
The Chiefof Police may reject requests on the grounds offinancial restraints, inappropriate topic
or irreconcilable scheduling difficulties. Any employee who submits a request for schooling as
set forth in the above, and is denied, shall be notified in writing as to the reason.
10

Employees scheduled to work first shift on the day immediate]y prior to the scheduled training
shal1 upon request, have working hours for that day changed to allow at least eight and ha lf (8%)
hours off pr-ior to reporting for said training.
SECTION 11.3 - FAILURE TO SCHEDULE

Failure of the full time employee to submit a request for training prior to the fir t (MSS) of
November of each year may result in forfeiture of paid training.
SECTION 11.4 - EDUCATIONAL BENEFIT INCENT[VE

In the first pay period of December of each year, on a separate check from any other payment
due, qualified employees that have completed their one year probation will receive the following
benefit:
• Employees with an Associate's Degree will receive $600.00
• Employees with a Bachelor's Degree will receive $800.00
• Employees with a Master's or other post-graduate degree will receive $1 ,000.00
Proof of completion (i.e., a certificate or degree) must be received by December 1 of each year
to qualify for the educational benefit.
Employees are only eligible to receive a bonus for the highest level of education they have
attained, regardless of whether they hold more than one of the degrees mentioned above,
ARTICLE12
HOLIDAYS
SECTION 12.1-PAID HOLIDAYS

Employees shall be entitled to the additional pay described in this Article for the following
holidays du.ring the term of the Agreement:
l) NEW YEARS DAY, 2) DR. MART[N LUTHER KING, JR. DAY, 3) POLICE
MEMORIAL DAY (MAY 15TH), 4) MEMORIAL DAY 5) INDEPENDENCE DAY, 6)
LABOR DAY, 7) COLUMBUS DAY, 8) VETERANS DAY, 9) THANKSGIVING DAY,
10) CHRISTMAS DAY
SECTION 12.2 - HOLIDAY DURING VACATJON LEA VE

ff a holiday occurs while an employee is on vacation leave, such leave time will not be charged
against the employee's vacation balance.
SECTION 12.3 - WORKJNG HOLIDAYS

11

Holiday Shifts are defined as the shift that starts on the day of the Holiday. Shifts that are scheduled to
carry over into a holiday from the previous day are not Holiday Shifts. If an employee is required to
work on a holiday, that employee shall receive payment at the rate oftime and one-half (1 1/i) his
regular rate for each hour worked. Payment may be made in the form of cash or by award of
compensatory time, as requested. See ARTICLE 13, SECT[ON 3 . If an employee is required to
report early for a Holiday Shjft or required to hold over on a Holiday Shift, the employee will be paid 2.5
times the employee's regular rate of pay for those hours the employee is required to work before or after
the Holiday Shift.

In addition the employee shall receive e ight and a half (8.5) hours of holiday pay which will be
paid in cash.
If the employee calls in sick during the holiday that employee will lose the eight and a half (8.5)
hours ofholiday pay.

SECTION 12.4 - HOLJDAYON DAY OFF
Ifa holiday occurs on an employee's regularly scheduled offday, the employee shall receive eight
and a half (8.5) hours of holiday pay which will be paid in cash.

SECTION 12.5-HOLIDAY DURING UNPAID LEAVE
Employees on unpaid leave and laid-off employees shall not receive holiday pay.

SECTION 12.6- LOSS OF HOLIDAY PAY
An employee shall lose holiday pay if the employee is absent either on unapproved sick leave or
without leave on the employee's last scheduled working day before a holiday or the first scheduled
working day following a holiday. Tn the event the employee is sick on either or both days, the
employee must provide a doctor's excuse for the period ofthe absence in order to receive holiday
pay, An employee while on disciplinary suspension shall not be entitled to any holiday pay as
provided for in this Article.

SECTION 12.7 - HO LIDAV PAY - DEATH IN THE LINE OF DUTY
In the case ofthe death of an employee while in the Line of Duty, the unpaid holiday pay to the
credit of any such employe-e shall be paid to the- surviving spouse or the employee's estate.

12

ARTICLE 13
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME
SECTION 13.1 - HOURS OF WORK
The regular workweek shall consist of forty-two and one half (42 ½) hours. The regular pay period
shall consist often (JO) workdays.

SECTION 13.2 - OVERTIME PAY
Any employee working in excess of their regular schedule hours on an assigned shift will be
compensated at the rate ofone and one-half (1 1/JJ titnes their base rate for all such excess time. Any
employee who works on a normal scheduled day off shall be compensated at the rate of one and
one-half (1 1/J times of their base rate for all such time worked except where the parties agree that
the em ployee will work such day in exchange for another day off provided that day off comes before
the end of the pay period.
The Chief of Police has the right to make mandatory overtime assignments .

SECTION 13.3 - COMPENSATORY TIME
Any employee may waive SECTION 13.2 and receive compensation in the form ofcompensatory
time in lieu ofovertime pay. Compensatory time shall be ca'lculated the same as ove11ime pay. An
employee may accrue a maximum of sixty-eight (68) hours ofcompensatory time. Such time may
be taken in exchange for work time only in half (1/2) hour increments, and only after scheduling
by the Chief of Police (or designee).

SECTION 13.4 - DEATH OF AN OFFICER
In the case of the death of an employee while in the line of duty, unpaid ove1time and unused
compensatory time (cash payment) shall be paid to the surviving spouse or to the employee's
estate.

ARTICLE 14
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
SECTION 14.1 - UNIFORM FURNISHED TO NEW EMPLOYEES
The Township shall furnish or shall cont inue to furnish the appropriate seasonal uniforms and
equipment for all employees, excluding footwear. All un iforms remain the property of the
Township and must be turned in when an employee is separated from the Township service. The
Township will provide all necessary and appropriate dry cleaning services.

SECTION 14.2 - SCHEDULE - UNIFORM & EQUIPMENT ISSUED

13

I - Breast Badge ----------------------------------------------------------2
2 - Collar Brass -----------------------------------------------------------1 Set

3 - Name Plate --------------------------------------------------- l
4 - Shirts, Winter-----------------

-------------5

5 - Tie and Tie-Bar ------------------------------------------------1
6 - Jacket----------------------------------------------------------- 1
7 - Hat------------------------ -

---------------------1

8 - Shirts, Summer --------------------------------------------------------5
9 - Trousers ----------------------------------------------------------------5

10 - Hat Badge ------- - - - - - - - ------------1
11 - Hat Rain Cover ------------------------------------------------------- 1
12 - Rain Coat -----------------------~------------------- - - I

13 - Under Belt ---------------------------------------------- 1
14 - Gunbelt -------------------------------------------- I
15 - Holster ----------------------------------------------------- 1

16 - Handcuffs ----------------------------------------------------1 Pairs
17 - Handcuff Case------------------------------------1

18 - Magazine Pouch -----------------------------------------------------1
19 - Key Carrier------------------------------------------------------------1
20 - Semi-auto ------------------------------------------------------------1

2 1 - Body Armor with two (2) carriers ---------------------- I
22 - ASP Baton ------------------------------------------------ I
23 - ASP Carrying Case -------------------------- I

14

and any other uniform item or piece ofequipment as requiredby the Chiefof Police (or designee),

ARTICLE 15
SHIFTS
SECTION 15.1 - DEFINITION OF SffiFTS
The First (P) Shift shall begin between the hours ofl0:45 P.M. and l :00 A.M. each day. The Second
Shift shall begin eight (8) hours from the beginning ofthe First Shift and the Third Shift shall begin
in sixteen (16) hours from the beginning ofthe First Shift.

ARTICLE 16
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
SECTION 16.l - PAY FOR BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
Bereavement leave ofthree (3) days shall be paid to attend the funeral ofa member ofthe immediate
family. Proof ofdeath and relationship of the deceased MAY be requested.
The immediate fam ily is defined as: 1) SPOUSE, 2) PARENT, 3) PARENT-IN-LAW, 4)
STEP-PARENT, 5) GUARDIAN, 6) CHILD, 7) STEP-CHILD, 8) BROTHER, 9) SISTER,
10) HALF BROTHER, 11) HALF SISTER, 12) BROTHER-JN-LAW, 13) SISTER-IN~
LAW, 14) SPOUSE'S SIBLINGS, 15) SIBLING'S SPOUSES, 16) GRANDPARENT, 17)
GRANDPARENT-IN-LAW. Other RELATIVES living in the employee's household shall be
considered as immediate family.

SECTION 16.2-EXTENDED FAMILY
Bereavement leave of one (1) days shall be granted to attend the funeral of an I) AUNT, 2)
UNCLE, 3) AUNT-IN-LAW, and 4) UNCLE-fN-LA W.

SECTION 16.3 - EXTENDED LEAVE
Upon approval by the Chief of Police, bereavement leave in excess of required amount MAY be
charged to the etnployee's accrued leave balance, but before sick leave may be used, accrued
compensatory time must first be exhausted.

ARTICLE 17
WAGES
SECTION 17. 1 - ANNUAL WAGE RATE
The annual wage rates paid to sworn personnel covered by this Agreement are set forth below.

15

SECTION 17.2 - CURRENT WAGE SCALE (2021 THROUGH 2023)

JANUARY 2021

JANUARY 2022

JANUARY 202'.l

$92,041.54

$94,802.79

$97.646.88

$41.65HR

$42.90 HR

$44.18 HR

PROBATTONARY

$87,932.55

$90,570.52

$93,287.64

SERGEANT

$39.79 HR

$40.98 HR

$42.2 1 HR

SERGEANT

Annual increases will take effect on the first pay period in January ofeach contract year.

ARTICLE 18
SENIORITY
SECTION 18.1 - SENIORITY
Seniority shall be defined as the length ofcontinuous, permanent, full time employee's date ofhire.
Seniority shall not be available to employees during their probationary period, but shall be
retroactive to the date of hire upon successful completion of the probationary period. Seniority
shall be lost when an employee:
l234-

5-

Resigns;
Is discharged;
Is laid offand not recalled within one ( I) year;
ls offthe payroll for any reason whatsoever, except military service, for
one ( l ) calendar year; or
Is laid off by the Township for a period of their Township Seniority or one
(l) year, which ever period is less.

ARTICLE 19
LAYOFFS .AND RECALL
SECTION 19.1-LAYOFF
Layoffofemployees shall be made in the inverse orderofthe date when an employee first entered
into full time service with Clearcreek Township Police Department. If it is found that two or
more employees have the same starting date, then layoff order for the employees involved shall
be detennined by a review of performance evaluations.

SECTION 19.2 - RECALL

16

The Township shall establish a recall list for each classification in which a layoff has occurred.
The list shall consist of the names oflaid off employees in the inverse order of their layoff, with
the most recently laid offperson at the top ofthe list. Should the Township desire to fill a position
within the Police Department in a classification in which a recall line exists that position shall be
first offered to persons on the list in the inverse order of layoff, with the most recently laid off
person receiving the offer first. The position must be offered to every person on the list in
accordance with seniority before a new employee is hired.
SECTION 19.3 - RECALL PROCEDURE
Notice of recal I shall be sent to the employee by certified mail. The Employer shall be deemed
to have fulfilled its obligations by mailing the recall notice by certified mail, returned receipt
requested, to the last mailing address provided by the employee.
The recalled employee shall have ten (10) calendar days following the date ofreceipt ofthe recall
notice to notify the Chief of the intention to return to work is other wised specified in the notice.
It will be assumed that no response from the employee to a recall notice means the employee
does not wish to return to their position.
SECTION 19.4 - RECALL RIGHTS
Employees shall have recall rights for one ( 1) year from the date of layoff. Employees who
decline a recall offer may be removed from the recall list.
ARTICLE20
VACATION
SECTION20.J -VACATION SCHEDULE
Employees shall be entitled to paid vacation as follows:
1 - After one (1) year of service -

Two (2) weeks (85 hours)

2 - After five (~) years ofservice -

Three (3) weeks (127'Ii hours)

3 - After ten (1 OJ years of service -

Four (4} weeks (170 hours)

4 - After twenty (20) years ofservice Five (5) weeks (212 1Ii hours)
SECTION 20.2 - POSTING VACATION NOTICE

A vacation notice shall be posted during the first week ofJanuary ofeach year. Employees shall
apply for vacation leave within ten (10) working days from the date notice is posted. In cases of
coinciding requests the most senior employee shall prevail.
SECTION 20.3 - VACATION REQUEST AFTER VACATION SIGN UP
17

Every effort will be made to grant the vacation leave as requested by an employee. Need of the
Department may necessitate a change in an employee's vacation. When two (2) employees
request the same vacation periods after the January sign up period the earliest request received
shall prevail.

SECTION 20.4 - CARRY OVER
Up to five (5) days of unused vacation leave may be carried over to the employee's next
anniversary year.

SECTION 20.5- VACATION CONSIST OF
One (l) week of vacation leave shall consist of five (5) workdays.

SECTION 20.6 - DEATH OF EMPLOYEE
In the case of the death of an employee, the unused vacation leave to the credit of any such
employee shall be paid to the surviving spouse or to the employee's estate.

ARTICLE21
MEDICAL AND LIFE INSURANCE
SECTION 21.1 - COST TO TOWNSHIP
The Township shall pay eighty~five percent (85%) of the cost o f the premiums for hospital,
medical, dental, vision, prescription drug card, and life insurance for each employee and
dependents in the bargaining unit for the duration of this agreement.
For years 202 1 thru 2023, the Township will contribute seventy percent (70%) of the deductible
of the healthcare plan into each employee's Health Savings Account in pay period # I of the
calendar year.
Before March l of each year, the Township will convene a committee that shall include one (/)
member from the bargaining unit. The purpose of this committee will be to work with the
Township Administrator to evaluate health insurance options and to present a formal
recommendation of the committee to the Board ofTrustees prior to a decision being reached for
health insurance coverage benefits for the following plan year. This committee will continue to
meet each year thereafter and make recommendation to the Trustees prior to a decision being
reached on health insurance coverage for the following year.
The Township is committed to keeping substantially similar benefits for the members of the
bargaining unil, witl1 rt:spt:cl lu lulal out of pocket expenses, considering options for health
insurance carriers, plan design, and the potential for funding of a Health Reimbursement Accouol
and/or Health Savings Account, or the like, as it explores the possibility of transitioning to a
different form of health insurance.

18

SECTION 21.2 - HOSPITAL, MEDICAL, DENTAL, VISION, PRESCRIPTION DRUG
CARD AND LIFE INSURANCE
The Township shall provide hospital, medical, dental, vision, prescription drug card, and life
insurance as specifically described in the plan documents of the plan adopted by the Townsh ip.
SECTION 21.3 - TOWNSHIP AUTHORITY TO CHANGE INSURANCE CARRIER
The Township shal I continue to have the authority to change insurance carriers at any time, or to
institute a fu ll or quasi-self-insured plan, provided that the goal of such change is to reduce costs
while maintaining substantially similar benefit levels. The Township shall immediately notify
the Union prior to any change in carrier or benefits and will meet with representatives of the
bargaining unit to discuss such changes. In the event that the parties disagree with the proposed
changes, the parties agree to submit the issue to the Township Trustees for final determination.
ARTICLE22
SAVINGS CLAUSE
SECTION 22.1 - SAVINGS CLAUSE
Should a court of competent jurisdiction determine that a provision of th is Agreement is illegal
or unenforceable then such provision shall automatically tenninate. The remainder of the
Agreement shall continue in full force and effect. In the event that a provision is determined to
be unlawful, the Township and the Union shall promptly meet for the purpose of negotiating a
lawful alternative provision.
ARTICLE 23
SICK LEAVE
SECTION 23.1 - ACCUMULATION OF SICK LEAVE
For each completed eighty-five (85) hours in active pay status, exclusive of overtime, unpaid
leave ofabsence or disciplinary suspension, each employee earns 4.6 hours ofsick leave. (Active
pay status may be defined as hours worked, hours on approved pald leave, and hours on paid
sick leave). The amount of sick leave time any one (1) employee may accrue is sixteen hundred
fot1y (1640) hours. Sick leave for on-duty personnel shall be charged in minimum units of onehalf {1/2) hour; Off-duty personnel shall receive sick time in minimum units of one (1) hour.
Employees absent on sick leave shall be paid at the regular rate.
Employees are entitled to sell back up to forty-two and one-half hours (42 ½ hours) of accrued
(non-transferred) sick leave once annually. These funds may be received directly by check, or
may be direct deposited into Ohio Deferred Compensation's program, or employees' HSA
accounts by the Township, upon employees' individual direction.

SECTION 23.2 - TRANSFER OF SICK LEAVE
19

Upon submitting proper verification, by employee to Employer, employees who transfer between
departments (other than within Clearcreek Township), or agencies, or from other public
employment, or who are reappointed or reinstated within ten (10) years of prior public service
employment will be credited with one-fourth (114) of the accumulated hours of sick leave up to
a maximum of sixteen hundred forty (1640) hours.
Upon retirement from Employer service the bargaining unit member will be paid one-half (/12)
ofthe accumulated hours not to exceed a maximum of four hundred (400) hours. Upon separation
for any reason other than retirement, no sick leave pay out will occur.
For purposes ofthis section, retirement means that an employee has completed twelve ( 12) years
of credited service with the Ohio Public Employee Retirement System and has retired from
Clearcreek Township or is eligible to receive disability pension benefits from the Ohio Public
Employee Retirement System immediately following separation from employment with the
Clearcreek Township Police Department.
When an employee passes away while in active employment, the surviving spouse or others, as
spelled out in Section 2113.04 of the Ohio Revised Code, will be eligible to receive sick leave
payment for which the decedent would otherwise have qualified. Such payment shall be based
on the rate of pay ofthe employee at the time ofdeath.
SECTION 23.3 - GRANT OF SICK LEAVE
Sick leave may be granted to the employee upon request for the following reasons:
l lllness or injury ofthe employee or injury or illness ofthe employee's immediate
family where the employee's presence is reasonably necessary.
2Exposure of the employee or a member of the employee's immediate family to
a contagious disease which would have the potential of jeopardizing the health of the
employee or the health of others.
3-

Employee childbirth and or related medical conditions.

Nothing in this section shall be construed as to require the Chiefof Police to approve the use of
sick leave by an employee.
The Chiefof Police may investigate all usage of sick leave and may with just cause withhold full
payment of said sick leave until the investigation is completed.
Should the Chief of Police determine based on j ust cause that an employee has not used sick
leave properly, payment may be denied and the employee may be disciplined. Employees who
do not report for work due to sickness and who have exhausted their sick leave days are subject
to disciplinary action for being absent without approved leave. The Chief of Police is authorized
to approve leave without pay.

20

SECTION 23.4 - DOCUMENTATION
An employee absent on sick leave for more than two (2) days shall submit documentation from
a physician substantiating the reason for the leave ("documentation"). The Chief of Police has
authority to require employees to furnish documentation for any sick leave. Failure to submit
documentation as required may result in leave without pay and a deduction in the subsequent
payroll period; - refusal to submit documentation may be disciplined, up to and including
termination. The doctor's documentation should be forwarded to the Chiefof Police (or designee)
before the employee is permitted to return for work.

SECTION 23.5 - NOTIFICATION OF SICK LEA VE
An employee requesting sick leave shall notify to their immediate supervisor or other designated
person of the fact and the reason as far in advance as possible, but in no case later than two hours
prior to the beginning of a scheduled shift. Failure to do so may result in the em ployee not being
granted sick leave or being paid for any absences; the employee will also be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including termination.
Upon the employee's request, other accrued leave may be used as sick leave after sick leave is
exhausted.

SECTION 23.6 - FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT
All Family and Medical Leave Act leave will be granted and/or denied in accordance with the
prevailing Federal Law. Accrued paid leave shall run concurrent with Federal Family Leave time
where it is pennitted by the FMLA.

SECTION 23.7 - IMMEDIATE FAMILY
Immediate family, for purposes of the Article, shall be defined as: l) SPOUSE, 2) PARENT, 3)
CHILD, 4) STEPCHILD, and 5) ANY other relation living in the employee's household.

ARTICLE24
CALL-fN AND COURT TIME
SECTION 24.1 - CALL-IN
Employees who are required to come in to work or required to come in for training or mandatory
department meeting at a time not connected to their regular scheduled hours of work shall be
compensated at one and one-half(!½) times the regular hourly rate of pay with a minimum of
three (3) hours in pay or in compensatory time for such call-in. A second call-in within the two (2)
hour period shall be considered a continuation of the first call-in.

SECTION 24.2 - COURT TIME

21

Employees shall be given a minimum of three (3) hours at time and one half for work related court
appearances not connected to their regular scheduled hours of work. A work related court
appearance is an actual court appearance, tiling of a criminal charge, and/or meeting at the court
or prosecutor's office in preparation for trial. At the option of the employee, payment may be by
payroll or compensatory time. Compensatory time shall not exceed the maximum established in
ARTICLE 13, SECTION 3.
ARTICLE25
USEOFLEAVE
SECTION 25.1 • USE OF LEAVE
Employees shall use vacation and personal days only in eight and one half (81/2) hour increments.
Once an employee has reported to duty and is granted sick leave it shall be on an hour for hour
basis.
When an employee is requesting compensatory time while on-duty, the employee may request
approval for leave from the Chief of Police (or designee). Time off may be granted if minimum
staffing or other assignments will not be impacted by the request.
When an employee is requesting compensatory time while not on duty, the employee is required
to submit the proper request form forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the requested time. In the
event an employee wishes to request compensatory time and the employee has not requested the
compensatory time within the required forty-eight (48) hour period, the employee must provide
the name ofan employee who has agreed to cover the employee's shift for the period during which
the employee wishes to take compensatory time. The employee requesting compensatory time with
less than forty-eight (48) hours notice must first contact part-time employees to cover the shift. In
the event no part-time employee is available to cover the shift, the employee may then contact fulltime employees to cover the shift. The Township will comply with applicable Federal Law with
respect to the use ofcompensatory time.
ARTICLE26
PERSONAL DAY LEAVE
SECTION 26.l • PERSONAL DAY LEAVE
In each calenda•· year, an employee shall be credited with two (2) personal leave days per year. A
third personal day may be used in the calendar year and will be deducted from the employee's sick
leave hours. Unused personal days cannot be carried over to the next year and may not be paid out.
Personal time may be taken in half( 1/2) hour increments subject to the Chiefs prior approval and
according to depa1tmental policy.

22

ARTICLE27
OPBA REPRESENTATION
SECTION 27.1 - REASONABLE ACCESS
Access to the OPBA for the purpose of performance of rts representational duties shall not be
unreasonably withheld.

SECTION 27.2 - SELECTING A UNION REPRESENTATIVE
One (1) employee per bargaining unit will be selected by the union to act as union representative
for the purpose ofprocessing and investigating grievances under the grievance procedure and shall
be known as the Director. The Director may have an alternate who shall act in the Director's
absence.

SECTION 27.3 - DIRECTOR TO ADMINISTER THIS AGREEMENT
OPBA Director shall attend to the administration of this agreement (grievances and negotiation
sessions) on a no-loss/no gain basis.

ARTICLE28
REIMBURSEMENT
SECTION 28.1 - REIMBURSEMENT
Employees required to purchase meals by vhiue of a special department duty assignment outside of
Warren County and in noncontiguous counties shall be reimbursed at the following rates, subject to
prior approval by the Chiefof Police, and upon presentation of a receipt for such meals.

$12.00 breakfast or actual cost including tax and 15% tip
$14.00 lunch or actual cost including tax and 15% tip
$20.00 dinner or actual cost including tax and 15% tip

SECTION 28.2 -

COMB1NED REIMBURSEMENT

If an employee is required to purchase more than one meal per day, the employee may exceed the
individual allowance, but may not exceed the total amount allowed for the number of meals
purchased. The total amount allowed per day is forty-s ix ($46.00) dollars. lf an employee is
attending an eight (8) hour seminar/training and is within a seventy (70) mile radius, the employee
will be entitled to reimbursement for lunch only. Employees will be compensated for travel from
the police department to the training location or other destination as required by their duties, but
may be ordered to travel from home in order to avoid paying travel time. Employees who travel
from home and submit reimbursement will be reimbursed for mileage at the rate currently sel by
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
23

SECTION 28.3 - TRAVEL EXPENSE
Any employee who is req1.1ired to use their personal vehicle to conduct official police business
shall be compensated at the rate currently set by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The employee
will be compensated for the fo llowing travel expenses: parking expenses, highway tolls, and bridge
tolls.

SECTION 28.4 - TAXABLE COST REIMBURSEMENTS AND FRINGE BENEFITS
The Federal government considers certain cost reimbursements and other fringe benefits as part
of an employee's taxable income. Typical fringe benefits, such as health insurance, remain
nontaxable. However, certain travel, meal reimbursements and other, less common, benefits may
be considered taxable income to the employee. Clearcreek Township will always comply with
the requirements of federal law with respect to tax issues. Taxable income will be reported
annually on the employee's W-2 form. The Police Chief is responsible for marking
reimbursements forms as taxable or nontaxable. Travel expenses (including lodging, meals and
mileage) for overnight trips are nontaxable. Travel expenses for trips made on a single day are
taxable. If the Police Chief is unsure as to whether an expense is taxable or nontaxable, he/she
will consult the Office of the Township Administrator.

ARTICLE29
PERSONNEL FILES
SECTION 29.1 - ONE OFFICIAL FILE
There shall be one (I) official file which shall be kept in the Assistant Administrator's Office and
every employee shall be allowed to review their own personnel file at any reasonable time upon
written request to the Chief of Police or Assistant Administrator, during regular business hours.
Any employee may copy documents in their file.

SECTION 29.2 - RELEASE OF INFORMATION
The Police Department will not release personnel file records to persons, agencies, or entities
outside the Po lice Department other than its representatives unless required by state or federal law,
public records laws, regulation or court order to release files to such other persons, agencies or
entities.

SECTION 29.3 - ALLEGED INACCURACY
If upon examining their personnel file, any bargaining unit member believes that there are
iual:l:1.J1•acies in documents contained therein, the member may write a memorandum to the Chief of
Police explaining the alleged inaccuracy. The memorandum shall be placed in the personnel file and
attached to the documents containing the alleged inaccuracy.

SECTlON 29.4 - REMOVAL OF DISCIPLINE RECORDS
24

If twenty four (24) months have passed following discipline for a verbal or written reprimand,
and no intervening discipline has occurred, the verbal or written reprimand will not be relied upon to
detennine the appropriate level of discipline for a subsequent infraction .. In the case of a suspension or
demotion, if forty eight (48) months have passed with no intervening discipline, the suspension or demotion
will not be relied upon to detennine the appropriate level of discipline for a subsequent infraction. These
records will cease to have an effect on disciplinary matters after the time periods stated above.

ARTICLE30
OCCUPA TJONAL INJURY LEAVE
SECTION 30.1 - ELIGIBLE FOR INJURY LEAVE
An employee who suffers a service-connected injury or illness incurred in the course of and arising
out of employment with the Employer shall be eligible for injury leave upon the eighth (8th) day of
lost time. Injury )eave for seven (7) days or fewer days of lost time will be for medical claims only
pursuant to the rules and tegulations of the Bureau of Workers' Compensation, the employee may
utilize sick or other approved leave during this time. Injury leave shall be available upon the eighth
(8th) day for ninety (90) calendar days from the date of injury and any leave used shall be re-credited
to the employee's leave balance. After ninety (90) calendar days, the employee may utilize sick time
or other approved leave of absence to supplement Workers' Compensation benefits.

SECTION 30.2 - EXECUTION OF AGREEMENT
When an employee applies for injury leave with pay, he must execute an agreement assigning to
the Employer any such pay fo,m Workers' Compensation during the period of the paid leave and
all necessary fonns to process to appropriate claims with the Ohio Bureau of Workers'
Compensation. The Employer will issue a Check to the employee each pay period equivalent to
the employee's base wage for a pay period. Any payment from Workers' Compensation for a
covered claim during the above ninety (90) calendar day period shall be paid over to the Township.
When an employee and the Township disagree concerning an injury or illness, the employee may
utilize sick or other approved leave. Should the Industrial Commission rule favorably to the
employee, the Township shall re-credit the leave used and the Township shall be reirnbursed with
Workers' Compensation disability payment.

SECTION 30.3-REVIEW THE EMPLOYEE'S PHYSICAL AND MENTAL STATUS
The Chief of Police has the right to review the employee's physical and mental status each thirty
(30) days of absence in order to determine the member's ability to return to work. In the event of
a difference of opinion as to the emp loyee's mental or physical status between the employee's
physician and the Employer's physician, the issue shall be submitted to an Industrial Commission
Specialist whose decision shall be final and binding on both parties. The services of the third
physician shall be paid by the Emp loyer.

SECTION 30.4 - TIME LENGTH
25

The ninety (90) calendar day inj ury leave is available for each distinct, separate injury or illness.
Recurrence of the same injury/illness shall be charged to the original ninety (90) calendar days.

ARTICLE31
ALCOHOL AND DRUG TESTING POLICY
SECTION 31.l - PROHIBITING ACTIVITIES

All Employees are subject to this Article. All employees covered by this Article are prohibited
from engaging in the following:
A.

Reporting to duty, remaining on duty, or performing any function while having
any alcohol concentration; unless on official business with the prior approval of
the Chiefof Police;

B.

Reporting to duty, remaining on duty, or performing any function while using a
controlled substance (including prescription drugs, unless the physician has
advised Lhe employee thaL the substance does not adversely affect !he employee's
ability to function) or if the employee tests positive for controlled substances;

C.

Possessing alcohol while on duty, other than on official police business;

D.

Using alcohol or controlled substances while on duty;

E.

Performing any ftmctions within four (4) hours after using alcohol;

F.

Using alcohol for eight (8) hours following an accident in which the employee is
required to take a post-accident alcohol test or until the employee undergoes a
post-accident alcohol test, whichever occurs first;

G.

Refusing to submit to a post-accident, random, reasonable suspicion or follow-up
alcohol or controlled substance test.

SECTION 31.2 - REQUIRED TESTING
An employee will be requ ired to submit to testing for alcohol and/or controlled s ubstances under
the following circumstances:
A.

New Employee Testing: Prior to the first time an employee perfonns any
Township function, the employee will be tested for controlled substances. The
employee will not be permitted to perform any functions unless the conlrolled
substance test results arc negative.
The Township shall arrange the time and location for the new employee test. The
employee is responsible for reporting to the collection site for the test The
Township will be responsible for only the cost of the test itself. All other costs
26

incurred by the employee concerning a new employee test are entirely the
employee's responsibility.

B.

Po t-Ac ident Te ting: As soon as practicable following: (a) an employee who
suffers or causes an employee to suffer a service~connected injury or illness
(ncuJTed in the course of and arising out of employment with the Employer, (b)
an accident in which a fatality occurs, (a) an accident mwhich an injury is treated
away from the scene and the employee receives a citation for a moving violation
arising from the accident, (d) an accident in which a vehicle is required to be
towed from the scene and the employee receives a citation for a moving violation
arising from the accident, or (e) when an employee causes a vehicle accident; the
employee shall be tested for alcohol and controlled substances. The Township
shall cease attempts to administer the test eight (8) hours following the accident
for alcohol and after thirty-two (32) hours for controlled substances.
The employee shall be transported to the collection site by a representative of the
Township. Following the test, the employee shall be transported home and the
employee will not be permitted to perform any functions until a negative controlled
substance test result is reported.
Following a breath alcohol test which shows no detectable amount of alcohol, the
employee will be permitted to apply for accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal
leave, compensatory time, or unpaid leave to cover the period of absence until the
controlled substance test results are available. If the controlled substance test
results are negative, the employee will be credited for the used paid leave, or
compensated for the period of leave without pay at the employee's regular hourly
rate of pay, unless other work rule violation(s) have occurred.
Fol lowing a breath alcohol test which shows any detectable level of alcohol, the
employee will be taken home and permitted to apply for accumulated paid leave.
The employee may not perform any functions for a minimum of twenty-four (24)
hours. An employee with a breath alcohol test ofless than 0.04 shall also be subject
to appropriate disciplinary measures in accordance with the Township's Drug Free
Workplace Policy or other applicable policies.
Fallowing a breath alcohol test result indicating any concentration, or following
a positive controlled substance or illegal drug test result, if the employee's
employment is not terminated, the employee may request the use of accumulated
sick leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory tjme, or unpaid leave and the
consequences listed in Section 32.2 above will result.

C.

Random Testing: A minimum number of employees (currently JO %/hr alcohol
and 50% for controlled substances) annually will be randomly selected usjng a
scientifically valid method in which each employee will have an equal chance of
being tested each time selections are made. The dates for testing shall be
unannounced and spread throughout the calendar year. When an employee is
selected for testing, he shall cease doing their function and proceed to the test site
27

immediately. If an employee is randomly selected for an alcohol test and that
employee is not CutTently perfonning, just about to perform, or just finished
performing their Township function, the employee's selection may be kept
confidential until the next time that employee performs a Township function.
Fo llowing a breath alcohol test which shows any detectable level of alcohol, the
employee will be taken home and pennitted to apply for accumulated paid leave.
The employee may not perform any functions for a minimum of twenty-four (24)
hours. An employee with a breath alcohol test of less than 0.04 shall also be subject
to appropriate disciplinary measures in accordance with the Township's Drug Free
Work-place Policy or other applicable policies.
Following a breath alcohol test result indicating any concentration or following a
positive controlled substance test result, if the employee's employment is not
terminated, the employee may request the use of accumulated sick leave, vacation,
personal leave, compensatory time, or unpaid leave and the consequences listed in
Section 32.2 above will result.

D.

Reasonable Suspicion Testing: A trained supervisor or official may require an
employee to undergo testing for alcohol or controlled substances based upon specific,
contemporaneous, articulable observations concerning the appearance, behavior,
speech, or body odors of the employee. If an employee is required to undergo testing
under this section, the employee must immediately cease to perfonn their Township
function and he will be trcillsported to the collection site by a representative of the
Township. If an employee is required to undergo reasonable suspicion controlled
substance testing, such employee shall not be permitted to perfonn any Township
fimctions until a negative contro lled substance test result is reported. Following a
reasonable suspicion controlled substance test, the employee will be pennitted to
apply for accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory time, or
unpaid leave until the test results are available. Ifthe controlled substance test results
are negative and no other work rule violation(s) have occun-ed, the employee shall be
returned to his position and credited for his entire used paid leave or compensated
for the period ofleave without pay at the employee's regular hourly rate of pay.
Following a breath alcohol test which shows any detectable level of alcoho l, th.e
employee will be taken home and permitted to apply for accumulated paid leave.
The employee may not perform any Township functions for a minimum oftwentyfour (24) hours. An employee with a breath alcohol test of less than 0.04 shall also
be subject to appropriate disciplinary measures in accordance with the Township's
Drug Free Workplace Policy or other applicable policies.
f,ollowing a breath alcohol test result indicating any concentration or following n

positive controlled substance test result, if the employee's employment is not
terminated, the employee may request the use of accumulated sick leave, vacation,
personal leave, compensatory time, or unpaid leave and the consequences listed in
Sectio.n 32.2 above will result.
28

The Township will cease attempts to administer the test eight (8) hours after the
observation was made.
E.

Return- o-Outy Testing: Before an employee who has been found to be in
violation of the prohibitions section of this Article, set out in Section 32.1 , may
return to duty in a position requiring the performance of any functions, the
employee must undergo testing for alcohol and/or controlled substances. The
results of the alcohol test must show no concentration if the offense involved
alcohol and the controlled substance test must be negative if the offense involved
controlled substances. Any costs associated with this test will be the responsibility
of the employee at the time the test is administered.

F.

Follow- p Testing: When an employee has been found to be in violation of the
prohibitions section of this Article, set out in Section 32.1 , and the substance abuse
professional has determined that the employee needs assistance in resolving alcohol
or substance abuse problems, the employee will be subject to a minimum oftwo (2)
unannounced follow~up tests within the first twelve (12) months as directed by the
substance abuse professional. Any costs associated with this test will be the
responsibility oftbe ernployee at th.e time the test is administered.

SECTION 31. 3 - CONSEQUENCES
If an employee violates any of the prohibitions listed in Section 32.1 of this Article, the following
consequences will result:
A.

The employee may be disciplined for any acts committed while under the influence
of alcohol or a controlled substance in accordance with the disciplinary Article of
this contract. An employee who tests positive will be given an opportunity to
participate in a rehabilitation program. An employee shall be permitted only one
(1) chance at rehabilitation. Disciplinary conferences should be held within three
(3) days of the notification of an alleged violation, when possible.
If the emp loyee is not terminated, the employee may be required to app ly for
accumulated sick leave, vacation, pctsonal leave, and compensatory time, and
Family and Medical Leave, if applicable, to cover any period of absence. If the
employee does not have sufficient paid leave to cover the period of absence, the
employee must request unpajd leave in accordance with Township policy.

B.

The employee shal l be immediately removed (taken out of service) from any
Township function. Such removal is in accordance with federal regulations, and
therefore not subject to any grievance procedure the Township follows.

29

At the Township's discretion, an employee may be permitted to perform nonsafety sensitive functions, if the Township determines that such a position is
available. ff no such non~safety sensitive position is available, and no paid leave
is available, the employee can request an unpaid leave of absence (e.g. Family
and Medical Leave, disability leave, or other unpaid leave ofabsence).
C.

The employee shall be provided with information regarding the services available
for alcohol and substance abuse.

D.

The employee shall be evaluated by a substance abuse professional (SAP), and may
not perfonn any functions until all recommended counseling and treatment is
completed. These actions are in accordance with federal regulation, and therefore
not subject to any grievance procedure the Township follows. If the SAP does not
recommend any treatment or counseling then there shall be no further discipline
under this policy unless other provisions ofthis policy are violated or the employee
has a blood alcohol level greater than 0.04.
Failure to complete or participate in prescribed counseling rehabilitation program
shall result in the employee's termination. Any costs associated with the
prescribed counseling, treatment, or rehabilitation program are the responsibility
of the employee, unless otherwise covered by the Township-sponsored medical
benefit plan to which the employee participates.

E.

The employee will be subject to re-evaluation, return-to-duty testing and
unannounced follow-up tests for twelve (12) months following the member's
return to duty. These actions are in accordance with federal regulations, and
therefore not subject to any grievance procedure the Township follows.

SECTION 31.4 - REPORTING THE USE OF PRESCRIPTION/NON-PRESCRIPTION
MEDICINE
An employee is required to report the use of any prescription or non-prescription medicines
containing alcohol or any ofthe prohibited controlled substances listed in Section 32.5, below, to
their supervisor. At the time the medicatioh is prescribed, the employee shall inquire as to whether
the medication will impair the employee's ability to perform any functions. The employee shall be
required to produce a signed statement from the treating physician that any prescribed medication
containing alcohol. or a controlled substance (as defined in Section 32.5) does not impair the
employee's ability to perform any functions and/or does not interfere with the safe performance of
the employee's job.
Jf the treating physician determines that the medication will impair the employee's ability to
pcrfunu hi!> futtclions, al the Township's discretion, the employee may be permitted to perform
light duty (non-safety sensitive) functions, if the Township detennines that such a position is
available at that time. If no light duty is available, the employee will be permitted to use
accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory time, or unpaid leave to cover

30

the period ofabsence . The employee may also be required to follow the Township's PMLA pol icy
and procedures, if applicable, if the absence qualifies.

SECTION 31.5 - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Controlled substances for the purpose of this Article shall include all legal, illegal and prescription
drugs containing marijuana cocaine, opiates (e.g. codeine. morphine, etc.), PCP, and
amphetamines. All drug screening and confinnation tests shall be conducted by a laboratory
certified under the DHI JS "Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs 11•
The Township and the laboratory shall have a clear and well-documented procedure for collection,
shipment and accessing of urine specimens. The Township, the collection site, and the laboratory
shall fol low the procedures in 49 CFR Part 40, including an evidentiary chain of custody and control
and split sample collection and testing. The collection site person is responsible for maintaining the
integrity of the specimen collection and transfer process. All procedures shall be outlined in writing
and provided to Township representatives and donors. A separate sample will be made available
for the employee being tested. The member may request that the sample be sent to a neutral
laboratory certified under DHJIS for testing. The cost of this test will be home by the bargaining
unit member.

SECTION 31.6 - TRAINED TECHNICIAN
J\11 alcohol breath tests shall be administered by a trained breath alcohol technician (BA1] or a law
enforcement officer certified to conduct such tests. Only evidential breath testing (BET) devices shall
be used alone with the prescribed breath alcohol testing form. The Township and the testing facility
shall follow the procedures in 49 CrR Part 40.

SECTION 31.7-REFUSAL TO SUBMIT
Refusal to subm it to any of the alcohol or controlled substance tests required by this Article will
result in the employee's immediate removal from the any Township functions and may result in
disciplinary action. Refusal will be treated as a positive test and the employee will be referred to a
counseling program and subject to retum~to-duty and follow-up testing. Actions constituting a
refusal to submit to a test include:
1.

Failing to provide adequate breath fot alcohol testing;

2.

Failing to provide adequate urine for controlled substance testing;

3.

Engaging in conduct that clearly obstructs the testing procedure;

4.

Failing to remain readily available for a post-accident test.

SECTION 31.8 - ZERO TOLERANCE

31

Employees who have been tested for alcohol with the results showing any concentration will nol
be permitted to perform any functions for twenty-four (24) hours following administration of the
test. Discipline may be administered in accordance with the Township's Drug Free Workplace Act
Policy or in accordance with any labor agreement between the parties and/or other disciplinary
policies.

SECTION 31.9 - CALL OUTS
Employees who arc on call are responsible for informing the Township when the employee is
called if he is unable to report due to alcohol consumption. The Township will, whenever possible,
notify employees of the likelihood of a call out situation. When an employee is on notice of a
possible call out, and the call out is communicated to the member eight (8) hours in advance of the
call out, and employee is then unable to report because ofalcohol consumption, the employee may
be subje.c tto discipline.

SECTION 31.10- EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Information regarding tbe effects ofalcohol and controlled substance use on an individual's health,
work, and personal life, and information about drug and alcohol counseling, rehabilitation, and
employee assistance programs is available through the Assistant Administrator's Office or your
individual department head's office, and will be periodically provided to employees.
Employees are encouraged to voluntarily admit problems with drugs and alcohol prior to
violating Township policies. If an employee voluntarily enters into counseling or rehabilitation
he will be permitted to apply for an unpaid leave, personal leave, or other leave of absence. The
employee may also be permitted or required to use all available sick leave, vacation, personal
leave, compensatory time, and Family and Medical Leave, if applicable. Any costs associated
with a voluntary counseling or rehabilitation program are the responsibility of the employee,
unless otherwise covered by the Township-sponsored medical benefit plan to which the employee
participates.

SECTION 31.t 1- OBTAINING EMPLOYEES RECORDS
Upon written request from the employee, the Township will promptly provide copies of any
records pertaining to the employee's use of alcohol or controlled substances including the results
of any lests. The Township may charge a reasonable fee for copies. However access to this
information will not be contingent upon payment for records other than those specifically
requested.

SECTION 31.12 ~ COMPLIANCE TO ALL OTHER REGULATlONS
All bargai11i11g uJtit employees are subject to this A11icle a11d rem.ain subject to all other policies,
procedures, rules, and regulations, established by the Township under its independent authority
which are not inconsistent with the requirements herein. All employees also remain subject to all
other relevant federal, state, and local laws and regulations.

32

ARTICLE32
SUBCONTRACTING
SECTION 32.t - SUBCONTRACTING
ln the event the Township desires to subcontract any bargaining unit work, il will not result in the
reduction of the bargaining unit hours, nor wi II it result in layoffs. Rather, the subcontracting will
be limited to the Township utilizing non-bargaining unit personnel to provide the services or duties
that no current bargaining unit members have the current skill or ability to perform or that they are
currently performing.

ARTICLE33
PHYSICAL FITNESS AND WELLNESS

SECTION 33.2 - ADDITIONAL EXAMINATIONS
Employees returning from disability or sick leave shall be subject to physical perfonnance, fitness
and/or medical examinations appropriate to the employee's duties. These additional physical
examinations and supplemental medical evaluations may be ordered by the Chief of Police or the
Assistant Administrator and paid for by the Township. ff the employee chooses to select a
physician for the physical exam ination, the fe.e shall be paid by the employee and the medical
report will be submitted to the physician chosen by the Township to make an evaluation of the
employee's condition and overall fitness. However, the Chief of Police or the Assistant
Administrator reserves the right to require additional physical examinations at the Township's
expense. Physical performance examinations and fitness examinations shall be conducted in
accordance with the standards and procedures currently as adopted by the Township in 2004. These
examinations shall be for the purpose of detertnining the employee's ability to perform their duties
with average efficiency.

SECTION 33.3 - CORRECTIVE MEASURES
In requiring a physical examination or medical evaluation, the Chief of Police shall request that
the examining physician recommend measw·es to be taken by the employee to correct or improve
any health or physical condition which impairs the employee in the performance of his assigned
duty. The Chief of Police may direct the employee to follow such corrective measures within the
time frame recommended by the physician and order follow-up examinations. Failure to follow
corrective measure shall be grounds for disciplinary action up to and including termination.

SECTION 33.4 - WELLNESS PROGRAM
To ensure the fitness and wellness of all employees, the employees are eligible to participate in a
wellness program at The Helen & Charles Coffman Family YMCA in Springboro, Ohio. The
Township will participate in the YMCA of Metropolitan Dayton Corporate Membership Program.
This would entitle employees to become members at a discounted rate. The employee may by
payroll deduction have his membership fee deducted from their paycheck. ft is the intent of this
33

program is to enhance aerobic capacity, improve strength and/or flexibility. non-passively improve
ability to perform strenuous work and actively assist the employee in reducing body fat to assist
in any compliance with Section 34.2 and/or Section 34.3.

SECTION 33.5 - USE OF TOBACCO
Employees shall not use any type of tobacco products while on duty unless necessary for
performance of specific tasks approved by the Chief of Police. Employees shall not use any type
ofnon-tobacco products which are smoked or any form ofelectronic cigarette while on duty unless
necessary for performance of specific tasks approved by the Chief of Police.
ARTICLE34
PAST PRACTICE

No past practice shall be binding upon the Employer unless reduced to writing and agreed to by the
parties; however, prior to eliminating or changing an existing past practice, the Employer will provide the
Union with at least thirty (30) days advance notice in writing. The Employer will meet upon request by
the Union to discuss the proposed change and consider alternatives offered. It is understood that the
Employer's decision may be implemented after such meetings are held.

ARTICLE35
TERMS OF AGREEMENT
DURATION

SECTION 35.t -DURATION
The Agreement shall be in full force and effect from the period 12:01 A.M., January I, 2021 , unti l
11 :59 P.M., December 31, 2023 and shall renew automatically from year to year thereafter, unless
either party serves notice of the intent to terminate or modify this Agreement at least sixty (60)
days prior to December 31 , 2023, or any successive December 31st thereafter.

,A..th

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have duly executed this Agreement this J_J_day
of l:fh.V't\\?U', 2020.

THE BOARD OF CLEARCREEK
TOWNSHIP TRUSTEES

ee&ludd.R

OHIO PATROLMEN'S BENEVOLENT
J ~I ASSOCIATION

i/4--y:1{

d

,,,

34
