#761
BEFORE
JACALYN J. ZIMMERMAN
ARBITRATOR

ILLINOIS FRATERNAL ORDER OF
POLICE LABOR COUNCIL
and

ILRB Case No. S-MA-16-068

CITY OF EAST ST. LOUIS, ILLINOIS
(POLICE DEPARTMENT)

INTEREST ARBITRATION AWARD

Appearances:
For Illinois Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council:
Robert Jones, Esq.
974 Clock Tower Drive
Springfield, IL 62704
For the City of East St. Louis:
CJ Baricevic, Esq.
Chatham & Baricevic
107 West Main St
Belleville, IL 62220-1501

Background
This matter arises under Section 14 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, 5
ILCS 315 et seq., (Act) which provides for interest arbitration for protective service
employees in the event that they cannot reach agreement on contract terms.
The City of East St. Louis, Illinois (City or Employer) is located in St. Clair County,
an area known as “Metro East” as it is just across the Mississippi River from St. Louis,
Missouri. The Illinois Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council (FOP or Union) has, for
many years, been the collective bargaining representative of the following unit of the
Employer’s employees:
Included:

All sworn police officers with the rank of sergeant and below

Excluded:

All sworn police officers with the rank of Lieutenant and above, confidential,

supervisory personnel and all others prohibited by the Act.
At the relevant time, the Employer employed 28 full-time police officers.
The parties’ most recent collective bargaining agreement was effective 2012
through 2015. The bargaining unit employees have received no salary increases for more
than five years. Following extensive negotiations and, as detailed above, the rejection of
a tentative agreement (TA), the parties selected the undersigned arbitrator to conduct
interest arbitration proceedings to resolve their dispute concerning one term of a new
agreement. A hearing was subsequently conducted by videoconference. The parties
submitted the matter for resolution on oral argument.
Relevant statutory language
Section 14(g) of the Act sets forth the standard for selection of offers made by the parties:
As to each economic issue, the arbitration panel shall adopt the last offer of
settlement which, in the opinion of the arbitration panel, more nearly
complies with the applicable factors prescribed in subsection (h). The
findings, opinions and order as to all other issues shall be based upon the
applicable factors prescribed in subsection (h).
Section 14(h) of the Act sets forth the following criteria upon which the arbitrator is to
base her findings:
Where there is no agreement between the parties, or where there is an
agreement but the parties have begun negotiations or discussions looking
to a new agreement or amendment of the existing agreement, and the wage
Illinois FOP Labor Council and City of East St. Louis
Case No. S-MA-16-068
Page 2

rates or amended agreement are in dispute, the arbitration panel. shall base
its findings, opinions and order upon the following factors, as applicable:
(1) The lawful authority of the Employer.
(2) Stipulations of the parties.
(3) The interest and welfare of the public and the financial
ability of the unit of government to meet those costs.
(4) Comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of
employment of the employees involved in the
arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours and
conditions of employment of other employees
performing similar services and with other employees
generally:
(a) In public employment m comparable
communities.
(b) In private employment m comparable
communities.
(5) The average consumer prices for goods and services,
commonly known as the cost of living.
(6) The overall compensation presently received by the employees,
including direct wage compensation, vacations, holidays and other
excused time, insurance and pensions, medical and hospitalization
benefits, the continuity and stability of employment and all other benefits
received.
(7) Changes in any of the foregoing circumstances during the pendency of
the arbitration proceedings.
(8) Such other factors, not confined to the foregoing, which are normally
or traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of wages,
hours and conditions of employment through voluntary collective
bargaining, mediation, fact-finding, arbitration or otherwise between the
parties, in the public service or in private employment.
Findings of fact
The only issue before the arbitrator concerns Section 21.4/Appendix “A” Salary
schedule for the new agreement. The parties presented identical final offers on this
subject, which was Item #4 in both final offers:
Effective 1/1/16 2% base wage increase
Effective 1/1/17 2% base wage increase
Illinois FOP Labor Council and City of East St. Louis
Case No. S-MA-16-068
Page 3

Effective 1/1/18 2% base wage increase
Effective 1/1/19 2% base wage increase
Wages will be retroactive on all hours paid.
The parties do not dispute that on or about July 25, 2019, the Union and the City
reached a tentative agreement (TA) which included the wage provision contained in both
final offers. The City’s subsequent rejection of that agreement, and proposal instead for
a 0% increase for the four years at issue, , is as recounted below, the basis for the instant
proceedings.
Ryan Olier has been a Union representative for the City’s police force since 2018.
Prior to the execution of the tentative agreement, he met with the bargaining unit
members to discuss why the proposal for the 2% annual increase had not been ratified
before he was assigned to represent the unit. As he explained at the arbitration hearing,
Mr. Olier then met with the then-City Manager, and City counsel Mr. Baricevic, as the
bargaining unit members wanted to know if there would be layoffs if the Union signed off
on the tentative agreement. Mr. Olier testified that the Union was assured that although
there was a possibility of layoffs in the future, the City was not looking at any layoffs at
that time.
Mr. Olier confirmed at the hearing that the signatures on the TA were his own, as
well as those of City Manager Brooke Smith and legal counsel C.J. Baricevic. At a City
Council meeting in October 2019, Mr. Baricevic presented the TA and explained that it
would constitute an unfair labor practice under the Act should the Council not ratify it, as
the City had agreed to its terms.1 However, the Council, acting upon Ms. Smith’s
recommendation, voted not to ratify the TA’s salary provision.
Ms. Smith explained at the hearing that she was appointed to her position on May
3, 2019. She testified concerning the City’s budget issues, including a decline in revenue
from the Casino Queen, a major source of income for the City. She explained that the City
obtains a large portion of its revenue, including income taxes, sales taxes, and food and
beverage taxes, from the Casino Queen, but profits declined steadily as the casino went
from a $14 million business down to $6 million in 2019.
1 Mr. Olier also spoke at the meeting, explaining the changes made to minimum manpower and sick leave

coverage provisions.

Illinois FOP Labor Council and City of East St. Louis
Case No. S-MA-16-068
Page 4

The year-to-date revenue in October 2020, due in part to pandemic closures and
restrictions, was $2 million. She stated that the City’s anticipated budget shortfall for
2021 was approximately $7.6 million.
Ms. Smith also explained that the State of Illinois’ “intercept” of City revenue for
the benefit of the police and fire pension funds is a substantial factor in the City’s budget.2
Under the intercept law, pension funds can apply to the State Comptroller’s office to
request withholding of State revenues that would otherwise go to cities, and to direct
those monies to the pension funds for the total amount of unfunded pension payments
from city governments.
In September 2019, she stated, the Comptroller intercepted approximately $4
million to cover the City’s underfunded 2017 and 2018 pension amounts. Ms. Smith
maintained that the Comptroller will continue to intercept 100% of the City’s in-State
revenue until its total pension obligation is satisfied.
Ms. Smith asserted that the intercept is the reason the City decided to vote down
the TA, and at the time of the hearing it was still not yet “out of the woods” regarding the
intercept. Therefore, she maintained, if the City granted the retroactive raises required
by the TA, it would have to effectively shut its doors and could not continue operating,
although, Ms. Smith stated, the City hoped to reach a settlement on the pension intercept
to avoid all revenue being diverted.
As for decreasing spending elsewhere, Ms. Smith noted that there have been
several job cuts across all City departments. For example, the City Manager’s office was
down from five employees to just Ms. Smith, and the Finance Department was down from
three or four employees to only one consultant. Even the Police and Fire departments
had seen reductions in force.
Ms. Smith also testified that the City has considered seeking funding from the State
and federal governments, and the Mayor has been in touch with Governor J.B. Pritzker to
see what options the City might have for relief. Trying to obtain a loan has also proved
problematic, given that the City has a backlog of uncompleted audits. As of the date of the
hearing, the City had not yet heard back from the bank on approval. The City has even
2 The intercept law, 40 ILCS 5, became effective in January 2018.

Illinois FOP Labor Council and City of East St. Louis
Case No. S-MA-16-068
Page 5

looked at increasing taxes; however, Ms. Smith stated, East St. Louis is currently the
highest taxing entity in the area, especially with respect to property taxes.3
Ms. Smith admitted that she was aware of all of these issues concerning the City’s
finances on July 25, 2019 when she signed the TA. She maintained that she did not feel
that there was enough money to pay the 2% increases, but proceeded to sign the TA
because she was told she could not renege on the previous City Manager’s offer of 2%, as
that would constitute regressive bargaining.
Ms. Smith confirmed that she was present when the TA was presented to the City
Council in October 2019, and that she briefed the Mayor and Council members about it.
She admitted at the arbitration hearing that she recommended that the Council not
approve the TA. Ms. Smith explained that she did not know she was legally obligated to
argue for ratification as she did not feel like she participated in negotiations, given that
the terms were already decided before she took office.
Positions of the parties
The Union
The Union stresses that the only item in dispute is number 4, salary, and requests
that the arbitrator enforce the TA as written. First, the Union urges the arbitrator to
follow the analysis of Arbitrator Marvin Hill in the 2014 South Holland case. There,
Arbitrator Hill detailed a three-part test for determining whether a TA should be enforced,
looking at (1) the circumstances surrounding negotiations that led to the TA; (2) the
nature of the TA itself; and (3) the reasons for the rejection. The application of that
analysis here leads clearly to the conclusion that the City must abide by the TA.
Alternatively, the Union requests that the arbitrator rely on the factors set forth in
Section 14(h) of the Act. The Union urges that its proposal is more reasonable given
certain statutory factors, including the interest and welfare of the public, an internal and
external comparison of wages, and the average consumer price index.

3 Though the City has looked into establishing a tax on its marijuana cultivation facility, State law precludes

that, she explained.

Illinois FOP Labor Council and City of East St. Louis
Case No. S-MA-16-068
Page 6

The Union stresses that it has provided both comparable percentages from
surrounding labor markets as well as the average Consumer Price Index for the years 2016
through 2019. Every percentage supports the union’s proposal:
Comps:
Alton → 1.33%
Belleville → 2.25%
Collinsville → 2.05%
Edwardsville → 2.45%
Fairview Heights → 2.5%
Granite City → 2.25%

Consumer Price Index:
2016 → 2.1%
2017 → 2.1%
2018 → 1.9%
2019 → 2.4%

The Union points out that the most significant factor here is the cost of living,
because if one relied upon the City’s ability to pay, the employees of East St. Louis would
never see a pay raise. The FOP points out that East St. Louis has had financial trouble for
years, that the City’s representatives were well aware of the financial issues when they
agreed to the TA, and that the police officers are essentially paying the price for City
mismanagement. In defense of the comparables offered, the Union points to a 2010
decision by Arbitrator Reynolds, Case No. S-MA-09-085, that speaks to the appropriate
comparable cities and established that it is incumbent upon the City to demonstrate its
inability to pay. The Union urges that the arbitrator award the salary increases set forth
in the TA.
The City
The City first asserts that the Union is using old census numbers to certify its
comparables. As 2020 was a census year, the numbers the Union relies upon here reflect
the demographics from 10 years ago, and are therefore irrelevant.
The crux of the City’s argument focuses on its financial issues. East St. Louis is not
only declining in its ability to generate revenue, but also has increasing tax rates and is
losing residents. The Casino Queen, the City’s top revenue generator, was closed for at
least the four months preceding the hearing due to the pandemic.
Moreover, the City stresses, prior to the lockdown, all revenue coming into the City
was diverted to the Comptroller pursuant to the State’s pension intercept law. Instead of

Illinois FOP Labor Council and City of East St. Louis
Case No. S-MA-16-068
Page 7

that revenue being delivered into the City’s general revenue fund, it was seized for the
benefit of the Police and Fire departments pension funds.
The City explains further that East St. Louis is one of two cities at the time to have
been subjected to this recently-enacted pension intercept law.

The other, Harvey,

negotiated a settlement. Thus, although the City admits it was aware of its financial
burdens before entering negotiations, it had hoped to resolve the intercept issue before
the Comptroller seized $4 million.
The City points out that the first intercept was finalized after the City negotiated
and signed the TA, but before the Council voted against it. The City stresses that current
case law and the Act grant the arbitrator authority to consider such new information
before making a final determination.
Lastly, the City notes that the most important consideration here is the interest
and welfare of the East St. Louis citizens. Because the City cannot afford the raises, major
layoffs will occur if the TA is authorized. East St. Louis already has one of the highest tax
rates in the county and previous City management left four years of audits in arrears. As
a result, the City has had trouble obtaining a loan and cannot raise already steep taxes.
Thus, the City argues, 0% is the only amount the City can afford if it plans to maintain a
viable police department. The arbitrator must allow the City to void the TA, and should
award its current offer of no salary increases.
Discussion
As stated at the outset, there is no dispute that until Ms. Smith recommended, and
the City Council voted, to reject the TA, the parties were in agreement as to appropriate
retroactive salary increases for its police officers, who had been working for several years
without any. The Union argues that both the South Holland award, and the traditional
analysis governing interest arbitration determinations set forth in Section 14(h) of the
Act, require that I award the 2% retroactive increases for 2016 through 2019. On both
counts, I agree.
In the South Holland case, Arbitrator Hill reviewed the applicable arbitral caselaw
and concluded that whether a party should be bound by a tentative agreement required
an examination of all of the surrounding circumstances, as such an agreement is by its
Illinois FOP Labor Council and City of East St. Louis
Case No. S-MA-16-068
Page 8

very nature one step away from the final, valid contract. In the case before him, where
the union membership refused to ratify an agreement, he termed the parties’ deal a
“super” agreement which had to be afforded great weight. The same must be said here.
I first note that the wage scale which became part of the tentative agreement was
based upon the final offers of both parties, including the Employer’s. The negotiations
and resulting TA were a multi-year effort, with counsel involved throughout. So far as
this record indicates, there was no problem or intent on the City’s part to reject the
agreement, until City Manager Smith, who had signed off on it, recommended that the
City Council reject it, because she did not feel the City could afford it.4
At the time that she took this action, Ms. Smith was fairly new to her position, and
testified at length concerning the various financial problems which plague the City. The
undersigned has worked with these parties for several years, and is well aware of the
difficult circumstances in which the City operates, no doubt exacerbated by the pandemic.
Nevertheless, as discussed in Arbitrator Reynolds’ 2010 interest arbitration award for
these parties, the City has suffered these problems for a very long time, and the City
officials who were involved in bargaining, as well as its counsel, were well aware of the
state of the City’s finances when they presented the City’s offer and incorporated it into
the TA. They obviously believed that the City would find a way to grant its police officers,
who work in very difficult circumstances, some additional compensation.
Indeed, Ms. Smith testified that she too was well aware of all of the difficult
financial circumstances, including the likely pension intercept by the State Comptroller,
at the time she signed the agreement. Nothing changed between then and when she
recommended that the City Council walk away from the agreement, except that the
Comptroller had taken the anticipated step of proceeding with the intercept. In other
words, other than the fact that she, who had worked for the City a relatively short time,
had a different view than the bargaining team which negotiated and approved the salary
schedule, there was no legitimate, demonstrated reason for the City to reject the TA. I

4 I note Ms. Smith’s testimony that she signed off on the agreement, even though she disagreed with it,

because she was told she could not renege on the City’s previous offer. I also note Mr. Olier’s testimony that
Employer counsel stated at the City Council meeting at issue that the City could be faced with unfair labor
practice charges if it rejected the TA. While the Union apparently chose to litigate in this forum rather than
before the Illinois Labor Relations Board, counsel’s point is well taken.
Illinois FOP Labor Council and City of East St. Louis
Case No. S-MA-16-068
Page 9

also note that although Ms. Smith detailed the various fiscal problems, she did so in a
general manner and not present any comprehensive analysis of the City’s income,
expenditures, obligations and the like, showing where money was spent and why it could
not be spent for police officer increases. She also described at length the various ways the
City was trying to alleviate its problems, including negotiating a settlement to lessen the
financial burden of the intercept, as had apparently been done by the City of Harvey. All
of these efforts appeared to be ongoing, and could well help the City meet its financial
obligations to its police officers .
As Arbitrator Reynolds noted, the fact that salary increases may be difficult to pay
does not demonstrate an inability to pay. Here, where the City had determined, and
agreed, that it could pay them, and did not demonstrate that it could not, the TA must be
enforced.
Even if I did not find the City bound by the TA, the application of the Section 14(h)
factors would require that I award what was the offer of both parties, but is now the
Union’s offer. The City did not dispute the surrounding communities identified by the
Union as comparables, other than to state that because they were selected prior to the
2020 census the demographics are irrelevant. The City does not explain why this is the
case, nor does it propose any comparables of its own. All of the identified communities,
except for one, had annual wage increases higher than those set forth in the TA. It does
not dispute the Union’s assertion that the TA is supported by annual cost of living
increases, and it obviously is, as the TA comes in slightly under those increases.
Rather, the City falls back upon the same financial problems it recites as a basis for
voiding the TA. The Employer has demonstrated that it has fiscal problems, but not that
those problems require that its critical public safety employees work under the conditions
it proposes, no increases for four years. The terms of the TA will be awarded as written.

Illinois FOP Labor Council and City of East St. Louis
Case No. S-MA-16-068
Page 10

AWARD and ORDER
The salary provision of the TA signed by the parties on July 25, 2019 constitutes
the Award as to that contract term for the collective bargaining agreement at issue. The
City is ordered to implement this Award within 30 days. The arbitrator will retain
jurisdiction for the period of time necessary to ensure compliance with this Award.

Jacalyn J. Zimmerman, Arbitrator
August 2, 2021

Illinois FOP Labor Council and City of East St. Louis
Case No. S-MA-16-068
Page 11
