IN THE COMMONWEALTH COURT OF PENNSYLVANIA
Falls Township,
Appellant
v.
Police Association of Falls Township

BEFORE:

:
:
:
:
:
:

No. 503 C.D. 2023
SUBMITTED: April 11, 2024

HONORABLE ANNE E. COVEY, Judge
HONORABLE CHRISTINE FIZZANO CANNON, Judge
HONORABLE BONNIE BRIGANCE LEADBETTER, Senior Judge

OPINION NOT REPORTED
MEMORANDUM OPINION BY
SENIOR JUDGE LEADBETTER

FILED: May 10, 2024

Falls Township appeals from an order of the Court of Common Pleas
of Bucks County denying the Township’s petition to vacate arbitration award and
affirming the grievance arbitration award rendered pursuant to the Policemen and
Firemen Collective Bargaining Act (Act 111).1

In the award, the arbitrator

determined that the Township’s discharge of Grievant, Stephanie Metterle, was not
supported by just cause and reduced the discharge to a 30-day suspension. We
affirm.
As summarized from the Arbitrator’s award, the facts are as follows.
Grievant worked as a police officer for the Township for approximately ten years
until her October 20, 2020 discharge for an alleged second violation of Section
103.175 of the Falls Township Police Department Code. The Code addresses
1

Act of June 24, 1968, P.L. 237, as amended, 43 P.S. §§ 217.1-217.12.

Conduct Unbecoming an Officer in the form of “[r]epeated violations of Department
Rules & Regulations and/or any other course of conduct indicating that a member
has little or no regard for his/her responsibility as a member of the Police
Department.” Jan. 5, 2022 Arb. Award at 1-31; Reproduced Record (R.R.) at 14a44a. The Township’s impetus for the discharge was its determination that Grievant
made false statements in her March 2019 complaint to the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Commission (PHRC) by alleging that she had been a member of the multicounty Major Incident Response Team (MIRT) but had been removed in favor of a
male officer.2 Past misconduct included a 30-day suspension in 2012 for an off-duty
fight and a 10-day suspension in 2018 for falsifying records by submitting overtime
slips listing herself as “off” while she was out testifying when, in fact, she was
working a modified-duty day shift. Id. at 19-20; R.R. at 32a-33a.
Before the arbitrator, the parties stipulated to the following issue:
“Whether the Township had just cause for the discharge of Grievant? If not, what
shall the remedy be?” Id. at 2; R.R. at 15a. Following hearings held on July 21 and
August 16, 2021, the arbitrator rendered the following award:
The discharge was not supported by just cause. The
discharge is reduced to a thirty (30) day suspension. The
Township is ordered to reinstate the Grievant to her former
position; restore her seniority; and make her whole for any
loss of wages (minus the 30-day suspension), benefits, and
other emoluments of employment flowing from the
2

Following the events of September 11, 2001, MIRT was formed to respond to emergencies
as well as to provide coverage for large-scale events, natural disasters, terrorist threats, crowd/riot
control, and dignitary protection. Jan. 5, 2022 Arb. Award at 3-4; R.R. at 16a-17a. Generally,
MIRT includes Philadelphia, Bucks, Delaware, and Montgomery counties, with Chester County
sometimes also being included. Id. at 3; R.R. at 16a. “The initial training for members, going
back to 2003 or 2004, included and still includes five days of training, involving riot control, crowd
control, formations and movements, personal protective equipment, hazardous materials and
‘officer down’ training.” Id. at 7-8; R.R. at 20a-21a.

2

discharge. The Township is ordered to adjust the
Grievant’s disciplinary records to reflect the altered
discipline.
Id. at 31; R.R. at 44a.
On appeal, the trial court denied the Township’s petition to vacate
arbitration award and affirmed the award. The Township’s appeal to this Court
followed. When reviewing appeals from Act 111 grievance arbitration awards, our
Supreme Court has held that “[t]he narrow certiorari scope of review limits a
reviewing court to questions regarding: (1) the jurisdiction of the arbitrators; (2) the
regularity of the proceedings; (3) an excess of the arbitrator’s powers; and (4)
deprivation of constitutional rights.” City of Phila. v. Fraternal Ord. of Police Lodge
No. 5, 677 A.2d 1319, 1422 (Pa. Cmwlth. 1996) [quoting Pa. State Police v. Pa.
State Troopers’ Ass’n (Betancourt), 656 A.2d 83, 85 (Pa. 1995)].
Before this Court, the Township argues that the arbitrator exceeded his
authority by impermissibly requiring the Township to violate the clear mandates of
its disciplinary code where the only available penalty thereunder should have been
dismissal. In addition, the Township maintains that the arbitrator’s penalty reduction
thereby lowering the agreed-upon standard of maintaining the highest moral
compass of policing violated (1) Article 30 of the parties’ collective bargaining
agreement (CBA), prohibiting unilateral reform of the CBA; and (2) Article 2,
Section 2 of the CBA, the parties’ agreement that “[t]he Department of Police and
the individual members of [Police Association of Falls Township] PAFT . . . are to
be governed by the highest standards of honor, integrity and dedication in all their
public and personal conduct in order that the Department . . . and the individual
members of PAFT may merit the respect and confidence of the general public it

3

serves.” Art. 2, Sec. 2 of the CBA between the Township and PAFT, Jan. 1, 2013Dec. 31, 2017 at 2; Original Record (O.R.) at 23.3
The Township’s position is without merit.

As this Court has

acknowledged: “[T]he arbitration process allows arbitrators to modify disciplinary
penalties and fashion appropriate awards based on the specific facts of a given
case.” In re Melamed, 287 A.3d 491, 500-01 (Pa. Cmwlth. 2022) (emphasis in
original) [quoting Cnty. of Allegheny v. Allegheny Cnty. Prison Emps. Indep. Union,
244 A3d 873, 882 (Pa. Cmwlth. 2020)]. Notably, the parties in the present case
stipulated that the issue before the arbitrator included the appropriate remedy. Jan.
5, 2022 Arb. Award at 2; R.R. at 15a. In addition, mindful that the arbitrator
considered Article 2 of the CBA,4 his determination that Grievant’s statements in
her PHRC complaint were false did not dictate that he find just cause for the
discharge.
In addressing the specific facts of the present case, the arbitrator
considered the effect of management fault on an arbitrator’s ability to reduce
discipline. See id. at 31; R.R. at 44a. In so doing, he painstakingly outlined the
witnesses’ testimony and his respective credibility determinations. As an initial
matter, he noted the parties’ agreement that a MIRT detail was assigned to the 2018
Philadelphia Eagles Super Bowl Parade. Id. at 4; R.R. at 17a. Upon Grievant’s
learning that three Township police officers had been sent to Philadelphia as part of
a MIRT detail and that she was more senior than one of them, Grievant asserted that
she should have been given the opportunity to work the parade detail and submitted
a request for the overtime that would have been due had she done so.
3

Id.

Because the original record was filed electronically and not paginated, the original record
page number references the electronic pagination.
4

See Jan. 5, 2022 Arb. Award at 31; R.R. at 44a.

4

Notwithstanding the fact that Chief Wilcox tasked then-Lieutenant Whitney, now
Chief Whitney, to determine whether Grievant was a member of MIRT and,
therefore, entitled to overtime, Lieutenant Pletnick processed the overtime slip
signed by Sergeant Belinsky and Grievant received the requested overtime payment
before Whitney concluded his investigation. Id. at 6; R.R. at 19a. “Pletnick
indicated that, since Belinsky had signed it, ‘that was good enough for him.’” 5 Id.
Ultimately, the Township concluded that Grievant had never been a member of
MIRT. See id. at 4-7; R.R. at 17a-20a.
Given Whitney’s experience with Grievant, Whitney decided to clarify
which officers were in MIRT and the requirements for an officer to be included. Id.
at 6; R.R. at 19a. After discussions with Lieutenant Pennington, the assistant team
commander for the Bucks County MIRT, Whitney was left with the impression that
MIRT team operations were much more relaxed than special weapons and tactics
(SWAT) team operations. Consequently, Whitney sent out an April 10, 2018
memorandum listing active members of MIRT and advising all other officers that
they were ineligible for MIRT activities. In part, the memo provided: “If you are
not on this list, you are not part of MIRT and not eligible for any MIRT activities . .
. . If you were formally [sic] on MIRT, please turn in all of your MIRT equipment
to [Lieutenant] Ward.” Id. at 14-15; R.R. at 27a-28a. Because Grievant was not on
the list that Pennington provided to Whitney, she was not on the list of active
members. Id. at 6-7; R.R. at 19a-20a. “Pennington acknowledged on cross that the
MIRT leadership relies upon the individual departments to notify MIRT of changes
in membership status.” Id. at 9; R.R. at 22a.
Indeed, “[t]he request was approved by three supervisors, including Corporal Pinto, Sergeant
Belinsky (who actually signed the slip before an investigation was undertaken), and Lieutenant
Plotkin.” Id. at 29; R.R. at 42a.
5

5

Upon receiving the April 2018 memorandum listing active MIRT
members, Grievant expressed surprise that she nonetheless had been paid overtime
for the Eagles Parade. She emailed Whitney and asked whether she was being
removed from MIRT. He advised her to talk to Ward if she wanted to be on MIRT.
Grievant “testified that she did not contact [] Ward because, in a conversation with
Whitney, he advised her that it might be better if she concentrated on her accident
reconstruction duties and her good work with traffic tickets and arrest on patrol.” Id.
at 18; R.R. at 31a. Grievant acknowledged that Whitney advised her that, from what
he had learned, Grievant had never been on MIRT. Id.
In March 2019, Grievant filed a complaint with PHRC. Pertinent here,
she alleged in paragraph 12 that she was removed from MIRT in February 2018 and
replaced by a male member of the team. In addition, she alleged that Whitney
“informed her that she had never been on MIRT despite the fact that she had
previously undergone MIRT training and had worked on MIRT details.” Id. As
noted, the Township discharged Grievant in October 2020 for making false
statements in her PHRC complaint pertaining to MIRT.
After rendering credibility determinations and weighing the relevant
evidence of record, the arbitrator concluded that Grievant knew the falsity of her
assertions that she was removed from MIRT and replaced with a male member. Id.
at 30; R.R. at 43a. In support, the arbitrator noted the fact that Grievant was never
advised that she was on MIRT, never engaged in the five days of core training
required of new team members, never received equipment or a MIRT identifier, and
never registered as part of the Everbridge Notification System used as a
communication system for the team. Id. at 27-28; R.R. at 40a-41a. The arbitrator
emphasized Grievant’s inability to return a MIRT uniform and/or equipment. In that

6

regard, Whitney testified that the easiest way to prove whether Grievant was on
MIRT was to have her produce the uniform. Id. at 5; R.R. at 18a. Soon after
Whitney made the request, he ran into Grievant outside the MIRT equipment closet
at which time she claimed to have lost the uniform. Id. Rejecting Grievant’s
testimony, the arbitrator found: “I don’t believe that [Grievant] ever had the
uniform, and thus could not have lost it[; T]he conversation between [Grievant] and
Whitney that day convinces me that [she] really knew she was not on the MIRT
team.” Id. at 29; R.R. at 42a.
In reducing the discharge to a 30-day suspension, the arbitrator
reasoned:
Based upon my findings, [Grievant] breached the
high standards in place through the misconduct found
here. The Township urges that, as this is a second
violation of Section 103.175, the disciplinary scale calls
for discharge. In this just cause analysis, however,
management was at fault too for not fully addressing the
issues at the time then-Lieutenant Whitney investigated
the MIRT overtime request for the Eagles Parade overtime
and, instead paying her for the overtime. As such, I find it
appropriate to reduce the penalty from discharge to a 30day suspension.
Id. at 31; R.R. at 44a. Notably, Grievant “was never advised that this overtime
payment was made in error.” Id. at 29; R.R. at 42a. Accordingly, we discern no
issue with the arbitrator’s having considered the specific facts of the case and
fashioning an appropriate award.
Next, the Township argues that the trial court erred in refusing to
consider the Township’s public policy concerns. If this Court determines that the
trial court so erred, the Township urges this Court to modify the narrow certiorari
review to allow for consideration of such concerns and to reverse where an
7

arbitrator’s award is contrary to public policy, fails the test for judgments
notwithstanding the verdict employed by the Uniform Arbitration Act (UAA), 6 or
fails the essence test employed in review of arbitration awards issued under the
Public Employe Relations Act (PERA).7
We reject the Township’s position.8 As noted, our Supreme Court
established the narrow certiorari review for courts to use when reviewing appeals
from Act 111 grievance arbitration awards. Notably, the Supreme Court has rejected
calls to expand the narrow certiorari review to include public policy concerns. The
Supreme Court reasoned:
Broadening the narrow certiorari scope of review to
include a provision which would allow the courts to
interfere with an arbitrator’s award whenever that award
could be deemed to be violative of “public policy” however that nebulous concept may be defined by a
particular appellate court - would greatly expand the scope
of review in these matters. If we were to adopt the State
Police’s recommendation to include this ill-defined term
42 Pa.C.S. §§ 7301-7320. Section 7302(d)(2) of the UAA provides that “a court in reviewing
an arbitration award pursuant to this subchapter shall . . . modify or correct an award where the
award is contrary to law and is such that had it been a verdict of a jury the court would have entered
a different judgment or a judgment notwithstanding the verdict.” 42 Pa.C.S. § 7302(d)(2).
6

7

Act of July 23, 1970, P.L. 563, as amended, 43 P.S. §§ 1101.101-1101.2301. For employees
covered by PERA, grievance arbitration awards are reviewable under “the highly circumscribed
‘essence test[.]’” City of Bradford v. Teamsters Loc. Union No. 110, 25 A.3d 408, 412 (Pa. 2011).
Pursuant thereto, a reviewing court must first “decide whether the issue is encompassed by the
CBA [at issue],” and “second, the court must uphold the arbitrator’s award if the arbitrator’s
interpretation can rationally be derived from the CBA.” Millcreek Twp. Sch. Dist. v. Millcreek
Twp. Educ. Support Pers. Ass’n, 210 A.3d 993, 996 (Pa. 2019). The narrow public policy
exception to the essence test prohibits enforcement of an arbitrator’s award that contravenes public
policy. Neshaminy Sch. Dist. v. Neshaminy Fed’n of Teachers, 171 A.3d 334, 338 (Pa. Cmwlth.
2017).
8

As PAFT observes, the Township preserved an argument as to the applicability of the UAA
but not PERA. PAFT’s Br. at 37 n.11.

8

within the narrow certiorari scope of review, we would
markedly increase the judiciary’s role in Act 111
arbitration awards. This would undercut the legislature’s
intent of preventing protracted litigation in this arena.
Pa. State Police v. Pa. State Troopers Ass’n, 741 A.2d 1248, 1252-53 (Pa. 1999).
Moreover, noting that we were bound by Supreme Court precedent, this
Court in Borough of State College v. Borough of State College Police Association,
303 A.3d 248, 259 (Pa. Cmwlth. 2023), reiterated that “the standard of review for
Act 111 cases does not encompass, and this Court cannot expand it to include, a
public policy exception under the excess powers prong of narrow certiorari.”
Accordingly, we affirm.

BONNIE BRIGANCE LEADBETTER,
President Judge Emerita

9

IN THE COMMONWEALTH COURT OF PENNSYLVANIA
Falls Township,
Appellant
v.
Police Association of Falls Township

:
:
:
:
:
:

No. 503 C.D. 2023

ORDER

AND NOW, this 10th day of May, 2024, the order of the Court of
Common Pleas of Bucks County is hereby AFFIRMED.

BONNIE BRIGANCE LEADBETTER,
President Judge Emerita
