COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
between
THE STATE COLLEGE AREA SCHOOL DISTRICT
and
THE STATE COLLEGE EDUCATIONAL SUPPORT PERSONNEL
ASSOCIATION
for
SECRETARIAL/CLERICAL EMPLOYEES
PARAPROFESSIONAL EMPLOYEES

JULY 1, 2023 – JUNE 30, 2028

CONTENTS
PAGE
ARTICLE I

RECOGNITION

2

ARTICLE II

TERM OF AGREEMENT

3

ARTICLE III

NO LOCK-OUT, NO STRIKE PROVISION

3

ARTICLE IV

FAIR SHARE/DUES DEDUCTION/MAINTENANCE
OF MEMBERSHIP

3

ARTICLE V

CONTRACT SECURITY

4

ARTICLE VI

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

5

ARTICLE VII

ASSOCIATION RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES

7

ARTICLE VIII

EMPLOYEE RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES

8

ARTICLE IX

JOB CLASSIFICATION AND WORK YEAR

10

ARTICLE X

WORKING HOURS AND CONDITIONS

13

ARTICLE XI

SENIORITY

14

ARTICLE XII

VACANCIES – TRANSFERS

15

ARTICLE XIII

PERSONNEL FILES

16

ARTICLE XIV

SHORT-TERM PAID LEAVES OF ABSENCE

17

ARTICLE XV

UNPAID LEAVES OF ABSENCE/EXTENDED LEAVES

21

ARTICLE XVI

EDUCATIONAL IMPROVEMENT

23

ARTICLE XVII

INSURANCE BENEFITS

24

ARTICLE XVIII

RETIREMENT BENEFITS

27

ARTICLE XIX

WAGES AND OTHER COMPENSATION

29

1

CONTENTS (Cont.)
PAGE
ARTICLE XX

SIGNATURES

33

APPENDIX A

PAYROLL DEDUCTION AUTHORIZATION
FOR ASSOCIATION DUES

34

APPENDIX B

DENTAL INSURANCE

35

APPENDIX C

HOURLY WAGE RATES

36

APPENDIX D

MEDICAL INSURANCE PLANS

46

APPENDIX E

MEDICAL INSURANCE RATES

52

2

AGREEMENT
This AGREEMENT is made and entered into on May 15, 2023, by the STATE COLLEGE AREA
SCHOOL DISTRICT, party of the first part, hereinafter called the "BOARD," or "EMPLOYER," or
“DISTRICT” and the STATE COLLEGE EDUCATIONAL SUPPORT PERSONNEL
ASSOCIATION, party of the second part, hereinafter called the "ASSOCIATION."
As consideration for the promises herein contained, it is mutually agreed as follows:

ARTICLE I
RECOGNITION
The District recognizes the Association as the exclusive bargaining agent for the employees in
the bargaining unit of the Association as certified by the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board
under the terms and conditions of Act 195 as amended by Act 88 of 1992, known as the "Public
Employee Relations Act," hereinafter referred to as "Act," which Act provides for collective
bargaining for public employees.
Both parties hereto aver that this Agreement sets forth the terms and conditions to which each
party agrees to be bound and that such Agreement has been reached voluntarily, without undue
or unlawful coercion or force by either party.
Employees in this contract shall be defined as in the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board NISI
Order of Certification # PERA-R-98-10-E: "All full-time and regular part-time white-collar
nonprofessional employees including but not limited to secretarial employees and
paraprofessionals."

ARTICLE II
TERM OF AGREEMENT
The term of this Agreement shall begin July 1, 2023, and shall continue in full force and effect
until June 30, 2028, or until such later date as the parties may hereinafter agree is to be the
extended ending date. Any such extended date shall be evidenced by an amendment to this
Agreement, to which amendment both parties shall signify their approval by affixing their
signatures hereto.

ARTICLE III
NO LOCK-OUT, NO STRIKE PROVISION
Both parties agree to faithfully abide by the provisions of the Pennsylvania Public Employee
Bargaining Law, Act 195, as amended by Act 88 of 1992. As a condition of the various

3

provisions of this Agreement, to which the parties have agreed, the bargaining agent pledges
that members of the Association will not engage in a strike (as the term is defined in Act 195 as
amended by Act 88), sanction, or slowdown during the term of this Agreement, and the
Employer pledges that it will not conduct, or cause to be conducted, a lockout during the term of
this Agreement.

ARTICLE IV
FAIR SHARE/DUES DEDUCTION/MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP
A.

Fair Share
The District and the Association agree to comply with all the provisions of related law. If
a Fair Share fee law is enacted in the future, the parties agree to discuss
implementation.

B. Dues Deduction
1. The District agrees to deduct from the wages of bargaining unit employees
membership dues in the SCESPA/PSEA/NEA at the written request of any member
of the bargaining unit, and to transmit the monies monthly so deducted by one (1)
check promptly to the Association.
2. The Association will certify to the Business Office in writing, by September 15 of
each year, the current rate of dues and a membership list of any employee
organization for the applicable school year. The Association will provide a signed
authorization statement from each individual employee in the bargaining unit who
desires to have dues deducted. An ongoing statement from year-to-year will be
acceptable. The authorization card shall include a stipulation entitling the Employer
to withhold any dues remaining if an employee leaves District employment prior to
the completion of the school year.
3. The Association may amend the membership list monthly.
4. Deductions referred to in paragraph (1) above will be made in as nearly equal
installments as is practicable during the school year.
5. Form to be used: see APPENDIX A.
C. The District agrees that all employees who are members of the Association shall be
subject to the "maintenance of membership" provision as defined in Article III,
Subsection (18) of the Public Employee Relations Act, Act 195.

4

ARTICLE V
CONTRACT SECURITY
A. Severability
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this Agreement shall be
held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision,
section, sentence, clause, or part of this Agreement, it being the intent of both parties
that the remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
B. Statutory Savings
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny or restrict to any employee such
rights as provided under the Public School Code of 1949 as amended, or the Public
Employees Relations Act, Act 195, or any other applicable laws and regulations. The
rights granted to employees hereunder shall be deemed to be in addition to those
provided elsewhere.
C. Modification
This Agreement shall not be reopened for discussion or modified in whole or in part by
the parties except by an instrument, in writing, duly executed by both parties.
D. Ratification
The terms of this contract shall be ratified by the appropriate procedures of both the
District and of the Association before the contract can be considered final.
E. Printing and Distribution of Agreement
A copy of this Agreement for each bargaining unit member shall be printed at the
expense of the Employer and will be made available to the Association President. One
hundred (100) additional copies will be furnished at no extra charge. If, at any time
during the term of this Agreement, the Association needs additional copies, these
additional copies will be furnished to the Association President at no extra charge.
F. Bargaining Unit Work
The District will not contract out bargaining unit work if such action results in the layoff of
the employee regularly assigned to those duties being contracted.

ARTICLE VI
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
A. Definitions
1. A "grievance" shall mean a complaint by a member of the bargaining unit or a group
of the same, that there has been a violation, misinterpretation or misapplication of a
term or terms of this Agreement.

5

2.

An "aggrieved party" is the person or persons making the complaint.

3.

A "party in interest" is the person or persons making the complaint and any person
who might be required to take action or against whom action might be taken in order
to resolve the complaint.

4.

The term "days" when used shall mean days when the District’s Central Office is
open for business.

B. Purpose
The purpose of this procedure is to secure, at the lowest possible administrative level,
equitable solutions to grievances. Grievance procedures will be kept informal and
confidential as may be appropriate at any level of the procedure.
C. General Procedures
1. Since it is important that the grievance be processed as rapidly as possible, the
number of days indicated at each level should be considered a maximum, and every
effort should be made to expedite the process.
2. Nothing herein contained will be construed as limiting the right of any employee
having a grievance to discuss the matter informally with appropriate members of the
administration, and having the grievance adjusted without the intervention of any
employee organization, provided the adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of
this Agreement.
3. At levels beyond Level One of a grievance after it has been formally presented, a
member of the Grievance Committee of the Association may attend any meetings,
hearings, appeals or other proceedings required to process the grievance.
4. The time limits provided herein may be extended by written agreement of the parties.
5. If in the judgment of the Association a grievance affects a group or class of
employees, the Association may submit such grievance (group grievance) in writing
directly to the Superintendent. The processing of the grievance shall commence at
Level Two.
D. Initiation and Processing
1. Level One - Immediate Supervisor
A grievance must be initiated at Level One, in writing to the aggrieved's immediate
supervisor, within twenty (20) days from the time the grievant knew of its occurrence.
The matter will then be discussed between the two (2) parties and/or through a
member of the Grievance Committee of the Association. The objective of this
discussion will be the informal resolution of the matter, and it shall be held within

6

seven (7) days after written notification of the grievance, at a time mutually
convenient to the parties concerned.
2. Level Two - Superintendent of Schools
a. In the event that the employee is not satisfied with the disposition of the
grievance at Level One, and if further action is, the individual shall, within seven
(7) days, file the grievance in writing with the chairperson of the Grievance
Committee. The Grievance Committee shall make a judgment on the merits of
the grievance within seven (7) days. If the Grievance Committee decides either
that the request lacks merit or accepts the decision at Level One, it shall so notify
the grievant. If the Grievance Committee decides that the grievance has merit, or
the employee is dissatisfied with the Grievance Committee's decision, either
party may refer the grievance in writing to the Superintendent within seven (7)
days after the decision is rendered by the Grievance Committee.
b. The Superintendent or designee shall represent the administration. Within seven
(7) days after receipt of the written grievance by the Superintendent of schools,
the Superintendent or designee shall meet with the aggrieved party and
association representative to consider and resolve the grievance.
3. Level Three - Board of School Directors
If the aggrieved employee desires to proceed to this level, the grievant shall file such
grievance within seven (7) days after receipt of the denial at Level Two with the
Secretary of the Board of School Directors for the Board's consideration. After such
referral, the aggrieved party or Association representative and the Board shall meet
within ten (10) days for the purpose of considering and resolving the grievance
in a mutually satisfactory manner.
4. Level Four - Binding Arbitration
If the action in Level Three fails to resolve the grievance to the satisfaction of the
Association, the Association may refer the grievance to binding arbitration as
provided in Section 903 of Act 195.
E. Grievant and Association Rights
The grievant shall be represented at all stages of the grievance procedure by a person
selected or approved by the Association. No reprisals of any kind shall be taken by the
Employer or any agent thereof against any party in interest, any representative, any
member of the Association, or any other participant in the grievance procedure.
Records of grievances shall not be forwarded to any prospective employer.

7

ARTICLE VII
ASSOCIATION RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES
A. Information
The District agrees to furnish to the officers of the Association in response to reasonable
requests from time to time all available public information concerning the educational
program and the financial resources of the District, and all such information that shall
assist the Association in developing programs on behalf of the employees. Information
concerning addresses of employees shall be held in strict confidence by the
Association.
B. Use of Buildings
The Association and its representatives shall have the right to use school buildings at
reasonable hours for Association meetings and other Association activities free of
charge. Additionally, the District will strive to provide storage space at the same building
of the Association President. If space is not available within that building, then space will
be provided at Panorama Village.
C. Bulletin Boards
The Association shall be entitled to use bulletin boards for Association notices.
D. Mail Boxes and Mail System
The Association shall have the right to use inter-school and intra-school mail systems
and mail boxes.
E. Equipment
The Association shall have the right to use school equipment.
F. Right to Speak at Meetings
An Association representative may speak to the employees during any meeting of said
employees provided prior agreement to do so shall be made with the person conducting
the meeting.
G. Release Time for Association President
The President of the Association will be released with pay for up to ten (10) days each
year to attend hearings or proceedings involving the Association, provided the
Association pays for substitute coverage. The Association will submit requests for
released time as far in advance as is feasible, listing the number of days requested and
specifying the meetings to be attended. The same provision shall pertain to all other
members requesting absence under this section.
H. Release Time for Association Representatives
The District shall provide up to a total of twenty (20) days of release time with pay for
Association representatives to attend state meetings, provided the Association pays for

8

the substitutes. Additional days needed for an Association member to serve on state or
national committees may be granted by the Superintendent upon written request of the
Association.

ARTICLE VIII
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES
A. Procedures For Discharge, Reduction or Discipline
No employee shall be discharged, reduced in rank or compensation, except for
incompetence, intemperance, neglect of duty, violation of the School Laws of
Pennsylvania, or reasonable regulations of the Employer, or for other just cause. Due
notice of such reason or reasons shall be given to the employee and to the Association
representative in writing, and any such action asserted by the Employer or any agent or
representative thereof shall be subject to the grievance procedure herein set forth
provided that either party shall have the right of appeal to court from the final decision
under the grievance procedure.
The Employer will attempt to discipline employees in such manner so as not to
embarrass the employee before the public or other employees. It must be kept in mind,
however, that where insubordination or flouting of authority by an employee in public
and/or in the presence of other employees takes place, the Employer shall not be
restricted by the operation of this section.
B. Required Meetings or Hearings
Whenever any employee is required to appear before the Superintendent, Board, or any
committee or representative thereof concerning any matter which could adversely affect
the continuation of that employee in current office, position, or employment or the salary
or any increments thereto, then the employee shall be given prior written notice of the
reasons for such meeting or interview and shall be entitled to have a representative of
the Association and/or legal counsel present to advise and represent the employee
during such meeting or interview.
C. Notification of Reasonable Assurance
All bargaining unit employees whose positions are continuing for the next school year,
shall be given notice of reasonable assurance of continued employment no later than
June 30 of each year.
D. Changes In Assignment
Employees shall be given prior notification and an opportunity to discuss the reasons
prior to any change in assignment.
E. Layoff/Recall
1. Procedures for Layoffs

9

a.

In the event it becomes necessary to lay off employees for any reason, the
District shall consider seniority as one of the factors in determining which
employees to lay off. The Employer shall furnish the Union with all pertinent
information, including copies of documents used in making determinations
relevant to layoffs.

b.

Employees to be laid off shall be notified in writing within fifteen (15) days prior to
the effective date of the layoff. The written notice will provide the reasons for the
layoff.

c.

Laid off employees will be automatically added to the substitute list.

2. Procedures for Recall
a. For the purposes of this section, classification shall be defined according to the
following:
i. Secretarial/Clerical or Paraprofessional Classification
ii. Grade classification
iii. Full-time or Part-time
iv. Number of days assigned per year
b. When recalling laid off employees, the District shall consider seniority as one of
the factors in determining which employees to recall to vacant positions. No
other individual inside or outside of the bargaining unit may be hired in the laid off
employee’s own job classification until the laid off employee is recalled back into
a position within the employee’s own job classification.
c. The laid off employee may apply to a position in a job classification other than
their own job classification. The employee must notify the Human Resources
Office if they wish to remain on the recall list.
d. Refusal to accept recall to an equivalent position within their own job
classification will result in a loss of recall rights and seniority.
e. The District will automatically place laid off employees on the recall list for one (1)
year following layoff. In subsequent years, eligibility for recall shall be conditional
upon annual written notice to the Employer of the laid off employee’s current
residence and availability.
F. Unsafe and Hazardous Conditions
In the case of a bomb threat or other emergency requiring evacuation, all bargaining unit
members shall leave the building with the students and teachers. Additionally, no
bargaining unit member will be required to reenter the building until it is declared safe for
students and employees. Bargaining unit members may volunteer to enter an

10

evacuated building for the purpose of assisting law enforcement, fire and/or other
emergency personnel.
G. Limits of Duties
No unlicensed or non-certified bargaining unit member shall be required to provide any
health service which, by law, regulation or policy must be performed by a certified or
licensed professional.

ARTICLE IX
JOB CLASSIFICATIONS AND WORK YEAR
A. Job Classifications
For the purposes of this contract, the parties recognize the existence of two (2) distinct
classifications within the support services function. These classifications are:
Secretarial/Clerical and Paraprofessionals.
B. Length of the Work Year
The work year for bargaining unit employees shall be as follows:
1. Paraprofessionals
Minimum of 181 days per year (which includes two (2) paid holidays and two (2)
professional development days) to a maximum of 260 days per year [which includes
twelve (12) paid holidays].
2. Secretarial/Clerical
Minimum of 200 days per year [which includes five (5) paid holidays] to a maximum
of 260 days per year [which includes twelve (12) paid holidays].
3. In the event of an extra day(s) in a work year, employees shall be paid on June 30 for
the additional day(s) at the rate of pay being received during the pay period
immediately prior to the extra day(s).
4.

All positions include a designated number of professional development days when
employees are required to attend in-service days. Professional development days
will be announced in April of the preceding school year. Employees should contact
their administrator if they are unsure when these days are scheduled. When
employees are required to attend additional in-service days, they shall be paid for
such attendance at their current hourly rate.

C. Holidays
1. Secretaries/Clerical Employees
a. Twelve-month employees (260 days) shall receive the following paid holidays,
for a total of 12 paid holidays included in their 260 paid days:
Labor Day

11

Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Day before Christmas
Christmas Day
Day after Christmas
3 Floating Holidays
○ Scheduled by the District between December 24 and January 2
○ Any employee who is required to work on one or all of these days,
will receive their regular pay
■ Floating holiday(s) for those days worked (maximum of 3)
will be added as floating holidays in the absence
management system
○ Any such floating holidays must be used by June 30 of that school
year
New Year’s Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
b. Eleven-month (238 days) and ten-month (216 days) employees shall receive
the same paid holidays as twelve-month employees with the exception of
Independence Day, for a total of 11 paid holidays included in their 238 or 216
paid days.
c. 200-day employees shall receive the following paid holidays, for a total of 5
paid holidays included in their 200 paid days:
Labor Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
New Year's Day
Memorial Day
2. Paraprofessionals
Twelve-month (260 days) paraprofessionals receive the same 12 paid holidays
as do 260-day secretarial/clerical employees. All other paraprofessionals shall
receive the following paid holidays, for a total of 2 paid holidays included in their
paid days:
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
D. Vacations
1. Secretaries/Clerical
a. Twelve-month (260 paid days) employees shall earn vacation days as follows:
1 through 3 years of service - 1 day per month
= 12 days
4 through 8 years of service - 1.25 days per month
= 15 days

12

9 through 19 years of service - 1.67 days per month
20 years of service or more - 1.83 days per month

= 20 days
= 22 days

b. Eleven-month (238 paid days) employees shall earn vacation days, calculated
over 12 months, as follows:
1 through 3 years of service - .92 days per month
= 11 days
4 through 8 years of service - 1.17 days per month
= 14 days
9 through 19 years of service - 1.50 days per month
= 18 days
20 years of service or more - 1.67 days per month
= 20 days
c. Ten-month (216 paid days) employees shall earn vacation days, calculated over
12 months, as follows:
1 through 6 years of service - .83 days per month
= 10 days
7 through 9 years of service - 1.04 days per month
= 12.5 days
10 or more years of service - 1.25 days per month
= 15 days
d. 200 paid days employees earn no vacation days
2. Paraprofessionals
a. Twelve-month (260 paid days) paraprofessionals shall earn vacation days as
follows:
1 through 3 years of service - 1 day per month
= 12 days
4 through 8 years of service - 1.25 days per month
= 15 days
9 through 19 years of service - 1.67 days per month
= 20 days
20 years of service or more - 1.83 days per month
= 22 days
b. All other paraprofessional employees earn no vacation days.
3. For the purposes of this section, years of service is defined as all continuous years
employed by the District in a full-time position.
4. Employees are permitted to accumulate a maximum amount of vacation days equal
to twice their annual accrual.
5. Employees are urged to take vacation time with prior approval of their immediate
supervisor. It is recommended that employees submit requests for vacation time at
least ten (10) days in advance.
6.

All employees accruing vacation time will be paid for accrued but unused vacation at
termination. Vacation days for compensation will not exceed the number accrued in
one (1) year. If an employee dies while in service, the cash payment shall be made
to the employee’s named beneficiary, and in default or death of a named beneficiary,
to the legally appointed representative of the employee’s estate.

13

ARTICLE X
WORKING HOURS AND CONDITIONS
A. Definitions
Full-time, benefit-eligible positions are those that are regularly scheduled to work at least
30 hours per scheduled work week.
Employees hired prior to January 1, 2015, who:
1. are appointed to a benefit-eligible position as of June 30, 2018, shall remain
benefit-eligible as long as they remain in that position.
2. are appointed to a position that is not eligible for benefits as of June 30, 2018, and:
a. who subsequently are required by the District to work a regular schedule of 25 29.5 hours per scheduled work week shall be eligible for benefits.
b. who voluntarily move to a regular work schedule of 25 - 29.5 hours per
scheduled work week shall not be eligible for benefits.
B. Work Hours
1. Secretaries
a. The normal work week shall be 37.5 hours beginning on Monday, normally
between no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and ending on Friday no later than 5:00 p.m.
Alternate starting and ending times may be established outside of 7:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m if:
i. a position is vacant and District needs require alternate starting and
ending times, or
ii. the incumbent secretary desires and the administrator and the Human
Resources Director approves in writing alternate starting and ending
times.
b. The normal work day shall be 7.5 hours with a duty-free hour or half-hour off for
lunch each working day. Each immediate supervisor has the right to stagger
lunch breaks in an office/building where more than one secretary works to
provide complete office coverage from 11:00 a.m. through 2:00 p.m.
2. Paraprofessionals
The normal work hours per day for paraprofessionals shall begin on Monday,
normally no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and ending on Friday, no later than 5:00 p.m., with
a duty free half-hour lunch break. Alternate starting and ending times may be
established outside of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. if:
a. a position is vacant and District needs require alternate starting/ending times, or
b. the incumbent paraprofessional desires and the administrator and the Human
Resources Director approves in writing alternate starting/ending times.

14

3. Full-time employees shall be entitled to a paid fifteen (15) minute break in the
morning and a paid fifteen (15) minute break in the afternoon.
C. Working Conditions
All secretaries and employees working in a classroom shall be entitled to a suitable,
nonprimary size chair. If a writing space is needed, then that too shall be supplied.
Employees shall receive all classroom supplies (books, pens, pencils, paper, etc.)
necessary to fulfill the duties of their position.

ARTICLE XI
SENIORITY
A. Definitions
1. Seniority shall be defined as the total length of service in the District in a bargaining
unit position.
2. As used herein, "Qualification" or "Qualified" means having sufficient skill, ability, and
physical fitness to move into a job and immediately perform at least well enough to
meet minimum requirements as set forth in the job description.
B. Accrual
Seniority shall continue to accrue during all approved leaves of absence. Seniority shall
be broken only for resignation, retirement, or lawful discharge.
C. Ties
Ties in seniority shall be broken by lottery. Such lottery shall be conducted by an
Association representative.
D. Notification
On or before September 15 of each year, seniority lists shall be posted in each building.
Interim updating of these lists shall be sent to the Association President.
E. Exceptions
Any exception to the seniority list must be filed with the District within sixty (60) calendar
days of the posting of the list.

ARTICLE XII
VACANCIES - TRANSFERS
A. Definition
For the purpose of this section, "vacancy" means a position that the Board of School
Directors determines has become available as a result of the retirement, resignation,

15

death or lawful dismissal of a current employee or as a result of the creation of a new or
additional bargaining unit position. "Temporary Vacancy" shall mean that a position is
available as a result of the absence of a current employee on approved leave. "Days"
shall be defined as those days when the District Administrative Office is open for
business.
B. Posting
1. Whenever a vacancy or temporary vacancy arises or is anticipated within the
bargaining unit, it shall be posted for bid on the District’s Human Resources website
and shall remain posted for a period of ten (10) workdays.
2. Content - All postings shall contain the minimum qualifications/skill requirements,
grade classification, hours per day, days per year, location and job description.
C. Bidding
All employees in the bargaining unit, including furloughed (laid off) employees, may
apply for posted vacant or newly created positions. Bids shall be submitted in
accordance with the instructions included on the Human Resources website.
D. Awarding Positions
1. Vacancies will be filled as soon as possible following the end of the posting period.
All internal candidates within the bargaining unit who applied in accordance with
Section C above and who have the minimum qualifications included in the job
description for the position will be interviewed before external candidates are
interviewed. If any bargaining unit candidate is not interviewed prior to external
candidates being interviewed, the individual shall be granted an interview prior to the
filling of the vacancy. If more than ten (10) days will be needed, the parties agree to
discuss an appropriate time frame not to exceed 30 days. The successful internal
candidate shall begin receiving their new rate of pay, if higher, no later than ten (10)
workdays from notification of receiving the position.
2. The successful internal candidate will be transferred to the new position within ten
(10) workdays of the notification of assignment. If more than ten (10) days will be
needed, the parties agree to discuss an appropriate time frame not to exceed thirty
(30) days. The successful internal candidate shall begin receiving their new rate of
pay, if higher, no later than ten (10) workdays from notification of receiving the
position.
3. All internal bargaining unit candidates shall receive written notification of the outcome
of their bid within fifteen (15) workdays of the Board of School Directors approval of
the hire of the successful candidate.

16

E. Involuntary Transfer
In the event that an involuntary transfer is deemed necessary by the Employer, the
following shall apply:
1. The District will first consider qualified volunteers, if any, for the transfer.
2. If the need to transfer remains, the District shall consider the seniority of the qualified
employees within the classification as one of the factors in determining which
employees should be transferred.
3. The District will make every effort to transfer a qualified employee within the
respective group, grade, hours per day, and annual number of days scheduled to
work. If this is not possible, the qualified employee will be transferred to a position
that most closely aligns with the respective group, grade, hours per day, and
number of days scheduled to work at the time of the elimination of the position.
The Human Resources Director will meet with the employee to be transferred to explain
the reasons for the transfer. In the event of a transfer to a higher paying position, the
employee shall receive the higher rate of pay. In the event of a transfer to a lower
paying position, the individual will be red-circled until the rate of the new position
exceeds the red-circled rate.

ARTICLE XIII
PERSONNEL FILES
A. Right to Access
Employee personnel records are available in the Human Resource Office for personal
inspection by the employee upon advance notice to the Human Resources Director.
The right to access includes the right to make written comments about any information
contained in the file. Any written comment must be signed by the employee, and it will
become part of the personnel file. The Human Resources Director will maintain the
confidentiality of specific confidential materials such as letters of reference. The Human
Resources Director or a designee will be present while the employee reviews file
material. The employee shall have the right to have an Association representative
present during said review.
B. No Separate File
There shall be no separate permanent files that the individual employee does not have
access for inspection purposes. The District will maintain a personnel file for each
employee in the Human Resource Office.
C. Derogatory Material
No material derogatory to an employee's conduct, service, character or personality shall
be placed in the personnel file unless the employee has had an opportunity to review the

17

material. The employee shall acknowledge the opportunity to review such material by
signing the copy to be filed with the express understanding that such signature in no way
indicates Agreement with the contents thereof. The employee shall also have the right
to submit a written answer to such material and that answer shall be reviewed by the
Superintendent or his/her designee and attached to the file copy.

ARTICLE XIV
SHORT-TERM PAID LEAVES OF ABSENCE
The District agrees that members of the bargaining unit will be entitled to paid short-term leaves
for personal reasons as hereinafter set forth:
A. For Personal Illness
1. Sick Day Accrual
Employees shall earn on a monthly basis one (1) day of sick leave per month of
service per year. In addition, six (6) sick/family care days shall be added to
employees’ balances in July of each year. Such sick leave shall accumulate from
year-to-year without limitation.
Employees may be required, at the discretion of their supervisor, to present a
physician's certification stating the reason for absence after three (3) consecutive
days' absence. Except, however, that physician’s certification shall not be requested
for absences related to a documented Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
condition.
2. Sick Day Donation Program
In the event an employee is ill or injured and needs to be absent from work for a
prolonged period of time, this Article and Article XV outline procedures for the use of
applicable accrued paid time off and additional time off without pay. In the event that
an employee exhausts all applicable accrued paid time off, this program
provides the opportunity for co-workers to donate some of their accrued sick days
in order to provide additional paid time off to the absent employee.
Procedure
a. When an employee is absent and about to exhaust all applicable paid time off,
the employee or the employee’s supervisor will contact the Human
Resources Office advising of the need for donation.
b. After consulting with the employee, if the absent employee wishes to participate
in the donation program, Human Resources will send a message to the members
of the SCESPA bargaining unit.
c. All donating employees will remain anonymous.
d. If there are sick days available to be used, the absent employee shall be
compensated at the absent employee’s regular rate of pay.

18

e.
f.

Donating employees must maintain at least 30 sick days after donation.
Normally, employees can donate a day at a time, up to five (5) in each school
year.
g. Employees who wish to donate will follow the instructions as outlined by the
Human Resources Office. Human Resources will notify the donor when the
donated time has been deducted from their accrued leave.
h. Donated days will be used in the order in which they were received.
i.
The absent employee may use the donated time until the employee is able to
return to work or the disability insurance eligibility begins, whichever occurs first.
j.
The absent employee may return with a balance of one (1)sick day per month for
the remainder of the school year from the date of return, up to ten (10) donated
sick days.
B. For Death in the Immediate Family
Five (5) days each occurrence. Immediate family shall be defined as wife, husband,
parents (including step or foster parents), sister, brother, children (including step or foster
children), parent-in-law, grandparent, grandchild, son-in-law, daughter-in-law,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, or other members of the same household. Two (2) days for
each occurrence for aunt, uncle, niece, or nephew.
C. For Death of a Close Friend or Relative
One (1) day each occurrence.
D. Care for Immediate Family
1. Employees are permitted to use up to 6 accumulated sick/family care days per year
to care for an ill, immediate family member. Immediate family shall be defined as
wife, husband, domestic partner, parents (including step or foster parents), sister,
brother, children (including step or foster children), parent-in-law, grandparent,
grandchild, also the following who are members of the same household: son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, niece, nephew, aunt and uncle.
2. Birth or Adoption of a Child/Children
Employees who have at least one (1) year of continuous employment with the
District shall be eligible to use up to 10 consecutive unused sick/family care days
within 60 calendar days following the birth or adoption of a child/children.
E. For Personal Business
1. Secretarial/Clerical
1st through 3rd year of service
4th year of service or more

2 days
3 days

2. Paraprofessional
1st through 3rd year of service
4th year of service or more

2 days
3 days

19

3. For all bargaining unit employees, such leave will accrue from year-to-year and may
accumulate to a total of five (5) personal business leave days. Employees will be
permitted to take up to five (5) days of accumulated personal leave consecutively
subject to the operational needs of the District. Except in cases of emergency,
written approval must be requested and granted by the building principal or
appropriate supervisor one week prior to the commencement of the personal leave.
4. If on July 1 of any year the accumulated unused personal leave days, with the new
year’s days added, exceed five (5), the excess number of days will be transferred to
the employee’s sick leave accumulation.
F. Jury Duty/Legal Absence
Compensated by full salary minus jury compensation. Employees who are required to
appear in a legal proceeding arising out of their employment in the school District, shall
be provided the necessary time off with pay.
G. Subpoenaed Witness
If an employee is subpoenaed as a witness and is not a party to the legal action, the
employee’s full salary shall be paid for the time spent by the employee during
working hours as a witness. If the subpoena is related to a SCASD student and/or
situation, upon receipt of the subpoena, the employee shall immediately provide a copy
to the Human Resources Office. Human Resources and/or the District Solicitor shall
attempt to make alternate arrangements for the employee’s participation to minimize
impact on students.
H. Emergency School Closings/Absence on Account of Weather
1. Secretarial/Clerical
All District buildings will normally be open; however, at those times when school is
closed to students due to weather conditions or when an employee is absent due to
the weather, the following will apply:
a. All eleven- and twelve-month employees
All employees will be expected to report to work as close to the usual starting
time as conditions permit. Should the employee not report to work, time
missed will be charged to vacation, time without pay, or personal day where
applicable.
b. All 200 and 216 paid day employees
Employees in 200 or 216 paid day positions, based upon the student school
year, will not report to work on those days that the student school day is
canceled due to weather conditions. The make-up day(s) will come on days
previously scheduled on the school calendar as make-up days or will be
added in June.

20

2. Paraprofessional
All District buildings will normally be open; however, at those times when school is
closed to students due to weather conditions or when an employee is absent due to
the weather, the following will apply:
a. All 260 day (12-month) employees
All employees will be expected to report to work as close to the usual starting
time as conditions permit. Should the employee not report to work, time
missed will be charged to vacation, time without pay, or personal day where
applicable. Approval of the supervisor will be required if the time is to be
charged to vacation.
b. All other paraprofessional employees
Employees whose work year is based upon the student/teacher school year,
will not report to work on those days that the student school day is canceled
due to weather conditions. The make-up day(s) will come on days previously
scheduled on the school calendar as make-up days.
3. Declared State of Emergency
a. If the state or local government should declare a state of emergency due to
weather conditions or other disasters, and organizations are ordered to keep
employees at home, then employees will not be required to report to work
and will suffer no loss in pay.
b. If the state or local government should declare a state of emergency due to
other emergency conditions not referenced above, then the parties shall meet
to discuss what, if any, accommodations can be made.
c. Properly identified essential employees who are required by their
administrator to report to work during a Declared State of Emergency shall
receive compensation at one and one-half (1 ½) their regular hourly rate for
hours worked.

4. In the event an employee reports to work and finds no work available, the employee
shall be paid for two (2) hours on a straight time basis. However, the employee shall
not be paid if:
a. the employee has been informed (by personal contact or via a public
announcement) at least one hour in advance not to report to work, or
b. the employee turns down suitable alternate work that is offered.
I.

Delayed Opening/Early Dismissals
1. Secretarial/Clerical
When a "delayed opening" of school has been announced, all secretarial/clerical
staff should plan to arrive at their work assignment as close to the usual starting time
as conditions permit or account for their absence using applicable paid leave or time
without pay.

21

When an early dismissal of school has been announced, the Superintendent will
inform all secretarial/clerical staff if and when they may leave their assigned
responsibilities prior to the end of the normal work day. Employees who request to
leave prior to the Superintendent's announcement must secure approval of their
immediate supervisor and account for their absence using applicable paid leave or
time without pay.
2. Paraprofessionals
When a "delayed opening" has been announced, paraprofessional employees
should plan to be in the building for the same number of minutes in advance of the
delayed start of school as is usually required by the immediate supervisor. Thus, if
paraprofessional employees are required to report 30 minutes before the
instructional day begins, these employees should plan to be on duty 30 minutes
before the specified "delayed opening" time. Supervisors may provide different
instructions to their employees in writing by September 30 each year.
When an early dismissal has been announced, paraprofessional employees remain
at work until advised by the Principal that they may leave.
260 Day Paraprofessionals
Subject to the same terms and conditions outlined for secretarial/clerical employees
under Article XIV, Section I, 1 above.

ARTICLE XV
UNPAID LEAVES OF ABSENCE/EXTENDED LEAVES OF ABSENCE
A. Induction Into the Armed Forces - The provisions of federal and state laws regarding
leaves and rights retained by persons on leave for military services apply to all members
of the bargaining unit. Any member of the bargaining unit desiring to return to the
District prior to the originally designated approved date shall submit a request in writing
at least sixty (60) days prior to the requested return date. This request is not to be
interpreted as an automatic approval.
B. Family and Medical Leave Act - For purposes of the Family and Medical Leave Act
(FMLA), an eligible employee is any employee who has worked for the District for at
least 12 months, and who has worked at least 1,250 hours within the 12-month period
immediately prior to the absence.
A qualifying employee is eligible during any fiscal year for a total of either 12 or 26 work
weeks (depending on the reason for the absence) of unpaid FMLA leave. As outlined in
this contract, the District provides additional leave time in some situations. FMLA leave
may be for one (1) or more of the following:

22

1. the birth of an employee's child, including prenatal doctor visits as well as caring for
the newborn child;
2. the placement of a child with the employee for adoption or foster care;
3. the care for a seriously ill child, spouse, or parent of the employee;
4. the employee's own serious illness which causes the employee to be unable to
perform assigned functions;
5. a qualifying military exigency; or
6. the care of a covered service member injured in the line of duty.
Absences may be of an ongoing nature or, when medically necessary, may be taken as
an intermittent leave or on a reduced leave schedule. Whenever possible, the employee
shall make a reasonable effort to schedule any medical treatment visits so as not to
unduly disrupt operations.
An employee who is absent under the provisions of the FMLA must record the absence
as such.
C. Childbearing Leave - Disabilities caused or contributed to by pregnancy, miscarriage,
abortion, childbirth, and recovery therefrom, are, for all job-related purposes, temporary
disabilities and are covered by FMLA. While on childbearing leave, the employee will be
entitled to use sick leave benefits and disability benefits during the time she is disabled
and unable to work. All available sick leave must be used before becoming eligible for
income protection benefits. Normally, the disability period for childbearing is six (6)
weeks following delivery. Should disability extend beyond six (6) weeks, an FMLA form
indicating the anticipated length of disability and expected date of return to work must be
submitted to the Human Resources office. The request for such leave must be
discussed with the supervisor and the Human Resources office in advance of the
leave. Placement upon return will be in the same or substantially equivalent position as
the one held prior to the leave.
D. Child Rearing Leave - Request for child rearing leave shall be made in writing to the
Human Resources office at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date the leave is
to begin. Employees shall be granted up to one (1) year for child rearing leave. During
such leave, the employee uses all available vacation and personal time prior to being
placed on a leave without pay. After all time covered by FMLA has been used, the
employee may elect to continue all benefits by paying the full cost. The request for such
leave must be discussed with the supervisor and the Human Resources office in
advance. Employees on child rearing leave are required to submit to the Human
Resources office notification of intent to return at least thirty (30) days prior to

23

expiration of leave. Placement upon return will be in the same or substantially equivalent
position as the one held prior to the leave. All benefits for which the employee qualifies
will be reinstated.
E. Extended Leave
The District may grant a leave of absence without pay due to sickness or accident for up
to two years for any employee whose accumulated sick leave runs out and who provides
medical documentation stating the cause of disability, the beginning of the disability
period, the length of the disability and the expected date the employee could return to
work. Employees on approved extended leaves without pay will not be considered
absent without leave. This provision does not diminish or otherwise modify the right of
eligible full-time employees to receive income protection payments as provided under
Article XVII, Section A, 4.
ARTICLE XVI
EDUCATIONAL IMPROVEMENT
A. Required Courses
The District shall reimburse any employee for the full cost of any courses that the District
requires the employee to take as well as any expenses associated with attendance at
the course. Examples of expenses include mileage, meals and lodging. All time spent
participating in the course will be considered to be work hours.
B. College Tuition Reimbursement
Members of the bargaining unit will be eligible for tuition reimbursement for up to
nine (9) credits per contract year in accordance with the following:
1. To be eligible for reimbursement, all courses must have the prior approval of the
applicable administrator and the Assistant Superintendent.
2. Courses shall be offered by an accredited institution and the coursework can be
applied to work within the District. This includes technical courses or similar
experiences that are offered outside of a college/university if the course or
experience complements the individual’s expertise.
3. Employees shall be reimbursed for the payment of college tuition up to 85 percent of
the actual cost. In no case may this exceed 85 percent of the 2023-2024 Penn State
University tuition per credit hour.
4. The course shall be satisfactorily completed: an equivalent grade of B- or better
when a letter grade is reported; or, 80% or better when a numerical grade is
reported; or, a grade of Pass when the course is graded on a Pass/Fail basis.
5. If an employee separates from the school District for any cause other than furlough
or the involuntary transfer of a spouse/partner within twelve (12) months after the

24

completion of a course that is paid in part or in whole by the District, the employee
shall repay the District 100% of the funds expended for the course.
Reimbursement shall be made within fifteen (15) work days of the employee's written
evidence of course registration and an itemized receipt of payment. At the time
reimbursement is requested, the employee will sign a contract, prepared by the District,
acknowledging that the District may withhold the outstanding balance due from the
employee's final paycheck of the year, if proof of satisfactory course completion is not
provided or the employee becomes ineligible for some other reason.
For those employees registering at Penn State University, the District will accept direct
billing from the University.
C. In-Service Training
Scheduled District in-service days may include programs tailored specifically for support
personnel. When such activities are planned, the District may require employees to
participate.
ARTICLE XVII
INSURANCE BENEFITS
A. Insurance Benefits
1. Medical Benefits
a. The District agrees to provide a health insurance plan to employees in
benefits-eligible positions - plan provisions and employee monthly premiums
are included in Appendix D. Employees hired prior to July 1, 2018, may
choose either the PPO plan or the Qualified High Deductible Health Plan and
may change plans during the open enrollment period each year or in the case
of a qualifying event. Employees hired on or after July 1, 2018, may elect
coverage in the Qualified High Deductible Health Plan. The employee
monthly premium will be made via monthly payroll deduction through a
Section 125 Plan with pre-tax dollars.

b. Health Savings Account
Employees enrolled in the Qualified High Deductible Health Plan shall have
access to an associated Health Savings Account. Both the employee and the
District may make contributions to the Health Savings Account. Annual
District contributions shall be:
For September 2023, $330 for individual coverage, $660 for all other
coverages.

25

For January 2024 through January 2028, $750 for individual coverage,
$1,500 for all other coverages – 67% of this amount will be added to the
Health Savings Account by the 6th business day in January and 33% will
be added on September 1.
$750 for individual coverage, $1,500 for all other coverages – 67% of this
amount will be added to the Health Savings Account by the 6th business
day in January and 33% will be added on September 1.
Those employees enrolled in the Qualified High Deductible Health Plan who
elect to enroll in Medicare will receive from the District an amount equivalent
to the HSA contributions added to the employee’s paycheck on the pay date
next following January 1 or September 1. It is the employee’s responsibility
to advise the Human Resources Office of their intent to enroll in Medicare.
c. Wellness Incentives
Employees will be able to reduce their monthly co-premium by up to $8 per
month by electing up to 2 Wellness Incentives outlined by the District during
open enrollment.
d. The District agrees to pay employees who waive medical insurance $2,000
per year. Payment will be made in two (2) installments, December and June.
In order to waive coverage, the employee must document medical insurance
coverage through another entity. An employee who waives coverage may
rejoin District coverage during the annual open enrollment period or in the
case of a qualifying event. An open enrollment period by a spouse’s or
domestic partner’s employer constitutes an event whereby an employee can
make an election change and receive a prorated buyout. No incentive will
be provided to an employee who is covered as a dependent on another
District employee’s insurance.
e. Spouses and domestic partners employed by another school district,
intermediate unit, or vocational technical school; the Mount Nittany Medical
Center/Physicians’ Group and other, similar medical facilities/groups; an
institution of higher education; a federal/state/local government and/or its
respective agencies; or, Wegmans who are eligible for health insurance
coverage through their employer will be eligible for coverage under the
District’s health insurance only if the employee pays the full premium cost
differential for such spouse/domestic partner.
Dependents employed by another school district, intermediate unit, or
vocational technical school; the Mount Nittany Medical Center/Physicians’
Group and other, similar medical facilities/groups; an institution of higher
education; a federal/state/local government and/or its respective agencies; or,

26

Wegmans who are eligible for health insurance coverage through their
employer will be eligible for coverage under the District’s health insurance
only if the employee pays an additional $100 per month for such dependent.
f. Coverage for employees whose spouse/domestic partner is also a District
employee who is eligible for health insurance may enroll in either one (1)
family plan or two (2) individual plans [one (1) for each employee]. When
spouses/domestic partners are members of two different bargaining units, the
employees will pay monthly co-premiums which are the lesser of the
co-premiums between the two (2) contracts for family coverage.
g. Continuation of Benefits Upon Retirement
Employees who retire from their employment with the District and
receive retirement benefits from the Public School Employees' Retirement
System have the option to continue their medical/dental insurance benefits
until age 65, or until they become eligible for coverage elsewhere, by paying
the District’s group monthly premium directly to the District.
h. Continuation of Benefits Upon Separation of Employment
All bargaining unit employees who terminate their employment with the
District at the end of their work year, shall have their health insurance
coverage only, continued through the end of August.
2. Dental Insurance
The District agrees to provide dental insurance as included in Appendix B for each
employee in a benefits-eligible position. The District will provide dependent dental
coverage with 66% of the premium costs paid by the District. Employee premiums
will be made through monthly payroll deduction (see Appendix B). When an
employee’s spouse/domestic partner is also a District employee who is eligible for
dental insurance, each employee will be provided an individual dental insurance
policy. If the couple has dependent children, then one of the employees may cover
the children (the lesser of the employee premiums will be used).
3. Life Insurance
Premiums are paid by the District for full-time employees for a term life insurance
policy with accidental death and dismemberment in the amount of $40,000.
Employees may elect to purchase, through payroll deduction, an additional $40,000
term life insurance through the optional plan.
4. Income Protection (Long-Term Disability Insurance)
Provided by the District for all full-time employees. This protection provides 60% of
the employee's salary while on disability for a period of no more than two years for
sickness and five (5) years for accidents. A thirty (30) calendar day waiting period
from the date of disability is required before a person is eligible for income protection

27

insurance. Employees are required to use all available sick leave days before this
insurance can take effect.
5. Workers' Compensation
All employees are covered by Workers' Compensation Insurance. An employee is
required to report to the Human Resources Office all accidents that occur at work
immediately after such occurrences, but no later than thirty (30) days after the
incident, in order to be eligible to receive appropriate benefits under the
Pennsylvania Workers' Compensation Act.
B. Insurance Benefits for Part-time Employees
Part-time bargaining unit employees may elect to purchase health insurance (employee
only), dental insurance (employee only), life insurance and income protection (disability)
by paying 100% of the total District cost for the benefits selected. The cost for these
benefits will be deducted from the employee’s monthly pay.

ARTICLE XVIII
RETIREMENT BENEFITS
A. Retirement Benefits
A retirement benefit will be paid for accrued but unused sick leave days for those
employees retiring from the District who meet the requirements described below:
i. the employee has terminated service by meeting the requirements of the School
Code, and
ii. has had a minimum of ten (10) years continuous service with the State College Area
School District, and
iii. has completed thirty-five (35) years or more of credited service in the Pennsylvania
Public School Employes' Retirement System (PSERS), regardless of age, or
iv. has completed thirty (30) years or more of credited service in the PSERS at age 60,
or
v. has completed twenty-five (25) years or more of credited service in the PSERS and
qualified for a withdrawal (early) retirement, or
vi. has completed twenty (20) years of service in the State College Area School District
and is at least age 55, or
vii. if disabled, after ten (10) years of service and is qualified for disability allowance
under the PSERS.

28

The dollar benefit paid will be $40.00 per day for each day of unused sick leave. The
maximum days of sick leave paid shall not exceed the employee’s work year plus 40
days.
Upon the death of an employee, the retirement benefit payment will be made to the
beneficiary(ies) or estate within thirty (30) days after notification of the estate
representative.

ARTICLE XIX
WAGES AND OTHER COMPENSATION
A. Wage Schedules
1. Rates of pay for each classification (Secretarial/Clerical and Paraprofessional) are in
accordance with the Wage Rate Schedules found in Appendix C.
2. Grade Assignment
The District and the Association will develop a list of position grades and titles and
add that list to this document as Appendix E.
3. Employees hired on or before 12/31/2005 with twenty (20) years or more continuous
service or will receive a longevity allowance of 1.75% each year for as long as they
continue to work for the District.
4. Paraprofessionals hired for a lunch assignment in addition to an instructional
assignment will be paid at the instructional paraprofessional rate for their entire
assignment.
B. Placement on Wage Schedule
1. When an employee moves from one pay grade to another pay grade in the same
employee classification (i.e., Grade III to Grade IV), the employee will maintain the
same years of service for step placement purposes in the new position.
2. When an employee moves from one employee classification to another employee
classification (i.e., paraprofessional to secretarial), then:
a. If the employee does not have any applicable experience, the salary will be
placed at the base rate of the appropriate pay grade.
b. If the employee does have applicable experience, then credit can be given for
that applicable experience. For every two (2) years of applicable experience an
employee moves up one (1) step on the pay schedule, not to exceed five (5)
steps in total.
c. In the event that the employee’s current hourly rate is higher than the
applicable step for the new position’s pay grade, the employee’s current wage
rate will be frozen (red circled) until the rate in the new grade scale catches up
with the frozen wage rate.
29

d. Credit for applicable
Superintendent.

experience

shall

be

at

the discretion of the

3. When a position is reclassified (changed from one job classification to a different job
classification; such as but not limited to: from a paraprofessional to a secretarial
position) the incumbent employee will maintain employment in the reclassified
position, as well as step placement. This reclassification process will not constitute
a vacancy as defined in Article XII, Vacancies – Transfers, Section A. Definition of
this Agreement.
4. Determining Starting Rates:
a. Employees who have terminated employment with the District and are
re-employed within the same year, shall be credited with their former
continuous years of service for placement on the wage schedule.
b. Employees, who have terminated employment with the District and are
re-employed after a year’s absence, will be considered to be newly hired
employees..
c. Newly hired employees can receive credit for prior experience in a related field.
For every two (2) years of applicable experience an employee moves up one
(1) step on the pay schedule, not to exceed five (5) steps in total.
Employees hired prior to July 1, 2023, will have a one time opportunity to submit
their resume to the Human Resources Office and request credit for applicable
work experience that occurred prior to being employed by the District under the
guidelines laid out above. This opportunity extends from July 1, 2023, through
October 31, 2023. Each request will be reviewed and any resulting step movement
will be applicable the next pay date.
5. Movement on the wage rate schedule shall reflect years of continuous service within
the appropriate employee classification.
Credit for a year’s service will be
dependent upon satisfactory job performance. A full year’s credit for wage rate
schedule step advancement will be provided for employees beginning employment
with the District prior to December 31.
C. Payroll Schedule
Beginning July 1 of each year, increases in pay as agreed herein shall be effective.
D. Pay Periods
1. Secretarial/Clerical
a. The payroll schedule for 12-month (260-day) employees is based on 12 pay
periods within the year beginning on July 1 and ending June 30 of the following
year. The payroll schedule for 11-month (238-day) employees is based on 12 pay
periods within the year beginning on August 1 and ending July 31 of the following
year. The payroll schedule for ten-month (216-day) and 200-day employees is

30

based on twelve (12) pay periods within the year, beginning on September 1 and
ending August 31 of the following year. Scheduled pay days are the last working
day of each month. In the event a regularly scheduled pay day falls on a
holiday, employees will be paid on the last working day preceding the holiday.
b. Authorized payroll deductions, other than those of a mandatory nature
(retirement, social security, and federal, state and local income taxes) will be
made upon request of the employee. Deductions consist of authorized annuity
insurance, credit union deduction, United Way contributions, savings bonds,
dependent dental insurance and life insurance. For further information, please
contact the Human Resource Office.
c. Employee’s pay will be made via direct deposit to a bank/credit union account or
to a debit card.
2. Paraprofessionals
a. The payroll schedule for paraprofessional employees who work five (5) or more
hours per day, 260 days per year, is based on 12 pay periods within the year
beginning on July 1 and ending June 30 of the following year.
b. The payroll schedule for all other paraprofessional employees who work five (5)
or more hours per day, is based on twelve (12) pay periods within the year
beginning September 1 and ending August 31 of the following year.
Paraprofessional employees who work fewer than 5.0 hours/day must complete
daily time sheets indicating the hours worked per day. Wages paid will be based
on hours worked as reported on the employee time sheets. The payroll schedule
for these paraprofessionals will be the last working day of each month based
upon the hours worked from the 16th of the previous month to the 15th of the
month in which payday occurs.
c. Authorized payroll deductions, other than those of a mandatory nature such as
retirement, social security, and federal, state and local income taxes, will be
made upon request of the employee. Deductions consist of authorized annuity
insurance, credit union deduction, United Way contributions, savings bonds,
dependent dental insurance and contributory life insurance. For further
information, please contact the Human Resource Office.
d. Employee’s pay will be made via direct deposit to a bank/credit union account or
to a debit card.
3. Employees who are paid on a monthly basis, September through August, may
elect to withdraw their July and August paychecks in one lump sum on July 15.
Employees who wish to choose this option shall request this in writing to the

31

payroll department no later than May 15. Once this option is requested, this
withdrawal payment will continue each year thereafter, unless the employee
provides written notification to the payroll department by May 15, to discontinue
this option.
E. Mileage Reimbursement
The District will provide a mileage reimbursement at the approved Internal Revenue
Service rate per mile to employees who, in the course of their work, are required to drive
their personal automobile while performing business for the District.
F. Overtime
1. Overtime is permitted to be worked only after advance approval by the supervisor.
2. Overtime will be computed at the rate of one and one-half (11/2) times the regular
hourly rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of the base work week of forty (40)
hours. All overtime hours must be reported on time sheets. Double time rates of pay
will be paid for required work on Sundays. If an employee is required to work on a
paid holiday, the rate of pay for those hours worked will be one and one-half (11/2)
times the regular hourly rate of pay in addition to the holiday pay.
G. Temporary Pay
Temporary Pay is applicable when bargaining unit members:
1. Are assigned the higher level duties of an absent employee in a higher pay grade,
in lieu of regularly assigned duties, the employee will be paid at the regularly
assigned hourly rate or the higher pay grade rate, whichever is greater.
2. Are assigned a significant increase in supervisory responsibilities for a minimum of
three (3) hours in a day. This shall include supervising a classroom when the
teacher is presenting remotely. Such additional pay shall be an additional $1.00 per
hour for the those hours worked.

32

APPENDIX A
PAYROLL DEDUCTION AUTHORIZATION FOR ASSOCIATION DUES
I hereby authorize the State College Educational Support Personnel Association to enter into an
Agreement as defined by the Agreement with the District to have my association dues deducted
from my paycheck in 10 equal installments for those paid via timesheets/or 12 equal
installments for those paid on a monthly basis. These dues will be those established by the
local, regional, state and National Education Associations, and each year shall be increased or
decreased in an amount necessary to meet such increase or decrease as established by said
associations. It is to be understood that this authorization for deduction of association dues will
take effect with the next pay date and will continue yearly until such time that I elect to cancel it
by written request to the State College Educational Support Personnel Association by August 15
of the dues year, or until I terminate my employment with the District. Should I resign prior to
the end of the school year, I authorize the balance of dues owed to the State College
Educational Support Personnel Association to be deducted from my final check.

Date: __________________

Signed: ______________________________________________

Building: _______________

Address: ______________________________________

Employee ID #: _________________________________

34

APPENDIX B
DENTAL INSURANCE
A. The District will provide a dental benefit insurance policy to employees in a
benefits-eligible position. Individual coverage is provided at no cost. Dependent
coverage is available at an employee cost of thirty-four percent (34%) of the premium
costs paid by the District.
B. Preventive Services
The plan will pay 100% for the following:
● oral examinations
● cleaning of teeth (twice per year)
● preventive x-rays
● fluoride treatment
There is no annual deductible for these services and the cost of these services is not
applied to the annual $1,000 maximum coverage limit.
C. General Services
The plan will pay 100% for the following:
● treatment-related x-rays
● fillings
● anesthetics
● antibiotics
● extractions
● oral surgery
● endodontics
● periodontics
● space maintainers
● emergency office visits
● repair of prosthetic appliances
● major restorative (employees only)
An annual deductible of $50 for in-network services/$100 for out-of-network services is
applied against the incurred covered general services expenses, as outlined above, for
each employee/dependent.
The annual maximum payment for general services benefits is $1,000.00 per
employee/dependent.
D. Major restorative services are provided to dependents, with reimbursement at the rate of
75% of the usual/customary charge for the locale where the work is performed for the
dependent. The deductible and the maximum benefits as indicated in C are applicable
for this coverage.

35

APPENDIX C
HOURLY WAGE RATES
Secretarial/Clerical July 1, 2023-2024
Step

Years

A

B

C

D

E

F

1

0

$16.30

$17.15

$18.10

$19.20

$20.45

$21.90

2

1

$16.55

$17.40

$18.35

$19.45

$20.70

$22.15

3

2

$16.85

$17.70

$18.65

$19.75

$21.00

$22.45

4

3

$17.15

$18.00

$18.95

$20.05

$21.30

$22.75

5

4

$17.45

$18.30

$19.25

$20.35

$21.60

$23.05

6

5

$17.75

$18.60

$19.55

$20.65

$21.90

$23.35

7

6

$18.05

$18.90

$19.85

$20.95

$22.20

$23.65

8

7

$18.45

$19.30

$20.25

$21.35

$22.60

$24.05

9

8

$18.85

$19.70

$20.65

$21.75

$23.00

$24.45

10

9

$19.25

$20.10

$21.05

$22.15

$23.40

$24.85

11

10

$19.65

$20.50

$21.45

$22.55

$23.80

$25.25

12

11

$20.05

$20.90

$21.85

$22.95

$24.20

$25.65

13

12

$20.55

$21.40

$22.35

$23.45

$24.70

$26.15

14

13

$21.05

$21.90

$22.85

$23.95

$25.20

$26.65

15

14

$21.70

$22.55

$23.50

$24.60

$25.85

$27.30

16

15

$22.45

$23.30

$24.25

$25.35

$26.60

$28.05

36

APPENDIX C
HOURLY WAGE RATES
Secretarial/Clerical 2024-2025
Step

Years

A

B

C

D

E

F

1

0

$17.10

$17.95

$18.90

$20.00

$21.25

$22.70

2

1

$17.35

$18.20

$19.15

$20.25

$21.50

$22.95

3

2

$17.65

$18.50

$19.45

$20.55

$21.80

$23.25

4

3

$17.95

$18.80

$19.75

$20.85

$22.10

$23.55

5

4

$18.25

$19.10

$20.05

$21.15

$22.40

$23.85

6

5

$18.55

$19.40

$20.35

$21.45

$22.70

$24.15

7

6

$18.85

$19.70

$20.65

$21.75

$23.00

$24.45

8

7

$19.25

$20.10

$21.05

$22.15

$23.40

$24.85

9

8

$19.65

$20.50

$21.45

$22.55

$23.80

$25.25

10

9

$20.05

$20.90

$21.85

$22.95

$24.20

$25.65

11

10

$20.45

$21.30

$22.25

$23.35

$24.60

$26.05

12

11

$20.85

$21.70

$22.65

$23.75

$25.00

$26.45

13

12

$21.35

$22.20

$23.15

$24.25

$25.50

$26.95

14

13

$21.85

$22.70

$23.65

$24.75

$26.00

$27.45

15

14

$22.50

$23.35

$24.30

$25.40

$26.65

$28.10

16

15

$23.25

$24.10

$25.05

$26.15

$27.40

$28.85

37

APPENDIX C
HOURLY WAGE RATES
Secretarial/Clerical 2025-2026
Step

Years

A

B

C

D

E

F

1

0

$17.90

$18.75

$19.70

$20.80

$22.05

$23.50

2

1

$18.15

$19.00

$19.95

$21.05

$22.30

$23.75

3

2

$18.45

$19.30

$20.25

$21.35

$22.60

$24.05

4

3

$18.75

$19.60

$20.55

$21.65

$22.90

$24.35

5

4

$19.05

$19.90

$20.85

$21.95

$23.20

$24.65

6

5

$19.35

$20.20

$21.15

$22.25

$23.50

$24.95

7

6

$19.65

$20.50

$21.45

$22.55

$23.80

$25.25

8

7

$20.05

$20.90

$21.85

$22.95

$24.20

$25.65

9

8

$20.45

$21.30

$22.25

$23.35

$24.60

$26.05

10

9

$20.85

$21.70

$22.65

$23.75

$25.00

$26.45

11

10

$21.25

$22.10

$23.05

$24.15

$25.40

$26.85

12

11

$21.65

$22.50

$23.45

$24.55

$25.80

$27.25

13

12

$22.15

$23.00

$23.95

$25.05

$26.30

$27.75

14

13

$22.65

$23.50

$24.45

$25.55

$26.80

$28.25

15

14

$23.30

$24.15

$25.10

$26.20

$27.45

$28.90

16

15

$24.05

$24.90

$25.85

$26.95

$28.20

$29.65

38

APPENDIX C
HOURLY WAGE RATES
Secretarial/Clerical 2026-2027
Step

Years

A

B

C

D

E

F

1

0

$18.70

$19.55

$20.50

$21.60

$22.85

$24.30

2

1

$18.95

$19.80

$20.75

$21.85

$23.10

$24.55

3

2

$19.25

$20.10

$21.05

$22.15

$23.40

$24.85

4

3

$19.55

$20.40

$21.35

$22.45

$23.70

$25.15

5

4

$19.85

$20.70

$21.65

$22.75

$24.00

$25.45

6

5

$20.15

$21.00

$21.95

$23.05

$24.30

$25.75

7

6

$20.45

$21.30

$22.25

$23.35

$24.60

$26.05

8

7

$20.85

$21.70

$22.65

$23.75

$25.00

$26.45

9

8

$21.25

$22.10

$23.05

$24.15

$25.40

$26.85

10

9

$21.65

$22.50

$23.45

$24.55

$25.80

$27.25

11

10

$22.05

$22.90

$23.85

$24.95

$26.20

$27.65

12

11

$22.45

$23.30

$24.25

$25.35

$26.60

$28.05

13

12

$22.95

$23.80

$24.75

$25.85

$27.10

$28.55

14

13

$23.45

$24.30

$25.25

$26.35

$27.60

$29.05

15

14

$24.10

$24.95

$25.90

$27.00

$28.25

$29.70

16

15

$24.85

$25.70

$26.65

$27.75

$29.00

$30.45

39

APPENDIX C
HOURLY WAGE RATES
Secretarial/Clerical 2027-2028
Step

Years

A

B

C

D

E

F

1

0

$19.50

$20.35

$21.30

$22.40

$23.65

$25.10

2

1

$19.75

$20.60

$21.55

$22.65

$23.90

$25.35

3

2

$20.05

$20.90

$21.85

$22.95

$24.20

$25.65

4

3

$20.35

$21.20

$22.15

$23.25

$24.50

$25.95

5

4

$20.65

$21.50

$22.45

$23.55

$24.80

$26.25

6

5

$20.95

$21.80

$22.75

$23.85

$25.10

$26.55

7

6

$21.25

$22.10

$23.05

$24.15

$25.40

$26.85

8

7

$21.65

$22.50

$23.45

$24.55

$25.80

$27.25

9

8

$22.05

$22.90

$23.85

$24.95

$26.20

$27.65

10

9

$22.45

$23.30

$24.25

$25.35

$26.60

$28.05

11

10

$22.85

$23.70

$24.65

$25.75

$27.00

$28.45

12

11

$23.25

$24.10

$25.05

$26.15

$27.40

$28.85

13

12

$23.75

$24.60

$25.55

$26.65

$27.90

$29.35

14

13

$24.25

$25.10

$26.05

$27.15

$28.40

$29.85

15

14

$24.90

$25.75

$26.70

$27.80

$29.05

$30.50

16

15

$25.65

$26.50

$27.45

$28.55

$29.80

$31.25

40

APPENDIX C
HOURLY WAGE RATES
Paraprofessional 2023-2024
Step

Years

A

B

C

D

1

0

$14.83

$15.83

$16.63

$24.75

2

1

$15.08

$16.08

$16.88

$25.00

3

2

$15.38

$16.38

$17.18

$25.30

4

3

$15.68

$16.68

$17.48

$25.60

5

4

$15.98

$16.98

$17.78

$25.90

6

5

$16.28

$17.28

$18.08

$26.20

7

6

$16.58

$17.58

$18.38

$26.50

8

7

$16.98

$17.98

$18.78

$26.90

9

8

$17.38

$18.38

$19.18

$27.30

10

9

$17.78

$18.78

$19.58

$27.70

11

10

$18.18

$19.18

$19.98

$28.10

12

11

$18.58

$19.58

$20.38

$28.50

13

12

$19.08

$20.08

$20.88

$29.00

14

13

$19.58

$20.58

$21.38

$29.50

15

14

$20.23

$21.23

$22.03

$30.15

16

15

$20.98

$21.98

$22.78

$30.90

41

APPENDIX C
HOURLY WAGE RATES
Paraprofessional 2024-2025
Step

Years

A

B

C

D

1

0

$15.63

$16.63

$17.43

$25.55

2

1

$15.88

$16.88

$17.68

$25.80

3

2

$16.18

$17.18

$17.98

$26.10

4

3

$16.48

$17.48

$18.28

$26.40

5

4

$16.78

$17.78

$18.58

$26.70

6

5

$17.08

$18.08

$18.88

$27.00

7

6

$17.38

$18.38

$19.18

$27.30

8

7

$17.78

$18.78

$19.58

$27.70

9

8

$18.18

$19.18

$19.98

$28.10

10

9

$18.58

$19.58

$20.38

$28.50

11

10

$18.98

$19.98

$20.78

$28.90

12

11

$19.38

$20.38

$21.18

$29.30

13

12

$19.88

$20.88

$21.68

$29.80

14

13

$20.38

$21.38

$22.18

$30.30

15

14

$21.03

$22.03

$22.83

$30.95

16

15

$21.78

$22.78

$23.58

$31.70

42

APPENDIX C
HOURLY WAGE RATES
Paraprofessional 2025-2026
Step

Years

A

B

C

D

1

0

$16.43

$17.43

$18.23

$26.35

2

1

$16.68

$17.68

$18.48

$26.60

3

2

$16.98

$17.98

$18.78

$26.90

4

3

$17.28

$18.28

$19.08

$27.20

5

4

$17.58

$18.58

$19.38

$27.50

6

5

$17.88

$18.88

$19.68

$27.80

7

6

$18.18

$19.18

$19.98

$28.10

8

7

$18.58

$19.58

$20.38

$28.50

9

8

$18.98

$19.98

$20.78

$28.90

10

9

$19.38

$20.38

$21.18

$29.30

11

10

$19.78

$20.78

$21.58

$29.70

12

11

$20.18

$21.18

$21.98

$30.10

13

12

$20.68

$21.68

$22.48

$30.60

14

13

$21.18

$22.18

$22.98

$31.10

15

14

$21.83

$22.83

$23.63

$31.75

16

15

$22.58

$23.58

$24.38

$32.50

43

APPENDIX C
HOURLY WAGE RATES
Paraprofessional 2026-2027
Step

Years

A

B

C

D

1

0

$17.23

$18.23

$19.03

$27.15

2

1

$17.48

$18.48

$19.28

$27.40

3

2

$17.78

$18.78

$19.58

$27.70

4

3

$18.08

$19.08

$19.88

$28.00

5

4

$18.38

$19.38

$20.18

$28.30

6

5

$18.68

$19.68

$20.48

$28.60

7

6

$18.98

$19.98

$20.78

$28.90

8

7

$19.38

$20.38

$21.18

$29.30

9

8

$19.78

$20.78

$21.58

$29.70

10

9

$20.18

$21.18

$21.98

$30.10

11

10

$20.58

$21.58

$22.38

$30.50

12

11

$20.98

$21.98

$22.78

$30.90

13

12

$21.48

$22.48

$23.28

$31.40

14

13

$21.98

$22.98

$23.78

$31.90

15

14

$22.63

$23.63

$24.43

$32.55

16

15

$23.38

$24.38

$25.18

$33.30

44

APPENDIX C
HOURLY WAGE RATES
Paraprofessional 2027-2028
Step

Years

A

B

C

D

1

0

$18.03

$19.03

$19.83

$27.95

2

1

$18.28

$19.28

$20.08

$28.20

3

2

$18.58

$19.58

$20.38

$28.50

4

3

$18.88

$19.88

$20.68

$28.80

5

4

$19.18

$20.18

$20.98

$29.10

6

5

$19.48

$20.48

$21.28

$29.40

7

6

$19.78

$20.78

$21.58

$29.70

8

7

$20.18

$21.18

$21.98

$30.10

9

8

$20.58

$21.58

$22.38

$30.50

10

9

$20.98

$21.98

$22.78

$30.90

11

10

$21.38

$22.38

$23.18

$31.30

12

11

$21.78

$22.78

$23.58

$31.70

13

12

$22.28

$23.28

$24.08

$32.20

14

13

$22.78

$23.78

$24.58

$32.70

15

14

$23.43

$24.43

$25.23

$33.35

16

15

$24.18

$25.18

$25.98

$34.10

45

APPENDIX D
MEDICAL INSURANCE PLANS
July 1, 2023 – December 31, 2023

46

47

APPENDIX D
MEDICAL INSURANCE PLANS
Effective January 1, 2024

48

49

HEALTH CARE PLAN SUMMARY – QHDHP
State College Area School District - QHDHP Benefit Summary
This program is a qualified high deductible plan as defined by the Internal Revenue Service. It is designed for use with a Health Savings Account (HSA). On
the chart below, you'll see what your plan pays for specific services. You may be responsible for a facility fee, clinic charge or similar fee or charge (in
addition to any professional fees) if your office visit or service is provided at a location that qualifies as a hospital department or a satellite building of a
hospital. If you enroll as an individual, the deductible and out-of-pocket maximums for the “Employee Only Plan” apply. If you enroll as a family, the
deductible and out-of -pocket maximums for the “Family Plan” apply and can be satisfied by one or more of your family members.
Benefit
Network
Out-of-Network
General Provisions
Benefit Period(1)
Calendar Year
Deductible (per benefit period)
Employee Only Plan
$1,600
$3,000
Family Plan
$3,200
$6,000
Plan Pays – payment based on the plan allowance
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Out-of-Pocket Limit (Includes prescription drug expenses, coinsurance
and copay. Once met, plan pays 100% coinsurance for the rest of the
benefit period)
Employee Only Plan
$1,600
$3,000
Family Plan
$3,200
$6,000
Total Maximum Out-of-Pocket (Includes deductible, coinsurance,
copays, prescription drug cost sharing and other qualified medical
expenses, Network only)(2) Once met, the plan pays 100% of covered
services for the rest of the benefit period.
Employee Only Plan
$3,200
Not Applicable
Family Plan
$6,400
Not Applicable
Office/Clinic/Urgent Care Visits
100% after $25 copay after deductible
Retail Clinic Visits & Virtual Visits
70% after deductible
100% after $25 copay after deductible
Primary Care Provider Office Visits & Virtual Visits
70% after deductible
100% after $25 copay after deductible
Specialist Office & Virtual Visits
70% after deductible
Virtual Visit Originating Site Fee
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
100% after $50 copay after deductible
Urgent Care Center Visits
70% after deductible
Telemedicine Services(3)
100% after $20 copay after deductible
Preventive Care(4)
Routine Adult physical exams
100% (deductible does not apply)
70% after deductible
Adult immunizations
100% (deductible does not apply)
70% after deductible
Colorectal cancer screening
100% (deductible does not apply)
70% after deductible
Routine gynecological exams, including a Pap Test
100% (deductible does not apply)
70% (deductible does not apply)
Mammograms, annual routine
100% (deductible does not apply)
70% after deductible
Mammograms, medically necessary
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Diagnostic services and procedures
100% (deductible does not apply)
70% after deductible
Routine Pediatric physical exams
100% (deductible does not apply)
70% after deductible
Pediatric immunizations
100% (deductible does not apply)
70% (deductible does not apply)
Diagnostic services and procedures
100% (deductible does not apply)
70% after deductible
Hospital and Medical/Surgical Expenses (including maternity)
Hospital Inpatient
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Hospital Outpatient
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Maternity (non-preventive facility & professional services) including
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
dependent daughter
Medical Care (including inpatient visits and consultations)/Surgical
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Expenses
Emergency Services
Emergency Room Services
100% after $100 copay after network deductible (copay waived if admitted)
Ambulance
100% after network deductible
Ambulance – Non-Emergency
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Therapy and Rehabilitation Services
100% after $25 copay after deductible
70% after deductible
Physical Medicine
Limit: 30 visits/benefit period
Respiratory Therapy
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
100% after $25 copay after deductible
70% after deductible
Speech & Occupational Therapy
Limit: 30 visits per therapy/benefit period
100% after $25 copay after deductible
70% after deductible
Spinal Manipulations
Limit: 20 visits/benefit period
Other Therapy Services (Cardiac Rehab, Infusion Therapy,
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Chemotherapy, Radiation Therapy and Dialysis)

50

Inpatient
Inpatient Detoxification/Rehabilitation
Outpatient (includes virtual behavioral health visits)

Mental Health/Substance Abuse
100% after deductible
100% after deductible
100% after $25 copay after deductible

Other Services
Allergy Extracts and Injections
100% after deductible
Autism Spectrum Disorder including Applied Behavior Analysis(5)
100% after deductible
Assisted Fertilization Procedures
Not Covered
Dental Services Related to Accidental Injury
Not Covered
Diagnostic Services
Advanced Imaging (MRI, CAT, PET scan, etc.)
100% after deductible
Basic Diagnostic Services (standard imaging, diagnostic medical,
100% after deductible
lab/pathology, allergy testing)
Durable Medical Equipment, Orthotics and Prosthetics
Home Health Care
Hospice
Infertility Counseling, Testing and Treatment(6)
Private Duty Nursing
Skilled Nursing Facility Care
Transplant Services
Precertification Requirements(7)

100% after deductible

Prescription Drug Program(8)
Soft Mandatory Generic
Defined by the National Pharmacy Network - Not Physician Network.
Prescriptions filled at a non-network pharmacy are not covered.

Specialty Pharmacy (30 day supply)

70% after deductible
70% after deductible
Not Covered
Not Covered
70% after deductible
70% after deductible
70% after deductible

100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Limit: 90 visits/benefit period
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Limit: 240 hours/benefit period
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Limit: 100 days/benefit period
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
YES
Prescription Drugs

Prescription Drug Deductible
Individual
Family

Your plan uses the Comprehensive Formulary with an Incentive
Benefit Design.

70% after deductible
70% after deductible
70% after deductible

Integrated with medical deductible
Integrated with medical deductible
Retail Drugs (31/60/90-day Supply)
90% Generic Plan Payment after plan deductible
75% Brand Formulary Plan Payment after plan deductible
70% Brand Non-Formulary Plan Payment after plan deductible
Maintenance Drugs through Mail Order (90-day Supply)
$10 Generic Copay after plan deductible
$30 Brand Formulary Copay after plan deductible
$50 Brand Non-Formulary Copay after plan deductible
$3 Generic Copay after plan deductible
$10 Brand Formulary Copay after plan deductible
$16 Brand Non-Formulary Copay after plan deductible

(1) Your group's benefit period is based on a Calendar Year.
(2) The Network Total Maximum Out-of-Pocket (TMOOP) is mandated by the federal government. TMOOP must include deductible, coinsurance,
copays, prescription drug cost share and any qualified medical expense. Effective with plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2024,, the
TMOOP cannot exceed $8,050 for individual and $16,100 for two or more persons. In addition, new regulations for 2024 do not allow a member
within a family plan to exceed $9,450 in cost sharing.
(3) Services are provided for acute care for minor illnesses. Services must be performed by a Highmark approved telemedicine provider. Virtual
Behavioral health visits provided by a Highmark approved telemedicine provider are eligible under Outpatient Mental Health/Substance Abuse
benefit.
(4) Services are limited to those listed on the Highmark Preventive Schedule (Women's Health Preventive Schedule may apply). Gender, age and
frequency limits may apply.
(5) Coverage for eligible members to age 21. Services will be paid according to the benefit category (e.g. speech therapy). Treatment for autism
spectrum disorders does not reduce visit/day limits.
(6) Treatment includes coverage for the correction of a physical or medical problem associated with infertility. Infertility drug therapy may or may not
be covered depending on your group’s prescription drug program.
(7) Highmark Medical Management & Policy (MM&P) must be contacted prior to a planned inpatient admission or within 48 hours of an emergency
or maternity-related inpatient admission. Be sure to verify that your provider is contacting MM&P for precertification. If this does not occur and it
is later determined that all or part of the inpatient stay was not medically necessary or appropriate, you will be responsible for payment of any
costs not covered.
(8) At a retail or mail order pharmacy, if your deductible has not been met, you pay the entire cost for your prescription drug at the discounted rate
Highmark has negotiated. The amount you paid for your prescription will be applied to your deductible. If your deductible has been met, you will
only pay any member responsibility based on the benefit level indicated above. You will pay this amount at the pharmacy when you have your
prescription filled.

51

APPENDIX E
MEDICAL INSURANCE RATES
Employee Monthly Premiums

7/1/2023 thru
12/31/2023

1/1/2024

1/1/2025

1/1/2026

1/1/2027

1/1/2028 thru
6/30/2028

Individual

$117.42

$118.00

$128.00

$139.00

$149.00

$159.00

P/Child(ren)

$309.69/$325.83

$326.00

$343.00

$361.00

$379.00

$399.00

E/S

$356.66

$357.00

$377.00

$396.00

$406.00

$416.00

Family

$372.80

$373.00

$393.00

$414.00

$432.00

$452.00

7/1/2023 thru
12/31/2023

1/1/2024

1/1/2025

1/1/2026

1/1/2027

1/1/2028 thru
6/30/2028

Individual

$25.50

$30.00

$33.00

$37.00

$41.00

$45.00

P/Child(ren)

$89.69/$94.36

$94.00

$104.00

$115.00

$128.00

$140.00

E/S

$103.29

$102.00

$114.00

$126.00

$140.00

$150.00

Family

$107.96

$107.00

$119.00

$132.00

$146.00

$160.00

PPO

QHDHP

52
