WARRANT ARTICLE 8

Ratification of a Contract negotiated between the Town of Hudson
Board of Selectmen and the Hudson Public Works Department Union
AFSCME Local 1801 for Wage & Benefit Increases.

Shall the Town of Hudson vote to approve the cost items included in the
collective bargaining agreement reached between the Town of Hudson
Board of Selectmen and the Hudson Public Works Department Union
AFSCME Local 1801 which calls for the following increase in salaries and
benefits:

Year

7/1/23

Amount

—

6/30/24

$81,628

and to raise and appropriate the sum of $81,628 for the 2023-2024 Fiscal
Year, said sum representing the additional costs attributable to the increase
in salaries and benefits over those paid in the prior Fiscal Year?
Recommended by the Board of Selectmen 5-0
Recommended by the Budget Committee 10-0
Tax Rate Impact is $0.02

I

Town of Hudson
Hudson Public Works
FY 2024

FY 2024
COLA %

(

3.0%

COLA $

$

45,831

Step S

$

21,530

FICA

$

5,153

Pension

$

9,114

Total

$

81,628

Tax Rate Impact

$0.02

0

0

0

I

AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE TOWN OF HUDSON, NEW HAMPSHIRE
AND
HUDSON PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
LOCAL #1801 OF TIlE AMERICAN FEDERATION

(
I

OF STATE, COUNTY, AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES

,l’y I,

June 30 202J2024

0

0

0

r
INDEX

(

SECTION

PAGE

I
AGREEMENT
11
PURPOSE
III
RECOGNITION
IV
EXCLUSION
V
NON-DISCRIMINATION
VI
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
VII
MANAGEMENT RIGhTS
VIII
CONSULTATION
IX
UNION BUSINESS
X
AGENCY FEE
XI
MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP
XII
DISCIPLINE AND TERMINATION FOR CAUSE
XIII
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
XIV
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME
XV
SENIORITY
XVI
WORK REDUCTION AND LAYOFFS
XVII
TIMECLOCKS
XVIII
SALARIES
XIX
PROMOTION AND TRANSFERS
XX
WORKERS COMENSATION
XXI
HOLIDAYS
XXII
EARNED TIME
XXIII
UNIFORMS
XXIV
hOSPITAL/hEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE
XXV
LIFE INSURANCE
XXVI
FLEXIBLE BENEFIT PLAN
XXVII
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
XXVIII
EXTENDED LEAVE OF ABSENCE (Family Leave Ad)
XXIX
SAFETY
XXX
MILITARY LEAVE
XXXI
JURY DUlY
XXXII
MISCELLANEOUS
XXXIII
CONTRACTING AND SUBCONTRACTING OUT
XXXIV
SEPARABILITY
XXXV
EFFECT OF AGREEMENT
XXXVI
DURATION OF AGREEMENT
APPENDIX A
FISCAL YEAR 2020-2023 WAGE SCHEDULE
APPENDIX A—B
FISCAL YEAR 202-4-2024 WAGE SCHEDULE
APPENDIX B
F48C2A-h—YfAR 2022 WAGE SCHD{4L4-EAPPENPI-X-C----———FISCAL-Y-EAR-202-WAG&SC4-WDU-LE
APPENDIX 44C
BENEFIT SUMMARY

2
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
5
6
7
10
II
Il
II
12
13
13
14
1-7j
18
20
20
21
21
22
22
23
24
24
24
24
25
26
27
28

Town of Hudson and
Local 18ff AFSCMC Pubfc Works Department
tlf 1, OaO-2O23—June SO. O32O24
Page Ii

C-

2028

0

0

0

I
Agreement
This Agreement between the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire (hereinafter called the
‘town”) and Local #18W American Federation of State. County and Municipal
Employees (hereinafter called the “Union”) is made and entered into on this
20202022.
day of
II.

Purpose
The general purpose of this Agreement is to set forth agreements reached between the
Town and the Union with respect to wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment for employees in the bargaining unit described in the Recognition Clause as
follows:

Ill.

Recognition
The Town recognizes the Union as the exclusive bargaining agent for: All full-time
employees of the Department of Public Works (previously certified by PELRB as
“Highway Department”)
Truck Driver/Laborer
Truck Driver/Laborer (Special Equipment-Sewer) Equipment Operator I
Mechanic
Chief Mechanic, Shop Foreman
Foreman, Sewer
Head Groundskeeper
Foreman, Highway
Sub-Foreman (Assistant Foreman)
Dispatcher/Clerk
Operations Assistant/Dispatch
Traffic technician
Foreman. Parks

(

IV.

Exclusion
1. The Agreement excludes the classification and positions of:
Director of Public Works
Road Agent
Highway Supervisor
2. The exclusion of members from the unit for the purpose of assuming confidential
status shall be preceded by discussion with the Union.
3. Any impasse in this area shall be submitted to the Public Employee Labor Relations
Board for resolution.

Town o8 Hudson and
Local 1801 AFSCME PubNc Works Department
July’, 4OO-2O23—JLine 30,
Page

2

0

0

0

r

(

V.

Non-Discrimination
The Town and the Union agrees not to discriminate against a member of the unit because
of race, creed, color, sex, age, religion, marital status, pregnancy, sexual orientation,
national origin, veteran status or disability.

VI.

Strikes and Lockouts
Under no circumstances will the Union cause, encourage, sponsor, or participate in any
strike, sit-down, stay-out, sick-in, sick-out, work slowdown, withholding of services or
any curtailment of work or restriction or interference with the operations of the
Department during the term of this Agreement.

VII.

Management Rights
I. The parties agree that all the rights and responsibilities of the Town which have not
been specifically provided for in this agreement are rctaincd in the sole discretion of
the Town whose right to determine and structure the goals, purposes, fttnctions, and
policies of the Town without prior negotiation wilh the Union and without being
subject to the grievance aud arbitration procedures of this agrccment shall include but
not be limited to the following: a) the right to direct etnployees: to determine
qualifications, protnotional criteria, hiring criteria, standards of work and to hire,
promote, transfer, assign, retain employees in positions; and to suspend, demote.
discharge or take other disciplinary actions against an employee for proper or just
cause, subject to the other provisions of this agreement, including grievance and
arbitration; b) the right to relieve an employee from duty because of lack of work or
other ]egitimate reasons; c) the right to take such action as in its judgeinent it deems
necessary tn maintain the efficiency of Public Works Department operations; d) the
right to determine the means, methods, budgetary and financial procedures, and
personnel by which the Public Works Department operations are to be eotiducted; e)
the right to take such actions as may be necessary to carry out the missions of the
Public Works Department in case of etnergencies; I) the right to make rules,
regulations, and policies not inconsistent with the provisions of this agrcctiicnt and to
require compliance therewith: and g) the right to subcontract.
a. Nothing in this agreement shall be construed to limit the right of the Director of
Public Works or other supervisory personnel to comtnand the Public Works
Department as their udginent dirccts them in any and all emergency situations as
they deem to he appropriate.
b. It shall be the right of the Union to present and process grievances of its members
whose wages, hours or working conditions are changed in violation of the
agreement as specified in Article XIII whenever such grievances exist.

Town of Hudson arid
Local isOl AFSCME Public Works Departmenl
lily I, ?OaO-2023—June 30, 200a2024
Puge

3

0

0

0

I
VIII.

Consultation
I. Representatives of the Union shall meet with designated representatives of the Town,
i.e.: Chairman of the Board of Selectmen or his/her designee, Director of Public
Works once a month to discuss matters of mutual concern, including those matters
necessary to the implementation of this Agreement. A written agenda shall be
submitted by the Union to the designated representatives no less than five days before
the scheduled date of the meeting. At the discretion of the Town, additional matters
for discussion may be placed on the agenda. When such is the case the Union will be
given five (5) days to consider the matter prior to its discussion. Nothing contained
herein shall prevent the Town and the Union from meeting on a less frequent basis on
mutual agreement.
2. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Union from consulting with the Town’s
management personnel at any time, if matters of mutual concern arise of an urgent or
emergency nature, I lowever, grievances must be submitted in accordance with the
procedure contained in this Agreement.

IX.

Union Business
I. The Union officers and representatives shall he:
Chairperson
Stewards (2)

(

2. The Union shall advise the l’own of the names of the employees holding Union office
(as noted above).
3. Union officers as described above shall be permitted to process grievances and
exercise the Consultation Article during their scheduled hours of duty, provided they
have prior permission from their supervisor and the amount of time in which
employees are engaged in such activities is reasonable.
4. An effort will be made to schedule negotiating sessions at least Ih the time which
does not conflict with the scheduled duty of employees who are members of the
Union collective bargaining team. In the event the employees, not to exceed three (3)
in number, who arc members of the Union’s negotiating team, are scheduled for duty
at a time during which a collective bargaining meeting will be held, said employees
will be permitted to participate in negotiations without loss of pay.
X.

Aeencv Fees
Upon the presentation of a signed authorization card by the employee, covered by this
agreement to the Town, the Town agrees to deduct the voluntary dues or agency fee of
the Uniun from the weekly wages of such employees covered by this agreement and pay
the total amount of dues collected to the treasurer of AFSCME Local 1801 once a month
along with a statement indicating who has paid dues or agency fee.

rown of Hudson and
Local 1801 AF1CME Public Works Department
23—June 30, 30232024
July 1, eaO
Page

4

C

0

0

(
lithe employees have no check coming to them, or if their checks are not large enough to
satisfy the dues, then no deductions ‘vi I be made for them.
Xl.

Maintenance of Membership
I. Each member of the bargaining unit who, on the effective date of this Agreement, is a
ircinber of the Union, and each employee who becomes a member of the bargaining
unit and the Union afler that date shall continue his/her membership in the Union
during the duration of this Agreement, provided, however, that an employee may at
his/her discretion and in writing, withdraw his’hcr membership from (he Union
anytime within the period between sixty (60) days and thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration dale of the Agreement.
2. Should there be a dispute between an employee and the Union over the mailer of an
employee’s Union membership. the Union agrees to hold the Ton harmless in any
such dispute.

(

3. The Union shall post notices oil departmental bulletin boards sixty (60) calendar days
prior to the expiration date of the agreement adising employees of their right to
revoke dues deductions.
XII.

Discipline and Termination for Cause
I. An employee may be disciplined or terminated/dismissed if there is found to be just
cause for stich action. Just cause shall include but not be limited to the following: a)
nedically diagnosed incapacity to perform assigned duties: b) incompetence: c)
behavior incompatible with effective conduct of duty; d) behavior detrimental to the
Town ore) failure to carry out assigned duties.
2. All written warnings. suspensions and discharges must be communicated in writing
and the reasons for such action be stated clearly within such a statement. The
effected employee and the Union shall each receive a copy of this document.
3. Disciplinary action will normally be taken in the following order:
a. Verbal Warning
b. Written Warning
c. Suspension without Pay
d. Discharge
l-lowever, the above sequence need not be followed if an infraction is sufficiently
severe to merit immediate suspension or discharge.
4. No employee shall be penalized, discipline, suspended or dischargcd without just
cause.

Tow, of Hud,o,ar
Local liDS AFICM[ ubLc Works Department
July 5, O?a-20?J— June 30, a0a2014
Page

IS

0

0

0

(
5. Employees who are absent from work for more than 40 consecutive working hours
and who have not been granted a leave of absence during that period, or who do not
present justifiable evidence showing they were unable to report, shall be deemed to
have quit.
6. References to verbal warnings will be removed from personnel file(s) six (6) months
from date of warning.
7. Written records relating to written warnings will be removed frotn personnel files
after one (I) year from the date of discipline.
8. Employees may examine their own individual personnel files at a reasonable time
agreed to by their supervisor.
9. Pursuant to RSA 275:56 as amended; if, upon inspection of his/her personnel file, an
employee feels a record contained therein should be moved or corrected, in writing,
he/she tnay so request of the Department Head. If the request is denied, the employee
may submit a vritten statement for the files explaining his/her version of the
information contained therein, with evidence supporting such version. Such
statement shall be maintained as part of the employee’s personnel record.
XIII.

(

Grievance Procedure
1. Definition
A Grievance under this Article is defined as an alleged violation of any provision of
this Agreement in which an individual grievant alleges a personal loss or injury.
NOTE: An employee who has a complaint” tnay take up the cotnplaint with his/her
immediate supervisor verbally before he/she processes the complaint as a formal
grievance. The immediate supervisor shall give his/her answer within five (5)
workdays. It is anticipated that nearly all complaints can be resolved informally
without grievance. Each grievance must be submitted in writing by the Union and
must contain a statement of the facts surrounding the grievance the provision(s) of
this Agreement allegedly violaled, and the relief requested.
2. Procedure
Step One
An employee or the Union on behalf ofan employee desiring to process a grievance
mist file a written statement of the grievance to the Director of Public Works or
his/her designee no later than ten (10) workdays after the employee knew the facts on
which the grievance is based, and in no case more than one (I) month from the
occurrence. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall meet with the
employee and the Union representative within three (3) workdays following receipt of
the notice and shall give a written decision within three (3) workdays thereafter,

Town of Hudson and
Local 1801 AFSCME Public Works Department
July 1, O20-2O2J —June 30, 20fl2024
Page tO

0

0

0

I

lithe employee or the Union on behalf of an employee is not satisfied with the
decision of the Director of Ptthlic Works he/she may file, within five (5) workdays
following the Director of Public Work’s decision, a written appeal with the Board of
Selectmen or their designee, setting forth specific reasons why the employee or (lie
Union believes the Agreement is being violated by the Town action in question.
Within thiny (30) workdays following receipt of the appeal. the Board ofSelcetnien
or their designee shall either tssue a ‘-ritten deetsion or schedule a hearing. Said
hearing shall be held no later than thirty-five (35) workdays following receipt of the
appeal and written decision shall be rendered within five (5) wsorkda s thereafter.
a. If the Union is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance or no decision
has been rendered by the Board of Selectmen or their designee within thirty’ (30)
working days after they receive the grievance and prior to the submission of the
grievance to arbitration representatives of the Union and martagement may. by
mutual consent, meet to determine if the grievance can be settled without
arbitration.
Step ‘three
If the employee or the Union on behalf ofan employee is not satisfied with the
decision of the Board of Seleettnen or their designee, the Union may file, within thirty
(30) workdays following receipt of the decision, a request for arbitration to the Puhltc
Employee Labor Relations Board (PELRB) under its rules and regulations. ‘the
deeisioti of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties.

(

3. ‘the cost of arbitration shall be borne by the losing party. It shall be incumbent
ttpoti the arbitrator to speciR’ the party designated as the losing party to facilitate
payment of arbitration costs.
4. l’he foregoing thnc litnitations tnay be extended by mutual s ritten agreement of
the parties.
5. Failure of the grtevant to abide by the time litnits set out in this article shall result
in the grtevance heitig deemed settled on the basis of the last decision made by” the
appropriate “hiearitig officer” on behalf of the Town.
6. ‘l’he Town shall not designate a hearing officer at any step of the grievance
proeedttre who has heard the grievance at a prior step.
XIV.

Hours of Work and Overtime
I. Nnrmal Work Schedule. The normal work schedule shall be forty (40) hottrs per
week comprised of consecutive days of work with equal number of hours per day.
Saturdays and Sundays shall not be part of any regular schedule. Winier Maintenance
schedule shall be from the
Sunday in December through the last Saturday in March

Town of Hudson and
Local 1801 AFSCM[ Public Works Oepartrnenl
Jury 1, O?o’7O23— Jurse JO, o2a2O?4
Page

7

0

0

0

r
with the hours of operation to be Monday through Friday 6M0 AM. to 4:00 P.M.
The remainder of the calendar year is to be recognized as the Summer Maintenance
schedule of Monday through Thursday 6:00 AM. to 4:00 PM. All schedules shall be
approved by the Director of Public Work’s.
a. All department employees shall he entitled to one morning and one afternoun
work break period not to exceed tiftecri ([5) minutes each and an opportunity ftnr
employees to eat their lunch during the day while on pay status.
2. Workday and Workweek. The workday is defined as 12:01 AM. until 12:00
Midnight. The Workweek is defined as 12:01 Sunday until 12:00 Midnight on the
subsequent Saturday for pay purposes.
3. Overtime. All hours actually worked in excess of forty (40) hours in a workweek
shall be paid at 1.5 times the normal hour rate. All hours actually worked in excess of
a regularly scheduled shift shall be paid at 1.5 times the normal hourly rate. There
will be no pyramiding of overtime.
Scheduled Non-Emergency Overtime Scheduled non-emergency ovcrtimc is given
to employees qualified to perform the task required. Etnployees qualified to perform
the task are asked to volunteer to fill the overtime slots. All attempts are made to
distribute overtime in an even and fair manner so that all volunteering employees
have a chance to share the available overtime.
—

Emergency Overtime Emergency overtime is distributed to employees qualificd to
perform the task required. Employees who desire this overtime volunteer to make
tnemselves available for call in or are available when contacted. All employees mist
make themselves available in emergencies to work overtime. Every effort will he
given to having those employees who desire the overtime vork the overtime and not
those who do not desire the overtime. All attempts are made to distribute overtime in
an even and fair namner so that all volunteering employees have a chance to share the
available overtime,
—

Scheduled Emergency Overtime Scheduled emergency overtime is distributed to
employees qualified to perform the task required. Etnployecs qualified to perform the
task are asked to volunteer to till the overtime slots. All employees most make
themselves available in emergencies to work overtime if enough employees do not
volunteer to fill the overtime slots. Every effort will he given to having those
employees who desire the overtime work the overtime and not those who do not
desire to overtime. All attempts are made to distribute overtime in an even and fair
manner so that all volunteering employees have a chance to shame the available
overtime.
—

Employees who are sent home outside of their normal work schedule to rest, and
return within eight (8) hours; will return at the pay status as though they never left.
Employees “ill not be paid for hours in which they are not at work.
rown ot Hudson and
Local ISDI AFSCME PubS: Works Department
July 1, 4OO2O?3—June 30, Oa2O14
Page

3

0

0

0

C

4. Hours paid but not worked, such as legitimate use of Earned Time, holidays, etc. shall
be counted in determining hours worked for the purpose of computing overtime pay.
It shall heat the department head’s discretion to determine if Earned lime is being
legitimately taken.
5. Call-Hack Pay. Any person who has [ett their place of employment and is called to
work prior to the next normal shift will be paid for a minin]utn of three (3) hotirs at
the rate of time and one-half: provided, further, that an etnployee who is called back
for overtime or emergency work and who completes the required task and returns to
hisTher residence within three (3) hours minimum guarantee may he called back for
additional emergency or overtime without an additional three (3) hours minimum
work guarantee, It is the purpose and intent ot’this section to assure an emploee of
at least three (3) hours of pay at overtime rates for the inconvenience of being called
back to work between normal shifts, but not to be separately paid for several callhacks within the three (3) hour minimum guarantee period. Any employee who is
called in one hour or less prior to the start of his/her normal shift receives such time at
the overtime rate, but is excluded from the three (3) hour tninimumn guarantee.

(

6. Employees may be required to work long hours as a result of snow or other
emergencies. Employees shall he paid double time for all work performed in excess
of 16 consecutive hours and l’or hours worked Thanksgiving Day and/or Cliristnias
Day.
7. Standby Compensation. Employees who volunteer during their normal off dur’ hours
to standby duty and arc required to be available for communication with their
Department during the standby period, and for reporting to work ‘vithin a reasonable
period of time to duty shall receive a standby pay. Effective July 1.2017. employees
who are assigned to standby dun or requested to he available for standby duty as
determined by the Department head shall be paid twelve (S12.00) dollars per day for
their respective workdays, and seventeen tS17.00) dollars per day for their respective
ion-work (oft) days. and Holidays. ElTeetive July 1.2018. employees who are
assigned to standby duty or requested to be available for standby duty as determined
by the Department I-lead shall he paid thirteen dollars and fifty cents (S 13.50) per day
for their respective workdays, and eighteen dollars and fifty cents ($18.50) per day
for their respective noti—work (otT) days. and Holidays. Ltnless otherwise excused by
the Department F-lead, failure to report may result in discipline as provided in Article
XII.
a. There shall be no reduction of the standby rate as defined in the preceding
section in the event an employee on standby is called in and reports to work.
8.

Plus Rates. An employee may be temporarily assigned to the work ol’any position or
the same or lower rate of pay without change in compensation. Upon cessation of
such temporary assignment, said employee shall be restored to Isis/her original
position.

Town of Hudson and
Local 1801 AFSCf.IE Public Works Department
July I, aOa42O2J— June 30, aO42o24
Pace

9

0

C
When an employee works on a temporary assignment in a higher paid position, lie/she
will receive either a 75J0% increase in compensation or the minimum rate olpay For
the classification whichever is greater for each hour worked.
9.

XV.

F inpiovees who need to leave during their regularly scheduled shift due to Fatigue.
etc., as a resu It of working continuously throughout the previous night. may do so
with prior approval of thet supervisor. tn this ease employees are not paid for
released hours but may elect to use earned time to cover those hours of their regularly
scheduled shift. In addition. if the employee is requested to nork overtime at a later
lx)inl in the work week a deduction of overtime will nnt occtmr as a rcstmlt of not
compiling forty (40) regular hours.

Seniority
-

There shall be two (2) types of seniority:
a. Department Seniority Department Seniority shall relate to the tune an employee
has been continuntisly employed b’ the Town in the department recognized by
this Agreement.
b. Classification Seniority—Classification Seniority shall relate to length of tinme an
employee has been employed in a particular classification.
—

(

2. Classification Seniority in the classification involved shall prevail in matters
concerning layoffs. Qualified and available former permanent employees shall be
reinstated before nc’v emp!oees are hired following a layoff. lhis preference shall
expire after one (1) year.
3. Upon receiving a promotion, an employee’s name shall be entered at the bottom of
that particular Classification Seniority list to which he/she has been promoted.
regardless of his/her Department Seniority, and he/she shall be considered to be the
junior or least senior employee in that classification regardless of the Department
Senmormtv of other employees already in that job. until such time as other
promotions/hirings are made into that classification. New promotions/hirings shall
entered at the bottom of that particular Classification Seniority list concerned. [f a
promoted employee does not pass his/her new position’s probation or if he/she is
unsatished with the position within 30 days after the assignment then he/she shall be
returned to his/her old classification at the earliest date that is operationall) possible
and regain his/her former classification and associated seniority.
4. Until a new employee has served the initial twelve month probationary period it shall
be deemed that he/she has no seniority status, and he/she may he discharged or laid
off with or without cause, such discharge or layoff shall not he subject to the
grievance procedure,
5. An employee shall not forfeit seniority during absences caused by:
a. Illness resulting in total temporary disability due to his/her regular work with the
Town, certified to by an affidavit from the Workers’ Compensation carrier.
rows of Hudson 8nd

Locul 1801 AFSCME Public Works Depurtmeni
July 1, 420-2023—muse 30, 2032024
P 1 g C

I 10

0

0

0

C
b. Illness resulting in total temporary disability, certified to by a physicians
affidavit.
6. An employee shall lose his/her seniority for, but not limited to the following reasons:
a. Discharge for just cause.
b. If lie/she resigns.
7. The employee’s present classification seniority as of the cfiec!ivc date of this contract
shall be the only type of seniority considered for the purpose of establishing the
Classification Seniority System called for in this Article. This Classification
Seniority most have been continuous in nature to merit consideration under this
section. The preparation and maintenance of the Classification Seniority Roster shall
be the responsibility of the Chairman of the Board of Selectmen or his/her designee.
XVJ

Work Redtictions or l.avoffs
-

(

If there is a layoff or any reduction in the work force the person with the least
seniority in the affected classification will be laid off first. These laid off employees
will be recalled in the reverse order oflayotT The person with the mast seniority will
be hired back first.

2. No employee shall have the right of replacing another employee in any classification
by virtue of Department Seniority alone, except that in the event of a permanent lack
of work in any classification, those employees affected in that classification shall be
assigned when operationally possible to the next lower classification for which the
are qualified. Absolute bumping rights are
to be assumed by the foregoing.
3. \ll employees who have been laid off will be kept on a re-employment list for a
milinmuls of one (I) year.
XVII

‘lime Clocks
Each hour shall he divided into four 4i parts and every fifteen (15) nunutes shall
constitute one quarter of an hour. Overtime, after a regularly scheduled shift, shall not
begin until eight (8) minutes have elapsed. After that time. full overtime from the end of
regularl scheduled shift, shall be paid for the number of quarters of an hour worked.

XVIII.

Salaries
1.

Effective July I, 2O24-2O23. the wage schedule shall he adjusted by three percent
(3%). The adjusted wage schedules will be as provided in Appendix A-TB.
Effec-tive-Juty-t-—202-l-the--wage-sehcdtilc-shall be adjusted by three percent (3%)

Town of HL1dsonFs
l.ocol ‘Sot ArscM[ Public Works Oepartmcr,i
July I. ?a42O23— June 30, O2U24
P a g 0

I 11

0

0

0

C
Effective July 1,2022 the w schedule shall be odjusled by three percent (3%).
The adjusted wngcschedules \-vill he as provided in Appendix-C;
All employees will move to the next available step at the anniversary of their hire or
promotion in rank.
Employees shall be granted movement from step I to step 2 upon successful
completion of probation; thereafter, eligible employees will be granted step increases
annually on their anniversary date as provided in Appendix A-4B.
2. A change in job and thus employment in a hjghcr classification in the wage schedule
(i.e., the new classification is assigned to pay grade V as compared to IV) is
considered a promotion and as such would result in the employee moving to the same
step they are currently on, at the new elassifmcaliun.
XIX.

Promotions and Transfers
I. When a position within the bargaining unit is approved lobe filled and which offers
the possibility of a promotion to unit members, it will he posted on Departmental
bulletin boards for a period of five (5) working days.

(

Management shall make a determination of the filing of such posted position no later
than 30 working days after the close of the posting period.
a.

Job posting shall include job specifications, rate of pay, job location, the shift and
also if the job is permanent with a permanent rating.

2. After an award is made of a promotion the name of the person promoted shall be
posted for five (5) working days following said award.
3. Vacancies in management positions within the Department which are excluded from
the bargaining units shall be posted on the departmental bulletin boards.
4. Employees who are absent during the entire posting period shall be automatically
placed on the list for consideration for the position(s) provided, however, that such
employee may, at his/her discretion, have his/her name removed from the list within
five (5) work days of returning to work.
5. Upon receiving a promotion, an employee’s name shall be entered at the bottom of
that particular Classification Seniority list to which he/she has been promoted,
regardless of his/her Department Seniority, and he/she shall be considered to be the
junior or least senior employee in that classification, regardless of the Department
Seniority of olher employees already in that job, until such time as other promotions
are made into this classification. New promotions shall be entered at the bottom of
that particular Classification Seniority list concerned. If a promoted employee does
Town of Hudson and
Local imOl AFSCME Public Work5 Department
July 1, oa2o23—June 30, a0a32o24
P a g e

I 12

0

0

0

(
not pass his/her lie” position’s probation then he/she shall be returned to his/her old
classification and regain his/her former classification or may do so voluntarily.

6. The provisions of Article XIX are subject to the grievance and arbitration procedure.
XX.

Workers’ Compensation
I. Workerrs Compensation, as distinguished from Earned Time and Sick Pool Timc.
shall mean absence from duty caused by an accident, injttry or occupational disease
incurred while (he employee was engaged in the performance of his/her official
duties.
a. The Town will pay to an employee absent, as the result of an employment related
disability, an amount which, is provided for by New Hampshire statute and
administered by the Compensation Fund of New l-lampshire.
2. An employee may utilize accumulated Earned Time or Sick Pool time (aftcr live day
Sici’ Pool waitine period I to cover the period of rime between the occurrence ofa job
related injury or disease and the on-set or availability of Worker’s Compensation
payments.

(

3At any time after a job-related disability, the employee may request that accumulated
Earned Time or Sick Pool time (after five day Sick Pool Waitine oeriud) he used as
special disability leave to either provide for continued receipt of pay in the case of
tardy Workerts Compensation payments or to supplement the payments in order to
receive one hundred percent(IOt)%) of the employee’s regular rate of pay.
--

.L-lThe tirst Workers Compensation Davinent received by the eniplo’ec most he
remitted to the Town. When remitting Workers’ Compensation payments to the
I own, the clnplovee’s Earned Time used will be replenished first. aud any additional
time used will be replenished to Sick Pool or Earned Time in the order used. In some
eircmnstanccs, the Town will uire (hat additional Workers’ Compensation
oaviaienrs received by the emplo be remitted to the Town to fully replenish Earned
Titne and Sick Pool time used by the employee.

I.

Upon receipt of the Worker’s Compensation payments from (he Compensotion Fund
otti14amØ’mpeyeem’mesHehewtt-bwi4et*+e-ef
nortion of the Worker’s Comnensnlion check to the To’.vn for the
purpose of restoring same pornoo Ut lIlJlF 1artIJ lttIt uttIIeJ II) co-cr tot lit
rsttl+mg—frem-tht1-fe1nfed-m}ua5-of-disease7
-“°‘-“

XXI.

Holidays
I. All employees shall be paid for the following named holidays, lhttr (4) floating
ho!idays, and any other day proclaimed as a holiday by the Town:
New Year’s Day
Thanksgiving Day

town ci Hudson and
Local 1801 AFSCME Pubhc Works Department
Ue I, O4O2J— Jute 30, a022024
P a

a I 13

Formatted: Font: (Defait) 1 met New Roman. 12 Pt
Formatted: lr.denr Left 03

Space After: Bpt Lire

spac:ng: Multiple 1.08 Ii, Nc bullets or numbering

0

0

0

Memorial Day

Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas
Four (4) Floating Ilolidays

Fourth of July

Labor Day

J1Tyvn etnplovees in other hargainine units recei’e Joneteenth as a liolidavthenth
Town will extend iuneteenth as a holiday to members of the haruainme unit.
Where conflict exists between the State aM National holiday, the Board of Selectmen
shall determine the day to be celebrated.
a. Holiday compensation shall he based on an employee’s reguhirly scheduled shift.
Employees in permanent percent-time positions of lilly-percent (50%) or greater shall
receive holidays on a pro-rala basis.
2. Employees who are absent clue to non-work related accident or injury or absent
without leave l’or the siHgle day directly preceding or directly t’ollowing the holiday
shall forfeit pay for the holiday.
3. Special Cases When a holiday falls on a Sunday or Monday which an employee is
not scheduled, the following scheduled workday shall be deemed a holiday. When a
holiday falls on a Friday which an employee is not scheduled or Saturday. the
workday preceding shall bc deetned a holiday. Should a holiday fall within a
vacation period, it shall not be counted as part of annual vacation allowance.

(

4. Employees being paid by the Compensation Fund of New Hampshire (Worker’s
Compensation) or the Disability Insurance carrier are not paid fur holidays during the
period of receipt of such benefits.
5. Employees may request the use ofa floating holiday at any time during the year,
however, a nti’timutn of two (2) weeks’ notice and appro’al by the Director of Public
Works, or his designee, is required prior to the Caking of the day off Floating
holidays must be taken during the fiscal year within which they are earned or Ihey are
lost.
XXII.

Earned Time
I. Earned Titne is an alternalive approach to the traditional manner of co ering absence
for vacation, personal leave days, and sick leave. Instead of dividing benefits into a
specific number of days for each benetit Earned Time puts these clays together into a
single benefit. Earned Time days can be used for a variety of purposes. including a
paymeni including a payment in cash at Ihe time of voluntary termination. Earned
Titne is available as soon as it is “earned”. ‘l’he exact number of Earned ‘I hue days
available each year will depend on the years of service to tlte low n
a.

Berea-ctucnt [,eave is provided by a separate benefit. (See Atticte XXVII)

Tow r ot H v’o .1 rid
local 1801 AFSCM[ Public Works Depanmen
July 1, O30-203— u,e 30, aozu?4
Page 114

,Formattedtont Detault)TimesNewRoman. l2pt

0

0

0

2. Coverane. Employees who are emp]oyed in a permanent position of at least 75
percent tinie* are covered by Earned Time, the accrual rates are as follows:
Years
Service
0-I
1-2
2-3
3-4
4-5
5-15
After 15

Hours Accrued (Approx.)
per Month
13.33
14
14.66
15.33
16
16.66
20

Annual Hours
Accrued
160
168
176
184
192
200
240

(* Part-time employees who at the time of signing this agreement have percent-time
appointments of 50-74% will be grandfathered” or eligible for Ihe Earned Time
Program.)
3.

For purposes of this policy. years of service vill be calculated in a manner identical to
that used for purposes of Seniority (Article XV, Sec. l.a.). Employees accumulate
Earned time based on regularly scheduled hours worked or in pay status up to those
hours budgeted for the position (other non-status hours worked and supplemental
compensation such as overtime are excluded) and on years of service to the Town.

4. Termination and Restoration of Service Credit: An employee \vhose break in service
from the town is less than one year will have his/her service bridged for purposes of
computing Earned Time aceroal. For breaks of more than one year an individual will
earn one year credit for each year of employment after return, until the total past
credit is accrued. After five years of employment following return to work, credit for
all previous service will be given.
5. Usage:
a.

Earned Time may he used after being earned including during an employee
probationary period. Ahsences will be mutually agreed upon by the employee
and his/her supervisor prior to the date of absence, unless the employee ‘vas
unable to anticipate and plan for the absences.

b. After the first hour of work, Earned Time use may he by the quarter hour.
c. Earned Time benefits accrue gjy doring the initial 3 weeks (15 working days) of
sick leave pool usage. Each separate use of the sick leave pool, however,
provides for the continuing earning ability.
6. Longevity Incentive:

Town of H u dose and
Loca[ 1801 AFScME PubIc Works Department
July 1, 0a.2023— June 30, O232O24
P a

e

I 15

0

0

0

C
All employees will receive a one-time award of five (5) non-lapsing personal days
upon completion of twenty (20) years of service to the Town of iludson. These days
may not be sold back to the Town and will not be paid out when leaving employment.
7. Sick Leave Pool:
The Sick Leave Pool is intended to provide security by allowing employees to “buy”
insurance for extended illness, or other disability. When “buying” Pool days,
employees convert Earned Days on a I to 3 basis. Similar to purchasing insurance,
the employee may pick a given number of days to exchange for coverage in case of
extended disability. For purposes of the sick leave pool. a day is eight (8) hours and
niust be converted as such.

(

Pool days are available for use only under the conditions listed below, and are not
eligible for payout at retirement or termination.
a) Use of Pool days may begin on the sixth consecutive work day absence due to
illness, injury, or other disability. Earned ‘lime must he used during this Sick
Pool Waiting period,
h) A physicians’ report must accompany the request to use Pool days.
e) It is not necessary to use tip all earned Days before using Pool Days.
d) The employee may continue using Pool (lays until his/her Pool is exhausted,
or until no longer disabled.
e) Periodic doctor’s reports may be required.
I) The maximum Pool day accrual is 150 days (i.e., the maximum conversion of
Earned (lays 5 50, which would convert to ISO I’ool days). If Pool days are
used, or if alt employee wishes to add to his/her Pool days, more Earned days
may be added each July (to a total of I 50). Earned ‘lime days may nut be
converted to Pool days at any other time.
8. Maximum Carryover
a. Employees on roll effective July I, 2004 shall be perntitted to carryover to future
years accrued earn time up to maximum of 720 hours,
b. Employees hired after July I, 2004 shall be permitted to carry over to future
year’s accrued time up to a maximum of 480 hours,
Any accruals which cannot be carried over will be paid out to the employee in the
next pay period following their anniversary date of employment.
All accruals will be paid to the employee at the time of termination, retirement or
layoff, except as provided below if such termination is for cause,
In the event that any employee has more accrued time on their anniversary date of
employment during the first year of the agreement than provided above, the employee

]

Towrtof Hudsonarad
ocaI 1801 AF5CME Pubhc Works Department
July 1, 0O’2O23—June 30, ao2o24
P a g e

I 16

0

0

0

C
shall be paid one hundred percent (100%) of the excess accrual in the next pay period
following their anniversary date of employment.
All accrual payments shall beat the base rate in effect at the time of payout.
9. Annual Buyout
Employee may request, during the first week in June or the first week in December
payment for accumulated earned time. Request will be granted only in units of forty
hours, i.e., buy back of 40 hours, 80 hours, t20 hours, etc.
Earned Time, when paid in this manner, will beat one hundred percent (100%) of
its value based upon the employee’s current rate of pay on June 1°, or December I”,
respectively. Payment will be made in the last paycheck of the fiscal year or
calendar year.
10.

Use in conjunction with disability insurance requirements:
a. An employee may utilize his/her Earned Time or when appropriate the Sick Leave
Pool to cover the period between an injury or disease and the on-set or availability
of disability payments.

(

b. At any time after a disability, the employee may request that Earned lime or,
when appropriate, the Sick Leave Pool be used to supplement the disability
payments. In no case shall the combination of Earned Time or Sick Leave Pool
benefits and the compensation received from the Disability tnsurance Cnmpany
equal more than one hundred percent (100%) of the employee’s regular rate of
pay.

c. Upon receipt of the delayed disability payments, if that were to occur, the
employee may elect to submit payment to the Town by virtue of “signing over” a
portion of his/her disability check to the Town for the purpose of restoring a
portion of either the Earned Time or Sick Leave Pool days used to cover the
absence due to disability. Such restoration oldays need nol be made if the
employee does not desire to restore such Earned Time or Earned Time Pool
benefits.
II. All accruals will be paid to the employee at the time of termination, retirement, or
layoft unless such termination is for cause. However, since a two (2) week notice is
considered to he appropriate, in cases where such notice is not given, a pro-rata
payment for Earned Time Accrual, based on the notice given will he made. In the
event terminalion is for catJse, the employee shall not be entitled to an earned-time
payout unless otherwise expressly approved by Ihe Board olSelectmen,

rown of Hudson and
Local 1801 AFSCME Public Works Department
July!. 00-2OZ3—June 30,
P a g a

I 17

0

0

0

(
XXIII.

Uniforms
I. The Town will provide an allowance of up to .5435 to each employee in the unit to
purchase appropriate unitbrms, shoes or boots. The account will be restored to that
level of funding on July 1st of each year.
2. New etnployces shall have the allowance of $435 available upon satishtctorv
completion of their probationary period.

XXIV.

Hospiial/I-IeaIih Insurance Coverace
Health Insurance: Effective January 1,2017 the Town pays eighty (80%) of the premiutn
cost for employees enrolled in ABS (HMO plafl. BC2T2O (Point of Service plan) and
Lumenos 2500 (52,500/55,000: Iligh Deductible plan) or other plans that provide
comparable coverage as recomtnended by the Joint Labor/Management Committee,
established herein. Any change in coverage options will require mutual agreetnent
between the parties.

(

In the event rhat an cmploee chooses the Lumenos 2500 plan the Town will contribute
to a health Savings Account (HAS) each January. even during status Quo period. $2,000
for a single plan. 54.000 for Iwo person plan, and 55.000 for a family plan.
The town will tnake the appropriate arratigements to assttre the article is fully funded as
a cost item.
Full-time employees who are eligible to paiticipate in the Town’s health insurance and
dental tisurance programs. hut who opt not to participate. are etigible to receive
pa’ ments in lieu of this coverage. In order to be eligible for payments in lieu of
coverage, an employee must provide the Town with proof of coverage under anotiter
health tisurance plan. Employees do not need to provide proof of coverage under
another detilal insurance plan.
Full-tttne etnplovee.s hired prior to July I. 2014 shall receive pay in lieu of health
itisuratice coverage, payable in weekly inslailments, according to the level of coverage
for which they qualift according to the following schedule:
$129.20
Single
2 person
$193.80
Family
£239.02
-

-

-

Full-time employees hired on July I, 2014 or thereafter shall receive pay in liett of health
insurance coverage, payable in weekly installments, according to the level of coverage
tar ‘hich Ihey qualil3 according to the following schedule:
Single
$50.00
2 persoti/family SlOt).00
-

-

Town of Hudson and
ocaI 1801 AFSCME Pubif: WDrk5 Department
Julyl, aaa2O23—June 30, Ooaa2olS
P a 3 €

I 13

0

0

0

(
Full-time employees hired prior toJuly 1.2014 shall receive pay in lieu of dental
coverage, payable in weekly installments, according to the level of coverage for which
they qualify according to the following schedule:
SingleS 5.12
2 person
S 9.92
$18.04
Family
-

-

Full-time employees hire on July 1.2014 or thereafler shall rcceive pay in lieu of dental
coverage, payable in weekly installments, according to the level of coverage for which
they qualify according to the following schedule:
55.12
Single2 person’family 59.92
-

Employees who are in no pay status will not receive arty further pay- in lieu of health or
dental coverage unless and until they return to paid status. Employees ‘vita are
terminated, who resign or who retire prior to being paid the full amount of pay in lieu of
coverage pay shall not receive the balance of the payment. Employees who change their
health insurance coverage mid—year shall have their opt out payment pro—rated or
discontinued in accordance with their new coverage selection.

(

Ettiplovees hired prior to July 1,2014:
a) That receive a flex payment for opt down, will continue to receive a flex payment
equal to that which they receive as of June 30, 2014.
b) That are eligible to receive a flex payment for health insurance, will receive a flex
payment as agreed upon in the CBA.
c) That are eligible to receive a flex payment for dental insitrance, will receive a flex
payment as agreed upon in the CBA.
d) Employees who are or become of single status will receive health insurance at no
charge.
1 be maxi mum annual flex payments referred to in this scctioti are available to any full
Inc active ctnployee who remains employed by the Town and eligible for I lealth and
Dental coverage by virtue of their employment status with the Town. for the entire plan
year. Employees who lose eligibility for these benefits as a result of a change in their
cmploytnent status with the Town il I no longer receive these payments.
The parties recognize that increasing health insurance premium costs are adversely
affecting both the Town and Employees. In the event the Town or the Bargaining Unit
detertnines there is a need to consider other providers, cost reducing alternatives ajtd/or
coverage options. the Town and the Union will convene a Joint Labor/Management
committee to explore and assess any such options Ihe Joint Labor/Management
comtnittee shall consist of two metnhers frottt each bargaining unit. two members from
the exempt statlas well as the Town Administrator and Finance Director. Members of
the committee xvi! I be perns itted to attend tncetings -lt i Ic ott paid status. The Joint
Labor/Management committee shall no bind the bargaining unit and shall not obligate
the parites to re-open the collective bargaining agreenietti aid-term.
TcwnofHsonaed
Loca, 801 SCME Pu1ILc Wo,ts De;trtnent
I. O2O23— June 30, O1a2C2J

P a

e

t 19

0

0

0

C

The Town and the UNION agree that if any portion of the parties’ negotiated health
insurance plan will trigger the application of the so call “Cadillac Tax”, as it may be
amended, shall also follow the procedure below:
a.

It is agreed that the Town and the Union may immediately reopen this Agreement
solely’ for the purpose of negotiating any changes iii the health insurance plan that
may be necessary to avoid the application of the Cadillac Tax to the Town or any
plan administrator, insurer, risk pool or plan participant, or to assure that the plan is
legally compliant. AH initial bargaining session shall be held within ten (10)
business days of a request to reopen, unless another schedule is agreed to by the
parties. ‘the Town shall assist the UNION in obtaining plan design and pricing
information from insurance providers.

b. If within ninety (90) business days of either parties’ request to reopen this
Agreement, the parties are unable to agree on changes in the health insurance plan
nccessary to avoid the Cadillac Tax and/or achieve legal compliance, then the issue
shall be submitted to expedite binding intcrcst arbitration. The interest arbitration
shall proceed as follows:
1. The parties agree that the special nature of’ this issue may require an arbitrator
with specific knowledge of the ACA; therefore, the parties will make every
effort to mutually agree on an arbitrator with such specialized knowledge. If
the parties cannot agree upon an arbitrator, an arbitrator shalt be selected
using the procedures described in Article Xlii Step 3.

(

2. The interest arbitration hearing shall be held no later than thirty (30) business
days afier either party declares that the reopened negotiations on health
insurance are at impasse, unless otherwise agreed to by the parties.
3. The Town and the UNION shall each submit to the selected arbitrator a
proposal for modifying the negotiated health insurance which shall avoid the
Cadillac Tax, the Town and the UNION shall exchange their proposals not
less than ten (10) business days prior to the arbitration hearing.
4. The arbitrator shalt be empowered to select either the Town’s proposal or the
UNION’s proposal (‘final offer” arbitration) and is expressly not empowered
to fashion his or her own modifications to the negotiated health insurance
plan.
XXV.

Life Insurance
The Town agrees to provide term life insurance with coverage being one (1) times an
employee’s annual salary. (Base pay)

Town of Hudson and
local 1801 AFSCME Public Work, Departrne,t
July 1, 0a0.2023—June 30, oan024
P a g a

t 10

C

C

C

(C

XXVI.

Flexible Benefits Plan
Employees are provided with the voluntary option of participating in Town of hudson
Flex Plan. An abbreviated summary of this plan is contained in Appendix B.

XXVII.

Bereavement Leave
I. All employees, with appointments of fifty percent (50%) or greater shall be granted
bereavement leave of up to three (3) days per occurrence, with pay, due to the death
of an immediate family member. With the approval of the Town Administrator, an
additional two (2) days of bereavement leave may be granted in the event of hardship
due to excessive travel related to bereavement for immediate family. Such leave shall
be requested of the department head or his/her designee. (Employees with less than a
100% appointment will receive a pro-rata benefit based upon their average number of
hours in a day.)
2. Immediate family for the purpose of this Article shall be defined as:
Father-in-law
Spouse
(Step) Sister
(Step) Brother
Mother-in-law
(Step) Child
Grandchild
Son-in-law
(Step) Mother
Or blood relative or ward residing in the same household.

(Step) Father
Daughterinlaw

3. Earned time off, including vacation, personal days or previously accumulated Earned
lime may be used to cover other absences due to bereavement.

(

4. Special leave of one (I) working day with pay for the purpose of attending the funeral
shall be grantcd an employee in the event of the death of his/her:
Brother—in—law
Grand father
Sister— in— law
Grandmother
Aunt
Uncle
‘First” Cousin
Bereavement compensation shall be based on Employee’s regularly scheduled shift.
XXVIII.

Extended Leave of Absence

—

(Family Leave Act)

I, Employees are allowed up to twelve (12) weeks of leave without pay, in each twelve
(12) month period, for reasons provided fur under the Family Leave Act of 1993
(FMLA) i.e. a) the birth of the employee’s child, b) the placement of a child with the
employee for adoption or foster care, c) caring for a spouse. child or parent in the
event of a serious health condition, or d) inability of the employee to perform the
functions of his or her job because ofa serious health condition. All definitions
within this section shall correspond to those in the Act and its regulations.
2. To the extent possible the portion of extended leave of absence (FMLA) taken doe to
disability resulting from pregnancy, miscarriage or child birth shall be charged to
available Earned lime. Such Earned Time shall be used from the on-set of the
extended leave of absence (FMLA).
Town of H ud so p and
Local 1801 AFSCME Public Works Department
July 1, O2O2O23— June JO, dOJ32024
P a p p

I 21

0

0

0

C
3.

During the twelve 02) week period of leave, the employee’s insurance benefits vill
be maintained in a manner identical to that in effect for “active’ employees and the
employees service credit and position will not he affected by such leave.

4. After twelve (U) weeks has elapsed, the employee’s employment status will be
continued by 1) return to duty, 2) medical evidence clearly slating the employees
inability to return to assigned duties and the use of benefits provided for in this
Agreement.
& The lwelve(12) month period, for purposes of FMLA calculation, shall he the
anniversary dale of the initial granting nf leave of absence under the Act and this
Article of the Agreement.
XXI X.
I. The Town shall have the right to make regulatiotis for the safety and health of its
employees tluring their hours of cml] loyment. Representatives of the ‘town and the
Union may meet once in ninety days at the request of either party to discuss such
regulations. The Union agrees that its members who are employees of the Town will
comply with the Town’s rules and regulations relating to safely.

(

XXX.

Military Leave
I. Any permanent employee enlisted or inducted into the Armed Forces of the United
States or who as a member of the Reserve or National Guard Unit is called to active
Duty in the Armed Forces and who satisfactorily completes such service and makes
application for reemployment within 90 days of release from active duty or within 30
tlays, in the instance of training, shall be returned to town employment in a position
of like pay, seniority or status to the position the employee left. The employee shall
he entitled to the same or similar pay, status and seniority the employee would have
had if the employee continued employment.
2. Any employee who is a member of a military reserve or National Guard unit shall be
enlitled 10 leave without loss of lime, pay or regular leave or any other benefits for all

periods of military services in the service of the Slate of New Hampshire at the call of
the Go’ernor without regard to length of time, and for family military serviee in the
United States for a period not to exceed a total of [5 calendar days on any fiscal year.
Entployees shall be entitled to full compensation, less any military compensation
received in the instance of reserve duly, for what would otherwise be normally
assigned work days. excluding overtime, during the IS calendar days of military
assignment.
3.

An” employee who is a member ofa military reserve or National Guard unit ‘vho
receives training in excess of 15 calendar days. and not at the call of the Governor
and ill the service of the State as set out abnve shall be entitled to leave without pa’
for the duration of the training. If however, the employee must go on active duty in

0wn of HjdsOn .r4
.oca 1801 AFSCVE Public Wor, DeulrtTent
ae.Ag3—Ju,e 3D. ?O?

IL) yl,

Pale

22

0

0

0

I
the United Slates Armed Forces to receive such training, the employee shall not he
entitled to leave without pay, but rather reemployment as set out above. An employee
entitled to leave without pay shall not accrue Earned time while receiving military
leave without pay, but shall not lose any previously accrued Earned time and shall
return to the same or another position similar to pay, seniority and status. While on
military leave without pay, the employee shall not be cnvered by the Town’s medical
benefits and may only continue family mcdical coverage benefits by paying the
appropriatc premiums.

4. All employees must present orders 10 their supervisors in order to obtain this leave,
which indicates date of departure and length of service anticipated. Employees
returning from reserve duty shall also submit proof of compensation received from
such duty.
5. Any enhancemcnt(s) to thc above provisions for the military service shall be at the
sole discretion of the Board of Selectmen and shall be extended to members of this
bargaining unit as applicable.
XXXI.

(

Jury Duty
Any regular full-time employee or part-time employee who is required to serve on a jury,
or as a result of official Town of 1-ludson duties is required to appear before a court,
legislative committee or quasi-judicial body as a witness in response to a subpoena or
other directive, shall be allowed authorized leave with pay less any amount received for
such service. A probationary period shall be extended by the same amount of time as
required for serving on jury duty. An employee who receives notice ofjury duty or
witness service must notify’ their supervisor immediately in order that arrangements may
be made to cover the position. The Town reserves the right to request that an employee
who is called for jury duty be excused if their absence would create a hardship on the
operational effectiveness uf the department to which they are assigned. Employees are to
return to work aftcrjury duty although no more than the regular scheduled number of
hours for both jury duty and work shall be required. If excused as a juror on any given
day, the employee is expected to contact their supervisor to report to work as instructed.
The employee is responsible to turn over jury or witness fees to the Finance Department,
excluding mileage fees.
Time away will not affect Earned time accruals.
Employees who appear in court as the Plaintiff or Defendant in any action not related to
their official duties shall not be paid for the time away from work unless the time is taken
as Earned Time. Court payments for travel expenses are to be retained by the employee.
The employee may keep an)’ court payment for services performed on the days of their
regularly scheduled weekend or performed while on Earned time leave.

Town of Htjdnon and
Local 1801 AFSCME PubIc Works Onparinient

Julyl, 2020-2023—june 30, 20032024
P a g C

I 23

0

r
XXXII.

Miscellaneous
Intra-unit Relations
Since it is to the benefit of all that harmonious fraternal relations prevail in the Town, any
disputes which may arise between and among members of the unit and which have major
consequences of their performances shall, at the Chairman of the Board of Selectmen or
his/her designee, discretion, be referred to the bargaining agent for mediation and
resolution.
Bulletin Board
The Town shall provide a bulletin board for the posting of notices of the Town and
Department addressed to the employees and for notices of the Union addressed to its
members. The Department shall locate its bulletin board at a convenient place. No
notices shall be posted in or around the Town property except on the board and then only
afler approval by the Town as being suitable for posting. No Union notice shall he
posted unless it has been signed by the responsible officer of the Union.

XXXIII.

Contracting and Subcontracting Out
-

The Town recognized the concern of the Union in regard to contracting and
subcontracting out work which results in a reduction of the work force.

2. If Ihe Town or Department covered by this Agreement changes its methods of
operation which involves contracting out work which is now being performed by
bargaining unit employees, the Town will give notice to the Union of its intention.
Furthermore, the Town will attempt to absorb affected employees into other Tnwn
positions. Tn those eases where employees are not absorbed into other Town
positions, the Totvn and/or Department will provide as much advance notice of
pending layoffs as reasonably possible.
XXXI V.

Separability
In the event any provision of this Agreement in whole or in part is declared to be
illegal, void, or invalid by any court of competent urisdiction or any administrative
agency having jurisdiction. all of the other terms, conditions, and provisions of this
Agreement shall remain in full force and effect to the same extent as if that provision
had never been incorporated in this Agreement and in such event, the remainder of
this Agreement shall continue to be binding upon the parties hereto.

XXXV.

Effect of Agreement
-

This instrument constitutes the entire Agreement of the Town and the Union, arrived
at as a result of collective bargaining negotiations, except such amendments hereto as
shall have been reduced in writing and signed by the parties.

Town of Hudson and
Local 1801 AF5CME Public Works Department
July 1, O30-2O23— LIne JO, J0J2024
P a g C

(L

I 24

0

0

0

C
2. The panics acknowledge thai during the negotiations which rcsultcd in this
Agreement, each had unlimited right and opportunity to make demands with respect
to any subject or matter nut removed by law from the area of collective bargaining,
and that the understandings and agreements arrived at by the parties after the exercise
of thai righi and ihc opportunity are sd forth in thc Agreement. therefore, the Town
and the Linion, for the life oft Ii is A grccincnt. cach voluniari ly and unqualifiedly
waives thc right, and each agrccs that thc other shall not be obligated to bargain
collectively wiih respect to any subject or maitcr rcfcrrcd 10 or covered by this
Agreement. or with respect to any subjcct or matter not specifically referred to or
covcred in this Agreement. even though such subjects or matters may not have been
within the knowledge or contemplation of either or both parties at the time that they
negotiatcd or signed this Agrccment.
XXXVI.

Duration of Aereenient
This Agreement shall he in full force and effect from July I, 2020—2023 through June 30.
20234. By mutual agreement. the parties may extend the terms thereof, with or
without modification as may he agreed. Either party shalt give written notice thereof at
least one hundred and twenty (120) days prior to the Budget Submission Date in the year
following expiration.

(

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused their signatures to be affixed
on the dates indicated by their duly authorized representatives.
FOR TI IF TOWN OF HUDSON
Board of Selectmen:

FOR AFSCME LOCAL 1801 HUDSON
DEPARFMENI OF l’LBLJC WORKS

lou n Administrator:

Finance Director

I

Town of Hudson and
Local 1801 AFSCME PtjblJc Works Dpanment
July 1, 0420-2023—Jon, 33, 20002324
P

‘

I 25

0

(

Appendix A
TOWN OF HUDSON, Nil
LOCAL 1801 PUBLIC WORKS WAGE SCFIEDULE
Effeclhe July 1.2022 with 3.0% COL Adjustuienl
-

I____________
CLassJiaissm nIsaI2by 086 45cr] to Jr gmde as ñJrateJ bcEow
Grady

Rank%iasciflraiion

Viii
Xli

Tnrk Dr:serLahrner ilnrk I

Xii

‘criLaho rer I): DoDa:c3t r5crk
Operanurs Assaaar2flspatch
Tnr ftseraabolel (Tnxk Drner:LaS seriF). S cIliqLnet
Operalor Seu en. Fcnpnrrt Operator I: )Ieclranr: Head rumOr-keeper
-

XIV

TnofficTecl.ncn

XIV

Sub-Fenenno (Assnarz Foce:nor)
Foiennnr. S erwr Ferennari I!E4:rsavor Oereral. CtrefMeclrar.rc

XVI

Gnde
VIII

$2134

XII
XJV
XVI

$2482
$2682
52906

n2

pj

$2220
$2587

$2300

$2705
$3032

-

Slump Forerrarn

Stein S

$2693
$29 15

52394
$2798
531,3

$31 60

$3288

52482
52908

52574
$30 13

52663
$3119

$31 45
$34 ii

$3268
$3547

53382
$3670

(

lows of Hudson and

Local 1801 AFSCME Pubte Works Department
July 1 3020-2023—June tO 2020024

P a g e

I 26

t

9

lO

52743

52825
$3300

$2010
$3408
53695

$3212
$3283
$3780

53588
$3894

540 Ii

0

0

0

r
Appendix B
Town of Hudson, NI-I
LOCAL I got PUBLIC WORKS WAGE SCHEDULE
Effective July I 2023 with 3D0 COLA Adjuslmenl (FY24)
-

Classifications shall be assigned to the grude as indicated below

uIzU

Rank/CIasshIlraIIpn

VIII
Xli
Xli

XVI

Truck Driver/Laborer (Truck Driver Laborer I); Dispatch Clerk
Operations Assistant/Dispatch
Truck Driver/Laborer (Truck Driver Laborer II); Special Equipment Operator Sewer
Equipment Operaior I; Mechanic; Head Grounds-keeper
Traffic Technician
Sub—Foreman (Assistant Foreman)
Foreman, Sewer; Foreman, Highway or General; Chief Mechanic Shop Foreman

ai

Secn2

$ 21.98
S 25.56
$ 27.62
$ 29.93

$
$
$
$

XIV
XIV

Qn4t
VIII
Xli
XIV
XVI

-

-

22.87
26.65
28.80
31.23

SkPI

SkA

5 23.78
$ 27.76
$ 30.02
5 32.53

S 24.66
$ 28.82
$ 31.22
S 3387

$ 25.56
$ 29.95
$ 3239
$ 35.15

(

ThwnofH—dsonand
real 5801 AFSCME °utlic Works 3e p2’trner
I. 2aG-1G23— jane 33, 2034202’
P a g C

I 27

Step 6

kP1

S 26.51
$ 31.03
5 33.66
S 36.53

$ 27.43
$ 32.13
5 34.83
$ 37.80

Step 10
$ 28.25
$ 33.08
S 35.87
S 38.93

$ 29.10
$ 34.08
$ 36.96
$40.11

$ 29.97
S 35.10
$ 38.06
$ 41.31

C

C

C

C
Appendix C
TOWN OF HUDSON, NH
Benefit Summary
Life/AD&D

Term Life
Option:

One time base earnings (100% paid by Town)
At the employee’s expense: they may choose to
increase coverage to 2 times earnings or 3 times
earnings (35% participation is needed)

Disability

Short term

60% weekly earnings/SI ,000 maximum
I day waiting period for an accident
8 day waiting period for an illness
26 week maximum
(100% paid by Town)

Long term

60% monthly earnings/$3,500 monthly maximum
toage6s
(100% paid by Town)

(
Medical

ABS (HMO) (80% paid by Town)
BC2T2O (P05) (80% paid by Town)
Lumenos 2500 (High Deductible) (80% paid by Town)
Employees can opt out and receive flex payments

Dental

Delta Dental (100% paid by Town)
$25 Deductible
100/80/50/50 co-insurance
$1,000 yearly maximum benefit

Pension

Employer provided retirement plan
With New Hampshire Retirement System (NHRS)

Savings

Employee can choose to participate in ICMA Deferred Comp
Plan (457 Plan)

Town of Hudson and
Local 1301 AFSCME Public Wonks Depantment
Js’v 1, Oa0-2023—Junn 30, ?O32O24
P a g e

I 23

C

0

C
