AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF CLINTON
AND THE
POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION OF MICHIGAN

Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021

Page 1
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
THIS AGREEMENT entered into the ______ day of January,
2017, between the Charter Township of Clinton, a Michigan
Municipal
Corporation,
hereinafter
referred
to
as
the
"Township," and the Police Officers Association of Michigan,
hereinafter referred to as the Association or Union, as
exclusive bargaining agent for the Local Association of Clinton
Township Police Officers, effective April 1, 2016 to March 31,
2021.
WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, the parties hereto in consideration of the
mutual covenants and agreements herein contained, do hereby
agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
PURPOSE AND INTENT
1.1:
The general purpose of this agreement is to set forth
terms in respect to rates of pay, wages, hours of employment, or
other conditions of employment, and to promote orderly and
peaceful labor relations for the mutual interest of the Charter
Township of Clinton, in its capacity as Employer, the employees,
the Union, and the citizens of the Charter Township of Clinton.
1.2:
The parties recognize that the interest of the
community and job security of the employees depend upon the
Employer's success in establishing proper services to the
community.
1.3:
To these ends, the Employer and the Union encourage to
the fullest degree friendly and cooperative relations between
their respective representatives at all levels and among all
employees.
ARTICLE II
RECOGNITION
2.1:
The Charter Township of Clinton recognizes the Police
Officers Association of Michigan as the sole and exclusive
bargaining agent to the extent permitted and required by Act 336
of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan for 1947, as amended
by Act 379 of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan for 1965,
as amended, for all officers holding the rank of Patrol Officer,

Page 2
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
Patrol Officers assigned to any Division, within said Department
and Police Detective.
2.2:
The Township will not interfere with, discourage,
restrain, or coerce police officers in the Association from
engaging in any lawful activities therein.
2.3:
The Township will negotiate with the Union on items
relating to rates of pay, wages, hours, conditions of employment
and fringe benefits, including incentives for education.
2.4:
It is agreed between the parties hereto that the cost
of negotiation, execution, administration, and enforcement of
this Agreement is fairly reflective as an employee's regular
monthly membership dues that are paid by members of the
Association, and therefore the parties adopt the philosophy of
the "agency shop" principle in this agreement.
2.5:
All employees, therefore, within the bargaining unit,
shall sign a written authorization with the Township to have
deducted from wages, and paid to the Association a sum equal to
the monthly membership dues as shall from time to time be
promulgated by the Association membership and published by the
officers.
Employees who shall fail to comply with this
requirement within thirty (30) days from the first date of their
employment shall be discharged by the Township.
The return of
said deductions by the Township to the association shall be made
at a time agreeable to the parties hereto, which shall be
reasonable with the operations of the payroll department and the
office of the Treasurer.
The Union shall indemnify and hold the Township
harmless for any costs or expenses incurred, in the event of any
employee asserting any claim against the Township in respect to
the foregoing.
2.6:
However, if at any time during the continuance of this
Agreement, the "agency shop" principle, as outlined above, is
declared illegal by any court of record in the State of
Michigan, then and in that event the Township may refuse to
deduct such payroll deduction, and any employee who wishes to
continue on a voluntary basis may do so, and the Township shall
process such voluntary contributions.

Page 3
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
ARTICLE III
REPRESENTATION
3.1:
The POAM shall be represented in all negotiations and
the Township agrees to negotiate with those representatives as
herein provided.
The local president or his designated
representative and a committee of the local, not to exceed five
(5) shall also serve on the bargaining committee.
3.2:
If the bargaining committee of the Association so
requires, the department shall permit three (3) on-duty officers
to serve on the bargaining committee without loss of pay and
benefits depending upon the calls for service situation at the
time.
However, not more than five (5) members of the Local
Association shall be at the negotiation table at one time.
3.3:
Two (2) members of the Local Association Executive
Board, in addition to the Local Association President, may be
excused from duty, for the business portion of the monthly Local
Association meetings, depending upon the calls for service
situation at the time.
3.4:
The president of the Local Association or an alternate
shall be allowed time off without loss of pay or benefits to
conduct such Association business as is necessary, including his
or her participation in grievance procedures; provided, however,
for regularly scheduled business, a forty-eight (48) hour notice
shall be given to the Chief of Police or his designee, and such
notice shall be given as soon as possible for non-scheduled
business.
3.5:
The Local Association President, with the approval of
the Chief of Police or his designee, will be allowed to attend
State and National Association meetings and conferences, not to
exceed five (5) days per contract year, without loss of pay or
benefits. Notice of intent to attend these meetings will be
provided to the Chief of Police in advance of the affected work
schedule's preparation or two (2) weeks, whichever is earlier.
ARTICLE IV
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
4.1:
GRIEVANCE RESOLUTION.
The informal resolution of
grievances is urged and encouraged to be resolved at the lowest
possible level of supervision for which this grievance procedure

Page 4
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
is established. Whenever the words "ten (10)" or "fifteen (15)"
days are used in this article they shall be defined to be ten
(10) or fifteen (15) working days exclusive of holidays,
Saturdays and Sundays.
4.2:
GRIEVANCE DEFINITION.
A grievance is defined to be
any difference that may arise between the parties relative to:
A.

Any matter involving an alleged violation of any
other provisions of this agreement or Act 78 of
the Public Acts of the State of Michigan of 1935
as amended.

B.
1.

Matters relating to rate of pay.

2.

Matters relating to wages.

3.

Matters relating to hours of employment.

4.

Matters relating to conditions of employment
as set forth in this contract and those
matters
of
health,
safety
and
general
welfare
of
employment
not
necessarily
provided for in this contract.

4.3:
GRIEVANCE GOVERNANCE.
Every officer covered by this
Agreement shall have the right to present grievances in accord
with the following procedure commencing with Section 4.4;
however, whenever any grievance could cost the Township more
than $5,000.00, it shall be automatically processed to Step Four
of the Grievance Procedure.
Grievances affecting a number of employees may be
treated as a policy grievance and entered at the second step of
the grievance procedure by the Association.
It shall be the firm policy of the Employer to assure
to its employees and to the Association an opportunity to have
the unobstructed use of this grievance procedure without fear of
reprisal or without prejudice in any manner to employment
status. However, the time limits of the grievance steps may be
extended only upon the mutual written agreement of the
Association and the Employer and only in advance of the
expiration of the step.

Page 5
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
4.4:

INTERNAL PROCEDURES.
STEP 1:
If either an officer or the Union feels they
or it have been aggrieved, they shall discuss the
grievance with their immediate supervisor and the
Local President or a designated representative of the
Local
President.
If
the
grievance
is
not
satisfactorily resolved in this manner, the Local
President or a designated representative of the Local
President shall file the grievance verbally or in
writing within fifteen (15) days with the officer's
immediate supervisor, or if not available, to the next
ranking officer in charge who shall answer the
grievance in writing within fifteen (15) days of its
receipt.
STEP 2:
If a satisfactory settlement is not reached
in Step One, or if the written answer is not submitted
within the fifteen (15) day limit as prescribed in
Step One, the grievance shall be submitted in written
form within fifteen (15) days to the Captain in charge
of his or her division for review, who shall reply in
writing within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the
grievance.
STEP 3:
If a satisfactory settlement is not reached
in Step Two, or if the written answer is not submitted
within the fifteen (15) day limit as prescribed in
Step Two, the grievance shall be submitted in written
form within fifteen (15) days to the Chief of Police
or his designee for review, who shall reply in writing
within
fifteen
(15)
days
from
receipt
of
the
grievance. A meeting between the Chief of Police and
the Local President or a designated representative of
the Local President shall be held to discuss the
grievance during and within the aforesaid fifteen (15)
day period.
STEP 4:
If a satisfactory settlement is not reached
in Step Three, or a written answer is not submitted
within the fifteen (15) day limit as prescribed in
Step Three, the grievance shall be submitted in
written form within fifteen (15) days to the person
designated by the Clinton Township Board as having
authority to review grievances and settle grievances
who shall presently be designated as the Human

Page 6
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
Resources Director unless changed by the Township
Board in the future. The designee or the Board shall
meet with the Union representatives within fifteen
(15) days.
After having met with the Union, the
designee or Township Board has fifteen (15) days to
submit his or their answer in writing to the Union.
STEP 5:
Arbitration or an Act 78 Civil Service
Hearing: If a satisfactory settlement is not reached
in Step Three or Step Four, or if the Township Board
does not meet with the Union within fifteen (15) day
limitation or if the written answer is not submitted
within the fifteen (15) day limit as prescribed in
Step Three, the moving party can either proceed to
binding arbitration as set forth below or petition the
Township Civil Service for a hearing.
However, once
the election is made by the moving party, that party
forfeit the right to withdraw that election and
proceed on the other remedy.
The submission of the
unresolved
grievance
to
either
the
American
Arbitration
Association
or
the
Civil
Service
Commission
will
preempt
the
moving
party
from
submitting the unresolved grievance to the body that
the grievance has not been submitted to.
4.5:

ARBITRATION.
A.

The party that requests arbitration of an
unsettled grievance shall notify the other party
in writing of such desire for arbitration. After
a receipt of a desire to arbitrate, the parties
shall attempt to agree on an arbitrator. If the
parties are unable to so agree within five (5)
working days or within a longer period that is
mutually agreed upon, the moving party shall
submit the matter to the American Arbitration
Association requesting that an arbitrator be
selected with the assistance, and under the rules
of the American Arbitration Association, or if
mutually agreed upon the moving party may submit
the matter to Federal Mediation and Conciliation
Service.

B.

The arbitrator shall have no power to add to or
subtract from or modify any of the terms of this
agreement or any supplementary agreement, nor to

Page 7
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
rule on any matter except while this Agreement is
in full force and effect between the parties.
C.

The arbitrator shall have no power to establish
wage scale rates on new or changed jobs, or to
change any wage rates unless it is provided for
in this Agreement.

D.

The arbitrator shall have no power to provide
agreements for the parties in those cases where,
in this Agreement, they have agreed that further
negotiations should occur to cover the matter in
dispute.

E.

In the event a case is appealed to an arbitrator
and he finds that he has no power to rule on such
case, the matter shall be referred back to the
parties without decision or recommendation on the
merits of the case.

F.

The award of the arbitrator shall be based
exclusively
on
evidence
presented
at
the
arbitration hearing; and, the award under no
circumstances shall be based in whole or part or
contain a reference to statutes; decisions,
regulations or other extra contract materials not
specifically incorporated in this Agreement.

G.

The arbitrator shall have no power or authority
to rule on the discipline or discharge of any
probationary employee.
In cases of discipline
and discharge, if the Civil Service forum is
chosen,
the
Union
shall
only
represent
probationary employees through the Civil Service
Board level under Act 78.

H.

The expenses of the arbitrator shall be shared
equally by the parties.
Each party shall make
arrangements
for
and
pay
the
expenses
of
witnesses which are called for them.

I.

There shall be no appeal from an arbitrator's
decision. It shall be final and binding on the
Union, on all bargaining unit employees, and the
Township,
on
those
matters
within
the
jurisdiction of the arbitrator.

Page 8
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
J.

4.6:

In
the
event
that
an
arbitrator
reduces
discipline so that the resulting discipline is a
suspension which exceeds thirty (30) calendar
days, he or she must rule whether said time in
excess
of
thirty
days
will
count
towards
seniority or service credit and if it will
include benefits.

CIVIL SERVICE & PROCEEDINGS.
A.

Any
unresolved
grievances
having
not
been
submitted to the American Arbitration Association
may be submitted to the Civil Service commission.
Said Commission will be in compliance with Act
No. 78 of the Public Acts of the State of
Michigan for 1935, as amended.

B.

The limitation placed on arbitratorial powers
enumerated in Section 4.5 shall apply equally to
the Civil Service Commission.
In cases of
discipline and discharge, if the Civil Service
forum is chosen, the Union shall only represent
probationary employees through the Civil Service
Board level under Act 78.

ARTICLE V
PROMOTIONS, LAY-OFFS, SUSPENSIONS,
DISCHARGES AND REINSTATEMENTS AND TERMINATION OF
EMPLOYMENT
5.1:
The provisions of Act No. 78 of the Public Acts of the
State of Michigan for 1935, as amended, are adopted by reference
as if fully stated herein with reference to Promotions, Layoffs,
Suspensions, Discharges and Reinstatements and Termination of
the Employment.
If an employee is laid off for three (3)
consecutive years without being recalled for employment, then
all rights to employment terminate.
5.2:
Any employee who is unable to perform his regular job,
is not on leave, and has used all of his or her sick days,
vacation days, and personal days, shall not be considered to
have any rights of employment and shall be terminated as an
employee.

Page 9
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
Benefits
such
as
longevity,
clothing
allowance,
holiday pay, weapon allowance and the like shall be paid and
prorated to the date of termination.
The provisions of this section shall no way effect the
compensation provisions under the worker's compensation section
nor does it apply to leave of absences where the leave is
conditioned and the conditions have been fulfilled.
5.3:
Suspension time shall not affect pension retirement
dates or seniority status and shall only relate to document
discipline and sanctions of loss of pay.
All benefits shall
continue and all provisions of this Collective Bargaining
Agreement shall remain in effect. Unless ordered by an
arbitrator in accordance with Section 4.5(J) of this agreement,
suspension time in excess of thirty calendar days shall not
count towards pension service credit, seniority, and no benefits
will be provided or earned during the suspension period.
5.4:
Discipline shall be removed from a member's personnel
file after a period of two (2) years from the date of discipline
provided there is no additional disciplinary action within the
two (2) year period.
ARTICLE VI
SENIORITY-TRANSFER-JOB OPENINGS
6.1:
All original appointments to any position in the
police department shall be for a probationary period of one (1)
year.
Once the officer has completed the one (1) year period
then the officer shall accrue seniority retroactively to the
initial date of employment as a full-time police officer with
the Clinton Township Police Department.
For officers who are not yet certified or require
recertification, the probationary period shall be for one (1)
year after the completion of the legally required courses of
basic training.
6.2:
A seniority list shall be furnished to the Association
by the department once each year.
6.3:
It is understood that transfers within the bargaining
unit are not permanent unless positions are specified in this
article as permanent positions. Transfers shall not be made

Page 10
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
unless notice of vacancy has been posted on the Union's bulletin
board for a minimum of fourteen (14) days. Any officer
interested in filling said vacancy shall file a written request
within fourteen (14) days from date of posting. This time period
shall be to allow all persons interested in said vacancy to file
a written request for consideration. Any person who does not
work for any reason, during the time a notice of vacancy is
posted, shall be included on the list as if they had made a
written request and shall be eligible until such time they are
contacted by the division Captain or his or her designee and
request that they not be considered.
6.4:
Filing a written request for consideration shall be
all that is required for those positions filled only by the
officer having the most seniority as stated in this article of
this collective bargaining agreement.
Interviews may be held
for those positions specifically defined in section 6.5 of this
collective bargaining agreement in which the Chief of Police may
consider equally the person's ability, training and education.
The interviews shall be held during the officer's normal shift
hours on a day they are scheduled to work or they shall be
compensated at the proper rate of compensation stated in article
VIII section 8.2 of the collective bargaining agreement.
6.5:
Seniority shall be the first consideration in filling
vacancies and transfers, however, the Chief of Police may
consider equally a person's ability, work record, training and
education provided that, in the case of a denial, the reasons
for such a denial must be provided to the officer in writing in
accordance with the just cause standard.
This provision shall
apply to the following positions:
Multi-jurisdictional Team Officers (e.g. MATS,
COMET) Training Officer(s)
Traffic Duty Officer(s)
Swat or Entry Team Officer(s) Critical Incident
Officer(s) Field Training Officer(s)
Community Relations Officer(s) K-9 Officer(s)
Accident Reconstructionist(s) Special
Investigations Division Internet Task Force
School Liaison Officer (Continuation of these
positions is subject to continued funding from
the School Systems.)
Bicycle Patrol
Department Training Coordinator

Page 11
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
If a position is filled by a person who has less
seniority, all persons with more seniority who filed a written
request for consideration shall have the right to grieve the
decision through the grievance procedure, if they feel the
decision is unjust.
With the exception of the above defined
positions, the officer having the most seniority shall receive
the position and/or transfer.
Employees who are accepted to special assignments
which require special training must agree to remain in such
assignments for a minimum of eighteen (18) months.
These
positions are:
Accident Reconstructionist
Evidence Technician
Field Training Officer
K-9 Officer
Traffic Officer
Training Officer
6.6:
In the event a person who is assigned to a posted
position is removed unjustly by the Chief or administration,
that person has the right to contest such removal through the
grievance procedure.
A posted position is defined as every
position except road patrol officer.
6.7:
Probationary officers shall not be assigned to any
posted position except in an emergency situation as designated
by the Chief of Police, and then only for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days, unless written approval is given by the
president of the Local Association.
6.8:
Management shall be allowed and encouraged to rotate
members without rank into the posted positions to better
acquaint them with the total operation of the police department.
The posting shall be open to all non-probationary employees.
Such rotation shall be selected based on seniority with a
minimum of four (4) years.
If no one with four (4) years of
seniority applies to the posting, management shall select from
the non-probationary with less than four (4) years seniority who
applied. Assignment to posted positions shall be for a term of
four (4) years. Officers time served in a posted position shall
not exceed the duration of time that was announced in the
posting for the position.
If an officer leaves one posted
position in order to accept an assignment to another posted
position, time spent in the original posted position shall count

Page 12
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
towards the maximum time that may be served in the second posted
position.
After waiting a period of seven (7) years, while
assigned to road patrol, members shall again be considered as if
they had not held a prior posted position. The seven (7) year
period shall start from the date the previous posted position
was scheduled to end regardless of when the officer returned to
road patrol. The lowest seniority non-probationary officer may
be ordered to fill the posted position in a non-voluntary
position. If a posted position cannot be filled with volunteers
and an officer is ordered to assume the position this officer
will not be considered as holding a posted position. Any officer
coming off probation during the duration of a non-voluntary
assignment may request the position and be assigned that
position for the remaining portion of the posted period.
Fulfilling the remainder of a position shall subject the officer
to the seven (7) year waiting period as if the officer had held
the position for the full period.
6.9:
Positions or assignments that are made on a restricted
basis because of the health or physical problems involving the
personnel shall not be subjected to the Seniority-Transfer-Job
Opening procedure.
6.10:
The selection of the two (2) investigator positions in
the criminal investigation division and the property officer
position shall be based solely on seniority.
ARTICLE VII
HOLIDAY PAY
7.1:
All officers shall receive a lump sum payment in the
last pay period of November, each year, for thirteen (13)
calendar holidays (104 hours). The said holidays are:
New Year's Day
Washington’s
Birthday
Lincoln's Birthday
Good Friday
Easter
Memorial Day

4th of July
Labor Day
Veteran's Day
Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve
Christmas Day
New Year's Eve

In addition to the above payment, all officers who
work any of the said holidays shall receive an extra day's pay
based on their base salary for each holiday worked and that

Page 13
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
extra day's pay shall be included in their regular scheduled
paycheck covering the pay period which the holiday or holidays
occurred. However, the officer shall not receive that pay for a
holiday if the officer is away without leave on either the last
scheduled day before or the first scheduled day after said
holiday.
All holidays will be observed on the calendar holiday.
If a holiday falls on an Officer's regularly scheduled work day,
the Officer will be required to work a full day unless he is
authorized to use a vacation or personal leave day. If a holiday
falls on an Officer's regularly scheduled off day, he shall not
receive compensation beyond that provided in Section 7.1 of this
agreement.
7.2:
Holidays shall be assigned within the schedule
groupings in accordance with Article XXX, on the basis of those
with the fewest holidays worked are given the opportunity to
work first. When the number of holidays worked are equal,
seniority shall prevail and the senior member shall be given the
opportunity of working the holiday first. If it is impossible to
fill the holiday assignment with volunteers the lowest seniority
shall be ordered to work first.
7.3:
Officers working on Christmas Day shall be provided
with a reasonable food benefit at the police station during
their shift.
ARTICLE VIII
OVERTIME PAY, OFF-DUTY PAY AND EMERGENCY PAY
8.1:
Members who immediately before or after they work
their scheduled eight (8) or twelve (12) hour shift and who
qualify for overtime shall be compensated at the overtime rate
of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the hourly shift rate worked.
Members called in for overtime work not in conjunction
with a scheduled shift shall receive one and one-half (l-1/2)
times the hourly rate based on the shift they worked.
Members working in conjunction with their regularly
scheduled eight (8) or twelve (12) hour shift work overtime into
a holiday will receive one and one-half (1-1/2) times pay plus
holiday pay for hours worked, however, members working in
conjunction with their regularly scheduled eight (8) or twelve

Page 14
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
(12) hour shift who work overtime after a holiday will not
receive holiday pay for the overtime, but shall be entitled to
one and one-half (1-1/2) times the hourly rate of the shift they
were working without consideration of holiday premium.
Members on vacation shall not be considered for callback or call-in unless it is an emergency call-out.
Then they
shall be paid at twice (2) the hourly shift rate worked.
Members assigned to the arraignment officer position
shall not be eligible for road patrol overtime until all
eligible road patrol officers have been offered said overtime.
If an officer is on a furlough day that is attached to
leave days and the leave days are not part of a scheduled
vacation, he or she shall be eligible to be called for overtime
assignment.
Officers unable to physically perform road patrol
duties due to light duty status, worker’s compensation status,
leave of absence or military leave shall not be called but shall
be charged with the amount of hours they were unavailable.
8.2:
When members appear in any court, administrative
hearing, morgue assignment, etcetera, on their time off, they
shall be paid at the overtime rate of one and one-half (1-1/2)
times their normal base hourly rate for all hours spent on such
assignments with a minimum of three (3) hours for each
appearance.
An officer is entitled to one (1) three (3) hour
minimum regardless of the number of appearances that occur
within said period, except in those cases where the appearance
relates to a Special Detail or Department Meeting wherein
separate funding is received by the Department to compensate for
the appearance.
Members appearing in court, on certain holidays
(Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's Birthday and Veteran's day)
shall only earn one and one-half (l-l/2) times their hourly base
rate.
However, members appearing in any court, administrative
hearing, morgue assignment,
etcetera, during a scheduled
vacation period shall be paid at the overtime rate of two (2)
times their normal hourly base rate for all hours spent on such
assignments with a minimum of three (3) hours for each
appearance.

Page 15
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
When members receive notice to appear in any court or
administrative hearing, etcetera, during a scheduled vacation
period it shall be the responsibility of the member to contact
the proper authority to reschedule the appearance. If a member
is unable to reschedule the appearance they are to notify the
officer in charge of the case or the prosecuting attorney.
Interviews for seniority transfer-job
openings
in
Article VI of this collective bargaining agreement shall be paid
in compensatory time at the overtime rate of one and one-half
(1-1/2) times their, normal base hourly rate for all time spent
with a minimum of one (l) hour for each appearance.
8.3:
Any member notified to stand by, they shall receive a
minimum of three (3) hours pay. If the stand by period exceeds
four (4) hours, they shall receive a minimum of two (2)
additional hours pay. If a member has not received notification
by the end of the four (4) hour increment to stand by longer
than that four (4) hour period, his duty to stand by will be
considered fulfilled.
The standby provision shall not be used except when the member
is authorized to standby by a prosecuting attorney or the
detective in charge of the case.
8.4:
A.

Overtime under one (1) hour shall be computed in
the following manner:
0 minutes to 15 minutes equals zero (0)
Over 15 minutes to 30 minutes equals one-half
(l/2) hour
Over 30 minutes to 60 minutes equals one (1) hour

B.

Overtime over one (1) hour and beyond established
minimums per the contract shall be computed in
fifteen (15) minute increments as listed below:
5 minutes to 15 minutes equals 15 minutes
Over 15 minutes to 30 minutes equals 30 minutes
Over 30 minutes to 45 minutes equals 45 minutes
Over 45 minutes to 60 minutes equals 1 hour

Page 16
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
8.5:

OVERTIME DISTRIBUTION.
A.

Overtime shall be allotted as follows: at the
beginning of each fiscal year and special details
those officers interested in working overtime
will be placed on an overtime list by seniority,
in each of the appropriate overtime books (Road
Patrol Book/Special Details Book). When overtime
is necessary the following procedure will be
used:
1.

Officers who are members of the affected
shift will be called in lowest to highest OT
hours offered in book order.
For road
patrol assignments, this shall represent a
twelve (12) hour shift.

2.

If none are available, any off-duty officer
shall be called by the number of hours.
(RO3 and Traffic to be called last).

3.

If no off-duty officers are available, then
overtime shall be offered to existing shift
by number of hours, in compliance with the
maximum allowable eighteen (18) continuous
hour policy.

4.

If no existing shift member chooses to work
eighteen (18) hours in compliance with
continuous hour policy, then affected offduty members shall be called and offered six
(6) hours prior to existing shift being
ordered.
If no affected on-duty members
choose to work eighteen (18) hours in
compliance with continuous hour policy, then
non-affected
off-duty
members
shall
be
called and offered six (6) hours prior to
existing shift being ordered.

5.

If
no
affected
off-duty
members
are
available, then RO3 and Traffic Patrol
officers may be called.

6.

If the above procedure is exhausted without
providing adequate staffing levels, overtime
shall be offered to Detective Bureau members
of the bargaining unit first who are

Page 17
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
qualified to operate patrol
then road patrol supervisors.

equipment

and

7.

In
the
event
additional
staffing
is
required, the lowest seniority officer that
is currently working and not in the overtime
book shall be ordered to do so.

8.

Calls shall be placed to the officer’s
preferred number and the phone shall be
allowed to ring a minimum of five (5) rings.
If voicemail is activated, a message shall
be left as to who called, why and the time.

B.

Each officer to whom an attempt was made,
regardless of response, contact, or non-contact,
will be charged with the amount of hours that
were available.
The above format will be
followed until the end of the fiscal year.
In
the event of more than one person having equal
amounts
of
charged
hours,
seniority
shall
prevail. Seniority shall prevail until such time
the officers have been given the opportunity to
work then the number of hours changed shall
determine the order officers are called.
An
officer with the least number of hours charged
shall be called first.

C.

Amounts of four (4) hours or less may be offered
to
existing
or
oncoming
shifts,
without
contacting officers who are off, but above format
must still be followed.

D.

Officers who do not request to be placed on the
overtime list shall not be held over for more
than two (2) hours, unless the officers on the
overtime
list
are
called
using
the
above
procedure, or ordered to work overtime when
scheduled off unless it is an extreme emergency.

E.

Officers who initially requested not to be placed
on a specific overtime list shall be included
should they later request same in writing.
However, upon being placed on the list they shall
assume the highest amount of hours currently on
the list at the time of placement. Likewise,

Page 18
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
officers may request to be removed from any list
at any time by doing so in writing.
8.6:

Compensatory Time.
A.

Compensatory
follows:

time

shall

be

accumulated

as

No more one hundred fifty (150) hours of
compensatory time will be allowed on the books at
any given time.
B.

Compensatory time shall be used as follows:
1.

Compensatory time is to be used only when
manpower permits, with the approval of the
shift or bureau commander.

2.

Compensatory time may be used by itself or
in conjunction with vacation or leave days.

Payment
for
Compensatory.
Upon
separation
from
service, officers shall be paid for all their accrued
compensatory time. In the event the separation is due
to the officer's death, the payment for accrued
compensatory time shall be paid to the officer's
estate or legal representative or to their immediate
family as provided by law.
ARTICLE IX
VACATIONS
9.1:
Vacation days shall be granted after six (6) months of
satisfactory employment has been completed, and at that time,
the computation for vacation days reverts back to date of
initial employment. All vacation days shall be earned and
accumulated on a monthly basis at the following rates:
9.2:
Members with less than six (6) years shall earn nine
and one-third (9.33) hours per month. Members with six (6) years
through twelve (12) years shall earn fourteen (14) hours per
month. Members with over twelve (12) years of service shall earn
seventeen and one-third (17.33) hours per month. These amounts
are reflected in the following:

Page 19
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
YEARS OF SERVICE
Start through 5 years

112 hours/year
(9.33 hours/month)

6 years through 12 years

168 hours/year
(14 hours/month)

Over 12 years

208 hours/year
(17.33 hours/month)

The purpose of this article is to guarantee each
member a winter and summer vacation if wanted. This does not
preclude members from taking vacation days upon availability.
9.3:
Vacations are a temporary separation from service.
For the purpose of this definition a vacation shall be construed
to include the standard number of leave days granted in
conjunction with the vacation.
A member shall be granted a
minimum of two (2) vacations per year but shall not be
restricted to two (2) if they have accumulated vacation days on
the books.
Members shall be granted a summer and winter
vacation, as the case may be, at the expiration of six (6)
months of initial service and thereafter as they are entitled to
same.
9.4:
The annual vacation season shall be divided into a
summer and winter vacation period as described in Appendix H.
9.5:
Vacation election Schedule. The
time period shall be completed as follows:

vacation

selection

First pick-summer vacation:
Third Wednesday in March

Second pick-summer vacation:
Third Wednesday in April

First pick-winter vacation:
Third Wednesday in September

Second pick-winter vacation:
Third Wednesday in October

9.6:
Vacations shall be drawn in accordance with the police
officer's seniority.
In the case of a tie between officers
having identical seniority, priority shall be determined by the
position the member was at on the eligibility list at the time
of appointment. Trading of vacation periods shall be permitted.
Officers may submit absentee requests.
9.7:
Vacations
shall
be
selected
by
the
following
procedures:
The highest seniority member on each shift or in

Page 20
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
the bureaus will have the opportunity to select first, then the
next most senior and etcetera until everyone eligible has been
given an opportunity to select a vacation.
A second vacation
selection within the same season shall be granted provided that
each eligible member has exercised his first vacation selection.
The same procedure shall be followed in the second pick with
regard to seniority.
9.8:
Scheduled vacations may include any combination of
leave, furlough, personal business or compensatory time to a
maximum of twenty-one (21) continuous days.
Any vacation over
twenty-one (21) days must be approved by the Chief of Police or
his designee.
9.9:
A member who selects a vacation in either the summer
or winter period shall be responsible to take those dates which
they have selected unless, a minimum of thirty (30) days prior
to the starting date of their vacation, they notify their shift
commander of their intention to cancel their vacation period. A
member may cancel their vacation period with less than thirty
(30) days’ notice based upon extenuating circumstances with the
approval of their shift commander.
9.10:
The Clinton Township Police Department shall furnish a
calendar of the vacation selection as indicated in Section 9.5.
officers shall place their names down for each day they are
requesting. The type of days which the officer chooses to make
up his furlough, leave, compensatory time, banked sick leave and
PTO will be placed on the monthly leave request form. Officers
shall be required to take a minimum of sixteen (16) leave hours
per seven (7) day vacation period; thirty-two (32) leave hours
per fourteen (14) day period, forty-eight (48) leave hours per
twenty-one (21) day period. Vacation periods overlapping into
half (1/2) weeks will include eight (8) leave hours; twenty-four
(24) leave hours per ten (10) day period, forty (40) leave hours
per seventeen (17) day period.
9.11:
A minimum of two (2) officers from the same shift in
the Road Patrol will be allowed on vacation at the same time. A
minimum of one (1) officer from a division will be allowed on
vacation.
However, a member who is required by the department
to transfer shifts or transfer from or to-a division after a
vacation selection period shall be allowed to take their
previously selected period.

Page 21
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
9.12:
A
vacation
selection
during
the
Christmas
Eve/Christmas Day, New Year's Eve/New Year's Day period shall
not extend through both Christmas and New Year’s.
9.13:
Upon separation from service, members shall be paid
for all their accrued vacation hours.
In the event the
separation is due to the member's death, the payment for accrued
vacation hours shall be paid to the member's estate or legal
representative.
9.14:
Two hundred and forty (240) hours is the maximum
number of hours which may be carried forward from one fiscal
year to the next. Although vacation hours may accumulate during
the fiscal year in excess of two hundred forty (240) hours they
shall not be forfeited as long as they are used before the end
of the fiscal year.
9.15:
An officer shall be entitled to cash in for pay up to
one-half of his/her banked furlough/vacation hours each contract
year provided a minimum of eighty (80) hours is maintained in
the furlough/vacation bank.
No
more
than
forty
(40)
hours
of
cashed
in
furlough/vacation time shall be included in an officer’s final
average compensation annually.
ARTICLE X
COMPENSATED ABSENCES
10.1:
It is understood between the parties hereto that sick
days accrued prior to ratification of this agreement shall be
referred to as "banked sick time."
The accrual of banked sick
time shall be frozen as of the month in which this agreement is
ratified. Fifty percent (50%) of accumulated banked sick leave
shall be paid in the case of retirement or payment to
beneficiaries in the event of death. If the officer leaves the
employment of the Township for any reason provided, however,
that the officer has at least five (5) years with the
department.
10.2:
An officer who reports for work and leaves because of
sickness during his or her tour of duty shall be charged sick
time for the exact number of hours which he or she is absent
from work.

Page 22
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
10.3:
Sick Leave shall not be considered as a privilege
which an officer may use at his or her discretion, but shall be
allowed only in case of actual sickness or disability of the
officer.
Serious illness of a husband, wife or child shall
warrant use of sick leave by the officer after arrangements have
been made with his or her immediate superior. When an officer's
absence is for more than three (3) continuous work days, the
officer may be required to file a physician's certificate to
verify the injury or illness which prevented the officer from
working. The Chief or his or her designee may also require such
a physician's certificate from any employee whenever the
officer's
pattern
of
sick
leave
absences
indicates
the
possibility of sick leave abuse.
Officers who fail to file a
physician's certificate under this policy will not be paid for
sick leave absences involved. Officers who exhibit sick leave
absences that indicate a pattern of abuse who fail to provide a
physician's certificate will also be subject to disciplinary
action.
10.4:
At the end of each contract year officers shall have
the right to sell up to ninety- six (96) hours of banked sick
time for one-half (Y,) of his or her pay per day determined by
the value of the officer's base pay on the last day of the
contract year in which the hours are to be paid. This payment
shall be paid in the second pay period in April. Up to one-half
(1/2) of ninety-six (96) hours of banked sick time sold in a
fiscal year may be used in the calculation of the Officer's
final average compensation for retirement.
At the end of the
contract
year
beginning
4/1/2012,
officers
may
sell
an
additional thirty-six (36) hours of banked sick time for one
half (1/2) of his/her pay per hour determined by the value of
the officer's base pay on the last day of the contract year for
which the hours are to be paid.
This one time only sale of
hours shall be included in the officer's final average
compensation for retirement.
10.5:
Paid Time Off.
Effective the first day of the month
following ratification, officers shall accrue paid time off
(PTO) at a rate of ninety-six (96) hours per year (eight (8)
hours per month). Up to one-hundred and twelve (112) hours paid
time off accumulated in excess of one hundred and twelve (l 12)
shall be paid to the employee in the first pay period following
the end of the contract year in which said time exceeds one
hundred and twelve (112). Excess hours shall be paid at a rate
of one-half (1/2) of base pay.
The last day of the contract
year in which the excess was accumulated will determine the

Page 23
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
price of the base pay per hour. Up to one half (1/2) of fiftyseven (57) PTO hours sold in a fiscal year may be used in the
calculation of the officer's final average compensation for
retirement.
Fifty percent (50%) of accumulated paid time off
shall be paid in the case of retirement or payment to
beneficiaries in the event of death, or if the officer leaves
the employment of the Township for any reason. PTO can be used
at the employee's discretion provided there is no unreasonable
disruption of business operations.
For the purpose of
determining if an employee earns PTO credit for a month, the 15th
of the month shall be used. If an employee severs employment on
or after the 15th of the month, then he/she shall receive PTO for
the month. If an employee is hired on or after the 15th of the
month, then he/she shall not receive PTO for the month.
This
rule shall also apply to employees returning from leave.
The trading of either banked sick time or paid time
off between employees is prohibited.
10.6:
Short-Term & Long-Term Disability. The Township shall
provide officers with short term disability benefit which shall
provide sixty-six and two-thirds (66-2/3%) percent of his or her
salary.
Effective upon ratification of this agreement, the
short-term waiting period shall be seven (7) calendar days. The
Township agrees to maintain and provide at no cost to the
officer hospital, medical, life, dental, and optical insurance
at the same benefit level being provided to the collective
bargaining group. This coverage shall be maintained during the
waiting period as well as through the short-term disability
benefit period.
The Township shall also provide long-term
disability benefits in accord with the benefits of the Insurance
Policy and Summary Plan Description in the Human Resources
Office, except as modified by this collective bargaining
agreement. The benefits of the above plan shall not be
diminished without the mutual agreement of both parties. A copy
of the long-term benefits is contained in the policy and
description recited above and shall be included with the
signature copy of the contract.
Updates shall be given to the
Local Association Secretary.
Complete copy shall be available
for examination in the Human Resources Office.
10.7:
If an officer is absent from work because of injury or
sickness, he or she shall have the option of first using bank
sick leave vacation days, PTO leave and compensatory days before
applying for the benefits under the short-term disability
program.
Once the said officer applies and qualifies for the

Page 24
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
short-term disability benefits, he or she shall not have the
right to draw on banked sick days, vacation days, PTO leave or
compensatory days for any injury or illness arising out of the
same cause for which the disability benefit originated.
However, at the conclusion of the short-term disability period
(180 days from when the officer was absent from work due to the
injury or illness) and before the commencement of the long-term
disability, the officer again shall have the option of using
sick days and/or bank sick days, personal days, furlough days
and compensatory days before applying for long term disability
benefits.
10.8:
Once an officer qualifies for disability benefits
under the long-term policy the officer may maintain the
hospital, medical, life, dental, and optical insurance that was
previously available to him/her while receiving short-term
benefits provided the officer funds the cost of maintaining such
insurance benefits in advance of the time of payment with the
further provision that such insurance benefits cannot be
maintained for a period exceeding six (6) months.
The officer
shall not accrue either PTO or vacation time while on either
short-term or long-term disability leave.
The times mentioned herein shall not diminish the
length of time that the Township is required to supply COBRA
benefits, it being the understanding of the parties that the
COBRA benefits will be available to the officers and commences
once the Employer ceases to provide the insurance benefits
mentioned herein and the officer does not maintain those
benefits by paying for them himself/herself during the six (6)
months period allowable under the long-term disability program.
10.9:
Once a regular officer is on long-term disability for
a period of six (6) months, then that officer shall no longer be
an employee of the Charter Township of Clinton regardless of the
fact that there are banked sick days, PTO, vacation days and
compensatory days not used. This provision does not prevent the
officer from requesting a leave of absence from the Township
before going on long-term disability, with the further provision
that such leave of absence shall not exceed a maximum period of
six (6) months.
10.10:
If the officer can return to work within the six (6)
months of commencing long-term disability period, then he or she
shall be guaranteed the automatic return to his or her job, with
full seniority, providing the returning officer must be able to

Page 25
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
prove that he or she has sufficiently recovered from his or her
disability to the point that he or she can perform his or her
duties if requested by management.
If the officer can return to work between the period
from six (6) months to eighteen (18) months of being on long
term disability, the officer shall have a "preference rating"
for the next police officer position available, provided he or
she is able to prove that he or she has sufficiently recovered
from his or her disability to the point that he or she can
perform his or her duties if requested by management.
"Preference rating" is understood to mean that the officer shall
be offered the first opening as a police officer with the
Township regardless of the eligibility lists.
If the officer stays on long-term disability for a
period in excess of eighteen (18) months, or does not present
himself/herself for the same employment within eighteen (18)
months of commencement of long-term disability, then and in that
event the officer loses all seniority and is treated in all
respects as a new employee if he or she desires to return to
work.
ARTICLE XI
FUNERAL LEAVE
In the event of death in the immediate family of an
officer or their spouse, the officer shall be entitled, when so
required, to three (3) days leave with regular pay and benefits
to arrange for and attend the funeral, burial or memorial
services. Immediate family shall be deemed to be husband, wife,
child, mother, father, sister, brother, grandparent, mother-inlaw, father-in-law, stepfather, stepmother and stepchild.
If
the funeral of an immediate family member is held more than two
hundred and fifty miles from the Township Civic Center Offices,
an employee will be granted one additional funeral day with pay
to attend the funeral.
Officers shall be entitled to one (1) day leave with
pay when so required in the event of death of aunt, uncle, niece
and nephew, of the officer or their spouse to attend funeral,
burial or memorial services.
If an officer has a scheduled leave day, including
furlough or personal business, when he or she is entitled to

Page 26
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
funeral leave, then the previously scheduled leave day will be
rescheduled for immediately after the funeral leave.
If additional time is needed, additional time can be
used from any banked furlough, sick, PTO, or comp time without
being denied.
An officer may not work shift overtime on those days
when a funeral leave day is scheduled.
ARTICLE XII
SHOW UP TIME
12.1:
Police officers are required to report for duty
fifteen (15) minutes prior to the start of their shift, in order
to insure the continuity of police operations, and shall receive
an annual lump sum payment of two (2%) percent of their annual
base salary as of March 31st. This amount is to be paid on the
first pay period following the completion of the contract year.
This amount shall be paid pro rata to reflect the period of time
worked during the previous contract year.
Officers shall be
required to attend said roll call and shall be dressed and ready
for duty when doing so.
12.2:
If any officer is to be denied pay for the fifteen
(15) minute roll call, he shall be denied at the proper rate.
ARTICLE XIII
HOSPITALIZATION PLAN
13.1:
Employees shall be provided the following health
insurance choices, including spouse and dependent children
coverage as defined by the carrier, during the Township's annual
open enrollment period:
A.

Blue Cross/Blue Shield Community Blue Option l;
$10/$20 RX with 1-X MOPD (Appendix D)

B.

Blue Cross/Blue Shield CB10 PPO, $15/$30 RX with
1-X MOPD, HC, CM, CI, PCD (Appendix E)

C.

Blue Cross/Blue Shield CB10
with RXCM (Appendix F)

PPO, $7/$35/$70 RX

Employees who select a health plan from above shall
pay the difference between the Township's PA 152 contribution

Page 27
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
cap and the premium or illustrative rate of the selected option,
if any.
Should the Township elect to change PA 152 compliance
options from the current status as of the date of this
agreement, either party may request to reopen Section 13.l for
further negotiation during the term of the agreement.
In the
event the parties do not reach an agreement, the matters subject
to bargaining in 13.1 shall be resolved through arbitration
pursuant to Act 312 of 1969, as amended.
13.2:
The Township shall provide and assume the full cost of a
hospital, medical, and surgical insurance policy for each
employee who retires from the Department after twenty-five years
of service (including enhanced service time).
The policy shall
cover the retired officer, the retiree's spouse and any
dependent children. The coverage shall be the same CB 10 PPO Option D as that provided to officers in 13.1 above.
An
employee,
who
retires
meeting
the
above
requirements but having service time (including enhanced service
time) of less than twenty-five (25) years, may elect to receive
this coverage with premiums to be funded as follows:
Percentage of Monthly Premium
Years of Service
Paid by Employer
Paid by Retiree
10-14 years
25%
75%
15-19 years
50%
50%
20-24 years
75%
25%
25-more years
100%
0%
If an employee receives a duty disability pension,
he/she shall be entitled to full hospitalization insurance at no
charge regardless of years of service.
Payment must he made to the Township twenty (20) days in advance
of the month of applicable coverage. This coverage must be
elected by the employee prior to the time of retirement and its
continuation is voluntary by the retiree. Coverage must be
maintained on a continuous basis except as provided in #5 below.
A retiree who fails to make necessary premium payments timely
may be disqualified for future coverage hereunder by the
Township Board of Trustees.
Effective April 1, 2011, employees hired by the
Township prior to April 1, 2011 shall be required to contribute

Page 28
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
$35 per pay into the Township Retiree Health Care Fund.
Employees hired on or after April I, 2011 shall contribute six
percent (6%) of base pay into the Township Retiree Health Care
Fund.
If the retiree and/or the retiree's spouse qualify for
Medicare benefits, the Township shall provide a Medicare
supplement like or similar to the policy which the retiree had
while in retirement prior to Medicare coverage.
In order to
qualify for the Medicare Supplement, the retiree and or his or
her dependent must enroll in Medicare parts A and B as soon as
they are eligible.
To be eligible for the retiree health care benefit
described in this section, the spouse and dependent children
must have been the spouse and dependents of record at the time
that the employee retired on a regular or disability retirement
and began receiving retirement benefits.
13.3:
Effective with this contract, employees who are
covered by another hospital/medical insurance plan may elect to
receive fifty dollars ($50) per week in lieu of participation in
the Clinton Township hospital/medical insurance plan. Employees
electing this benefit must meet the requirements and agree to
the stipulations as described in Appendix "A" attached to this
agreement and complete the form "Waiver of Medical Insurance"
attached to this contract as Appendix "B."
In those cases, where both husband and wife are
covered by the Township, one person shall carry his/her spouse
and dependent on the health insurance policy and the other
person shall elect the cash payment. It shall be up to the
employees to determine which employee retains the health
insurance policy and which employee elects the cash option.
ARTICLE XIV
DENTAL AND OPTICAL PLANS
14.1:
The Township shall provide and pay for a dental plan
for the employee and dependents as described in Appendix G.
This plan includes an orthodontic rider, which will cover
dependents up to the age of nineteen (19) years of age with a
maximum lifetime benefit of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00).
There shall be no deductible and the plan will

Page 29
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
have a fifteen-hundred dollar ($1,500) limit on benefits per
person per contract year.
Non-PPO Dentist reimbursement for all Class I benefits
shall be 65%.
14.2:
The Township shall provide a dental plan from Delta
Dental Plan of Michigan, covering Class I benefits equal to
active employees, for members who retire on or after April 1,
2002, their spouses and any minor dependent children.
14.3:
The Township shall provide all members, their spouses
and their minor dependents with an Optical Insurance Plan which
covers annual eye examinations and the annual purchases and/or
replacement of single and multi-corrective lenses (bi and tri
focals), frames, safety glasses (employee only) and contact
lenses. Service program benefits described below:
Eye Examination
Lenses
Single Vision
Bi-focals
Tri-focals
Lentocular
Frames
Contacts Lenses

$45.00
$40.00
$60.00
$85.00
$105.00
$120.00
$120.00
$120.00

12 months
12 months
12 months
12 months
12 months
12 months
24 months
12 months

Effective upon signing this agreement, the Township
shall provide all members of the bargaining unit with Lasik/RK
procedure coverage with a maximum lifetime benefit of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
14.4:
Members who retire on or after that date, their spouses,
and any minor children shall be afforded the optical insurance
benefit described in Section 14.3.
ARTICLE XV
LIFE INSURANCE
15.1:
The Charter Township of Clinton shall provide each
employee a fifty thousand dollar ($50,000.00) life insurance
policy with double indemnity in the event of accidental death.
It is agreed that upon a normal service retirement the employee
will be provided with a ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) life
insurance policy.

Page 30
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
15.2:
The officers understand that the life insurance
provided by the Township does provide an accelerated benefit
option, and the parties acknowledge that if that option is
exercised the life insurance guarantee of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) may be diminished.
Any officer requesting
disability benefits shall assume the obligation of determining
how such option affects his or her life insurance.
15.3:
The parties hereto agree that the insurance carrier
specified in this collective bargaining agreement may be
substituted by the Township provided the benefits afforded are
equal.
15.4:
The Township shall offer each full-time employee an
option to purchase additional life insurance benefits up to the
guaranteed issuance offered by the selected carrier and in
increments authorized by the carrier.
It is understood the
guaranteed issuance and purchase options will vary depending on
the
life
insurance
company
selected
by
the
Township.
Availability may vary based on total Township participation in
the plan.
Payment for the additional life insurance benefit
shall be through a payroll deduction.
ARTICLE XVI
WORKERS' COMPENSATION
16.1:
Provisions of the workers' compensation laws of the
State of Michigan shall apply in all injuries, accident or
illness to employees arising from the performance of their
duties. Any employee who is unable to work as a result of such
injury, accident or illness shall be paid by the Township the
difference between eighty percent (80%) of his or her regular
rate of pay and the amount received from workers' compensation
for the duration of the recovery not to exceed twelve (12)
months from the date of the injury, accident or illness.
16.2:
For the twelve (12) month period recited above, the
employee shall be entitled to accrue benefits, including
seniority, as though he or she were working.
At the end of the twelve (12) month period, if the
employee cannot return to work in the same capacity, the
employee's employment relationship shall cease unless the
Township Board grants a further extension.

Page 31
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
During the twelve (12) month period, and no later than
ten (10) months from the injury, the employee shall notify the
Township of his or her decision to apply for a disability
retirement to allow necessary time for processing prior to the
cessation of the employment relationship with the Township.
16.3:
Normal payroll tax deductions will be made on the
supplemental check issued by the Township.
However, total
authorized deductions for union dues, and pension contribution
shall be deducted at the full annualized bi-weekly rate.
Employees may be required to submit copies of all workers’
compensation checks which they have received to the accounting
department.
ARTICLE XVII
CLOTHING AND CLEANING
17.1:
The cost of cleaning a uniform shall be borne by the
Township.
The Township reserves the right to take bids and
nominate a cleaner or cleaners to provide the services for the
officers.
17.2:
Each member shall receive a "Bank System" for drawing
new personal equipment and clothing each year, and for this
purpose, the year shall be computed from April 1 through March
31, and credited as an advance for the contract year.
17.3:
Officers shall receive eight hundred ($800) dollars in
said bank each year, and in addition thereto, they shall receive
two hundred ($200) dollars in cash as an advance payment for the
contract year in the first pay in the month of April. Officers
assigned
to
the
permanent
positions
in
the
Criminal
Investigation Division shall receive eight hundred ($800)
dollars in cash for new clothing each year. Payments are to be
paid at the rate of four hundred ($400) dollars in the first pay
period in April, and four hundred ($400) dollars in the first
pay period in October each year.
Officers assigned to nonuniformed investigative positions shall also receive four
hundred ($400) dollars in the first pay period in April, and fur
hundred ($400) dollars in the first pay period in October each
year.
These payments are an advance cash allowance for
clothing to be used in the course of their employment.
Cash

Page 32
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
allowances shall be prorated on a monthly basis if the officers
leave said divisions, with credit given for the month of
leaving, if over fifteen (15) days are spent in any division in
a particular month.
The officers assuming these positions
during a contract year shall have the right to use the remainder
of their bank for that year in the form of cash payments.
17.4:
When an officer first enters the service of Clinton
Township, they shall be furnished a complete uniform, including
a safety vest, by the Township.
After they have successfully
completed their education courses, their probationary period,
and are placed in the seniority system, then, and at that time,
they shall be entitled to a clothing allowance as described in
the preceding paragraphs; prorated forward to the subsequent
April payout date.
17.5:
The Township shall repair or replace certain personal
property broken, damaged or lost in the line of duty, if not
through the negligence of the officer, in accord with the
following limitations:
A.

Uniform items or personal items complimenting the
officer's performance, as determined by the
Chief, damaged or lost in an incident recited
above will be repaired or replaced.

B.

Wedding ring shall be repaired or replaced up to
a value of $200.00.

C.

Watches shall be repaired or replaced up to a
value of $200.00.

D.

Personal health items, such as hearing aids,
dentures or partials, eyeglasses and the like,
shall be repaired, replaced or paid for at a
reasonable cost as determined by the Chief upon
proper
documentation
and
information
being
submitted by the Officer.

17.6:
The parties hereto agree that in the event there is a
change in the basic uniform, the same would not become effective
until the next contract period.
17.7:
If a change is made by the Township, the payment for the
changed uniform will be made through the allowance provided in
this Article.
The Township will provide enough time so that

Page 33
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
such change will not result in a hardship on the officer. The
Local Association can grieve an unreasonable change in uniform.
In such case the change will not be implemented until an
Arbitrator has ruled on the grievance.
17.8:
Management shall list brands or specifications of
various uniforms required. If they can be purchased at a savings
at any uniform shop by the officers, other than the usual source
of supply, the officer may follow normal purchase procedure used
by the Department to secure said uniform.
The clothing
allowance shall be limited to purchases of uniforms and
equipment as needed to perform assigned duties.
17.9:
Safety Vests.
The Employer agrees to purchase for
each employee a soft-body armor concealable bulletproof vest of
his/her manufacturer choice, which shall be approved by the
Department prior to purchase. Officers may select a vest up to
the maximum threat level available for concealable body armor,
but must meet a minimum threat level equal to the departmental
service weapon.
As a condition of this benefit, the employee
agrees to wear said vest during all working hours when he or she
is on uniform road patrol duty and further agrees to have the
vest available for use while on other assignments. The Employer
agrees to replace the vest as is necessary or needed, but at no
sooner intervals than five (5) years. Any vest damaged that is
not through neglect will be replaced immediately at the
Employers expense.
ARTICLE XVIII
LEAVE OF ABSENCE
18.1:
EDUCATIONAL LEAVE:
Educational leaves of absence
shall be granted within the discretion of the Chief of Police
for a period of up to one (I) year in order for an officer to
attend school on a full-time basis.
Upon completion of said
leave of absence, the officer shall be returned to permanent
duty without loss of seniority, provided there is an opening
available and the officer is physically able to perform his or
her job.
It shall be incumbent and mandatory that an officer
on an educational leave shall notify the Chief of Police, in
writing, at least one (l) month prior to his or her termination
of leave and his or her intent to return to Township employment.
His or her failure to so notify the Chief of Police will
constitute a waiver of the Township's obligation to return him
or her to active duty. If he or she wishes in the future, then

Page 34
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
to return to the Township he or she will be considered as a new
employee applicant for rehire.
18.2:
In the event that the Township does not have an
opening available when an officer expresses his or her intent to
return to active duty after an educational leave, then and in
that event the officer will be returned to active duty when the
first opening is available. He or she shall be kept reasonably
apprised of the status of openings by the Township.
18.3:
Seniority will not accumulate during the leave of
absence for educational purposes, but seniority will freeze at
the time the officer discontinues his or her service with the
department to take his or her leave.
18.4:
The officer taking an educational leave shall be
allowed to maintain his or her benefits in full force and effect
during said leave by making appropriate and timely COBRA
contributions to the Township for his or her insurance benefits.
He or she shall not be considered an employee of the Township
while he or she is on leave. Rights of maintaining his or her
benefits shall exist only for the one (1) year period.
In
addition, once an employee's leave of absence commences, the
employee ceases to accrue pension credit, vacation or paid time
off.
18.5:
ILLNESS IN IMMEDIATE FAMILY: An officer may be granted
a leave of absence for a prolonged illness in the immediate
family.
Said leave is restricted to illness with reference to
the spouse, children, mother or father of the officer and is
based upon the discretion of the Chief of Police and said leave
may be granted up to a six (6) month period. No seniority will
accumulate during this period of time, but the officer may
maintain his or her insurance benefits in full force and effect
during said leave by making appropriate and timely COBRA
contributions to the Township for his or her insurance benefits.
In addition, once an employee's leave of absence commences, the
employee ceases to accrue pension credit, vacation or paid time
off.
18.6:
GENERAL LEAVE:
Employees may be granted a general
leave of absence for up to six (6) months with approval of the
Chief of Police without loss of seniority already acquired that
freezes at that point until he or she returns to active duty.
The officer shall be able to maintain his or her insurance
benefits in full force and effect during said leave by making

Page 35
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
appropriate and timely COBRA contributions to the Township for
his or her insurance benefits. In addition, once an employee's
leave of absence commences, the employee ceases to accrue
pension credit, vacation or paid time off.
The Township Board
may grant an additional six (6) months general leave, upon
written request to the Township Board by the officer.
Upon
completion of said leave of absence, the officer shall be
returned to permanent duty, provided there is an opening
available and the officer is physically able to perform his or
her job. It shall be incumbent and mandatory that an officer on
general leave shall notify the Township at least one (I) month
prior to his or her termination of leave and his or her intent
to return to Township employment.
His or her failure to so
notify the Township will constitute a waiver of the Township's
obligation to return him/her to active duty.
If he or she
wishes in the future then to return to the Township, he or she
will be considered as a new employee applicant for rehire.
18.7:
In the event that the Township does not have an
opening available when an officer expresses his or her intent to
return to active duty after a general leave, then and in that
event the officer will be maintained at the top of the
eligibility list and the officer will be returned to active duty
when the first opening is available.
He or she will be kept
reasonably apprised of the openings by the Township. Provided,
however, if an opening is not available within a period of
eighteen (18) months from the time the officer commences a
general leave, his or her right to maintain eligibility is
terminated and held for naught.
18.8:
That throughout this Agreement, when an officer is on
leave, or for some other reason is not presently "actively"
employed and under this Agreement he or she has an opportunity
to maintain benefits, then and in that event, the benefits shall
be timely and appropriately maintained by his or her payment in
advance to the Township in accord with the directives of the
Accounting Department. This provision is not intended to apply
to those instances where an employee is "permanently" separated
from the Department.
18.9:
Military Leave.
The Township shall not provide time
away from duty unless required by federal or state law.
Any
employee eligible for time off shall notify the Employer in
writing forthwith and notify the Township immediately upon
receiving any orders to attend training.
The employee, upon

Page 36
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
request of management, shall attempt to attend training sessions
in such a fashion as to minimize the loss of manpower.
ARTICLE XIX
OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT
All members shall be permitted to engage in part-time
outside employment provided that the nature of such work does
not downgrade their image as a law enforcement agent or the work
schedule interfere with their normal duties as law enforcement
officers, subject to the approval of the Chief of Police which
shall not be unreasonably withheld.
ARTICLE XX
CIVIL LIABILITY INSURANCE AND LEGAL COUNSEL
20.l:
That the Township shall provide necessary insurance
and legal counsel protecting the employee against any civil
liability
because
of
alleged
false
arrest,
detention,
imprisonment or malicious prosecution.
Said policy shall be in
an amount of not less than the Township is presently carrying.
20.2:
The Local Association shall be issued a copy of the
insurance
pol
icy,
and
each
employee
shall
familiarize
themselves with the provisions thereof.
20.3:
It is incumbent on each employee to secure their own
counsel, to work with the attorneys for the Township or the
Township insurance carrier, for those lawsuits which could
reasonably be expected to exceed the dollar amount of the
insurance protection or causes not covered by insurance. Once a
determination has been made that the suit could reasonably be
expected to exceed coverage, or if for a cause not covered by
insurance, the Township will send notice of same to the
employee.
ARTICLE XXI
USE OF PRIVATE AUTOMOBILE
Officers shall not be required to use their private
automobiles in connection with department duties.

Page 37
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
ARTICLE XXII
MAINTENANCE OF CONDITIONS
The
Charter
Township
of
Clinton
will
make
no
unilateral changes in wages, hours and conditions of employment
during the term of this agreement, either contrary to the
provisions of this agreement or otherwise.
ARTICLE XXIII
SCHOOL TUITION
23.1:
An employee who on his or her days off attends an
accredited college, university or trade school in a course or
program related to police service, with the approval of the
chief of police, shall be reimbursed by the Township for
tuition, purchase of books, and other necessary materials
required by the course.
Employees shall be reimbursed by the
Township within thirty (30) days upon submission of proper
documentation that he or she is enrolled in the course.
23.2:
Employees who on his or her days off attends a
college, university or trade school in a course or program
related to police service, with the approval of the chief of
police, shall be reimbursed a maximum of $4,000 per calendar
year by the Township for tuition, purchase of books, and other
necessary materials required by the course.
23.3:
Any employee who withdraws from or fails to complete a
course after receiving reimbursement from the Township or who
fails to obtain a passing grade of "C" or better, shall have
thirty (30) days from the- date of withdrawal or the date he or
she receives less than a "C" grade to repay the Township such
monies.
If such amount is not repaid to the Township, upon
advance notice to the employee, such amount may be withheld from
his or her pay.
Advance notice shall not be necessary if the
employee is terminating employment.
23.4:
Employees who submit for reimbursement of funds upon
enrollment into a class, shall submit at one time all tuition
receipts, book receipts, lab fee receipts, etc. Failure to do so
will require that the employee hold all additional receipts
until the next time he or she applies for tuition reimbursement.

Page 38
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
ARTICLE XXIV
EDUCATIONAL ALLOWANCE
24.1:
Both parties to this Agreement believe that it is for
the public good to encourage secondary education in those
instances where the courses taken for secondary education are of
benefit to the police officer in the performance of his or her
duties and to this end the parties agree that the Chief of
Police, the Local Association President and a person to be
mutually chosen by the Local Association and Chief of Police
shall determine what secondary educational hours shall be
allowed as credit to an officer in determining whether or not an
educational allowance shall be granted.
24.2:
It is the intention of the parties hereto that such a
committee shall consult with the proper educational personnel of
the community colleges and the State universities to determine
what hours of credit should be given. For example: If an officer
is taking classes for a four (4) year college degree in criminal
administration or criminal justice and he has taken at least
thirty (30) hours of the same courses and he has passed them
successfully for which he would have earned a certificate if he
had attended a different institution then and in that event he
shall be given the thirty (30) credit hours as though he had
earned a certificate and in those cases where he has sixty (60)
hours in courses where he would have received an Associate
Degree if he had taken such courses and passed them successfully
in a different institution, then he will be given credit as
though he had an Associate Degree.
24.3:
For those officers who have earned an equivalent
credit of a certificate, said officers shall receive an
additional two hundred dollars ($200.00) per contract year. For
those officers who have earned an equivalent of or an Associate
Degree, said officers shall receive an additional four hundred
dollars ($400.00) per contract year.
For any officer who has
completed one hundred twenty (120) hours in a field relating to
law enforcement and/or a B.A. -B.S. Degree will be entitled to a
yearly payment of six hundred dollars ($600.00).
24.4:
It is further agreed that the payments stated above
are inclusive rather than cumulative.
If an officer who has
completed the one hundred twenty (120) hours shall be paid a
total of six hundred dollars ($600.00) annually that will be the
maximum, he receives even though he has the equivalent of a
certificate of an Associate Degree. For those officers who have

Page 39
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
the equivalent of an Associate Degree and are receiving four
hundred dollars ($400.00) annually, that shall be the complete
amount of educational allowance received even though he also
holds the certificate credits.
24.5:
It is further agreed that officers entitled to
educational allowance shall receive their allowance annually,
pro-rated as of June 30th each year and paid in the first
regularly scheduled pay in July.
24.6:
For those officers who have become a member of the
Clinton Township Police Department after the execution of this
agreement who have earned an equivalent credit of a certificate,
said officers shall receive a one-time payment of two hundred
dollars ($200). For those officers who have earned the
equivalent of an associate degree, said officers shall receive
an additional one-time payment of two hundred dollars ($200).
For any officer who has completed one hundred twenty (120) hours
in a field relating to law enforcement and/or a B.A. - B.S.
degree shall be entitled to an additional one-time payment of
two hundred dollars ($200).
24.7:
It is further agreed with respect to those officers
entitled to an educational allowance who became police officers
and members of the police department after the execution of this
agreement that such one-time payment shall be paid in the first
regular scheduled pay in July of each year following the
completion of their certificate, associate degree, or B. A. - B.
S. degree or the equivalent approved hours.
ARTICLE XXV
WEAPON ALLOWANCE
25.1:
Each member shall be compensated at the rate of two
dollars ($2.00) per day for carrying their side arm. Payment for
said weapon allowance shall be paid on the last regularly
scheduled pay of each contract year.
25.2:
It is further agreed that each member covered by this
agreement will be allowed to participate in a shooting program,
with a minimum of one (I) shooting for qualification, conducted
as part of training scheduled during the normal working hours
and while on duty.

Page 40
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
25.3:
It is further agreed between the parties hereto that
the police department shall have a qualified gunsmith inspect
each weapon at least once a year to clean same and determine its
condition relative to tuning and safety, and if any defects are
found, the same will be corrected before the weapon is returned
to the Department for use.
Each officer shall be provided all
new ammunition each calendar year.
Ammunition for rounds used
or found defective shall be replaced immediately.
25.4:
It is understood by the parties that the Department
does not require Officers to carry firearms when they are off
duty.
ARTICLE XXVI
LONGEVITY
Effective April 1, 2016, longevity is eliminated from
the contract and, in exchange, $1,040.00 is rolled into the
salary schedule at the forty-eight (48) month top pay rate.
ARTICLE XXVII
SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL
27.1:
For road patrol and traffic assignments, members who
work midnight shift (6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.) shall receive an
additional six percent (6%) over their base hourly rate for each
hour worked.
Members assigned non-road patrol positions who
work the afternoon shift (4:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. or 3:00 p.m.
to 11:00 p.m.) shall receive an additional four percent (4%)
over their base hourly rate for each hour worked.
27.2:
All shift premium payments shall be included with
member's regular pay for the pay period when hours were worked
and shall include all overtime and holidays as well as regular
scheduled shifts, but will not include hours of overtime paid
for court appearances.

ARTICLE XXVIII
MEDICAL AND HOSPITALIZATION INSURANCE
FOR WIDOWS OR WIDOWERS AND FAMILY
28.1:
WIDOW OR WIDOWER AND FAMILY BENEFITS:
Upon death of
any full time employee of the police department, the Township

Page 41
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
shall make available a hospitalization insurance policy for the
deceased's spouse and family provided the cost of said policy
shall be paid by the widow/widower or deceased's family at least
one (1) month prior to the date upon which the premium is due.
28.2:
The policy referred to in this section will be a type
policy which shall be as equal as possible and providing
hospitalization insurance policies as the Township provided for
the employee prior to his death, it being fully understood that
it might not be possible for the Township to acquire the same
hospitalization policy under its present group insurance
arrangement and the widow or widower and family shall have the
right to discontinue this policy at any time since the service
rendered by the Township is only one of servicing the
arrangements for payments provided the Township is paid in
advance.
28.3:
The service or aid to be rendered by the Township
concerning the policy of hospitalization insurance as provided
in this section, shall remain in effect only until the widow or
widower remarries, however, in the case where there are
dependent children of the deceased employee under the age of
nineteen (19) years, then in that event, the widow, widower's
children or guardian for the minor children may elect to have
the Township acquire the said hospitalization insurance policy
for said children provided the full cost of the premium of such
insurance shall be paid to the Township at least one (1) month
in advance of any premium due date.
28.4:
DUTY DEATH - SPOUSE and DEPENDENT MINOR CHILDREN: Upon
death of any full time officer of the police department, should
death
occur
on
duty,
the
Township
shall
provide
a
hospitalization and medical insurance policy for the deceased's
spouse and dependent minor children and the cost of said policy
shall be paid for by the Township.
The hospitalization insurance policy provided for by
the Township in this section, shall be equal to the policy
provided for the officer prior to his or her death.
The service or aid to be rendered by the Township
concerning the pol icy of hospitalization insurance as provided
in this section, shall remain in effect only until the widow or
widower remarries, however, in the case where there are
dependent minor children of the deceased officer, then in that
event, the widow, widower's children or guardian for said minor

Page 42
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
dependent children may elect to have the Township acquire the
said hospitalization insurance policy for said minor dependent
children with the cost of said policy being paid for by the
Township until the child is no longer a minor dependent child.
ARTICLE XXIX
SUBCONTRACTING OF UNIT WORK
The Township will not, except in cases of emergency,
assign work currently being performed by officers covered under
this contract to outside agencies and/or departments.
ARTICLE XXX
SCHEDULING
30.1:
Shifts.
For bargaining unit members assigned to
a road patrol position, the work day shall consist of a twelve
(12) hour tour of duty, with not more than forty-five (45)
minutes off duty for lunch.
A tour of duty for road patrol
personnel shall begin at 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. For bargaining
unit members assigned to non-road patrol positions, the work day
shall consist of an eight (8) hour tour of duty, with not more
than thirty (30) minutes off duty for lunch. A tour of duty for
non-road patrol personnel shall be established by the necessity
of the position.
It is agreed and understood that arraignment
officer duty is an eight (8) hour tour of duty position.
The 12-Hour Work Schedule (14-day cycle) is as follows:
Sat Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri
Platoon 1
W
W
W W
W
W
W
Platoon 2 W
W
W
W
W
W
W
Platoon 3
W
W
W W
W
W
W
Platoon 4 W
W
W
W
W
W
W

Days – 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. – Platoons 1&2
Nights – 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. – Platoons 3&4
For bargaining unit members assigned to a road patrol
position, the work period shall consist of fourteen (14)
consecutive days.
Hours worked from eighty-one (81) through
eighty-four (84) during the fourteen (14) day work period shall
be compensated at the straight time rate as either regular pay
or compensatory time to be used in accordance with Departmental
policy. The employee shall designate which form of compensation

Page 43
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
he/she selects for hours eighty-one (81) through eighty-four
(84) at time of shift selection for the subsequent six-month
period.
Those officers assigned to traffic duty as of the
signing of this agreement may elect to either move to a twelve
(12) hour tour of duty or remain in the eight (8) hour tour of
duty and shift presently assigned. Once a traffic duty position
is vacated by the incumbent, all subsequent traffic duty
appointments shall be twelve (12) hour tour of duty.
In the event an officer does not respond to shift pick
requests within established time limits set by the Department,
the Department will assign a shift to that officer.
30.2:

30.3:

Changing Shifts:
A.

Any officer changing his or her shift during the
year at the order of the Department will be
placed in the group of the Officer he or she is
replacing, taking the appropriate number within
the group determined by his or her seniority.

B.

Any officer changing his or her shift during the
year as a result of his or her request, will be
placed in the group of the Officer he or she is
replacing, and taking the seniority of that
Officer within that group.

Returning from Special Assignments:
A.

Should an officer return to the Road Patrol from
another assignment such as Detective Bureau,
Special Investigation, COMET, MATS, etc., and the
officer has completed his service time with that
assigned position, he shall return to his or her
assigned shift prior to that assignment.
He or she may be placed in a group at the
discretion of the shift commander taking the
appropriate number within the group determined by
his or her seniority.

B.

Should an officer return to the Road Patrol from
another assignment such as Detective Bureau,
Special Investigation, COMET, MATS, etc., and the
return is the Officer's request prior to the
completion of service time, or the Department's

Page 44
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
request due to the Officer's inability to meet
the requirements, he or she shall be placed in
the group of the officer they are replacing on
the road, taking the appropriate number within
the group determined by his or her seniority.
30.4:
As part of minimum shift compliment there will be no
less than two (2) patrol cars staffed by two (2) patrol officers
on patrol from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
30.5:
Officers unable to fully perform their regular job
duties due to an on-duty injury, on-duty illness, off-duty
injury, maternity or non-contagious illness shall have the
option of working in light duty status.
When there is more than one (1) officer from the same
shift assigned to light duty status, the Department may assign
the additional officer(s) to another shift.
The following
criteria shall be applied when making such shift reassignment:
A.

Officers on light duty due to on-the-job illness
or injury shall have preference for shift
selection over officers on light duty due to nonduty related reasons.

B.

If the officers are on light duty because of the
same reasons (i.e. on-duty or off-duty) the
officer with the greater seniority shall have
preference for shift selection.

C.

Officers on light duty status that are reassigned
to another shift shall receive the higher shift
differential of their normal shift or the shift
they have been reassigned on.

Officers required to attend medical appointments while
off duty shall be paid in compensatory time at the overtime rate
of one and one-half (1-112) times their normal base hourly rate
of for all time spent with a minimum of two (2) hours for each
appearance.
30.6:
It is agreed and understood that in the event of foot
patrol being assigned by the Chief of Police, there shall be two
(2) officers assigned to such duty.

Page 45
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
30.7:
The Clinton Township Police Station will be manned by
at least one (1) full-time police officer at all times, who will
be responsible for the booking, printing, photographing and
lodging of all prisoners. This officer shall be assisted by the
arresting officers when he believes the prisoner or situation
creates a potential safety problem.
ARTICLE XXXI
RESERVE OFFICERS
31.1:
All persons utilized as Clinton Township Police Reserve
Officers or Dispatchers shall be required to wear shoulder
patches on their uniforms and/or badges which clearly and
conspicuously distinguish such persons as a reserve officer or
dispatcher, whichever the case may be.
No reserve officer or
dispatcher shall be allowed to wear a badge during outside
employment.
31.2:
No reserve officers shall be assigned to any member of
this bargaining unit without member's consent and then only in
the capacity of an observer or trainee. Reserve officers shall
not be considered as personnel in regards to Article XXX Minimum
Personnel Requirement.
ARTICLE XXXII
TRADING DAYS
The exchange of work days may be permitted with the
approval of the Chief of Police or the command officer it was
requested of, however, sick days shall never be exchanged,
traded in, given away or transferred.
If an officer agrees to
exchange work days and fails to appear for duty, he/she shall be
held responsible for failure to appear that day.
ARTICLE XXXIII
SEPARATE CHECKS
Where separate checks are referred to in this
contract, it is understood by the parties to mean that the
accounting department, at its option, rather than issuing
separate checks may issue one check for the regular pay period
and include in that check the amount that would normally be
contained within a separate check for such matters as education

Page 46
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
allowance, weapons allowance, holiday pay, longevity pay, and
show-up time.
ARTICLE XXXIV
WORK ASSIGNMENTS
34.1:
All monthly work assignments and leave days will be
posted at least ten (10) days prior to the expiration of the
current schedule, and same shall not change after this time
without mutual agreement of union members and management.
34.2:
Any time off granted by the department in the form of
vacation time, personal leave, scheduled leave, leave days or
other work leave shall not be canceled by the department if it
was scheduled forty-eight (48) hours prior. In an emergency, a
change can be made, provided a member receives a minimum of
forty-eight (48) hours’ notice.
ARTICLE XXXV
DEDUCTIONS
The Township will make arrangements for the deduction
of United States Savings Bonds and deferred compensation plans
from employees' paychecks.
Other than those deductions previously mentioned in
this contract, the Township will not be required to make any
further deductions from an employee's paycheck unless it is
required by law.
ARTICLE XXXVI
RESIDENCY
The Township agrees that it will not impose or attempt
to impose any residency requirements upon any members of the
Association Bargaining Unit.

Page 47
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
ARTICLE XXXVII
BILL OF RIGHTS
37.1:
No employee shall be ordered or coerced in any manner
to submit to a polygraph examination, lie detector test or
similar test, or chemical such as sodium pentothal or truth
serum tests or similar tests by whatever name called for any
reason unless such employee shall demand said examination in
writing.
37.2:
No employee shall be discharged, disciplined, or in
any way discriminated against for refusing or declining to
submit to a polygraph examination, lie detector test, or similar
test by whatever name called.
37.3:
The employer and/or employee shall not utilize any
type of recording device or electronic surveillance device to
record or transcribe any conversation between the employer and
any employee unless disclosure of such device is made to the
employer and/or employee prior to such conversation or the
employer has received a proper court order.
37.4:
Except when on duty, in uniform, or when acting in his
official capacity, no employee shall be prohibited from engaging
in political activity or be denied the right to refrain from
engaging in political activity.
37.5:
Employees shall have the right to bring civil suit
against any person, group of persons, or any organizations or
corporations or the heads of such organizations or corporations
for damages suffered, either pecuniary or otherwise, or for
abridgment of their civil rights arising out of the officer's
performance of official duties.
37.6:
Any employee shall have the right to examine any and
all personnel files maintained by the employer regarding the
employee
with
the
exception
of
employment
letters
of
recommendation, upon written request during normal business
hours construed to be 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, excepting holidays. Officers may comment in writing to
any adverse materials placed in his or her personnel file.
37.7:
The employee's files shall not be made available to
any person or organization other than the employer and employee
without the employee's written authorization, except pursuant to

Page 48
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
an appropriate
subpoena.

Court

or

Civil

Service

Commission

order

or

37.8:
No employee shall be required or requested for
purposes of assignment or other personnel action to disclose any
item of his or her property, income, assets, source of income,
debts, or personal or domestic expenditures (including those of
any member of his or her family or household), unless such
information is obtained under proper legal procedures or tends
to indicate a conflict of interest with respect to the
performance of his or her official duties. This paragraph shall
not prevent inquiries made by authorized agents of a tax
collecting agency in accordance with acceptable and legally
established procedures.
37.9:
Whenever any employee is under investigation or
subject to questioning by the employer or its designated
representative for any reason which could lead to disciplinary
action,
demotion,
dismissal
or
criminal
charges,
such
investigation, interview, interrogation and/or counseling shall
be conducted under the following conditions:
A.

The
questioning
shall
be
conducted
at
a
reasonable hour, when possible, preferably at the
time when the employee is on duty.
Questioning
shall take place at the Police Department, unless
the officer consents to another location or the
officer is physically unable to report to the
Police Department.
If the officer is off duty,
he or she shall be compensated at the proper
overtime rate listed in Article VIII.

B.

Any employee, at his or her request, shall have
the right to be represented by counsel and/or
Association representatives prior to making any
statements, written or verbal, concerning any
act,
incident
or
occurrence
from
which
counseling,
disciplinary
action,
criminal
prosecution or civil suit might result.

C.

The
employee
under
investigation
shall
informed of the rank, name and command of
officer in charge of the investigation,
interviewing/interrogating
officer
and
persons present during the questioning if
already known to the employee.

be
the
the
all
not

Page 49
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
D.

The
employee
under
investigation
shall
be
informed of the nature of the investigation prior
to any questioning and he or she shall be
informed of the name of the complainants.
Exception is made in those instances where the
complainant must remain anonymous for security or
confidential reasons, or is unknown to the
investigating
officer.
Transcripts,
other
relevant
documents,
evidence
and
evidence
generated by the hearing shall be made accessible
to the officer after questioning. Officers shall
be notified of the outcome of the investigation.

E.

The questioning session shall be for reasonable
periods and shall be timed to allow for such
personal necessities and rest periods as are
reasonably necessary.

F.

The employee being questioned shall not be
subjected to offensive language or threatened
with transfer, dismissal or any disciplinary
action. No promise or reward shall be made as an
inducement to answering questions.

G.

Upon disclosure, the employee and/or employer
will
be
permitted
to
record
the
complete
interrogation
session
including
all
recess
periods. There shall be no unrecorded questions
or statements.

H.

If the employee under investigation would have
"Miranda" warnings available to him/her as a
civilian or is likely to be placed under arrest
as a result of the investigation, he or she shall
be completely informed of all his or her rights
prior to the commencement of the questioning.

37.10:
An Employee will not be deprived of liberty or
property without due process of law nor denied the equal
protection of the laws.
37.11:
Any Employee involved in a shooting shall not be bound
as a condition of employment to make an oral or written
statement, including a Preliminary Crime Report, until such time
when the employee has been able to contact an Association

Page 50
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
official and/or attorney and has had a reasonable time to
discuss the incident with an Association lawyer.
The lawyer
shall then be able to counsel the officer during his Preliminary
Crime Report or any other oral or written statements that may be
required.
37.12:
No employee will be favored or discriminated against,
nor disciplined, demoted or transferred for exercising any of
the above rights or any rights afforded him or her by this
contract.
ARTICLE XXXVIII
DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS
38.1:
When any complaint or charge shall be brought against
any employee or disciplinary proceedings are contemplated
against an employee under such circumstances that the misconduct
being investigated, if substantiated, would constitute a crime
under State or Federal law, no statement shall be taken from the
officer nor shall be interrogated, except in accordance with the
following procedures:
38.2:
Employees shall be allowed to have a representative
from the Union present al al l meetings, conferences or hearings
which they believe may result in disciplinary action.
38.3:
The officer shall first be advised of the charge or
charges against him, either by the Chief or by a Command Officer
of the Department.
38.4:
The officer shall be advised of his right against
self-incrimination and of his right to legal counsel.
Legal
counsel may appear with the officer in any subsequent
proceedings if the officer so desires.
38.5:
NOTIFICATION OF COMPLAINT.
When a complaint against
an officer is registered by another member of this department,
either verbal or written the officer the complaint is made
against shall be notified and given an opportunity to reply to
said complainant.
When necessary this notification may be
withheld until complainant is investigated.
38.6:
Disciplinary action which results in loss of pay will
be implemented no later than the first scheduled work day
following the day that the employee is served with the notice of

Page 51
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
discipline.
Disciplinary suspensions shall result in loss of
pay but the employee shall be entitled to benefits as if he or
she continued to work.
38.7:
The officer and his counsel if any, shall be entitled
to a written statement of the charges, against the officer,
which are being investigated upon demand for same, provided the
time is reasonable.
Any such statement of charges may be
amended or amplified subsequently, and any disciplinary action
which may be taken shall in no way be limited to matters set
forth in any statement) or amended or amplified statement of
charges.
38.8:
The officer may then be ordered to make a statement
concerning
the
charges
against
him,
and
to
submit
to
interrogation.
The officer may decline to do so, but any such
refusal shall constitute grounds for disciplinary action.
38.9:
If the officer chooses to make a statement and submit
to interrogation, any such statement and any answer resulting
from interrogation may be used as the basis for disciplinary
action, and may also be used in any proceedings before the Civil
Service Board or Arbitration in the event of appeal of such
disciplinary action.
For any and all other purposes, any such
statement or answers to interrogations shall be privileged and
shall constitute a private record, and shalt not be made
available without the signed consent of the officer to any
person or agency, except pursuant to subpoena issued by or any
authority.
38.10:
Any and all of the rights and privileges conferred
herein upon members of the Association may be waived by the
officer, but any such waiver shall be signed and in writing.
Nothing herein is intended to contravene any other rights,
duties, or privileges contained in Act 78.
ARTICLE XXXIX
SALARY STRUCTURE
The parties hereto agree that the annual base salary for patrol
officers for the period extending from April 1, 2016 through
March 31, 2021, and thereafter until amended, shall be as
follows:

Page 52
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Start
6 mos.
12 mos.
18 mos.
24 mos.
30 mos.
36 mos.
42 mos.
48 mos.

Effective
4/1/2016
1.50%
46,526
47,989
51,644
53,843
56,770
58,963
62,620
66,276
70,992

Effective
4/1/2017
2.00%
47,457
48,949
52,677
54,920
57,905
60,143
63,873
67,602
72,412

Effective
4/1/2018
2.00%
48,406
49,928
53,731
56,018
59,063
61,346
65,150
68,954
73,860

Effective
4/1/2019
2.00%
49,374
50,927
54,805
57,138
60,245
62,572
66,453
70,333
75,337

Effective
4/1/2020
2.00%
50,361
51,945
55,902
58,281
61,450
63,824
67,782
71,740
76,844

Retro pay calculation for 4/1/16 shall include roll in longevity
($1,040) and the 1.50% shall be applied.
Then an officer’s
longevity should be subtracted at a prorated rate from April 1,
2016 through the last pay period in November, 2016.
All members of the bargaining unit shall participate
in Direct Deposit for all Township pays.
Patrol persons assigned to the Detective Section of
the Criminal Investigation Division shall be awarded a rate of
pay which is one hundred ten percent (110%) of the patrol
officer maximum.
School Liaison assignments will be paid one hundred
two percent (102%) to start, one hundred four percent (104%)
after one (l) year, and one hundred six percent (106%) after two
(2) years.
Assignments will last a maximum of four (4) years,
dependent on school system funding.
ARTICLE XL
PERMANENT SHIFTS
40.1:
Shifts for each contract year shall be determined by
seniority as a police officer in the Clinton Township Police
Department.
40.2:
Permanent shifts for non-probationary road patrol
officers shall be divided into two (2) periods.
The first
period shall extend from May through October, consisting of
seven (7) four (4) week schedules and shall be chosen by
seniority. The second period shall extend from November through
April, consisting of six (6) four (4) week schedules and shall

Page 53
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
be chosen by seniority. The first period picks shall be made on
the third Wednesday in February.
Second period picks shall be
made on the third Wednesday
in
August.
All
road
patrol
officers shall put down a first, second, and third choice for
each period. Specific shift hours, such as early shift or late
shift, shall be indicated also. Officers may submit absentee
requests.
40.3:
The selection process described in Section 40.2 shall
only be applicable to officers while assigned to the road patrol
and shall not affect the department's right to transfer officers
between divisions and bureaus, which may affect the officer's
working conditions.
40.4:
Permanent shifts for those officers assigned to
bureaus or other divisions other than the road patrol shall
extend from April 1st to March 31st and shall be selected on the
third Wednesday in February by seniority.
40.5:
The police administration may rotate probationary
officers in three (3) month intervals or as required by the
Field Training Officer Program for a period of one (1) year. The
number of permanent shift picks will not be affected by those on
this one (1) year rotation.
ARTICLE XLI
TERM OF CONTRACT
This contract shall be effective as of April 1, 2016
and shall remain in full force and effect until midnight March
31, 2021. Economic benefits accruing from the effective date of
this contract shall be retroactive to April 1, 2016, unless
otherwise stated, and shall be paid to bargaining unit members
as soon as reasonably possible.
ARTICLE XLII
LEGALITY
The
parties
hereto
realize
that
certain
court
decisions or change of legislation during the term of this
contract may make certain portions of this Agreement invalid
and/or illegal. In that case, it is the intent of the parties
hereto that only that provision that is not consistent with the

Page 54
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
law or legislation is invalid, and the remaining portions of
this contract shall remain in full force and effect.
Pursuant to Public Act 9 of 2011, the parties are
notified that an emergency manager appointed under the Local
Government and School District Fiscal Accountability Act (Public
Act 4 of 2011) may reject, modify, or terminate the Collective
Bargaining Agreement of the parties as provided in Public Act
No. 4 of 2011.
This clause is inserted into this document pursuant to
Public Act 9 of 2011 (MCL 423.215 (7)-(9)).
By signing this
agreement, the Union does not agree to acknowledge that this
provision is binding on the Union.
The Union reserves the
right to assert, where appropriate, that this clause is not
enforceable. Should Public Act 9 of 2011 be repealed, amended,
modified or judicially limited in any way, this provision is
limited or unenforceable consistent with such act.
ARTICLE XLIII
PENSIONS
43.1:
Members of the bargaining unit shall be provided pension
benefits in accord with Act 345 of P.A. 1937, as amended.
The
parties agree that the de facto operation of the Retirement
System for the Charter Township of Clinton consists of a defined
benefit plan, commonly referred to as an annuity plan and the
defined contribution plan, commonly referred to as a savings
plan.
These plans have been treated by the parties of this
Agreement and the Board of Trustees of the Retirement System as
qualified plans under the provisions of the Internal Revenue
Code. The parties will continue the qualified status of the two
plans within the Pension Trust Fund and agree to take action
which may be required by Internal Revenue Service Rules and
Regulations and the tax laws to maintain qualified plan status
of the defined benefit plan (annuity plan) and the defined
contribution plan (savings plan) under Section 401 (a) or any
other applicable Section of the Internal Revenue Code.
43.2:
Officers may retire with normal service of twenty-five
(25) years, regardless of age. Upon retirement, a member shall
receive a regular pension of two and eight-tenths percent
(2.80%) of their average final compensation multiplied by the
first twenty-five (25) years of service.
Effective upon the
signing of this contract, there shall be no pension benefit

Page 55
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
reduction when an individual member receives full Social
Security benefits and the maximum pension. benefit allowed will
be seventy percent (70%) of final average compensation.
Members hired on or after April 1, 2011:
Bargaining
unit members hired by the Township on or after April 1, 2011,
shall be provided a regular retirement pension equal to two
percent (2%) of the member’s average final compensation
multiplied by all years of service prior to the member’s
anniversary date occurring after 4/1/2011.
Annual pension service credit years commencing on an
employee’s anniversary date after 4/1/2016 shall be earned with
a 2.8% multiplier for post 4/1/2011 hires.
The 10.12% normal
contribution rate identified in the actuarial valuation shall be
paid by the employee for years earned with the 2.8% multiplier
with a maximum pension benefit of 70%.
43.3:
"Average final compensation" shall mean the average of
the three (3) years of highest annual compensation received by
the member during their ten (10) years of service immediately
preceding their retirement or leaving service.
Effective upon
the signing of this contract, a member will vest in the pension
system at eight (8) years.
43.4:
Upon normal service, excluding disability or early
retirement, members of the bargaining unit shall be entitled to
withdraw up to their accumulated contributions (including
interest) to the system, provided that they agree to accept an
appropriate lesser monthly benefit.
Such lesser benefit is to
be computed by the Township's actuary using a method intended to
prevent such contribution withdrawal from costing the Township
or the pension fund any additional monies. For purposes of this
calculation the actuary shall use the then current interest rate
for immediate annuities published by the Pension Benefit
Guarantee Corporation and the actuary shall also use mortality
table used for the most recent regular actuarial determination.
43.5:
The Township shall provide the Union with any changes
in the components which make up the elements of Average Final
Compensation. At the present time those monetary benefits that
are computed for Average Final Compensation purposes are:
regular salary, overtime pay, longevity pay, pay in lieu of
holiday and/or vacation time, education allowance, show up time
and shift differential.

Page 56
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
43.6:
Effective August 1, 1998; bargaining unit members
shall pay a pension contribution into said Act 345 Pension Fund
of six and fourteen-hundredths percent (6.14%) of all salary
paid.
Effective upon ratification, the employee contribution
for employees hired prior to April 1, 2011 shall increase from
six and fourteen-hundredths percent (6.14%) of all salary paid
to eight and fourteen-hundredths percent (8.14%).
Effective
April 1, 2011, the employee contribution into the Act 345
pension fund shall be four percent (4%) of taxable compensation
for employees hired by the Township on or after April 1, 2011.
43.7:
Surviving
Spouse
Benefit
for
Retiree
on
Duty
Disability Retirement.
A surviving spouse of a retiree who is
receiving a duty disability pension at the time of death shall
continue to receive the same duty disability pension benefit
throughout the life of the surviving spouse. It is understood
that this would entitle the surviving spouse to the same
benefits he or she would receive had the retiree lived to the
age of fifty-five (55) years and has selected their spouse as
beneficiary under Act 345.
43.8:
It is hereby understood and agreed that Section 6 (1)
(i) of Public Act 345 of 1937, as amended, shall be amended to
provide:
If a member continues in service on or after the date of
acquiring 10 years of service credit and does not have an Option
I election provided for in subdivision U) in force, and dies
while in service of the municipality before the effective date
of the member's retirement, leaving a surviving spouse, the
spouse shall receive a pension computed in the same manner as if
the member had retired effective the day preceding the date of
the member's death, elected option I provide for in subdivision
(h), and nominated the spouse as survivor beneficiary.
43.9:
For employees who retire on or after (April 1, 2008),
after 5 years of retirement said retirees will be eligible for
annual 13th check not to exceed the retirant's normal monthly
retirement check. Said check will be distributed if investment
funds attributed to the Police members exceed eight (8%)
percent. Up to 50% of said excess will be used to make such
payments.
If 50% of the excess is not sufficient to make a
payment equal to a monthly check then the amount available will
be distributed equally among the eligible retirees. Unused
excess will not be carried over from one year to the next.

Page 57
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
43.10:
The Township agrees to create a 401(a) defined
contribution plan for bargaining unit members who have reached
the 70% cap in the Act 345 defined benefit pension system. The
401(a) defined contribution plan will be maintained with
Fidelity Investments and will require a mandatory Township
contribution
of
7%
of
wages
and
a
mandatory
employee
contribution of 7% of wages.
Thereafter, the Township will
match an employee's contribution dollar for dollar at the
current maximum allowed by the Internal Revenue Service up to
25%. Upon entering the 401(a) defined contribution plan, the
employee's bi-weekly contribution to the Act 345 pension system
will cease. During participation in the defined contribution
plan, the participant continues with full employment status and
receives all future promotions and benefit/wage increases. It is
understood by both parties to this agreement that voluntary
employee contributions are post-tax contributions. It is also
understood by both parties that it is the participant's sole
responsibility
for
analyzing
the
tax
consequences
of
participation in the 401(a) defined contribution system.
43.11:

Purchase of Military/Prior Police Service

Note:
This benefit is only available to those who are members
of this bargaining unit at the time of ratification by both
parties.
A.

Member may purchase up to two (2) years of
military/prior police service (combined) credit
at 100% of the actuarially determined cost.

B.

Members who have already purchased military/prior
police service credit are not eligible to
purchase more time.

C.

Within sixty (60) days of ratification of this
Agreement by both parties, the member must
declare his/her intent and request the actuarial
study.

D.

The member pays full cost of the study.

E.

Within sixty (60) days of receipt
actuarial study, the member must pay
purchase of service time or decline.

F.

Purchase of service time must be for a minimum of
six (6) months’ time.

of
for

the
the

Page 58
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
G.

Payment for service time must be made in a lump
sum.

H.

The cost of military/prior police service time
purchased by the employee shall not be refundable
to the employee under any circumstance nor will
it be included as part of any annuity withdrawal
refund.

I.

An equivalent purchase of retiree health care
service credit must be made at the same time at
100% of actuarial determined cost.

ARTICLE XLIV
HOSPITALS FOR EMERGENCY WORK RELATED INJURIES
The parties agree that in the event of an on duty
injury the Township will use the Henry Ford Macomb or the
McLaren Macomb Hospital, and each employee will in advance
notify the Township of their desire in order to have the
information available in the event of an emergency.
ARTICLE XLV
MISCELLANEOUS
PROVISIONS
45.1:
In
service
Training
and
Other
Police
Training
Programs.
The Clinton Township police department will make
every
effort
to
ensure
that
its
members
are
afforded
opportunities to increase their knowledge of the job through
various in service training programs. Every effort will be made
to make sure that each member has an updated first aid card and
is also trained in CPR.
The training will either be conducted
while the member is on-duty or the member will be compensated at
the proper overtime rate.
The department will also make arrangements to send at
least one man (road patrol) to the Macomb County Community
College training programs. This in no way limits the department
from sending members to other schools for training purposes, one
man per month carried either as work leave or paid the proper
overtime rate.
Selection shall be based on seniority with the
most senior having the first pick and so on down the list until
every member has had a choice, then the list starts over again.
However, a member may choose not to attend and thus pass his
choice on down to the next on the list.
The
department
shall
equalize
training
sessions
between the command officers and the patrol officers by sending

Page 59
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
at least an equal number of patrol officers to
classes or seminars as they send command officers.

specialized

The training sessions established by the department
are considered mandatory for all members, provided the notice of
same is posted at least thirty (30) days, when possible, in
advance of the session.
If the member is not excused by the
Police Chief or the Inspector or their designee, then the first
training period missed shall result in a sanction of one-day
suspension without pay for such member and any additional
failures to attend which results in two or more within a one (1)
year period shall subject the officer to additional sanctions,
up to and including discharge.
If an officer is excused from
training, the training session will be made up at a later date.
The department will schedule the date for a make-up, at which
time an officer maybe either on duty or off.
45.2:
Vehicle Specifications. The department agrees to
furnish patrol vehicles which have a minimum of one hundred six
(106) inch wheelbase and are equipped with air conditioning.
Upon mutual agreement of the Chief of Police and the
Local Association Executive Board, vehicles used for other
purposes may be equipped with a minimum wheelbase less than one
hundred six (106) inches.
45.3:
Accrued Time Earned.
The department shall provide
members of the bargaining unit with a running total of their
accrued vacation and paid time off hours every four (4) months.
45.4:
The Police Department will provide a glass enclosed
and locked bulletin board for the exclusive use of the Local
Association in posting Local Association notices and job opening
announcements.
The
notices
will
not
include
political
advertisements.
45.5:
K-9 Officer. Vacancies in the position of K-9 Officer
shall be filled in accordance with Article 6.5. The K.-9 Officer
will be paid a premium equal to three and three-quarters (3-3/4)
hours at straight time per week.
The K-9 Officer will be
assigned a Police Department vehicle which will be designated as
the K-9 Unit. The maintenance for this vehicle will be paid for
by the Clinton Township Police Department. The cost for medical
care and food for the canine will be assumed by the Clinton
Township Police Department. The K-9 Officer will be provided a
minimum of two (2) training days per month for the K-9 Program

Page 60
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
and the K-9 Officer will be granted Work Leave Days for same.
Assignment of K-9 will be working life of the dog.
ARTICLE XLVI
FIELD TRAINING OFFICER PROGRAM
The
following
conditions
shall
apply
in
the
implementation and operation of the Police Department's Field
Training Officer Program.
46.1:
Field Training Officers will be provided with forty
(40) hours of MLEOTC certified instruction for FTO to prepare
the
skills
necessary
to
apply
practical
in-the-field
training/coaching
techniques
and
to
reliably
assess
the
trainee's performance.
46.2:
The FTO will receive one and one-half (1.5) hours of
overtime for each eight (8) hour shift worked with the trainee.
46.3:
The FTO will receive two (2) hours of compensatory
time for each forty (40) hours worked with the trainee.
46.4:
Overtime will be paid for regular scheduled FTO Unit
meetings if applicable.
46.5:
The trainee
minimum manpower.

will

not

count

in

the

calculation

of

46.6:
The FTO in the first four (4) weeks of training will
not be counted in minimum manpower.
After the first four (4)
weeks, the FTO will not be counted towards minimum manpower if
the trainee is brought in for pre-scheduled training.
46.7:
The FTO and the trainee will not count as a two (2)
officer car.
46.8:
Reference to this Article
will be referred to as a trainee.

the

probationary

officer

Page 61
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
ARTICLE XLVII
POLICE DETECTIVE CLASSIFICATION
The
following
conditions
implementation
and
operation
of
Classification.

shall
apply
the
Police

in
the
Detective

47.1:
This is a non-supervisory career position. Employees in
this classification shall be allowed to accept transfers to
other permanent positions and promotions or to return to the
position of patrol officer.
47.2:
Four (4) years seniority is required to be eligible to
test for this position.
47.3:
Promotions to this position will be made in accordance
with Civil Service procedures.
47.4:
Employees in this classification will be paid one
hundred ten percent (110%) of a police officer's maximum base
pay upon assuming the position.
47.5:
Employees in this classification shall continue to
receive all benefits provided to police officers under this
collective bargaining agreement.

Page 63
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
APPENDIX "A"
PAY IN LIEU OF HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE
The Union and the Employer recognize that in some
instances employees have duplicate health insurance coverage.
In these cases, the Township and another employer are both
paying insurance premiums and the employee is receiving little
or no additional benefits. In an effort to avoid this wasteful
duplication, the parties have agreed upon the following program
which allow employees to decline the Township provided hospital/
medical insurance program and receive instead a contribution to
their deferred compensation account.
A.

Eligibility.
All
employees
who
are
covered
or
eligible for coverage by the Employer's hospital/
medical insurance programs are eligible for this
option. They may take advantage of this option by:
1.

Providing written proof that they have current
coverage under another health insurance plan and;

2.

Submitting the "Waiver of Medical Insurance" form
which appears as Appendix B to this Agreement.

B.

Amount of Benefit. The Employment will compensate the
employee in the amount of $100 per pay period in
addition to his or her normal pay.

C.

Stipulations.
stipulations:

The

parties

agree

to

the

following

1.

Employees may elect this option at any time.

2.

The supplemental pay will begin with the first
pay date in the month that insurance coverage
ceases. There will be no retro- active payments.

3.

Employees may elect to reinstate their health
insurance coverage and drop the supplemental pay
plan
at
the
annual
health
insurance
open
enrollment.
If an employee wishes to reinstate
their health insurance coverage at any other
time, they may do so only if the reinstatement is
due to loss of coverage as a result of the death
of, divorce from, or loss of coverage due to the

Page 64
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
unemployment of the individual
employee under another plan.

covering

the

4.

Those
persons
who
are
eligible
for
hospital/medical insurance at the inception of
this Agreement but who have elected not to be
insured by the Township plan because they are
covered by another plan, will be eligible for
this option.

5.

In those cases where both a husband and wife work
for the Township, one person may carry his or her
spouse and dependents on the health insurance
policy and the other person may elect the
supplemental pay plan.

6.

When an employee elects to drop his or her
insurance coverage, he or she must drop it for
him/herself and all dependents. (e.g. A parent
cannot drop insurance for him/her self and retain
coverage for his or her children).

7.

The Provisions of this plan which pertain to
adding
or
dropping
insurance
coverages
are
subject to the administrative rules of the
insurance carriers for the Township.

Page 65
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
APPENDIX "B"
WAIVER OF MEDICAL INSURANCE
AND
ELECTION OF SUPPLEMENTAL PAY
IN LIEU OF PARTICIPATION IN GROUP MEDICAL INSURANCE
I hereby authorize the Charter Township of Clinton to
cancel my group medical plan if I currently have group coverage
and provide supplemental pay to me of $100 per pay in lieu of
participation in any Township group medical plan. I affirm that
I am covered by the health plan coverage offered through:
____________________________________*
(Name of Company or Carrier)
I understand that by exercising the election to
receive these payments, I will receive no benefits or payments
as primary subscriber from any Township group medical plan.
I understand that except in the case of death, divorce
from, or loss of coverage due to the unemployment of the
individual covering me under another plan, I will not be
eligible for enrollment in any of Clinton Township's group
medical plans until the next open enrollment period.
I understand that if I wish to enroll in any of
Clinton Township's group medical plans at a later date, I will
be subject to the plan's enrollment rules.

Name (PLEASE PRINT)

SIGNATURE

DATE

DEPARTMENT NAME

SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER
* If covered elsewhere, you must provide written proof of other
coverage.

Page 66
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
APPENDIX “C”
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN
CLINTON TOWNSHIP AND THE
POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION OF MICHIGAN
Both parties hereby agree that Article XXXVIII and
Article XXXIX of the Collective Bargaining Agreement is
clarified as followed: Employees being interviewed, solely for
internal investigative purposes, and who are ordered to make a
statement as a condition of employment, shall only be advised of
their Garrity Rights.
POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
OF MICHIGAN
___________________________
James A. Tignanelli

CLINTON TOWNSHIP POLICE
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

Brandon Blake, President

CLINTON TOWNSHIP
_____________________________
Fred Posavetz, Chief of
Police

Page 67
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
APPENDIX “D”

Page 68
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 69
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 70
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 71
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 72
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
APPENDIX “E”

Page 73
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 74
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 75
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 76
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 77
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 78
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
APPENDIX “F”

Page 79
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 80
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 81
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 82
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 83
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 84
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 85
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY

Page 86
Charter Township of Clinton/POAM
Effective April 1, 2016 through March 31, 2021
SIGNATURE COPY
