AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE STATE COLLEGE AREA SCHOOL DISTRICT
AND
THE AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES
AFL-CIO COUNCIL 83
FOR
BUS DRIVERS
FOR
JULY 1, 2022 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2027

1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
Agreement

3

Article 1

Preamble

3

Article 2

Recognition

3

Article 3

Term of Agreement

3

Article 4

Dues And Voluntary Deductions

3

Article 5

Grievance Procedure

5

Article 6

Wages

6

Article 7

Seniority

7

Article 8

Bidding Procedure

8

Article 9

Union Identification

10

Article 10

Union Privileges

11

Article 11

Benefits

11

Article 12

Short-Term Paid Leaves of Absence

14

Article 13

Extended Or Unpaid Leaves Of Absence

17

Article 14

Holidays

19

Article 15

Sick Day Donation Program

20

Article 16

Uniforms

20

Article 17

Procedures for Discharge, Reduction, or Discipline

21

Article 18

Use of School Buildings

21

Article 19

General Provisions

21

2
Article 20

Working Hours and Conditions

23

Article 21

Layoff/Recall

26

Signature Page

27

Appendix A

Wage Rate Schedule

28

Appendix B

Employee Medical Insurance Premiums

29

Appendix C

Medical Insurance Plan Summary

30

Appendix D

Dental Insurance

36

3
AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT is made and agreed to on June 6, 2022, by the STATE COLLEGE
AREA SCHOOL DISTRICT, party of the first part, hereinafter called the "EMPLOYER" or
“DISTRICT” and the AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL
EMPLOYEES, AFL-CIO, COUNCIL 83, party of the second part, hereinafter called the "UNION".
ARTICLE 1 - PREAMBLE
It is the intent and purpose of the parties hereto to promote harmonious and cooperative
relationships between AFSCME and the DISTRICT; and one way to accomplish this is by
negotiating in good faith, a collective bargaining agreement.
ARTICLE 2 - RECOGNITION
The EMPLOYER hereby recognizes the UNION as the exclusive bargaining agent for the run
drivers, regular floaters, noon floaters, full-time floaters, regular substitutes, mechanics, and
maintenance mechanics with respect to the collective bargaining process.
ARTICLE 3 - TERM OF AGREEMENT
The term of this Agreement shall begin July 1, 2022, and shall continue in full force and effect
through June 30, 2027, or until such later date as the parties may hereinafter agree is to be the
extended ending date. Any such extended date shall be evidenced by an amendment to this
Agreement, to which amendment both parties shall signify their approval by affixing their
signatures hereto.
ARTICLE 4 - DUES AND VOLUNTARY DEDUCTIONS
The EMPLOYER agrees to deduct from the wages of the employees who authorize such
deduction on the approved form dues and/or voluntary deductions for the local School Bus
Drivers’ Union.
The UNION shall indemnify and hold the DISTRICT harmless against any and all claims, suits,
orders or judgments brought or issued against the DISTRICT as a result of any action taken or
not taken by the DISTRICT under the provisions of this Article.
All employees covered by this Agreement who have joined the UNION during the period of this
Agreement, must remain members for the duration of this Agreement with the provision that any
such employee or employees may resign from the UNION during the period of fifteen (15) days
prior to the expiration of this Agreement.

4
Union Dues:
1. The amount of such dues shall be certified to the EMPLOYER in writing by the Treasurer
of the UNION and shall remain in effect until such time as the amount of said dues are
changed in writing and delivered to the EMPLOYER.
2. The UNION agrees that it will supply to the EMPLOYER a list of new members for whom
deductions are to be made no later than September 15 for all new employees beginning
in the fall of the year. These deductions will begin with the payroll at the end of
September.
3. Employees desiring to join the UNION after the September 15 date may do so by the
first of each month with the first payment being taken out of the pay at the end of that
month.
4. The UNION shall supply an authorization card for each individual and include a
stipulation entitling the EMPLOYER to withhold subject dues.
5. The EMPLOYER shall not be responsible for uncollected dues for the employees who
sever their employment from the DISTRICT prior to having paid the full amount.
6. Dues deductions shall be made for each employee with an even amount deducted each
month; their amount to be figured by the EMPLOYER according to the formula supplied
by the UNION.
Fair Share Fee:
The DISTRICT agrees to deduct a fair share fee bi-weekly from all employees in the
bargaining unit who are not members of the UNION. Authorization from non-members to
deduct fair share fees shall be certified to the EMPLOYER by the UNION.
Voluntary Deductions:
The DISTRICT agrees to deduct from the wages of any employee who authorizes such
deduction on the approved form voluntary contributions to the Union Political and Legislative
(PAL) fund. Such written authorization may be executed by the employee at any time by
providing a copy to both the EMPLOYER and the UNION.
Remittance to UNION:
The aggregate dues and fair share fee deductions of all employees will be mailed to:
AFSCME AFL-CIO, Council 13, 4031 Executive Park Drive, Harrisburg, PA 17111-1599, by
the tenth (10th) of the succeeding month after which such deductions have been made.
The aggregate PAL deductions of all employees will be made payable to PAL, AFSCME,
Council 13 and will be mailed to: PAL, AFSCME, Council 13, 4031 Executive Park Drive,
Harrisburg, PA 17111-1599.

5
The DISTRICT agrees to provide an itemized statement including the name of each employee
and the amount deducted with both remittances.
ARTICLE 5 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
I.

Definitions
A. Grievance: A grievance is an allegation by an employee, a group of employees or by
the UNION that there has been a violation, misinterpretation or misapplication of a term
or terms of this agreement.
B. Aggrieved Person: An aggrieved person is the person or persons making the complaint.
C. Days: The term days when used shall mean work days except that Saturday, Sunday, or
a legal holiday shall not be counted as the last day of any time limit.

II.

General Procedure
A. The number of days indicated at each step should be considered a maximum and every
effort should be made to expedite this process.
B. The failure of an employee to proceed to the next level of the grievance procedure within
the time limits set forth shall be deemed to be an acceptance of the decision previously
rendered. The failure of an administrator at any level to communicate his/her decision in
writing within the specified time limits set forth herein shall entitle the grievant to move
the grievance to the next step.
C. Nothing contained herein will be construed as limiting the right of any employee having a
grievance to discuss the matter informally with appropriate members of the
administration, and having the grievance adjusted without the intervention of any
employee organization.
D. At all steps beyond step one of a grievance after it has been formally presented,
representatives of the Union and/or their designees may attend grievance hearings,
appeals or other proceedings required to process the grievance.
E. All grievances shall be initiated on the Union form.

III.

Resolution of Grievances
The parties to this Agreement agree that an orderly and expeditious resolution of
grievances arising out of the interpretation of the terms of this Agreement shall provide
for a five (5) step process which is described in the following paragraphs.
Step I
Person, or persons, initiating the alleged grievance shall present the grievance, in writing
and on a form provided by the EMPLOYER, to the appropriate Director within ten (10) days
after its occurrence. The appropriate Director shall reply to the grievance within seven (7)
days after initial presentation of the grievance.

6
Step II
If the action in Step I above fails to resolve the grievance within seven (7) days to the
satisfaction of the affected parties, the grievance shall be referred to the Business
Administrator of the EMPLOYER or his/her designee within seven (7) days.
Step III
If the action in Step II above fails to resolve the grievance within seven (7) days to the
satisfaction of the affected parties, the grievance shall be referred to the Superintendent
within seven (7) days.
Step IV
If the action in Step III above fails to resolve the grievance to the satisfaction of the affected
parties, the grievant shall, within seven (7) days, refer the grievance, in writing, to the School
Board. The School Board shall respond to the grievance, in writing, within seven (7) days
after the Board considered the grievance which shall be at least fifteen (15) days after the
grievance is referred.
Step V
If the action in Step IV above fails to resolve the grievance to the satisfaction of the affected
parties, the grievant shall be referred to binding arbitration as provided in Section 903 of Act
195. If the grievance fails to meet the criteria of Section 903 of Act 195, the decision of the
Board of Education in Step V shall be final.
ARTICLE 6 - WAGES
I.

Wage Rates
A. The regular hourly rates of pay for each position covered by this Agreement are included
on the Wage Rate Schedules found in Appendix A.
1. Each position shall have a “Year One” rate, a “Year Two” rate, and a “Job” rate.
2. Each employee newly hired into the bargaining unit receives the Year One rate.
3. Employees shall move to the Year Two rate as of July 1 st of the following year. For
example:
a. An employee hired in December 2016 moves to the Year Two rate July 1, 2017.
b. An employee hired in January 2017 moves to the Year Two rate July 1, 2018.
4. An employee shall be paid the Job rate as of the July 1 that follows moving to the
Year Two rate.
B. Moving To Another Position
When an employee moves to another position the employee will maintain the same
years of service for step placement purposes in the new position.
C. Employees hired prior to July 1, 2016, shall be paid the higher of the hourly job grade

7
rate for their position and years of service as included in Appendix A or their hourly rate.
Each July, employees whose hourly rate has been higher than the Job Rate will receive
either their new rate or the new Job Rate, whichever is higher.
D. Employees who terminated employment with the DISTRICT and are then re-employed
will be placed on the Year One wage rate.
ARTICLE 7 - SENIORITY
I.

Full-Time and Part-Time Definitions
A. For all employees whose current date of hire is on or after July 1, 2016:
1. A full-time employee shall be defined as a person who is regularly scheduled for at
least 30 hours per week during the school year.
2. A part-time employee shall be defined as a person who is regularly scheduled for
fewer than 30 hours per week during the school year.
B. For all employees whose current date of hire is prior to July 1, 2016:
1. A full-time employee shall be defined as a person who is regularly
scheduled for
at least 25 hours per week during the school year.
2. A part-time employee shall be defined as a person who is regularly scheduled for
fewer than 25 hours per week during the school year.

II. Seniority Dates
Upon completion of the probationary period the employee’s seniority date shall date back to
the first day of their current uninterrupted period of employment.
At least twice each year, on October 15 and February 1, the EMPLOYER shall provide the
UNION with a current seniority list. In the event of errors in the list, such errors shall be
brought to the EMPLOYER’S attention, in writing, within twenty (20) working days after the
same is furnished to the UNION.
Ties in seniority for all purposes shall be broken by the drawing of lots.
To protect seniority, each employee shall keep the DISTRICT informed of the employee's
current home address and telephone number.
Seniority shall be terminated for any of the following reasons:
1. Wherein an employee quits.
2. Wherein an employee is discharged for cause.
3. Wherein an employee is absent from work for one (1) week without properly notifying the
DISTRICT.
4. Wherein an employee fails to return to work after physically being able to do so
following a leave of absence for illness or injury.

8
Employees will accrue and retain all seniority if they return from a medical leave of absence
or work related injury or illness within a twenty-four (24) month period if the employee
receives disability payments or workers' compensation during such leave.
Seniority in bidding and promotion shall be as defined in Article 8.
ARTICLE 8 - BIDDING PROCEDURE
I. Definition
Regular Run Driver - A driver whose regular assignment is driving the same regular route
every morning and afternoon. These positions are normally bid however, in certain cases
they may be assigned.
Regular Floater - Employed two (2) hours during the morning run and two (2) hours during
the afternoon run. These positions are not bid and are not considered regular routes but the
employee does accrue seniority.
Noon Floater - Employed two (2) or more hours between the morning and afternoon run as a
substitute for mid-day routes. These positions are bid. In order to qualify an employee must
hold a regular morning and afternoon route. These positions are considered regularly
scheduled mid-day routes.
Regular Noon Run Driver - Employed two (2) or more hours between the morning run and
the afternoon run to drive a regularly scheduled mid-day route. These positions are bid. In
order to qualify, an employee must hold a regular morning and afternoon route. Learning
Enrichment runs are in this category.
Full-Time Floater - A bid position and employed for at least 2.5 hours during the morning run
and at least 2 and 3/4 hours during the afternoon run and is the same as a regular bid route.
These positions are bid and are considered regular routes.
Late Run Driver - Employed two (2) or more hours to drive regularly scheduled late routes.
These positions are bid. In order to qualify an employee must hold a regular morning and
afternoon route.
Substitute - Employed less than twenty (20) hours per week on an on-call or part-time basis.
These positions are not considered regular routes and the employee does not accrue
seniority.
II. When a regular route becomes available, whether it is a morning/afternoon route, a midday
route, or a late route, the DISTRICT will post the open route for five (5) working days. If no
currently licensed driver, who is available within five (5) working days of the bid award, bids
on the route in writing, the DISTRICT will select the regular floater with the least seniority for

9
that route. No routes becoming available in the last six weeks of the school year will be
posted.
III. If a regular run driver’s route is abolished, and there are no similar routes to assign her/him
to, the following procedure will apply:
A. The driver will retain “regular run” classification and initially be assigned “floater” duties
with identical work hours.
B. The driver may “bump” a lower seniority regular run driver with equal or lesser hours, or
C. The driver may exercise a one-time choice, exempt from the bidding process, of any
subsequently vacant regular run with equal or lesser hours. Driver choices will be
awarded by seniority and this choice will not count as a bid.
D. Any “bumped” regular driver will follow the same procedure.
IV. On August 15, known open routes will be posted. All new routes will be posted no later than
ten (10) working days prior to the first employee meeting. Posting will remain open until the
first employee meeting at which time any route bid on will be filled by the senior driver.
Every effort will be made to give the driver bidding on more than one route preference
according to his/her seniority.
V. If a driver is awarded a different route, the vacated route will be posted in accordance with
the applicable section, (II, IV, or VI). Drivers are permitted only two changes each of a
regular route, mid-day route, and late route during any school year. If a driver bids on a
combination or routes, (example: morning/afternoon and mid-day) and the driver is not
awarded both or all routes, the driver may decline the awarded route or routes. In these
cases the route or routes will be awarded to the next lower seniority bidder.
VI. On the first day of school all unassigned routes will be posted including those vacated
through the bidding procedure and these routes will remain for five (5) consecutive working
days at which time the route will be awarded according to seniority and, where
possible, driver preference.
VII. When a route is posted, a copy of the route to be driven with stop times will be attached to
the posting.
VIII.No employee will be permitted to bid on routes which will regularly assign them more than
eight (8) hours each day or forty (40) hours per week.
IX. The DISTRICT will post, on the first day of school, a request for drivers who would like to
substitute on late routes and also for drivers who are interested in field trips.
X. Simultaneous awards will be permitted.

10

XI.Drivers who have come back from a leave of absence will follow the bidding procedure in
order to obtain a route except from a medical or FMLA leave of absence.
XII. Drivers will expect to retain in September a similar route they occupied at the close of the
previous school term. If this does not occur a driver would be permitted to exercise their
rights as specified in Section III above.
XIII.The bus runs for visually impaired students or handicapped students will not be bid and are
exempt from the bidding procedures. The EMPLOYER will assign drivers to these runs and
ensure all drivers assigned will receive proper training as determined by the DISTRICT.
XIV.The Transportation Office will, to the best of its ability and in a timely manner, strive to
maintain accurate and current run schedules.
XV. The Transportation Office will post any vacancy in a permanent job assignment when it is
known that the incumbent will be temporarily absent, for whatever reason, in excess of
forty-five (45) working days. Only those drivers not currently holding a bid position will be
eligible to bid on temporary vacancies.
XVI.All drivers will have the option to drop added hours that have been assigned to their current
position to pick up a “bid run”. In addition, drivers will have the option to drop added hours
that exceed five duty days.
XVII.Openings within the garage maintenance mechanic job family only will be filled by seniority,
providing the individuals who apply have the present skills and ability to do the job.
XVIII.The DISTRICT and the UNION will partner to develop a transition plan to move all of these
notifications to a website and email process before the expiration of this Agreement. This
process will be inclusive of and available to all employees.
XIX.When an employee holds a position that is regularly scheduled for less than 40 hours per
week and accepts the offer of a second less than 40 hours per week position which is
included in a different job family, such employee is subject to the sixty day probationary
period provided in Article 20 for the second position. If such employee does not successfully
complete the probationary period, s/he shall be removed from the second position, but such
action will not affect her/his first position.
ARTICLE 9 - UNION IDENTIFICATION
No employee shall be prevented from wearing a pin or other identification identifying such
employee’s membership in the Union.

11
ARTICLE 10 - UNION PRIVILEGES
I.

The accredited representative of the UNION, including the local Union Representative, shall
have access to the premises of the DISTRICT to conduct Union business with the following
conditions:
A. Such business must be conducted with a driver or drivers at the conclusion of the
regular bus run(s).
B. Such meetings may be held on DISTRICT premises in accordance with the
requirements of the DISTRICT's Building Use Policy.

II. The UNION may post notices, pamphlets and memorandums on boards in areas so
designated by the DISTRICT, provided that such material is signed, dated and clearly
identified as to the source. No such material shall be posted which is profane, obscene
or defamatory to the DISTRICT or which constitutes election campaign material.
III. The local UNION officers shall be permitted to use the inter-school mail system to distribute
a reasonable amount of authorized material to building representatives within the DISTRICT.
The material shall be identified as to the nature and source.
IV. The DISTRICT agrees to provide office space for the UNION as soon as such space is
available. At a minimum, office space will be available upon the completion of the High
School building project.
V. Release Time for Association Representatives
A. The President or other representatives of the UNION will be released with pay to attend
hearings or proceedings involving the UNION and the DISTRICT. The UNION will
submit requests for release time as far in advance as is feasible, specifying the meetings
to be attended. The UNION shall be reasonable in requesting such absences and the
DISTRICT shall be reasonable in approving such requests.
B. The President and representatives of the UNION shall use accrued vacation time,
personal time, or take time off without pay to attend state meetings and conferences held
by the UNION. The UNION will submit requests for release time as far in advance as is
feasible.
ARTICLE 11 – BENEFITS
I.

Insurance Benefits
A. Medical Benefits
1. All full-time employees are eligible to participate in a health insurance plan - employee
monthly premiums are included in Appendix B.

12
2. Employees will continue with their selected insurance plan from July 1, 2022, through
December 31, 2022. Effective January 1, 2023, employees can select either the PPO
Plan or the Qualified High Deductible Health Plan (QHDHP). The summary of benefits
for the PPO Plan and the QHDHP are located in Appendix C.
3. Employees may change plans during the open enrollment period each year or in the
case of a qualifying event.
4. The employee monthly premium will be made via payroll deduction through a Section
125 Plan with pre-tax dollars.
5. Any employee eligible for health insurance who elects to waive coverage shall be
entitled to payments of $1,000 each in December and June of each year. In order to
waive coverage, the employee must document medical insurance coverage through
another entity. An employee who waives coverage may rejoin DISTRICT coverage
during the annual open enrollment period or in the case of a qualifying event. No
incentive will be provided to an employee who is covered as a dependent on another
DISTRICT employee’s insurance.
6. Spouses and domestic partners employed by another school district, intermediate unit,
or vocational technical school; the Mount Nittany Medical Center/Physicians’ Group and
other, similar medical facilities/groups; an institution of higher education; a
federal/state/local government and/or its respective agencies; or Wegmans who are
eligible for health insurance coverage through their employer will be eligible for coverage
under the District's health insurance only if the employee pays the full premium cost
differential for such spouse/domestic partner. Dependents employed by another school
district, intermediate unit, or vocational technical school; the Mount Nittany Medical
Center/Physicians’ Group and other, similar medical facilities/groups; an institution of
higher education; a federal/state/local government and/or its respective agencies; or
Wegmans who are eligible for health insurance coverage through their employer will be
eligible for coverage under the District's health insurance only if the employee pays an
additional $100 per month for such dependent.
7. Employees whose spouse or domestic partner is also a DISTRICT employee who is
eligible for health insurance will be provided health insurance in the most economical
way for the District.
8. Health Savings Account
Employees selecting the QHDHP shall have access to an associated Health Savings
Account. Both the employee and the DISTRICT may make contributions to the Health
Savings Account. DISTRICT contributions for July 1, 2022 through June 30, 2027 shall
be:
● $750 for individual coverage, $1,500 for all other coverages

13
●

67% of this amount to be added to the Health Savings Account on January 1 and
33% added on September 1 in each year.

Those employees who are enrolled in Medicare and elect to enroll in the QHDHP will
receive from the DISTRICT an amount equivalent to the HSA contributions referenced
above. The applicable amount shall be added to the employee’s paycheck on the pay
date next following January 1 or September 1.
B. Dental Insurance
All full-time employees of the bargaining unit are eligible to participate in the new dental plan
(e.g., diagnostic and preventative services are exempt from both the deductible and the
annual $1000 coverage) as described in Appendix D. Full-time employees may elect to
include eligible dependents with sixty-six percent (66%) of the premium costs paid by the
EMPLOYER. The DISTRICT will pay fifty percent (50%) of the premium costs for
employee-only coverage for part-time employees.
If an employee's spouse has dental insurance available at his or her place of employment,
the use of the DISTRICT's dental insurance by such spouse and the family will be subject to
the spouse's participation in the spouse’s dental plan and coordination of benefits.
C. Life Insurance
The EMPLOYER agrees to provide group term life insurance for each full-time
employee for the bargaining unit, coverage to be in the amount of $40,000. Each
member of the bargaining unit shall have the option to purchase an additional $40,000
at their expense through payroll deduction, the premium amount determined according
to age.
D. Disability Income Insurance
The EMPLOYER agrees to provide each full-time employee with a disability income
insurance plan to provide benefits up to 60% of the employee’s gross income per
month, not to exceed $1,000 per month, for a period of two years in the event of illness
or injury beginning on the 31st day of disability. The disability income will be offset by
benefits received from sick leave benefits, workers' compensation insurance, social
security disability, or disability income from the Public School Employes' Retirement
System (PSERS).
E. Vision Care Insurance
The DISTRICT will pay the Union Health and Welfare Fund for vision care insurance for
all enrolled members of the bargaining unit.
F. Part-time Employee
Any part-time employee who enrolls into the program will pay 100% of the cost of group
rates for these benefits.

14
II. Public School Employees Retirement System (PSERS)
The DISTRICT participates in the Public School Employees Retirement System. PSERS
sets forth all regulations pertaining to this program.

ARTICLE 12 - SHORT-TERM PAID LEAVES OF ABSENCE
I.

Personal Illness
A. Accrual
1. In any school year, each full-time employee earns on a monthly basis 1.33 days of
sick leave per month of service per year.
2. In any school year, each part-time employee earns sick leave on a monthly basis as
follows:
● First through 3rd year of employment: 0.67 days per month of service per
year.
● Upon completion of the 3rd year of employment: 1.11 days per month of
service per year.
3. Any unused sick leave shall be cumulative from year-to-year without limitation.
Employees can access their sick day balances online.
B. Care for Ill Immediate Family
Full-time employees are permitted to use up to 5 sick days per year to care for an ill
immediate family member. Part-time employees are permitted to use up to 2 sick days
per year to care for an ill immediate family member.
C. Employees must notify the Transportation Office of their absence at least forty-five (45)
minutes before their route or shift begins.
D. Personal sick leave will not be granted to employees injured while employed by another
employer.
E. Supervisors have the right to verify the reported sickness of an employee.
F. The EMPLOYER may require a doctor's certificate for an absence of three days or more.
A doctor's certificate may be required if the EMPLOYER has reason to believe the
employee is abusing the sick leave. Except, however, that physician’s certification shall
not be requested for absences related to a documented Family and Medical Leave Act
(FMLA) condition.
G. A retirement benefit will be paid for accrued but unused sick leave days for those
full-time employees retiring from the DISTRICT who:
1. Terminated service by meeting the requirements of the School Code; and

15
2. Had a minimum of ten (10) years continuous service with the State College Area
School DISTRICT, and
3. Completed thirty-five (35) years or more of credited service in thePSERS, regardless
of age, or
4. Completed thirty (30) years or more of credited service in the PSERS at age 60, or
5. Completed twenty-five (25) years or more of credited service in the PSERS and
qualified for a withdrawal (early) retirement, or
6. Completed twenty (20) years of service in the State College Area School DISTRICT
and is at least age 55, or
7. Is disabled, completed at least ten (10) years of service, and is qualified for disability
allowance under the PSERS.
The dollar benefit paid will be $35.00 per day for each day of unused sick leave. The
maximum days of sick leave paid shall not exceed the employee’s work year, for
example:
180 day employee
180 days maximum
200 day employee
200 days maximum
260 day employee
260 days maximum
II. Bereavement
A. Full-time employees shall be eligible for up to five (5) days each occurrence to be used
within two months of the date of death, provided such an amount of leave is required.
Immediate family shall be defined as wife, husband, domestic partner, parents (including
step or foster parents), sister, brother, daughter, son, parents-in-law, grandparents,
grandchildren, son-in-law, daughter- in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law.
In addition, one day shall be granted for attendance at the funeral of a close friend or
other relative.
B. Part-time employees shall be eligible for up to four (4) days each occurrence to be used
within two months of the date of death, provided such an amount of leave is required.
Immediate family shall be defined as wife, husband, domestic partner, parents (including
step or foster parents), sister, brother, daughter, son, parents-in-law, grandparents,
grandchildren, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law.
Ill. Jury Duty
Each employee will be compensated on the basis of regular pay minus jury duty
compensation.

16
IV. Legal Absence
If a full-time employee is required to appear in a legal proceeding arising out of his/her
employment in the DISTRICT, other than as a defendant in a criminal proceeding, such
employee will be given necessary time off with pay.

V. Personal Leave
A. Each full-time employee will be granted personal leave as follows:
● First three years of service - two days per year
● Fourth year of service or more - three days per year
B. Each part-time employee will be granted one (1) day per year.
C. Full-time employees may accumulate up to a total of 5 personal days; part-time
employees may accumulate up to a total of 3 personal days. If on July 1 of any year the
accumulated unused personal days, with the new year’s days added, exceed five, the
excess number of days will be transferred to the employee’s sick leave accumulation.
D. The request for personal leave must be made in accordance with the applicable
Director’s procedure.
VI. Vacation
The DISTRICT will provide the following vacation days on a monthly basis for employees
employed full-time for a 12-month period:
First three years
12 days per year
Fourth through eighth years
15 days per year
Ninth through 19 years
20 days per year
Twenty years or more
22 days per year
No employee will be able to accumulate more than twice his/her annual accrual rate.
Request for vacation shall be submitted in writing to the Director of Transportation, at least
five working days in advance of the vacation.
Vacations shall be scheduled and granted for periods of time requested by the employee
subject to management’s responsibility to maintain efficient operations. If the nature of the
work makes it necessary to limit the number of people on vacation at the same time, the
employee with the greatest seniority shall be given a choice of vacation periods in the event
of any conflict in selection. Where reasonable opportunities are available for selection of
vacations on a seniority basis, approved requests shall not be revoked if a conflict in
selection develops after the selection period. The selection period shall be the first two
weeks of November for vacations from January 1 to June 30 of the following year and the
first two weeks of April for vacations from July 1 to December 31. Requests for vacation
outside of the selection period will be based upon the request submission date.

17

Vacation shall be granted at the employee's request where convenient with the
EMPLOYER's schedule; however, if it is necessary to limit the number of employees off at a
given time the employees who are most senior shall be given preference.
All employees accruing vacation time will be paid for accrued but unused vacation at
termination in an amount not to exceed the equivalent of one year’s accrual. Employees
whose vacation balance exceeds the equivalent of one year’s accrual will be permitted to
use the remaining days as vacation time prior to retirement/resignation, provided the
employee gives the District sufficient notice.
VII. The DISTRICT and the UNION will partner to develop a transition plan to move access to
and management of all paid time off balances to a website process before the expiration of
this Agreement. This process will be inclusive of and available to all employees.
ARTICLE 13 - EXTENDED OR UNPAID LEAVES OF ABSENCE
I.

Induction Into the Armed Forces
The provisions of federal and state laws regarding leaves and rights retained by persons on
leave for military services apply to all members of the bargaining unit. Any member of the
bargaining unit desiring to return to the DISTRICT prior to the originally designated
approved date shall submit a request in writing at least sixty (60) days prior to the requested
return date. This request is not to be interpreted as an automatic approval.

II. Family and Medical Leave Act
For purposes of the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), an eligible employee is any
employee who has worked for the DISTRICT for at least 12 months, and who has worked at
least 1,250 hours within the 12-month period immediately prior to the absence.
A qualifying employee is eligible during any fiscal year for a total of either 12 or 26 work
weeks (depending on the reason for the absence) of unpaid FMLA leave. As outlined in this
contract, the DISTRICT provides additional leave time in some situations. FMLA leave may
be for one or more of the following:
● the birth of an employee's child, including prenatal doctor visits as well as caring for
the newborn child;
● the placement of a child with the employee for adoption or foster care;
● the care for a seriously ill child, spouse, or parent of the employee;
● the employee's own serious illness which causes the employee to be unable to
perform the functions of her/his position;
● a qualifying military exigency or the care of a covered service member injured in the
line of duty.
Absences may be of an ongoing nature or, when medically necessary, may be taken as an
intermittent leave or on a reduced leave schedule. Whenever possible, the employee shall

18
make a reasonable effort to schedule any medical treatment visits so as not to unduly
disrupt operations.
An employee who is absent under the provisions of the FMLA must record the absence as
such.
III. Childbearing Leave
Disabilities caused or contributed to by pregnancy, miscarriage, abortion, childbirth, and
recovery therefrom, are, for all job-related purposes, temporary disabilities and are covered
by FMLA for eligible employees. While on childbearing leave, the employee will be entitled
to use available sick leave and disability benefits during the time she is disabled and unable
to work. All available sick leave must be used before becoming eligible for income
protection benefits (when applicable). Normally, the disability period for childbearing is six
(6) weeks following delivery. Should disability extend beyond six weeks, an FMLA form
indicating the anticipated length of disability and expected date of return to work must be
submitted to the Director of Human Resources. The request for such leave must be
discussed with the supervisor and the Director of Human Resources in advance of the
leave. Placement upon return will be in the same or substantially equivalent position as the
one held prior to the leave.
IV. Child Rearing Leave
Request for child rearing leave shall be made in writing to the Director of Human Resources
at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date the leave is to begin. Employees shall be
granted up to six (6) months for child rearing leave. During such leave, the employee uses
all available vacation and personal time prior to being placed on a leave without pay. After
all time covered by FMLA has been used, the employee may elect to continue all benefits in
which enrolled by paying the full cost. The request for such leave must be discussed with
the supervisor and the Director of Human Resources in advance. Employees on child
rearing leave are required to submit to the Director of Human Resources notification of
intent to return at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of leave. Placement upon return
will be in the same or substantially equivalent position as the one held prior to the leave. All
benefits for which the employee qualifies will be reinstated.
V. Extended Leave For Illness Or Injury
The DISTRICT may grant a leave of absence without pay due to illness or injury for up to
two years for any employee whose accumulated sick leave runs out and who provides
medical documentation stating the cause of disability, the beginning of the disability period,
the length of the disability and the expected date the employee could return to work. Such
leave may be covered by FMLA for eligible employees. Employees on approved extended
leaves without pay may continue all insurance coverages in which they are enrolled by
remitting the cost for such coverages to the Human Resources Office on a monthly basis.
This provision does not diminish or otherwise modify the right of eligible full-time employees
to receive income protection payments as provided under Article 11, Section I, D.

19

VI. Return to Work
When an employee who is on an approved leave of absence without pay for any
reason, excluding extended illness or injury, is ready to return to duty, he/she shall be
given the next available assignment in the class of positions for which he/she is qualified.
Failure to notify the Director of Transportation of intent to return three weeks prior to the end
of the leave shall terminate the employee’s right to return. Employees who request leave
without pay status due to the unforeseen rescheduling of their daily assignment by the
DISTRICT will not be held accountable for that time with respect to maintaining their annual
bid (for example, school delays, early dismissal, etc.).
If the leave without pay is for extended illness or injury (defined as illness or injury verified by
a doctor’s certificate) that extends beyond the employee’s available paid sick leave, such
employee will again be assigned the same route held prior to the leave. If the route has
been abolished, the employee will be assigned the next available route.
VII. Employees on an approved leave of absence without pay shall not be entitled to paid
holidays, to accrue or use vacation or sick leave, or, except for illness or injury, to have
medical benefits paid by the EMPLOYER. However, an employee may continue any
and all of the health, dental or life insurance coverages by notifying the EMPLOYER of
his/her wish to have benefits continue and by paying the full monthly cost of the
premiums to the Employer preceding the beginning of the month of coverage.
VIII.When an employee returns from leave without pay and is restored to a position, all
benefits of seniority and fringe benefits shall be stored in the amounts possessed at the
beginning of the leave without pay, without deduction or increase.
ARTICLE 14 - HOLIDAYS
I.

The DISTRICT will provide the following holidays for employees employed full-time for a
12-month period:
● January 1 (New Year's Day)
● Memorial Day
● Independence Day
● Labor Day
● Thanksgiving Day (plus 1 day)
● Christmas Day (plus 2 days)

II. The DISTRICT will provide Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day as paid holidays for
full-time and part-time Food Service employees who are employed for less than 12 months.
III. If an employee works on a holiday, s/he will be compensated for the holiday plus double
time for all hours worked.

20
IV. If a holiday listed above occurs on a Saturday or Sunday, the DISTRICT and UNION will
mutually determine what day will be designated as that holiday.
ARTICLE 15 - SICK DAY DONATION PROGRAM
In the event an employee who is eligible to accrue sick days is ill or injured and needs to be
absent from work for a prolonged period of time, Articles 12 and 13 outline procedures for the
use of applicable accrued paid time off and additional time off without pay. In the event that an
employee exhausts all of her/his applicable paid time off, this program provides the opportunity
for co-workers to donate some of their accrued sick days in order to provide additional paid time
off to the absent employee.
Procedure
1. When an employee is absent and about to exhaust all applicable paid time off, the
employee or the employee’s supervisor will contact the Human Resources office
advising of the need for donation.
2. After consulting with the employee, if the absent employee wishes to participate in the
donation program, Human Resources will send a message to the members of the
AFSCME bargaining unit.
3. All donating employees will remain anonymous.
4. The absent employee will be compensated at her/his regular rate of pay.
5. Donating employees must maintain at least 30 sick days after donation.
6. Normally, employees can donate a day at a time, up to five in each school year.
7. Employees who wish to donate will follow the instructions as outlined by Human
Resources. Human Resources will notify the donor when her/his donated time has
been deducted from their accrued leave.
8. Donated days will be used in the order in which they were received.
9. The absent employee may use the donated time until the disability period ends or
disability insurance eligibility begins, whichever occurs first.
10. The absent employee may return with a balance of one sick day per month for the
remainder of the school year from the date of return, up to 10 donated sick days.
11. The DISTRICT and the UNION agree to meet as needed to review and revise this
procedure.
ARTICLE 16 - UNIFORMS
Mechanics and Maintenance personnel will receive the following issued clothing:
1. Eleven (11) complete uniforms to include shirts and pants.
2. Two (2) coveralls and two (2) jackets.
Upon completion of the probationary period, Mechanics and Maintenance personnel will be
reimbursed up to $200 for one pair of steel-toe shoes per fiscal year. Steel-toe shoes are
required to be worn during work hours. In order to receive this reimbursement, the employee
must provide a receipt.

21

Upon completion of the probationary period, Bus Drivers will be paid a stipend of $92 every
three years for one pair of waterproof boots. Boots will be required to be worn when working
outside. While driving, Bus Drivers will be required to wear shoes with a closed toe and have a
non-skid sole.
ARTICLE 17 - PROCEDURES FOR DISCHARGE, REDUCTION OR DISCIPLINE
No employee shall be discharged, reduced in rank or compensation, except for incompetence,
intemperance, neglect of duty, violation of the School Laws of Pennsylvania, or reasonable
regulations of the EMPLOYER, or for other just cause. Due notice of such reason or reasons
shall be given to the employee and to the UNION representative in writing, and any such action
asserted by the EMPLOYER or any agent or representative thereof shall be subject to the
grievance procedure herein set forth provided that either party shall have the right of appeal to
court from the final decision under the grievance procedure. As provided in Article 7, this
provision does not apply to probationary employees.
The EMPLOYER will attempt to discipline employees in such a manner so as not to embarrass
the employee before the public or other employees. It must be kept in mind, however, that
where insubordination or flouting of authority by an employee in public and/or in the presence of
other employees takes place, the EMPLOYER shall not be restricted by the operation of this
section.
ARTICLE 18 - USE OF SCHOOL BUILDINGS
The UNION shall have the right to use school buildings in accordance with the DISTRICT’s
Building Use Policy.
ARTICLE 19 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
I.

Employees who are required to use their personal automobiles for authorized DISTRICT
business will be reimbursed at the rate established for all employees of the DISTRICT by
the Board of School Directors for such travel. Requests for such compensation must be
submitted monthly to the applicable Director on appropriate travel allowance forms.

II. In the event that any part-time employee is awarded a full-time position with the DISTRICT,
the employee shall be required to relinquish the part-time position and shall not be
permitted to hold any other part-time position while employed full-time. The scheduling of
any non-substitute part-time custodial employees more than sixty (60) hours in any three
consecutive pay periods will result in a full-time position being posted for bid/hire.
Exceptions to this will be handled in a meet and discuss format between the DISTRICT and
UNION.

22
III. All full-time employees will have access to the Community Education Program. Individuals
may be reimbursed the tuition fees of courses requested, providing the following criteria is
met and prior approval is granted:
● Courses must be related to current job.
● A passing grade must be achieved.
IV. No Discrimination
Both the DISTRICT and the UNION agree not to discriminate against any employees on the
basis of race, creed, color, national origin, political affiliation, age, sex, marital status, nonjob
related handicap or disability, or the proper exercise by an employee of his/her rights
guaranteed by ACT 195.
V. Run Times and Sheets
A. All run times must be accurately posted on time sheets. Any changes or corrections
made on a timesheet must be brought to the driver’s attention prior to submission. False
reports by the driver may be subject to disciplinary action if warranted.
B. All run sheets will be kept updated and current at all times. It will be the responsibility of
the EMPLOYER to keep all run sheets updated and current.
C. Where time is not a factor, all field trips will be offered to regular run or bid position
drivers prior to the trip being contracted out, in accordance with procedures established
in Article 20, Section 2.
VI. Emergency Situations
During emergency situations (snow, flood, any situation that is unsafe for students to be
present, etc.) all 12-month employees will be considered essential employees. In these
situations, as well as any time school is canceled, essential employees who work will be
compensated for their hours in accordance with Article 20. If, however, all DISTRICT offices
are closed and twelve-month employees are compensated for those hours lost, 12-month
Transportation employees will be compensated for the same hours. Any hours actually
worked will be additionally compensated at one and one half times the normal hourly wage
rate. Should any building dismiss early or be closed as a result of an emergency situation,
those employees who are not considered essential for that emergency situation will be
assigned elsewhere in the DISTRICT or be permitted to substitute accrued vacation or
personal time to remain in a compensatory status for all hours missed.
VII. Employees who miss their morning, noon, afternoon or late run assignment due to
unexpected school schedule changes will be compensated at their regular hourly rate of
pay for all hours missed unless these runs will be made up at a later date.
VIII.Management may adjust assigned work hours to accommodate the schedule and work
changes resulting from a delayed start to the school day or an early dismissal. Two-hour
delay schedules will be communicated to staff no later than October 15 of each year.

23

In the event an employee reports to work and finds no work available, the employee will be
paid for two hours on a straight time basis. However, s/he will not be paid if:
A. the employee has been informed at least one hour in advance not to report for work by
telephone, by personal contact, by a letter addressed to her/his last home address as
provided by the employee, or by other predetermined means; or
B. the employee turns down suitable alternate work that is offered.
IX. The Employer agrees that if meals are not provided to drivers while on a field trip out of
the State College area, then the employee shall be reimbursed at a rate as indicated below:
Breakfast $10.00
Lunch
$15.00
Dinner
$26.00
Breakfast will be reimbursed only if the driver was required to be out of town the previous
evening on a DISTRICT assigned duty, and the trip continues beyond 6:00 a.m. the next
day. In order to be eligible for reimbursement, the meal must have been eaten while on a
field trip, and the passengers were scheduled for a meal stop, or the driver was required to
drive during a normal mealtime and the meal was eaten during the waiting time period.
Snacks are not reimbursable. An official restaurant receipt must be provided for each meal
or an itemized store receipt for the date of the field trip.
X. Mechanics, holding a current PA inspection license, receive $200 in their November 30 pay
for successfully renewing their inspection license.
ARTICLE 20 - WORKING HOURS AND CONDITIONS
I.

Probationary Period
A newly hired employee shall be considered a probationary employee for a period of sixty
(60) days actually worked following the first day of employment. Upon completion of the said
sixty (60) day period, such probationary employees shall be considered as an employee.
During the probationary period, such employees cannot use the grievance procedure.
Employment may be terminated for any probationary employee for any reason at any time
during the probationary period.

II. Hours of Work
A. A work week shall consist of the days Monday through Sunday.
B. Whenever possible, the work year shall consist of 180 days.
C. Summer bus routes, to include summer Hearts and Strides, will be posted for bid and
awarded by seniority. Drivers will be paid their regular hourly rate.

24
D. In the event the District is closed due to weather and classes are held virtually, all
employees who were scheduled to work that day but have no work available will be
scheduled to make up that day later in the school year. If the employee prefers, then the
time can be made up one or two weeks after the last day of school at a day/time
acceptable to the supervisor.
III. Extra Hours - All Types
A. Definition
Extra hours will include any hours during the school year beyond the bid runs or shifts as
posted and awarded. This may include, but will not be limited to, noon run or late run
substitutes (except noon run floaters), shuttles, field trips. Handicapped runs exempted
from the bidding procedure will be considered the same as if they were bid runs. Visual
impaired runs exempted from the bidding procedure will be considered the same as if
they were bid runs. All drivers assigned will receive proper training as determined by the
District.
B. All extra hours will be on a voluntary basis within job classification (driver or shop) and
an extra hours report shall be maintained for all active employees and updated each pay
period for the purpose of rotation. All extra bus trips will be on a voluntary basis and a
list of eligible drivers shall be established for the purpose of rotation. To be eligible, a
driver must hold a regular run for 60 days and currently hold a regular run. If no
volunteers are available, the run shall be assigned to the least senior qualified driver.
C. All extra hours beyond the bid runs (field trips, swimming trips, etc.) will be distributed
approximately equally among those bus drivers on the volunteer list. Volunteers will be
eligible for all field trips. There will be no separation between in town and out of town
trips.
D. Any bus driver refusing extra assignments will be credited with those number of hours
actually worked for the purpose of equalization. For equalization purposes, the employer
will attempt to insure the difference in hours from the most hours worked to the least
hours worked will not exceed ten (10) hours.
E. Bus drivers not on the voluntary list will only be considered if the voluntary list is
exhausted.
F. Where time and regular run staffing are not a factor, all field trips will be offered to
regular run or bid position drivers prior to the trip being subcontracted out, in
accordance to procedures established in this Article.
G. The UNION will receive a copy of all regularly scheduled field trips contracted out no
later than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the actual event.

25
IV. On snow or emergency days, drivers will receive notification of school cancellation or
delay by telephone or by public radio broadcasts as soon as possible.
V. Drivers will be notified of proper procedure for calling off in the event they are unable to
report to work for any reason.
VI. Overtime
A. An employee shall be paid one and one-half times his/her straight time hourly rate of
pay for all hours actually worked in excess of forty (40) hours during a work week.
There shall be no pyramiding or duplication of overtime or holiday premium pay.
B. Overtime is to be distributed as equally as possible by job family and work location over
a twelve month period July 1 to June 30. When an overtime opportunity occurs,
volunteers will be sought beginning with the most senior employee within the job family
at the work location, on a rotating basis. Any employee refusing overtime shall be
credited the number of hours worked by another individual for equalization purposes.
The EMPLOYER will keep records of such overtime for equalization purposes.
C. In the event employees are not available, such work will be assigned on a nonvolunteer basis beginning with the least senior employee within the job family on a
rotating basis. The EMPLOYER will be required to keep records of such overtime
assignments.
D. Where feasible, the same employee should not be required to work two consecutive
days of mandatory overtime.
VII. The EMPLOYER will pay the difference in the cost between a regular driver’s license
and the required Commercial Driver’s License (CDL).
VIII.Working Conditions
A. The DISTRICT will compensate employees at their regular hourly rate or overtime rate
as applicable for all time required to take refresher courses needed in the course of
employment or for any required safety meetings that are held outside the normal work
hours.
B. The DISTRICT will pay for the required physical and/or X-rays needed in the course of
employment. The DISTRICT will designate its physician.
C. Employees’ pay will be made via direct deposit to a bank/credit union account. If an
employee does not have a bank/credit union account, the DISTRICT will assist the
employee in obtaining such an account. If following this assistance, the employee is
unable to establish an account; the DISTRICT will continue to issue a paycheck to the
employee.

26
ARTICLE 21 - LAYOFF/RECALL
I.

When, in the sole opinion of the DISTRICT, it is necessary to reduce the working force of
the DISTRICT, temporary employees in each job shall be laid off first. Employees who have
not completed their probationary period in each job family shall be laid off next before any
permanent employees are laid off. If a further need to reduce the workforce exists,
employees shall be laid off in an inverse order of seniority, according to the job family.

II. Employees shall be given a minimum of two (2) weeks advance written notice of layoff
indicating the reasons which make the layoff necessary.
III. Employees shall be laid off in inverse order of their seniority according to their job title.
IV. An employee who loses his/her position because of the abolishment of said position
shall have the right to apply for and shall be eligible, in accordance with the seniority
provisions to claim the job of the least senior employee within his/her classification,
provided the senior employee has the qualifications, skills and ability to do the job. An
employee scheduled for layoff may decide to accept the layoff and waive his/her right to
bump a less senior employee in another job family for whose job they are qualified. No
part-time employee may bump a full-time employee from a position even though the
full-time employee may have less seniority. Full-time employees, however, may bump
part-time employees with less seniority.
V. Ties in seniority for all purposes shall be broken by the drawing of lots.
VI. Employees shall be recalled in the order of seniority and job family on the basis of need as
solely determined by the DISTRICT to positions for which they are qualified. It is
understood that an employee may be in a lay off status from their job title but not be
unemployed within the school DISTRICT. Any employee who is laid off in excess of
twenty-four (24) months shall lose his/her right to recall under the provisions of this Article.
If a position becomes available during a time when employees have been laid off within the
past 2 years, the most senior employee within that job description shall be recalled into the
open position. If a position becomes available and no employees within that job description
have been laid off during the past 2 years, and other employees with the Physical Plant
department that have been laid off within the past 2 years, and meet the requirements of the
job description, the most senior employee meeting the qualifications shall have the option of
being recalled into the open position.
VII. The EMPLOYER shall recall a laid off employee when an opening occurs; however, if such
employee refuses the open job then such employee shall be removed from the recall list.
VIII.In the event that an employee is laid off, the employee shall, upon request, receive payment
for earned unused vacation leave.

27
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement on
June 6, 2022.

STATE COLLEGE AREA SCHOOL DISTRICT (SCASD)

06-06-2022
SCASD Board President

SCASD Board Secretary

Date

06-06-2022
Date

AFSCME DISTRICT COUNCIL 83, LOCAL 259

Staff Representative

7o.� ��)_�

Date

28

APPENDIX A - WAGE RATE SCHEDULE
Annual Hourly Rate Increase
July
2022
$.95

July
2023
$.80

July
2024
$.70

July
2025
$.70

July
2026
$.70

Wage Rate Schedule
Transportation Title

Year 1 Rate

Year 2 Rate

Job Rate

Bus Driver (includes an extra $0.30/hour)
July 2022

$19.30

$19.65

$20.15

July 2023

$20.40

$20.75

$21.25

July 2024

$21.40

$21.75

$22.25

July 2025

$22.40

$22.75

$23.25

July 2026

$23.40

$23.75

$24.25

July 2022

$18.09

$18.44

$18.94

July 2023

$18.89

$19.24

$19.74

July 2024

$19.59

$19.94

$20.44

July 2025

$20.29

$20.64

$21.14

July 2026

$20.99

$21.34

$21.84

July 2022

$21.50

$21.85

$22.35

July 2023

$22.30

$22.65

$23.15

July 2024

$23.00

$23.35

$23.85

July 2025

$23.70

$24.05

$24.55

July 2026

$24.40

$24.75

$25.25

Assistant Bus Mechanic

Bus Mechanic

29

APPENDIX B – EMPLOYEE MEDICAL INSURANCE PREMIUMS

July 1 December 31,
2022

January 1,
2023

January 1,
2024

January 1,
2025

January 1,
2026

January 1,
2027 thru
June 30,
2027

Individual

$103.00

$101.00

$112.00

$125.00

$139.00

$139.00

P/Child(ren)

$186.00

$247.00

$281.00

$319.00

$361.00

$369.00

E/S

$226.00

$271.00

$307.00

$349.00

$396.00

$404.00

Family

$226.00

$283.00

$321.00

$365.00

$414.00

$422.00

July 1 December 31,
2022

January 1,
2023

January 1,
2024

January 1,
2025

January 1,
2026

January 1,
2027 thru
June 30,
2027

Individual

$24.00

$27.00

$30.00

$33.00

$37.00

$41.00

P/Child(ren)

$52.00

$79.00

$94.00

$104.00

$115.00

$128.00

E/S

$81.00

$87.00

$102.00

$114.00

$126.00

$140.00

Family

$81.00

$91.00

$107.00

$119.00

$132.00

$146.00

PPO

HDHP

30

APPENDIX C – MEDICAL INSURANCE PLAN SUMMARY - PPO
State College Area School District - PPO Benefit Summary
On the chart below, you'll see what your plan pays for specific services. You may be responsible for a facility fee, clinic charge or
similar fee or charge (in addition to any professional fees) if your office visit or service is provided at a location that qualifies as a
hospital department or a satellite building of a hospital.
Benefit

Network

Out-of-Network

General Provisions
Benefit Period(1)

Calendar Year

Deductible (per benefit period)
Individual
Family

$350
$700

$700
$1,400

Plan Pays – payment based on the plan allowance

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Out-of-Pocket Limit (Once met, plan pays 100%
coinsurance for the rest of the benefit period)
Individual
Family

$1,250
$2,500

$2,500
$5,000

$6,850
$13,700

Not Applicable
Not Applicable

Total Maximum Out-of-Pocket (Includes deductible,
coinsurance, copays, prescription drug cost sharing and
other qualified medical expenses, Network only)(2) Once
met, the plan pays 100% of covered services for the rest of
the benefit period.
Individual
Family

Office/Clinic/Urgent Care Visits
Retail Clinic Visits & Virtual Visits

100% after $25 copay

70% after deductible

Primary Care Provider Office Visits & Virtual Visits

100% after $25 copay

70% after deductible

Specialist Office & Virtual Visits

100% after $25 copay

70% after deductible

Virtual Visit Originating Site Fee

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Urgent Care Center Visits

100% after $50 copay

Telemedicine Services(3)

100% after $20 copay
Preventive Care(4)

Routine Adult physical exams

100% (deductible does not
apply)

70% after deductible

Adult immunizations

100% (deductible does not
apply)

70% after deductible

Colorectal cancer screening

100% (deductible does not
apply)

70% after deductible

Routine gynecological exams, including a Pap Test

100% (deductible does not
apply)

70% (deductible does not
apply)

Mammograms, annual routine

100% (deductible does not
apply)

70% after deductible

Mammograms, medically necessary

100% (deductible does not
apply)

70% after deductible

Diagnostic services and procedures

100% (deductible does not
apply)

70% after deductible

Routine Pediatric physical exams

100% (deductible does not
apply)

70% after deductible

31
Pediatric immunizations

100% (deductible does not
apply)

70% (deductible does not
apply)

Diagnostic services and procedures

100% (deductible does not
apply)

70% after deductible

Emergency Services
Emergency Room Services

100% after $100 copay (waived if admitted)

Ambulance

90% after network deductible

Ambulance – Non-Emergency

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Hospital and Medical/Surgical Expenses (including maternity)
Hospital Inpatient

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Hospital Outpatient

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Maternity (non-preventive facility & professional services)
including dependent daughter

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Medical Care (including inpatient visits and
consultations)/Surgical Expenses

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Therapy and Rehabilitation Services
Physical Medicine

100% after $25 copay

70% after deductible

Limit: 30 visits/benefit period
Respiratory Therapy

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Speech & Occupational Therapy

100% after $25 copay

70% after deductible

Limit: 30 visits per therapy/benefit period
Spinal Manipulations

100% after $25 copay

70% after deductible

Limit: 20 visits/benefit period
Other Therapy Services (Cardiac Rehab, Infusion Therapy,
Chemotherapy, Radiation Therapy and Dialysis)

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Benefit

Network

Out-of-Network

Benefit

Network

Out-of-Network

Mental Health/Substance Abuse
Inpatient

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Inpatient Detoxification/Rehabilitation

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Outpatient Mental Health
(includes virtual behavioral health visits)

100% after $25 copay

70% after deductible

Outpatient Substance Abuse
(includes virtual behavioral health visits)

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Other Services
Allergy Extracts and Injections

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Autism Spectrum Disorder including Applied Behavior
Analysis(5)

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Assisted Fertilization Procedures

Not Covered

Not Covered

Dental Services Related to Accidental Injury

Not Covered

Not Covered

Diagnostic Services
Advanced Imaging (MRI, CAT, PET scan, etc.)

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Basic Diagnostic Services (standard imaging, diagnostic
medical, lab/pathology, allergy testing)

32
Durable Medical Equipment, Orthotics and Prosthetics

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Home Health Care

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Limit: 90 visits/benefit period
Hospice

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Infertility Counseling, Testing and Treatment(6)

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Private Duty Nursing

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Limit: 240 hours/benefit period
Skilled Nursing Facility Care

90% after deductible

70% after deductible

Limit: 100 days/benefit period
Transplant Services

90% after deductible
deductible

Precertification Requirements(7)

70% after
Yes

Prescription Drugs
Prescription Drug Deductible
Individual
Family
Prescription Drug Program(8)
Soft Mandatory Generic
Defined by the National Pharmacy Network - Not Physician
Network. Prescriptions filled at a non-network pharmacy are
not covered.
Your plan uses the Comprehensive Formulary with an
Incentive Benefit Design.
Specialty Pharmacy (30 day supply)

None
None
Retail Drugs (31/60/90-day Supply)
85% Generic Plan Payment
75% Brand Formulary Plan Payment
70% Brand Non-Formulary Plan Payment
Maintenance Drugs through Mail Order (90-day Supply)
$10 generic copay
$30 formulary brand copay
$50 non-formulary brand copay
$3 Generic Copay
$10 Brand Formulary Copay
$16 Brand Non-Formulary Copay

(1) Your group's benefit period is based on a Calendar Year.
(2) The Network Total Maximum Out-of-Pocket (TMOOP) is mandated by the federal government, TMOOP must include
deductible, coinsurance, copays, prescription drug cost share and any qualified medical expense. Effective with plan years
beginning on or after January 1, 2016, the TMOOP cannot exceed $6,850 for an individual and $13,700 for two or more
persons.
(3) Services are provided for acute care for minor illnesses. Services must be performed by a Highmark approved telemedicine
provider. Virtual Behavioral health visits provided by a Highmark approved telemedicine provider are eligible under
Outpatient Mental Health/Substance Abuse benefit.
(4) Services are limited to those listed on the Highmark Preventive Schedule (Women's Health Preventive Schedule may apply).
Gender, age and frequency limits may apply.
(5) Coverage for eligible members to age 21. Services will be paid according to the benefit category (e.g. speech therapy).
Treatment for autism spectrum disorders does not reduce visit/day limits.
(6) Treatment includes coverage for the correction of a physical or medical problem associated with infertility. Infertility drug
therapy may or may not be covered depending on your group’s prescription drug program.
(7) Highmark Medical Management & Policy (MM&P) must be contacted prior to a planned inpatient admission or within 48
hours of an emergency or maternity-related inpatient admission. Be sure to verify that your provider is contacting MM&P for
precertification. If this does not occur and it is later determined that all or part of the inpatient stay was not medically
necessary or appropriate, you will be responsible for payment of any costs not covered.
(8) The formulary is an extensive list of Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved prescription drugs selected for their
quality, safety and effectiveness. It includes products in every major therapeutic category. The formulary was developed by
the Highmark Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee made up of clinical pharmacists and physicians. Your program
includes coverage for both formulary and non-formulary drugs at the specific copay or coinsurance amounts listed above.
Under the soft mandatory generic provision, you are responsible for the payment differential when a generic drug is
authorized by your provider and you purchase a brand name drug. Your payment is the price difference between the brand
name drug and generic drug in addition to the brand name drug copay or coinsurance amounts, which may apply.

33

APPENDIX C – MEDICAL INSURANCE PLAN SUMMARY - QHDHP
State College Area School District - QHDHP Benefit Summary
This program is a qualified high deductible plan as defined by the Internal Revenue Service. It is designed for use with a Health
Savings Account (HSA). On the chart below, you'll see what your plan pays for specific services. You may be responsible for a
facility fee, clinic charge or similar fee or charge (in addition to any professional fees) if your office visit or service is provided at a
location that qualifies as a hospital department or a satellite building of a hospital. If you enroll as an individual, the deductible and
out-of-pocket maximums for the “Employee Only Plan” apply. If you enroll as a family, the deductible and out-of -pocket maximums
for the “Family Plan” apply and can be satisfied by one or more of your family members.
Benefit

Network

Out-of-Network

General Provisions
Benefit Period(1)
Calendar Year
Deductible (per benefit period)
Employee
$1,500
$3,000
Only Plan
$3,000
$6,000
Family Plan
Plan Pays – payment based on the plan allowance
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Out-of-Pocket Limit (Includes prescription drug expenses,
coinsurance and copay. Once met, plan pays 100%
coinsurance for the rest of the benefit period)
Employee Only Plan
$1,500
$3,000
Family Plan
$3,000
$6,000
Total Maximum Out-of-Pocket (Includes deductible,
coinsurance, copays, prescription drug cost sharing and
other qualified medical expenses, Network only)(2) Once
met, the plan pays 100% of covered services for the rest of
the benefit period.
$3,000
Not Applicable
Employee Only Plan
$6,000
Not Applicable
Family Plan
Office/Clinic/Urgent Care Visits
Retail Clinic Visits & Virtual Visits
100% after $25 copay after
70% after deductible
deductible
Primary Care Provider Office Visits & Virtual Visits
100% after $25 copay after
70% after deductible
deductible
Specialist Office & Virtual Visits
100% after $25 copay after
70% after deductible
deductible
Virtual Visit Originating Site Fee
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Urgent Care Center Visits
100% after $50 copay after
70% after deductible
deductible
Telemedicine Services(3)
100% after $20 copay after deductible
Preventive Care(4)
Routine Adult physical exams
100% (deductible does not
70% after deductible
apply)
Adult immunizations
100% (deductible does not
70% after deductible
apply)
Colorectal cancer screening
100% (deductible does not
70% after deductible
apply)
Routine gynecological exams, including a Pap Test
100% (deductible does not
70% (deductible does not
apply)
apply)
Mammograms, annual routine
100% (deductible does not
70% after deductible
apply)
Mammograms, medically necessary
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Diagnostic services and procedures
100% (deductible does not
70% after deductible
apply)
Routine Pediatric physical exams
100% (deductible does not
70% after deductible
apply)
Pediatric immunizations
100% (deductible does not
70% (deductible does not
apply)
apply)
Diagnostic services and procedures
100% (deductible does not
70% after deductible
apply)

34
Hospital and Medical/Surgical Expenses (including maternity)
Hospital Inpatient
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Hospital Outpatient
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
Maternity (non-preventive facility & professional services)
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
including dependent daughter
Medical Care (including inpatient visits and
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
consultations)/Surgical Expenses
Emergency Services
Emergency Room Services
100% after $100 copay after network deductible (copay
waived if admitted)
Ambulance
100% after network deductible
Ambulance – Non-Emergency
100% after deductible
70% after

Physical Medicine

Respiratory Therapy
Speech & Occupational Therapy

deductible
Therapy and Rehabilitation Services
100% after $25 copay after
70% after deductible
deductible
Limit: 30 visits/benefit period
100% after deductible
70% after deductible
100% after $25 copay after
70% after deductible
deductible
Limit: 30 visits per therapy/benefit period

Benefit
Spinal Manipulations

Network

Out-of-Network

100% after $25 copay after
deductible

70% after deductible

Limit: 20 visits/benefit period
Other Therapy Services (Cardiac Rehab, Infusion Therapy,
Chemotherapy, Radiation Therapy and Dialysis)

100% after deductible

70% after deductible

Mental Health/Substance Abuse
Inpatient

100% after deductible

70% after deductible

Inpatient Detoxification/Rehabilitation

100% after deductible

70% after deductible

100% after $25 copay after
deductible

70% after deductible

Outpatient (includes virtual behavioral health visits)

Other Services
Allergy Extracts and Injections

100% after deductible

70% after deductible

Autism Spectrum Disorder including Applied Behavior
Analysis(5)

100% after deductible

70% after deductible

Assisted Fertilization Procedures

Not Covered

Not Covered

Dental Services Related to Accidental Injury

Not Covered

Not Covered

Diagnostic Services
Advanced Imaging (MRI, CAT, PET scan, etc.)

100% after deductible

70% after deductible

Basic Diagnostic Services (standard imaging, diagnostic
medical, lab/pathology, allergy testing)

100% after deductible

70% after deductible

Durable Medical Equipment, Orthotics and Prosthetics

100% after deductible

70% after deductible

Home Health Care

100% after deductible

70% after deductible

Limit: 90 visits/benefit period
Hospice

100% after deductible

70% after deductible

Infertility Counseling, Testing and Treatment(6)

100% after deductible

70% after deductible

35
Private Duty Nursing

100% after deductible

Skilled Nursing Facility Care

100% after deductible

70% after deductible

Limit: 240 hours/benefit period
70% after deductible

Limit: 100 days/benefit period
Transplant Services

100% after deductible

Precertification Requirements(7)

70% after deductible
YES

Prescription Drugs
Prescription Drug Deductible
Individual
Family
Prescription Drug Program(8)
Soft Mandatory Generic
Defined by the National Pharmacy Network - Not Physician
Network. Prescriptions filled at a non-network pharmacy
are not covered.
Your plan uses the Comprehensive Formulary with an
Incentive Benefit Design.
Specialty Pharmacy (30 day supply)

Integrated with medical deductible
Integrated with medical deductible
Retail Drugs (31/60/90-day Supply)
90% Generic Plan Payment after plan deductible
75% Brand Formulary Plan Payment after plan deductible
70% Brand Non-Formulary Plan Payment after plan
deductible Maintenance Drugs through Mail Order (90-day
Supply)
$10 Generic Copay after plan deductible
$30 Brand Formulary Copay after plan deductible
$50 Brand Non-Formulary Copay after plan deductible
$3 Generic Copay after plan deductible
$10 Brand Formulary Copay after plan deductible
$16 Brand Non-Formulary Copay after plan deductible

(1) Your group's benefit period is based on a Calendar Year.
(2) The Network Total Maximum Out-of-Pocket (TMOOP) is mandated by the federal government. TMOOP must include
deductible, coinsurance, copays, prescription drug cost share and any qualified medical expense. Effective with plan
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, the TMOOP cannot exceed $6,550 for an individual and $13,100 for two
or more persons. In addition, new regulations for 2016 do not allow a member within a family plan to exceed $6,850
in cost sharing.
(3) Services are provided for acute care for minor illnesses. Services must be performed by a Highmark approved
telemedicine provider. Virtual Behavioral health visits provided by a Highmark approved telemedicine provider are
eligible under Outpatient Mental Health/Substance Abuse benefit.
(4) Services are limited to those listed on the Highmark Preventive Schedule (Women's Health Preventive Schedule may
apply). Gender, age and frequency limits may apply.
(5) Coverage for eligible members to age 21. Services will be paid according to the benefit category (e.g. speech
therapy). Treatment for autism spectrum disorders does not reduce visit/day limits.
(6) Treatment includes coverage for the correction of a physical or medical problem associated with infertility. Infertility
drug therapy may or may not be covered depending on your group’s prescription drug program.
(7) Highmark Medical Management & Policy (MM&P) must be contacted prior to a planned inpatient admission or within
48 hours of an emergency or maternity-related inpatient admission. Be sure to verify that your provider is contacting
MM&P for precertification. If this does not occur and it is later determined that all or part of the inpatient stay was not
medically necessary or appropriate, you will be responsible for payment of any costs not covered.
(8) At a retail or mail order pharmacy, if your deductible has not been met, you pay the entire cost for your prescription
drug at the discounted rate Highmark has negotiated. The amount you paid for your prescription will be applied to
your deductible. If your deductible has been met, you will only pay any member responsibility based on the benefit
level indicated above. You will pay this amount at the pharmacy when you have your prescription filled.

36

APPENDIX D
DENTAL INSURANCE
A. The District will provide a dental benefit insurance policy to employees in a benefits-eligible
position. Individual coverage is provided at no cost. Dependent coverage is available at an
employee cost of thirty-four percent (34%) of the premium costs paid by the District.
1. Preventive Services
The plan will pay 100% for the following:
● oral examinations
● cleaning of teeth (twice per year)
● preventive x-rays
● fluoride treatment
There is no annual deductible for these services and the cost of these services is not
applied to the annual $1,000 maximum coverage limit.
2. General Services
The plan will pay 100% of the usual/customary charge for the following:
● treatment-related x-rays
● fillings
● anesthetics
● antibiotics
● extractions
● oral surgery
● endodontics
● periodontics
● space maintainers
● emergency office visits
● repair of prosthetic appliances
● major restorative (employees only)
The plan will pay 75% of the usual/customary charge for the following:
● major restorative services provided to dependents
An annual deductible of $50 for in-network services/$100 for out-of-network services is
applied against the incurred covered general services expenses, as outlined above, for
each employee/dependent.
The annual maximum payment for general services benefits is $1,000.00 per
employee/dependent.
