City of Naperville

400 S. Eagle Street
Naperville, IL 60540

Legislation Text
File #: 22-0694, Version: 1

CITY COUNCIL AGENDA ITEM
ACTION REQUESTED:
Adopt the resolution authorizing execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the City of
Naperville and IBEW Local 9 representing the Naperville Electric Utility employees
DEPARTMENT:

Legal Department

SUBMITTED BY:

Dwight Pancottine, Labor and Employment Attorney

BOARD/COMMISSION REVIEW:
N/A
BACKGROUND:
The Naperville Electric Utility has 46 employees in a variety of positions, which includes 28 in the
positions of Lineman and Substation Lineman. They are represented for purposes of collective
bargaining by IBEW Local 9 (“Union”). The collective bargaining agreement (“CBA”) between the City
and Union expired on December 31, 2020. The City and Union have reached agreement on a
successor CBA consistent with City Council authority, and that agreement has been ratified by the
bargaining unit employees. It is attached to the Resolution document as Exhibit A.
DISCUSSION:
City Council authorized staff to negotiate a five-year agreement with a total wage increase of up to
12.5% over that period. The City Council also authorized staff to bargain the removal of the Vested
Overtime provision, an antiquated guaranteed overtime clause that has been in the CBA since the
1980’s. The attached CBA contains the following economic terms:
Term: The CBA has a five-year term retroactive to January 1, 2021 and terminates on December 31,
2025.
Wage Rate Increases: The Agreement includes a 12.5% wage increase over the five-year term. Staff
bargained the Vested Overtime provision out of the CBA and the cost of doing so was consistent with
City Council authority and is reflected in the wage increases that take effect in 2022.
FISCAL IMPACT:
The total cost of the five -year 12.5% wage increase is $682,035. There is no fiscal impact
attributable to the wage increases related to the Vested Overtime elimination as they were offset by
cost savings bargained into the CBA and savings implemented by Electric Utility management as
authorized by Council.

City of Naperville

Page 1 of 1

Printed on 6/23/2022
powered by Legistar™
