CONTRACT

OLEAN CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT

and

OLEAN
EDUCATIONAL SUPPORT PERSONNEL
ASSOCIATION

Begins: July 1, 2021
Ends: June 30, 2025

CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE 1.

GENERAL MATTERS
Section 1.1
Concerning this Agreement
Section 1.2
Recognition of OESPA Rights
Section 1.3
Recognition of District Rights
Section 1.4
Grievances

1
1
3
4
5

ARTICLE 2.

POSITIONS AND SCHEDULES
Section 2.1
Positions
Section 2.2
Schedules
Section 2.3
Seniority Layoff and Recalls
Section 2.4
Personnel File

6
6
7
10
13

ARTICLE 3.

WAGES
Section 3.1
Section 3.2

14
14
15

Rules for Hourly Rate
Other Pay Rules

ARTICLE 4.

VACATIONS, HOLIDAYS AND LEAVES
Section 4.1
Vacations and Holidays
Section 4.2
Leaves

18
18
20

ARTICLE 5.

BENEFITS
Section 5.1
Section 5.2

22
22
25

ARTICLE 6.

Pension and Insurance
Other Benefits

WORKING CONDITIONS
Section 6.1
Working Conditions

28
28

APPENDIX A

29

APPENDIX B GRIEVANCE FORM

32

APPENDIX C LETTER TO AAA

33

1

NOTICE
IT IS AGREED BY AND BETWEEN THE PARTIES THAT ANY PROVISION OF THIS
AGREEMENT REQUIRING LEGISLATIVE ACTION TO PERMIT ITS IMPLEMENTATION BY
AMENDMENT OF LAW OR BY PROVIDING THE ADDITIONAL FUNDS THEREFOR SHALL
NOT BECOME EFFECTIVE UNTIL THE APPROPRIATE LEGISLATIVE BODY HAS GIVEN
APPROVAL.
THIS AGREEMENT is entered into by and between the CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT, CITY OF
OLEAN, NEW YORK (hereinafter called “District”) and the OLEAN EDUCATIONAL SUPPORT
PERSONNEL ASSOCIATION (hereinafter called (“OESPA”):

ARTICLE 1. GENERAL MATTERS
Section 1.1 Concerning this Agreement
1.11

The following definitions apply in interpreting this Agreement:
(a)

“District” means the City School District, City of Olean, New York.

(b)

“Board” means the Board of Education of the District.

(c)

“Superintendent” means the person appointed to that position on an acting or regular
basis or his/her designee.

(d)

“OESPA” means the Olean Educational Support Personnel Association.

(e)

“Agreement” means this Agreement, all appendices referred to in this Agreement, and
all amendments to this Agreement.

(f)

“Party” means the District or the OESPA.

(g)

“Parties” means the District and the OESPA.

(h)

“Negotiating Unit” refers to all employees of the District in the classified (except the
exempt) classifications of the civil service, except:
(1)

all employees in the negotiating unit currently represented by the Olean Teachers
Association;

(2)

all certified personnel and all classified civil service supervisory, administrative,
and managerial employees; and

(3)

all employees in confidential positions (by whatever civil service title known)
including:
(i)

secretary to the Superintendent,

2
(ii)

secretary to the Assistant Superintendent,

(iii)

secretary to the Business Administrator,

(iv)

treasurer, and

(v)

employees in the office of the Board, including the District Clerk

(vi)

Secretary to the Director of Human Resources

(i)

“Employee” means a person holding a position in the negotiating unit on other than a
casual or temporary basis (i.e., an employee hired for a period of six (6) months or
less).

(j)

“Fiscal Year” means the period from July 1st to the first succeeding June 30th, both dates
inclusive.

(k)

“Fund” means the source from which specific employees are paid (e.g., “school lunch
fund,” “general fund,” etc.).

(l)

“Job Title” means those positions listed in Appendix A of this Agreement.

(m)

“Classification” means the Civil Service classifications (e.g., “competitive,” “noncompetitive,” “labor,” etc.).

1.12

The term of this Agreement begins at 12:01 a.m. on July 1, 2021 and continues until midnight
on June 30, 2025, unless a particular provision of this Agreement specifies a different effective
or termination date in which case such different date shall prevail. During its term, this
Agreement cannot be changed by waiver, implication, or by any other means except a written
dated amendment signed by the representatives of the parties.

1.13

Except when this Agreement says otherwise, the following rules apply in interpreting this
Agreement:
(a)

A word used in the masculine gender applies also in the feminine.

(b)

A word used in the singular number applies also in the plural.

(c)

Language in this Agreement is construed as strictly against one (1) party as against any
other. It is immaterial which party suggested it.

(d)

Each lettered Appendix referred to in this Agreement (for example, “Appendix A”) is a
part of this Agreement and is incorporated in this Agreement by reference.

(e)

No provision of this Agreement shall be interpreted so as to be in conflict with any
provision of law.

(f)

Unless expressly set forth in this Agreement, neither party is obliged to continue any
past practice.

3
1.14

Every provision of this Agreement is severable from every other provision, except as this
Agreement says otherwise. If this Agreement requires a party or a person to do anything that is
prohibited by law, the obligation is invalid, but all other obligations imposed by this Agreement
remain valid. In the event that any provision of this Agreement is declared by a court of last
resort to be unlawful, the parties shall meet as soon as practicable to negotiate necessary
amendments to this Agreement to the extent that they may lawfully do so.

1.15

This Agreement constitutes the entire and complete record of the binding commitments between
the parties. From and after the date this Agreement is signed, no other document shall constitute
a binding commitment between the parties unless it is (i) dated on or after that signing date, and
(ii) signed by a duly authorized representative of each party.

1.16

The District will furnish one (1) copy of this Agreement to each current employee and to each
new hire.

1.17

During the term of this Agreement, neither party shall have the right to insist upon negotiating
any mailer whether or not referred to in this Agreement, except that the OESPA shall continue
to have the right to negotiate respecting the impact upon the terms and conditions of
employment of employees in the Negotiating Unit of a decision made by the District provided
that the subject matter of that decision is itself a mandatory subject of negotiations. Nothing in
this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit negotiations with respect to a successor to this
Agreement.

1.18

If either party desires to negotiate a successor to this Agreement, it shall notify the other party in
writing not earlier than March 1st nor later than April 1st of the last fiscal year of this Agreement.
Collective negotiations with respect to the successor agreement shall begin not later than
May 1st of the last fiscal year of this Agreement. By mutual consent the parties may waive any
or all of the foregoing time limits.

1.19

If notice is given pursuant to paragraph 1.18 of this Agreement, parties shall simultaneously
exchange proposals on a mutually convenient date. Such proposals shall be in the form of
specific additions to, deletions from, or replacements of the language of this Agreement.

Section 1.2 Recognition of OESPA Rights
1.21

The District recognizes the OESPA as the sole and exclusive representative of all employees in
the Negotiating Unit for the purpose of collective negotiations and the handling of grievances.
This recognition shall continue for the maximum period permitted by law.

1.22

The OESPA shall have the sole and exclusive right with respect to other organizations to
represent all employees in the heretofore defined Negotiating Unit in any and all proceedings
under the Public Employees Fair Employment Act; to designate its own representatives and to
appear before any appropriate official of the District to effect such representation; to direct, to
manage and to govern its own affairs to determine those matters which the membership wishes
to negotiate and to pursue all such objectives free from any interference, restraint, coercion or
discrimination by the District or any of its agents.

1.23

Within thirty (30) days after the signing of this Agreement and thereafter by February 1st of

4
each year, the District will furnish the OESPA upon its written request a list of the names, hire
dates (the first day of work), position start dates (first day in new position), and job titles of all
employees covered by this Agreement.
1.24

The District will make one (1) deduction each pay period for Association (Olean Educational
Support Personnel Association, NYSUT and its affiliates NEA and AFT) dues from the wages
of those employees who have filed with the Board office signed appropriate deduction
authorization forms therefore. These deductions shall be continuous until such time as the
employee cancels them in writing. Pursuant to Section 208(3)(b) of the New York State Civil
Service Law, the Association is entitled to have deducted from the wage or salary of bargaining
unit employees who are not members of the Association, the amount equivalent to the dues
levied by the Association as an agency shop fee. Not later than July 1st of each fiscal year, the
Association shall certify in writing to the District office the amount of any change in dues or
agency fee for that fiscal year. All such deductions for each month are to be remitted to the
treasurer by the fifteenth (15th) day of the following month. The Association will maintain a
fully legal refund procedure for any employee demanding the return of any part of an agency
shop fee deducted which represents the employee’s pro-rata share of expenditures by the
Association in aid of activities or causes of a political or ideological nature only incidentally
related to terms and conditions of employment. Nothing herein shall be deemed to require an
employee to become or remain a member of the Association.

1.25

The Association shall hold the District harmless against any and all suits claims, demands and
liabilities arising out of any action taken by the District in connection with this Section 1.2.

1.26

The District will provide bulletin board space in each building for the exclusive use of the
OESPA for its announcements of meetings, election notices and other OESPA business. Such
space will also be used as the official space for job postings; however, each Building Principal
shall be free to post job vacancies on other bulletin boards as well.

1.27

A Labor Management Committee is hereby established to consist of representatives chosen by
each party. The Committee shall meet on reasonable notice from the OESPA President to the
Superintendent or from the Superintendent to the OESPA President.

Section 1.3 Recognition of District Rights
1.31

The District reserves and retains, solely and exclusively, all of its legal and inherent rights as
such rights existed prior to the execution of this Agreement. The sole and exclusive rights of
the District which are not abridged by this Agreement shall include, but are not limited to, its
rights: to establish or continue its policies, practices, rules, regulations, and procedures and,
from time to time, to change or abolish such policies, practices, rules, regulations, and
procedures; to discontinue operations or services or their performance by employees of the
District; to determine the number and kind of employees required; to assign work to employees
in accordance with the needs and requirements determined by the District to judge the
efficiency and competency of the employee’s performance of work; to establish and change
work schedules and assignments, to transfer, promote and demote employees; to lay off,
terminate or otherwise relieve employees from duty because of lack of work or other reasons; to
establish and enforce rules for the maintenance of discipline; and to reprimand, suspend and
discharge employees and to take such other measures as the District may determine to be
necessary for the orderly accomplishment of its purposes.

1.32

Nothing in this Agreement shall be allowed to interfere with the District’s obligation to comply
with the Americans with Disabilities Act and the District is expressly permitted to take all

5
actions necessary for such compliance.

Section 1.4 Grievances
1.41

A grievance is described as any dispute arising between the District and employee or the
OESPA and the District over the violation of this Agreement.

1.42

If a non-competitive or labor class employee who has served the District satisfactorily for two
(2) or more years is terminated by the District for any reason other than the abolishment of
positions or reduction of staff he/she shall be afforded the same rights as a competitive class
employee is afforded under Sections 75 and 76 of the Civil Service Law as amended under like
circumstances.

1.43

If an employee has a grievance, he/she must discuss it with his/her immediate supervisor not
later than the fifth working day after the day on which the employee became aware or should
have become aware of the facts out of which the grievance arises. The grievant is entitled to
have an OESPA representative present during this discussion if the grievant so requests. Any
grievance which is not brought to the supervisor’s attention by the grievant within the time
period stated in the first sentence of this paragraph shall be barred.

1.44

If the grievant is not satisfied with the supervisor’s answer to the grievance, he/she must appeal
it to the Superintendent not later than the eighth working day after the discussion with the
supervisor; otherwise, the grievance will be deemed to have been satisfied by the supervisor’s
answer. The grievant shall appeal the grievance by delivering a written grievance in the form
shown in Appendix B of this Agreement to the Superintendent’s office. Not later than the
eighth working day after delivery of the written grievance to his/her office, the Superintendent
or his/her designee shall meet with the grievant and the OESPA representative to discuss the
grievance. Other persons who have knowledge of the facts may also attend the meeting. Not
later than the eighth working day after that meeting, the Superintendent shall deliver to the
grievant (with a copy to the OESPA representative) a written answer to the grievance.

1.45

If the grievant is not satisfied with the Superintendent’s answer to the grievance he/she must
appeal it to the Board not later than the fifth working day after the delivery of the written
answer; otherwise the grievance will be deemed to have been satisfied by the Superintendent’s
answer. The grievant shall appeal the grievance by giving written notice thereof to the Clerk of
the Board. Not later than the tenth working day after the next regular meeting of the Board
following receipt of the notice by the Clerk, the Board or a committee thereof shall meet with
the grievant, the Superintendent and the OESPA representative to discuss the grievance. Other
persons who have knowledge of the facts may also attend the meeting. Not later than the fifth
working day after that meeting, the Board shall deliver to the grievant (with a copy to the
OESPA representative) a written answer to the grievance.

1.46

If the grievant and the OESPA are not satisfied with the Board’s answer to the grievance, the
OESPA may appeal it to arbitration not later than the fifteenth working day after delivery of the
written answer; otherwise the grievance will be deemed to have been satisfied by the Board’s
answer. The OESPA shall appeal the grievance by mailing a letter to the American Arbitration
Association (“AAA”) (with a copy to the Superintendent) which shall specifically identify the
grievance by the name of the grievant and the date thereof as shown on the written grievance
and which shall request the AAA to send to each party a list of twenty (20) names of arbitrators.
The letter shall be in the form shown on Appendix C. Within ten (10) working days of receipt
of such list, each party shall return its copy of the list to the AAA with the names unacceptable
to it crossed off and all others, if any, numbered in order of the party’s preference. The AAA

6
shall then name as arbitrator the person most preferred by the parties as indicated on the list, but
if there is no mutual choice then the AAA shall send each party a second list of twenty (20)
arbitrators and the foregoing procedure will be repeated. If there is no mutual choice from the
second list, the AAA shall name another person to serve as arbitrator.
1.47

The arbitration shall be held in accordance with the Voluntary Labor Arbitration Rules of the
AAA so far as they are consistent with this Agreement. The fees and expenses of the arbitrator
shall be shared equally by the parties, but all other expenses of the arbitration shall be borne
solely by the party which incurred them. The arbitrator shall have power to interpret this
Agreement as it applies to a grievance properly submitted to him/her, to decide whether or not
the Agreement has been violated as alleged in the grievance and if so to decide what the
appropriate remedy shall be. The arbitrator shall have no power to add to, subtract from, or
otherwise modify this Agreement or to substitute his/her judgment for the judgment of the
District in matters which this Agreement leaves to the judgment of the District. The decision of
the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties and the employees.

1.48

The purpose of the grievance procedure set forth in this Section 1.4 is to provide an exclusive
method for resolving grievances. Therefore, before submitting a grievance to arbitration an
employee shall consider whether his/her complaint about the District’s act could be resolved by
commencing a proceeding before a judicial, administrative or legislative body or person. If it
could be so resolved, the employee should decide between submitting a grievance to arbitration
or commencing such a proceeding because it is agreed that:

1.49

(1)

submitting a grievance to arbitration bars the employee and the Association from then or
later commencing any judicial, administrative or legislative proceeding involving the
same act of the District as is the subject of the grievance; and

(2)

commencing a judicial administrative or legislative proceeding bars the employee and
the Association from then or later submitting a grievance to arbitration involving the
same act of the District as is the subject of the proceeding.

The time limits set forth in this Section 1.4 are essential and must be strictly adhered to as it is
the desire of the parties to resolve grievances as promptly as practicable. However, any such
time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the parties evidenced in writing dated and
signed by authorized representatives of both parties. Neither party shall unreasonably withhold
his/her consent to the other party’s request for such an extension.

ARTICLE 2. POSITIONS AND SCHEDULES
Section 2.1 Positions
2.11

The District will post announcements of new job titles and permanent openings in existing job
titles which the District has decided to fill, for a period of five (5) work days and notification of
the opening to all unit members (who have provided the District the necessary phone number
and information) via a District generated robo call prior to the first posting. It is the unit
member’s responsibility to notify the Human Resources Office if his/her contact information
changes. Such posting shall include the last date on which applications will be accepted, hourly
rate, hours to be worked, including the length of the lunchtime, location of the vacancy, job title
and Civil Service classification (competitive, non-competitive or labor), and the expected date
that the job will begin. During that five (5) working day period, any employee who desires to

7
be transferred or promoted to the announced job shall apply therefore to the Director of Human
Resources on forms provided by the District. In filling announced jobs, the District will give
fair consideration to both employee and non-employee applicants and, where in the judgment of
the District a non-employee applicant and an employee applicant are substantially equal, will
give preference to the employee applicant. In deciding among several employees who have
applied for the same job and who the District determines are qualified therefore and relatively
equal in skill, ability, efficiency and physical capabilities, the District shall give preference to
more senior employees. All employees who bid on a vacancy will be notified of their
acceptance or rejection when a Board decision is made.
2.12

The District may temporarily transfer (i.e., place in a different title) an employee, but if the
transfer is to exceed two (2) months it must be approved by the Superintendent with no loss of
hours or pay. If the employee desires to return to his/her old position at the end of two (2)
months, he/she may do so. Thereafter, the position may be filled by posting, substitute help, or
hiring of a new employee. This paragraph shall not apply to the reassignment (i.e., changing
the location of work between buildings) of an employee.

2.13

If the District does not hire a substitute for an absent cleaner, building maintainer, maintenance
person, clerical or cafeteria person, employees on duty assigned to cover the tasks which would
otherwise have been performed by the absentee shall have their work assignment revised by
their supervisor.

2.14

The District shall notify the OESPA of each new employee hired to fill a unit position.

Section 2.2 Schedules
2.21

The District has the right to schedule employees as needed. However, the normal schedule of
hours for full-time employees is as follows:
Food Service Helpers, Senior Food Service Helpers, Cooks, Cook Manager, and Nurses: who
are employed by the District, may be required to report to work up to three (3) working days
prior to the first day of school and in exchange will be given equal time off during scheduled
conference days. The time off, to be determined by the Superintendent or his/her designee will
be in consult with the Association President and guided by the Board approved District school
calendar. Time will be exchanged in either full or half days.
Building Maintainer/Cleaner
Day Shift: 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. or 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. (but the latter shall not apply to
employees employed as custodians as of May 25, 1976) including one (1) hour unpaid lunch;
except 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. with one-half (1/2) hour unpaid lunch from July 1st to August 31st
inclusive and during Winter and Spring recesses.
Night Shift: 3:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. including one-half (1/2) hour paid lunch, except day shift
hours when school is not in session including one-day holidays if the Supervisor so directs.
a.

When the District requires night work during the summer, winter, and/or spring breaks
the least senior cleaner receiving a nightshift differential will be required to work as
needed by the District. Unless the District’s needs require otherwise, the working hours
of this individual will be 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. with a half hour (1/2) unpaid lunch.

8
b.

From Monday to Friday, the District agrees not to shift night workers (who are working
days during recesses or holidays) back to nights to cover for outside groups who pay or
reimburse the District for use of a building and who are carrying on non-instructional
activities.

c.

When the District requires night work at other than the High School during holidays and
recesses, the least senior, non-probationary cleaner who regularly works during the
school year in the building involved shall be assigned the night work in question. At the
High School, all night work during holidays and recesses will be assigned to the least
senior, non-probationary cleaner receiving a nightshift differential who regularly works
during the school year at the High School.

Cleaner (part time): Hours for part-time cleaners may be flexible hours (may vary) after the
traditional school hours and/or “day shift” hours on Saturday’s (day shift is defined as between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.). The hours may be day shift hours Monday – Friday when
school is not in session, including one-day holidays, if the Supervisor so directs. The hours will
be set upon at least five (5) days notice in any given week.
Senior Building Maintenance: 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. including one hour (1) unpaid lunch;
except 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. with one-half (1/2) hour unpaid lunch from July 1st to August 31st
inclusive and during Winter and Spring recesses.
Records, Receiving & Inventory Clerk: 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. including one half (1/2) hour
unpaid lunch; except 7 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. with one half (1/2) hour unpaid lunch from July 1st to
August 31st and during Winter and Spring recesses. If the Records, Receiving & Inventory
Clerk and the supervisor agree, these start and end times may be adjusted.
All Others: 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. including one hour (1) unpaid lunch; except 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m. with one-half hour (1/2) unpaid lunch from July 1st to August 31st inclusive and
during Winter and Spring recesses.
Clerical: 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. (except Keyboard Specialist assigned to the High School
Guidance Office 7:45 a.m. to 3:45 p.m.) including one-half hour (1/2) unpaid lunch; 7:30 a.m.
to 3:30 p.m. from July 1st to August 31st; provided that, on an occasional basis, a unit member’s
immediate supervisor may direct the member to work his/her regular school year schedule
during this period, notwithstanding Section 2.28 of this Agreement, or a unit member may
volunteer to work his/her regular work schedule during this period with the approval of his/her
immediate supervisor.
Nurses: School Nurses, Licensed Practical Nurses and the Senior Nurse shall remain in their
assigned buildings and be available for duty throughout their lunchtimes.
2.22

No full time employee hired prior to July 1, 1972 shall be required to work other than a normal
workweek of five (5) consecutive eight (8) hour days from Monday to Friday inclusive without
prior consultation with the OESPA.

2.23

Shifts will consist of consecutive hours. Split shifts will be used only in emergencies.

2.24

An employee shall be given at least forty-eight (48) hours notice of overtime work whenever
practicable.

9

2.25

Nothing in this section is intended as a guarantee of work to any employee.

2.26

All overtime allocations will be made on a daily basis in accordance with the following rules:
A.

Preference for scheduled work, which is required by the District, will be given first to
the employee who is primarily responsible for the area where the work is to be done.

B.

If the employee with preference for the overtime declines the work, then all of the
employees in the same job titles in the building where the work is to be done shall be put
on an alphabetical roster with two (2) exceptions; (1). When High School auditorium
overtime is declined by the person primarily responsible, the Director of Facilities will
assign the overtime from a list of up to three (3) High School building maintainer or
cleaner employees who will be offered training in the operation of the auditorium
lighting and sound system. The process outlined in paragraph 2.26 C will be used to
assist the Director of Facilities in overtime assignments from the above described list; or
(2) When High School gymnasium overtime is declined by the person primarily
responsible, then the overtime shall go to the roster. This roster shall be used for each
separate shift of overtime in chronological order of the event. If the total overtime
requirement exceeds eight (8) hours, the overtime will be split into equal shorter shifts
each not to exceed eight (8) hours (e.g. if the District needs twenty-one (21) hours of
overtime, split into three (3) seven-hour shifts). For the purposes of this paragraph 2.26
only, “all of the employees in the same job titles in the building where the work is to be
done” refers to all Cleaners, building maintainers, Supervising Building Maintainers
who are regularly assigned to the building where the overtime is to be performed.

C.

Employees shall rotate through the roster in the following manner: The first person on
the roster is offered the overtime. Whether that person declines or works the shift, that
employee goes to the bottom of the roster unless that employee is a night shift employee
who therefore cannot work evening overtime during the week. If such a night shift
employee comes to the top of the roster from Monday to Friday, the employee stays at
the top of the roster until the employee works or declines overtime which falls outside
the employee’s normal work hours.

D.

If no employee, or not enough employees, on the roster volunteers in the job titles
affected, the District has the right to assign the employee who is primarily responsible
for the area where the overtime work is to be performed, but if that employee is not
available, then to the other employees in the order specified in subparagraphs “B” and
“C” above.

E.

Maintenance overtime will be given exclusively to maintenance employees.

F.

Preference for scheduled overtime work in a school cafeteria required by the District will
be given first to the Cook Managers, Cooks, Senior Food Service Helpers and Food
Service Helpers in the affected school who are regularly assigned to the area where the
work is to be done on the basis of an alphabetical roster for that school. If enough
employees do not volunteer for the overtime work, then the overtime work shall be
offered on the basis of an alphabetical roster composed of all Cook Managers, Cooks,
Senior Food Service Helpers and Food Service Helpers from other schools in the
District. Food Service Helpers will be allowed overtime under this subparagraph only
when a Cook Manager, Cook, or Senior Food Service helper will be present at the time
and the place of the required overtime work. If no employee, or not enough employees,

10
volunteer for the overtime work the District has the right to assign employees to perform
the work.
G.

Scheduled overtime requiring use of the District’s Delivery Van for functions primarily
originating in the High School shall be given first to the Records, Receiving & Inventory
Clerk, then to the High School roster. This overtime will be offered only to those drivers
who meet the District’s requirements to operate this vehicle.

H.

During football season, scheduled overtime requiring use of the District’s Delivery Van
for functions relating to the football season shall be given first to the Records, Receiving
& Inventory Clerk, then to the Cleaner in charge of the Athletic Complex. If these
regular drivers decline the overtime, the overtime will be offered to employees on the
High School roster. This overtime will be offered only to those drivers who meet the
District’s requirements to operate this vehicle.

I.

Scheduled overtime requiring use of the District’s Delivery Van for functions originating
in a school other than the High School (including, but not limited to, District-wide
events such as the Education Fair) will be offered to employees in the High School on
the roster. This overtime will be offered only to those drivers who meet the District’s
requirements to operate this vehicle.

J.

Subparagraphs “G”, “H” and “I” above relate solely to overtime work scheduled or
employees in this negotiating unit which involves the use of the District’s Delivery Van
and are not intended to limit the District’s use of that vehicle by other employees of the
District.

2.27

Required overtime work for clerical job titles shall be performed by employees in the office
affected.

2.28

An employee shall not be required to start late or go home early to avoid payment of overtime,
but this shall not prevent rescheduling of employees for purposes of vacation or other relief.

2.29

If an employee has left work and is thereafter recalled to work after the end of his/her normal
work day and before the beginning of his/her next normal work day, he/she shall be guaranteed
a minimum of two (2) hours (three (3) hours on holidays specified in paragraph 4.16 of this
Agreement) pay and shall be paid for such work at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times
his/her regular straight time rate of pay. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to an
employee who is called in to begin work earlier than his/her normal starting time. The
provisions of this paragraph do not apply to a building maintainer who is recalled solely
because he/she has failed to perform his/her building security duties properly.

Section 2.3 Seniority, Layoff and Recalls
2.31

Definitions.
Regular Full-Time Employee - an employee working a ten (10), eleven (11) or twelve (12)
month schedule of regular hours per day and regular days per week totaling at least thirty (30)
hours per week.

11
Regular Part-Time Employee - an employee working a ten (10), eleven (11) or twelve (12)
month schedule of regular hours per day and regular days per week totaling less than thirty (30)
hours per week.
Substitute Employee - a person employed to replace another employee on a temporary basis.
Active Payroll - the time when an employee is being paid for working or is on paid leave time
pursuant to this Agreement, as distinct from the time when an employee is absent or is on
unpaid leave or is on lay off.
2.31.1 Full-Time Employees - Except as noted in paragraphs 2.31.2 and 2.31.5, the provisions of
paragraphs 2.31.1 - 2.31.8 of this Section 2.3 apply only to regular, full-time employees in
negotiating unit positions which are in the non-competitive class or the labor class of the Civil
Service. Competitive positions in the negotiating unit are covered by the Civil Service Law for
purposes of seniority, lay off and recall.
2.31.2 A regular full-time or part-time employee acquires and accrues seniority only within a particular
job title. If he/she moves voluntarily from one (1) job title to another, he/she ceases accruing
seniority in his/her former job title and begins to accrue seniority in his/her new job title. Where
pursuant to Civil Service Rule Changes a unit member’s title is changed, such change shall not
cause an employee to be adversely impacted including but not limited to loss of seniority in the
job title which was held immediately preceding the District enacted title change.
2.31.3 Probationary employees do not have seniority. However, when a probationary employee
completes his/her probationary period, he/she will then acquire seniority which will date back to
the date he/she began work as a probationary employee or, if he/she had prior service with the
District as a full-time substitute employee in the same job title and that service immediately
preceded his/her probationary appointment without a break in service, then his/her seniority will
date back to the date he/she began that substitute. With respect to the foregoing sentence, in the
case of a cleaner or a building maintainer, prior uninterrupted service with the District as a fulltime substitute employee in the cleaner job title immediately preceding his/her probationary
appointment as a cleaner, or as a building maintainer if he/she performed custodial duties as a
cleaner, shall qualify. The probationary period shall not exceed 26 weeks.
2.31.4 Seniority is the length of an employee’s service in a particular job title since his/her last date of
hire by the District. Discontinuous periods of service in a particular job title may be counted as
seniority in that job title provided all such periods occurred since the employee’s last date of
hire by the District. “Last date of hire” means the date when the employee first began work for
the District as a regular full-time employee in any position covered by this Section 2.3 or, if
he/she previously worked for the District but was terminated, then it is the date he/she began
work following the last period of non-employee status.
2.31.5 A regular full-time or part-time employee shall lose seniority and shall be terminated from
employment automatically when any one (1) or more of the following occurs:
(1)

He/she has been on layoff for a period of more than two (2) years, duration.

(2)

He/she has been discharged by the District.

(3)

He/she resigns.

12
(4)

He/she retires.

(5)

He/she has been recalled pursuant to paragraph 2.31.8 of this Agreement but he/she
refused the recall.

(6)

He/she has been recalled pursuant to paragraph 2.31.8 of this Agreement but he/she fails
to return to work within a period of five (5) consecutive work days following the date
he/she is notified of recall unless he/she was unable to return because of illness or injury,
he/she reports that fact to the District by that fifth workday and submits a medical
certificate verifying his/her illness or injury if the District so requests.

(7)

He/she fails to return to work on the first workday following the expiration of a leave of
absence unless he/she was unable to return because of illness or injury and applies for an
extension of the leave before that first workday.

2.31.6 When an employee is on unpaid leave of absence or on layoff he/she shall not accrue seniority,
but his/her accumulated seniority shall be restored to him/her when and if he/she returns to
work unless he/she was on layoff or leave of absence for a period of more than two (2) years.
2.31.7 If the District decides to reduce the full-time staff in a particular job title, the full-time
employees in that job title shall be laid-off in inverse order of their length of full-time service
with the District. Such an employee who has been laid-off from his/her own job title may
displace an employee with less full-time service in any equal-rated or lower-rated (lower paid
at the probationary level) job title provided that, as determined by the District, he/she has the
skill, ability and physical capability required by the District for the performance of the work of
the equal-rated or lower-rated (lower paid at the probationary level) job title. Employees who
displace equal-rated or lower-rated employees due to a layoff and/or recall or reorganization
shall carry their full District seniority including his/her full time seniority in the job title which
he or she held immediately preceding the staff reduction described herein, with them to the new
title; provided, however, that if such employee was employed on a ten (10) month or eleven
(11) month basis and moves into a twelve (12) month position, seniority for the purpose of
benefit calculations shall be pro-rated. As used in this paragraph, “full-time” means the fulltime schedule of hours for the department involved in the reduction of staff. This paragraph is
subject to the preferential statutory rights of veterans (as defined in the Civil Service Law and
of exempt volunteer firemen (as defined in the General Municipal Law)
2.31.8 If a permanent full-time opening occurs or a permanent full-time position is created, all
employees who have been on layoff for a period of two (2) years or less from any job title and
who have seniority in the job title of the opening or new position shall be entitled to be recalled
in order of their seniority in that job title. Any employee so recalled shall, in the case of an
opening or a new position, be placed on the step last held by the employee in that job title prior
to being laid-off.
2.32

Part-Time Employees. The provisions of paragraphs 2.32.1 - 2.32.3 of this Section 2.3 apply
only to regular part-time employees in negotiating unit positions within the non-competitive or
labor classes of the Civil Service.

13
2.32.1 Regular part-time employees will accrue seniority on a pro-rated basis (the number of weekly
hours in the employee’s then-current job title, divided by thirty (30) of a regular full-time
employee. If a reduction of part-time staff is deemed necessary by the District, no regular parttime employee will be laid off until all part-time, substitute and probationary employees in the
laid off employee’s job title are laid off; provided, however, that the District need not lay off
any temporary employees whose positions are funded by the state or federal governments.
2.32.2 Should the District determine layoffs to be necessary within a part-time job title, the employee
with the least seniority in the job title involved will be the first to be laid off until the total
number of employees determined by the District as necessary to decrease forces within that job
title shall be established.
2.32.3 When the District determines to recall regular part-time employees from lay off, the laid off
employee with the most seniority in the job title to which recall is being made shall be recalled
first.

Section 2.4 Personnel File
2.41

An employee personnel file is maintained in the District office. This file contains the
employee’s record of service with the District. Nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to
prohibit an administrator or supervisor from maintaining files containing information about an
employee.

2.42

An employee may inspect his/her personnel file during the regular business hours of the District
office provided that he/she does so during his/her lunch or rest periods or on his/her off-duty
time.

2.43

When an employee inspects his/her file, he/she shall be shown the entire contents of the file
except letters of reference and other pre-employment materials. A log shall be maintained in
the file showing the date of the employee’s inspection and when inspecting the employee shall
date and initial the back of each item in the file except letters of reference and other preemployment materials.

2.44

If the employee so requests, he/she shall be given a copy of any item in his/her file that
comments on his/her performance. If the employee has previously been given a copy of the
item, he/she shall be charged for all copies given him/her after the first copy at the rate set by
the Board for copies given to a member of the public. An employee may submit a written and
signed response to any item in his/her file. If he/she does so, it shall be stamped with the date it
was submitted and attached to the item in question in the file.

2.45

Before any document which comments on an employee’s performance (e.g., letters from
parents, reports from supervisors) -- other than a document which simply reports on the
employee’s attendance or absence and other than a document originated by the employee --is
put in his/her personnel file, two (2) copies thereof shall be given to the employee. He/she shall
retain one (1) copy. He/she shall date and sign the other copy and return it to the District office
not later than the fifth working day after he/she received it. That shall be the file copy, but if
he/she fails to return it, another copy shall be filed with a notation that the employee did not
return the copy sent to him/her. No document described in the first sentence of this shall be
placed in an employee’s personnel file unless it identifies by name the source of the comments
on the employee’s performance.

14

2.46

A former employee may inspect his/her personnel file under the same conditions as set forth
under paragraphs 2.42, 2.43 and 2.44 of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 3.

WAGES

Section 3.1 Rules for Hourly Rates
3.11

The hourly rate for each job title is shown in Appendix A attached to this Agreement. Each job
title has one (1) or more annual increments beyond the probationary rate. An employee shall
advance from the probationary rate to the first annual increment step after he/she has completed
thirteen (13) full pay periods work for the District. Thereafter: (i) an employee who advanced
to the first annual increment between July 1st and the succeeding December 31st (both dates
inclusive) shall advance to the next annual increment on the first July 1st thereafter and to
succeeding annual increments, if any, on each July 1st thereafter; and (ii) an employee who
advanced to the first annual increment between January 1st and the succeeding June 30th (both
dates inclusive) shall advance to the next annual increment on the second July 1st thereafter and
to succeeding annual increments, if any, on each July 1st thereafter.

3.12

If the District creates a new job title in the Negotiating Unit, the District and the OESPA will
meet at a mutually acceptable time and place to negotiate a wage rate for the job title, but this
shall not preclude the District paying employees in the position an interim rate until the
negotiated rate is agreed upon.

3.13

Ten (10) month employees are paid in twenty-two (22) equal installments or twenty-six (26)
equal installments on the basis of a one hundred ninety three (193) day year which includes
holidays, but which does not require more than one hundred eighty five (185) days work
without additional compensation for additional work days which must have the approval of the
District Administrator.

3.14

If, an employee is assigned by his/her supervisor to perform the full duties of a higher-rated job
title for a period of not less than five (5) consecutive work days, the employee shall be paid at
the rate of that job title Step 2, or at the employee’s rate of pay in his/her own title plus one
dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per hour, whichever is higher. If an employee is assigned by his/her
supervisor to perform the full duties of a higher-rated job title for one (1) full day or more (up to
four (4) full consecutive work days), the employee shall be paid from the time he/she begins
such work at the employee’s rate of pay in his/her own title plus fifty cents per hour (.50/hr).

3.14.1 Classroom Coverage. If any member of the OESPA is asked by the Building Principal or his/her
designee to provide coverage or supervision in the absence of a regularly assigned classroom
teacher, the member will be compensated at a rate of an additional four dollars and five cents
($4.05) per hour if the coverage is for a full period or more in the Middle School and High
School, or forty five (45) minutes or more in length in the Primary/Intermediate schools.
3.14.2 Nurse’s Coverage. If any member of the OESPA is asked by the Building Principal or his/her
designee to provide coverage in the absence of the assigned Nurse, other than to cover the
Nurse’s lunch break, the member will be compensated at a rate of an additional four dollars and
five cents ($4.05) per hour if the coverage is for a full period or more in the Middle School and

15
High School, or forty five (45) minutes or more in the Primary/Intermediate schools.
3.15

If an employee is promoted permanently to a higher-rated job title; he/she shall enter that job
title at the lowest step which yields an increase in pay over his/her hourly rate in his/her former
job title.

3.16

Effective July 1, 1974, no new employee shall be hired at a rate higher than the probationary
rate for his/her job title. Any employee who, because of being hired at a rate higher than the
probationary rate, was as of June 30, 1976 being paid at a rate of pay higher than the rate of pay
specified in Appendix A of this Agreement for his/her job title and the step appropriate to
his/her District service (as specified in paragraph 3.11 above) shall remain at his/her June 30,
1976 rate of pay until such time as that rate becomes less than the one called for by Appendix A
at which time he/she will begin being paid at the rate called for by Appendix A.

3.17

Eleven (11) month employees shall have the option of being paid in twenty-four (24) or twentysix (26) equal installments on the basis of a two hundred twenty-five (225) day year which
includes the paid holidays specified in paragraph 4.16 of this Agreement.

Section 3.2
3.21

Other Pay Rules

An employee who performs overtime work, authorized by the Superintendent or his/her
designee, in excess of forty (40) hours in one (1) work week shall be paid for all such overtime
work at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times his/her regular straight time hourly rate of
pay. For purposes of computing overtime pay only, paid holiday, vacation, personal leave and
sick leave time shall be counted as hours worked. Employees who work beyond their normal
work week up to forty (40) hours may request compensatory time at the rate of one (1) hour for
every hour worked below forty (40), instead of cash payment.
Employees who work in excess of forty (40) hours in one (1) work week may request
compensatory time at the rate of time and one-half for every such hour in excess of forty (40),
instead of cash payment. To be taken, such compensatory time must be requested by the
employee and granted in advance by the immediate supervisor or his/her designee (considering
the District’s needs and scheduling difficulties). Where such compensatory time is requested
and granted, it must be used by the end of the pay period following the pay period in which the
overtime was earned.

3.22

A school lunch fund employee shall be paid time and one-half (1-1/2) his/her regular straight
time hourly rate of pay for all work performed after 5:00 p.m. if beyond his/her normal work
day.

3.23

Each full-time twelve (12) month employee shall receive each year, in addition to his/her other
compensation, the amount shown below opposite the number of years of service he/she had
completed as of July 1st of that year:
10 but less than 15
15 but less than 20
20 or more

Effective July 1st, 1991:
$400
$550
$725

Full-time ten (10) and eleven (11) month unit members with continuous full-time service to the
District (e.g., no resignation, separation or part-time service) who become permanent full-time

16
twelve (12) month unit members shall have their years of service in the District as a full-time
ten (10) and/or eleven (11) month unit member counted for the purpose of calculating the
benefit defined in Section 3.23 herein. This benefit applies only to full-time permanent twelve
(12) month employees and full-time ten (10) and eleven (11) month employees who become
full-time, permanent twelve (12) month employees with no separation in full-time service. This
payment shall be made each year by separate check.
3.24

Nurses, Licensure and Required Degree. Licensed Practical Nurses (LPN’s) and Registered
Nurses (RN’s) who have an Associate’s Degree required or Certificate of Completion for an
accredited Practical Nursing Program for their “LPN” or “RN” license will be paid an annual
stipend of one thousand dollars ($1,000). RN’s who hold a Bachelor’s or Master’s Degree required
for their “RN” license will be paid an annual stipend of two thousand dollars ($2,000). (Stipends
will be prorated for partial year’s service). Nurses will only be eligible for one “Degree” stipend.
The Stipends will be paid out in equal payments along with the nurse’s regular pay.

3.25

When an employee is authorized or required by the District to attend a workshop or conference,
the District will reimburse him/her for all necessary and reasonable meal and registration
expenses. If the conference or workshop is out-of-town, he/she shall also be reimbursed for all
necessary and reasonable travel and lodging expenses. To obtain reimbursement, the employee
must submit a claim (and supporting receipts when required) on the District’s standard voucher
form not later than one (1) month after the conference or workshop.

3.26

A teacher aide who is normally and regularly assigned to cafeteria duty (for breakfast and/or
lunch periods) shall have his/her hourly rate increased by fourteen cents ($.14) per hour for all
hours worked during the year. For purposes of this provision, “cafeteria duty” shall be defined
as a duty:
a. assigned to a teacher aide by the building principal;
b. which requires the general and ongoing supervision of all students present in the cafeteria;
c. which occurs during the students’ scheduled breakfast and/or lunch meal time.
“Cafeteria duty” excludes other assignments, such as:
a. eating in the classroom, picnics, fieldtrips, etc.;
b. 1:1 and other aides who are present in the cafeteria during scheduled breakfast and/or lunch
meal times as a result of a student or students assignment and who are not assigned to
supervise all students;
c. aides who are assigned to work in the cafeteria during times other than scheduled student
meal times (recess, morning holding time, etc.); and
d. other assignments that do not meet the criteria set forth in paragraph “1” above.

3.27

All unit members who are members of the bargaining unit will be evaluated at least once each
year. Probationary employees will be evaluated two (2) times prior to the end of their
probationary appointment and at least one (1) other time during their first year of employment.
The provisions of this paragraph will apply to part-time employees on a pro rata basis, as a part-

17
time employee’s annual, cumulative hours of work bear on those of a full-time employee in the
same title who works the same number of months.
All unit members who have completed one to nine (1-9) consecutive years of service and who
receive from the District the minimum job performance ratings will receive an additional
payment over and above their annual salary in accordance with Chart “A” below.
Chart A – 1 to 9 years
Performance
Category
Ratings
Ratings
Ratings

Payout
Excellent
Good/Satisfactory
Good/Satisfactory

Excellent
Excellent
Good

Excellent
Excellent
Excellent

Excellent
Excellent
Excellent

Excellent
Excellent
Excellent

$500
$400
$300



“5 Excellent Ratings” earns $500.



“4 Excellent Ratings” with “1 Good or Satisfactory Rating” earns $400.



“3 Excellent Ratings” with “1 Good or Satisfactory Rating” and “1 Good Rating” earns $300.

All unit members who have completed at least ten (10) consecutive years of service and who
receive minimum job performance ratings will receive an additional payment over and above
their annual salary as provided in Chart “B”.
Chart B – 10 years or more
Performance
Category
Ratings
Ratings
Ratings

Payout
Excellent
Good/Satisfactory
Good/Satisfactory

Excellent
Excellent
Good

Excellent
Excellent
Excellent

Excellent
Excellent
Excellent

Excellent
Excellent
Excellent

$1000
$750
$500



“5 Excellent Ratings” earns $1000.



“4 Excellent Ratings” with “1 Good or Satisfactory Rating” earns $750.



“3 Excellent Ratings” with “1 Good or Satisfactory Rating” and “1 Good Rating” earns $500.

These payments will be paid no later than July 31st of the year in which they were earned. The
financial outcome of the Employee Performance Evaluation is not grievable in any manner.
3.27

If an employee is required by the District to perform work that by law requires a license or State
Certification to perform, the District and the Association will negotiate compensation for such
work.
The District and the Association have agreed that effective as of July 1, 2004, the premium per
hour for those properly licensed persons designated by the District to perform asbestos removal
duties will be fifteen cents ($.15).

18

The District and the Association have agreed that effective November 1, 2005, the premiums
per hour for those Certified Pool Operators assigned by the District to perform Certified Pool
Operator duties will be fifteen cents ($.15) and paid in the following manner. The premium rate
will be paid for all District work hours of the person designated by the District as primarily
responsible to perform Certified Pool Operator duties. Additionally, if for any reason the
primarily designated person is not available to perform the Certified Pool Operator duties or for
any other reason, as determined by the District; the District may direct other employee(s)
certified in Certified Pool Operation to perform Certified Pool Operator duties. Those other
persons so assigned will be paid at the premium rate of fifteen cents ($.15) per hour for the
actual time that he/she is physically performing Certified Pool Operator duties.
3.28

Provided a District vehicle is not available, unit members who are required to travel between
multiple District buildings on the same work day or are required to travel via a personal vehicle
for District business will be eligible for mileage reimbursement. Mileage reimbursement will be
paid at the current IRS rate upon submission of proper vouchers to the Business Office.
Mileage vouchers must be submitted to the Business Office prior to June 30 to be eligible for
reimbursement.

ARTICLE 4. VACATIONS, HOLIDAYS AND LEAVE
Section 4.1 Vacations and Holidays
4.11

Each full-time twelve (12) month employee will be entitled to two (2) weeks vacation with pay
after the completion of twelve (12) months of service, three (3) weeks vacation after ten (10)
years of service, four (4) weeks vacation after eighteen (18) years of service, and five (5) weeks
vacation after twenty-five (25) years of service. An employee moving from a ten (10) or eleven
(11) month position to a twelve (12) month position will receive vacation credit on a pro rata
basis, effective upon the employee’s change to twelve (12) month status. The proration will be
based on the date the employee’s 12 month status is effective, the ratio between the employee’s
respective ten (10) or eleven (11) and twelve (12) month schedules and the hours the employee
worked per day while in ten (10) or eleven (11) month status, with any hours less than six (6)
being counted as a half (1/2) day.
Part-time twelve (12) month employees will be entitled to five (5) paid vacation days per year
prorated based on the number of hours and/or number of days normally worked per week.

4.12

The amount of vacation to which an employee (who is eligible for vacation) is entitled will be
determined as of July 1st of each year. For purposes of computing amounts of vacation only:
(a)

the anniversary date of each employee who began work prior to July 1, 1972 shall be
deemed to be July 1st.

(b)

with respect to an employee who began work on or after July 1, 1972:
(1)

he/she will be entitled to one (1) day of vacation for each full month of service
which he/she renders prior to the first July 1st after he/she began work, but not to

19
exceed ten (10) days. A full month of service means a month in which he/she
actually worked fifty-one percent (51%) or more of his/her full-time hours
scheduled.
(2)

starting with the second July 1st after he/she began work, his/her anniversary
date shall be deemed to be July 1st.

4.13

Vacations as described above may be taken at any time from July 1st of the year it is made
available through July 31st of the subsequent school year. Unit members may take vacation
time in half or full day increments. At least one (1) month in advance in the case of vacations
which include any part of the summer recess and at least two (2) weeks in advance of all other
vacations (unless the employee and his/her Supervisor or the Director of Human Resources
waive this time requirement) an employee must seek the prior written approval of his/her
immediate Supervisor and the Director of Human Resources for his/her proposed vacation time.
An employee, upon his/her request made at least three (3) weeks before his/her vacation, may
be paid his/her vacation pay on the last regular payday proceeding the first day of his/her
vacation.

4.14

If an employee requests his/her vacation time and due to extreme emergencies, his/her request
for vacation time is repeatedly denied and it is impossible to grant vacation time which the
employee is entitled to, the District agrees to reimburse the employee for such vacation time.

4.15

If a holiday specified in paragraph 4.16 of this Agreement falls when an employee is on paid
vacation, he/she shall receive an extra day’s pay in lieu of that holiday or, if the Director of
Human Resources so decides, the employee may instead be granted an extra day of paid
vacation in lieu of that holiday.

4.16

The following recognized holidays will be observed on the days required by New York State
law and regulation (unless the District and the OESPA agree otherwise in particular cases).
(a)

for all twelve (12) month employees and for all eleven (11) month employees on the
active payroll at the time the holiday falls:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)

New Years Day**
Martin Luther King Day**
President’s Day**
Good Friday
Memorial Day**
Independence Day
Labor Day
Veterans Day**
Thanksgiving Day**
Friday after Thanksgiving Day
Last Working Day before or after Christmas Day (If Christmas falls on a
Thursday, the holiday will be Friday, if Christmas falls on a Tuesday, the holiday
will be Monday.)
Christmas Day**
Last Working Day before or after New Years Day (If New Years Day falls on a
Thursday, the holiday will be Friday, if New Years Day falls on a Tuesday, the

20
holiday will Monday.)
(14)

Effective 2014-2015, the District will provide an additional holiday as follows:
Twelve (12) month employees – Columbus Day
Ten (10) and eleven (11) month employees – the last day of the school
year as determined by the District calendar.

** Applicable holidays for all ten (10) month employees on the active payroll at the
time the holiday falls
When a holiday numbered (1), (6), (8), (1l),(12) or (13) falls on a Saturday the day to be
observed as the holiday shall be Friday, if the holiday falls on a Sunday; the day to be observed
shall be the following Monday. Employees will be paid for such holidays for the same number
of hours as they would have normally worked had the day not been a holiday. Employees
required to work on a holiday shall be paid double time for that day.
4.17

Eleven (11) month employees shall not be required to work on days during the Winter and
Spring recesses when students are not in attendance.

Section 4.2 Leaves
4.21

Ten (10) month employees will be allowed three (3) days per year, eleven (11) month
employees will be allowed four (4) days per year, twelve (12) month employees will be allowed
four and one-half (4-½) days per year for absence due to personal business upon approval of the
employee’s immediate supervisor. Personal leave days are for personal matters which cannot
be accomplished outside the working day. Prior request and approval is required. Personal
leave days cannot be taken the day before or the day after (a) a holiday, (b) a vacation or, (c) for
ten (10) month and eleven (11) month employees, a school recess. The Superintendent may
authorize such days as valid within his/her discretion. Unused personal leave days will be
added to accumulated sick leave but not to exceed the maximum. The Superintendent’s
decision to authorize or not to authorize such days shall not be grievable. Employees who have
not completed sixty (60) days of actual work will not be paid for any absence due to personal
business taken under the foregoing provisions of this paragraph unless and until they have
successfully completed sixty (60) days of actual work for the District.
In emergency situations and with the Superintendent’s approval, unit members may convert sick
days to personal days. The Superintendent’s decision to authorize or not to authorize such
conversion shall not be grievable.

4.22

In the event of an emergency closing, with District approval unit members may utilize any and
all accumulated personal or vacation leave time instead of reporting to work.

4.23

Each full-time employee and each part-time employee will be granted one (1) sick leave day for
each month of service with the District. When a part-time employee is absent on sick leave,
he/she shall be charged with having used one (1) sick leave day for each day he/she is absent
and shall be paid for such day for the number of hours of work for which he/she would
normally have been scheduled to work according to his/her regular schedule. Unused days may
accumulate to a maximum of two hundred (200) days. At the beginning of each school fiscal
year, the sick-leave days to which each employee (except an employee with less than one (1)
year of service) would be entitled during that year will be credited to him/her. In September of
each year, employees shall receive a statement telling them how many days they have

21
accumulated as of September 1st. A medical certificate may be required by the District with
respect to any sick leave day where the District suspects abuse of the sick leave privileges. The
provisions of this paragraph do not apply to substitute, temporary, or casual employees.
Employees who have not completed sixty (60) days of actual work for the District will not be
paid for any absence due to sickness taken under the foregoing-provisions of this paragraph
unless and until they have successfully completed sixty (60) days of actual work for the District.
4.24

Sick leave may be used for the employee’s own illness or, for illness in the employee’s
immediate family. Immediate family, as used in this paragraph, means spouse, child, parent,
brother, sister, or a relative residing in the employee’s home. When an employee knows in
advance that he/she will need to use sick leave (e.g., scheduled surgery, expected delivery date,
return of family member from hospital), they shall so inform his/her immediate supervisor and
the OCSD Substitute Hotline as soon as practicable.

4.25

When a member of an employee’s immediate family dies the employee may be absent for three
(3) days for the purpose of attending the funeral and making other arrangements in connection
therewith. Such days shall not be deducted from any other leave. As used in this paragraph,
immediate family means spouse, child, son-in-law, daughter–in–law, parent, parent-in-law,
brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, grandparent, grandparent-in-law, grandchild, or a
relative residing in the employee’s home. The Superintendent may grant additional days as
he/she determines to be appropriate. When an aunt, uncle, niece, or nephew of an employee
dies, the employee may be absent for one (1) day for the purpose of attending the funeral and,
making other arrangements in connection therewith. Such day shall not be deducted from any
other leave.

4.26

An employee may request an unpaid child-rearing leave of absence not to exceed one (1) year
for the purpose of taking care of an infant who is resident in the employee’s home and is less
than one (1) month old at the time the leave is to begin. The request shall be made in writing to
the Director of Human Resources at least thirty (30) school days prior to the first day of
requested leave and shall state the proposed first and last days of the requested leave.

4.27

Whenever an employee has been on paid or unpaid sick leave for a total period of four (4)
weeks or more, the employee shall submit to the Director of Human Resources, a certificate
from his/her attending physician stating that the employee is medically fit to return to his/her
position and perform the full duties thereof before he/she is allowed to resume working. If an
employee anticipates using sick leave in excess of ten (10) consecutive school days, the
employee shall notify the District of that to facilitate scheduling. Before an employee returns
from sick leave after an absence in excess of ten (10) consecutive school days (but less than four
(4) weeks or more), the District shall have the right to require a note from a physician stating
that the employee is fit to return to full duty. In the event that an employee is deemed by a
physician to be unfit to return to full duty, the Superintendent shall make the determination as to
whether a return to partial duty will be permitted. To obtain the physician’s note, the employee
shall have the option of being examined by the District’s physician at the District’s expense, or
being examined at his/her own expense by a physician of his/her choosing. If the employee is
examined by the District’s physician and is not satisfied by that expert’s determination and the
District will not allow the employee to return to work, the employee shall have the right to
request examination by another physician at the District’s expense. If the initial note submitted
by the employee is prepared by a physician other than the District’s physician and if the District
questions the determination made therein, the District shall have the right to require that the
employee be examined by the District’s physician, at the District’s expense. If the District
exercises this right and such action causes the employee to be delayed from returning to work

22
pending the District’s physician’s determination, the employee shall not lose any additional sick
days or the time lost from work due to said delay. If the District’s physician and the employee’s
physician disagree and the District decides to not allow the employee to return to work, the
employee may request, within twenty-four (24) hours, and the District will pay for, a third
opinion which shall be controlling. The physician supplying the third opinion shall be selected
by mutual agreement of the employee’s physician and the District’s physician. Any time lost
from work from the date of the employee’s request or a third opinion to the date that an opinion
is rendered by the physician shall be shared equally by the District and the employee. If the
employee is deemed unfit to return to work by the third physician, the employee shall resume
using his/her own sick leave days until he/she is able to return to work.
4.28

Not more than a total of ten (10) personal days per year may be used for Association business
including collective bargaining negotiations with the District. Notice of absence for such days
shall be given as far in advance as practicable, but in any case not less than seven (7) calendar
days in advance of the first day of such absence, but this advance notice requirement may be
waived by the District in situations which it regards as appropriate for such waiver. Notice shall
be given to the Superintendent’s office and shall be accompanied by a statement from the
Association President that the employees involved are authorized to use the days for
Association business.

4.29

If an employee is required to serve on a jury during his/her normal working hours, he/she shall
be granted leave for such service and shall suffer no loss in straight time pay while rendering
jury service provided he/she delivers to the District a document issued by the court which shows
the days and hours during which such service was rendered and signs over to the District all
fees (not including travel or meal expenses) paid by the court with respect to any day of jury
service for which the employee is paid by the District. The employee shall cooperate with the
District in seeking a delay in jury service if the District so requests.

4.30

Unit members may utilize partial days, to be taken in one (1) hour increments, for sick leave
and personal leave. If the District determines substitute coverage is necessary, the District will
be responsible for securing substitute(s) when unit members are absent.

ARTICLE 5.

BENEFITS

Section 5.1 Pension and Insurance
5.11

The present pension program, commonly known as “section 75g”, shall be continued with rider
41J.
Upon retirement, members will be compensated for unused sick days. However upon
retirement, the maximum number of days for which a member may be reimbursed is thirty-five
(35) (for days 166-200) with the first one hundred sixty-five (165) days being applied to ERS
Retirement rider 41J. As defined herein, compensation for unused sick days will be paid at the
rate of sixty dollars ($60) per day for each day accumulated to a maximum of thirty-five (35)
days.

5.12

The District is a participant in the Allegany/Cattaraugus School Districts Medical Plan and will
make available the basic POS plan provided thereby to employees who are eligible for such

23
plans (“eligible” for the purposes of POS health insurance meaning those employees regularly
scheduled for and working at least thirty (30) hours per week) and who are on the active payroll.
Eligible employees may elect either family or individual coverage. The prescription coverage
provided shall contain a two dollar/twenty dollar/thirty-five dollar ($2/$20/$35) co-pay (co-pays
are generic, preferred brand name and non-preferred brand name, respectively). Mail order for
any of the above will cost the member the equivalent of two (2) co-pays for a three (3) month
supply. The POS plan made available to the employees shall be established by the plan’s
governing body with such changes as that body may implement from time to time. If for any
reason any of the District offered plans cease to exist or the District terminates its participation
therein, the District will then provide coverage comparable to or better than the plan.
Employees eligible for health insurance and hired before June 30, 2013 will contribute the
following amounts to the annual premium cost:



For Family Coverage:
For Single Coverage:

$1,085.04
$ 413.28

Employees eligible for health insurance and hired on or after July 1, 2013 will contribute twenty
percent (20%) of the premium cost.
With respect to the POS Plan:
(1)

Any complaint under the Plan with respect to its interpretation or application must be
processed through the “Claim Review Procedure” set forth in the Plan document. If the
matter is not settled to the employee’s satisfaction, and the Plan document does not
provide for arbitration of such dispute, then within thirty (30) days of the written answer
from the governing Committee of the Plan, the Association may submit the issue directly
to binding arbitration. The Association and the District agree that such binding
arbitration should only be before an arbitrator under the Rules of the American
Arbitration Association who has expertise in medical health insurance coverage benefits
and policies and is familiar with the rights of covered individuals and the responsibilities
of the insurance provider. The Plan Administrator will furnish the Association and the
District with all pertinent data related to the dispute subject to the provisions of
subparagraph (3).

(2)

All data obtained by the Plan Administrator with respect to insurance claims shall be
considered confidential and shall be disbursed to persons involved or connected with the
Plan strictly on a need-to-know basis and such information shall be utilized for no other
purpose than is necessary for the administration of the Plan and the payment of claims.
Any health data obtained by the Plan may not be used to discipline or dismiss an
employee.

(3)

Employees who submit claims in accordance with the procedures established by the Plan
and if the claim is not disapproved in accordance with the Plan procedures, shall have
said claim paid (to the extent of the coverage provided) in a timely manner so that the
employee shall suffer no financial loss as a result of the slow payment of the claim. It
shall be considered that the employee suffered no financial loss if such claim is paid
within a reasonable period of time in comparison to the payment of similar claims by
Blue Cross/Shield or other well known health insurance plans.

24

5.13

(4)

An employee whose spouse works for the same District or another school district
participating in the Plan may enroll in the Plan with no lapse in coverage if their
spouse’s coverage ceases for any reason. In no event shall there be double coverage in
the Plan.

(5)

If an employee has been absent and unable to work because of his/her own illness or
injury, if the absence has continued for at least thirty (30) consecutive calendar days, and
if the employee has exhausted all paid leave and vacation days available to him/her
pursuant to this Agreement and is therefore on unpaid leave of absence, he/she shall
nevertheless be continued in the Plan at no premium cost to himself/herself until the end
of the second calendar month following the month in which his/her unpaid leave began;
thereafter he/she may remain in the Plan as long as he/she remains on unpaid leave
provided that he/she pays the premium therefore to the District office not later than the
first business day of each month.

(6)

An employee may waive being covered by the health insurance coverage set forth in this
paragraph 5.12 by submitting to the District’s Business Office a written, dated and
signed statement to that effect. When an employee submits such a waiver, the coverage
will be stopped effective with the first month for which the District has not already paid
the premium. An employee who waives entitlement to health insurance coverage shall
receive three thousand dollars ($3,000) annually for such waiver. If an employee waives
coverage for less than twelve (12) months, a prorated payment shall be made. An
employee who waives coverage may re-enter a District plan by providing written notice
to the Business Administrator, in which case coverage shall commence with the first
month for which the District has not already paid the employee to be off of the plan. If,
in any event, the District makes a monthly waiver payment to an employee for a month
during which the employee was covered by a District plan, the District shall have the
right to recoup the amount of said payment through payroll deduction. The waiver
payment under the terms of this paragraph 5.12(6) shall not be made to any employee
who receives health insurance through the District. An employee’s election to waive
coverage under this provision shall be made on an annual basis, in accordance with the
requirements of the Internal Revenue Code and regulations thereunder applicable to
cafeteria plans; re-entry into a plan once an employee has elected to waive coverage
shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the Internal Revenue Code and
regulations thereunder applicable to cafeteria plans; payments pursuant to this provision
shall be governed by the terms of the Cafeteria Plan described in paragraph 5.23 and in
accordance with all requirements of the Internal Revenue Code and regulations
thereunder.

Whenever an employee is absent from his/her employment and unable to perform his/her duties
as a result of a personal injury caused by an accident or assault occurring in the course of
his/her employment and receives Workers’ Compensation payments for such absence, will be
paid sick benefits in lieu of wages during his/her absence from his/her employment up to a
period of six (6) months. Sick benefits are defined as being an amount which represents the
difference between Workers’ Compensation and payments in regular salary and includes any
other benefits or emoluments redounding to the benefit of the employee under the existing
Agreement. Days allowed for absence due to injury suffered on school premises or in line of
duty covered by Workers’ Compensation shall not be deducted from sick time allowance. An
employee injured on duty must file an accident report with the Business Administrator’s office
as soon as possible but in no case later than five (5) days from the date of the accident.

25
Accident report forms are available in that office and the office of all school principals. In the
event of a work related accident, the unit member shall immediately notify the nurse and, as
soon as practicable, his/her immediate supervisor.
5.14

An employee who retires from District service under the rules of the NYSERS shall have the
right to continue in the District’s group health plan at his/her own expense from the date of
retirement until such time as the employee is deceased, covered under another plan or opts to
terminate coverage through the District’s plan for any reason. Coverage shall be available
pursuant to this provision for the retiree and any dependents covered as of the date of retirement
(i.e., a second spouse or dependent children through re-marriage after the date of retirement
cannot be covered). The coverage available to the retiree (and dependents) shall be provided
through the same plan provided to active employees and shall be available at a cost equal to one
hundred percent (100%) of the applicable premium for the retirees under the plan. If a retiree
(and/or dependents) at any time on or after retirement opts out of any of the benefits provided
under the plan (for example, prescription card), the retiree (and/or dependents) shall not
thereafter be entitled to obtain or opt for said benefit. The retiree (and dependents) shall, with
the exception of the rules stated herein for dependent coverage and opting out of benefits, be
subject to all plan rules applicable to active employees except where the plan has rules specific
to retiree coverage. Benefits provided pursuant to this provision shall run concurrent with the
benefits provided by COBRA for the first eighteen (18), twenty-nine (29) or thirty-six (36)
months (as applicable) of coverage. In order for a retiree (and dependents) to obtain coverage
pursuant to this provision, an election must be made within two (2) months of the date of
retirement or one (1) month before benefits under COBRA would cease. “Retirement from
District Service” pursuant to this provision means that there shall be no break between the
employee’s service to the District and the retirement.

Section 5.2 Other Benefits
5.21

The District will continue to reimburse each employee in the school lunch classifications for the
cost of two (2) sets of uniforms per year; provided, however, that the cost of only one (1)
uniform need be reimbursed to an employee who is regularly scheduled for two (2) hours per
day or less. If the cost of the two (2) sets of uniforms is less than one hundred twenty dollars
($120) (seventy dollars ($70) in the case of a two-hour employee) per school year, the District
will provide reimbursement to the school lunch employee for the balance of the one hundred
twenty dollars ($120) (or seventy dollars ($70)) for purchase of shoes (or sneakers or athletic
shoes approved by the Cafeteria Manager before purchase) and/or aprons upon presentation of
satisfactory proof of purchase.
The District shall make an annual payment to each cleaner, building maintainer and stock room
clerk who was on the District payroll on July 1, 1998, in the gross amount of forty dollars ($40),
minus required withholdings, to be paid in, or along with, the second paycheck in October.

5.22

Sick Bank - In case of a serious and prolonged illness, an employee who has exhausted all of
his/her accumulated sick leave may be allowed additional sick leave days without loss of pay by
utilizing the accumulated sick leave days of other employees provided that an employee may
not contribute more than three (3) days per year for any given employee to so utilize. The
Superintendent and the Association President shall actually agree on the number of days (not to
exceed sixty (60)) which shall be allowed the employee under this paragraph: provided that
each such agreed on day must be deducted from the accumulation of some other employee or
employees pursuant to a written authorization signed by him/her or them.

26

5.23

(a)

An employee may make application for use of sick leave under Paragraph 5.22 more
than once in a single school year, provided that the employee otherwise meets the terms
of Paragraph 5.22. This is true both for additional leave in connection with the same
condition as the employee’s original use of such days or for a new condition.

(b)

For an employee to make use of leave under Paragraph 5.22 a second time, he/she must
have exhausted any sick days earned between the end of the first leave and the start of
the second leave.

(c)

All such requests for additional leave, whether for the same condition as the first leave
(either to use days approved but not used in the first leave, or to be granted new days) or
for a different condition must be submitted for approval by the Association President and
the Superintendent in accordance with Paragraph 5.22.

(d)

The Association President shall report to the Director of Human Resources the number
of days contributed and the names of the contributing employees for each leave
approved under Paragraph 5.22 within the time frame established in the Superintendent’s
approval of such leave. If any such days are not utilized by the employee, they shall be
held until sixty (60) calendar days following the end of the leave or use by the employee
should he/she have need for as due to the original medical condition. If the excess days
are not so used, they shall be returned to the employees contributing them.

Cafeteria Plan.
(a)

The District will continue to maintain a “Cafeteria Plan” pursuant to Section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The District will continue to bear the
administrative cost of maintaining and operating the Cafeteria Plan.

(b)

The benefits that will be available under the Cafeteria Plan are as follows:

(c)

(1)

A Medical Premium Conversion Account to which an employee may elect to
contribute, on a pre-tax basis, his/her share, if any, of the monthly premiums for
his/her coverage under the health insurance provided by the District.

(2)

A Medical Expense Reimbursement Account to which an employee may elect to
contribute, on a pre-tax basis, the amount allowed per IRS Regulations, up to
Three Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($3,500) per plan year.

(3)

A Dependent Care Assistance Spending Account to which an employee may
elect to contribute on a pre-tax basis, an amount up to the maximum annual
contributions permitted by law.

(4)

A payment in lieu of health insurance under which an employee who does not
receive coverage under the District’s health insurance program will receive
additional cash compensation (as described in paragraph 5.12).

Participation in the Cafeteria Plan is optional, and any amounts that an employee elects
to contribute to the Cafeteria Plan shall be deducted from his/her paycheck in equal
installments.

27
5.24

The District will permit employees, under the auspices of the Olean City School District
Flexible Benefit Plan, to request that payroll deductions be taken from their regular paychecks,
on an after-tax or pre-tax basis as elected by the employee, and used to pay premiums for:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

AFLAC NY’s Short-Term Disability Coverage;
AFLAC NY’s Cancer Protection Coverage;
AFLAC NY’s Direct Cash – Hospital Indemnity Protection Coverage
AFLAC NY’s Dental Policies; and
AFLAC NY’s Accident Policies (with or without disability rider).

An employee’s request to deduct premiums described in the preceding sentence must be made
in accordance with the election procedures prescribed by the Olean City School District
Flexible Benefit Plan. The District also will permit employees to request that after-tax payroll
deductions be taken from their regular paychecks and used to pay premiums for long-term care
insurance. An employee’s request to have after-tax payroll deductions be taken from his or her
regular paycheck and used to pay premiums for long-term care insurance must be submitted in
writing to the District by August 1st of each year, and will remain in effect for the subsequent
twelve (12) month period beginning on the immediately following September 1st. The District
will not be responsible for explaining, selling or encouraging participation in any of the
coverage’s available to employees under this section.
During the 2004-05 school year, the District will establish a special, one-time window period of
six weeks duration for employees to select coverage and arrange for payroll deductions
hereunder.
5.25

Attendance Incentive – If an employee attends all but one (1) or two (2), (two (2) for ten (10)
month employees, two and one-quarter (2-1/4) for eleven (11) month employees, two and onehalf (2-1/2) for twelve (12) month employees) of the required employee attendance days during
the school year, the employee will be paid on the first regular payday for school employees in
the following fiscal year an amount equal to one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the employee’s
annual straight-time wage (hourly rate times regular schedule of hours for the year) for the
school year in which the employee earned this attendance award. Days taken pursuant to
paragraphs 4.25, 4.28, 4.29 and days donated to the sick leave bank pursuant to paragraph 5.22
shall not be counted against an employee for the purposes of this paragraph.

5.26

To commence July 1, 2014, the District will establish under the auspices of an Olean City
School District Health Reimbursement Account (HRA) for each unit member who is covered by
District health insurance. The District will contribute one hundred dollars ($100) per school
year to each HRA. The District shall choose the plan administrator and pay the administrative
fees.
This District-established HRA shall be subject to State and Federal Law and Regulation,
including IRS regulations and rulings, and applicable withholdings. Should any portion of the
HRA be declared contrary to law, then such portion shall not be deemed valid and subsisting,
but all other portions shall continue in full force and effect. If a participant resigns or retires
from the District, the participant may request reimbursement of Health Care Expenses from the
HRA Account until the Account is exhausted and the Administrative fee will be deducted from

28
the balance of the HRA. As to those portions declared contrary to Law and/or Regulation, the
Association and the District shall promptly meet and negotiate those portions in order to provide
the same or similar benefit(s) which conform, as closest as possible, to the original intent of the
parties.
5.27

The District shall check-off and remit payments to the NYSUT Benefit Trust upon submission
of a signed authorization to the payroll office for anyone within the Association. Such signed
authorization may be discontinued at the end of its term upon written notice by the employee to
the District. The District shall remit to the NYSUT Benefit Trust the payments deducted.
Deductions shall be made in equal installments.
The Union shall defend and indemnify the District and hold the District and its agents,
representatives and employees harmless from and against any and all suits, claims, demands and
liabilities of any kind that may arise out of, or by reason of the deduction and transmission of
monies as provided for in this section.

ARTICLE 6.

WORKING CONDITIONS

Section 6.1 Working Conditions
6.1

The District will reimburse unit members for reasonable replacement costs up to one hundred
fifty dollars ($150) for clothing or eye wear damaged while acting in the course of the
employee’s job duties and during the employee’s workday, based upon submission of the
damaged item, replacement receipt and incident report within five working days of the incident.
This benefit will not cover loss or damage to ordinary wear or the unit member’s misuse.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the duly authorized representatives of the parties have signed their names
this

day of _

, 2021.

FOR THE DISTRICT:

FOR THE OESPA:

_________________________________
Superintendent

_____________________________
President

29
APPENDIX “A”
Hourly Rates 2021-2022

Job Title
School Nurse (RN)
Information Technology Specialist
Senior Maintenance Mechanic
Custodian/Buildings & Grounds
Licensed Practical Nurse
Lifeguard
Maintenance Worker (Building Main.)
Keyboard Specialist
Records, Receiving & Inventory Clerk
Cook Manager
Teacher Aide
Cleaner
Cook
Food Service Helper

Probationary Rate
2021-2022
$22.50
$20.00
$20.00
$16.45
$16.20
$16.20
$16.20
$14.65
$14.40
$14.15
$14.00
$13.50
$13.40
$13.15

Step 1 Rate
2021-2022
$23.63
$21.00
$21.00
$17.27
$17.01
$17.01
$17.01
$15.38
$15.12
$14.86
$14.70
$14.18
$14.07
$13.81

Step 2 Rate
2021-2022
$24.81
$22.05
$22.05
$18.14
$17.86
$17.86
$17.86
$16.15
$15.88
$15.60
$15.44
$14.88
$14.77
$14.50

“Effective July 1, 2021, Off Step Members’ hourly wage increases will be in accordance with the terms of the
Memorandum of Agreement dated [insert date].”

Hourly Rates 2022-2023
Job Title
School Nurse (RN)
Information Technology Specialist
Senior Maintenance Mechanic
Custodian/Buildings & Grounds
Licensed Practical Nurse
Lifeguard
Maintenance Worker
Keyboard Specialist
Records, Receiving & Inventory Clerk
Cook Manager
Teacher Aide
Cleaner
Cook
Food Service Helper

Probationary Rate
2022-2023
$23.00
$20.00
$20.00
$16.80
$16.55
$16.55
$16.55
$15.00
$14.75
$14.50
$14.35
$13.85
$13.75
$13.50

Step 1 Rate
2022-2023
$24.94
$21.00
$21.00
$17.64
$17.38
$17.38
$17.38
$15.75
$15.49
$15.23
$15.07
$14.54
$14.44
$14.18

Step 2 Rate
2022-2023
$26.18
$22.05
$22.05
$18.52
$18.25
$18.25
$18.25
$16.54
$16.26
$15.99
$15.82
$15.27
$15.16
$14.88

Off Step Members will receive a 3% increase over their 2021-2022 hourly wage, effective July 1, 2022.

30
Hourly Rates 2023-2024
Probationary Rate
Step 1 Rate
Step 2 Rate
Job Title
2023-2024
2023-2024
2023-2024
School Nurse (RN)
$23.75
$24.94
$26.18
Information Technology Specialist
$20.00
$21.00
$22.05
Senior Maintenance Mechanic
$20.00
$21.00
$22.05
Custodian/Buildings & Grounds
$17.20
$18.06
$18.96
Licensed Practical Nurse
$16.95
$17.80
$18.69
Lifeguard
$16.95
$17.80
$18.69
Maintenance Worker
$16.95
$17.80
$18.69
Keyboard Specialist
$15.40
$16.17
$16.98
Records, Receiving & Inventory Clerk
$15.15
$15.91
$16.70
Cook Manager
$14.90
$15.65
$16.43
Teacher Aide
$14.75
$15.49
$16.26
Cleaner
$14.25
$14.96
$15.71
Cook
$14.15
$14.86
$15.60
Food Service Helper
$13.90
$14.60
$15.32
Off Step Members will receive a 3% increase over their 2022-2023 hourly wage, effective July 1, 2023.
Hourly Rates 2024-2025
Probationary Rate 2024 - Step 1 Rate Step 2 Rate
Job Title
2025
2024 -2025
2024 -2025
School Nurse (RN)
$23.75
$24.94
$26.18
Information Technology Specialist
$20.00
$21.00
$22.05
Senior Maintenance Mechanic
$20.00
$21.00
$22.05
Custodian/Buildings & Grounds
$17.60
$18.48
$19.40
Licensed Practical Nurse
$17.35
$18.22
$19.13
Lifeguard
$17.35
$18.22
$19.13
Maintenance Worker
$17.35
$18.22
$19.13
Keyboard Specialist
$15.80
$16.59
$17.42
Records, Receiving & Inventory
$15.55
Clerk
$16.33
$17.14
Cook Manager
$15.30
$16.07
$16.87
Teacher Aide
$15.15
$15.91
$16.70
Cleaner
$14.65
$15.38
$16.15
Cook
$14.55
$15.28
$16.04
Food Service Helper
$14.30
$15.02
$15.77
Off Step Members will receive a 3% increase over their 2023-2024 hourly wage, effective July 1, 2024.

31
Shift Differentials 2021-2025
Sr Food Service
OIMS Cook
OHS Cook
Shift Differential
Library Aide when no Librarian is assigned to the Library

.27
.27
.27
.27
.27

32
APPENDIX B

GRIEVANCE FORM

(1)

Employee’s Name: _____________________________________________
Employee’s Position: ___________________________________________

(2)

This grievance was discussed with (immediate supervisor’s name):
____________________on (date) __________________________

(3)

Give brief statement of facts of the incident which gave rise to the grievance.
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________

(4)

This incident took place on (date): _________________________

(5)

The Association charges that the incident violates paragraph(s) of the Agreement:
______________________________________________________________

(6)

Requested remedy:
______________________________________________________________

Employee’s signature:
Association Representative’s signature:
____________________________________________
Date submitted to Superintendent’s Office: ________________________

33
APPENDIX C

LETTER TO AAA
REQUESTING GRIEVANCE
ARBITRATION
(date)
__________________________________________
American Arbitration Association
1633 Broadway, Floor 10
New York, NY 10019-6708
To whom it may concern:
The Olean Educational Support Personnel Association, acting pursuant to Section 1.46
of the current agreement between it and the City School District, City of Olean, New
York (a copy of the arbitration portion of that agreement is enclosed), requests that you
send to the undersigned and to the Superintendent of the District a list of 20 names of
arbitrators to hear the following grievance:

Grievant’s Name: ____________________________
Date of Written Grievance: ___________________________

Very truly yours,

Olean Educational Support Personnel
Association
Copy to:
(name)
Olean City School District
Olean, New York 14760

Superintendent
