AGREEMENT
BETWEEN CITY OF HIALEAH, FLORIDA
AND
FLORIDA COUNCIL 79 OF AFSCME/
HIALEAH CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION/ AFSCME
LOCAL 161
OCTOBER 01, 2023 - SEPTEMBER 30, 2026

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Agreement
Preamble
Article 1

Recognition

Article 2

Representation of the Union

6

Article 3

Representation of the City

6

Article 4

Union/City Conferences

7

Article 5

Labor/Management Committee

7

Article 6

Management Rights

8

Article 7

No Strike

9

Article 8

Term of Agreement

10

Article 9

Notice

10

Article 10

No Discrimination

11

Article 11

Bulletin Boards

12

Article 12

Reserved (Left Blank)

13

Article 13

Existing Rules

13

Article 14

Grievance Procedure

13

Article 15

Discipline and Discharge

17

Article 16

Employee Evaluation

18

1

Article 17

Working Out of Classification

19

Article 18

Notice of Transfer or Schedule Change

20

Article 19

Call Back Pay

20

Article 20

Jury Duty

20

Article 21

Bereavement Leave

21

Article 22

Military Training Leave

23

Article 23

Off-Duty Injuries

23

Article 24

Sick Leave

23

Article 25

Line of Duty Injuries

27

Article 26

Stand-by Pay

32

Article 27

Furloughs

32

Article 28

Voting

32

Article 29

Promotional Procedures

33

Article 30

Layoff and Recall

34

Article 31

Seniority

37

Article 32

Tuition Reimbursement

37

Article 33

Tool Allowance

39

Article 34

Safety

41

Article 35

Holidays

41

Article 36

Overtime/Compensatory time (Ball Back)

43

2

Article 37

Vacation

45

Article 38

Health Insurance Provision

48

Article 39

Prevailing Benefits

53

Article 40

Union Stewards

53

Article 41

Savings Clause

55

Article 42

Union Time Pool/Union Elections

55

Article 43

Pension

57

Article 44

Total Agreement

61

Article 45

Parental Leave

61

Article 46

Drug and Alcohol Testing

62

Article 47

Notes to the Pay Plan

66

Article 48

Part-Time Employees

68

Article 49

Heart Bill

71

Article 50

Separation Pay

74

Article 51

Personnel Board

75

Article 52

Solid Waste Division

76

Article 53

Tardiness Policy

76

Article 54

Reserved (Left Blank)

77

Article 55

Emergency Operations

78

3

Article 56

Uniform Policy

78

Article 57

Direct Deposit

81

Article 58

Reserved (Left Blank)

81

Article 59

Reimbursement

81

Signature Page

83

Appendix “A”
Appendix “B”
Appendix “C”
Please note: The Pay Scales are located at the end of the contract.

4

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
Section 1.
Pursuant to and in accordance with all applicable provisions of Chapter 447, Florida
Statutes, as amended, the City recognizes the Union as the exclusive bargaining
representative for all employees included in the Bargaining Unit.
Section 2.
The Bargaining Unit is defined as composed of those positions recognized by the Florida
Public Employees' Relations Commission in Certificate No. 1336, and subsequent amendments.
Both parties recognize that any change to the Bargaining Unit would require a proper
amendment approved in accordance with applicable law.
ARTICLE 2
REPRESENTATION OF THE UNION
The President of the Union, and/or the person or persons designated by said President, shall
have full authority to conclude an Agreement on behalf of the Union, subject to a ratification vote
of members of the Bargaining Unit. It is understood that the Union President and/or his/her
designee is the official representative of the Union for the purpose of negotiating with the City.
Negotiations entered into with persons other than those as defined herein, regardless of their
position or association with the Union, shall be deemed unauthorized and shall have no weight or
authority in committing or in any way obligating the Union.
ARTICLE 3
REPRESENTATION OF THE CITY
The City shall be represented by the Mayor, or a person or persons designated in writing
to the Union by the Mayor. The Mayor or his/her designated representative(s) shall have full
authority to conclude an agreement on behalf of the City, subject to ratification by an official
resolution of the City Council.
It is understood that the designated representative(s) of the City are the official
6

representatives for the purpose of negotiating with the Union. Any negotiations entered into with
persons other than those defined herein, regardless of their position or association with the City,
shall be deemed unauthorized and shall have no weight or authority in committing or in any way
obligating the City.
ARTICLE 4
UNION/CITY CONFERENCES
Section 1.
Counsel or advisors to representatives of the Union or the City may, at the will of either,
attend any conference or meeting between the Union and the City.

Section 2.
The President, or his/her designee, shall be allowed time off without loss of pay or
emoluments, from his/her regular employment when necessary to attend meetings of the City
Council, City of Hialeah Retirement Board, or City of Hialeah Personnel Board.
Section 3.
Three (3) employee representatives, who shall be members of the Bargaining Unit, shall
be permitted to attend negotiating sessions while on duty with no loss of pay or emoluments,
provided that the Human Resources Department is notified at least seventy-two (72) hours in
advance of the names of the three (3) individuals.
ARTICLE 5
LABOR/MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
Section 1.
The City agrees to meet with the Union to discuss Labor/Management issues.
Section 2.
The Union shall be represented by the Union President and/or any other Bargaining Unit
members considered necessary by both parties.

7

Section 3.
These meetings will take place during working hours with no loss of pay.
Section 4.
All Labor/Management Committee Meetings will be electronically recorded with said
tapes retained for a minimum of two (2) years. Tapes shall be available to both parties equally.
ARTICLE 6
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Section 1.
The Union agrees that the City has and will continue to retain, whether exercised or not, the
right to operate and manage its affairs in all respects; that the powers or authority which the City has
not officially abridged, deleted or modified by the express provisions of this Agreement are retained
by the City. The rights of the City, through its management officials, shall include, but shall not be
limited to: the right to determine the organization of City Government; to determine the purpose of
each of its constituent departments; to exercise control and discretion over the organization and
efficiency of operations of the City; to set standards for service to be offered to the public; to direct
the employees of the City, including the right to assign work and overtime, to hire, examine, classify,
promote, train, transfer, assign, and schedule employees in positions with the City; to suspend,
demote, discharge, or take other disciplinary action against employees for proper cause; to increase,
reduce, change, modify or alter the composition and size of the workforce, including the right to
relieve employees from duties because of lack of work or funds; to determine the location, methods,
means, and personnel by which operations are to be conducted, including the right to determine
whether goods or services are to be made or purchased; to establish, modify, combine or abolish job
pay positions; to change or eliminate existing methods of operations, equipment or facilities; to
determine the methods, means and number of personnel needed or desirable for carrying out the City's
mission and to direct the workforce.
Section 2.
The City has the sole authority to determine the purpose and mission of the City and to
prepare and submit budgets to be adopted by the City Council.

8

Section 3.
The City shall enforce and comply with the provisions of the Agreement so as not to violate
the City Charter or the existing Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
Section 4.
Those inherent managerial functions, prerogative and policy making rights that the City
has not expressly modified or restricted by a specific provision of the Agreement are not in any
way, directly or indirectly, subject to the Grievance Procedure contained herein.
Section 5.
Delivery of municipal services in the most efficient, effective and courteous manner is of
paramount importance to the City of Hialeah. Such achievement is recognized to be a mutual
obligation of both parties within their respective roles and responsibilities.
ARTICLE 7
NO STRIKE
Section 1.
“Strike” means the concerted failure to report for duty, the concerted absence of
employees from their positions, the concerted abstinence in whole or in part by any group of
employees from the full and faithful performance of their duties of employment with the City,
participation in a deliberate and concerted course of conduct which adversely affects the
services of the City, picketing or demonstrating in furtherance of work stoppage, either during
the term or after the expiration of the Collective Bargaining Agreement.
Section 2.
Neither the Union nor any of its officers, agents and members, nor any bargaining unit
member covered by this Agreement will instigate, promote, sponsor, engage in or condone any
strike, sympathy strike, slowdown, sick-out or concerted stoppage of work.
Section 3.
Each employee who holds a position with the Union occupies a position of special trust
and responsibility in maintaining and bringing about compliance with this Article and the strike
prohibition in Florida Statutes, Section 447.505, and the Constitution of the State of Florida, Article
1, Section 6. Accordingly, the Union, its officers, stewards and other representatives agree that it
9

is their continuing obligation and responsibility to abide by the provisions of this Article and the
Law by remaining at work during any strike.
Section 4.
Any or all employees who violate any provision of this Article or the Law prohibiting
strikes may be dismissed or otherwise disciplined by the City.
ARTICLE 8
TERM OF AGREEMENT
Section 1.
This Agreement, after having been first executed by both parties in accordance with
applicable Florida Statutes and PERC regulations, and after having been imposed in accordance
with applicable Florida Statutes and PERC regulations, shall become effective after ratification by
the Union and the acceptance of this Agreement by the City Council except as provided
otherwise herein, and shall continue in full force and effect until 11:59 p.m., September 30,
2026.
Section 2.
This Agreement shall automatically be renewed from year-to-year thereafter unless either
party shall have notified the other in writing not later than April 1st of year the contract is slated to
end, that it desires to modify the Agreement with negotiations to begin no later than May 31 of
said year. Such notification shall include a list of proposals that shall inform the other party of the
items they desire to negotiate. The remainder of the Agreement shall remain in full force and effect
and automatically be renewed from year to year.
ARTICLE 9
NOTICE
Section 1.
The City agrees to provide to the Union President or his/her designee the following:
Agendas of Regular and Special City Council Meetings (except where exempt by applicable law),
Regular and Special Retirement Board Meetings, Regular and Special Personnel Board Meetings

10

and Hearings, Regular and Special Safety Committee Meetings, Regular and Special Council
Committee Meetings, and the Minutes of Regular and Special City Council Meetings (except
where exempt by applicable law), Regular and Special Retirement Board Meetings, Regular and
Special Personnel Board Meetings and Hearings, Regular and Special Safety Committee
Meetings, and Regular and Special Council Committee Meetings.
Section 2.
Notices shall be placed in a box to be provided for the Union, and to be located at a site
in City Hall designated by the City, at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to scheduled meeting
time, unless the meeting is scheduled with less than 48 hours’ notice, in which case notice will
be placed in the box as soon as reasonably practicable.
Section 3.
The City will give, where possible, advance notice of Insurance Committee Meetings
when the meetings concern health insurance issues for the Unit.
ARTICLE 10
NO DISCRIMINATION
The City and the Union agree that the provisions of the Agreement shall be applied equally
to all employees in the Bargaining Unit without discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race,
color, creed, national origin, religious, political affiliation or disability in accordance with
applicable federal and state law.
Section 2.
All references in the Agreement to the gender of employees shall be construed to include
all employees.
Section 3.
The Union and the City recognize Affirmative Action Programs, the Americans With
Disabilities Act and the Family and Medical Leave Act, as they pertain to the City of Hialeah.
Subject to collective bargaining rights, the Union and the City agree to cooperate in the
development of Affirmative Action Programs for employees within the unit.

11

Section 4.
The parties agree not to interfere with the right of the employees to join or not join the
Union, and there shall be no discrimination, interference, restraint or coercion by the City or
Union because of Union membership or non-union membership.
ARTICLE 11
BULLETIN BOARDS
Section 1.
The City shall provide bulletin board space, which shall be used for the following notices:
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.

Recreation and special affairs of the Union
Union Meetings
Union Elections
Reports on Union Committees
Copy of Union Contract
Union Benefits Programs
Training and Educational Opportunities
Official Union Newspaper

Section 2.
Notices posted on these bulletin boards shall not contain anything reflecting adversely on
the City, or any of its officers or employees; nor shall any posted material violate any law, rule
or regulation.
Section 3.
The City shall provide a maximum of seventeen (17) bulletin boards, one (1) each at the
following locations:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Fleet Maintenance (employee lounge area)
Solid Waste
City Hall Lounge Area
Police Administration Building
Parks and Recreation (Time Clock Area)
Milander Park (Equipment Room/Staff Area)
Goodlet Park (Equipment Room/Staff Area)
Police Substation 4 (Break Room)
J.F.K. Library
Water and Sewer Dept. (office)

12

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

Water and Sewer Department (Maintenance)
Streets Department (Time Clock Area)
Fire Administration Building (3rd Floor Mailroom)
Police Communications Building
Bucky Dent Park (Equipment Room/Staff Area)
Babcock Park (Equipment Room/Staff Area)
Police Substation 5 (Break Room)

ARTICLE 12
RESERVED
[This Article intentionally left blank.]

ARTICLE 13
EXISTING RULES
Any alterations or amendments to Departmental Rules, Regulations, Policies or
Procedures, shall be presented to the Union fifteen (15) calendar days prior to taking effect.

ARTICLE 14
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
It is the policy of the City and the Union to encourage discussion on an informal basis.
Such discussion should be held with a view to reaching an understanding that will resolve the
matter in a manner satisfactory to the parties, without need for recourse to the written Grievance
Procedure; provided, however, that resolution of a grievance is consistent with the terms of this
Agreement. No discussion between an employee and the City under the provision of this Article,
and prior to the filing, in writing, of a grievance, shall, however, serve to operate as an election
of remedies as per Article 15, Discharge and Discipline.
Section 1.
It is agreed to and understood by both parties that there shall be a procedure for the
resolution of grievances. The Union has the right not to process grievances of employees who are
not dues paying members of the Union. It is agreed that the Union reserves the exclusive right to
13

process grievances at any step of the grievance procedure, including arbitration. Any member of
the bargaining unit may process a grievance through representation of his/her own choosing. If a
bargaining unit member processes his/her own grievance, the Union shall be sent a copy of all
grievances, written responses and participate as an interested party to assure that the grievance is
resolved in accordance with the provisions of this contract. The Union accepts its duty of fair
representation but retains its right to preclude the processing of non-meritorious grievances
through the steps of this grievance procedure, inclusive of arbitration.
Section 2.
A grievance is any dispute, controversy or difference between (a) the parties, or (b) the
City and an employee or employees on any issue with respect to the interpretation or application
of this Contract. Any grievance not conforming to the provisions of this paragraph shall be denied.
Section 3.
Nothing in this Article or elsewhere in this Agreement shall be construed to permit the
Union to process a grievance (a) on behalf of any employee without consent, or (b) with respect
to any matter which is the subject of a grievance, appeal, administrative proceeding, or
judicial/quasi-judicial proceeding before any governmental board, agency, or court brought by an
individual employee or group of employees, or by the Union. It is further agreed by the Union
that employees covered by this Agreement shall make an exclusive election of remedies available
to them. Selection of redress other than through the Grievance Procedure contained herein shall
preclude the aggrieved party or parties from utilizing the Grievance Procedure for the adjustment
of a grievance.
Section 4.
Any grievance not processed by the aggrieved or his/her representative in accordance with
the time limits provided for in this Article, except as mutually extended as provided herein, shall
be considered conclusively abandoned. Any grievance not answered by Management within the
time limits provided for in this Agreement and not mutually extended as provided herein shall
automatically advance to the next higher step of the Grievance Procedure. Time limits can only
be extended by mutual agreement of the Union and management in writing.
Section 5.
Where a grievance is general in nature in that it applies to a number of employees having
the same issue to be decided, or if the grievance is directly between the Union and the City, it

14

shall be presented directly to the Mayor at Step 4, within thirty (30) calendar days of the
occurrence which gave rise to the grievance, and signed by the aggrieved employees or the Union
representative on their behalf. Submission of this general grievance shall serve as an election of
remedies.
Section 6.
A grievance shall be processed in accordance with the following procedure:
Step 1.

The Union and/or the aggrieved employee shall file a written grievance with
their Department/Division head within thirty (30) calendar days of the
occurrence that gave rise to the grievance. The grievance must be on the
grievance form.

Step 2.

Within thirty (30) calendar days of the receipt of the grievance, the
Department/Division head shall respond to the Union and the aggrieved
employee, when the employee is proceeding without Union representation.

Step 3.

If not resolved at Step 2, the grievance and the Department/Division head’s
response will be served by the Department/Division Head on the Human
Resources Director within ten (10) calendar days, at which time a
labor/management conference will be scheduled comprised of not more
than three (3) representatives from the City and three (3) representatives
from the Union. The labor/management meeting shall be held as soon as
practicable. If a labor/management conference is not scheduled within thirty
(30) calendar days either party shall have the option of moving to the next
Step.

Step 4.

If the issue is not resolved at the labor/management step, a grievance appeal
may then be filed within thirty (30) calendar days with the Mayor, who shall
have thirty (30) calendar days to respond.

Step 5.
5.1.

If the grievance is not resolved at Step 4, the party desiring arbitration
shall request in writing, within fifteen (15) calendar days of when the
Mayor’s response was due, a panel of arbitrators from the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Services (“FMCS”). Should a panel not be
requested within such time-frame, the grievance shall be considered

15

abandoned. The City will pay 50% of the initiation fee of grievances
filed with the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Services (“FMCS”),
not to exceed $500.00 for each year. A copy of the request for a panel
shall simultaneously be sent to the other side. Either party may
unilaterally reject one panel and request a replacement panel at its own
expense. The party requesting arbitration shall be the first to strike a
name. The parties shall then alternately strike names until one name
remains, which shall be the name of the arbitrator. The parties may agree
to select an Arbitrator by mutual consent.

5.2.

The arbitration shall be conducted under the rules of the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Services (“FMCS”), subject to the
following: the arbitrator shall not have jurisdiction and authority to
change, amend, add to, subtract from or otherwise alter or supplement
this Agreement or any part thereof or any amendment thereto; the
arbitrator shall have no authority to consider or rule upon any matter
which is stated in this Agreement not to be subject to arbitration or
which is not a grievance as defined in this Agreement; or which is not
specifically covered by this Agreement; nor shall this Collective
Bargaining Agreement be construed by an arbitrator to supersede
applicable laws in existence at the time of the signing of this Agreement.

5.3.

The arbitrator may not issue declaratory or advisory opinions and shall
confine himself/herself exclusively to the question, which is presented
to him/her, which question must be actual and existing.

5.4.

The fee and expenses of the arbitrator shall be paid by the party who
loses the appeal to arbitration, except as provided below. Each party
shall fully bear its own costs regarding witnesses and representation. In
the event the parties agree to schedule more than one case on a given
day or on multiple days, then the fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall

16

be shared equally by the parties. The parties agree that where multiple
cases are to be heard by one arbitrator, the parties agree to identify those
cases thirty (30) calendar days in advance of any arbitration hearing.

5.5.

Copies of the award of the arbitration made in accordance with the
jurisdiction or authority under this Agreement shall be furnished to both
parties within thirty (30) calendar days of the hearing and shall be final
and binding on both parties.
ARTICLE 15
DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE

Section 1.
In cases where it becomes necessary to discharge or otherwise discipline any employee
covered by this Agreement, a representative of management shall give notice of discipline to the
employee. Such notice of discipline shall be confirmed in writing to the employee and the Union
within fifteen (15) calendar days following the day of discharge or imposition of discipline,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, holidays and the day of occurrence.
Section 2.
If an appeal of any discipline, discharge, suspension or reduction is filed with the Personnel
Board by an individual entitled to such appeal under the Charter and/or in accordance with the
Board's Rules and Regulations, such appeal shall be an election of remedies and shall waive any
right on the part of the employee or the Union to file or process a grievance under the terms of this
Agreement protesting such discharge or other disciplinary action and shall be filed within fifteen
(15) calendar days of receipt of written notice. If such grievance is to be filed in accordance with
the terms of the Grievance Procedure Article, as contained in this Agreement, it shall commence
in Step 4 of said procedure and shall be filed within thirty (30) calendar days of the written notice
of discipline, discharge, suspension or reduction.
Section 3.
An employee who has made an election of a particular remedy regarding adverse
disciplinary action (i.e. Civil Service Appeal or Grievance Procedure), and who subsequently has
his appeal or grievance dismissed on the basis of untimeliness, or for any other procedural error,

17

shall nonetheless, have been considered to have elected his remedy and shall not be entitled to use
any of the other resolution procedures.
Section 4.
Employees who have not been certified to the classified service may be dismissed
during a probationary period without cause. These employees, however, shall be entitled after
the first six (6) months of the probationary period, to a written reason why they are being
discharged, however, they will not be able to grieve this item under the grievance procedure.
ARTICLE 16
EMPLOYEE EVALUATION
Section 1.
All employees covered by this Agreement will be evaluated utilizing the evaluation forms
as deemed appropriate by the City. The current evaluation form is included at.
Appendix C – Performance Review and Evaluation.

Section 2.
Employees rated will be given a copy of the evaluation rating. Only notice of below
acceptable and unacceptable evaluations will be forwarded to the Union President. Any employee
who has been continuously employed by the City for a least twelve (12) months immediately
prior to being rated below acceptable by Management will be given a reasonable opportunity, not
less than three (3) months, nor more than nine (9) months, to improve to an acceptable rating
level before any disciplinary action may be taken against the employee. If an employee is rated
below acceptable in the third trimester of a nine (9) month promotional probationary period,
his/her probation may be extended up to three (3) months to allow the employee an opportunity
to improve to an acceptable rating.
Section 3.
Should an employee feel the merit step denial was incorrect, the employee may grieve the
denial consistent with the grievance procedure. However, any such grievance shall be
consolidated with any discipline appeal should the employee be removed, suspended or reduced
18

in grade because of the evaluation. Employees with less than one (1) year of service at the time
of the evaluation will not be able to grieve this item beyond Step 4 of the Grievance Procedure
pursuant to Article 14.
ARTICLE 17
WORKING OUT OF CLASSIFICATION
Section 1.
No employee covered by this Agreement shall be required to work outside his
classification, except under emergency conditions as determined by the Mayor and/or Department
Head or anyone legally acting in either of these capacities. The City agrees to notify the Union of
any changes in the job description of any classification in the Bargaining Unit prior to taking
effect. It is understood, however, by both parties to this Agreement, that the job descriptions are
to continue to be interpreted consistent with the purpose and intent of the job descriptions.
Section 2.
When it becomes necessary for an employee to work out of classification for more than
three (3) consecutive full days of actual work, excluding approved vacation and/or compensatory
time leave and sick leave where a doctor’s note is provided, the City agrees to assign out of
classification pay of 10% over their regular classification base rate of pay, retroactive to the first
day the employee worked out of class. The City agrees it will not remove and reassign an employee
working out of classification for the purpose of avoiding payment to that individual and then
reassigning another employee to work out of classification or reassigning the same individual so
as to prevent three (3) consecutive days of working out of classification.
Section 3.
The City agrees not to work any individual employee out of classification status for more
than nine (9) months total during the term of this Agreement. The Union recognizes the City's
right to continue out of classification for a position for more than a nine (9) month period, in the
event the employee regularly occupying the position is on maternity, disability, medical or
military service leave and the employee is expected to return to employment.

19

ARTICLE 18
NOTICE OF TRANSFER OR SCHEDULE CHANGE
If a transfer or change in an employee's regular schedule means a change in hours or days
off, the employee shall be notified no less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the transfer or
change in scheduling in order to enable the employee to arrange for the orderly change. The ten
(10) days’ notice requirement may be waived by mutual consent of the parties, or by the City
based on operational necessity. A change in an employee’s time off for lunch does not constitute
a schedule change that requires a ten (10) calendar days’ notice.
ARTICLE 19
CALL BACK PAY
When it is necessary for the Department/Division to require Bargaining Unit employees
to return to work, not on their regular assigned shift, the City agrees to compensate the employees
for a minimum of three (3) hours’ pay at the established rate of one and one-half (1 1/2) times the
employee’s pay rate converted to an hourly rate or three (3) hours’ compensatory time at time
and one-half (i.e., four and one-half (4 1/2) hours). The City reserves the right to require the
employee to remain at a worksite or on call for the entire (3) hour call back time period.
ARTICLE 20
JURY DUTY
Section 1.
All Full-Time Temporary and Civil Service employees shall be paid for actual working
time lost when called to serve on jury duty. Such employees shall be paid at their regular hourly
rate for all working time lost.
Section 2.
No Civil Service or Full-Time Temporary employee will be required to surrender jury
duty pay received from the Court in order to receive full City pay under these provisions.
Section 3.

20

No Civil Service employee or Full-Time Temporary employee who serves four (4) hours
or more of jury duty shall be required to work that day if said employee is in fact scheduled as a
regular workday to work on said day. If an employee is released from jury duty less than four (4)
hours after reporting, the employee will be required to return to his/her place of duty for the
remainder of the shift, or if the employee has not started his/her shift, the employee will be
required to report to his/her shift at the normal starting time. The employee must provide written
proof of dates of jury service upon returning to work.
Section 4.
No employee who volunteers for jury duty will be compensated under the provisions of
this Article.
ARTICLE 21
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
Section 1.
Any Civil Service employee shall, in the case of death in the immediate family, be given,
at the employee’s request, five (5) working days off with pay to attend the family member's
funeral services. The immediate family is constituted to mean the following:
Father, Step-Father, Mother, Step-Mother, Sister, Step-Sister, Half-Sister, Brother, StepBrother, Half-Brother, Husband, Wife, Child, Step-Child, current Father-in- law, current
Mother-in-law,

current

Son-in-law,

current

Daughter-in-law,

Grandchild

and

Grandparents of the employee, and may also include any other person who was an actual
member of the employee’s household.
Section 2.
Any Full-Time Temporary employee, after ninety (90) calendar days of continuous
employment, shall be eligible for Bereavement Leave, not to exceed three (3) working days under
the same conditions as prescribed for Civil Service employees in Section 1.
Section 3.
Employees must submit proof of death, and proof of household membership for any
person who was an actual member of the employee’s household if applicable, with the report of

21

leave within five (5) working days of returning to work, in order to receive compensation. In lieu
of a death certificate, an employee may submit a newspaper account showing the death and
relationship of the deceased to the employee and/or other appropriate criteria, e.g., funeral home
program, as deemed appropriate by the Human Resources Department.

22

ARTICLE 22
MILITARY TRAINING LEAVE
Section 1.
All employees who are either reserve officers or enlisted personnel in the U.S. Army
Reserve, U.S. Naval Reserve, U.S. Marine Corps. Reserve, U.S. Coast Guard Reserve, U.S. Air
Force Reserve, or Florida National Guard shall be entitled to leave of absence from their
respective duties without loss of pay, time efficiency rating or Civil Service seniority credits on all
days during which they shall be engaged in field or Coast defense exercises or other training
ordered under the provisions of the U.S. Military or Naval Training regulations; provided that
leaves of absence granted as a matter of legal right under the provisions of this Section shall not
exceed seventeen (17) days in any one calendar year.
Section 2.
Request for military leave shall be submitted thirty (30) days prior to the desired leave.
When notice by the Federal Government is given in less than thirty (30) days, the employee is
obligated to turn said notice in immediately.
ARTICLE 23
OFF-DUTY INJURIES
The City has no duty to accommodate any employee who has sustained an off-duty injury
not covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act. No employee shall have the asserted right to
continue in light-duty status for an off-duty injury not covered by the Americans with Disabilities
Act. The City reserves the option to accommodate an employee who has sustained an off-duty
injury.
ARTICLE 24
SICK LEAVE
Section 1.
The parties agree that care and discretion shall be exercised by Management and the Union
in order to prevent the abuse of sick leave privileges. Excessive absences on account of trivial
indispositions must be discouraged. “Excessive absences” are defined as sick leave usage in

23

excess of sixty (60) hours in a consecutive twelve (12) month period without medical certification
that the employee was unable to work, or provide written proof from a medical facility that the
employee attempted to obtain an appointment, but was unable to do so. This documentation must
be provided within five (5) days of the employee’s return to work. After exceeding the sixty (60)hour cap referenced above, discipline appeals will only be permitted when based on discrepancies
in the number of hours used or whether the medical documentation was provided, as required.
Sick leave used when the City shuts down all or a portion of its operations, or employees are
otherwise requested not to report to work, will not be taken into account in calculating excess
absences. For the purposes of this Article, the consecutive twelve (12) month period shall
commence on each October 1, and continue for a twelve (12) month period, and every consecutive
twelve (12) month period thereafter.
Failure to provide documentation will result in the following:
60.1 – 67.5 hours

oral counseling

67.6 – 75.0 hours

written reprimand and removal from voluntary overtime roster
[passed over for two (2) overtime opportunities]

75.1 – 82.5 hours

three (3) day suspension

82.6 – 90 hours

ten (10) day suspension

90.1 hours or more

termination

When an employee reaches sixty (60) hours of undocumented sick leave, which does not
include personal sick leave time, they forfeit their right to request the use of personal sick leave
for the balance of the calendar year. The use of personal sick leave must be pre-approved.
A.

Progressive Discipline - Any employee receiving discipline, pursuant to this
section, in consecutive years, shall be subject to having the prior year’s discipline
carried over for purposes of progression. For example: An employee receiving the
2nd step discipline in one (1) calendar year shall commence to the next discipline in
a consecutive year at the 3rd offense step. Discipline in a third consecutive year
would commence at the 4th step offense, assuming no greater level than a 3rd step
offense was reached in the prior year.

B.

If discipline is carried over pursuant to paragraph A above resulting in Step 4
discipline, an employee will be required to serve a twenty (20) day suspension prior
to termination.

24

Section 2.
Permanent Bargaining Unit employees may be allowed to accrue one (1) full working day
(7 1/2 hours) sick leave per month, provided that the employee is in pay status at least fifteen (15)
days per month.
Section 3.
Employees in probationary status and/or temporary employees will accrue sick leave in
accordance with Section 2. However, no sick leave with pay shall be used during the employee's
first ninety (90) working days.
Section 4.
In order to receive sick leave with pay, an employee must take steps to notify his/her
immediate supervisor or the person designated by the Department Head to receive such notice of
illness within thirty (30) minutes after the time scheduled for the beginning of the employee's
daily duties. Notwithstanding the above, employees assigned to Police and Fire Communications
shall notify their supervisor or designee at least one (1) hour before their scheduled shift.
Employee absences of more than three (3) days shall require medical documentation that the
employee was unable to perform their duties, in order for the employee to receive compensation
for this absence.
Section 5.
Employees shall be paid upon separation, a percentage of the value of their sick leave bank
based upon their total years of service as provided below:
YEARS

PAYOFF PERCENTAGE

0-4

0%

4 years + 1 day – 6 years

20%

6 years + 1 day – 8 years

40%

8 years + 1 day – 10 years

60%

10 years + 1 day or more

100%

Employees whose employment has been terminated for cause shall not be entitled to receive any
of the value of their sick leave bank.
Section 6.
A.

For employees hired on or before December 12, 2000, the total number of hours in
an employee's sick leave bank at time of separation shall be multiplied by the

25

employee’s hourly rate, at the time of separation and shall be paid out to the
employee based upon the appropriate percentage, given the employee’s years of
service as of the date of separation.
B.

For employees hired after December 12, 2000, the hours in the employee’s sick
bank at time of separation shall be paid at the rate at the time the sick leave was
earned and shall be paid out to the employee based upon the appropriate percentage,
given the employee’s years of service as of the date of separation.

Section 7.
In the event of an employee's permanent disability or death, 100% of their sick leave shall
be paid to the employee or their estate, in accordance with the time bank provisions set forth in
Section 6.
Section 8.
Leave taken for certain family and medical reasons shall be granted for eligible employees,
pursuant to the Family Medical Leave Act of 1993, as amended (“FMLA”), subject to all
conditions of the Act.
Section 9.
Any employee who has accumulated at least 450 hours of unused sick leave as of
December 31st of the previous year shall be paid fifty percent (50%) of their unused sick leave
time over the 450 hours, not to exceed a payout of 300 hours per year. Employees have the option
of directing the City to deposit the funds in the employee’s Deferred Compensation Account, up
to the maximum amount allowed by law.
The City shall pay the employee no later than the Friday after the first payday in
September, provided funds are available, as determined by Administration.
Section 10.
No employee shall accept outside employment of any kind or nature whatsoever during the
employee’s normal working hours or shift, nor engage in any form of self-employment while on
sick leave.

26

ARTICLE 25
LINE OF DUTY INJURIES
The parties agree that the benefits provided for in this Article shall only be made available
to employees who suffer on-the-job injuries and are deemed entitled to receive the benefits
pursuant to the provisions of Section 70-66(d), Article III, Chapter 70 of the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Hialeah for a maximum benefit period not to exceed 72 weeks and subject to the
employee being carried and remaining in pay status, but unable to perform any of the duties of the
employee’s job as a result of the on-the-job injury. If eligible, these benefits shall be paid to the
employee in addition to payments made to the employee pursuant to the Florida Worker’s
Compensation law, the total sum of which shall be subject to the maximum percentage of pay
provided for in this Article for the benefit period provided. Upon the expiration of the maximum
benefit period and exhaustion of benefits, the employee shall be required to apply for disability
retirement and diligently pursue the application to final determination of eligibility by the
Retirement Board. Nothing in this Article shall be interpreted to abrogate the right of the City to
allow and demand the employee perform limited duties with no reduction in pay, so long as the
employee is able to perform the limited duties, at any time prior to a final determination by the
Retirement Board of an application for disability retirement. Nothing in this Article shall be
interpreted to abrogate the right of the City to notice and due process as an interested party in the
determination of disability applications considered by the Retirement Board. Upon ratification,
nothing in this Article shall be interpreted to mean an employee is entitled to receive these benefits
upon the occurrence of any of the following: (i) exhaustion of the maximum benefit period, (ii)
upon a determination on the employee’s disability retirement application, (iii) upon severance of
employment, whether by resignation, retirement, termination or otherwise, or (iv) upon return to
work. Article III, Chapter 70 shall be amended consistent with this Article.
Section 1.
An employee who sustains a job connected injury and who has been determined to be
entitled to receive benefits during the employee’s temporary absence from duty in accordance with
the applicable City Code provision, shall be carried in full pay status and eligible to receive up to
100% of their salary at the time of the injury, less any money received for Workers’ Compensation
benefits for a period not to exceed twenty (20) weeks.

27

Section 2.
If the injury renders the employee disabled from performing their duties in the classified
service beyond the twenty (20) weeks referred to in Section 1, the employee shall receive an
amount of money equal to seventy-five percent (75%) of the employee’s salary at the time of
injury, less any money received from Workers’ Compensation, for an additional fifty-two (52)
weeks.
Section 3.
An employee who has sustained a job connected injury, who is unable to perform any work
for the City after the fifty-two (52) week period referred to in Section 2, and who has been approved
to receive disability retirement benefits from the City of Hialeah Retirement System shall, upon
retirement, will no longer be eligible nor continue to receive any benefits pursuant to this Article.
Section 4.
All employees, who are receiving benefits post their on-the-job injury (100% of salary)
according to this Article shall continue to earn and accrue full employee benefits up to the
maximum benefit period, as long as the employee is carried in pay status.
Section 5.
Any employee denied entitlement to disability benefits, pursuant to this Article, shall have
the right to grieve such denial under Article 30, Grievance Procedure, of the Collective Bargaining
Agreement.
Section 6.
If an employee files a lawsuit against the City regarding the accident giving rise to the
disability, then the benefits provided for in this Article, excluding Workers’ Compensation, shall
be suspended pending determination of said litigation.
Section 7.
The insurance premium of an employee receiving benefits, pursuant to this Article shall be
the same as an active employee, until the maximum seventy-two (72) weeks of benefits is
exhausted (initial 26 weeks plus additional 52 weeks). After 72 weeks the benefits provided by
this Article shall cease and employees shall be responsible for the full cost of health insurance
including for any dependent coverage. The maximum benefit period of 72 weeks may be extended
for an additional 36 weeks while the employee makes an application for disability retirement
before the Retirement Board and diligently pursues the application to final determination. The

28

benefits shall not extend beyond the additional 36 weeks notwithstanding the cause of delay in a
final determination of the employee’s application for disability retirement.
This provision will not affect or alter the insurance benefits of an employee who has been
accepted/classified permanently and totally disabled, in accordance with requirements of Florida
Workers’ Compensation Law. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Article, if an
employee is adjudicated by an administrative judge of compensation claims to be permanently and
totally disabled, in accordance with Florida Workers’ Compensation law, upon retirement from
the City of Hialeah, the employee shall, in addition to disability retirement, receive the benefits
provided by this Article to fill in the gap, if any, in an amount equal to the sum of 100% of salary
at the time of injury minus the sum of benefits paid under Workers’ Compensation, disability
retirement, the employee’s annuity, Medicare and any other subsidy to which the employee is
entitled to receive.
Section 8.
Any employee who, as a result of an in-line-of-duty accident/injury, is unable to perform
any work for the City within the employee’s classification with no change reduction in pay,
notwithstanding any reasonable accommodations made for that employee's particular disability,
and who has been receiving disability benefits pursuant to this Article for the maximum benefit
period of seventy-two (72) weeks shall be required to submit an application and pursue the
application for disability retirement with diligence to a final determination by the Retirement
Board.
Section 9.
Any employee who fails to comply with the requirement to submit an application and
pursue the application for disability retirement to a final determination by the Retirement Board
shall have the employee’s benefits suspended, pursuant to this Article and/or the applicable Code
provisions, pending compliance. If, at the end of seventy-two (72) weeks and the additional thirtysix (36) week extension provided in Section 7 of this Article, the employee has not completed the
process for disability retirement, the employee’s benefits, under this Article shall end.
Section 10.
A.

An employee, who retires from the City on a disability retirement, shall continue to

pay the active group health insurance rate for group health insurance coverage (single dependent
and/or family coverage), if the employee desires such coverage, only if the retiree is on a disability

29

retirement for line-of-duty injuries elects to receive a service pension under 70-238 up to a
maximum of 66 2/3 percent of the average compensation of three years of membership service
that represents three individual years of the highest annual salary to which an annuity contribution
has been paid to the Retirement System. An employee, who retires from the City on disability for
line-of-duty injuries, who elects to a service pension under 70-238, up to a maximum of 75 percent
of the average compensation of three years of membership service that represents three individual
years of the highest annual salary, to which an annuity contribution has been paid to the Retirement
System, shall pay the full insurance premium for group health insurance coverage (single
dependent and/or family coverage), if the employee desires such coverage. In no event will the
employee pay more for the health insurance coverage offered pursuant to the union contract, than
an employee covered by Section 70-240(e), as amended, pays for health insurance coverage,
except as modified by Section 7. At age 65, upon being eligible for and enrolling in Medicare Part
A and Part B coverage, the City will pay the full cost of the retiree only.
B.

A retiree for a total and permanent disability under section 70-248 for line of duty

injuries shall be eligible for enhanced disability benefits if the disability is caused by a severe
injury in the line of duty, which is the direct result of one specific violent event, involving a
substantial physical impact to the employee-retiree. If an employee-retiree contracts Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndrome (“AIDS”) or Hepatitis-C through the transmission of bodily fluids
as a direct result of one specific event occurring in the line of duty, documented at the time of the
event, and the employee, at the time of the event has exercised universal precautions and complied
with all applicable standard operating procedures and policies of the City of Hialeah, then such
employee-retiree is entitled to the enhanced benefits provided herein. The enhanced benefits shall
be a service pension limited to and only to a maximum of 75 percent of the average compensation
of three years of membership service that represents three individual years of the highest annual
salary, with the retiree only responsible for payment of the active rate for health insurance for
single dependent and/or family coverage, if the retiree desires such coverage.
This does not apply to employees who have applied for total and permanent disability under
section 70-248 on or before January 1, 2007 and later retire with a disability under section 70-248.
Section 11.
Nothing in this Article prevents the City from making accommodations for employees,
who may otherwise be eligible to receive disability retirement benefits. The City specifically

30

reserves the right to accommodate any employee, who has sustained an injury in the line of duty.
Any employee who refuses to accept an accommodation offered to them by the City shall not be
entitled to receive in line of duty disability benefits, pursuant to this Article. Nothing in this section
withstanding, no employee shall have the asserted right to continue in light duty status.

31

ARTICLE 26
STANDBY PAY
Section 1.
Any employee who is requested to be on standby shall receive two (2) hours’ straight time
compensation for each day the employee is requested to be on standby, in addition to the Call
Back minimum in Article 19.
Section 2. Water and Sewers Department
Any employee who is requested to be on standby shall receive two (2) hours’ straight time
compensation for each day the employee is requested to be on standby. These employees shall
not be entitled to the call back minimum in Article 19.
ARTICLE 27
FURLOUGHS
Pursuant to Florida Statutes § 447.209, the City may furlough any full-time employee in
any manner it chooses, provided that such furloughs are unpaid, and further provided that part-time
employees working at least 30 hours a week bear their proportionate share of furlough time.
ARTICLE 28
VOTING
The City agrees to allow each employee who is a registered voter, no more than one hour
of the employee’s normal work day, with pay, to go to the polls to vote in each general and local
election, as determined by the Department/Division head in order to minimize disruption of
department operations. Voting time will be scheduled in a manner compatible to the normal work
schedule. Voting time shall not be used for any purpose other than voting. No time off will be
given to those employees who elect to vote absentee.

32

ARTICLE 29
PROMOTIONAL PROCEDURES
Section 1.
It will be the responsibility of the Human Resources Department to notify the President
of the Union of any vacancies existing within the classified service, within thirty (30) days of the
occurrence of the vacancy, or prior to filling the vacancy, whichever occurs first.
All budgeted vacancies created in the classified service of this City, if they are to be filled,
will be filled from a bonafide eligibility list. Said list will have been created by the giving of a
test for the position required as specified in the Civil Service Rules and Regulations. If no
eligibility list is in effect at the time, an emergency provisional appointment may be made; but a
test must be given to fill the position permanently within six (6) months of the time the vacancy
occurred.
A credit of five (5) points for any examination open to the general public will be given to
any Civil Service, permanent, provisional, temporary or part-time employee who has worked for
the City of Hialeah for one year or more, provided such employee first obtains the minimum
passing score as established by the Personnel Board for such examination.
A.

The employee must take the examination on the employee’s own time. However,
an employee participating in promotional examinations or open competitive Civil
Service examinations for the employee’s current position will be granted time off
without charge against leave for the time necessary to complete the examination.

B.

The City shall post, at the time of the job announcement for promotional
examinations, a list of books and/or reference material from which the examination
questions will be drawn.

C.

The City or applicable Department/Division will provide free copies of any City or
Departmental/Divisional policies and/or procedures as reference material, as
identified in Section 1(B) above, unless previously issued to the employee.

Section 2. Probationary Period
The probationary period for initial classification will be one (1) year with evaluation every
three (3) months. The employee will receive a written evaluation after three (3), six (6), nine (9)
33

and twelve (12) months, for initial employment, and after three (3), six (6) and nine (9) months
for promotional appointment. Said evaluation is to be written by the employee's supervisor with
an endorsement by the Department Head. The employee will receive a copy of the evaluation,
and be given the opportunity to appeal the evaluation to the Mayor.
The probationary period for promotional appointments will be nine (9) months. The
employee will be evaluated in the same manner as required for initial classification, however, the
nine (9) month evaluation will contain a provision of certifying the affected employee in the
reclassified position.
Any full-time temporary employee who has been continuously working full-time for the
City for nine (9) months or less immediately prior to receiving an appointment will serve a
probationary period of nine (9) months if appointed to a similar classification in the same
department. Those working for less than one year as a full-time temporary employee would have
a probationary period of one (1) year if not appointed to a similar classification in the same
department. The City shall establish competitive examinations for all promotions as required by
the City Charter.
An employee on a certified eligibility list, who has not successfully completed the
employee’s probationary period, applicable training and time-in-grade of one (1) year, shall not
be eligible for appointment. An employee on a certified eligibility list who is not eligible for
appointment based on the aforementioned conditions, will be bypassed, thereby rendering the
“rule of three” selection process unaffected by this provision. Employees bypassed based upon
this section shall not be considered “bypassed” for purposes of Civil Service Rule VIII, Section
3.
Section 2 may be waived based upon reasonably determined operational needs of a
department, thereby allowing intradepartmental appointments from a certified eligibility list upon
approval by the appointing authority.
ARTICLE 30
LAYOFF AND RECALL
Section 1. Layoff
1.

In the event it becomes necessary to lay off employees for any reason, employees

34

shall be laid off under the following order:
a.

For either citywide or department/division layoffs, employees shall be laid

off in the inverse order of their certification to Civil Service status (i.e., the end of their entrance
level probationary period) within their classifications.
2.

The City shall determine when reductions in force are necessary and which areas

shall be affected, (i.e., citywide or by department/division).
3.

When the City has formally considered a reduction in force, it will notify the Union

of such reduction prior to the laying off of employees.
4.

No permanent Civil Service employee shall be laid off because of lack of work or

funds from any position while any provisional, temporary, first-time probationary and part-time
employees, are employed within the same department.
5.

Any employee who is to be laid off who has advanced to his present classification

from a lower classification in which he held a permanent Civil Service appointment may, if he so
desires, bump any employee with less seniority, provided it is done within the first five (5) business
days after notification of layoff.
6.

Employees who bump a lower classification shall be paid a salary closest to their

salary at time of layoff, but at no time shall the salary paid exceed the maximum for the particular
lower classification.
7.

The City shall, however, retain the right to layoff out of inverse order when it is

necessary, in the City's determination, to retain an employee with special knowledge, skill or
ability. It is understood that this determination shall be subject to the Grievance Procedure.
8.

Any employee who is to be laid off, may carry all of his seniority (from all City

employment) to any other classification in which that employee previously obtained Civil Service
status, and bump an employee in said classification with less seniority provided it is done within
the first five (5) business days after notification of lay off.
9.

Any Civil Service employee who is to be laid off may bump the least senior

temporary employee in any other job classification, if the Civil Service employee is capable of
performing the duties then being performed by a temporary employee. The City agrees to use all
reasonable efforts to accommodate the Civil Service employee in finding an appropriate job
classification in which temporary employees are serving and in which the Civil Service employee
may bump. The employee's election to bump must be done within the first five (5) business days

35

after notification of layoff.
10.

In the event a grievance arises out of paragraphs 8 or 9 of this Article, the grievant

will not be entitled to back pay however, for purposes of this Article only, the grievance will
commence at the arbitration step of the grievance procedure.
11.

An employee taking advantage of paragraphs 8 or 9 of this Article shall be paid at

the highest step of the other job classification's range that is not higher than the salary the employee
was earning at the time of layoff from the classification from which the employee was transferred.
It is the intent of the parties that the employee shall earn the salary in the other classification that
is closest to his salary in the job classification from which he is being transferred.
Section 2. Recall
A.

Employees shall be called back from layoff according to the same criteria for layoff

(i.e., the most senior person will be recalled) unless in the City's judgment special skills are
required).
B.

The City shall notify an employee being recalled by registered mail at his last

known address of the vacancy to be filled. Unless the City receives from such employee being
recalled an acceptance, in writing, within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the recall
notice, the employee shall no longer be eligible for recall. Eligibility for recall shall not extend
beyond one (1) year from date of layoff.
C.

Employees on layoff shall be considered as being in a leave without pay status.

Section 3.
Nothing in this Article is intended to restrict the prerogatives of the City to determine the
financial necessity of service reduction, the form of the layoff, or the duration of the layoff.
Section 4.
The provisions of this Article do not apply to employees who are not in the bargaining unit.

36

ARTICLE 31
SENIORITY
Section 1.
All provisions within this Article shall constitute the basis for establishing a uniform
procedure of seniority for vacations, shift transfers, days off preference, and overtime.
Section 2.
All Civil Service employees shall be deemed to have seniority over any temporary
employee. The determinant for Civil Service employees shall be the date of appointment as a
Civil Service employee. Employees in the same classification hired on the same date, the
placement on the Certified Eligibility List, from which the appointment was made, will be
determinant; however, if at the time, no Certified Eligibility List was used, the date of
employment will be the determinant. Among Full-time Temporary employees, seniority will be
based upon the date of full-time temporary employment.
Section 3.
For the purpose of shifts and days off, seniority shall be based upon the date employee is
appointed to the present job classification. All Civil Service Employees shall be deemed to have
seniority over any Temporary employees.
Section 4.
It is recognized that the principle of merit must be given consideration in any efficiency
conscious organization; therefore, the Department/Division Heads reserve the right to final
determination in regards to employee transfer, shift assignment, days off and vacation time.
Section 5. Full-Time Temporary
A Full-time Temporary employee shall be defined as any nonseasonal employee
scheduled to work a normal workweek (i.e., 37 1/2 hours).
ARTICLE 32
TUITION REIMBURSEMENT
The City agrees to provide tuition reimbursement benefits to all certified Civil Service

37

bargaining unit employees under the following conditions and guidelines:
Section 1.
Courses must be taken at an accredited institution of higher learning or through the Board
of Public Instruction for Adult Education courses. Reimbursement, however, will be based upon
a percentage of the tuition for the State supported University in Miami-Dade County, rather than
for the various independent institutions. Tuition Reimbursement will be limited to cost per credit
hour and course-related labs, and only to a maximum of $4,000.00 per calendar year for course
work taken during the calendar year.
Section 2.
The employee must be a degree-seeking student in the field of Management, Public
Administration, or the degree must be directly related to their position.
Section 3.
The employee must attend classes on the employee’s own time.
Section 4.
Reimbursement to the employee will be upon completion of a course with respect to the
following reimbursement schedule:
A – 100% Reimbursement
B – 75% Reimbursement
C – 50% Reimbursement
For adult education level certification courses, reimbursement will be at 50% of the tuition
cost, payable on proof of satisfactory completion. Grades must be submitted for payment within
one (1) month of receipt of grades.
Section 5.
The employee will notify the Department of Human Resources of courses being
taken within two (2) weeks of the first day of class.
Section 6.
Said tuition reimbursement program shall apply to programs for Associate in Arts (AA),
Associate in Science (AS), Bachelor's degree or Master's degree only. Master's degrees, however,

38

will be paid at Bachelor's degree tuition rates for the State supported University in Miami-Dade
County, and the field of study must correspond to Section 2 above.
Section 7.
Upon completion of the approved course work, the employee must submit his semester
grade report together with the tuition fee receipt to the Department of Human Resources.
Section 8.
Should an employee receive reimbursement from the City and receive additional funding
from a third party so that the total reimbursement exceeds 100% of the employee's actual costs,
the employee must reimburse the City all funds that exceed 100% of the actual costs.
Any employee who receives tuition reimbursement under this Article, shall remain
employed by the City for a minimum of twenty-four (24) months from the date of completion of
any course for which the City has provided the employee reimbursement. If the employee
voluntarily leaves, or is terminated for cause, the employee shall reimburse the City all tuition
reimbursements received in the prior twenty-four (24) months through a deduction from his/her
final paycheck. This provision does not apply to separation by retirement.
Section 9.
Education Incentive Pay – After January 1, 2008, any full-time bargaining unit employee
who has or is awarded a bachelor’s degree, a master’s degree or doctorate, from a college or
university accredited by the U.S. Department of Education, shall be paid a biweekly incentive
pay of 1% of their base pay. This Education Incentive Pay shall be given only once to an eligible
employee (non-cumulative). Acceptable certification of the award of a degree must be provided
to the Human Resources Director before the Educational Incentive Pay shall be paid.
ARTICLE 33
TOOL ALLOWANCE
Section 1.
The City will reimburse up to $300.00 each fiscal year for the addition and replacement of
tools for employees holding the classifications of Mechanic, Carpenters, Plumbers, Electricians,
Skilled Craftsmen, Maintenance Workers, Welders, Utilitymen permanently assigned to the Fire
Department, Mechanic II and Utility Electronic/Electrician Technicians permanently assigned to
39

the Water & Sewers Department, and Utilitymen, Electronic Technicians and Journeymen who are
permanently assigned to the Telecommunications Division. Reimbursement is to be made upon
proof of purchase of tools. To be eligible, an employee must have completed his initial probationary
period.
Section 2.
The employees' tools, which are stolen or damaged due to vandalism upon forced entry
into the employer's property, will be replaced upon proof of a police report and an itemized list of
tools taken.
Section 3.
A basic standard minimum tool list, which employees must have to be hired, shall be
devised for the classification of these employees. A reasonable length of time shall be allowed for
any employee to acquire additional tools to meet the basic minimum tool allowance inventory.
Employees whose tool inventory does not meet the minimum or drops below the basic minimum
tool list inventory, shall not receive a tool allowance. Tools may not be loaned to meet the basic
inventory tool list.
Section 4.
The Department Head shall provide a required minimum list of tools for the Classification
of these employees.
The affected employees within the above listed classification shall submit an inventory of
all their personal tools, including make and model, to their immediate supervisor outside the
Bargaining Unit or his designee who will verify the list. Any additional tools purchased through
the reimbursement program shall be added to the list. The employee will maintain a copy and a
copy will be filed in the Department Office. This list shall be periodically checked and updated.
The City shall provide any special tools and be responsible for maintenance and replacement of
said special tools when necessary. The employee may not purchase tools already provided by the
City to the employee.

40

ARTICLE 34
SAFETY
The City agrees to comply with all applicable Federal, State, local laws, regarding
employee safety, including, but not limited to, OSHA Standards, within ninety (90) days of any
violation being brought to its attention the City will remedy any violations. The City will not
require an employee to work in an unsafe manner, area or condition, as defined by OSHA
Standards.
Section 2.
In those jobs or occupations where, special equipment or attire is required to comply with
current State and Federal Safety Standards, said special equipment or attire shall be provided and
maintained by the City. When special equipment/attire is provided, failure to wear such
equipment/attire may result in disciplinary action against the employee.
Section 3.
The City reserves the right to use an employee’s failure to wear the provided special
equipment/attire as a defense against Workers’ Compensation claims, in the event of an injury to
the employee.
ARTICLE 35
HOLIDAYS
Section 1.
There shall be fourteen (14) employee-paid holidays for members of the Bargaining Unit.
Bargaining Unit employees will recognize holidays under the following schedule:
Columbus Day

2nd Monday in October

Veterans’ Day

November 11th

Thanksgiving Day

4th Thursday in November

Friday after Thanksgiving Day

Day after Thanksgiving Day

Christmas Day

December 25th

41

New Year's Day

January 1st

Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday

3rd Monday in January

Presidents’ Day

3rd Monday in February

Memorial Day

Last Monday in May

Independence Day

July 4th

Labor Day

1st Monday in September

Employee’s Birthday

To be taken off with mutual consent of Employee
and Department Head

Personal Sick Leave (2 days)

To be taken from accumulated sick
leave with mutual consent of Employee
and Department Head

For Employees who work Monday through Friday, when the holiday falls on a Saturday,
the holiday will be observed on the preceding Friday, and when the holiday falls on a Sunday, the
holiday will be observed on the following Monday.
Section 1a. For designated holidays that are employee-paid, employees that are required
to work on a holiday which is a regularly-scheduled work day, shall be paid straight time or elect
to add the hours worked to the employee’s compensation time bank. If an employee is called into
work on a holiday that is not part of the employee’s normal workweek schedule, the employee
may be paid overtime as provided in the overtime provisions of the collective bargaining
agreement.
Employees in the Solid Waste Department who do not work on a holiday shall be paid at
straight time for the actual normal hours scheduled for that particular day, currently either nine
(9) or nine and one-half (9.50) hours.
Section 2.
In the event that one of the above-named holidays occurs during the course of an
employee's vacation, then the employee's vacation may be extended by one day, or the employee
would be given compensatory time at straight time for said day at the employee's option.
Section 3.
In the event that one of the above-named holidays occurs while an employee is on sick

42

leave, the employee will receive holiday leave and shall not be charged sick leave for that day.
Section 4.
A holiday will be any day in which an employee begins or would begin his shift during
the day recognized as a holiday under Section 1.
Section 5.
Employees performing work on any day of the above holidays, except the Employee's
Birthday, shall be paid time and one-half (1 1/2) of their straight hourly rate at the employee's
discretion, in addition to the Holiday pay. Employee's Birthday will be compensated at straight
time with the employee being given the option of having the day off or receiving compensatory
time.
Section 6.
If the City desires to permit the closing of certain departments or divisions on either side
of a holiday, the City shall not force the employee to take said day off. However, the Union
recognizes the City's right to request the employees to take the day off and to transfer employees
that desire to work rather than taking the day off to another Department or Division for the day.
The taking off of the day is at the discretion of the employee.
Section 7.
If a holiday falls on an employee's regularly scheduled day off, and the employee does not
work at all, on the holiday, during his regularly scheduled hours, the employee shall be permitted
to exercise his option as to whether or not he shall be compensated at straight time for the holiday
or be given compensatory time for said holiday. For those employees whose compensatory bank
is at its maximum, they shall, in all cases, be paid for the holiday.
ARTICLE 36
OVERTIME/COMPENSATORY TIME (CALL BACK)
Section 1.
a.

Overtime shall be paid for all work actually performed in excess of 40 hours

b.

Off-duty court appearances shall be paid as set forth in Section 8.

per workweek.

Employees performing overtime work shall, at the discretion of the employee, be given
compensatory time at the rate of time and one-half (1 ½) or pay at the rate of time and one-half

43

(1 ½) for such work.
Section 2.
Any employee with more than 300 hours of accumulated compensatory time, or who by
working overtime would accumulate greater than 300 hours, shall be paid overtime in all
instances. Employees, upon reaching 300 hours, or those who already exceed 300 hours, shall no
longer have the option of compensatory time, but instead, shall be paid for all overtime. Anyone
currently over 300 hours will be permitted to keep the hours on the books until such time as they
use the hours down to the 300-hour level or leave the employment of the City.
Section 3.
The parties agree that overtime hours shall not be used in the computation of arriving at
average earnings for the purpose of establishing pension benefits.
Section 4.
The parties agree that the assignment of overtime work is on an involuntary basis and any
employee refusing assignments of such work is subject to disciplinary action as deemed
appropriate by the Department/Division Head and approved by the Mayor.
Section 5.
Scheduled overtime shall be offered within a given Department/Division on the basis of an
overtime roster, by classification, which will be established on the basis of an individual's
continuous City service in the affected classification with the most senior employee, i.e., that
individual of the earliest certified date in the classification, being placed at the top of the roster,
except that employees demonstrating poor attendance, e.g., excessive undocumented absences in
the prior calendar year as defined in Article 24, may be by-passed on the overtime roster as
delineated in Article 24. Offers of scheduled overtime shall begin with the most senior employee
and then proceed upon a continuing rotating basis.
Forced overtime shall be in a reverse order, i.e., from least senior to most senior. In either
instance, special skills and/or qualifications may necessitate and would justify some deviation
from the strict rotating basis.

44

Section 6.
If an employee's employment is terminated voluntarily or involuntarily, all accumulated
compensatory time shall be paid to the employee or in case of death to the beneficiary.
Section 7.
Compensatory time will be taken at the convenience of the City. However, the City shall
make every attempt to accommodate the employee's request for compensatory time off.
Section 8.
If an employee is subpoenaed to appear on their off-duty time in a court proceeding as a
result of his/her job duties, they shall receive a minimum of three (3) hours at time and one-half
pay (i.e., 4 and 1/2 hours), or compensatory time at the employee’s discretion, except as set forth
in Section 2 above. Court time shall begin at subpoena time and end when excused for the day.
However, if the appearance time is one (1) hour or less before the beginning of the employee’s
regular shift, or one (1) hour or less after the end of the employee’s regular shift, the court-related
appearance shall be compensated at one and one-half (1 1/2) times for the amount of time worked
for the court appearance.
ARTICLE 37
VACATION
Section 1.
A.

Effective January 1, 2024, all full time AFSCME employees will accrue vacation

time as follows:
YEARS OF COMPLETED SERVICE DAYS OF VACATION PER YEAR
1-5 years
10 days
6-10 years

15 days

11-15 years

20 days

16 plus

25 days

45

Additionally, beginning January 1, 2024, employees who attain years of service in years 6, 11 and
16 will have their vacation days prorated in those years depending on the employee’s month of
hiring, as follows:

MONTH HIRED
January-March
April-June
July-September
October-December
B.

YEAR 6
15 days
14 days
13 days
12 days

YEAR 11
20 days
19 days
18 days
17 days

YEAR 16
25 days
24 days
23 days
22 days

Effective January 1, 2024, all full-time new hires will be provided with annual

vacation during the first year of employment pro-rated depending on the month the employee
starts:
IF EMPLOYEE STARTS DURING
THE MONTH
January-March

DAYS OF VACATION IN FIRST
YEAR OF EMPLOYMENT
10 days

April-June

7 days

July-September

5 days

October-December

3 days

Section 2.
In the event that a death in the family occurs while the employee is on vacation, the
employee shall be entitled to Bereavement Leave as authorized in Article 21 provided the
employee notifies the Department of such death prior to the end of his vacation. Time authorized
to be charged to Bereavement Leave under Bereavement Leave, Article 21, shall not be charged
against the employee's vacation time.
Section 3.
Where an illness of three (3) days or more occurs during a vacation an employee may
charge this time to sick leave. If an employee is ill for more than three (3) days, and produces a
doctor's note to their Department, such time charged to sick leave shall not be charged against the
employee's accrued vacation.

46

Section 4.
All Bargaining Unit employees shall be permitted to continue to accumulate and bank 300
hours in accordance with the rules and regulations under which said vacation days had previously
been accumulated.
Section 5.
The City will continue its present policy for payment of prepaid vacation checks.
Section 6.
Employees who have accumulated at least fifty (50) days of sick leave as of January 1,
shall be permitted to use up to five (5) days of that accumulated sick leave as bonus vacation.
Section 7.
A.

Commencing November 1, 1986, each department/division shall post a vacation

roster and accept requests for vacations for the following year, which shall be based on seniority
within the classification. Vacation roster shall take precedent over requests after said roster has
been established. This would preclude an individual with greater seniority bumping an individual
on the roster with less seniority. The roster shall remain open for forty- (40) days. Vacation shall
then be confirmed within ten (10) days after the closing of the roster. In the event two (2)
employees submit requests for vacation on the same date, for the same or substantially similar
vacation periods, and the City is unable to honor both requests, the determining factor in awarding
the requested vacation shall be the seniority of the employee by job classification.
B.

Requests for vacation outside of the vacation roster will be submitted by the

employee to the Department or Division Head, a minimum of twenty-five (25) days prior to the
commencement of the requested vacation. Therefore, the department shall confirm the employee's
vacation request within ten (10) days after receipt of the request. Every attempt will be made by
the City to honor the employee's request.
Determining factors in awarding the vacation shall be the respective dates of the requests,
i.e., the earlier request to be honored first and the needs of the Department/Division.
C.

The twenty-five (25) day time provisions set forth in Section 7 (B) may be waived

for a given employee with the agreement of the Department/Division Head and the employee.
Confirmed vacation requests will only be subject to cancellation if the department

47

experiences an unforeseeable emergency requiring the attendance of the employee at work. The
Mayor shall approve any request to cancel a vacation because of an unforeseeable emergency.
ARTICLE 38
HEALTH INSURANCE PROVISIONS
Section 1.
The City offers the following three (3) options with regard to Health Insurance to the
bargaining unit members. Members may elect to enroll in one of the three options as provided
herein. Only members electing one of these three (3) options will be enrolled in a term life policy,
as provided in Section 3 below.
A.

The insurance year is January 1 through December 31 of each year of this

B.

The three Medical Plan options are as follows:

Agreement.

Option 1. City Self-Funded Group Health Program Base Plan. The City will
provide a health benefit program that utilizes a managed care approach, commonly
referred to as a preferred provider organization (PPO). This managed health care
program will provide the employees with a comprehensive health care network. The
provider network will consist of doctors, hospitals and other services, including a
prescription drug program, who have agreed to offer medical services to employees
at reduced negotiated fees.
Option 2. City Self-Funded Group Health Program Premier Plan. The City
will provide a health benefit program that utilizes a managed care approach,
commonly referred to as a preferred provider organization (PPO). This managed
health care program will provide the employees with a comprehensive health care
network. The provider network will consist of doctors, hospitals and other services,
including a prescription drug program, who have agreed to offer medical services to
employees at reduced negotiated fees.
Option 3. Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) Plan.
C.

Exhibit 38A to this Agreement provides a summary of the features of each

plan that includes, but is not limited to the calendar year deductible, co-pays for physician visits,
out-of-pocket maximum and lifetime maximum and benefits for items like lab work, hospital

48

services, outpatient surgery, diagnostic and imaging, emergency room, urgent care and
prescription drugs. The summary identifies In-Network and Out-of-Network benefits. The benefits
to be provided will be as summarized in Exhibit 38A for the 2025 calendar year or shall be based
on the most current open enrollment memorandum provided to employees as may be amended
from year to year based upon the City of Hialeah Risk Management Department’s corresponding
open enrollment for its various insurance programs. Employees are encouraged to attend Open
Enrollment Meetings each year or to refer to the actual Plan documents for more specific
information.
D.

The employee’s biweekly contribution shall be as provided in Exhibit 38A or shall

be based on the most current open enrollment memorandum provided to employees as may be
amended from year to year based upon the City of Hialeah Risk Management Department’s
corresponding open enrollment for its various insurance programs for each of the following tiers
of coverage:

E.

1.

Employee only

2.

Employee plus spouse

3.

Employee plus child(ren)

4.

Family

Expenses due to a vehicular accident for which the employee and/or his or her

covered dependent(s) could have been covered and paid through a statutory required zero
deductible Personal Injury Protection (PIP) insurance policy covering a vehicle owned or leased
by the participant, and/or his or her covered dependent(s), and for which such insurance was
available regardless of whether or not such coverage was actually purchased by the participant,
and/or his or her covered dependent(s), and whether or not such insurance was in force at the time
of the accident, shall not be payable by the City's Health Insurance Program. This is not intended
to preclude from coverage employee A, who is injured in an accident involving employee B's
vehicle, when employee B does not comply with this section, unless employee A is a covered
dependent under employee B's city insurance.
F.

For the HMO Plan, if the actual premium charged by the HMO is greater than the

contribution made by the City for either employee only, employee plus one dependent, or
employee plus two or more dependents, the employee will be responsible for any difference in
premium cost. The City understands that the HMO coverage provided by the City has a limited

49

service area in South Florida. As an alternative to those eligible retirees who reside outside the
service area and wish to procure group health coverage through an alternate HMO carrier, the
City will provide a contribution that will be no more than what the City contribution would be if
the retiree had selected the HMO (i.e., Option 3). In order to receive this contribution, the retiree
will provide proof of purchase of individual single coverage through an alternate HMO carrier.
The City shall negotiate and provide insurance plans, except for benefits required to be provided
by law.
Section 2.
The City will assess the economic feasibility of a Section 125 Premium Only FICA Tax
Savings Program, at no administrative expense to the City, and make every effort to implement
such a tax savings program.
Section 3.
All bargaining unit members who enroll in one of the three health insurance benefit
options (i.e., those listed in Section 1.B.) shall be enrolled in a term life insurance policy in the
amount of $25,000 at no cost to the bargaining unit member.
Section 4.
The City will attempt to provide to employees’ additional life insurance options. The cost
of such policy to be paid in total by the employee.
Section 5.
Any employee, whose spouse is also employed by the City, will be allowed to carry
Dependent coverage.
Section 6.
An employee participating in Options 1, 2 or 3 is eligible to participate in a group dental
plan selected by the parties. The total cost of the dental plan shall be paid by the employee. The
benefits to be provided will be as summarized in Exhibit 38A for the 2025 calendar year or shall
be based on the most current open enrollment memorandum provided to employees as may be
amended from year to year based upon the City of Hialeah Risk Management Department’s
corresponding open enrollment for its various insurance programs.
Section 7.
The City may change insurance carriers and/or the scope and level of benefits in any plan
provided that the Union has an opportunity to discuss and make suggestions prior to

50

implementation. The City also may change the percentage of premium cost paid by the City,
provided that the City shall at no point pay less than seventy percent (70%) of the total premium
cost, from year to year, for any one or more of the optional plans available as may be elected by
unit members.

Section 8.
A. The City shall pay the full cost of the premium for individual coverage only, and only
under the most basic health insurance plan offered by the City for retired employees hired prior to
October 11, 2006, who meet the following criteria: The employee must (i) have retired in
accordance with the retirement plan, or retired with a total and permanent disability retirement;
and (ii) have been covered by the City’s group insurance at the time of separation from
employment, and must elect to continue such coverage at the time of separation from employment
such that there is no gap in coverage. The retired employee shall be responsible for paying the full
cost of any coverage, including dependent coverage, selected by the retired employee that exceeds
the cost of the premium for individual coverage.
B. Employees hired on or after October 11, 2006, who participate in the Employees
General Retirement System and retire on a normal retirement in accordance with the retirement
plan or with total and permanent disability retirement, may elect to continue group health insurance
coverage in any City sponsored plan offered, so long as the employee, is covered by the City’s
group health insurance at the time of separation from employment, and elects to continue such
coverage following separation from employment such that there is no gap in coverage, and
provided the employee pays the active employee rates for individual health insurance coverage in
effect at each open enrollment period until the retiree reaches the age of 65. The City shall pay the
full cost of the premium for such retiree’s individual coverage when the retiree attains eligibility
for and enrolls in Medicare Part A and Part B. The retired employee shall be responsible for paying
the full cost of any coverage, including dependent coverage, selected by the retired employee that
exceeds the cost of the premium for individual coverage.
C. Employees hired on or after April 1, 2012, who do not participate in the Employees
General Retirement System, and who retire after completing at least 20 years of service, may elect
to continue group health insurance coverage in any City sponsored plan offered, so long as the
employee is covered by the City’s group health insurance at the time of separation from

51

employment, and elects to continue such coverage following separation from employment such
that there is no gap in coverage, and provided the retired employee pays the full cost of any
premium for coverage in effect at each open enrollment period for the retiree and the retiree’s
dependents.
D. Beginning March 25, 2014, any employee who participates in the Employees General
Retirement System and (i) retires on a vested retirement (the employee has at least 10 years of
service but less than 20 years of service and 70 points) pursuant to code section 70-239 and is at
least 55 years old on the date of separation from city employment, or (ii) who retires on a non-job
related or not connected to an in-line-of-duty injury total and permanent disability retirement, may
elect to continue group health insurance coverage in any City sponsored plan offered, so long as
the employee is covered by the City’s group health insurance at the time of separation from
employment, and elects to continue such coverage following separation from employment such
that there is no gap in coverage, and provided the retired employee pays the full cost of any
premium for coverage of the retiree and the retiree’s dependents.
E. Employees who participate in the Employees General Retirement System and separate
from City employment before age 55 with at least 10 years but less than 20 years of credited
service, and receive a deferred vested retirement benefit pursuant to code section 70-239, are not
eligible for continued group health insurance coverage through a City sponsored plan following
separation from City employment.
F. Secondary-payer upon subsequent employment. This section shall take effect on
October 1, 2017, and shall be applicable to all City employees who retire on or after the effective
date. The City’s health insurance plan provided to all employees eligible to join the City’s group
plan and receive coverage as provided herein, shall be secondary payer if, at any time after
retirement, a retired City employee is employed by any organization, entity or business that offers
insurance coverage or any other employer-funded medical expense reimbursement plan to the
retired City employee, whether on a voluntary basis or as required by law, and regardless of
whether the retired City employee elects the coverage offered by a subsequent employer. If a
retired City employee is offered health insurance coverage or any other employer-funded medical
expense reimbursement plan by a subsequent employer and declines such coverage, the retired
City employee’s eligibility to receive coverage in the City’s group plan as provided herein shall
terminate. If the retired City employee misrepresents employment or the availability of employer-

52

based coverage or any other employer-funder medical expense reimbursement plan, the retired
City employee shall forfeit the right to insurance coverage as provided in this section. In no event
will the City provide dependent coverage to a retired City employee who is employed by another
employer that offers such coverage.
** See Appendix “B” for Exhibit 38A **
ARTICLE 39
PREVAILING BENEFITS
Section 1.
Job benefits, heretofore authorized by the City and continuously enjoyed by all employees
covered by this Agreement pursuant to PERC Certification 1336, and not specifically provided
or abridged by this Agreement, shall continue upon the conditions by which they had been
previously granted.
Section 2.
It is understood by both parties to this Agreement that the Prevailing Benefits provision
is intended to encompass Civil Service Rules and Regulations with respect to those employees to
whom they are applicable.
ARTICLE 40
UNION STEWARDS
Section 1.
Employees within the Bargaining Unit shall have the right to be represented by Stewards
in areas of the City employment in the number and manner set forth in Section 6 of this Article.
The Union shall furnish the Mayor and Human Resources Director a list of Stewards and
alternates Stewards' names and their assigned areas, and shall keep the list current at all times.
Section 2.
When requested by an employee, a Steward may only investigate any alleged or actual
grievance in his assigned Steward area as provided in Section 6. He shall be allowed reasonable
time therefore, during working hours without loss of time or pay upon notification and approval

53

of his immediate supervisor outside the Bargaining Unit. Such release time will be granted
consistent with the needs of the service but will not be unreasonably withheld.
Section 3.
Union business other than that cited above shall be conducted so as not to interfere with
the work assignment of Steward or any other employee(s).
Section 4.
A non-employee Union Representative may consult with employees in assembly areas
before the start of each work shift or after the end thereof, provided that prior notice is given to
the Mayor's office when possible.
Section 5.
An alternate Steward may be appointed for each Steward as provided for and assigned in
Section 6. The alternate Steward may only serve in the absence from duty of the regular Steward
and all provisions of this Article shall apply to alternate Stewards, as well as regular Stewards.
Section 6.
Authorized Stewards and areas of responsibility as follows:
DEPARTMENT

NUMBER OF STEWARDS

Police
Fire
Finance
Planning and Development
General Administration
Parks and Recreation
Solid Waste
Library
Grants and Human Services
Water and Sewers
Fleet
Construction and Maintenance
Streets and Public Services
Human Resources
Night Shift
Chief Steward

2
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1 (City Wide)
1 (City Wide)

No more than one (1) of the above Stewards shall be permitted on City time to process
54

and/or investigate any one grievance at the same time.
Section 7.
In those sections where there are more than one (1) Steward, only one (1) Steward shall be
permitted to process a grievance at any one time.
ARTICLE 41
SAVINGS CLAUSE
Section 1.
In the event any article, section or portion of this Agreement should be held invalid and
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall apply only to the
specific article, section or portion thereof, specifically specified in the court's decision, and that
portion of this Agreement in conflict shall be null and void, but the remainder of the Agreement
in conflict shall remain in full force and effect, with it being presumed that the intent of the parties
was to enter into the Agreement without such invalid portion or portions.
Section 2.
The City's representatives as defined in Article 3 of this Agreement and the Union's
representatives as defined in Article 2 shall promptly negotiate a substitute for the invalidated
article, section or portion thereof, as might be determined in accordance with Section 1 of this
Article.
ARTICLE 42
UNION TIME POOL/UNION ELECTIONS
Section 1
On the first day of October and the first day of April, each member of the Union shall
automatically have sick leave hours transferred to the Union Time Pool in accordance with the
amounts indicated by the Union. At least five (5) working days prior to April 1st and October 1st,
the Union President shall notify the City of the number of sick leave hours to be deducted from
each member. The sick leave hours available on the 1st day of April and October will first be
utilized in accordance with the Union notice before any use of the hours is permitted.

55

Section 2.
The form executed by the President, on behalf of all employees represented by the Union,
shall include language releasing the City of Hialeah from any and all liability to pay for Sick
Leave or Compensatory Time contributed by the employee to the Union Time Pool.
Section 3.
The Union Time Pool is to be used solely for Union business, to be determined by the
President or his/her designee.
Section 4.
For each employee using the Union Time Pool, a form shall be processed through
channels for the employee who is to use the Union Time Pool. The form shall be provided by the
City and shall be signed by the President or his designee. The form must be processed so that a
copy signed by the President or his/her designee shall be in the Office of the Department/Division
Head a minimum of three (3) calendar days prior to the time the employee has been authorized
to use the time pool. It is understood that on rare occasions the three (3) day time limit may not
be met. The President or his designee, within one (1) calendar week from use of said time, shall
forward an explanation to the Director of Human Resources as to why the three (3) day rule was
not met. Failure to file this explanation with the Director of Human Resources, within the time
limit specified, shall result in the employee not being paid for all such time requested.
Section 5.
In all cases, the employee shall be released from duty on Union Time Pool, only if the
needs of the Department/Division permit, but such release shall not be unreasonably denied. If,
because of the needs of the Department/Division, an employee cannot be released at the time
desired, the Union may request consideration to be given to an alternate.
Section 6.
The Employee Union Time Pool hours shall be used on an hour for hour basis, regardless
of the hourly rate of the employee using the time pool time. In reporting an employee's absence
as a result of the employee utilizing the Union Time Pool, the employee’s daily attendance records
shall reflect: "John Doe on UTP" (Leave with Pay Time Pool).

56

Section 7.
Any employee injured or involved in an accident while being paid for by the Union Time
Pool, or while engaged in activities paid for by the Union Time Pool, shall not be considered to
have sustained an on-the-job injury (Line of Duty Injury), nor shall such injury or accident be
considered to have occurred in the course and scope of his/her employment by the City of Hialeah
within the meaning of Chapter 440, Florida Statutes (Worker's Compensation), as amended, or
Section 70-66 or 70-67 of the City's Code (Disability Clause).
Section 8. – Union Elections
Union elections shall be held City-wide and there shall be a polling place in at least the
following locations:
City Hall
Library
Fleet Department
Parks and Recreation Department
Police Department
Solid Waste Division
Water and Sewers Department
All employees will be allowed reasonable time to vote during their regular work hours.
Any employee who does not work within the above facilities will be allowed reasonable time to
go to the nearest polling site during his regular work hours.
ARTICLE 43
PENSION
Section 1.
Bargaining Unit Members' pension benefits shall not be altered other than through the
collective bargaining process. The pension benefits and member contributions of bargaining unit
employees who participate in the Employees General Retirement System shall be as provided in
sections 70-96 through 70-235, Hialeah City Code, (the “Plan”) except as otherwise provided in
this Article. The Plan changes contained in this Article shall take effect on October 1, 2017, or
upon implementation if later (the “effective date”).

57

Section 2.
The accrued pension benefits of all bargaining unit employees who are members of the
Plan (except as otherwise provided in Section 6 below) will be frozen on the effective date, as
provided herein. The frozen accrued benefit of each member who is employed and not
participating in the DROP on the effective date shall be calculated based on the Plan provisions
in effect on the day before the effective date, and each member's credited service and average
final compensation on that date. All such members shall be 100% vested in the frozen accrued
benefit earned prior to the effective date (2% multiplier for members who separate from
employment before the normal retirement date, and 3% multiplier for members who separate
from employment and retire on or after the normal retirement date), and will be eligible to receive
the frozen accrued benefit upon reaching the normal retirement date in effect prior to the freeze
(any age where age plus years of credited service is equal to at least 70 with at least 20 years of
credited service), and separation from City employment. Such members will accrue benefits on
and after the effective date in accordance with Section 3 below.
Section 3.
Plan benefits for credited service on and after the effective date shall be the same as the
Plan provisions in effect prior to the effective date, except as follows:
a.

The benefit multiplier shall be 2.0% for credited service earned on and after the

effective date, and the 1.5% additional benefit multiplier for service after 25 years shall be
eliminated.
b.

The maximum benefit at retirement shall be 75% of average final compensation at

retirement, which will apply to the benefits earned before and after the effective date. Average
final compensation shall be the average of the highest annual compensation received by a member
during the highest 8 years of credited service; provided, in no event will a member’s average final
compensation be less than the highest 3-year average as of the effective date.
c.

The normal retirement date shall be age 62 with 20 years of credited service.

d.

Plan compensation shall be base pay only. All other types of compensation shall be

excluded for pension purposes.
e.

There shall be no cost of living adjustment on benefits based on credited service

earned on and after the effective date.

58

f.

Members shall not be eligible to purchase additional credited service after the

effective date.
g.

Members shall become vested in the benefit based on credited service earned on or

after the effective date upon reaching age 55 with 10 or more years of credited service while
employed by the City. A member who reaches age 55 with 10 years of service is 70% vested. The
vesting percentage will increase by 3% for each additional year of service after 10 years, up to 20
years of service. After completing 20 years of service, an employee is 100% vested. However, a
vested member who separates from city employment before age 62 is not eligible to receive a
benefit based on service after the pension changes take effect until age 62.
Section 4.
The member contribution shall increase by an additional 5% of compensation on the
effective date, for credited service on and after the effective date. A member who separates from
City employment prior to vesting may obtain a refund of the additional 5%-member contribution
with interest at the rate of three percent per annum. Members shall have the option of using
whatever portion of the 7% annuity savings fund contribution that is not being used to pay the
current 4%-member contribution to the retirement plan to pay the additional 5%-member
contribution.
Section 5.
The purchase of service credit pursuant to section 70-208 of the Plan shall be irrevocable,
and any member who has purchased service credit pursuant to section 70-208 of the Plan shall be
prohibited from selling such service credit back to the Plan.
Section 6.
The benefit reductions in Sections 2 and 3 above shall not apply to any member who
reached normal retirement eligibility before the effective date. The benefit reductions in Sections
2 and 3 above shall not apply to any member who has at least 16 years of actual service with the
city (actual service as a city employee excluding any service credit purchased pursuant to section
70-208 of the Plan) and has at least 62 points on the effective date except that the benefit
multiplier will be 3% for the first 20 years of service, and 2.0 % after completion of 20 years of
service, subject to a 75% maximum benefit multiplier. However, if such member has more than
20 years of credited service when the pension changes take effect, the 3% benefit multiplier will

59

apply to all years of credited service earned before the pension changes take effect, and the benefit
multiplier will be 2.0% for credited service earned after the pension changes take effect, up to the
75% maximum benefit multiplier. All members, including members who have reached normal
retirement eligibility and members who have at least 16 years of actual service with the city and
62 points on the effective date, shall pay the additional 5%-member contribution provided in
Section 4 for credited service on and after the effective date.
Section 7.
Bargaining unit members who are employed, not participating in the DROP, and do not
have at least 16 years of actual service with the city and 62 points on the effective date, shall be
eligible for a retirement benefit in two parts: (1) the frozen accrued benefit based on the member’s
credited service and the Plan provisions in effect on the day before the effective date, payable
upon separation from City employment on or after the normal retirement date in effect on the day
before the effective date; and (2) the accrued benefit based on credited service and the Plan
provisions in effect on and after the effective date, payable upon separation from City
employment on or after age 62 with 20 or more years of credited service.
Section 8.
Bargaining unit employees hired on or after April 1, 2012 shall participate in a section
401(a) defined contribution plan, as provided in Resolution No. 2012-42. Such employees shall
not be eligible to participate in the Employees General Retirement System.
Section 9.
Section 70-237 concerning reemployment of retired employees shall be revised to provide
for reemployment of retired public safety communications officers, building, zoning and fire
safety inspectors, and plans examiners after a 6-month separation from city employment, without
affecting the employee’s retirement benefits. Such reemployed employees shall not be eligible to
participate in a city sponsored retirement plan other than a deferred compensation plan funded
entirely with voluntary employee contributions.
Section 10.
Upon issuance of the actuarial report for the 2023-2024 fiscal year or by June 1, 2025, the
City agrees to discuss pension benefits with the Union. The Union agrees that such discussions

60

are not collective bargaining.
ARTICLE 44
TOTAL AGREEMENT
Section 1.
This Agreement, upon ratification by both parties, constitutes the complete and entire
Agreement between the parties, and concludes mandatory collective bargaining for its terms,
except as provided herein.
Section 2.
The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which resulted in this Agreement,
each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with respect to any
subject or matter not removed by law from the area of collective bargaining, and that the
understanding and agreements arrived at by the parties after the exercise of that right and
opportunity are set forth in this Agreement.

Section 3.
Either party upon written notice to the other, may request that negotiations be reopened,
at any time, concerning a particular article(s) of the Agreement or addition(s) to the Agreement.
Said written notice shall state the reason(s) for reopening and shall not affect the remainder of the
Agreement. The party receiving notice shall have the right of refusal with no consequence to this
Agreement.
Section 4.
If, after a reasonable period of negotiations concerning a reopened item, an agreement
cannot be reached between the City and the Union, the item shall be closed.
ARTICLE 45
PARENTAL LEAVE
Parental leave for a period of up to nine (9) months of combined approved leave and leave
without pay shall be available to all Bargaining Unit members, without loss of seniority. Upon

61

return to active duty, all employees having utilized the parental leave shall be considered as
having been continuously employed for the period of said leave. If the full nine (9) months are
taken at least three (3) months must be leave without pay.
An employee who returns from parental leave shall have the right to return to the same
area of assignment from which said employee went on parental leave. This right shall not include,
however reassignments made as an accommodation to an employee for the purpose of retaining
the employee in a work status for a longer period of time. An employee who replaces another
employee on parental leave may also be returned to his or her prior area of assignment.
ARTICLE 46
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING
Section 1.
The City and Union recognize that employee substance and alcohol abuse may have an
adverse impact on City Government, the Department's operations, the image of City employees,
and the general health, welfare and safety of the employees and the general public at large.
Therefore, the parties agree that the City shall have the right and authority to require employees to
submit to toxicology and alcohol testing designed to detect the presence of any controlled
substance, narcotic drug or alcohol, as follows (the testing procedures set forth in Subsection C of
this Section 1 shall apply to all testing done under this Article):
A.

Following any on-duty accident where the employee is operating a vehicle or

equipment (mechanical equipment or power tools).
B.

Where the employee's immediate supervisor and another supervisor have a reasonable

belief that the employee is under the influence of such substances or suffers from substance or alcohol
abuse, and that such abuse is on the job or the effects of the substance abuse spill over to the job and
interfere with the employee's ability to perform his job or constitute serious consequences to the
general public. It is also understood by the parties that the aforementioned authority to require an
employee to submit to such testing is based on a recommendation made by the employee’s immediate
supervisor, which must also be approved, by the Department/Division Head, or their designee within
the Department/Division.
C.

Random Substance Screening.
1.

Effective upon ratification, during each calendar year the City will send
62

bargaining unit employees for substance screenings conducted on a computer-generated random
basis at the City’s expense.
2.

Bargaining unit members selected for random substance screening shall

report to a collection site as chosen by the City. The collection site shall include sufficient
safeguards to ensure that proper chain of custody procedures are enforced.
3.

The following drugs or classes of drugs and cut off concentration levels

shall be applicable for determining whether specimens are negative or positive for the initial
or confirmatory test. A positive result shall be a concentration in excess of those listed below:
Type of Drug

Initial Test Level (ng/ml) GCMS Level (ng/ml)

Amphetamine

1000 ng/ml

500 ng/ml

Barbituates

300 ng/ml

150 ng/ml

Benzodiazepines

300 ng/ml

150 ng/ml

Cocaine metabolites

300 ng/ml

150 ng/ml

Marijuana metabolites

50 ng/ml

15 ng/ml

Methadone

300 ng/ml

150 ng/ml

Methaqualone

300 ng/ml

150 ng/ml

Methylenedioxyamphetamine
Analogues (MDA)

500 ng/ml

250 ng/ml

Opiates

2000 ng/ml

2000 ng/ml

Phencyclidine

25 ng/ml

25 ng/ml

Propoxyphene

300 ng/ml

150ng/ml

Alcohol concentration levels shall not exceed the applicable levels as determined by Florida
Statutes, Section 316.193, as amended.
4.

Bargaining unit members shall give a breath, urine, hair, sweat, saliva or

blood sample, or combination thereof, as directed by management, at a collection site chosen by
the City. During said test, the bargaining unit member shall provide sufficient amount of

63

specimen for the laboratory to secure two (2) samples to be tested. Blood samples will be
taken only when the employee, for any reason, does not provide an adequate sample of urine or,
in the case of alcohol, breath, or in other atypical circumstances, as determined by management.
5.

Bargaining unit members may, upon request, have an AFSCME

representative present during the testing procedure, provided that the test will not be postponed
for more than thirty (30) minutes to wait for an AFSCME representative to be present. The City
will advise the AFSCME President or designee by telephone of the pending test, but in no instance
will the thirty
(30) minute waiting rule be waived or will the bargaining unit member taking the
test have more than one representative present.
6.

If a bargaining unit member refuses to cooperate during the collection

process by failing to complete the required paperwork, refusing to provide a specimen or
otherwise attempts to adulterate or substitute a sample, such employee will be treated as having
tested positive.
7.

The City shall verify all initial positive test results by a second test known

as Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS) or other industry standard method.
8.

The Department head shall notify the bargaining unit member to report

to the Human Resources Department to be informed by the Human Resources Director of the
verified positive test results. The Union will be provided with a copy of the test results,
provided the Bargaining Unit Member has executed a consent form.
9.

If the bargaining unit member so requests, such member shall be given a

copy of the test results after the City has received it. The results of such test shall be confidential
and are not to be made public unless required by law.
10.

A bargaining unit member who receives a verified positive result may

contest or explain the results to the City, by notifying the Human Resources Department, within
twenty-four hours after receiving notification of the positive test result. This includes the right of
the bargaining unit member to challenge the results of the laboratory. In this case, it is the
responsibility of the bargaining unit member to inform the laboratory of this action and to
give directions for the disposition of a sample of the disputed specimen to a certified lab for
retesting. To facilitate the testing of a disputed specimen, all positive specimens will be retained
by the laboratory in long- term frozen storage for a minimum of 180 days. The bargaining unit

64

member shall pay for the cost of the retest if the retest shows a verified positive result. The City
shall pay the cost of the retest if the retest shows a verified negative result. Chain of custody
procedures must be followed in transferring a portion of the sample to the second laboratory.
11.

All chemical tests shall be conducted as soon as practical, preferably the

12.

Any positive test for a controlled substance, which is confirmed by Gas

same day.

Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GCMS), or better testing through random substance
screening or through reasonable belief shall result in termination by the Mayor within his authority.
However, if an employee has a positive test, but has no prior conduct indicating substance abuse,
the employee may be placed under a six (6) months supervision agreement with additional testing
commencing upon successful completion of a City-approved rehabilitation program. Testing during
this supervision period will be at the discretion of the City. Failure to successfully complete the
rehabilitation program or a subsequent positive drug/alcohol test may be sufficient grounds for
termination.
13.

All tests shall be analyzed in medical laboratories selected by mutual

agreement of the parties; such agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Section 2.
It is agreed that the test conducted under this Article shall be administered in a purely
employment context only as part of the City's legitimate inquiry into the use of any controlled
substance, narcotic drug, or alcohol by its employees.
Section 3.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to constitute a waiver of the bargaining rights of
the Union with regard to any future changes to the existing City Code, City Personnel Rules and
Department Rules and Regulations as they relate to disciplinary action against employees as a
result of toxicology and alcohol use or abuse.
Section 4.
In the event an employee challenges the existence of a "reasonable belief" as described in
Section 1.B, an arbitrator shall first determine whether in fact, prior to the time it administered the
test, the City had a "reasonable belief" and such issue shall be resolved prior to the disclosure of
the test results to the arbitrator or disclosure to the arbitrator that the employee has been
disciplined.

65

In the event the arbitrator determines that the City did not have a "reasonable belief" to
administer the test, the City shall not be entitled to use the test results or evidence to sustain or support
the discipline of an employee. In the event that the City did have a "reasonable belief" as set forth in
Section 1.B, then the City may, subject to other objections, introduce the test results or evidence to
support or sustain the discipline of an employee. The employee may grieve the issue of "reasonable
belief" in the same grievance relating to the resulting discipline.
Section 5.
In the event Federal or State law requires testing of employees over and above what is
outlined in the Article, the parties agree to abide by same.
ARTICLE 47
NOTES TO THE PAY PLAN
Section 1
A.

Cost of Living Adjustments – Full-time bargaining unit members received a 3%
cost of living adjustment during the first full pay period following January 19, 2024.

In the first full pay period following ratification of this Agreement by both parties, fulltime bargaining unit members will receive a 2.5% cost of living adjustment.
In the first full pay period following October 1, 2025, full-time bargaining unit members
will receive a 3.0% cost of living adjustment.
The corresponding pay scales are set forth in Appendix A to this Agreement. Note that all
employees will be paid no less than the Florida or Federal minimum wage laws, whichever is
higher.
B.

Merit Steps – Salary increments for recognizing acceptable service within

established ranges (“Merit Steps”) are provided in the pay plan. Employees shall be awarded a
one-Step increase, not to exceed the maximum rate, on the first day of the first full pay period
following completion of probation and, thereafter, on the anniversary of the employee’s
certification (i.e., completion of probation) to his or her current classification. Merit Step increases
shall be awarded on the basis of acceptable service, as determined by management. The
determination of Merit Steps will not include service time accrued between July 13, 2010, and
June 30, 2014.

66

Section 2. Longevity Pay.
A.

Every member of the bargaining unit, upon completion of nine (9) years

continuous service shall have added $15.00 biweekly to their regular pay on the anniversary date
of their civil service employment.
B.

During the first full pay period following the October 1 that follows the

ninth (9th) anniversary date of their civil service employment, when a year or a major fraction of a
year has passed, and on each October 1 thereafter, the employee shall be entitled to additional
longevity pay in accordance with the schedule set forth in the table below. Longevity pay shall not
exceed $150.00 bi-weekly.

C.

10 years of service
$40.00 bi-weekly
11 years of service
$44.00 bi-weekly
12 years of service
$48.00 bi-weekly
13 years of service
$52.00 bi-weekly
14 years of service
$56.00 bi-weekly
15 years of service
$67.50 bi-weekly
16 years of service
$72.00 bi-weekly
17 years of service
$76.50 bi-weekly
18 years of service
$81.00 bi-weekly
19 years of service
$85.50 bi-weekly
20 years of service
$100.00 bi-weekly
21 years of service
$105.00 bi-weekly
22 years of service
$110.00 bi-weekly
23 years of service
$115.00 bi-weekly
24 years of service
$120.00 bi-weekly
25 years of service
$125.00 bi-weekly
26 years of service
$130.00 bi-weekly
27 years of service
$135.00 bi-weekly
28 years of service
$140.00 bi-weekly
29 years of service
$145.00 bi-weekly
30 years of service
$150.00 bi-weekly
A onetime Special Longevity Pay increase equivalent to three percent (3%)

of base pay shall be given to full-time employees upon their completion of fifteen (15) years of
continuous employment from their hire date as a full-time employee. Upon ratification of this
Agreement, the non-use of the time between July 13, 2010, and June 30, 2014, for Special
Longevity Pay will end, but there will be no retroactive application of this time.
Section 3. – Hire Step
At the City’s discretion, the initial placement of an employee may be as follows in the

67

appropriate range: one (1) to five (5) years of experience – up to Step 5; Five (5) to ten (10) years
of experience – up to Step 10; and, Ten (10) to fifteen (15) or more years of experience – up to
Step 14.
Section 4. – Administration Pay
A.

A City-wide Department/Division Head may designate an individual, who

serves as the Department/Division Head’s secretary, in their Department/Division to receive an
increase of five percent (5%) over and above their base salary for the performance of
administrative duties, subject to approval by the Mayor. Any employee receiving administrative
pay will cease to receive such pay when the employee is no longer performing the administrative
duties for the Department/Division Head.
B.

When a classification requires additional knowledge and skills, the

classification pay range may be increased one time up to two ranges, at the discretion of
administration.
** See Appendix “A” for Pay Scales **
ARTICLE 48
PART-TIME EMPLOYEES
Section 1. – Definition
Part Time employees shall mean those employees working thirty (30) hours or less in
positions intended to last in excess of nine months or that actually last in excess of nine (9) months.
Part Time employees shall not be entitled to any of the benefits or provisions provided for in this
Article until they have been continuously employed by the City for a full year, with the exception
of the pay plan attached as Article 47.
Section 2
Part Time employees scheduled less than 22 1/2 hours per week shall receive no benefits
other than Article 14, Grievance Procedure and Article 39, Prevailing Benefits.
Section 3.
Part Time employees scheduled who work in excess of an average of 29 hours a week shall
be entitled to hospital and medical benefits under Article 38 with the exclusion of Life Insurance
and the Alcohol and Drug Provision.

68

Any part-time employee who was hired on or after April 1, 2012, is not entitled to any
insurance benefit upon separation from the City. Any part-time employee hired before April 1,
2012, who is currently eligible for retirement, may continue City health insurance benefits, upon
retirement, but will be responsible for the full cost of coverage.
Section 4.
Part Time employees shall be entitled to vacation under the following schedule based
upon their weekly hours:
1 - 7 years

1 week

8 - 14 years

2 weeks

15 or more years

3 weeks

(i.e., the calculation of the amount of vacation time to be paid shall be done in the following
manner: Effective January 1, 1991, and annually thereafter, the amount of time that the employee
worked during the previous year will be added up and divided by 52 and rounded to the nearest 1/4
hour to determine the amount of vacation time to be paid. Any employee working more than 850 (up
to a maximum of 1,950 hours) will have those hours divided by 52 and awarded that number of hours
for each week of vacation time earned. For purposes of calculating the number of hours worked,
vacation hours will be included in the number of hours worked.)
Section 5.
Part Time employees working 22 1/2 hours to 30 hours weekly shall not receive any benefits
or protections, other than those set forth in Article 14, Grievance Procedure, Article 39, Prevailing
Benefits, or as specifically contained in this Article.
Section 6. Overtime
A.

No overtime shall be awarded to Part Time employees except that the City is not

required to interrupt a particular route, game or function and substitute a Full-Time employee for
Part Time employee who has commenced the route, game or function during his regular scheduled
hours and is required to work over-time to complete same.
B.

Employee will have a choice of receiving overtime or compensatory time in

accordance with Article 36 upon exceeding 40 hours per week.
Section 7. Part Time Sanitation Collectors
A.

Will work a normal scheduled week of 30 hours.

69

B.

Will be on the incentive plan to the same extent and under the same terms of Full-

T i m e employees, with the exception of the difference in hours between a Part Time employee
(30 hours) and a Full-Time employee (37 1/2 hours).
C.

The hourly pay of Part Time employees in Solid Waste will be recalculated based

on the current 34 hours of pay, and paid over 30 hours without any loss of pay.
Section 8. Lay Offs
Part-time employees within a classification in a department shall ordinarily be laid off
before full-time employees are laid off. However, to meet the needs of the City and/or a particular
department, the City may override this provision and retain a part-time employee rather than a fulltime employee if, in the sole opinion of the City, the part-time employee is better qualified or
his/her retention is in the best interest of the City and/or department. The City will articulate its
rationale to the Union before the layoff occurs.
If a grievance arises out of Section 8 of this Article, the grievant will not be entitled to back
pay. For purposes of Section 8 grievance herein, the grievance shall commence at the arbitration
step of the grievance procedure.
Section 9. – Pay Plan
There shall be no salary increases during Fiscal Year 2009/2010.
Merit Steps increases for part-time employees shall be reinstated effective July 1, 2014.
When Merit Step increase raises resume on July 1, 2014, such increase shall be based on the
starting point of the bargaining unit member’s status as of July 12, 2010. Accordingly, the time
period of suspension (July 13, 2010 through June 30, 2014) shall not be included in the calculation
of Merit Step increases.
Note that all employees will be paid no less than the Florida or Federal minimum wage
laws, whichever is higher.
Section 10.
Part Time employees performing work on any of the holidays set forth in Article 35,
Section 1, with the exception of the employee's birthday or personal sick leave, shall be paid time
and one-half of their straight hourly rate for each hour worked.

70

ARTICLE 49
HEART BILL
The City of Hialeah agrees to implement a Heart Disability Provision to be known as
7067 G.E.H. (General Employees Heart). The intent of this provision is to provide the benefits as
detailed herein to employees covered by this Agreement, who suffer a condition of impairment
as defined herein.
Section 1.
1.

Scope of Provision 70-67 G.E.H
A.

Any condition or impairment of health of any Employee caused by

Tuberculosis, Hypertension, Heart Disease or Hardening of the Arteries, resulting in total
or partial disability or death, shall be presumed to be accidental and suffered in line of duty
unless the contrary be shown by competent evidence.
B.

Any condition or impairment of health as stated in "a" above caused

directly or approximately by exposure, which exposure occurred in the act or performance
of duty at some definite time or place without willful negligence on the part of the
employee, resulting in total or partial disability, shall be presumed to be accidental and
suffered in the line of duty, provided that such employee shall have successfully passed a
physical examination upon entering such service, which physical examination, including
electrocardiogram, failed to reveal any evidence of such condition, and further, that such
presumption shall not apply to benefits payable under or granted in a policy of life
insurance or disability insurance. This section shall be applicable to employees only with
reference to pension and retirement benefits with the City.
2.

70-67 G.E.H. shall not extend or otherwise affect Chapter 440, Florida Statutes,

pertaining to Worker's Compensation. However, benefits pursuant to this provision, shall be offset
by any Workers' Compensation benefits, as well as any normal or disability retirement benefits.
3.

Recipients eligible for 70-67 G.E.H. benefits shall be entitled to all the benefits and

subject to all the restrictions normally associated with Section 70-67 long-term disability (i.e., health
insurance, discontinuance of accumulation of sick leave, etc.), but shall receive benefits determined
in accordance with 70-67 G.E.H. provisions.

71

Section 2. 70-67 G.E.H. Eligibility
1.

Minimum of ten (10) years full time service as an employee of the City of Hialeah.

2.

An otherwise eligible employee, who experiences an injury resulting from an on-

duty incident which is ultimately determined to be covered by Worker's Compensation, would not
require ten (10) years of service to vest in the 70-67 G.E.H. benefit, but would instead, be entitled
to receive normal 70-66/70-67 benefits.
3.

An individual eligible to receive 70-67 G.E.H. benefits would not be entitled to

receive Section 70-66 or Section 70-67 benefits.
4.

The following shall be utilized for the determination as to whether or not an

individual qualifies for Article 49, Heart Disability Provision Benefits:
Step 1.
The individual, at his/her cost, shall go to a physician of his/her choice to have his/her
personal physician determine whether or not he/she is disabled, as outlined in Article 49, Heart
Bill.
Step 2.
Within thirty (30) days of the determination of Step 1, if the applicant's personal physician
has found him/her to be disabled, within the guidelines of Article 49, said individual shall petition
the City of Hialeah Human Resources Director, for consideration of Article 49, Heart Bill, by placing
his/her request in writing and submitting it to the Department of Human Resources.
Step 3.
Upon receipt of the request for consideration under Article 49 and the supporting letter
from the personal physician indicating the individual to be disabled, the City of Hialeah shall select
a doctor of its choice to examine the applicant.
Step 4.
The City shall provide the City physician a copy of Article 49, a copy of the job description
and a brief outline of light duty jobs for which the individual may be considered. The City of
Hialeah shall ask the physician to determine:
(a)

whether or not the individual is fit for regular duty;

(b)

whether or not the individual is fit for partial disability as outlined in Article 49; or

(c)

whether or not the individual should be considered totally disabled and receive
the benefit as outlined in Article 49.

72

Step 5.
If the City's physician finds the individual eligible for partial disability or regular duty, the
City shall submit the doctor's findings to the employee's physician for reconsideration.
Step 6.
If the employee's physician, after reexamination and conferring with the City's physician,
finds the individual fit for regular duty or for partial disability, the City shall then place the
individual in the appropriate position.
Step 7.
If the employee's physician still feels the individual to be totally disabled and not eligible
for partial or regular duty after reviewing the findings of the City's physician, the two doctors shall
select a third doctor to review the findings of the other two doctors and to exam the applicant for
his/her determination as to whether or not the individual is physically fit for; (a) regular duty; (b)
partial disability; or (c) total disability. The cost of the third doctor shall be a shared cost between
the City of Hialeah and the applicant.
Step 8.
If it becomes necessary to select a third doctor, the finding of the third doctor shall be
binding upon both parties with the individual being placed either into the appropriate position or
placed out on total disability. The third physician will be provided with a copy of the job
description, along with a brief outline of light duty jobs available, which was submitted under Step4
to the City's physician. The third doctor shall then make a determination as to: (a) whether or not
the employee is fit for regular duty; (b) partial disability; or (c) total disability.
Section 3. Effect of Total Disability
Step 1.
If an eligible employee is totally disabled, but eligible for normal retirement, the employee
must apply for disability retirement within thirty (30) days of the decisive medical decision. The
employee would receive a disability retirement percentage based on the City's retirement program.
Step 2
An employee determined to be eligible for 70-67 G.E.H. benefits shall receive as said
70-67 G.E.H. benefits, a percentage of the employee's gross salary at the time of injury or
medical determination of total disability whichever occurs first, based on the following schedule:

73

YEARS OF SERVICE

PERCENTAGE OF GROSS PAY

10-14 years

65%

15-19 years

70%

20 years and over

75%

Section 4. Effect of Partial Disability
If an eligible employee is able to return to light duty, the City within medical limitations
would be permitted to employ the employee anywhere within the employee's department/division
in a job commensurate with their position. With the mutual consent of the employee and the City,
the employee may be placed in a position anywhere within the City service. The employee shall
be paid commensurate with the employee's classification and the employee shall not lose
bargaining status.
ARTICLE 50
SEPARATION PAY
Limitations on separation pay at time of retirement:
A.

Those employees with less than $50,000.00 will be paid in full the first year.

B.

Those employees with $50,000 to $100,000 will be paid $50,000the first year, and the
remaining in the second year.

C.

Those employees with greater than $100,000 will be paid $50,000 the first year, a
minimum of $50,000 the second year, and the balance the third year.

D.

Those employees being paid out in multi-years will receive interest on their remaining
monies equal to the interest received by the City on its funds, i.e., time weight average
based on Federal Funds, documented by financial statements.

E.

If the employee dies before retirement or before receiving all of their separation pay, the
City shall pay the balance in full immediately upon request to the designated beneficiary,
or if there is none, to the person's estate.

F.

For purposes of definition, the amounts listed above refer to gross dollars and term year

74

refers to fiscal year (October 1 through September 30).
G.

Employees shall have the option to receive first and second pay out, as it relates to this
Article, in the same calendar year, as long as the pay outs are in different fiscal years. The
employee may also opt to be paid for second and third pay out in the same manner, as long
as pay outs are in different fiscal years.

H.

Employees who submit a non-revocable letter of retirement 120 days prior to retiring shall
have the maximum permitted to be paid into deferred compensation paid in their name
from any approved leave time they have on the books.
ARTICLE 51
PERSONNEL BOARD
Section 1.
The City Council agrees to accept names of qualified candidates for consideration for

appointment to the Personnel Board. The Union may submit a list of three (3) names to the City
Council for one appointment.
Section 2.
If the names submitted to the City Council are unacceptable to a majority of the Council,
the Union shall be required to submit new names by the next regularly scheduled City Council
meeting.
Section 3.
If the Union fails to submit names as required within thirty (30) days from the date a
vacancy occurs, then the City Council may appoint a member from names of qualified
candidates.
Section 4.
If a board member does not complete their full term, the Union shall resubmit names for
consideration for appointment for the remainder of said term.

75

ARTICLE 52
SOLID WASTE DIVISION
The City will determine the number of employees that will be regularly utilized by the City
for the program. The total number of employees required to staff all the program will be the
minimum number of Civil Service slots that are to be filled with the Civil Service personnel.
Nothing herein is intended to impose or restrict the City's power to set the number of routes and/or
the number of employees regularly employed on each route or administer this program including
determining the number or classification of employees to be employed in the program.
The City has contracted to a private vendor the collection of garbage, bulky waste and yard
waste. The City retains its right to make further adjustments to the program including but not
limited to the contracting of recycling materials as it sees fit.
1.

The City may use two crews (back-up crews) to supplement services on a rotating
basis.

2.

The backup crews shall stay until released by the Department of Public Works
Director or his/her designee, pending confirmation from inspectors that all services
are complete.

3.

Crew members may be allowed to leave when their respective assignments are
complete. Truck drivers may be asked to proceed to the landfill or transfer station.

4.

Any employees working overtime shall be paid only after an employee works more
than 37 1/2 hours of actual work in a workweek.

City recycling crews shall bid by sections annually, so that the bids for routes/sections take
effect February 1st of each year, as needed. In the event of further adjustment are made to the
program by the City, and City recycling crews are no longer the bid requirement is null and
void.
ARTICLE 53
TARDINESS POLICY
1.

All employees are expected to report to work and return from breaks/lunch on time.

2.

Where an employee is tardy, five (5) minutes or more, they shall provide a written

76

explanation that the supervisor shall review and determine whether it is acceptable or unacceptable.
Where the tardiness is due to an unacceptable reason, discipline shall be imposed in accordance
with the violation schedule stated below and the employee will be deducted fifteen (15) minutes
leave without pay, unless the tardiness exceeds fifteen (15) minutes, in which case the employee
will be docked the entire tardiness period.
VIOLATIONS OF THE TARDINESS POLICY (TARDINESS UNDER THIS
SECTION) SHALL RESULT IN THE FOLLOWING:
THIRD TARDY
IN A CALENDAR YEAR:

Written notice to employee reminding them
of the tardiness policy.

FIFTH TARDY
IN A CALENDAR YEAR:
in

Written reprimand and written notice
indicating that the sixth (6th) tardiness will result
the employee being subject to a suspension of three
(3) days leave without pay.

SIXTH TARDY
IN A CALENDAR YEAR:

Suspension of three (3) days leave without pay and
written notice indicating that the seventh (7th)
tardiness will result in the employee being subject to
dismissal.

SEVENTH TARDY
IN A CALENDAR YEAR:

Subject to dismissal.

1.

Where an employee is tardy less than five (5) minutes, they shall provide a written

explanation for supervisory review. Less than five (5) minutes tardiness, may also result in
corrective action, where necessary, and reflected in the annual evaluation (i.e., counseling,
warnings).
2.

All employees are reminded that entries on sign-in sheets must be accurate, and any

false statements shall be grounds for discipline, up to and including dismissal, in accordance with
the Civil Service Rules and Regulations. Management shall determine the method by which
employees’ time is recorded.
ARTICLE 54
Reserved
[Intentionally left blank]

77

ARTICLE 55
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS
In the event of an emergency, as determined by the Mayor or his designee, employee(s)
failing to report for work, without a reasonable excuse, will be subject to disciplinary action.

ARTICLE 56
UNIFORM POLICY
Section 1.
Employees in uniformed areas will be issued uniforms as follows:
Initial distribution – five (four in Solid Waste). Individual uniforms will be replaced upon return
of the old uniforms, when the old uniforms warrant replacement, as determined by management.
Section 2 – Safety Shoe Allowance
The City will rei m burse in a n am ount not to exceed $75.00 each fi scal y e a r
t o purchase/replace safety shoes for the following employees working in the listed departments:
Water & Sewers
Heavy Equipment Operator
Lift Station Mechanic
Mechanic II
Meter Reader
Senior Meter Reader
Service Worker
Utilityman
Utility Electronic/Electrician Tech
Water & Sewers Foreman
Water & Sewers Journeyman Apprentice
Water & Sewers Journeyman
Water & Sewers Supervisor
Construction & Maintenance
A/C Mechanic Assistant
Construction Crew Foreman
Construction Supervisor I
Construction Supervisor II
Electrician

78

Electrician Apprentice
Electrician Supervisor
Plumber
Plumber Apprentice
Service Worker
Skill Craftsman
Skill Craftsman Apprentice
Small Appliance Apprentice & Air Conditioning Assistant Mechanic
Stockroom Clerk
Truck Driver
Utilityman
Streets & Stormwater
Heavy Equipment Operator
Roadway Construction Supervisor
Service Worker
Service Worker (P/T)
Spray Technician
Stormwater Utility Technician
Streets Construction Foreman
Streets Engineer
Streets Inspector
Streets Journeyman
Truck Driver
Utilityman
Fleet Maintenance
Automotive Parts Counter Person
Automotive Supervisor I
Equipment Service Worker
Hydraulic Technician
Mechanic I & II
Service Worker
Service Worker (P/T)
Stockroom Clerk
Tire Repair Person
Truck Driver
Utilityman
Utilityman (P/T)
Welder
Solid Waste
Equipment Operator
Heavy Equipment Operator
Sanitation Collector
Sanitation Collector (P/T)

79

Sanitation Inspector
Service Worker
Service Worker (P/T)
Solid Waste Supervisor
Truck Driver
Utilityman
Utilityman (P/T)
Parks & Recreation
Parks & Recreation Journeyman
Service Worker
Service Worker (P/T)
Truck Driver
Utilityman
Utilityman (P/T)
Purchasing Division
Maintenance Worker
Telecommunications Division
Electronics Technician
Journeyman
Service Worker
Utilityman
Fire Department
Fire Inspector
Fire Plans Examiner
Building Department
Building Inspector
Electrical Inspector
Mechanical Inspector
Plumbing Inspector
The above listed employees are required to purchase and wear appropriate safety shoes
according to specific department specifications. To be eligible, employees must have completed their
initial probationary period. Reimbursement will be made upon proof of purchase of the proper safety
shoes. Replacement of lost, destroyed, or damaged safety shoes within the fiscal year will be at the
expense of the employee. A reasonable length of time shall be allowed for the listed employees to
acquire the necessary safety shoes. The Department Head shall provide employees with information
necessary to ensure that the safety shoes meet the Department’s specification. expense of the

80

employee. A reasonable length of time shall be allowed for the listed employees to acquire the
necessary safety shoes. The Department Head shall provide employees with information necessary
to ensure that the safety shoes meet the Department’s specification.
ARTICLE 57
DIRECT DEPOSIT
The City agrees to offer direct deposit of employees’ paychecks. Money will be wired
transferred no later than 3:00 p.m., on Friday of the pay week.
Deferred Compensation payments will be transmitted by wire transfer on the Monday
following payday, as soon as arrangements can be made with the financial institution.

ARTICLE 58
Reserved
[Intentionally Left Blank]

ARTICLE 59
REIMBURSEMENT FOR CERTIFICATIONS

1.

Any

Public

Safety

Communications

Officer,

Police

Dispatcher,

Fire

Communications Dispatcher, or I.D. Technician I, who receives outside training at the City’s
direction and who resigns without a reason deemed acceptable in the sole discretion of the Mayor,
or is terminated within three (3) years after their training is completed, will be responsible to
reimburse the City in the amount of $700.00, for the costs associated with their training. The City
reserves the right to withhold up to and including $700.00 from any funds that the employee
would be entitled to receive from their accumulated time banks, or their annuity savings fund,
upon separation and apply the withheld funds to satisfy this reimbursement provision.
2.

The City will reimburse for lifeguard certifications as follows:
A.

The CITY will reimburse new year-round part-time lifeguards, lifeguard

instructors, and chief guards, non-seasonal, for their Certification(s) as long as they remain
81

employed with the CITY for a period of eight (8) months after obtaining the
Certification(s).
B.

The CITY will reimburse current year-round lifeguards, lifeguard instructors and

chief guards, non-seasonal, for any Certification/Re-Certification(s) obtained after June 28, 2024,
as long as they remain with the CITY for a period of eight (8) months after obtaining the
Certification/Recertification(s).
C.

The certifications that will be reimbursed are the following: Lifeguard, Lifeguard

Instructor, AFO/CPO, CPR/AED, Water Safety Instructor (WSI), Bloodborne Pathogen, Oxygen
Administration, Water Aerobics (Water Fitness), Arthritis and First Aid.
D.

Employees must seek and obtain approval, via a written memorandum, from

their immediate supervisor and the Director of Parks & Recreation prior to obtaining
additional Certifications.
E.

If the employee resigns within eight (8) months after their Certification/Re-

Certification(s) date, they shall pay the CITY back the cost for the Certification/Re-Certification(s)
at the time of resignation. The employee will execute an agreement to this effect.
ARTICLE 60
DISPATCH SIGN-UP BONUS
The City, at its sole discretion, may offer a sign bonus of up to $5,000.00 to individuals
hired into positions in the 911/Dispatch Division. The City shall require reimbursement of
signing bonus if an individual separates from employment prior to three (3) years from the date
of hire.

82
