Moore Public Schools
2025 - 2026
NEGOTIATED CONTRACT
AND
PROCEDURAL AGREEMENT
Between
THE EDUCATION ASSOCIATION
OF MOORE and the
MOORE BOARD OF EDUCATION

IT IS THE POLICY OF THE MOORE SCHOOL DISTRICT TO PROVIDE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR
EMPLOYMENT, RETENTION, TRANSFER, REASSIGNMENT, ADVANCEMENT, AND REHIRE OF
ALL PERSONS REGARDLESS OF AGE, GENDER, RACE, COLOR, CREED, NATIONAL ORIGIN,
POLITICAL AFFILIATION, PHYSICAL/MENTAL DISABILITY OR RELIGION. THE DISTRICT WILL
PROVIDE REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS TO OTHERWISE QUALIFIED EMPLOYEES AND
APPLICANTS INACCORDANCE WITH THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA).

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.

SCOPE OF CONTRACT
1.01
1.02
1.03

II.

EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS
2.01
2.02
2.03
2.04
2.05
2.06
2.07
2.08
2.09
2.10
2.11
2.12
2.13
2.14

Ill.

Personnel File
Right to Representation
Staff Relations
Member Rights
Grievance Procedure
Protection of Members
Members' Right to Due Process
Drug Testing

ASSOCIATION RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES
4.01
4.02
4.03
4.04
4.05

V.

Part-Time/Temporary Contract
Nondiscrimination Policy
Teacher (Defined)
Professional Evaluation
Employment Recommendation
Conditional Employment
Suspension/Dismissal
Assignment
Transfers
Supplemental Assignment
Reduction in Staff
Summer School
Night Alternative School
Internet-Based Instruction

INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS
3.01
3.02
3.03
3.04
3.05
3.06
3.07
3.08

IV.

Recognition
Severability
Definitions

Association Leave
Use of School Buildings/Mail
Availability of Information
Printing/Distribution of Negotiated Contract
Release Time for President

LEAVE PROVISIONS
5.01
5.02
5.03
5.04
5.05
5.06
5.07
5.08
5.09

Sick Leave
Personal Business Leave
Bereavement Leave
Professional Enrichment In-Service Days
Leaves of Absence
Family Medical Leave Provisions
Jury Duty Leave and Compensation
Military Leave
Legal Proceedings Leave

2

VI.

WORKING CONDITIONS
6.01
6.02
6.03
6.04
6.05
6.06
6.07
6.08
6.09
6.10
6.11
6.12
6.13
6.14
6.15
6.16
6.17

VII.

FRINGE BENEFITS
7.01
7.02
7.03
7.04
7.05

VIII.

Member Substitute Pay
Reimbursement for Use of Personal Automobile
Payroll Deductions
Compensation
Supplemental Compensation

APPENDIX
9.01
9.02
9.03
9.04
9.05
9.06
9.07

X.

Sick Leave Accumulation Reimbursement
Retirement Contribution
Social Security
Work Related Injury
Fringe Benefit Program

COMPENSATION
8.01
8.02
8.03
8.04
8.05

IX.

Work Year/Work Day
Preparation Time
Lunch Period
Dress Code
Absence-Substitute Hired
Facilities
Private Access to Telephone
Non-Classroom Duties
Class Size
Conferences
Committee Appointments
Student Discipline
Inclusion
Innovative Programs
Financial Accounting Procedures
Faculty Meetings
Lesson Plans

Grievance Form
Compensation Schedule
Supplemental Compensation Index
Sick Leave Sharing Request Form
Physician's Statement
District Request
Donation Form

PROCEDURAL AGREEMENT

3

I.

SCOPE OF CONTRACT

1.01

RECOGNITION
The Moore School Board, hereinafter Board, hereby recognizes The Education Association of Moore (TEAM),
hereinafter Association, as the exclusive representative for all the Members of the Bargaining Unit whether under
contract, on leave, full or part-time, for the purpose of collective bargaining on all matters affecting wages, hours,
fringe benefits, and other terms and conditions of employment.
No agreement, understanding, consideration, or interpretation which alters, varies, waives, or modifies any of the
terms or conditions contained herein shall be made with any employee or group of employees by the employer or
any of its agents or representatives, unless it has been made, ratified, and agreed to in writing by the Association
and the Board. Any such agreement shall not constitute a precedent in the future enforcement of any terms
contained herein.
Unless otherwise indicated, the term, Member of the Bargaining Unit, (when used hereinafter in this Negotiated
Contract), shall refer to all employees represented by the Association in the Bargaining Unit defined as all certified
professional personnel of the Moore School District, excluding administrators, directors, coordinators, supervisors,
and any newly created positions which are principally supervisory or administrative.
The Association or its Members shall not strike or threaten to strike as a means of resolving differences. If the
Association or its Members engage in a strike, then the organization shall cease to be recognized as
representative of the professional educators and the school district shall be relieved of the duty to negotiate with
such organization or its representatives as outlined in current Oklahoma School Law (70 O.S. § 509.8).
BOARD RIGHTS
The Board retains all rights and authority it possesses by law. This Contract shall not impair the rights provided by
law either to the Board or the Association. Policies, regulations, and by-laws heretofore and hereafter adopted by
the Board, and not the subject of an agreement between the parties, shall remain in full force and effect. The
Policies affecting the terms and conditions of employment may be subject to negotiations in accordance with
subsequent paragraphs of this Article.
DURATION
The 2025-2026 Negotiated Contract shall take effect at 12:01 a.m. on July 1, 2025, and shall be in full force and
effect until June 30, 2026. If a successor contract has not been negotiated by June 30, 2026, the Association and
the Board agree to the continuation of those provisions allowed by state law of the expired contract.
If the Association or the Board desires to propose changes to this agreement, they shall do so in accordance with
the Procedural Agreement. (1999-2021 per annum)

1.02

SEVERABILITY
If any provision(s) of this Contract or any application of the provisions of this Contract to any person(s) is found,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, to be in conflict with any federal or state law, regulation, ruling or order, now
or hereinafter enacted or issued, such provision or application shall be inoperative, but the remaining provisions
hereof shall continue in effect. Upon request of the Association or the Board, within ten (10) days after such
finding(s), the parties shall meet solely for the purpose of negotiating the provision(s) affected.

1.03

DEFINITIONS
Temporary Contract - A contract with a definite starting and concluding date. All certified personnel will be initially
hired on a temporary contract. Any certified employee recommended for re-employment for a second school year
will be re-hired on a temporary contract. This second-year contract will advance to a continuing contract if the
employee has demonstrated effective performance through the evaluation process for that school year. Effective
performance is defined as reaching at least a 2.8 cumulative numerical rating for evaluations using the TLE
Qualitative Evaluation Model. Pursuant to meeting this effective rating, the employee's contract status will be
advanced to continuing status for re-hiring consideration by May 1st of that school year.
4

Part-Time Contract - A continuous contract in which Members of the Bargaining Unit shall have all benefits
including career status.
Probationary teacher - A duly certified or licensed teacher who has completed less than four (4) consecutive
complete school years of teaching in the Moore School District under a written teaching contract and has not
been determined to have attained career status pursuant to TLE, as provided by law.
Career teacher - A duly certified teacher who has completed four (4) or more consecutive complete school years
of teaching service in one school district in Oklahoma under a written teaching contract and/or has been
determined to have attained career status pursuant to TLE, as provided by law.
TLE – Teacher and Leader Effectiveness
Transfer - A change of job to another site(s).
Assignment - A change of job within a site.
Seniority - The longevity with the District based on continuous, full time, contractual employment commencing
with the signing of a Conditional Offer of Employment Form by the Member with the Moore School District. In
cases of the same signing date, the date and time when the member was conditionally offered his/her job by the
head of Human Resources will determine seniority status. Seniority shall not be broken, nor shall it continue to
accrue when a person is on authorized leave or on layoff. Members shall be required to update their certification
no later than June 30th of each year.
Grievance - For the purpose of this document is an alleged violation of the terms within the Contract. Two or more
Members affected by the same issue may file a consolidated or joint grievance. Signatures of each grievant will
be attached to the initial grievance.
Grievant – A Member who grieves an alleged violation of the terms within the Contract; may also refer to the
Association when a violation of items within the Contract are procedural in nature. In the event the grievant is the
Association, the signature shall be that of the Association president.
Days – When this Contract refers to a timeline or deadline of days, that shall refer to school days, except when a
grievance is submitted less than ten (10) days before the close of school or during the summer. The time limits
shall consist of working weekdays, excluding holidays.
Immediate Family member - Member's spouse, parents of member or spouse, child(ren), and/or stepchild(ren),
siblings, grandparents, grandchildren, or a household member.
Disability - A condition depriving the employee of the ability to perform one's assignment because of physical or
mental impairment.

II.

EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS

2.01

PART-TIME CONTRACT
Part-Time Contract - A continuous contract in which Members of the Bargaining Unit shall have all benefits
including career status. If the position becomes a full time position, the Member may be offered said position. The
Member shall be notified by May 1st if the position is to be non-renewed.
When a Member has taught in a part-time position for three or more years, he/she shall be offered the position if
his/her current position is made full time. (1999, 2015)

2.02

NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY
There shall be no discrimination against any Member of the Bargaining Unit covered by this contract in a manner,
which would violate any applicable laws on the basis of race, color, creed, national origin, age, gender, marital
5

status, sexual orientation, or disability as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act in the evaluation,
employment, transfer, or promotion of personnel. (2013)
2.03

TEACHER
An educator hired for the first time in one school district under a written continuing or temporary teaching contract
must meet one of the three options to transition from probationary to career status under TLE:
A. The educator completes three or more consecutive complete school years in one district and achieves an
overall district evaluation score of superior (4.8 or higher) for two of the three years, or
B. The educator completes four or more consecutive complete school years in one district, averages at least
effective (2.8 or higher) for the four-year period and attains an overall district evaluation score of at least
effective (2.8 or higher) for the last two years of the four-year period, or
C. The educator completes four or more consecutive complete school years in one district and does not meet
one of the above requirements, and the educator’s building principal writes a petition requesting the educator
be granted career status citing evidence of the educator’s effectiveness. An example of evidence would be
the observation scores attained earlier in same school year and/or walkthrough data collected by the
evaluator. The petition is sent to the district superintendent for consideration. If the superintendent approves
the petition, the petition moves to the local school board for a vote.
D. Anyone seeking career status prior to 4 years is subject to board approval.

2.04

PROFESSIONAL EVALUATION
A. Definitions:
1. Formal Evaluation for a Probationary Teacher - A process for improving the education of pupils through
Member professional growth and as criteria for Member contract renewal. Evaluation is an ongoing
process encompassing the entire educational experience. The formal evaluation in compliance with the
state-adopted Tulsa Model framework must include each of the following steps:
a. Pre-observation conference (upon request of evaluating administrator or Member)
b. First individual classroom observation – completed during the first quarter of the school year
c. First observation conference (within 5 school days of first observation)
d. Second individual classroom observation – completed during the second quarter of the school
year
e. Second observation conference (within 5 school days of second observation)
f. Third individual classroom observation – completed during the third quarter of the school year
g. Third observation conference (within 5 school days of second observation)
h. Written formal evaluation – to be completed by Spring Break
i. Evaluation conference (may be combined with the third observation conference)
2. Formal Evaluation for a Career Teacher – A process for improving the education of pupils through
Member professional growth and as criteria for Member contract renewal. Evaluation is an ongoing
process encompassing the entire educational experience. The formal evaluation in compliance with the
state-adopted Tulsa Model framework must include each of the following steps:
a. Pre-observation conference (upon request of evaluating administrator or Member)
b. First individual classroom observation – completed during the first semester of the school year
c. First observation conference (within 5 school days of first observation)
d. Second individual classroom observation – completed during the second semester of the school
year
e. Second observation conference (within 5 school days of second observation)
f. Written formal evaluation – to be completed by Spring Break
g. Evaluation conference (may be combined with the second observation conference)
3. Member Evaluation Forms - The purpose of Member evaluation forms as provided in Article 9.02, is to
provide consistency throughout the District in reporting information through established criteria for formal
evaluation through the Tulsa Model framework. The District may utilize a software program to store and
6

report evaluation data to the Member and State Department of Education as required by law. Any areas
of needed improvements shall be noted, and a corresponding plan of improvement provided as specified
in Section C of this Article.
B. Procedures:
The building principal or the assistant principal have the sole responsibility for evaluation.
Formal evaluation shall be made of probationary Members a minimum of once during the school year prior to
spring break. Formal evaluation shall be made of career Members a minimum of once every school year prior
to spring break. Career members who received an overall ranking of "Highly Effective" or "Superior" on the
prior year's evaluation may be evaluated once every three years. In this case, the career Member's overall
ranking on the Tulsa Model qualitative rubric will be carried over and stand during the non- evaluation years.
The following scale is in accordance with the Tulsa Model and shall be used for the rankings:
From
Less than 1.8
Equal to or greater than 1.8
Equal to or greater than 2.8
Equal to or greater than 3.8
Equal to or greater than 4.8

To
Less than 2.8
Less than 3.8
Less than 4.8

Ranking
Ineffective
Needs Improvement
Effective
Highly Effective
Superior

Step 1: Pre-observation Conference - A pre-observation conference may be requested by the evaluating
administrator or Member to be evaluated. The purpose of this conference shall be to schedule a window
for observation and review lesson plans and objectives. This conference may also serve as a time to
collaboratively review artifacts as evidence of effectiveness for various Tulsa Model rubric indicators. No
written forms shall be required for pre-observation.
Step 2: Observations and Observation Conferences
Probationary Teachers – The evaluating administrator shall conduct a minimum of three individual
classroom observations of not less than thirty (30) minutes each. The evaluating administrator will provide
a maximum window of time of five (5) instructional days in which each observation shall occur. If the
observation does not occur within the specified time, the evaluating administrator must confer with the
Member and reschedule, observing the same notice time frame. Observations shall not be conducted on
the day immediately following any extended break in the instructional calendar (whether scheduled or
unexpected). Observation conferences must be held after each of the three observations and timely
feedback shall be given to the Member following each of the observations. The evaluating administrator
may suggest a fourth observation and conference prior to completing the written evaluation in order to
provide additional time for improvement, but this must be approved by the Member. The Member also has
the right to request a fourth observation and conference. The Member and evaluating administrator shall
review and sign a Member observation form for each observation. A copy of each observation form must
be given to the Member and kept in the Member’s site personnel file.
Career Teachers – The evaluating administrator shall conduct a minimum of two individual classroom
observations of not less than thirty (30) minutes each. The evaluating administrator will provide a
maximum window of time of five (5) instructional days in which each observation shall occur. If the
observation does not occur within the specified time, the evaluating administrator must confer with the
Member and reschedule, observing the same notice time frame. Observations shall not be conducted on
the day immediately following any extended break in the instructional calendar (whether scheduled or
unexpected). Observation conferences must be held after each of the two observations and timely
feedback shall be given to the Member following each of the observations. The evaluating administrator
may suggest a third observation and conference prior to completing the written evaluation in order to
provide additional time for improvement, but this must be approved by the Member. The Member also has
the right to request a third observation and conference. The Member and evaluating administrator shall
review and sign a Member observation form for each observation. A copy of each observation form must
be given to the Member and kept in the Member’s site personnel file.
Step 3: Evaluation and Evaluation Conference - The evaluating administrator shall complete the written
evaluation and hold an evaluation conference with the Member. The evaluation conference may be
combined with the second (for career teachers) or third (for probationary teachers) observation
7

conference. The Member and evaluating administrator shall review and sign the Member evaluation form.
The signature of the Member does not indicate agreement with the evaluation. A copy of the evaluation
form must be given to the Member, kept in the Member's site personnel file, and sent to ASC to be kept in
the Member's official personnel file. The Member shall have the right to place in his/her site and official
personnel file a response/rebuttal to any written evaluation within ten (10) work days of receipt of the
evaluation. The response/rebuttal will be attached to the written evaluation. Any adverse evaluation of a
Member's performance placed in the Member's site or official personnel file may be subject to the
grievance procedure in accordance with Article 3.05: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE, of the Contract.
C. Assistance for Suggested Areas in Need of Improvement:
These plans for improvement fall under the guidelines set up in ARTICLE 2.06: CONDITIONAL
EMPLOYMENT, of this contract. Administrators are encouraged, as the performance issues may dictate, to
communicate informally with a Member before issuing a detailed written plan of improvement. When the
evaluation process of a Member indicates the need to improve professional skills, the evaluating administrator
shall provide a detailed plan to eliminate difficulties noted on the observation and/or evaluation through a Goal
Setting Form and/or Personal Development Plan.
Goal Setting Form - The Goal Setting Form is intended for collaborative use between an evaluating
administrator and Member needing further development. The Goal Setting Form may be used after any
observation or after an evaluation in lieu of a Personal Development Plan if all the following conditions
apply:
•
•
•

The Member has no more than 2 ratings of “needs improvement.”
The Member has no ratings of “ineffective.”
The evaluating administrator does not anticipate exiting the Member.

The Goal Setting Form shall be developed collaboratively between the Member and evaluating administrator,
confined to 2 indicators or fewer, and time-bound within a maximum window of twenty (20) school days. The
goals and actions within the Goal Setting Form must reflect and reference relevant dimensions and indicators
of the Tulsa Model rubric. It does require follow-up at a post conference. (This post conference may be
included as part of an observation conference or evaluation conference.) The Goal Setting Form shall be
signed by the Member and evaluating administrator when the form is first developed and again at the post
conference. If use of the Goal Setting Form is not successful at the evaluation stage, then a Personal
Development Plan is warranted. The Goal Setting Form including follow-up documentation shall be attached
to the final evaluation and a copy must be given to the Member and kept in the Member's site personnel file.
Personal Development Plan - A Personal Development Plan may be issued to a Member in response to areas
rated below effective during an observation. A Personal Development Plan shall be issued to a Member who
receives a rating of "ineffective" or "needs improvement" on any indicator of the evaluation (unless a Goal
Setting Form will be used in lieu of a Personal Development Plan). The goals and actions within the Personal
Development Plan must reflect and reference relevant dimensions and indicators of the Tulsa Model rubric.
The Personal Development Plan may be developed collaboratively between the Member and evaluating
administrator. It shall be confined to a maximum of 4 indicators and time-bound within a maximum window of
two (2) months. It does require follow-up at a post conference. This post conference may be included as part
of an observation conference or evaluation conference. The Personal Development Plan shall be signed by
the Member and evaluating administrator when the form is first developed and again at the post conference.
The Personal Development Plan including follow-up documentation shall be attached to the final evaluation
and a copy must be given to the Member and kept in the Member's site and official personnel file.
If the current evaluation model, forms, or process need to be revised, it shall be done by a committee composed
of three building principals or other administrators as selected by the Superintendent and three Members selected
by TEAM. Refer to the evaluation forms attached hereto as Appendix 9.02. (2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2016)
2.05

EMPLOYMENT RECOMMENDATION
Recommendations regarding employment shall be made yearly by the principal to the Superintendent. The
evaluating administrator shall complete a "Professional Educators Employment Status Form" for each Member of
the Bargaining Unit, and a copy shall be given to the Member prior to May 1st of each year. Members who wish to
resign or not continue employment must notify the head of Human Resources no later than fifteen (15) days
following the first Monday in June. Members who are recommended as non-reemployed or placed on conditional
8

status, shall be notified as specified in ARTICLES 2.04: PROFESSIONAL EVALUATION; 2.06: CONDITIONAL
EMPLOYMENT; 2.07: SUSPENSION/DISMISSAL; 2.11: REDUCTION IN STAFF of this Contract.
2.06

CONDITIONAL EMPLOYMENT
When the evaluating administrator determines that a Member of the Bargaining Unit is performing unsatisfactorily
in any area, the Member shall be notified in writing. The areas of unsatisfactory performance shall be identified
and written suggestions for improvement shall be listed and the evaluating administrator should make a
reasonable effort to assist the Member to correct whatever appears to be the cause for potential dismissal or nonreemployment. A reasonable time for improvement, which time shall not exceed two (2) months shall be given. At
the evaluating administrator's discretion, the time for improvement may be extended. The nature and gravity of
the Member's conduct shall be considered in determining what length of time would be reasonable.
When the plan of improvement has been completed, the Member shall be notified in writing that the plan has
expired or been extended. If the Member does not correct the cause for potential dismissal or non-reemployment
within a reasonable length of time, the principal shall make a recommendation to the Superintendent of the school
district for the dismissal or non-reemployment of the Member. Upon the recommendation of the principal, the
Member may be placed on conditional employment status.

2.07

SUSPENSION/DISMISSAL
SUSPENSION
The Superintendent may suspend a Member of the Bargaining Unit with pay and benefits without notice or
hearing, if he/she determines that the best interests and welfare of the students in the school district require such
action, pending final determination by the Board of a career/probationary Member's dismissal or nonreemployment.
GROUNDS FOR DISMISSAL
Subject to the provisions of the Teacher Due Process Act of 1990, a probationary Member may be dismissed or
not reemployed for cause.
A career Member may be dismissed or not reemployed for the following statutory grounds:
A. Willful neglect of duty;
B. Repeated negligence in performance of duty;
C. Mental or physical abuse to a child;
D. Incompetency;
E. Instructional ineffectiveness;
F. Unsatisfactory teaching performance;
G. Commission of an act involving moral turpitude; or
H. Abandonment of contract.
A Member convicted of a felony shall be dismissed or not reemployed. A Member may be dismissed or not
reemployed after a finding by a court of competent jurisdiction that such Member has engaged in criminal sexual
activity or sexual misconduct that has impeded the effectiveness of the Member's performance. (2006)
DISMISSAL
Before a Member may be dismissed or not reemployed, the Board shall send a copy of the Superintendent's
recommendation to the Member by certified mail, restricted delivery, return receipt requested, by personal
delivery to the Member with a signed acknowledgement of receipt, or by delivery by a process server. By the
9

same manner, the Board shall notify the Member of said Member's right to a hearing before the Board and the
date, time, and place set by the Board for the hearing, which shall be held not sooner than twenty (20) days or
later than sixty (60) days after the Member's receipt of notice. At said hearing the Member shall be entitled to all
rights guaranteed under such circumstances by the U.S. Constitution and the Constitution of Oklahoma.
Notice to a probationary Member shall specify the cause upon which the recommendation is based. Said notice
shall also specify the underlying facts supporting the recommendation. The Board shall notify the probationary
Member of its decision, including the basis for the decision, by certified mail, restricted delivery, return receipt
requested, by personal delivery to the Member with a signed acknowledgement of receipt, or by delivery by a
process server. The Board's decision regarding a Member shall be final.
Notice to a career Member shall specify the statutory grounds upon which the recommendation is based. Said
notice shall also specify the underlying facts supporting the recommendation. The Board shall notify the career
Member of its decision, including the basis for the decision, by certified mail, restricted delivery, return receipt
requested, by personal delivery to the Member with a signed acknowledgement of receipt, or by delivery by a
process server.
The Member shall receive any compensation and benefits to which said Member is otherwise entitled until such
time as the Board's decision becomes final. Provided, however, if the hearing for a Member is for nonreemployment of the Member, such compensation and benefits may be continued only until the end of said
Member's current contract. (2011)
2.08

ASSIGNMENT
Members of the Bargaining Unit shall be placed in positions for which they are qualified as determined by law
and/or the State Department of Education of Oklahoma.
Assignment of personnel within the building shall be the responsibility of the building principal. Assignment
decisions shall be made on the basis of the following criteria, which are listed in order of priority:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Needs of the district as specified by the site administrator.
All qualifications of all candidates for the position including degree level in subject area/grade level.
Ability to meet the specified needs of the assignment.
Expressed desire of the Member regarding assignment.
Length of service in Moore.
Length of service at site(s).

The site administrator shall provide written rationale to demonstrate consideration of the above stated criteria, if
requested.
VOLUNTARY ASSIGNMENT CHANGES
Members of the Bargaining Unit who desire an assignment change, i.e. grade level/subject area, in the same
building for the following school year may file a written statement with the building principal. Members may
request to be assigned to posted positions at any time in accordance with the provisions of the posting. When a
Member is denied an assignment change, he/she may request a conference to discuss the reason(s) for the
denial.
INVOLUNTARY ASSIGNMENT CHANGES
When an involuntary assignment change is deemed necessary, within the same building, a conference shall be
held with the Member(s) affected by the change to discuss the reason(s) for the involuntary assignment. This
conference shall be held as soon as possible after the need is recognized and at least two (2) weeks prior to
assignment change. During the first three (3) student weeks of each semester, involuntary changes in assignment
may be made as justified by enrollment with less than two (2) weeks notification. (1999, 2001, 2002, 2004, 2006,
2007)

10

2.09

TRANSFERS
Transfers of Members of the Bargaining Unit to positions at other sites within the District shall be made on the
basis of the following criteria, which are listed in order of priority:
1. Individual school personnel increase or decrease.
2. All qualifications of all candidates for the position including degree level in subject area/grade level.
3. Ability to meet the specified needs of the transfer.
4. Expressed desire of the Member regarding the transfer.
5. Length of service in Moore.
6. Length of service at site.
VOLUNTARY TRANSFERS
A Member of the bargaining unit who desires transfer to another site must make application for posted positions
at any time in accordance with provisions of the posting using the online current opening procedures.
Any member may request a conference with the head of Human Resources concerning assignments and/or
transfers.
As job openings occur, notice of these openings shall be posted on available electronic media a minimum of five
(5) workdays prior to the closing date by the superintendent or designee. Such notice shall specify the time limit
for submitting application for the vacancy. Those applicants interviewed but not selected shall be notified within
ten (10) workdays after the selection has been made. Notice of certified openings shall be electronically sent to
the Association.
Any Member may request a conference with the head of Human Resources concerning assignments and/or
transfers.
ADMINISTRATIVE TRANSFERS
When administration determines the need to fill a vacancy with a member from another site (before any member
is involuntary transferred) the administrator at the sending site will ask for transfer volunteers qualified for the
position to make the transfer to fill the vacancy. If more than one person applies for the transfer position, the
receiving principal will interview the applicants for the position and make a selection. A time frame for application
will be determined by the administration. (2017)
INVOLUNTARY TRANSFERS
When an involuntary transfer is deemed necessary, a conference shall be held with the Member(s) of the
Bargaining Unit who shall be affected by the change to discuss the reason(s) for the involuntary transfer. This
conference shall be held as soon as possible after the need is recognized and at least two (2) weeks prior to final
placement. During the first three (3) student weeks of each semester, transfers may be made as justified by
enrollment with less than two (2) weeks notification.
Final recommendations for a transfer shall be made jointly by the principals and the Superintendent or designee.
(1999, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2015)

2.10

SUPPLEMENTAL ASSIGNMENT
Definition:
Supplemental Assignment: Any professional assignment voluntarily accepted by a Member of the Bargaining Unit
in addition to that Member's primary teaching responsibility. (Refer to SUPPLEMENTAL COMPENSATION
INDEX attached hereto as APPENDIX 9.03.)
A Member who voluntarily accepts assignments supplemental to his/her primary teaching assignment shall be
compensated in accordance with ARTICLE 8.05 - SUPPLEMENTAL COMPENSATION.
Contracted Supplemental Assignments shall have the same leave benefits as regular teaching assignments.

11

Supplemental Assignments listed in the "Professional" category of Appendix 9.03 are appointed annually and
require the submission of a Plan of Action in Leadership (PAL) for consideration prior to appointment. This PAL
will include:
1. a candidate's qualification for the expectations of the role as determined through discussions with the
appropriate Coordinator or Administrative Leader,
2. specific goals and objectives for the coming year with a plan for determining if goals and objectives were
met and to what degree.
For each Supplemental Assignment at each site, a separate file of all PALS submitted per year will be held for a
period of 3 years.
If and when a Member is relieved of his/her Supplemental Assignment(s) either voluntarily or involuntarily, his/her
employment status and/or career status shall not be affected.
Before a Member is relieved of his/her Supplemental Assignment, the Member must be informed in writing of the
reasons in a timely manner.
In the event a supplemental assignment must be filled outside of the bargaining unit, the district will notify the
Association. (2008, 2014)
2.11

REDUCTION IN STAFF
When due to declining student enrollment in a given program area and/or the District, school closure, or financial
shortfall it becomes necessary to reduce the number of Members in a given program area or to eliminate or
consolidate positions, the Board shall follow the procedure listed below:
A. Normal attrition throughout the District. In the event that a Member's position has been shown to be in excess,
said Member shall be transferred to a vacant position within the school system for which he/she is certified.
B. If normal attrition does not sufficiently reduce the certified staff, the TLE score shall be the primary
consideration in the reduction process. lf TLE scores are the same, the following items shall be considered in
the reduction process in the order they are listed:
1. Probationary Members shall be released before career Members who are legally qualified to hold
positions currently held by Probationary Members.
2. Seniority in the District;
3. Length of service in current assignment;
4. Academic and professional preparation beyond minimum certification requirements; and
5. Total number of years teaching experience.
The prime consideration in executing the reduction in force using the criteria listed above is to assure the
retention of fully qualified Members to replace and perform all the needed duties of the terminated Members. The
Board shall follow the requirements of the continuing contract law in terminating Members in order to reduce staff.
However, if a Member whose position has been eliminated refuses the offer of a position for which he/she
qualifies, he/she shall be dismissed.
NOTICE TO INDIVIDUAL MEMBER
After all determination selections have been exercised, the Board shall give written notice of that fact by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the Member to be terminated. The notice shall include a statement of the
conditions requiring termination of employment. The Member's address as it appears on the District's record shall
be deemed to be the correct address. It shall be the Member's responsibility to see that the District has his/her
current address on file.

12

OBLIGATION WITH RESPECT TO REEMPLOYMENT OR OTHER EMPLOYMENT
A. For one (1) year after the effective date of termination pursuant to this procedure's provisions, the Board shall
offer to a Member who has been terminated all positions that become available for which he/she is certified.
Every possible effort shall be made to return said Member to the position held immediately prior to layoff or to
a substantially equivalent position. If several former Members are certified for a position, the position shall be
offered to the certified Member who had the most seniority when laid off. The offer shall be made by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and the Member shall be notified that he/she must submit acceptance within
ten
(10) calendar days. Acceptance shall be in writing.
B. A Member who is recalled within one (1) year shall have restored all benefits accrued on the effective date of
the termination, and for payroll purposes shall be given credit for all previous teaching experience to which
he/she would be entitled under this Contract.
C. A Member who is laid off shall remain on the recall list for one (1) year after the effective date of layoff unless
the Member:
1. Waives recall right in writing;
2. Resigns; or
3. Fails to accept recall to the position held immediately prior to layoff or to a substantially equivalent
position. (2001, 2012)
2.12

SUMMER SCHOOL
A notice of summer school to be held in the Moore Public Schools shall be posted as soon as the needs for
summer school have been established. This notice shall include location, application procedure for teachers,
session dates, anticipated teaching positions available and compensation.
Employment for summer school teaching positions shall be based on the following criteria listed in order of
priority:
A. Need;
B. Qualification as compared to all applicants; and
C. Length of service experience in Moore summer school.
Refer to Article 8.04 (N): COMPENSATION for the rate of pay.
In the event a summer school assignment must be filled outside of the bargaining unit, the district will notify the
Association. (2008)

2.13

NIGHT ALTERNATIVE SCHOOL
A notice of night alternative school positions available in Moore Public Schools shall be posted in accordance with
paragraph two, Voluntary Transfer, Article 2.09 TRANSFERS.
Night alternative school teaching positions shall be filled on the basis of the following criteria listed in order of
priority:
A. Need;
B. Qualification as compared to all other applicants; and
C. Length of service in Moore Public Schools.
Refer to Article 8.04 (N): COMPENSATION for the rate of pay.
13

In the event a night alternative school assignment must be filled outside of the bargaining unit, the district will
notify the Association. (2008, 2009)
2.14

INTERNET-BASED INSTRUCTION
A notice of internet-based instruction positions available in Moore Public Schools shall be posted in accordance
with paragraph two, Voluntary Transfer, Article 2.09 TRANSFERS.
Internet-based instruction teaching positions shall be filled on the basis of the following criteria listed in order of
priority:
A. Need;
B. Qualification as compared to all other applicants; and
C. Length of service in Moore Public Schools.
Refer to Article 8.04 (O): COMPENSATION for the rate of pay.
In the event a night alternative school assignment must be filled outside of the bargaining unit, the district will
notify the Association. (2015)

III.

INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS

3.01

PERSONNEL FILE
There shall be one (1) central personnel file for each Member of the Bargaining Unit, which shall be maintained at
the Administrative Service Center. Principals may keep working files, but material not maintained in the central
personnel file shall not provide the basis for discipline against a Member. No other personnel files shall be kept.
No material shall be placed in his/her personnel file(s) unless the Member has had an opportunity to review the
material.
Incidents that result in disciplinary action must be documented within ten (10) work days in which the affected
Member is present at work after the Administrator has been made aware of said incident. The Member shall
acknowledge that he/she has had the opportunity to review such material by affixing his/her signature to the copy
to be filed, with the express understanding that such signature in no way indicates agreement with the contents
thereof.
After the original document is signed by the Member, it must be placed in the Member's personnel file within five
(5) workdays. With concurrence of the affected principal, documentation dated prior to May 10th of the current
school year may be removed upon recommendation of a committee consisting of the affected Member, an
Association Representative and the affected principal or the head of Human Resources unless the Member has
been placed on conditional employment status for the following school year.
The Member shall have the right to submit a written answer and/or rebuttal to such material and to have it
attached to the file copy. Such a rebuttal must be submitted to the evaluating administrator within ten (10)
workdays of the date the document to be rebutted is signed by the affected Member. In the event the Member
believes the material to be inaccurate, untrue, or unfair, he/she may grieve the matter.
Inspection - Upon request, a Member may inspect his/her personnel file(s) subject to the following:
A. Inspection shall occur during the Member's non-working hours (including duty free lunch time) and scheduled
preparation time. Said inspection shall be at a time and in a manner mutually acceptable to the Member, the
Superintendent or designee. A Member may have a representative present while inspecting his/her file(s).
B. Copies of material(s) in a Member's personnel file(s) shall be provided to the Member upon request. The
Member shall bear the cost of the duplication.
14

C. Pre-employment information, e.g. reference checks and responses or information provided the Board with the
specific request that it remain confidential, shall not be subject to inspection or copying. (2001)
3.02

RIGHT TO REPRESENTATION
Members of the Bargaining Unit shall have the right to be accompanied by a Member of the Association at all
conferences with Administrators and/or the Board of Education which deal with issues of performance. Prior to the
conference, the Member shall notify the affected Administrator and/or the Board of Education of his/her intention
to be accompanied by a Member of the Association. When a member retains an attorney for representation, the
member must immediately notify the MPS attorney in writing so that scheduling includes both attorneys.
When a conference dealing with issues of performance is scheduled, the Administrator shall, in writing:
A. Give, at least, twenty-four (24) hour notice of the scheduled conference(s) except in those instances where, in
the judgment of the Administrator, the seriousness of the situation requires immediate attention.
B. Inform Member of the specific nature of the subject to be discussed.
C. Inform Member of his/her right to representation. (1999)

3.03

STAFF RELATIONS
The Board expects that the worth, dignity, and rights of the individual shall be a priority in all administrator/teacher
relationships.
Members of the Bargaining Unit and administrators shall treat each other as professionals at all times. Their
honor and integrity as educators shall receive the highest value and respect. (1999, 2002)

3.04

MEMBER RIGHTS
No Member of the Bargaining Unit shall be harassed or discriminated against by the Board of Education,
Superintendent or any other administrative officer of the District or by any employee organization, its officers or
any member thereof because of his/her exercise or non-exercise of rights under this Contract. It shall be
prohibited for an employee organization, employee or employer to impede, restrain or coerce an employer or
employees in the exercise of the rights guaranteed by state law or this Contract.
Members shall be provided electronic access at every site to a current state law book as compiled by the State
Board of Education, the negotiated Contract, Board policies, and administrative directives which affect their
employment in the Moore School District. (2001, 2012)

3.05

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
PURPOSE
The primary purpose of this procedure is to secure, at the lowest possible level, equitable solutions to a claim of
the grievant.
STRUCTURE AND TIME LIMITS
A. If any of the time limits outlined herein are not met by the grievant, the grievance shall lapse.
B. If any of the time limits outlined herein are not met by the affected administrator, in any step, the grievant may
proceed to the next higher step.
C. All documents, communications, or records dealing with the grievance shall be filed separately from the
personnel file of the grievant.
D. Both parties agree that the written records pertaining to the grievance shall be kept confidential.
15

E. The grievant must be present at all stages and shall be afforded the right to representation at any conference
or hearing relating to the grievance. Options for representation afforded the grievant shall include but not be
limited to:
1. Association Member Rights Representative in the grievant's building;
2. Association Member in the grievant's building;
3. Association Member Rights Team Member;
4. Non-association Member colleague in grievant's building;
5. Other representation of grievant's choice; or
6. No representation.
F. Steps shall be followed in sequence, subject to being discontinued by grievant at any point in this procedure.
Informal Procedure
Within twenty (20) working days after the discovery of the occurrence or the act of omission giving rise to
the grievance, the Member shall (a) promptly notify the Member's immediate administrator of the alleged
violation, stating that a grievance may exist; (b) discuss the alleged grievance with the administrator; and
(c) attempt to resolve the issue. Any written record of a complaint shall be destroyed if the grievance does
not go beyond Step 1.
Level One
A. If the grievance is not resolved through discussion, the grievant may submit a level one grievance
form to the immediate administrator within ten (10) days after the initial discussion.
B. The immediate administrator shall convene a hearing with the grievant within five (5) days of receipt
of the level one grievance.
C. The immediate administrator shall reply on the level one form to the grievant within ten (10) days of
the hearing.
Level Two
A. If the grievant is not satisfied with the level one decision, the grievant may submit the level two
grievance form to the Superintendent/Designee within ten (10) days of receiving the level one
decision.
B. The Superintendent/Designee shall convene a hearing with the grievant within five (5) days of receipt
of the level two grievance.
C. The Superintendent/Designee shall reply on the level two grievance form to the grievant within ten
(10) days of the hearing.
Level Three
A. If the grievant is not satisfied with the level two decision, the grievant may submit the level three
grievance form to the Clerk of the Board within five (5) days of receiving the level two decision.
B. The Board shall convene a hearing with the grievant at the next regular board meeting unless said
meeting will occur in less than ten (10) days. The hearing shall then be scheduled for the next
succeeding board meeting or for a special board meeting.
Note: A copy of each completed Grievance Report Form shall be received by the head of Human Resources,
affected administrator, grievant, and TEAM Member Rights Team. (Refer to the form attached hereto as
APPENDIX 9.01.) (2012)

16

3.06

PROTECTION OF MEMBERS
Members shall not be required to work under unsafe or hazardous conditions as determined by proper regulatory
authority, such as the Oklahoma State and Federal Departments of Health and Human Services, OSHA, local
police and fire departments. Member concerns shall be reported in writing to his/her principal, and the report shall
be forwarded to the Superintendent or designee.
Parents/Guardians are expected to treat members with respect. Any Member who is threatened with harm while
performing his/her duties shall notify the building principal. If an administrator becomes aware that an educator
has been threatened with harm by a third party, the administrator shall notify the educator. The principal shall
notify the proper authorities, if necessary, and shall provide such assistance, advice and moral support as
required. When a member has been physically assaulted by a student, a site administrator will make a bona fide
attempt to communicate with the member the plan for the student’s return prior to the student’s return to ensure
safety for all.
Any member who is unable to continue his/her contract of employment as a result of injury sustained in the
reasonable performance of his/her duties from
1. Assault by a pupil, relative of a pupil or person of the pupil's household; or
2. Injury sustained as a result of quelling or attempting to quell or stop a fight, disorder or any disturbance
related to a school function or activity shall be paid his/her full contract salary for the period of time as
he/she is prevented from working as a result of injuries sustained during the performance of his/her duties
up to the remainder of the contract year in which he/she was injured.
In all circumstances local, state, and Federal law as well as board policy will be followed.
Nothing in this article should be construed to limit a Member's right to contact law enforcement when warranted or
to seek additional legal recourse, such as filing criminal charges or pursuing other criminal or civil law remedies
available to the Member. (2002, 2014, 2025)

3.07

MEMBER'S RIGHT TO DUE PROCESS
The Association and the Board agree to abide by the provisions of the "Teacher Due Process Act of 1990" (70
O.S. section 6-101.20 et. seq).
When an issue regarding a Member is being investigated, the Member shall be given the opportunity to respond
to allegations during the fact-finding process and prior to the conclusion of the investigation and/or any resulting
disciplinary action being determined.
When a complaint is made about a Member, the administrator will attempt to schedule a meeting with the Member
and the complainant. Generally, anonymous complaints shall be disregarded. Disciplinary action shall not be
taken on unsubstantiated anonymous complaints.
DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE {MEMBERS)
The steps that will normally be followed in disciplining Members shall include:
1. Verbal reminder- the immediate administrator shall hold a conference with the Member to discuss issues
of performance. No formal written documentation will be kept.
2. Verbal reprimand - a brief notation of time, date and incident signed by the Member shall be placed only
in the immediate administrator's working file at the site and a copy shall be given to the Member.
3. Written reprimand - in accordance with Article 3.01 Personnel File
4. Suspension - in accordance with Article 2.07 Suspension/Dismissal
5. Dismissal- in accordance with Article 2.07 Suspension/Dismissal
*Discipline may be initiated at any step of this procedure depending upon the severity of the incident. (1999,
2002)

17

3.08

DRUG TESTING
No Member of the Bargaining Unit, other than Bus Drivers subject to Department of Transportation regulations,
shall be required to be tested for the use of any drug or alcohol unless a reasonable suspicion, as defined by
state law, exists.

IV.

ASSOCIATION RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES

4.01

ASSOCIATION LEAVE
A pool of sixty (60) days shall be provided to the Association for the purpose of legislative visits, Associationrelated professional meetings, and Association business. No more than seven (7) days shall be used from this
pool on a given day except for Delegate Assembly. No individual Member, other than the TEAM VicePresident(s), Treasurer, Legislative Chairperson, and Media Chairperson shall use more than four (4) days from
the pool during the school year. Days from the pool may not be approved for use by individual Members who
have exhausted all other sources of leave. Association leave may be granted on an hourly basis.
Written request for use of Association leave shall be made to the Superintendent or designee through the
President of the Association twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the anticipated absence.
Substitutes shall be provided by the District where needed. (2008,2010)

4.02

USE OF SCHOOL BUILDINGS / MAIL
The Association shall have the right to use school buildings for Association meetings and/or business upon
arrangement with the building administrator. Association meetings may be called during the time immediately
preceding or following the students' school day.
The Association shall have the right to place Association identification on the mailboxes of all Members of the
Association and to place notices, circulars, and other material in the mailboxes of all Members of the Bargaining
Unit.
Electronic communication may be used for Association business in accordance with Board policy.

4.03

AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION
Pursuant to state law, the Board Clerk shall make available the official agenda and/or addenda and minutes for
each meeting of the Moore Board of Education online.
Upon written request to the District's Public Information Access Officer or Designee, access to public documents
shall be provided to the Association in a timely manner in accordance with the Oklahoma Open Records Act.

4.04

PUBLICATION/DISTRIBUTION OF NEGOTIATED CONTRACT
Within ten (10) days of ratification, the Bargaining Teams representing the Board and Association will be provided
draft copies by the Board to proofread and mark for corrections. Within fifteen (15) days of ratification, the
spokesperson for the Board and the Association shall sign off on a final corrected copy. The Board shall be
responsible for typing and preparing the contract for publishing. The Board shall be responsible for publishing the
contract on the District Internet site, within twenty (20) days following the signing of the final corrected copy. The
cost of printing this negotiated contract shall be shared equally by the Association and the Board. The contract
shall be printed in the school facilities, provided that timelines can be met. The contract will be printed in sufficient
quantity to provide up to one hundred (100) copies each for the Board and the Association. The Board and/or the
Association may request additional copies at their own expense. Printed copies of the negotiated contract shall be
available for distribution within twenty (20) days from the date the corrected copy was approved for printing.
(2005, 2015)

18

4.05

RELEASE TIME FOR PRESIDENT
Upon request, the President of the Association will be granted full-time unpaid leave of absence to perform the
responsibilities of the office during the term of office. Upon completion of the term of Presidency, the member will
be reinstated to full-time status in the position held previous to the leave, if a vacancy exists, or a similar position
for which the President is certified and qualified.

V.

LEAVE PROVISIONS

5.01

SICK LEAVE
Each Member of the Bargaining Unit shall have ten (10) days sick leave each year, with unlimited accumulation.
New Members may bring a maximum accumulation of sixty (60) sick leave days into the system. The ten (10)
days are granted on the first workday of the Member's school year.
A. Sick leave may be used for temporary disability of the Member or his/her immediate family.
B. The Sick Leave Sharing Plan is a program from which the Members of the Bargaining Unit, who have used all
of their fully paid sick leave days and are unable to perform their contracted duties, may access additional
fully paid sick leave days. These days are intended for use for personal or family illness.
A Member may donate sick leave to another Member for the following reasons:
1. the Member has exhausted or will exhaust all fully paid sick leave due to pregnancy, miscarriage,
childbirth and recovery there from, an illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental condition, which is
of an extraordinary or severe nature, of the Member; or,
2. the Member has exhausted or will exhaust all fully paid sick leave due to pregnancy, miscarriage,
childbirth and recovery there from, an illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental condition, which is
of an extraordinary or severe nature, of his/her immediate family; and,
3. the condition has caused or is likely to cause the Member to take extended sick leave at substitute dock
(See "C" of this Article) or to go on leave without pay or to terminate employment.
On the basis of the above criteria, a Member may donate sick leave days/hours to any Moore Public School
employee requesting sick leave sharing days, provided that the donating Member's total sick leave balance
does not fall below twenty (20) days / one hundred thirty-five (135) hours. All donated sick leave must be
given voluntarily.
No Member shall be coerced, threatened, intimidated, or financially induced into donating sick leave for
purposes of the sick leave sharing plan.
A Member requesting donated days must first provide the Superintendent or designee with a medical
certificate from a licensed physician or healthcare practitioner verifying the severe or extraordinary nature and
expected duration of the condition. "Severe" or "extraordinary" means serious, extreme or life threatening
including temporary disability resulting from pregnancy, miscarriage, childbirth, and recovery there from. If a
Member is unable to give timely notice, he/she shall do so as soon as possible
C. If, after exhausting all maternity and sick leave, a member is absent from his or her duties due to personal
accidental injury, illness, or pregnancy, the member shall receive for a period of not to exceed twenty (20)
days his or her full contract salary less the amount of Board-approved certified substitute pay to include 3rd
party cost, if applicable.
D. After this time, a Member shall be placed on leave without pay until the end of the contract period or until the
Member is able to return to duty during the contract period. Provisions shall be made whereby the Member
can arrange payment for all professional dues and insurance. When the Member recovers sufficiently to
perform regular duties and returns to work, the Member shall be restored to such position or to a position of
like seniority, status, and incentive pay. (1999, 2001, 2003, 2010)
19

5.02

PERSONAL BUSINESS LEAVE
Five (5) days personal business leave shall be granted to each Member during the school year; these days shall
not be chargeable to sick leave. The Member's immediate supervisor must be notified as soon as the Member
knows the personal business leave is to be used.
In special circumstances, after the five (5) days have been exhausted, the head of Human Resources may
approve the use of days from the Member's sick leave accumulation to address the situation. The Member shall
contact the head of Human Resources for access to these days.
The use of personal business leave shall be granted upon request except for the following:
A. First three (3) student days or last five (5) student days of the school year
B. The student day preceding or following:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Labor Day
Thanksgiving
Winter Break
Spring Break

Exceptions may be granted by the head of Human Resources for special circumstances on an individual basis.
The Member shall submit a written request. The request must be received by the head of Human Resources at
least five (5) days prior to the requested date, whenever possible.
When such an absence would result in hardship for professional staff, students, school site or the school district,
the administrator may consult with the Member about a postponement.
Any personal business leave days that are not used at the end of any school year will be converted to sick leave
and added to the Member's sick leave accumulation at the beginning of the succeeding school year. (1999,2007,
2013)
5.03

BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
Each Member shall be provided a total of two (2) days of bereavement leave annually without loss of pay. If an
employee's effective date of employment is not at the beginning of the school year, the number of days allowed
for bereavement leave shall be prorated. Members working other than full time will receive time in proportion to
time worked. These days may be used for the death of the following: mother, father, child, including pregnancy
loss, stepmother, stepfather, sister-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, grandchildren,
grandparents, siblings, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew or persons who live in the
member’s home.
Bereavement leave is non-cumulative.
If during the same school year, a member or the member’s spouse suffers an additional death of a parent,
spouse, or child the member may request additional days of bereavement (up to two) if the two allowable
bereavement days have been exhausted. This request shall be made to the Human Resources Department.

5.04

PROFESSIONAL ENRICHMENT IN-SERVICE DAYS
In-service days for professional visitation, attendance or participation in professional workshops shall be provided
to Members of the Bargaining Unit. These days shall be equitably divided between grade levels and/or
departments with a minimum number of days equal to one-fourth (1/4) of the Members at each site.
Upon written request from the President of the Association to the Superintendent or designee, information
concerning professional enrichment day's usage will be provided for the current school year on a quarterly basis.
Each Special Service Specialist will receive one (1) district paid, no substitute required, professional development
day requested through the Director of Special Services. These days will not count against site professional
development Allotment since no substitute will be paid.
20

5.05

LEAVES OF ABSENCE
A. Member of the Bargaining Unit employed by the Moore Public Schools may be granted a leave of absence
without pay under the following conditions:
1. Disability - A Member may be granted a leave of absence for substantiated extended disability after all
sick leave has been expended.
2. TEAM President - Upon request, a leave of absence shall be granted each year to the President of The
Education Association of Moore. This leave shall run concurrently with the Member's term as president.
3. Childbearing/ Adoption/Placement of a Foster Child - A Member may be granted a leave of absence for
the purpose of childbearing/adoption/placement of a foster child. This leave shall be for a limited period
determined by the time frame necessitated by the childbearing/adoption/foster child placement process.
This leave can be combined with a leave for childcare.
4. A Member may be granted a leave of absence to provide care for a family member including, but not
limited to, spouse, children, parents, and grandparents (2017)
5. Good Cause - Other leaves of absence may be granted as justified by the Member and approved by the
Superintendent.
B. A Member of the Bargaining Unit who has been employed by the Moore Public Schools at least three (3)
consecutive years as a full-time contracted employee may be granted a one (1) or two (2) semester(s) leave
of absence without pay under the following conditions:
1. Educational Improvement - A Member may be granted a leave of absence for educational improvement.
The Member must show proof of satisfactory completion of at least six (6) hours per semester from an
accredited college or university.
2. Child Care - A Member may be granted a leave of absence for the purpose of childcare or child rearing.
This leave may be granted individually or in concert with childbearing/adoption/ placement of a foster
child.

C. Leaves of absence shall be requested in writing at least thirty (30) days prior to the beginning date of the leave
except for leaves for disability, childbearing/adoption/placement of foster child or other situations justified by the
Member. All leaves of absence shall be effective on the morning of the date requested for such leave to begin.
Members requesting a leave of absence shall submit a written request to the Human Resources office. Such
request shall designate the beginning date of the requested leave of absence. It shall be the obligation of the
Member to notify the Superintendent or designee in writing confirming the intent to accept a teaching assignment
by December 15 for a leave of absence ending first semester and by the last work day before spring break for a
leave of absence ending second semester.
Upon return to duty following a leave of absence or FMLA (see Article 5.06 - FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE
PROVISIONS), the Member shall be returned to the same assignment, if available. If the position of the Member
is eliminated during the leave of absence, the Member shall be returned to a substantially equivalent position.
Seniority shall not be broken, nor shall it continue to accrue while a Member is on an approved leave of absence.
Leaves of absence shall not extend past June 30 of the school year in which the leave commences.
Since the Member is only on a leave of absence, provisions may be made with the administration whereby
payments can be made to retain all professional memberships and insurance in all legal areas. (1999)
5.06

FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE PROVISIONS
The FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT of 1993 (FMLA) provides up to twelve (12) workweeks of unpaid, job
protected leave to Members for certain family and medical reasons. To use FMLA a Member must have been an
employee of the district for at least one (1) year and worked 1250 hours. The leave of absence provided through
FMLA shall run concurrently with paid sick leave and personal business leave until such leave is exhausted, at
which time remaining days under the FMLA provision will be unpaid. The Member ordinarily must provide thirty
(30) days’ advance notice when the leave is foreseeable.
Unpaid leave must be granted for the following:
1. Birth/ Adoption/ Foster Care Leave Care of the Member's child after birth or placement for adoption or
foster care.

21

2. Family Leave Care of the Member's spouse, child, or parent who has a serious health condition.
3. Medical Leave For a serious health condition that makes the Member unable to perform his/her job.
4. Military Qualifying Exigency Leave An employee with a spouse, son, daughter, or parent on "covered
active duty" may use their 12-week leave entitlement to address certain qualifying exigencies.
5. Military Caregiver Leave An employee is also entitled to take up to 26 weeks of leave during a single 12month period (less any FMLA leave taken during the period for other purposes under this policy) to care
for a "covered service member" with a serious injury or illness, if the employee is the spouse, son,
daughter, parent, or next of kin of the covered service member. This leave is applied on a per-coveredservice member, per-injury basis, provided that no more than 26 work weeks of leave may be taken
during a single 12-month period.
For the duration of FMLA leave, and as long as the Member maintains the district "group health plan," the District
will continue to pay the District's portion of the Member's health premium (School Board Policy #2230). (2001,
2003, 2010)
5.07

JURY DUTY LEAVE AND COMPENSATION
If a Member of the Bargaining Unit absent on jury duty needs a substitute, this substitute shall be paid by the
District. The Member shall incur no loss of salary and shall be entitled to keep all monies paid by the court for jury
services.
A Member shall be paid by the District for only the actual number of days of jury duty for which he/she has been
reimbursed by the court. If the Member is excused from jury duty for an entire day, he/she is expected to be at
his/her assignment.

5.08

MILITARY LEAVE
Members of the Bargaining Unit who are either officers or enlisted members of the Reserve Corps of the Army,
the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, or any other component of the Armed Forces of the
United States, including members of the National Guard, shall, when ordered by the proper authority to active
duty or service, be entitled to a leave of absence from their employment for the period of such active service
without loss of pay during the first thirty (30) days of such leave of absence.

5.09

LEGAL PROCEEDINGS LEAVE
A Member of the Bargaining Unit shall be granted on a day-to-day basis an absence, with pay, for any court
appearances and legal proceedings to which he/she is summoned. The provisions of this item exclude any legal
action initiated by the Member or any action resulting from a criminal charge filed against the Member.
The District shall grant a Member leave for jury service or as a witness subpoenaed in a criminal, civil or juvenile
proceeding and shall pay the Member during such service the full, current contract salary.
If a member is required to attend legal proceedings related to his/her role as an MPS employee outside of the
contractual work day/hours the district will consider compensation on a case-by-case basis to be approved or
denied by the head of Human Resources. All documentation requested must be submitted along with the request.

VI.

WORKING CONDITIONS

6.01

WORK YEAR / WORK DAY
The work year* for all Members of the Bargaining Unit shall be one hundred eighty-two (182) days which shall
include:

22

A. Not to exceed one hundred seventy-five (175) days of instruction, which includes two (2) parent-teacher
conference days. Parent-teacher conference days will be scheduled over two (2) days. A total of six (6) hours
must be allotted for conferences. Members shall designate which portions of the workday are available for the
requisite conference times. In the event of school days being canceled by order of the Superintendent for
weather and/or disaster events, Members of the Bargaining Unit will not be required to make up lost work
days provided the State-defined student minimum of 1086 hours has been met.
B. Three (3) in-service days prior to the first day of instruction with a fourth in-service day as a site improvement
day.
C. One (1) record day at the end of the first semester and one (1) record day at the end of the second semester.
Each site principal shall have the flexibility to determine alternate attendance and dismissal requirements for
the last record day, not to exceed the normal workday.
Definition: Record day is to be used to tabulate and record grades.
D. One (1) day to be selected by the Association for a spring professional meeting for all Members of the
Bargaining Unit.
All Members shall be assigned appropriate starting and dismissal times, provided that their workday shall be no
longer than seven and one-quarter (7¼) consecutive hours.
*For purposes of compensation only, per diem is calculated on the basis of one hundred eighty-two (182) days for
the current work year. (1999, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2011, 2015)
6.02

PREPARATION TIME
Each Member of the Bargaining Unit shall have scheduled preparation time during which he/she will not be
assigned duties, including but not limited to supervision of students (unless a student aide has been requested),
professional development, team meetings, and committee meetings. Twice a month the site administrator may
call a mandatory meeting during the member’s preparation time (2018).
A. Elementary - No less than two hundred fifty minutes (250) per five (5) day week. One hundred seventy-five
(175) minutes shall be in five (5) segments of no less than thirty-five (35) minutes. The additional minutes
shall be in no less than twenty-five (25) minute segments or shall be added to the thirty-five (35) minute
segments.
B. Secondary - No less than two hundred seventy-five minutes (275) per five (5) day week. Two hundred twentyfive (225) minutes shall be in five (5) segments of no less than forty-five (45) minutes. The additional minutes
shall be in no less than fifteen (15) minute segments or shall be added to the forty-five (45) minute segments.
Counselors and Media Specialists shall schedule their own preparation time as needed.
A Member shall not be required to travel during his/her preparation time. (1999, 2000, 2002, 2006, 2008, 2012,
2018)

6.03

LUNCH PERIOD
Each Member of the Bargaining Unit shall have a duty-free period of not less than twenty-five (25) consecutive
minutes each school day to eat his/her lunch.
A Member may leave the school campus during his/her lunch period. The Member shall notify the office when
leaving and returning to campus.

6.04

DRESS CODE
Members of the Bargaining Unit will maintain their own standard of professional dress, appropriate to their
individual teaching activities.

23

If the Member and the affected administrator cannot reach agreement on a specific case of appropriate dress,
said Member shall be notified in writing, by the affected administrator, of his/her concern and the necessity of a
conference. The administrator shall advise the Member of his/her right to an Association Representative at said
conference.
In situations deemed emergency by the immediate administrator, the Member may be asked to go home and
change his/her attire. If the Member wishes to question the decision, that challenge should be made through the
use of the grievance procedure.
6.05

ABSENCE-SUBSTITUTE HIRED
Each day that it is necessary for a Member of the Bargaining Unit to be absent from assigned duties, the Member
must make every effort to enter the absence on the Moore automated substitute system. Members shall enter the
absence as soon as the need for a substitute is known, at least one (1) hour prior to the Member's reporting time.
Members who enter the absence prior to the established times and do not get a job number and/or Members who
enter the absence after the established time shall also call their building principal or the principal's designee.
In the event of the absence of a Member to whom a class is assigned, and the above procedure is followed, all
possible efforts shall be made to hire a substitute teacher. All possible efforts shall be made to hire a substitute
teacher qualified in the necessary subject area. If neither a substitute nor a volunteer is available, a Member may
be assigned to cover a class. (See ARTICLE 8.01: MEMBER SUBSTITUTE PAY) (2009)

6.06

FACILITIES
An attempt shall be made to assign each Member a regular teaching area appropriate for his/her teaching
assignment. If a Member of the Bargaining Unit questions the appropriateness, conditions, or safety of his/her
teaching area, he/she shall present in writing his/her concerns to the building principal along with suggestions for
making the teaching area more appropriate. For maintenance concerns, the Member shall notify designated
administrator of the issue(s) via email or in a written format.
If the concern is not addressed within a reasonable period of time, the Member may request a verbal or written
response from the building principal/designee as to the status of the concern.
Faculty at school sites may develop a committee or may direct the Safe Schools Committee to survey members
and may make recommendations for facility utilization to the principal, the District's long-range planning
committee, and/or the Director of Operations for consideration.
Members will be notified in a timely manner when removing personal items and/or a change in room assignment
are deemed necessary. Members will be given the option of moving their personal items. (1999, 2001, 2004,
2005, 2006, 2015)

6.07

PRIVATE ACCESS TO TELEPHONE
A telephone and conversational area shall be made available to all Members of the Bargaining Unit at each
building site for private conversations. The use of a personal phone is at the discretion of the Member.

6.08

NON-CLASSROOM DUTIES
Non-classroom duties shall include but not be limited to the following: playground duty, parking lot duty, bus duty,
bicycle rack duty, hall duty, junior/safety patrol duty, cafeteria/lunch duty, etc.
Members of the Bargaining Unit shall not be involuntarily assigned non-classroom duties outside their workday,
during their duty-free lunch, or during their preparation time without compensation.
If a sufficient number of Members do not elect to perform non-classroom duties, the building administrator may
assign Members to said duties and they will be compensated in accordance with ARTICLE 8.05:
SUPPLEMENTAL COMPENSATION.
Members required to travel between school sites in accordance with daily teaching assignments shall not be
assigned a regular duty.

24

Each school faculty may convene a committee of members whose task shall be to reevaluate the duty needs,
schedule, and roster of that school. The committee shall consider member choice and flexibility in the designation
of duty/duties, the importance of equity and seniority regarding duty service, as well as the special needs of
traveling members, and recommend improvements in supervision and duty to the building principal. The
committee may also consider innovative ideas for improvement, including recruiting volunteers from the
community and rotating schedules. Student safety and supervision shall be prime considerations in the
deliberations of the committee.
This committee shall meet and make recommendations during the first semester of the school year. The
committee shall reconvene prior to the final student week to review issues related to duty service and supervision
and to consider possible recommendations for the following school year. (2002, 2004, 2006)
6.09

CLASS SIZE
Special consideration will be given to Kindergarten to help maintain smaller class size.
STATEMENT OF BELIEF ON CLASS SIZE
The Education Association of Moore in conjunction with the Administration and the Moore Public Schools' Board
of Education recognize and agree that students learn best in smaller class size settings. We are committed to
working to keep class sizes as low as possible within budgetary and personnel constraints and collaborating for
resolution of concerns about student management, accommodations, and resources that result from class size
compromises.

6.10

CONFERENCES
Parental, placement, or other student related conferences may be arranged by the Member of the Bargaining
Unit, the Principal or the Principal's designee. Such conference shall, whenever possible, be scheduled during the
Member's workday. At the request of the Member, the building principal will schedule a conference at his/her
convenience. All participants in the conference shall be consulted as to time for the conference before a definite
time is set.

6.11

COMMITTEE APPOINTMENTS
The Association shall have the right to appoint one (1) Member of the Bargaining Unit to serve on District wide
and/or site committees that require participation by certified personnel (example: curriculum committee, discipline
committee, textbook committee, technology committee). (2013)

6.12

STUDENT DISCIPLINE
Members of the Bargaining Unit will be given an opportunity to provide input on disciplinary decisions, unless
circumstances make this an impossibility.
If two (2) school days lapse without Administrator feedback on a disciplinary concern, the Member involved
should request to confer with the Administrator to seek information on the status and progress of that disciplinary
concern.
To facilitate communications within all segments of the school community concerning discipline in the Moore
Public Schools, a Discipline Committee will be maintained.
The committee shall be comprised of six (6) administrators (appointed by the Board or its designee), six (6)
teachers (appointed by the Bargaining Agent), and six (6) members shall be a mixture of parents and students.
The purpose of the committee shall be (1) review current student policies and procedures and (2) make written
recommendations to the Board for changes or additions to a succeeding discipline policy adopted by the Board.

25

A copy of the School Board's policy for the control and discipline of students is located on the MPS website on the
School Board Policies located in the Board Docs section of the Administrative page. Such policy shall clearly state
the rights of Members to maintain control and discipline, the methods of control and discipline of students, and
shall define standards of conduct to which students are expected to conform, as prescribed by state law. (2001,
2005, 2014, 2017)
6.13

INCLUSION
All teachers may be provided an opportunity to review the Individualized Education Plan (IEP) of any special
education student placed in his/her classroom for direct instruction. Review of the plan shall be done in
accordance with privacy laws and district access procedures.
When the IEP of a special education student places a student in a classroom, the teacher shall have available all
appropriate supplemental services including but not limited to curriculum, equipment, and/or classroom
modifications, supportive personnel, and instructional aids and devices, as listed in the IEP.
Every effort will be made to evenly distribute students who are on IEPS as they are placed in regular classes. If a
Member is concerned about the number of students on IEPS in a class, the concerns shall be addressed with the
site principal. (2003, 2016)

6.14

INNOVATIVE PROGRAMS
In order to facilitate educational innovation, faculties/administrators who desire to create/implement a program
which violates any portion of the negotiated contract shall:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Establish a site committee that includes Association members;
Develop the program;
Send the completed plan to the Association and the Superintendent or designee for review; and
Hold a secret ballot vote, which attains at least a 75% approval.

If sanctioned by the Association and the Board, their representatives shall sign a memorandum of agreement.
Such programs end at the conclusion of the current school year. (1999, 2000)
6.15

FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES
Members will only be required to submit the following accounting documents:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Fundraiser Approval Form
Request for Purchase Order Form
Receipts for funds collected
Deposit slips
Reconciliation Form

Members shall be prepared to provide detailed information of students who participated in fundraisers; inventory
lists of items sold, returned or lost; and monies owed or collected.
Members who feel that their financial record-keeping requirements should be reduced should report their
suggestions to their building principal.
6.16

FACULTY MEETINGS
Faculty meetings should serve to convey information pertaining to the efficient and effective operation of school
activities, including professional enhancement activities, and will be conducted during the workday with the
exception of two meetings per month which may be held for sufficient duration to qualify attendees for one
professional development point.
(2002, 2018)

26

6.17

LESSON PLANS
If the principal requires lesson plans to be submitted, Members may decide whether to submit their lesson plans
through print or electronic media.
Members of the Bargaining Unit may use their own lesson plan format(s) which are appropriate to the subject
and/or district approved curriculum. (2004)

VII.

FRINGE BENEFITS

7.01

SICK LEAVE ACCUMULATION REIMBURSEMENT
Reimbursement for accumulated sick leave shall be provided for all Members of the Bargaining Unit.
Upon termination of employment, Members shall be provided $10.00 for each day of accumulated sick leave up to
60 days. Members shall be provided with $50 for each day of accumulated sick leave above 60 days. (2023)
Transfer leave from other districts is not eligible for reimbursement. If the Member chooses to transfer all or any
part of his/her accumulated sick leave days to another district, said Member shall not be reimbursed for days
transferred.
Members shall apply in writing to the Superintendent or designee for reimbursement of accumulated sick leave
within thirty (30) days following the termination of employment.

7.02

RETIREMENT CONTRIBUTION
The Moore Board of Education shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of each Member of the Bargaining Unit's
contribution to the Oklahoma Teachers' Retirement System for the current school year.

7.03

SOCIAL SECURITY
The Board shall maintain social security coverage for each Member of the Bargaining Unit. (2004)

7.04

WORK RELATED INJURY
The Board shall maintain Workers' Compensation coverage.
When a Member of the Bargaining Unit is off work because of a work-related injury, that Member:
A. May, at his/her option, supplement temporary total disability benefits by the use of any sick leave or personal
business leave or fractional use thereof, available to the injured Member to the extent that the injured Member
shall receive full wages during the Member's temporary absence.
B. Shall draw, if eligible, Workers' Compensation until the Member is certified to return to work or has exhausted
Workers' Compensation benefits.
C. Shall use sick leave benefits according to provisions made in ARTICLE 5.01: SICK LEAVE in the event that
the Member has exhausted Worker's Compensation benefits and is not certified to return to work. (2004)
D. A member who is injured as a result of assault or battery while the member is in the performance of any duty
as an education employee shall be entitled to leave from employment as governed by Worker's
Compensation provisions. This leave shall be granted without loss of leave benefits to the member (1.S. 6145 of Title 70). (2009)

27

7.05

FRINGE BENEFIT PROGRAM
Members may choose whether or not to enroll in an Oklahoma State and Education Employees Group Insurance
Board (OSEEGIB) health plan.
Members electing to enroll shall have 100% of the Health Choice High option single premium paid and the flexible
benefit shall be credited to their Section 125 plan.
Members not choosing to enroll will receive taxable compensation in lieu of the flexible benefit in the amount of
$69.71 per month ($836.52 annually). Members may direct compensation to programs available in the 125 Plans.
Programs available through the IRS 125 Plan shall include but not be limited to:
•

OSEEGIB health plans

•

Dental insurance

•

Vision insurance

•

Group term life insurance premiums

•

Disability insurance premiums

•

Cancer & Dread Disease insurance premiums

•

Health Savings Accounts

•

Childcare

If a Member, who has major medical coverage (whether individual or family), does not choose to participate in the
125 Plan, said Member shall contribute, through payroll deduction the additional premium. Members may
increase coverage as provided in the plan adopted.
If the selected plan permits, the Board and the Association further agree that a Member may continue his/her
Fringe Benefit Program during an approved leave of absence, provided the Member makes full premium
payments. Such payments shall be paid to the Board of Education which, in turn, makes payments to the
carriers(s).
The Board shall also provide a ten-thousand-dollar ($10,000) life insurance policy for each Member and shall pay
the cost of administering Section 125 of the IRS Code. (2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2013)

VIII.

COMPENSATION

8.01

MEMBER SUBSTITUTE PAY
When a Member is absent for any reason, the district shall attempt to hire a substitute.
SUBSTITUTING DURING PREPARATION TIME
Members of the Bargaining Unit who substitute during their preparation time shall be compensated on a per class
period basis. The rate shall be the Board approved substitute pay prorated per teaching period.
SUBSTITUTING BEYOND PREPARATION TIME
After all possible efforts have been made to hire a substitute teacher, a Member who is required to cover another
Member's class shall be compensated in accordance with the following schedule, based upon the current daily
rate of certified substitute pay:

28

>1/2 to Full Class
>1/3 to 1/2 Class
>1/4 to 1/3 Class
Up to 1/4 Class
Full Day
$100.00
$50.00
$33.33
$25.00
Half Day
$50.00
$25.00
$16.67
$12.50
Hourly
$19.25
$9.63
$6.42
$4.81
Note: Not to exceed one (1) full class. (2000, 2001, 2007, 2009, 2010, 2018, 2019, 2021, 2022, 2023)

8.02

REIMBURSEMENT FOR USE OF PERSONAL AUTOMOBILE
Each Member of the Bargaining Unit required by assignment to travel from building to building during the school
day shall be paid for the use of a personal automobile. Compensation shall be calculated on the current prevailing
IRS per mile rate.
Any assignments requiring mileage reimbursement must have prior authorization of the respective Assistant
Superintendent and administrator whose budget is affected. Claims should be compiled and submitted at the end
of each academic quarter. (2000, 2001, 2002)

8.03

PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS
In addition to those deductions required by state and federal law, each Member of the Bargaining Unit may, upon
written authorization, initiate the following payroll deductions:
A. Oklahoma Educators Credit Union;
B. School approved health, hospital, life, cancer, dental, and vision insurance;
C. Annuities;
D. U.A. dues;
E. OEA/NEA Fund contributions;
F. Salary protection; and
G. Other items as approved by Board of Education policy. (2000, 2005, 2011)

8.04

COMPENSATION
The compensation of all persons covered by this contract is set forth in APPENDIX 9.02 which is attached hereto
and made a part hereof.
A. Each new Member of the Bargaining Unit hired prior to contract ratification in a school year shall be placed on
the compensation schedule commensurate with the returning Members.
Upon ratification all Members shall be moved to the placement for which they are qualified for the current
contract year.
B. All years of out-of-state experience or as approved by the State Department of Education for reimbursement
shall be applied to a Member's salary placement effective for those Members hired after ratification of the
2012-2013 contract. Approved/verified experience is on a go forward basis and is not eligible for any retro
compensation. (2019)
C. Any encumbrances in addition to the compensation schedule shall be in accordance with this article or
ARTICLE 8.05: SUPPLEMENTAL COMPENSATION.
D. In order for a salary adjustment to be figured and received by the Member during either semester, an official
transcript must be submitted to the Certified Personnel Records Clerk. Members will have the ability to submit
hours once per semester. One (1) official transcript showing degree and/or additional hours and the updated
certificate showing new degree or a letter of confirmation must accompany the notification form. The letter of
29

confirmation bearing the official signature of the registrar of the college or university or his/her designee must
contain the following information:
1. Number of hours above degree or
2. Degree.
Additional hours to be counted for BA+15, MA+15, and MA+30 must be college hours earned after the date
on which the designated degree was awarded.
E. Paydays will be on regularly scheduled district payment dates of the month, unless otherwise stated,
beginning pay shall not exceed the eighth (8th) workday and the last workday of the month and then revert to
the regular cycle, which shall be the fifteenth (15th) and the last day of the month. When the payday falls on a
weekend or federally recognized holiday, Members shall receive their paychecks on the last workday prior to
the beginning of the weekend, or official holiday otherwise paydays will be on the 15th or last day of the
month. Members shall receive all summer paychecks on the June fifteenth (15th) payday. In cases of natural
disaster or inclement weather, pay days may be moved to allow for reasonable accommodation by
administration.
F. Counselors shall be paid five percent (5%) above the Member's current compensation schedule placement.
G. Special Education teachers shall be paid ten percent (10%) above the Member's current compensation
schedule placement as per state law.
H. Alternative Education teachers shall be paid five percent (5%) above the Member's current compensation
schedule placement as per state law.
I.

Any Member who does not complete the full contract shall receive reimbursements for benefits earned during
that contract year on a prorated basis.

J.

Members of the Bargaining Unit who are authorized by the administration and approved by the Board to work
a period of days before and/or after the official school calendar year shall be remunerated at the rate of the
individual Member's per diem.

K. Advanced Technology Academic Education (ATAE)/Technology Education instructors shall receive a one
percent (1%) increment for each hour of ATAE/Technology taught as determined by the following formula:
One percent (1%) multiplied by $22,000 multiplied by the number of hours of ATAE/Technology taught.
(Example: 1% x $22,000 x hours of ATAE/Technology taught.)
L. Information on contracts issued individually to Members that violates the provisions of the negotiated contract
is subject to the grievance procedure.
M. Compensation for the following shall be at a rate of $23.00 per hour (2023):
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Summer School
Night Alternative School
Homebound
Internet-Based Instruction
IC Coaches
Professional Development Chair
Science Compliance Clerk (2018)
Social Media Facilitator (2019)
After School Tutoring (District Program) (2019)

The stipend will be paid annually contingent upon receiving funds from the State or mandated by the State.
(2018)
N. The district shall pay the initial and subsequent renewal costs for training and testing for Members who are
required to get a Commercial Driving License (CDL) as a part of their coach/sponsor duties.

30

O. Members who volunteer to perform lunch duty during their regularly scheduled duty-free lunchtime shall be
compensated at the current rate of substitute pay prorated per hour.
P. National Board - The stipend will be paid annually contingent upon receiving funds from the State or as
mandated by the State (2018).
Moore Public Schools will provide funding for up to five candidates who are members of the bargaining unit
for renewal of their National Board Certification. Qualified candidates will apply for this funding no later than
September 30th of the school year during which they will be eligible for renewal. In the event more than five
candidates apply for this funding, the Moore Public Schools Professional Development Committee will
evaluate his/her application based on a rubric to determine their commitment to the teaching profession, their
involvement in supporting other teachers, and their contributions to excellence in education in Moore Public
Schools. This will be awarded in the current year but will be paid upon completion of the National BoardCertified Teacher renewal process and with current employment in the district.
(2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2008, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2018, 2019)
8.05

SUPPLEMENTAL COMPENSATION
A Member of the Bargaining Unit who accepts a supplemental assignment shall be compensated. Compensation
for all supplemental assignments shall be determined by using the following formula: $22,000 multiplied by the
proper index number from APPENDIX 9.03: SUPPLEMENTAL COMPENSATION SCHEDULE attached hereto
and made a part hereof. Members shall start to receive supplemental pay (extra duty pay) no later than 6 (six)
weeks after their official report date back to work or when that job function is fully determined, pay will be equally
distributed across all remaining pay periods. Fully determined is defined as a position being filled by a specific
applicant with all applicable paperwork filled out and turned in to the appropriate stakeholders that allows for
processing time. (2005, 2015, 2019,2022,2023)

31

IX.

APPENDIX

9.01

GRIEVANCE FORM
White Copy - Superintendent
Canary Copy - Affected Administrator Pink Copy - Grievant
Goldenrod Copy-TEAM TRC Chairperson
MOORE PUBLIC SCHOOLS
GRIEVANCE FORM

Level (check one):

One_____

Two_____

Three_____

Name of Grievant_________________________Building_____________Assignment__________Date Filed __________
Date grievance occurred___________________
Contract article(s) allegedly violated____________________________________________________________________
Statement of Grievance______________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
Relief Sought______________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
Signature of Grievant______________________________________________________ Date______________________
Decision__________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
Signature and Title________________________________________________________ Date______________________
{If additional space is needed to complete any portion(s) of this form, attach and properly identify additional pages.)
Grievant is satisfied with the disposition of grievance at this level:

Yes_____

No_____

Signature of Grievant______________________________________________________ Date______________________

32

IX.

APPENDIX

9.02

COMPENSATION SCHEDULE
The district will continue to fund years of service with TRS. Consideration will be given to continue to fund the
TRS credit, if allowable from the State Department of Education, as a part of total compensation.
All certified staff members will receive their step raise. One year will be added for those who have more years of
service than the salary schedule lists. (2025)

33

IX. APPENDIX
9.02 COMPENSATION SCHEDULE
Moore Public Schools
Certified Compensation Schedule
Fiscal Year 2024-2025
(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

(E)
Total District
Compensation

(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

(E)
Total District
Compensation

Bachelor
Bachelor + 15
0
45,300
60.15
3,111
48,471
0
45,858
60.15
3,150
1
45,708
103.41
3,096
48,908
1
46,266
103.41
3,135
2
46,115
145.65
3,082
49,343
2
46,673
145.65
3,121
3
46,524
188.15
3,069
49,781
3
47,082
188.15
3,108
4
46,932
233.33
3,052
50,217
4
47,490
233.33
3,091
5
48,469
278.76
3,114
51,862
5
49,027
278.76
3,153
6
48,997
325.26
3,105
52,427
6
49,555
325.26
3,144
7
49,526
372.82
3,094
52,993
7
50,084
372.82
3,133
8
50,054
421.44
3,082
53,558
8
50,612
421.44
3,121
9
50,582
471.12
3,070
54,123
9
51,140
471.12
3,109
10
52,218
521.87
3,133
55,873
10
52,776
521.87
3,172
11
52,751
573.67
3,119
56,443
11
53,309
573.67
3,158
12
53,377
626.54
3,110
57,113
12
53,935
626.54
3,149
13
54,002
680.48
3,100
57,782
13
54,560
680.48
3,139
14
54,628
735.47
3,089
58,452
14
55,186
735.47
3,128
15
56,273
791.53
3,148
60,212
15
56,831
791.53
3,187
16
56,899
848.65
3,134
60,882
16
57,457
848.65
3,173
17
57,618
906.83
3,126
61,651
17
58,176
906.83
3,165
18
58,337
966.07
3,118
62,420
18
58,895
966.07
3,157
19
59,056
1,026.38
3,108
63,190
19
59,614
1,026.38
3,147
20
59,795
1,087.75
3,098
63,980
20
60,353
1,087.75
3,137
21
60,514
1,150.18
3,086
64,750
21
61,072
1,150.18
3,125
22
61,234
1,213.68
3,073
65,520
22
61,792
1,213.68
3,112
23
61,953
1,278.23
3,058
66,290
23
62,511
1,278.23
3,098
24
62,704
1,343.85
3,045
67,094
24
63,262
1,343.85
3,085
25
64,387
1,410.53
3,097
68,894
25
65,045
1,410.53
3,143
26
65,070
1,410.53
3,144
69,625
26
65,628
1,410.53
3,183
27
65,754
1,410.53
3,192
70,357
27
66,312
1,410.53
3,231
28
66,438
1,410.53
3,240
71,088
28
66,996
1,410.53
3,279
29
67,121
1,410.53
3,288
71,820
29
67,679
1,410.53
3,327
30
67,805
1,410.53
3,336
72,551
30
68,363
1,410.53
3,375
31
68,488
1,410.53
3,384
73,282
31
69,046
1,410.53
3,423
32
69,172
1,410.53
3,431
74,014
32
69,730
1,410.53
3,471
33
69,855
1,410.53
3,479
74,745
33
70,413
1,410.53
3,518
34
70,539
1,410.53
3,527
75,477
34
71,097
1,410.53
3,566
35
71,222
1,410.53
3,575
76,208
35
71,780
1,410.53
3,614
36
71,906
1,410.53
3,623
76,939
36
72,464
1,410.53
3,662
37
72,590
1,410.53
3,671
77,671
37
73,148
1,410.53
3,710
38
73,273
1,410.53
3,719
78,402
38
73,831
1,410.53
3,758
39
74,008
1,410.53
3,770
79,189
39
74,566
1,410.53
3,809
40
74,743
1,410.53
3,821
79,975
40
75,301
1,410.53
3,861
41
75,478
1,410.53
3,873
80,762
41
76,036
1,410.53
3,912
42
76,213
1,410.53
3,924
81,548
42
76,771
1,410.53
3,963
43
76,948
1,410.53
3,976
82,334
43
77,506
1,410.53
4,015
44
77,683
1,410.53
4,027
83,121
44
78,241
1,410.53
4,066
45
78,418
1,410.53
4,079
83,907
45
78,976
1,410.53
4,118
(A) Step - Salary placement level
(B) 2024-2025 Negotiated Base Salary
(C) Additional Salary (TRS Credit) - Statutory required payment to certified staff as additional salary. The State pays an equal amount
to the Oklahoma Teachers' Retirement System on behalf of the employee.
(D) District Paid Retirement - District paid teachers' retirement at 7% of District Paid Compensation (col E). Total retirement amount
remitted to TRS by the district is reduced by the TRS Credit (col C).
(E) District Paid Compensation - Total of columns B through D
Employees not enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall continue to receive taxable compensation in lieu of the Flexible Benefit
in the amount of $69.71 per month.
Employees who are enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall have the Flexible Benefit, equal to 100% of the HealthChoice High option
premium, credited to their 125 Plan.
NBCT Teachers will receive compensation equivalent to State funding

34

49,068
49,505
49,940
50,378
50,814
52,459
53,024
53,590
54,155
54,720
56,470
57,040
57,710
58,380
59,049
60,809
61,479
62,248
63,018
63,787
64,578
65,347
66,117
66,887
67,691
69,598
70,222
70,954
71,685
72,417
73,148
73,879
74,611
75,342
76,074
76,805
77,536
78,268
78,999
79,786
80,572
81,359
82,145
82,931
83,718
84,504

IX. APPENDIX
9.02 COMPENSATION SCHEDULE
Moore Public Schools
Certified Compensation Schedule
Fiscal Year 2024-2025
(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

(E)
Total District
Compensation

(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

Masters
Masters + 15
0
46,606
60.15
3,202
49,869
0
47,164
60.15
3,241
1
47,014
103.41
3,188
50,305
1
47,572
103.41
3,227
2
47,421
145.65
3,174
50,741
2
47,979
145.65
3,213
3
47,830
188.15
3,160
51,178
3
48,388
188.15
3,199
4
48,238
233.33
3,143
51,615
4
48,796
233.33
3,182
5
49,775
278.76
3,205
53,259
5
50,333
278.76
3,245
6
50,303
325.26
3,196
53,824
6
50,861
325.26
3,235
7
50,832
372.82
3,185
54,390
7
51,390
372.82
3,224
8
51,360
421.44
3,174
54,955
8
51,918
421.44
3,213
9
51,889
471.12
3,161
55,521
9
52,447
471.12
3,200
10
53,593
521.87
3,230
57,344
10
54,151
521.87
3,269
11
54,126
573.67
3,215
57,915
11
54,684
573.67
3,254
12
54,752
626.54
3,206
58,584
12
55,310
626.54
3,245
13
55,378
680.48
3,196
59,255
13
55,936
680.48
3,235
14
56,003
735.47
3,185
59,924
14
56,561
735.47
3,224
15
57,649
791.53
3,244
61,684
15
58,207
791.53
3,283
16
58,275
848.65
3,231
62,354
16
58,833
848.65
3,270
17
58,994
906.83
3,223
63,123
17
59,552
906.83
3,262
18
59,713
966.07
3,214
63,893
18
60,271
966.07
3,253
19
60,432
1,026.38
3,204
64,662
19
60,990
1,026.38
3,243
20
61,172
1,087.75
3,194
65,454
20
61,730
1,087.75
3,233
21
61,891
1,150.18
3,182
66,223
21
62,449
1,150.18
3,221
22
62,610
1,213.68
3,169
66,993
22
63,168
1,213.68
3,208
23
63,330
1,278.23
3,155
67,763
23
63,888
1,278.23
3,194
24
64,081
1,343.85
3,142
68,567
24
64,639
1,343.85
3,181
25
65,800
1,410.53
3,195
70,406
25
66,358
1,410.53
3,235
26
66,483
1,410.53
3,243
71,137
26
67,041
1,410.53
3,282
27
67,167
1,410.53
3,291
71,869
27
67,725
1,410.53
3,330
28
67,851
1,410.53
3,339
72,600
28
68,409
1,410.53
3,378
29
68,534
1,410.53
3,387
73,332
29
69,092
1,410.53
3,426
30
69,218
1,410.53
3,435
74,063
30
69,776
1,410.53
3,474
31
69,901
1,410.53
3,483
74,794
31
70,459
1,410.53
3,522
32
70,585
1,410.53
3,530
75,526
32
71,143
1,410.53
3,569
33
71,268
1,410.53
3,578
76,257
33
71,826
1,410.53
3,617
34
71,952
1,410.53
3,626
76,988
34
72,510
1,410.53
3,665
35
72,635
1,410.53
3,674
77,720
35
73,193
1,410.53
3,713
36
73,319
1,410.53
3,722
78,451
36
73,877
1,410.53
3,761
37
74,003
1,410.53
3,770
79,183
37
74,561
1,410.53
3,809
38
74,686
1,410.53
3,817
79,914
38
75,244
1,410.53
3,857
39
75,421
1,410.53
3,869
80,701
39
75,979
1,410.53
3,908
40
76,156
1,410.53
3,920
81,487
40
76,714
1,410.53
3,959
41
76,891
1,410.53
3,972
82,273
41
77,449
1,410.53
4,011
42
77,626
1,410.53
4,023
83,060
42
78,184
1,410.53
4,062
43
78,361
1,410.53
4,075
83,846
43
78,919
1,410.53
4,114
44
79,096
1,410.53
4,126
84,633
44
79,654
1,410.53
4,165
45
79,831
1,410.53
4,178
85,419
45
80,389
1,410.53
4,217
(A) Step - Salary placement level
(B) 2024-2025 Negotiated Base Salary
(C) Additional Salary (TRS Credit) - Statutory required payment to certified staff as additional salary. The State pays an equal amount
to the Oklahoma Teachers' Retirement System on behalf of the employee.
(D) District Paid Retirement - District paid teachers' retirement at 7% of District Paid Compensation (col E). Total retirement amount
remitted to TRS by the district is reduced by the TRS Credit (col C).
(E) District Paid Compensation - Total of columns B through D
Employees not enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall continue to receive taxable compensation in lieu of the Flexible Benefit
in the amount of $69.71 per month.
Employees who are enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall have the Flexible Benefit, equal to 100% of the HealthChoice High option
premium, credited to their 125 Plan.
NBCT Teachers will receive compensation equivalent to State funding

35

(E)
Total District
Compensation
50,466
50,902
51,338
51,775
52,212
53,856
54,421
54,987
55,553
56,118
57,941
58,512
59,182
59,852
60,521
62,281
62,951
63,720
64,490
65,260
66,051
66,820
67,590
68,360
69,164
71,003
71,734
72,466
73,197
73,929
74,660
75,391
76,123
76,854
77,586
78,317
79,048
79,780
80,511
81,298
82,084
82,870
83,657
84,443
85,230
86,016

IX. APPENDIX
9.02 COMPENSATION SCHEDULE
Moore Public Schools
Certified Compensation Schedule
Fiscal Year 2024-2025
(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

(E)
Total District
Compensation

(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

Masters + 30
Doctorate
0
47,722
60.15
3,280
51,063
0
48,470
60.15
3,333
1
48,130
103.41
3,266
51,499
1
48,878
103.41
3,318
2
48,537
145.65
3,252
51,935
2
49,285
145.65
3,304
3
48,946
188.15
3,238
52,372
3
49,694
188.15
3,290
4
49,354
233.33
3,221
52,809
4
50,102
233.33
3,274
5
50,891
278.76
3,284
54,453
5
51,639
278.76
3,336
6
51,419
325.26
3,274
55,018
6
52,168
325.26
3,327
7
51,948
372.82
3,264
55,584
7
52,696
372.82
3,316
8
52,476
421.44
3,252
56,150
8
53,224
421.44
3,304
9
53,005
471.12
3,239
56,715
9
53,753
471.12
3,292
10
54,709
521.87
3,308
58,538
10
55,594
521.87
3,370
11
55,242
573.67
3,293
59,109
11
56,127
573.67
3,355
12
55,868
626.54
3,284
59,779
12
56,753
626.54
3,346
13
56,494
680.48
3,274
60,449
13
57,379
680.48
3,336
14
57,119
735.47
3,263
61,118
14
58,004
735.47
3,325
15
58,765
791.53
3,322
62,878
15
59,651
791.53
3,384
16
59,391
848.65
3,309
63,548
16
60,277
848.65
3,371
17
60,110
906.83
3,301
64,318
17
60,996
906.83
3,363
18
60,829
966.07
3,292
65,087
18
61,715
966.07
3,354
19
61,548
1,026.38
3,282
65,857
19
62,434
1,026.38
3,344
20
62,288
1,087.75
3,272
66,648
20
63,175
1,087.75
3,334
21
63,007
1,150.18
3,260
67,417
21
63,894
1,150.18
3,322
22
63,726
1,213.68
3,247
68,187
22
64,613
1,213.68
3,309
23
64,446
1,278.23
3,233
68,957
23
65,333
1,278.23
3,295
24
65,197
1,343.85
3,220
69,761
24
66,084
1,343.85
3,282
25
66,916
1,410.53
3,274
71,600
25
67,848
1,410.53
3,339
26
67,599
1,410.53
3,321
72,331
26
68,531
1,410.53
3,387
27
68,283
1,410.53
3,369
73,063
27
69,215
1,410.53
3,435
28
68,967
1,410.53
3,417
73,794
28
69,899
1,410.53
3,482
29
69,650
1,410.53
3,465
74,526
29
70,582
1,410.53
3,530
30
70,334
1,410.53
3,513
75,257
30
71,266
1,410.53
3,578
31
71,017
1,410.53
3,561
75,988
31
71,949
1,410.53
3,626
32
71,701
1,410.53
3,609
76,720
32
72,633
1,410.53
3,674
33
72,384
1,410.53
3,656
77,451
33
73,316
1,410.53
3,722
34
73,068
1,410.53
3,704
78,183
34
74,000
1,410.53
3,769
35
73,751
1,410.53
3,752
78,914
35
74,683
1,410.53
3,817
36
74,435
1,410.53
3,800
79,645
36
75,367
1,410.53
3,865
37
75,119
1,410.53
3,848
80,377
37
76,051
1,410.53
3,913
38
75,802
1,410.53
3,896
81,108
38
76,734
1,410.53
3,961
39
76,537
1,410.53
3,947
81,895
39
77,469
1,410.53
4,012
40
77,272
1,410.53
3,999
82,681
40
78,204
1,410.53
4,064
41
78,007
1,410.53
4,050
83,468
41
78,939
1,410.53
4,115
42
78,742
1,410.53
4,101
84,254
42
79,674
1,410.53
4,167
43
79,477
1,410.53
4,153
85,040
43
80,409
1,410.53
4,218
44
80,212
1,410.53
4,204
85,827
44
81,144
1,410.53
4,270
45
80,947
1,410.53
4,256
86,613
45
81,879
1,410.53
4,321
(A) Step - Salary placement level
(B) 2024-2025 Negotiated Base Salary
(C) Additional Salary (TRS Credit) - Statutory required payment to certified staff as additional salary. The State pays an equal amount
to the Oklahoma Teachers' Retirement System on behalf of the employee.
(D) District Paid Retirement - District paid teachers' retirement at 7% of District Paid Compensation (col E). Total retirement amount
remitted to TRS by the district is reduced by the TRS Credit (col C).
(E) District Paid Compensation - Total of columns B through D
Employees not enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall continue to receive taxable compensation in lieu of the Flexible Benefit
in the amount of $69.71 per month.
Employees who are enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall have the Flexible Benefit, equal to 100% of the HealthChoice High option
premium, credited to their 125 Plan.
NBCT Teachers will receive compensation equivalent to State funding

36

(E)
Total District
Compensation
51,863
52,299
52,735
53,173
53,609
55,254
55,820
56,385
56,950
57,516
59,485
60,056
60,726
61,396
62,065
63,826
64,496
65,266
66,035
66,805
67,597
68,367
69,136
69,906
70,710
72,597
73,329
74,060
74,791
75,523
76,254
76,986
77,717
78,448
79,180
79,911
80,643
81,374
82,105
82,892
83,678
84,465
85,251
86,038
86,824
87,611

IX. APPENDIX
9.02 COMPENSATION SCHEDULE
Moore Public Schools
Certified Compensation Schedule - 5% Group
Fiscal Year 2024-2025
(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

(E)
Total District
Compensation

(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

Bachelor
Bachelor + 15
0
47,565
60.15
3,269
50,895
0
48,151
60.15
3,310
1
47,993
103.41
3,256
51,353
1
48,579
103.41
3,297
2
48,421
145.65
3,244
51,811
2
49,007
145.65
3,285
3
48,850
188.15
3,231
52,270
3
49,436
188.15
3,272
4
49,278
233.33
3,216
52,728
4
49,864
233.33
3,257
5
50,892
278.76
3,284
54,455
5
51,478
278.76
3,325
6
51,447
325.26
3,276
55,048
6
52,033
325.26
3,317
7
52,002
372.82
3,267
55,642
7
52,588
372.82
3,308
8
52,557
421.44
3,258
56,236
8
53,143
421.44
3,299
9
53,111
471.12
3,247
56,829
9
53,697
471.12
3,288
10
54,829
521.87
3,316
58,667
10
55,415
521.87
3,357
11
55,388
573.67
3,304
59,266
11
55,974
573.67
3,345
12
56,046
626.54
3,297
59,969
12
56,632
626.54
3,338
13
56,702
680.48
3,289
60,672
13
57,288
680.48
3,330
14
57,360
735.47
3,280
61,375
14
57,946
735.47
3,321
15
59,086
791.53
3,345
63,223
15
59,672
791.53
3,386
16
59,744
848.65
3,333
63,926
16
60,330
848.65
3,374
17
60,499
906.83
3,328
64,734
17
61,085
906.83
3,369
18
61,254
966.07
3,322
65,542
18
61,840
966.07
3,363
19
62,009
1,026.38
3,314
66,350
19
62,595
1,026.38
3,355
20
62,785
1,087.75
3,307
67,179
20
63,370
1,087.75
3,348
21
63,540
1,150.18
3,298
67,987
21
64,126
1,150.18
3,339
22
64,296
1,213.68
3,287
68,796
22
64,881
1,213.68
3,328
23
65,051
1,278.23
3,275
69,604
23
65,637
1,278.23
3,316
24
65,840
1,343.85
3,265
70,448
24
66,426
1,343.85
3,306
25
67,606
1,410.53
3,322
72,339
25
68,297
1,410.53
3,370
26
68,324
1,410.53
3,372
73,107
26
68,910
1,410.53
3,413
27
69,042
1,410.53
3,422
73,875
27
69,628
1,410.53
3,463
28
69,759
1,410.53
3,473
74,643
28
70,345
1,410.53
3,514
29
70,477
1,410.53
3,523
75,411
29
71,063
1,410.53
3,564
30
71,195
1,410.53
3,573
76,179
30
71,781
1,410.53
3,614
31
71,913
1,410.53
3,623
76,947
31
72,499
1,410.53
3,664
32
72,630
1,410.53
3,674
77,714
32
73,216
1,410.53
3,715
33
73,348
1,410.53
3,724
78,482
33
73,934
1,410.53
3,765
34
74,066
1,410.53
3,774
79,250
34
74,652
1,410.53
3,815
35
74,784
1,410.53
3,824
80,018
35
75,369
1,410.53
3,865
36
75,501
1,410.53
3,875
80,786
36
76,087
1,410.53
3,916
37
76,219
1,410.53
3,925
81,554
37
76,805
1,410.53
3,966
38
76,937
1,410.53
3,975
82,322
38
77,523
1,410.53
4,016
39
77,708
1,410.53
4,029
83,148
39
78,294
1,410.53
4,070
40
78,480
1,410.53
4,083
83,974
40
79,066
1,410.53
4,124
41
79,252
1,410.53
4,137
84,800
41
79,838
1,410.53
4,178
42
80,024
1,410.53
4,191
85,625
42
80,610
1,410.53
4,232
43
80,795
1,410.53
4,245
86,451
43
81,381
1,410.53
4,286
44
81,567
1,410.53
4,299
87,277
44
82,153
1,410.53
4,340
45
82,339
1,410.53
4,353
88,103
45
82,925
1,410.53
4,394
(A) Step - Salary placement level
(B) 2024-2025 Negotiated Base Salary
(C) Additional Salary (TRS Credit) - Statutory required payment to certified staff as additional salary. The State pays an equal amount
to the Oklahoma Teachers' Retirement System on behalf of the employee.
(D) District Paid Retirement - District paid teachers' retirement at 7% of District Paid Compensation (col E). Total retirement amount
remitted to TRS by the district is reduced by the TRS Credit (col C).
(E) District Paid Compensation - Total of columns B through D
Employees not enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall continue to receive taxable compensation in lieu of the Flexible Benefit
in the amount of $69.71 per month.
Employees who are enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall have the Flexible Benefit, equal to 100% of the HealthChoice High option
premium, credited to their 125 Plan.
NBCT Teachers will receive compensation equivalent to State funding

37

(E)
Total District
Compensation
51,521
51,980
52,437
52,897
53,355
55,082
55,675
56,269
56,863
57,456
59,294
59,892
60,596
61,298
62,002
63,849
64,553
65,361
66,168
66,977
67,806
68,614
69,423
70,231
71,075
73,078
73,734
74,502
75,270
76,037
76,805
77,573
78,341
79,109
79,877
80,645
81,413
82,181
82,949
83,775
84,601
85,427
86,252
87,078
87,904
88,730

IX. APPENDIX
9.02 COMPENSATION SCHEDULE
Moore Public Schools
Certified Compensation Schedule - 5% Group
Fiscal Year 2024 - 2025
(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

(E)
Total District
Compensation

(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

Masters
Masters + 15
0
48,937
60.15
3,365
52,362
0
49,522
60.15
3,406
1
49,365
103.41
3,352
52,820
1
49,951
103.41
3,393
2
49,792
145.65
3,340
53,278
2
50,378
145.65
3,381
3
50,222
188.15
3,327
53,737
3
50,808
188.15
3,368
4
50,650
233.33
3,312
54,195
4
51,236
233.33
3,353
5
52,264
278.76
3,380
55,922
5
52,849
278.76
3,421
6
52,818
325.26
3,372
56,516
6
53,404
325.26
3,413
7
53,373
372.82
3,363
57,110
7
53,959
372.82
3,404
8
53,928
421.44
3,354
57,703
8
54,514
421.44
3,395
9
54,483
471.12
3,343
58,297
9
55,069
471.12
3,384
10
56,272
521.87
3,417
60,212
10
56,858
521.87
3,458
11
56,832
573.67
3,405
60,810
11
57,418
573.67
3,446
12
57,489
626.54
3,398
61,514
12
58,075
626.54
3,439
13
58,147
680.48
3,390
62,217
13
58,733
680.48
3,431
14
58,803
735.47
3,381
62,920
14
59,389
735.47
3,422
15
60,531
791.53
3,446
64,768
15
61,117
791.53
3,487
16
61,189
848.65
3,435
65,472
16
61,774
848.65
3,476
17
61,944
906.83
3,429
66,280
17
62,529
906.83
3,470
18
62,699
966.07
3,423
67,087
18
63,284
966.07
3,464
19
63,454
1,026.38
3,415
67,896
19
64,040
1,026.38
3,456
20
64,230
1,087.75
3,408
68,727
20
64,816
1,087.75
3,449
21
64,986
1,150.18
3,399
69,535
21
65,571
1,150.18
3,440
22
65,740
1,213.68
3,388
70,342
22
66,326
1,213.68
3,429
23
66,497
1,278.23
3,377
71,151
23
67,082
1,278.23
3,418
24
67,285
1,343.85
3,366
71,995
24
67,871
1,343.85
3,407
25
69,090
1,410.53
3,426
73,926
25
69,676
1,410.53
3,467
26
69,808
1,410.53
3,476
74,694
26
70,394
1,410.53
3,517
27
70,525
1,410.53
3,526
75,462
27
71,111
1,410.53
3,567
28
71,243
1,410.53
3,576
76,230
28
71,829
1,410.53
3,617
29
71,961
1,410.53
3,627
76,998
29
72,547
1,410.53
3,668
30
72,679
1,410.53
3,677
77,766
30
73,264
1,410.53
3,718
31
73,396
1,410.53
3,727
78,534
31
73,982
1,410.53
3,768
32
74,114
1,410.53
3,777
79,302
32
74,700
1,410.53
3,818
33
74,832
1,410.53
3,828
80,070
33
75,418
1,410.53
3,869
34
75,549
1,410.53
3,878
80,838
34
76,135
1,410.53
3,919
35
76,267
1,410.53
3,928
81,606
35
76,853
1,410.53
3,969
36
76,985
1,410.53
3,978
82,374
36
77,571
1,410.53
4,019
37
77,703
1,410.53
4,029
83,142
37
78,289
1,410.53
4,070
38
78,420
1,410.53
4,079
83,910
38
79,006
1,410.53
4,120
39
79,192
1,410.53
4,133
84,736
39
79,778
1,410.53
4,174
40
79,964
1,410.53
4,187
85,561
40
80,550
1,410.53
4,228
41
80,736
1,410.53
4,241
86,387
41
81,322
1,410.53
4,282
42
81,507
1,410.53
4,295
87,213
42
82,093
1,410.53
4,336
43
82,279
1,410.53
4,349
88,039
43
82,865
1,410.53
4,390
44
83,051
1,410.53
4,403
88,864
44
83,637
1,410.53
4,444
45
83,823
1,410.53
4,457
89,690
45
84,409
1,410.53
4,498
(A) Step - Salary placement level
(B) 2024-2025 Negotiated Base Salary
(C) Additional Salary (TRS Credit) - Statutory required payment to certified staff as additional salary. The State pays an equal amount
to the Oklahoma Teachers' Retirement System on behalf of the employee.
(D) District Paid Retirement - District paid teachers' retirement at 7% of District Paid Compensation (col E). Total retirement amount
remitted to TRS by the district is reduced by the TRS Credit (col C).
(E) District Paid Compensation - Total of columns B through D
Employees not enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall continue to receive taxable compensation in lieu of the Flexible Benefit
in the amount of $69.71 per month.
Employees who are enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall have the Flexible Benefit, equal to 100% of the HealthChoice High option
premium, credited to their 125 Plan.
NBCT Teachers will receive compensation equivalent to State funding

38

(E)
Total District
Compensation
52,989
53,447
53,905
54,364
54,822
56,549
57,142
57,736
58,330
58,924
60,838
61,437
62,141
62,844
63,547
65,395
66,099
66,906
67,714
68,522
69,353
70,161
70,969
71,778
72,622
74,553
75,321
76,089
76,857
77,625
78,393
79,161
79,929
80,697
81,465
82,233
83,001
83,769
84,537
85,362
86,188
87,014
87,840
88,666
89,491
90,317

IX. APPENDIX
9.02 COMPENSATION SCHEDULE
Moore Public Schools
Certified Compensation Schedule - 5% Group
Fiscal Year 2024 – 2025
(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

(E)
Total District
Compensation

(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

Masters + 30
Doctorate
0
50,108
60.15
3,711
53,880
0
50,894
60.15
3,502
1
50,537
103.41
3,700
54,340
1
51,322
103.41
3,489
2
50,964
145.65
3,690
54,800
2
51,750
145.65
3,477
3
51,394
188.15
3,680
55,262
3
52,179
188.15
3,464
4
51,822
233.33
3,667
55,722
4
52,607
233.33
3,449
5
53,435
278.76
3,743
57,457
5
54,221
278.76
3,517
6
53,990
325.26
3,739
58,054
6
54,776
325.26
3,509
7
54,545
372.82
3,733
58,651
7
55,331
372.82
3,500
8
55,100
421.44
3,726
59,247
8
55,885
421.44
3,491
9
55,655
471.12
3,718
59,844
9
56,441
471.12
3,480
10
57,444
521.87
3,802
61,768
10
58,374
521.87
3,564
11
58,004
573.67
3,792
62,370
11
58,933
573.67
3,552
12
58,661
626.54
3,789
63,077
12
59,590
626.54
3,545
13
59,319
680.48
3,784
63,784
13
60,248
680.48
3,537
14
59,975
735.47
3,779
64,490
14
60,904
735.47
3,528
15
61,703
791.53
3,853
66,347
15
62,633
791.53
3,593
16
62,360
848.65
3,845
67,054
16
63,291
848.65
3,582
17
63,115
906.83
3,844
67,866
17
64,046
906.83
3,576
18
63,870
966.07
3,841
68,678
18
64,801
966.07
3,570
19
64,626
1,026.38
3,838
69,490
19
65,556
1,026.38
3,563
20
65,402
1,087.75
3,835
70,325
20
66,334
1,087.75
3,556
21
66,157
1,150.18
3,829
71,137
21
67,089
1,150.18
3,546
22
66,912
1,213.68
3,823
71,949
22
67,843
1,213.68
3,535
23
67,668
1,278.23
3,815
72,762
23
68,600
1,278.23
3,524
24
68,457
1,343.85
3,809
73,610
24
69,389
1,343.85
3,513
25
70,262
1,410.53
3,878
75,550
25
71,240
1,410.53
3,576
26
70,979
1,410.53
3,932
76,322
26
71,958
1,410.53
3,627
27
71,697
1,410.53
3,986
77,094
27
72,676
1,410.53
3,677
28
72,415
1,410.53
4,040
77,865
28
73,393
1,410.53
3,727
29
73,133
1,410.53
4,094
78,637
29
74,111
1,410.53
3,777
30
73,850
1,410.53
4,148
79,409
30
74,829
1,410.53
3,827
31
74,568
1,410.53
4,202
80,181
31
75,547
1,410.53
3,878
32
75,286
1,410.53
4,256
80,952
32
76,264
1,410.53
3,928
33
76,004
1,410.53
4,310
81,724
33
76,982
1,410.53
3,978
34
76,721
1,410.53
4,364
82,496
34
77,700
1,410.53
4,028
35
77,439
1,410.53
4,418
83,268
35
78,418
1,410.53
4,079
36
78,157
1,410.53
4,472
84,039
36
79,135
1,410.53
4,129
37
78,874
1,410.53
4,526
84,811
37
79,853
1,410.53
4,179
38
79,592
1,410.53
4,580
85,583
38
80,571
1,410.53
4,229
39
80,364
1,410.53
4,638
86,413
39
81,343
1,410.53
4,283
40
81,136
1,410.53
4,696
87,243
40
82,114
1,410.53
4,337
41
81,907
1,410.53
4,755
88,073
41
82,886
1,410.53
4,391
42
82,679
1,410.53
4,813
88,902
42
83,658
1,410.53
4,446
43
83,451
1,410.53
4,871
89,732
43
84,430
1,410.53
4,500
44
84,223
1,410.53
4,929
90,562
44
85,201
1,410.53
4,554
45
84,994
1,410.53
4,987
91,392
45
85,973
1,410.53
4,608
(A) Step - Salary placement level
(B) 2024-2025 Negotiated Base Salary
(C) Additional Salary (TRS Credit) - Statutory required payment to certified staff as additional salary. The State pays an equal amount
to the Oklahoma Teachers' Retirement System on behalf of the employee.
(D) District Paid Retirement - District paid teachers' retirement at 7% of District Paid Compensation (col E). Total retirement amount
remitted to TRS by the district is reduced by the TRS Credit (col C).
(E) District Paid Compensation - Total of columns B through D
Employees not enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall continue to receive taxable compensation in lieu of the Flexible Benefit
in the amount of $69.71 per month.
Employees who are enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall have the Flexible Benefit, equal to 100% of the HealthChoice High option
premium, credited to their 125 Plan.
NBCT Teachers will receive compensation equivalent to State funding

39

(E)
Total District
Compensation
54,456
54,914
55,372
55,831
56,289
58,016
58,611
59,204
59,797
60,391
62,460
63,058
63,762
64,466
65,168
67,018
67,721
68,529
69,337
70,145
70,977
71,785
72,593
73,402
74,246
76,227
76,995
77,763
78,531
79,299
80,067
80,835
81,603
82,371
83,139
83,907
84,675
85,443
86,211
87,036
87,862
88,688
89,514
90,340
91,165
91,991

IX. APPENDIX
9.02 COMPENSATION SCHEDULE
Moore Public Schools
Certified Compensation Schedule - 10%Group
Fiscal Year 2024-2025
(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

(E)
Total District
Compensation

(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

Bachelor
Bachelor + 15
0
49,830
60.15
3,428
53,318
0
50,444
60.15
3,471
1
50,279
103.41
3,416
53,798
1
50,893
103.41
3,459
2
50,727
145.65
3,405
54,278
2
51,341
145.65
3,448
3
51,177
188.15
3,394
54,759
3
51,790
188.15
3,437
4
51,625
233.33
3,380
55,239
4
52,239
233.33
3,423
5
53,316
278.76
3,453
57,048
5
53,930
278.76
3,496
6
53,897
325.26
3,448
57,670
6
54,511
325.26
3,490
7
54,478
372.82
3,441
58,292
7
55,092
372.82
3,484
8
55,060
421.44
3,433
58,914
8
55,673
421.44
3,476
9
55,640
471.12
3,424
59,535
9
56,254
471.12
3,467
10
57,440
521.87
3,499
61,460
10
58,053
521.87
3,542
11
58,026
573.67
3,488
62,088
11
58,640
573.67
3,531
12
58,715
626.54
3,483
62,825
12
59,328
626.54
3,526
13
59,403
680.48
3,478
63,561
13
60,016
680.48
3,521
14
60,091
735.47
3,471
64,297
14
60,705
735.47
3,514
15
61,900
791.53
3,541
66,233
15
62,514
791.53
3,584
16
62,589
848.65
3,533
66,970
16
63,203
848.65
3,576
17
63,380
906.83
3,530
67,816
17
63,993
906.83
3,573
18
64,171
966.07
3,526
68,663
18
64,784
966.07
3,569
19
64,962
1,026.38
3,521
69,509
19
65,576
1,026.38
3,564
20
65,774
1,087.75
3,516
70,379
20
66,388
1,087.75
3,559
21
66,565
1,150.18
3,509
71,225
21
67,179
1,150.18
3,552
22
67,357
1,213.68
3,501
72,072
22
67,971
1,213.68
3,544
23
68,148
1,278.23
3,492
72,919
23
68,762
1,278.23
3,535
24
68,975
1,343.85
3,484
73,803
24
69,589
1,343.85
3,527
25
70,826
1,410.53
3,547
75,783
25
71,550
1,410.53
3,598
26
71,578
1,410.53
3,600
76,588
26
72,191
1,410.53
3,643
27
72,329
1,410.53
3,653
77,392
27
72,943
1,410.53
3,695
28
73,081
1,410.53
3,705
78,197
28
73,695
1,410.53
3,748
29
73,833
1,410.53
3,758
79,002
29
74,447
1,410.53
3,801
30
74,585
1,410.53
3,810
79,806
30
75,199
1,410.53
3,853
31
75,337
1,410.53
3,863
80,611
31
75,951
1,410.53
3,906
32
76,089
1,410.53
3,916
81,415
32
76,703
1,410.53
3,959
33
76,841
1,410.53
3,968
82,220
33
77,455
1,410.53
4,011
34
77,593
1,410.53
4,021
83,024
34
78,207
1,410.53
4,064
35
78,345
1,410.53
4,074
83,829
35
78,958
1,410.53
4,117
36
79,097
1,410.53
4,126
84,633
36
79,710
1,410.53
4,169
37
79,848
1,410.53
4,179
85,438
37
80,462
1,410.53
4,222
38
80,600
1,410.53
4,231
86,242
38
81,214
1,410.53
4,274
39
81,409
1,410.53
4,288
87,107
39
82,023
1,410.53
4,331
40
82,217
1,410.53
4,345
87,973
40
82,831
1,410.53
4,388
41
83,026
1,410.53
4,401
88,838
41
83,640
1,410.53
4,444
42
83,834
1,410.53
4,458
89,703
42
84,448
1,410.53
4,501
43
84,643
1,410.53
4,514
90,568
43
85,257
1,410.53
4,557
44
85,451
1,410.53
4,571
91,433
44
86,065
1,410.53
4,614
45
86,260
1,410.53
4,628
92,298
45
86,874
1,410.53
4,671
(A) Step - Salary placement level
(B) 2024-2025 Negotiated Base Salary
(C) Additional Salary (TRS Credit) - Statutory required payment to certified staff as additional salary. The State pays an equal
amount to the Oklahoma Teachers' Retirement System on behalf of the employee.
(D) District Paid Retirement - District paid teachers' retirement at 7% of District Paid Compensation (col E). Total retirement
amount remitted to TRS by the district is reduced by the TRS Credit (col C).
(E) District Paid Compensation - Total of columns B through D
Employees not enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall continue to receive taxable compensation in lieu of the Flexible
Benefit in the amount of $69.71 per month.
Employees who are enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall have the Flexible Benefit, equal to 100% of the HealthChoice High option
premium, credited to their 125 Plan.
NBCT Teachers will receive compensation equivalent to State funding

40

(E)
Total District
Compensation
53,975
54,455
54,935
55,416
55,896
57,705
58,326
58,949
59,571
60,192
62,117
62,744
63,481
64,217
64,954
66,890
67,627
68,473
69,319
70,166
71,035
71,882
72,729
73,576
74,460
76,558
77,245
78,049
78,854
79,658
80,463
81,267
82,072
82,876
83,681
84,486
85,290
86,095
86,899
87,764
88,629
89,494
90,360
91,225
92,090
92,955

IX. APPENDIX
9.02 COMPENSATION SCHEDULE
Moore Public Schools
Certified Compensation Schedule - 10% Group
Fiscal Year 2024 - 2025
(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

(E)
Total District
Compensation

(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

Masters
Masters + 15
0
51,267
60.15
3,529
54,856
0
51,881
60.15
3,571
1
51,715
103.41
3,517
55,335
1
52,329
103.41
3,560
2
52,163
145.65
3,506
55,815
2
52,777
145.65
3,549
3
52,613
188.15
3,495
56,296
3
53,227
188.15
3,538
4
53,062
233.33
3,481
56,776
4
53,675
233.33
3,524
5
54,752
278.76
3,554
58,585
5
55,366
278.76
3,597
6
55,333
325.26
3,548
59,207
6
55,947
325.26
3,591
7
55,915
372.82
3,541
59,829
7
56,529
372.82
3,584
8
56,496
421.44
3,533
60,451
8
57,110
421.44
3,576
9
57,078
471.12
3,524
61,073
9
57,692
471.12
3,567
10
58,952
521.87
3,605
63,079
10
59,566
521.87
3,648
11
59,538
573.67
3,594
63,706
11
60,152
573.67
3,637
12
60,227
626.54
3,589
64,443
12
60,841
626.54
3,632
13
60,916
680.48
3,584
65,180
13
61,530
680.48
3,627
14
61,604
735.47
3,577
65,916
14
62,217
735.47
3,620
15
63,414
791.53
3,647
67,853
15
64,028
791.53
3,690
16
64,102
848.65
3,639
68,589
16
64,716
848.65
3,681
17
64,893
906.83
3,636
69,436
17
65,507
906.83
3,679
18
65,684
966.07
3,632
70,282
18
66,298
966.07
3,675
19
66,475
1,026.38
3,627
71,129
19
67,089
1,026.38
3,670
20
67,289
1,087.75
3,622
71,999
20
67,903
1,087.75
3,665
21
68,080
1,150.18
3,615
72,846
21
68,694
1,150.18
3,658
22
68,871
1,213.68
3,607
73,692
22
69,485
1,213.68
3,650
23
69,663
1,278.23
3,598
74,539
23
70,277
1,278.23
3,641
24
70,490
1,343.85
3,590
75,424
24
71,103
1,343.85
3,633
25
72,380
1,410.53
3,656
77,447
25
72,994
1,410.53
3,699
26
73,132
1,410.53
3,709
78,251
26
73,746
1,410.53
3,752
27
73,884
1,410.53
3,761
79,056
27
74,498
1,410.53
3,804
28
74,636
1,410.53
3,814
79,860
28
75,249
1,410.53
3,857
29
75,388
1,410.53
3,867
80,665
29
76,001
1,410.53
3,910
30
76,139
1,410.53
3,919
81,469
30
76,753
1,410.53
3,962
31
76,891
1,410.53
3,972
82,274
31
77,505
1,410.53
4,015
32
77,643
1,410.53
4,024
83,078
32
78,257
1,410.53
4,067
33
78,395
1,410.53
4,077
83,883
33
79,009
1,410.53
4,120
34
79,147
1,410.53
4,130
84,687
34
79,761
1,410.53
4,173
35
79,899
1,410.53
4,182
85,492
35
80,513
1,410.53
4,225
36
80,651
1,410.53
4,235
86,296
36
81,265
1,410.53
4,278
37
81,403
1,410.53
4,288
87,101
37
82,017
1,410.53
4,331
38
82,155
1,410.53
4,340
87,905
38
82,768
1,410.53
4,383
39
82,963
1,410.53
4,397
88,771
39
83,577
1,410.53
4,440
40
83,772
1,410.53
4,453
89,636
40
84,385
1,410.53
4,496
41
84,580
1,410.53
4,510
90,501
41
85,194
1,410.53
4,553
42
85,389
1,410.53
4,567
91,366
42
86,002
1,410.53
4,610
43
86,197
1,410.53
4,623
92,231
43
86,811
1,410.53
4,666
44
87,006
1,410.53
4,680
93,096
44
87,619
1,410.53
4,723
45
87,814
1,410.53
4,736
93,961
45
88,428
1,410.53
4,779
(A) Step - Salary placement level
(B) 2024-2025 Negotiated Base Salary
(C) Additional Salary (TRS Credit) - Statutory required payment to certified staff as additional salary. The State pays an equal
amount to the Oklahoma Teachers' Retirement System on behalf of the employee.
(D) District Paid Retirement - District paid teachers' retirement at 7% of District Paid Compensation (col E). Total retirement
amount remitted to TRS by the district is reduced by the TRS Credit (col C).
(E) District Paid Compensation - Total of columns B through D
Employees not enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall continue to receive taxable compensation in lieu of the Flexible
Benefit in the amount of $69.71 per month.
Employees who are enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall have the Flexible Benefit, equal to 100% of the HealthChoice High option
premium, credited to their 125 Plan.
NBCT Teachers will receive compensation equivalent to State funding

41

(E)
Total District
Compensation
55,512
55,992
56,472
56,953
57,433
59,242
59,863
60,486
61,108
61,730
63,736
64,363
65,100
65,837
66,573
68,509
69,246
70,093
70,939
71,785
72,656
73,502
74,349
75,196
76,081
78,103
78,908
79,712
80,517
81,321
82,126
82,930
83,735
84,540
85,344
86,149
86,953
87,758
88,562
89,427
90,292
91,158
92,023
92,888
93,753
94,618

IX. APPENDIX
9.02 COMPENSATION SCHEDULE
Moore Public Schools
Certified Compensation Schedule - 10% Group
Fiscal Year 2024 - 2025
(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

(E)
Total District
Compensation

(A)
Step

(B)
2024-2025
Base Salary

(C)
Add'l Salary
(TRS Credit)

(D)
District Paid
Retirement

(E)
Total District
Compensation

Masters + 30
Doctorate
0
52,494
60.15
3,891
56,446
0
53,317
60.15
3,672
1
52,943
103.41
3,882
56,928
1
53,766
103.41
3,660
2
53,391
145.65
3,873
57,410
2
54,214
145.65
3,649
3
53,841
188.15
3,864
57,893
3
54,664
188.15
3,638
4
54,289
233.33
3,853
58,376
4
55,112
233.33
3,625
5
55,980
278.76
3,935
60,193
5
56,803
278.76
3,697
6
56,561
325.26
3,932
60,818
6
57,385
325.26
3,692
7
57,143
372.82
3,928
61,444
7
57,965
372.82
3,685
8
57,724
421.44
3,923
62,069
8
58,547
421.44
3,677
9
58,305
471.12
3,917
62,694
9
59,128
471.12
3,668
10
60,180
521.87
4,008
64,709
10
61,153
521.87
3,759
11
60,766
573.67
4,000
65,340
11
61,740
573.67
3,748
12
61,455
626.54
3,999
66,080
12
62,428
626.54
3,743
13
62,144
680.48
3,997
66,821
13
63,117
680.48
3,738
14
62,831
735.47
3,994
67,560
14
63,805
735.47
3,731
15
64,641
791.53
4,074
69,507
15
65,616
791.53
3,802
16
65,330
848.65
4,069
70,247
16
66,305
848.65
3,793
17
66,121
906.83
4,070
71,098
17
67,095
906.83
3,790
18
66,912
966.07
4,070
71,948
18
67,886
966.07
3,786
19
67,703
1,026.38
4,070
72,799
19
68,678
1,026.38
3,781
20
68,517
1,087.75
4,069
73,674
20
69,492
1,087.75
3,777
21
69,308
1,150.18
4,067
74,524
21
70,283
1,150.18
3,770
22
70,098
1,213.68
4,063
75,375
22
71,074
1,213.68
3,762
23
70,891
1,278.23
4,058
76,227
23
71,866
1,278.23
3,752
24
71,717
1,343.85
4,054
77,115
24
72,693
1,343.85
3,745
25
73,608
1,410.53
4,130
79,148
25
74,633
1,410.53
3,814
26
74,359
1,410.53
4,186
79,956
26
75,385
1,410.53
3,866
27
75,111
1,410.53
4,243
80,765
27
76,137
1,410.53
3,919
28
75,863
1,410.53
4,300
81,573
28
76,888
1,410.53
3,972
29
76,615
1,410.53
4,356
82,382
29
77,640
1,410.53
4,024
30
77,367
1,410.53
4,413
83,190
30
78,392
1,410.53
4,077
31
78,119
1,410.53
4,469
83,999
31
79,144
1,410.53
4,130
32
78,871
1,410.53
4,526
84,807
32
79,896
1,410.53
4,182
33
79,623
1,410.53
4,583
85,616
33
80,648
1,410.53
4,235
34
80,375
1,410.53
4,639
86,424
34
81,400
1,410.53
4,287
35
81,127
1,410.53
4,696
87,233
35
82,152
1,410.53
4,340
36
81,878
1,410.53
4,752
88,041
36
82,904
1,410.53
4,393
37
82,630
1,410.53
4,809
88,850
37
83,656
1,410.53
4,445
38
83,382
1,410.53
4,866
89,658
38
84,407
1,410.53
4,498
39
84,191
1,410.53
4,926
90,528
39
85,216
1,410.53
4,555
40
84,999
1,410.53
4,987
91,397
40
86,024
1,410.53
4,611
41
85,808
1,410.53
5,048
92,266
41
86,833
1,410.53
4,668
42
86,616
1,410.53
5,109
93,136
42
87,641
1,410.53
4,724
43
87,425
1,410.53
5,170
94,005
43
88,450
1,410.53
4,781
44
88,233
1,410.53
5,231
94,874
44
89,258
1,410.53
4,838
45
89,042
1,410.53
5,292
95,744
45
90,067
1,410.53
4,894
(A) Step - Salary placement level
(B) 2024-2025 Negotiated Base Salary
(C) Additional Salary (TRS Credit) - Statutory required payment to certified staff as additional salary. The State pays an equal
amount to the Oklahoma Teachers' Retirement System on behalf of the employee.
(D) District Paid Retirement - District paid teachers' retirement at 7% of District Paid Compensation (col E). Total retirement
amount remitted to TRS by the district is reduced by the TRS Credit (col C).
(E) District Paid Compensation - Total of columns B through D
Employees not enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall continue to receive taxable compensation in lieu of the Flexible
Benefit in the amount of $69.71 per month.
Employees who are enrolled in an OSEEGIB Health Plan shall have the Flexible Benefit, equal to 100% of the Health Choice High option
premium, credited to their 125 Plan.
NBCT Teachers will receive compensation equivalent to State funding

42

57,049
57,529
58,009
58,490
58,970
60,779
61,402
62,023
62,645
63,267
65,434
66,061
66,798
67,535
68,271
70,209
70,946
71,792
72,638
73,485
74,357
75,203
76,049
76,897
77,781
79,857
80,662
81,466
82,271
83,075
83,880
84,684
85,489
86,293
87,098
87,902
88,707
89,511
90,316
91,181
92,046
92,911
93,776
94,641
95,507
96,372

IX. Appendix
9.03 Supplemental Comp Index
Index percentage based on $22,000
Bus Duty (AM & PM) (Not > 30 min. before or after
workday)
Bus Duty (AM or PM)
Hall/Parking Lot Duty (AM or PM)
Cafeteria Duty (AM or noon)
Junior Patrol/Safety Patrol
Playground Duty
Newspaper
Yearbook *
Combined Yearbook/Newspaper
Band
Assistant Band
Speech/Debate
Drama
Vocal Music
Musical Producer
Freshman Class
Sophomore Class
Junior Class
Senior Class
Honor Society
Color Guard
Key Club
Pep Club
Social Media
Student Government
Academic Competitions
Robotics Coach
STEM Coach
STEAM/Gifted Chair
Physical Education
PE Basketball (6th Grade) **
PE Archery (4th-6th) **
PE Cup Stacking (Any Grade) **
PE Walk Club (Any Grade) **
PE Track (5th-6th) **
Special Olympics Facilitator
Science Seminar
E-Sports
Youth and Government/Model UN
Moore Love Philanthropy Facilitator
Teaching an additional class period
Link Crew/FUSE
Educational Diagnostician
Psychologist
Speech Pathologist/OT/PT
American Indian Club Sponsor (Funded through
JOM)
School Nurse
Vocational Agriculture Instruction
Career Tech Co-Curricular
Etc. Related (Must be Board approved positions)
Lighthouse Coordinator
* If teacher oversees production of yearbook
** Conditional

Elementary

Junior High

High School

Index

Pay

Index

Pay

Index

Pay

0.06
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04

0.06
0.04
0.04
0.04

$1,320
$880
$880
$880

0.04
0.04

$880
$880

0.03

$1,320
$880
$880
$880
$880
$880
$0
$660

0.12
0.12
0.2
0.32

$2,640
$2,640
$4,400
$7,040

0.05

$1,100

0.22

$4,840

0.08

$1,760

0.16
0.16
0.3
0.55
0.32
0.225
0.25
0.38
0.15
0.07
0.07
0.09
0.1
0.1
0.05
0.07

$3,520
$3,520
$6,600
$12,100
$7,040
$4,950
$5,500
$8,360
$3,300
$1,540
$1,540
$1,980
$2,200
$2,200
$1,100
$1,540

0.05

$1,100

0.08
0.13
0.08

$1,760
$2,860
$1,760

0.16
0.15
0.13
0.15

$3,520
$3,300
$2,860
$3,300

0.05

$1,100

0.15
0.07
0.03
0.35

$3,300
$1,540
$660
$7,700

0.05
0.08
0.15
0.07
0.1
0.35
0.07
0.1175
0.2
0.2

$1,100
$1,760
$3,300
$1,540
$2,200
$7,700
$1,540
$2,585
$4,400
$4,400

0.064
0.033
0.15
0.05
0.03
0.1

$1,408
$726
$3,300
$1,100
$660
$2,200

0.03
0.03
0.075
0.03
0.05
0.03
0.015
0.02
0.01
0.005
0.005

$660
$660
$1,650
$660
$1,100
$660
$330
$440
$220
$110
$110

0.03

$660

0.1175
0.2
0.2

$2,585
$4,400
$4,400

0.1175
0.2
0.2

$2,585
$4,400
$4,400

0.033

$726

0.064
0.033

$1,408
$726

0.03
0.1

$660
$2,200

0.05
0.03
0.1

$1,100
$660
$2,200

43

IX. Appendix
9.03 Supplemental Comp Index
Athletics

Junior High

9th Grade

High School

Index percentage based on $22,000

Index

Pay

Index

Pay

Index

Pay

Head Football

0.250

$5,500

0.200

$4,400

0.700

$15,400

Football Assistants

0.125

$2,750

0.150

$3,300

0.300

$6,600

Offensive/Defensive Coordinators
$3,300

$7,700

0.500

$11,000

Head Basketball

0.175

$3,850

Assistant Basketball

0.125

$2,750

0.200

$4,400

Head Wrestling

0.175

$3,850

0.650

$14,300

Assistant Wrestling

0.125

$2,750

0.200

$4,400

Head Swimming (Boys or Girls)

0.200

$4,400

Head Swimming (Combined All Schools) *

0.400

$8,800

Assistant Swimming (Boys or Girls)

0.100

$2,200

Assistant Swimming (Combined Boys & Girls)

0.150

0.350

0.100

$2,200

0.200

$4,400

0.134

$2,948

0.300

$6,600

Assistant Track

0.150

$3,300

Head Cross Country (Boys or Girls)

0.175

$3,850

Head Cross Country (Combined Boys & Girls)

0.350

$7,700

Assistant Cross Country (Boys or Girls)

0.100

$2,200

Assistant Cross Country (Combined Boys & Girls)

0.200

$4,400

Head Track

0.120

$2,640

Head Baseball

0.150

$3,300

0.400

$8,800

Assistant Baseball

0.120

$2,640

0.200

$4,400

Head Volleyball

0.100

$2,200

0.300

$6,600

Assistant Volleyball

0.080

$1,760

0.150

$3,300

Head Golf

0.100

$2,200

0.110

$2,420

0.200

$4,400

Head Tennis (Boys or Girls)

0.100

$2,200

0.100

$2,200

0.150

$3,300

Head Tennis (Combined Boys & Girls)

0.120

$2,640

0.120

$2,640

0.300

$6,600

Assistant Tennis (Boys or Girls)

0.100

$2,200

Assistant Tennis (Combined Boys & Girls)

0.200

$4,400

Head Softball Fast Pitch

0.120

$2,640

0.400

$8,800

Head Softball Slow Pitch

0.120

$2,640

0.400

$8,800

Assistant Softball Fast Pitch

0.090

$1,980

0.200

$4,400

Assistant Softball Slow Pitch

0.090

$1,980

0.200

$4,400

0.300

$6,600

0.150

$3,300

0.300

$6,600

0.150

$3,300

0.050

$1,100

Athletic Trainer (for all schools)

0.550

$12,100

Assistant Athletic Trainer

0.300

$6,600

0.250

$5,500

0.350

$7,700

JV Cheer

0.185

$4,070

Assistant Cheerleaders

0.170

$3,740

Pom Pon

0.350

$7,700

JV POM

0.185

$4,070

Assistant Pom Pon

0.170

$3,740

Spirit Coordinator*

0.460

$10,120

Assistant Spirit Coordinator*

0.170

$3,740

Head Boys' Soccer

0.100

$2,200

Assistant Boys' Soccer
Head Girls' Soccer

0.100

Assistant Girls' Soccer
Special Olympics Facilitator

Athletic Facilitator

0.050

$1,100

0.260

$5,720

0.170

$3,740

Assistant High School Facilitator
Cheerleaders

*One position for the district, not per HS

44

$2,200

IX. Appendix
9.03 Supplemental Comp Index
Index percentage based on $22,000

Elementary

Junior High

Index

Pay

Site Technologists

0.25

Site Webmaster

0.035

Departmental Chairs with 4-7 teachers in the dept.
Departmental Chairs with 8 or more teachers in the
dept.
Special Ed Departmental Chairs with 4-7 teachers
in the dept.
Special Ed Departmental Chairs with 8 or more
teachers in the dept.

High School

Index

Pay

Index

Pay

$5,500

0.25

$770

0.035

$5,500

0.25

$5,500

$770

0.035

$770

0.065

$1,430

0.08

$1,760

0.15

$3,300

0.075

$1,650

0.1

$2,200

0.2

$4,400

0.075

$1,650

0.1

$2,200

0.2

$4,400

0.085

$1,870

0.12

$2,640

0.25

$5,500

0.1

$2,200

AP Coordinator
Media Specialist Coordinator

0.08

$1,760*

0.08

$1,760*

Teaching an additional class period

0.35

$7,700

0.35

$7,700

0.35

$7,700

0

$0

0

$0

0

$0

0.03

$660

0.03

$660

0.03

$660

Professional Development Chair *See Section 8.04
M.6. for Compensation
Etc. Related (Must be Board approved positions)
*One position for all Elementary and one position
for all Secondary.

45

IX.

APPENDIX

9.04

SICK LEAVE SHARING REQUEST FORM
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE CENTER
1500 S.E. 4th Street • Moore, OK 73160-8232
405.735.4249 • Fax 405.735.4392

REQUEST FOR DONATED SICK LEAVE PERSONNEL
SICK LEAVE SHARING PROGRAM
TODAY’S DATE

NAME:

EMPLOYEE ID #:

(Please Print)

SS #:

SCHOOL:

SITE #:

POSITION:
HAVE YOU OR WILL YOU EXHAUST ALL EARNED SICK LEAVE?
YES:

NO:

DATE YOU EXHAUSTED OR WILL EXHAUST ALL EARNED SICK LEAVE:
______________________________________________________________________________
HAVE YOU SUBMITTED A MEDICAL CERTIFICATION FROM A LICENSED HEALTH CARE
PRACTITIONER?
YES:

NO:

DATE YOU SUBMITTED A MEDICAL CERTIFICATE:
(Attach Medical Certificate)
EMPLOYEE SIGNATURE: _________________________________________________________

46

IX.

APPENDIX

9.05

PHSYICIAN’S STATEMENT (This form may be obtained from the site principal's/supervisor's office)

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE CENTER
1500 S.E. 4th Street • Moore, OK 73160-8232
405.735.4249 • Fax 405.735.4392

ATTENDING PHYSICIAN'S STATEMENT
Patient's Name_______________________________________________
To Whom It May Concern:
The above-named patient has been under my care from ________________
anticipated return to work date of ________________
Restrictions and/or comments:
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________
Signature of Attending Physician
(Please use this form if the physician's form does not include all of the above Information.)

47

IX.

APPENDIX

9.06

DISTRICT REQUEST (This form may be obtained from the site principal's/supervisor's office)

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE CENTER
1500 S.E. 4th Street • Moore, OK 73160-8232
405.735.4249 • Fax 405.735.4392

TO: ALL PERSONNEL
FROM: HEAD OF HUMAN RESOURCES
DATE:
SICK LEAVE SHARE PROGRAMS (ARTICLE 5.01 CERTIFIED/SEC. 5.08 SUPPORT). THIS PROGRAM
ALLOWS CERTIFIED/SUPPORT EMPLOYEES TO SHARE THEIR SICK LEAVE WITH A FELLOW EMPLOYEE
WHO HAS EXHAUSTED ALL OF HIS/HER LEAVE DURING A QUALIFIED SEVERE ILLNESS.
_________________________________________________IS IN NEED OF LEAVE THROUGH THIS
PROGRAM. THE SUPERINTENDENT OR DESIGNEE HAS DETERMINED THAT THE NEED IS VALID AND
THAT THIS EMPLOYEE HAS MET THE CRITERIA ESTABLISHED THROUGH THIS PROGRAM.
PLEASE REFER TO TEAM/ESPM NEGOTIATED CONTRACTS (ARTICLE 5.01 CERTIFIED / SEC. 5.08
SUPPORT) FOR THE GUIDELINES AND PROVISIONS OF THIS PROGRAM. IF YOU QUALIFY AND WOULD
LIKE TO DONATE HOURS OF SICK LEAVE TO THIS INDIVIDUAL PLEASE FILL OUT NECESSARY PAPER
WORK AND RETURN IT TO THE ADMINISTRATION BUILDING HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT.
IF YOU SHOULD HAVE ANY QUESTIONS OR NEED ADDITIONAL INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT the
Personnel Leave Clerk in the Administrative Service Center (735-4200) by_________________________.
(Deadline Date)
There is a NEED - I hope you will respond.
Thank you in advance for your help in this matter.
"'*PLEASE POST**
FOR ALL PERSONNEL TO SEE

48

IX.

APPENDIX

9.07

DONATION FORM

CERTIFIED PERSONNEL / SUPPORT PERSONNEL

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE CENTER
1500 S.E. 4th Street • Moore, OK 73160-8232
405.735.4249 • Fax 405.735.4392

TODAY’S DATE

_

DONATING EMPLOYEE’S NAME:

DONATING EMPLOYEE’S ID #:

SCHOOL:

SITE:

POSITION:

NUMBER OF HOURS TO BE DONATED:

NAME OF DISTRICT EMPLOYEE TO RECEIVE DONATED DAYS

DONATING EMPLOYEE’S SIGNATURE:

_

49

X.

I.

PROCEDURAL AGREEMENT

PURPOSE
1.1

II.

III.

IV.

MOORE PUBLIC SCHOOLS
THE EDUCATION ASSOCIATION OF MOORE
PROCEDURAL AGREEMENT

1160

The Board of Education of the Moore Public Schools and The Education Association of Moore recognize
the need for an orderly process of communication for administering employer/employee relations that
conform to state law at 70 O.S. sections 509.1 et seq.

RECOGNITION
2.1

This agreement is made and entered into by and between The Education Association of Moore,
hereinafter termed the "Association," and the Board of Education of the Moore Public Schools, hereinafter
termed the "Board."

2.2

The Board hereby recognizes the Association as the exclusive representative for the bargaining unit
consisting of all employees who are required by the position in which they are employed to be licensed or
certified as teachers or resident teachers and who do not hold supervisory authority with respect to other
teachers. Those excluded from the bargaining unit include administrators, directors, coordinators, and
supervisors. The Board agrees not to negotiate with any individual member of the bargaining unit for the
duration of this agreement. Further, no individual member of the bargaining unit shall negotiate with the
Board except through his/her duly recognized bargaining representative.

SCOPE OF BARGAINING
3.1

The Board and the Association agree to negotiate in good faith on wages, hours, fringe benefits and other
terms and conditions of employment.

3.2

The Board retains and reserves unto itself, without limitations, all powers, rights and authority conferred
upon and vested in it by state and federal law, including the right to make policy, rules and regulations
that are not inconsistent with any law or the negotiated agreement.

NEGOTIATIONS PROCEDURES
4.1

Negotiation Teams
The Board and the Association shall each designate in writing the names of not more than six persons
who shall serve as their respective representatives for negotiations pursuant to the provisions of this
agreement. Each party shall also designate the person on their teams who will serve as spokesperson.

4.2

Opening Negotiations
Between April l and April 30th of each school year, if either the Association or the Board desires there to
be negotiations for the ensuing year, that party shall submit a written request to the other party for
negotiations to commence. If no such request is made during the above time period, negotiations will not
take place for the ensuing school year.
The first negotiations session to exchange contract proposals shall occur on a mutually agreeable date
not more than thirty (30) days from the date of the written request to open negotiations.
The Association and the Board shall submit all of their negotiations proposals at the first session.
Subsequent proposals may only be submitted upon mutual agreement of the parties. Any non-monetary
articles that are not opened for negotiations shall remain unchanged for the ensuing school year.
A mutually acceptable meeting date to begin bargaining shall be set no more than thirty (30) calendar
days from the date of proposal change.

4.3

1160
Negotiations Sessions
Only members of the respective negotiation teams may be present during negotiations sessions. Other
parties may be permitted to be present only by mutual agreement of the parties.
50

No recordings or official transcripts shall be made without mutual agreement of the parties.
Negotiations will be conducted at the times, dates, and places mutually agreed to by the parties. The
time, date and places of subsequent sessions will be set by mutual agreement of the parties prior to the
close of each negotiation session.
Negotiations meetings shall be scheduled at times which will not interfere with the teacher workday and
the educational programs of the district.
4.4

Tentative Agreement
Both parties agree it is their mutual responsibility to empower their respective representatives the
necessary authority to make proposals, to consider proposals and counter-proposals in the course of
negotiations, and to reach tentative agreements subject to ratification by the Board and the Members of
the Bargaining Unit.
When tentative agreement is reached on any item, it shall be reduced to writing and signed and dated by
the spokespersons of each team. When tentative agreement is reached on all items, they shall be
submitted first to the Members of the Bargaining Unit for ratification and then to the Board for ratification.

4.5

V.

Access to Information
The Board shall provide the Association with up-to-date school district financial information. The district
shall also provide certified personnel salary placement data to the Association.

IMPASSE
5.1

If negotiations are not successfully concluded by the first day of school, an impasse shall exist. At any
earlier time following its initial negotiation either party may declare an impasse, or by mutual agreement of
the parties the date for declaring impasse may be extended beyond the first day of school.
Within two (2) days of such declaration, the parties may, by mutual agreement, request the services of
the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.
If the mediation process has been utilized and has failed to bring about agreement on all items, or if the
mediation process was not utilized, the unresolved items shall be submitted to fact finding as provided by
state law.

VI.

SEVERABILITY
6.1

VII.

If any provision of this agreement or application of the agreement to any employee covered hereby shall
be found contrary to law, then all other provisions or applications of the agreement shall continue in full
force and effect.

DURATION OF PROCEDURAL AGREEMENT
7.1

This agreement shall continue in effect for successive fiscal year periods unless a successor agreement
is mutually agreed upon by representatives of the Association and the Board. If either party desires to
modify, amend, or change this agreement said party shall give notice in writing by February 15 of any
calendar year. Modifying amendments or changes to this agreement can be made only as mutually
agreed upon by representatives of the Association and the Board. Any modification agreed upon shall
take precedence over any language in the prior negotiated contract concerning opening negotiations. In
the event that the Association disbands or otherwise ceases to be the recognized bargaining agent, this
agreement shall be null and void on that date of such disbanding or cessation of representation.
Reference: Negotiated Agreement

51

ARt

52

53
