AGREEMENT

01/04/2021
0971-02
20-MED-01-0023
39826

BETWEEN
CITY OF LOVELAND
AND
LOVELAND POLICE ASSOCIATION
REPRESENTING LIEUTENANTS

SERB CASE NUMBER
2020-MED-01-0023

Effective May 5, 2020 through May 1, 2023

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE
NUMBER
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

TITLE

PAGE
NUMBER

Preamble/Agreement. ......................................................................................... 1
Association Recognition .................................................................................... 1
Association Rights ............................................................................................. 1
Union Business ..................................................................................................3
Management Rights ...........................................................................................4
Probation ............................................................................................................5
Investigation and Discipline ..............................................................................5
Non-Discrimination ...........................................................................................8
Grievance Procedure ..........................................................................................8
Personnel Files ................................................................................................. 10
Seniority/Layoff and Recall ............................................................................. 11
Outside Employment .......................................................................... :............ 11
Health and Safety ............................................................................................. 12
Hours of Work and Overtime .......................................................................... 12
Unifonns and Equipment ................................................................................. 14
Personal Property ............................................................................................. 15
Wages ............................................................................................................... 15
Insurance and Longevity .................................................................................. 16
Holidays ........................................................................................................... 18
Vacation ........................................................................................................... 18
Sick Leave ........................................................................................................20
Injury Leave .....................................................................................................21
Tuition Reimbursement ...................................................................................22
Paid Absence Day ............................................................................................22
Severance .........................................................................................................22
Severability ......................................................................................................23
Waiver in Case of Emergency .........................................................................23
Wellness ...........................................................................................................24
Drug/Alcohol Testing ....... ;.............................................................................. 26
Professional Insurance .....................................................................................26
Duration ...........................................................................................................27
Signature Page .................................................................................................28

ARTICLE 1
PREAMBLE/AGREEMENT

Section 1.1. This Agreement, entered into by the City of Loveland, Ohio ("City" or
"Employer"), and the Loveland Police Association ("Union" or "Association"), has as its
purpose the following:
To comply with the requirements of Chapter 4117 of the Ohio Revised Code; and
to set forth the full and complete understandings and agreements between the
parties governing the wages, hours, terms and other conditions of employment for
those employees included in the bargaining unit as defined in this Agreement.
Section 1.2. The City, the Association, and each member of the bargaining unit agree to use
their best efforts to serve the citizens of the City of Loveland and the public in general, to see
that the public is served efficiently and with complete dedication to the interests of all citizens, to
assure that the services of the City are provided without interruption and to see that the highest
standards of integrity, in fact and in appearance, are maintained at all times.
ARTICLE2
ASSOCIATION RECOGNITION

Section 2.1. The City recognizes the Loveland Police Association as the sole and exclusive
representative for those employees of the City in the bargaining unit:
All full-time sworn Police Officers, rank of Lieutenant and above, certified May 12, 2011
by SERB in case number 1l-REP-01-0004 ..
Excluded: Police Chief, Captain, all other employees.
ARTICLE3
ASSOCIATION RIGHTS

Section 3.1. No Lockout: During the life of the Agreement, the City shall not cause, pennit, or
engage in any lockout or otherwise prevent employees from performing their regularly assigned
duties where the object thereof is to bling pressure on the employees or an employee
organization to compromise or capitulate to the City's terms regarding a labor relations dispute.
Section 3.2. Restraining Violations: If the Association claims this Section (3.1) is violated, it
may as its option, obtain an immediate arbitration healing. To do so it shall give the City wlitten
or electronic mail notice of its claim and request to the American Arbitration Association to
appoint an arbitrator to hear and decide the claim on an emergency basis. The Association shall
pay the American Arbitration Association's docketing fee. The hearing shall be held within
forty-eight (48) hours or as soon after that as possible. The parties shall not file and the
arbitrator shall not receive post hearing briefs about the issuance of an immediate restraining
order. The arbitrator shall rule from the bench and ifhe finds that this Section has been violated,
he shall immediately issue an award prohibiting continuation or resumption of the lockout. The
arbitrator shall continue the hearing (and may request post hearing briefs) on the issue of
damages. This arbitration provision does not affect the Association's right to seek direct relief,
injunctive or otherwise, in the courts or elsewhere.
1

Section 3.3. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to limit or abridge the Association's
or the City's right to seek other available remedies provided by law to address any violation of
Section 4417.1 l(A) or (B) of the O.R.C.
Section 3.4. Dues Deduction: The City agrees to deduct regular Association dues and fees at
such intervals as the Association notifies the City are proper, on a bi-weekly basis, for any
bargaining unit member voluntarily signing a written authorization for dues deduction. The
bargaining unit member shall submit the authorization to the City's payroll officer. The City
shall forward a check, for the aggregate of the dues and fees deducted, to the Association's
designated financial officer, together with an itemized list of the members for whom dues
deductions were made. The City assumes no obligation, financial or otherwise, arising out of the
provisions of this Section, and the Association hereby agrees that it will indemnify and hold the
City harmless from any liability arising out of any action taken by it or omitted by it in
compliance with or in an attempt to comply with the provisions of this Section.
Section 3.5. Association Business: Non-employee representative(s) of the Association shall be
admitted to the City's facilities for the purpose of processing grievances or attending meetings as
permitted in this Agreement. Upon arrival, the Association representative shall identify himself
to the Police Chief or the Police Chiefs designated representative. The City shall recognize one
(1) employee designated by the Association to act as Association representative for the purposes
of representation as outlined under this Agreement. In the absence of the Association
representative, an alternate will be recognized. No employee shall be recognized by the City as
an Association representative until the Association has presented the City with written
certification of that person's selection.
Rules governing the activity of Association
representatives are as follows:
Section 3.6. No official of the Association, employee or non-employee, shall interfere, interrupt,
or disrupt the normal work duties of other employees. The Association will not conduct
Association business during working hours except to the extent specifically authorized in this
Agreement.
Section 3.7. The Association shall not conduct Association activities in any work area(s)
without prior approval of the Police Chief or his designee.
Section 3.8. The Association employee official shall cease unauthorized activities immediately
upon the request of the Police Chief or his designee or upon the request of any management level
employee of the City.
Section 3.9. The Employer agrees to permit a bulletin board in the roll call room or other
suitable location for the use of employees represented by the Association if requested by the
Association.
The Employer may post on the bulletin board any notices concerning the employees covered
hereby which the Employer is required by law to post.
The Association may post on the bulletin board notices relating to recreational and social events
applicable to members of the bargaining unit, election notices, and results, notices of
membership meeting related to Association business, or notices related to the affairs of
bargaining unit members.
2

No obscene, immoral, unethical or vituperative matter shall be posted. The bulletin board shall
be maintained in a neat and orderly manner.
ARTICLE4
UNION BUSINESS

Section 4.1. The Loveland Police Association is authorized to select one (1) representative and
one (1) alternate to conduct approved Association business for the bargaining unit.
Section 4.2. A pool of time donated by the bargaining unit members from their accrued vacation
or compensatory time balances shall be established to compensate members for time spent on
union business on an hour for hour basis. Hours from the current pool shall be carried over to
the pool established in this Section. If the representative has reached the maximum allowable
accrual of compensatory time, the hours deducted from the pool shall be converted to cash and
paid to the representative at his or her regular hourly rate of pay. Time spent on Union business
during working hours shall be considered as hours worked, but shall not be calculated at the
overtime rate. The maximum amount of accumulated hours in the Union pool shall not exceed
two hundred (200) hours. Upon approval of the Union and notice to the Employer, these hours
are to be used for labor negotiations or handling grievances. These hours will be used by the
duly elected LP A associates or the grievant for hours actually spent in handling grievances,
negotiations or other agreed labor related affairs. Accumulated pool hours will carry over from
year to year.
Section 4.3. At the discretion of the Chief of Police, the Association may designate one (1)
representative to work on Association business during working hours. Such time shall be
deducted from the "pool" established in 4.2 on an hour for hour basis. The Chief of Police has
discretion regarding the use of this time and the time of day when it is used. Divisional
equipment may be used, with the exception of postage and long distance telephone calls.
Section 4.4. The Association may utilize the aforementioned provisions 4.1 and 4.3 by having
the Association representative in the bargaining unit notify the Chief as soon as possible of the
need for such leave, but no less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the commencement of said
leave, and provided that no other bargaining unit member be on leave or vacation at the same
time.
Section 4.5. An Association representative who conducts Association business relating to
grievances that is not during their regular duty hours shall be credited with compensatory time on
an hour for hour basis from the pool, unless the representative has reached the maximum
allowable accrual of compensatory time in which case the representative shall be paid for the
time spent at his or her regular hourly rate of pay.
Section 4.6. The Association representatives who attend negotiations shall be compensated at
their regular rate for their scheduled duty hours during which they attend to such matters. For
any time spent in preparation for and during negotiations that is not during their regular duty
hours, the Association representative shall be credited compensatory time on an hour for hour
basis from the "pool." At the end of the negotiating session, the Association representative shall
return to his/her regular assignment if the session ends before the end of the regularly scheduled
shift.

3

Section 4.7. The Association Representative shall be responsible for notifying the Employer of
the names of the negotiating team members.
The Association Representative may substitute Stewards after proper election or appointment as
necessary and prior notice to the Employer.
Section 4.8. The Employer may create any necessary administrative process to account for
accumulated pool hours they may deem necessary.
Section 4.9. The Employer shall grant sixteen (16) hours of "administrative" leave per year to
each the Union Steward and the Alternate Steward to attend Union sponsored training.
ARTICLES
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Section 5.1. Reserved Rights: This section, and any other provision in this Agreement relating
to management rights, is solely intended to supplement the rights of management granted in
Section 4117.08 of the Ohio Revised Code. This does not constitute bargaining about any of the
rights protected by Section 4117.08 and is not a waiver of the City's right to refuse to bargain
about any and all of the rights contained in that section except to the extent that these rights are
expressly modified by this Agreement. The management and direction of the affairs of the City
are retained by the City. This includes, but is not limited to: the selection, transfer, assignment
and layoff of police officers; the making, amending and enforcement of reasonable work rules
and regulations; the securing of the revenues of the City; the exercise of all functions of
government granted to the City by the constitution and statutes of the State ,of Ohio and the City
Charter; the determination from time to time as to what services the City shall perfonn; the
purchasing and maintaining of adequate and safe equipment; the detennination of the number of
hours per day or week any operation may be carried on; the selection and determination of the
number and types of police officers required; the establishment of training programs and
upgrading requirements for employees; the establishment and the changing of work schedules
and assignments; the contracting for the performance of such work as the City determines
advisable and the taking of such other measures as the City and/or management may determine
to be necessary for the orderly and efficient operation of the City; and the determination of the
size and composition of the work force. The City will not use this Section to contravene
individual rights granted by this Agreement or otherwise by law. The City retains all rights
except to the extent this agreement specifically and expressly provides to the contrary. This
section is not intended to prohibit the Association from bargaining about matters affecting the
wages, tenns or conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees.
Section 5.2. No Strike: During the term of this Agreement, the Association shall not, for any
reason, authorize, cause, engage in, sanction, or assist in any sick call work stoppage, strike,
sympathy strike, slowdown, or any other concerted activity which would interrupt the operations
or services of the City. This Section is for the benefit of the City and the public it serves, and is
in addition to all other rights provided them by law.
Section 5.3. Association Responsibility: The Association will use its best efforts to prevent any
violation of this Section and to stop any violation if one occurs. If there is a violation of this
Section, the Association will publicly denounce the strike and will provide the City with written
notice that the strike is not authorized, is in violation of this Agreement, and is not to be honored.
4

If the Association carries out its obligations under this Section, it shall have no financial liability
for the violation.
Section 5.4. Employee Discipline: The City shall have the right to discharge, demote, suspend
or otherwise discipline employees for violation of section 5.2. An employee disciplined under
this section may file a grievance.
Section 5.5. Restraining Violations: If the City claims this section is violated, it may at its
option obtain an ilmnediate arbitration hearing. To do so it shall give the Association written or
electronic mail notice of its claim and request the American Arbitration Association to appoint
an arbitrator to hear and decide the claim on an emergency basis. The City shall pay the
American Arbitration Association's docketing fee. The hearing shall be held within forty-eight
(48) hours or as soon as after that as possible. The parties shall not file and the arbitrator shall
not receive post hearing briefs about the issuance of an immediate restraining order. The
arbitrator shall rule from the bench and, if he finds that this section has been violated, he shall
immediately issue an award prohibiting continuation or resumption of the strike. The arbitrator
shall continue the hearing (and may request post hearing briefs) on the issue of damages. This
arbitration provision does not affect the City's right to seek direct relief, injunctive or otherwise,
in the courts or elsewhere.
ARTICLE 6
PROBATION

Section 6.1. Newly promoted employees shall be on probation for the first twelve (12) months
of active continuous employment in the new position. During that time, the City may demote
them to their previous position at its discretion, and the demotion will not be subject to the
grievance or arbitration procedure or any other review. The City and the Union can mutually
agree to extend the probation for an additional six (6) months.

ARTICLE7
INVESTIGATION AND DISCIPLINE

Section 7.1. Employees who have completed their probationary period may be discharged,
suspended, demoted or otherwise disciplined for just cause. Progressive discipline shall take into
account the nature of the violation, the employee's record of discipline, and the employee's
record of performance and conduct.
The Employer reserves the right to impose, in its sole discretion, the level of discipline it
_deems appropriate for the offense committed. Forms of disciplinary action are as follows:
A.

Verbal warning and/or reprimand;

B.

Written reprimand;

C.

Loss of vacation or sick leave time or holiday compensatory time but only at the option
of the Chief of Police and with the concurrence of the employee;

D.

Suspension without pay;
5

E.

Discharge from employment.

Section 7.2. No employee shall have the right to a Pre-disciplinary Conference for those
disciplinary actions set forth in Subsections 7.l(A) through 7.l(B), above. Written reprimands
may be appealed to Step 3 of the grievance procedure, but are not subject to arbitration.
Section 7.3. No employee who has completed his/her probationary period shall be disciplined in
the manner set forth in Subsections 7.l(C) through 7.l(E) , above, without being given the
opportunity to offer an explanation of the alleged misconduct at a Pre-disciplinary Conference.
Section 7.4. The Employer may, at its sole discretion, pending the investigation of charges,
place the employee on paid administrative leave.
Section 7.5. Any investigative questioning regarding charges of misconduct which could result
in the employee being disciplined in any manner set forth in Section 7.1 above, shall be
undertaken as follows:
A.

Questioning shall take place during working hours, if practical, at a place designated by
the Employer. Questioning shall not take place at the employee's residence without
his/her prior consent;

B.

The employee shall be infonned of the nature of the investigation before any questioning
commences, if the investigation is the result of a citizen complaint, the employee shall be
informed of the general allegation and the alleged facts;

C.

In the event that the employee is being questioned only as a witness, he/she shall be so
advised prior to the commencement of any questioning; and

D.

Prior to any investigatory interview, the employee will be advised of his or her right to
union representation. The employee may request the presence of an Association and/or
legal representative, in which case questioning may be postponed for up to twenty-four
(24) hours (or any other mutually agreed time) in order that the representative may be
present. The employee is only entitled to the presence of a union representative,
including a steward, not the preferred representative.

E.

The employee shall be advised of his/her "Garrity" rights.

F.

The member shall receive a copy of the Departmental or Administrative decision as to the
investigation.

G.

A complete record, either written, taped or transcribed, shall be kept of the complete
interview of the member, including noting all recess periods. A copy of the record shall
be available to the member or his counsel upon request. This Subsection applies only to
Section 7.1 (C) through (E).

Section 7.6. Any employee being questioned by the Employer or any of its agents or
representatives for any reason relating to an incident which has been captured via video and/or
audio recording must be advised, if it is known to the Employer, that the incident has been
captured via video and/or audio recording and, the employee shall have the right to review the
recording prior to being questioned for all non-criminal conduct.
6

Section 7.7. In the event that the Employer, its agent or representative, determines that an
employee's conduct may indeed warrant disciplinary action as set forth in Subsections 7.l(C)
through 7.1 (E), above, the Employer shall schedule a Pre-disciplinary Conference. The
conference shall be scheduled no later than sixty (60) days following the beginning of the
internal investigation, except where a criminal investigation is pending. However, where the
circumstances of the alleged misconduct are unique and/or where the investigation process has
involved delay, the conference date may be delayed for up to an additional thirty (30) days.
(When the last day of the said sixty [60] and/or additional thirty [30] days falls on a Saturday,
Sunday or bargaining unit holiday, the conference shall be held on the following Employer
business day.)
Section 7.8. Not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the scheduled starting time of the Predisciplinary Conference, the Employer will provide to the employee a written outline of the
charges which are the basis for the disciplinary action and a disclosure of evidence and materials
which it intends to be used at said Conference. The employee and/or his/her representative will
disclose any evidence and materials which he/she intends to use at the Conference twenty-four
(24) hours prior to the date thereof.
Section 7.9. At the time that the employee receives the written outline of charges, he/she must
choose to: 1) appear at the Conference to present an oral or written statement in his/her defense;
or 2) appear at the Conference and have a chosen representative present an oral or written
statement in defense of the employee; or 3) elect in writing to waive the opportunity to have a
Pre-disciplinary Conference. Failure of the employee to elect and exercise one of the options
will be deemed a selection of Option 3.
Section 7.10. At the Pre-disciplinary Conference, both the Employer and the employee may
•question each other, present testimony, introduce and question witnesses, and introduce
documents. The Conference may, at the option of the Employer, be taped or attended by a court
reporter. At the party's expense, either party may tape the proceedings and/or retain a court
reporter for transcription of the proceedings. Tapes and/or court reporter transcripts shall be
made available to the opposing party at cost. The employee may be represented by the
Association and/or legal counsel approved by the Association at the Conference. All parties
providing testimony at the Conference shall be sworn and the employee shall be infonned that
refusal to respond and/or responding untruthfully may result in further disciplinary action.
Section 7.11. After the Pre-disciplinary Conference the hearing officer shall have-fourteen-(-1-41-calendar days or any other mutually agreeable time to submit a written report of his/her findings.
Section 7.12. The City Manager shall receive the hearing officer's findings and take, within
fourteen (14) calendar days, such disciplinary action as he/she deems appropriate. A copy of the
hearing officer's findings shall be attached to the official's notice of discipline to the employee.
Section 7.13. Records of verbal warnings and/or reprimands shall cease to have force and effect
twelve (12) months following their effective date, provided no intervening discipline has
occurred. Records of written reprimands shall cease to have force and effect eighteen (18)
months from their effective date, provided no intervening discipline has occurred. Records of
suspension shall cease to have force and effect thirty-six (36) months from their effective date,
provided no intervening discipline has occun-ed. At the request of the member, expired
discipline shall be placed in an envelope within the personnel file and marked "expired
7

discipline."
For any record of discipline for theft; falsification of records; dishonesty; destruction of
Employer records; or mistreatment of other employees, the disciplinary actions shall remain in
full force and effect for sixty (60) months.
Expired records of discipline are admissible to refute any argument by the employee or Union
that the employee's work record is clean.
Section 7.14. A supervisor's supplemental log (SSL) is not considered a form of discipline, but
may be used to give notice to the employee of certain conduct and expectations.

ARTICLES
NON-DISCRIMINATION

Section 8.1. The provisions of this Agreement shall be applied equally to employees of the
bargaining unit without discrimination as to age, sex, race, color, religion, military status, genetic
information, sexual orientation, disability or national 01igin.
Section 8.2. The Employer agrees not to interfere with the rights of the employees to become
members of the Association, and there shall be no disparate treatment, interference, restraint or
coercion by the Employer or any representative of the Employer against any employee because
of Association membership or because of any legal employee activity in any official capacity on
behalf of the Association.
Section 8.3. The Association agrees not to interfere with the rights of employees to not become
members of the Association, and there shall be no disparate treatment, restraint, or coercion by
the Association or its representatives against any employee exercising the right to abstain from
membership in the Association or involvement in Association activities.
ARTICLE9
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Section 9 .1. A grievance is a complaint that the City has violated this Agreement. All
grievances shall be handled exclusively as set forth in this procedure. Grievances involving
suspension, demotion or termination must be filed directly at Step 3 within seven (7) calendar
days of the written notice of discipline; the parties may mutually agree to waive Step 3 and
permit a filing directly to arbitration.
Section 9.2. All grievances must be processed at the proper step in the progression in order to be
considered at the subsequent steps. Any employee may withdraw a grievance at any point by
submitting in writing a statement to that effect, or by permitting the time requirements at any
step to lapse without further appeal. Any grievance not answered by the City's representatives
within the stipulated time limits may be advanced by the employee to the next step in the
grievance procedure. All time limits may be extended upon mutual consent of the parties.
Section 9 .3. It is the mutual desire of the City and the Association to provide for the prompt
adjustment of grievances in a fair and reasonable manner, with a minimmn of intenuption of
work schedules. Eve1y reasonable effort shall be made by both the City and the Association to
resolve grievances at the earliest step possible. In the furtherance of this objective, the following
8

procedure shall be followed:
Step 1. In order for a grievance to receive consideration under this procedure, the
aggrieved employee, with an appropriate Association representative, if the former
desires, must identify the grievance in writing to his supervisor within seven (7) calendar
days of the occurrence of the incident giving rise to the grievance, or within seven (7)
calendar days of becoming aware of the incident giving rise to the grievance. In no case
may a grievance be filed more than forty (40) calendar days after the occurrence. The
supervisor shall schedule a meeting with the grievant and his representative, if any,
within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the grievance. The supervisor shall
investigate and respond in writing to the grievant or Association representative within
seven (7) calendar days following the meeting.
Step 2. If the grievance remains unsettled, it may be presented to the Police Chief or his
or her designee within seven (7) calendar days after the supervisor's response. The
Police Chief or his or her designee shall schedule a meeting between the parties within
ten (10) calendar days. The Police Chief or his or her designee shall have fourteen (14)
calendar days following the meeting in which to respond.
Step 3. If the grievance remains unsettled, it may be presented to the City Manager
within seven (7) calendar days after the Police Chiefs response. The City Manager or
his or her designee shall schedule a meeting between the parties within ten (10) calendar
days. The City Manager shall have fourteen (14) calendar days following the meeting in
which to respond.
Section 9.4. If the grievance is not resolved within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the
response at Step 3, the grievant may file a written notice to the City of intent to submit the
grievance to arbitration. The demand for arbitration must be filed with the American Arbitration
Association (AAA) or, with the agreement of both parties, with the Arbitration and Mediation
Service (AMS). The Loveland Police Association shall be the sole judge as to whether such case
shall, in fact, be appealed to arbitration. The arbitrator shall be selected under the rules of the
American Arbitration Association (AAA), unless the City and the Association mutually agree
upon an arbitrator or to follow the rules for selection of the Arbitration and Mediation Service
(AMS). The decision of the arbitration shall be binding on both the City and the Association.
The arbitrator shall not have the power to add to or subtract from or to modify this Agreement.
The costs of the services of the arbitrator and the cost of obtaining a panel of neutrals if any,
shall be paid equally by the City and the Association. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the
Association from seeking enforcement of any arbitration award in a court of competent
jurisdiction, provided all administrative remedies have been exhausted.
Section 9.5. No more than one (1) grievance shall be placed before an arbitrator at any one
hearing and in no instance shall there be multiple (two [2] or more) grievances heard by an
arbitrator unless it is mutually agreed to waive this provision.
Section 9.6. All grievances must contain the following information to be considered:
1.

Aggrieved employee's name and signature

2.

Aggrieved employee's classification
9

3.

Date grievance was filed in writing

4.

Date and time grievance occurred

5.

Where grievance occurred

6.

Description of incident giving rise to the grievance

7.

Sections of Agreement violated

8.

Desired remedy to resolve grievance

9.

A grievance may be brought by any member of the bargaining unit. Where a
group of bargaining unit members desire to file a grievance involving a situation
affecting each member in the same manner, one (1) member selected by such
group may process the grievance as a class action grievance, provided each
employee desiring to be included in the class action grievance signs the grievance.
If more than one (1) employee is involved in a grievance, one (1) of them shall be
selected as spokesman.

Section 9.7. The Association, through its staff representative, may file grievances claiming
violations of the dues deduction clause, or any claimed violation of contract rights which accrue
solely to the Association as a labor organization and not to individual employees. Such
grievances shall be initially filed within the time limits of Step 1.
Section 9.8. The employees may attend Steps 1, 2 and 3 of the grievance procedure without loss
of pay as a result of necessary attendance during regularly scheduled working hours. The
employee's representative (if a City employee) may also attend without such loss of pay at Step
1, 2 and 3.
ARTICLE 10
PERSONNEL FILES

Section 10.1. Each employee may inspect his personnel file maintained by the City at any
reasonable time, and shall, upon request, receive a copy of any documents contained therein. An
employee shall be entitled to have a representative of his choice accompany him during such
review.
Section 10.2. If an unfavorable statement or notation is in the file, the employee shall be given
the right to place a statement of rebuttal or explanation in his file. No anonymous material of
any type shall be included in the employee's personnel file.
Section 10.3. The City shall promptly comply with the Ohio Public Records Act and applicable
case law. Because Supervisor's Supplemental Logs or any similar item used to document the
conduct of a member are a public record, any member, upon request, shall be granted access to
such documents consistent with applicable law.

10

ARTICLE 11
SENIORITY/LAYOFF AND RECALL

Section 11.1. When the City determines that a long-term layoff or job abolishment is necessary,
it shall notify the affected employees ten (10) days in advance of the effective date of the layoff
or job abolishment. Employees will be notified of the City's decision to implement any shortterm layoff, lasting seventy-two (72) hours or less, as soon as possible. The City, upon request
from the Association, agrees to discuss, with representatives of the Association, the impact of the
layoff on bargaining unit employees.
Section 11.2. Layoffs shall be in inverse order of seniority with the least senior employee being
laid off first. Part-time employees shall be laid off prior to the layoff of full-time employees. A
Sergeant who has been laid off and who has more overall seniority as defined in Section 11.6 of
this Article may also bump the least senior Police Officer and assume the lower rank at the
applicable rate of pay for Police Officer, provided that he or she complies with the notice
requirements and time limits set forth in the collective bargaining agreement for Sergeants.
Section 11.3. Employees who are laid off shall be placed on a recall list for a period of two (2)
years. If there is a recall, employees who are still on the recall list shall be recalled in the inverse
order of their layoff. Any recalled employee requiring additional training to meet the position
qualifications in existence at the time of recall must satisfactorily complete the additional
training requirements within twelve (12) months of recall. Any training required by this Section
shall be at the City's expense and time.
Section 11.4. Notice of recall shall be sent to the employee by certified mail. The City shall be
deemed to have fulfilled its obligations by mailing the recall notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the last mailing address provided by the employee.
Section 11.5. The recalled employees shall have ten (10) calendar days following the date of
receipt of the recall notice to notify the City of his intention to return to work and shall have
fourteen (14) calendar days following the receipt date of the recall notice in which to report for
duty, unless a different date for returning to work is otherwise specified in the notice.
Section 11.6. For the purpose of this Article, seniority shall be computed on the basis of
uninterrupted length of continuous full-time service in the Loveland police department.
ARTICLE 12
OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT

Section 12.1. All outside employment must be approved by the Police Chief. If the Police Chief
denies permission for outside employment, he shall set forth his reasons for doing so in writing
and such writing shall be furnished to the employee(s) affected by such a denial. Denial of
permission to engage in outside employment shall not be based on arbitrary or capricious
grounds.

11

ARTICLE 13
HEALTH AND SAFETY

Section 13.1. The City will use its best efforts to keep City-owned police vehicles or other
equipment in a safe and healthful condition, and no employees shall be required to exercise their
responsibilities in unsafe equipment or vehicles.
An unsafe City-owned police vehicle or other equipment for the purposes of this Article is
defined as that which is in such a condition of damage or disrepair that it will no longer safely
perfonn the function for which it was intended.
Section 13.2. The Association and/or individual employees may raise safety issues with their
immediate supervisor. If the immediate supervisor does not respond within a reasonable amount
of time as detennined by the degree of danger, the matter may be presented to the Chief of Police
for final resolution.
Section 13.3. This provision is not applicable to those activities or events which are an inherent
part oflaw enforcement responsibilities.
Section 13.4. Employees must comply with all safety rules and regulations in the operation and
care of such City-owned police vehicles or equipment.

ARTICLE 14
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME

Section 14.1. Employee's scheduled pay period shall consist of eighty (80) hours.
Section 14.2. Employees shall have their days off scheduled consecutively, except as a result of
the changing off day schedule. Hours of work shall include five (5) consecutive eight (8) hour
days, four (4) consecutive ten (10) hour days, or no more than three (3) consecutive twelve (12)
hour days. Ten (10) hour and/or twelve (12) shift assignments may be converted to eight (8) hour
shifts for the purpose of scheduling training in excess of three (3) days.
Section 14.3. Employees shall be paid overtime at one and one-half (1 ½) times their regular rate
of pay for hours worked in excess of their regular scheduled work day, or in excess of eighty
(80) hours in the pay period for sworn personnel.
Section 14.4. Employees shall not be scheduled to work for more than sixteen (16) continuous
hours, excluding court appearances. If due to the qua1ierly shift rotation, an employee would be
scheduled for two (2) continuous twelve (12) hour shifts, the employee shall instead work a shift
outside their regular schedule during the same pay period.
Section 14.5. All hours in active pay status shall be counted for the purposes of overtime
premium. Hours worked shall include paid time off only up to the regular scheduled work day or
work period. There shall be no pyramiding of overtime.
Section 14.6. Employees may exchange/swap shifts or days off, or work an additional day for an
alternate day off with prior supervisory approval.
12

Section 14. 7. No overtime premiums shall be paid as a result of any shift, or days off swapping.
Section 14.8. All shift swapping or alternate days off must have the prior approval of the Chief
of Police or his designate and must comply with the Fair Labor Standards Act guidelines.
Section 14.9. Employees who must attend court as part of their duties, outside their regularly
scheduled hours of work, shall notify their supervisor as soon as possible.
The supervisor shall determine if the employee is to remain on duty between the last preceding,
or the next shift and the time of the court appearance.
Section 14.10. Any employee required to appear on off duty time before any court for matters
pertaining or arising from the employee's official duties, when such appearance does not abut
either end of his/her regularly scheduled shift, shall be compensated for at least three (3) hours of
overtime, paid at the overtime rate of one and one-half (1 ½) the employee's regular rate of pay,
notwithstanding the actual duration of the appearance. If the court time lasts more than three (3)
hours, the employee shall be paid at the overtime rate for all hours actually worked. Court travel
time shall be included, as measured from the Loveland Safety Center. If the court appearance is
cancelled one (1) hour or more before the employee was scheduled to report, no overtime is due.
If the court appearance is cancelled less than an hour before the employee is scheduled to report,
but the employee is not yet en route, the employee shall receive one (1) hour of pay at the
overtime rate. If the employee is en route at the time the appearance is cancelled, he or she shall
receive two (2) hours of pay at the overtime rate.
Section 14.11. Employees called back to work at a time disconnected from their regular hours of
work for any reason not due to the employee's fault or neglect, will receive a minimum of three
hours pay at the overtime rate, or will receive continuous pay from the time they last worked, or
the next time they work at the City's option, at the overtime rate. "Call back" does not include
any work time disconnected from the regular hours of work that is not requested or initiated by
the Employer. If the call back is cancelled one (1) hour or more before the employee was
scheduled to report, no overtime is due. If the call back is cancelled less than an hour before the
employee is scheduled to report, but the employee is not yet en route, the employee shall receive
one (1) hour of pay at the overtime rate. If the call back is en route at the time the appearance is
cancelled, he or she shall receive two (2) hours of pay at the overtime rate. Any member subject
to telephone consultations for work related issues as a result of assigned duties shall receive a
minimum of thirty (30) minutes pay at the overtime rate for any telephone consultations required
while off-duty that exceed six (6) minutes in length. Any telephone consultations exceeding
thirty (30) minutes in length will be compensated at the appropriate rate for the actual time of the
telephone consultation.
Section 14.12. If the Employer exercises the management rights provided for in Section 5.1 of
this Agreement and determines that a long tenn schedule change is necessary, a thirty (30) day
written notice of such long term schedule change shall be posted, and a copy shall be given to the
designated Association employee representatives.
Short term schedule changes lasting fourteen (14) calendar days or less may be implemented by
the Employer upon giving no less than seventy-two (72) hours written notice to the affected
employee(s).
13

Nothing in this article shall preclude the Employer from implementing any emergency schedule
changes or assigmnents arising from conditions beyond the control of the Employer.
Section 14.13. Employees may elect to take compensatory time in lieu of overtime
compensation as approved by the Chief. Employees may accumulate up to a maximum of eighty
(80) hours compensatory time for any combination of overtime, court time, or holiday time, or
any other earned overtime. Employees shall be pennitted to convert accrued compensatory time
to pay upon thirty (30) days written notice to the Employer one (1) time per fiscal year during the
life of this Agreement.
Section 14.14. When an employee is required to attend departmentally mandated training either
as part of a normal work day or on an overtime basis, the "hours worked" shall include training
travel time as measured from the Loveland Safety Center.

ARTICLE 15
UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT

Section 15.1. The City shall issue each newly hired employee all required uniform items. The
City will prepare and keep current a list of all items to be initially provided. Prior to any major
change in the list, the Police Chief shall notify and consult with the employee Association
representatives. The parties shall make a reasonable attempt to agree on the change prior to
implementation.
Section 15.2. Uniforms and equipment shall be replaced as necessary, determined by the Chief
or his designee.
Uniform parts and equipment will be inspected and ordered repaired or replaced as needed.
Unifonns will be cleaned and/or repaired by the city.
Section 15.3. The cleaning and repair of unifonns will be paid for by the City at a location
determined by the City.
Section 15.4. The City will pay for all alterations and repairs of uniforms necessitated by weight
loss or gain as a result of an exercise program. The employee will pay for any alterations
necessitated by weight gain, other than from an exercise program.
Section 15.5. Upon tennination of employment with the City, and prior to receipt of a final
paycheck, the employee shall return all issued equipment and unifonn paiis to the Chief of
Police or his or her designee. The employee will reimburse the City for any missing items
according to said item's depreciated value or replacement cost as applicable.
The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall receipt the employee for all equipment returned.
Section 15.6. Members assigned to the position of "Investigator" shall receive one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) clothing allowance annually for the purchase of required non-unifonn
clothing. The allowance will be pro-rated based upon the months served in the position in the
final year the member works in the position of "investigator." The annual payment shall be
made during January of each year. Newly assigned investigators shall receive five hundred
dollars ($500.00) to purchase required, non-uniform clothing within thirty (30) days of their new
14

assignment. The newly assigned member will receive the one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
allowance the subsequent January and every subsequent January while serving in that position.
ARTICLE 16
PERSONAL PROPERTY

Section 16.1. When and if an employee sustains damage or loss of personal equipment or
property while discharging his legal duties, the Employer shall reimburse the employee for
necessary repairs or replacement.
Section 16.2. Loss or damage as a result of the employee's willful or negligent mishandling will
release the Employer from any responsibility of repair or replacement.
Section 16.3. The Employer will reimburse the employee for the cost of repair of personal items
up to a maximum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). Wedding rings, watches or other personal
jewelry shall be limited to a two hundred dollar ($200.00) reimbursement.
Section 16.4. The employee shall present any damaged property for the Employer=s inspection
prior to any repairs or replacements.
Section 16.5. Repair or replacement shall be at the Employer's option.
Section 16.6. Any court-ordered restitution or any other restitution up to the amount paid under
this section shall be remitted to the Employer.
Section 16.7. In the event of damage to prescription eyeglasses, including frames, dentures or
other medical health or dental appliance, which damage occurs in the active discharge of an
employee's duties, the Employer will reimburse the employee at one hundred percent (100%) the
cost of repair or replacement.
Section 16.8. The employee shall file all appropriate Workers' Compensation forms and shall
reimburse the Employer for actual expenditures from any reimbursements received from
Workers' Compensation.
Section 16.9. Employees who are authorized to utilize their personal vehicles for official City
business such as court, training or other approved use shall be reimbursed at the approved IRS
rate per mile as measured from the Loveland Safety Center.
ARTICLE17
WAGES

Section 17.1. For the life of this Agreement, Lieutenants with less than thirteen (13) months
experience will be compensated at fourteen percent (14%) above top Patrol Officer rate of pay,
and Lieutenants with thirteen (13) or more months experience will be compensated at sixteen
percent (16%) above top Patrol Officer rate of pay.
Section 17.2. Any Lieutenant assigned by the Chief to perfonn the duties of a higher level
position (such as Deputy Chief) for four (4) or more consecutive hours in a day will receive an
additional $4.00 for each hour so assigned.
15

Section 17.3. The City has adopted the IRS "salary reduction" method regarding payroll and
pick-up contributions (P.F.D.P.F.) by Ordinance No. 1998-84.
ARTICLE 18
INSURANCE AND ANNUAL SERVICE CREDIT

Section 18.1. During the life of this Agreement, the City shall offer health insurance. Each
employee shall be eligible for individual and dependent's hospitalization and medical insurance
on the same basis as is available to all other non-bargaining unit City employees. Employees
who are covered by another health insurance plan who elect not to participate in the City's
medical insurance plan shall be eligible to receive reimbursement of one-thousand dollars
($1,000.00) annually based on their status during the open enrollment period. Those employees
electing not to participate in the City's health insurance plan shall furnish proof to the City
Manager or the City Manager's designee of other health insurance prior to receiving
reimbursement. Employees hired during an insurance year who elect to waive City coverage
shall have said reimbursement prorated. Should an employee have a qualifying event during an
insurance year and subsequently elect to participate in the City's health insurance plan, the
employee shall be responsible for reimbursing the City of Loveland on a pro-rated basis for the
previously paid incentive attributable to the same plan year.
Health insurance premium contribution levels shall be an eighty-five percent (85%) contribution
by the City and a fifteen percent (15%) contribution by the Employee.
Section 18.2. Compliance with the wellness requirements set by the health insurance consortium
in which the City participates, as provided in Section 18.3(3) of this Article, shall be deemed
sufficient to qualify the employee for the higher HSA contribution provided under Section
18.3(2) of this Article.
If the City leaves the current health insurance consortium, then the City may adopt new wellness
requirements with which employees must comply in order to receive the higher HSA
contribution under Section 18.3(2) of this Article, provided that they are the same requirements
generally applicable to City employees covered by the City's health insurance. Upon the
Union's request, the City agrees to meet and bargain with the Union about the replacement
wellness requirements for the higher HSA contribution.
Section 18.3. During the life of this Agreement, should the City offer a Health Savings Account
(HSA) health insurance option pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code (IRC), and offer a
wellness program, the City shall:
1.

Deposit for those employees taking the HSA plan but not pmticipating in the
wellness program in employees' health savings accounts no less than sixty
percent (60%) of the medical plan in-network deductible for the HSA plan
annually, on the same schedule as deposits are made to non-bargaining
employees, or the maximum allowable by the IRC, whichever is less.

2.

Deposit for those employees taking the HSA plan and participating in the
wellness program in employees' health savings accounts no less than seventy-five
percent (75%) of the medical plan in-network deductible for the HSA plan
annually, on the same schedule as deposits are made to non-bargaining
employees, or the maximum allowable by the IRC, whichever is less.
16

3.

In addition to the incentives provided in subsections 1 and 2 of this Section 18.3,
the City may impose other contribution reductions or increased premium costs on
employees who fail to comply with the wellness requirements for employees and
covered spouses imposed by any health insurance group plan or consortium in
which the City participates, provided that these penalties are (a) required by the
health insurance group plan or consortium and (b) are applicable to all other City
employees (and, where applicable, spouses) generally. The City shall provide
notice to all employees of what steps are required under this wellness program in
order to avoid the penalties required by the health insurance group plan or
consortium.

Section 18.4. During the life of this Agreement, should the City offer a Health Savings Account
(HSA) health insurance option pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code (IRC), but not offer a
wellness program, for those employees taking the HSA plan, the City shall deposit in each
employees' health savings accounts no less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the medical plan
in-network deductible for the HSA plan annually, on the same schedule as deposits are made to
non-bargaining employees, or the maximum allowable by the IRC, whichever is less.
Section 18.5. Each full-time employee shall be provided with group life insurance in an amount
equal to three (3) times the employee's base annual salary subject to the policy reduction at age
sixty-five (65). For the purpose of determining the amount of such coverage, the base annual
salary shall be that which is in effect on July 1, of each year.
Section 18.6. All full-time employees hired before December 9, 2020* (employment must be
continuous and uninterrupted) shall be allowed an annual service credit as follows:
First full calendar year of
employment

$480.00

2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
6 years

$600.00
$720.00
$840.00
$960.00
$1,080.00

*This date reflects the date the current police officer hiring list at the time of the
execution of this Agreement will expire.
Section 18.7. An employee may trade in up to eighty (80) hours of vacation or compensatory
leave time for additional cafeteria plan funds if all initial credit has been allotted for the cafeteria
plan.
Section 18.8. The City shall retain the right to change its health and life insurance carriers
provided the benefits remain identical to all other non-bargaining unit City employees.
Section 18.9. In the case of the death of any employee with more than one (1) year of
continuous service with the Employer, the accumulated but unpaid cafeteria plan funds shall be
converted to a lump sum payment, payable to the employee's beneficiary as previously
17

designated by the employee to the Employer in writing, on the official form provided by the
Employer. If there is no valid designation of beneficiary, the payment shall be made to the
employee's estate.
Section 18.10. If the maximum allowable contribution dictated by the group plan or consortium
is less than either of the amounts specified in subsections 1 or 2 of Section 18.3 and/or Section
18.4 of this Article, the City shall provide a premium credit equivalent to the difference between
the maximum allowed by the plan or consortium and the lower of the negotiated rate or the IRC
rate for each calendar year under the contract. The credit will be pro-rated and applied each pay
period the employee is enrolled in the health insurance program. Any employee terminating
coverage or employment during the insurance year will forfeit their right to the additional credit.

ARTICLE 19
HOLIDAYS

Section 19.1. The following holidays are recognized as premium holidays:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day
Good Friday
Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day
Christmas Day
Police Memorial Day

Independence Day
Labor Day
Veteran's Day
The Day After Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve
New Year's Eve

Any day adopted by City Council as a holiday for non-union personnel..
Compensation for premium holidays, whether worked or unworked is limited to the employee's
regular scheduled work hours per day.
An employee who works on a premium holiday shall receive compensation at the rate of one and
one-half (1 ½) times his hourly rate for all hours actually worked on the holiday, in addition to
the holiday pay described above. An employee may elect to receive compensatory time at the
rate of one and one-half (1 ½) times the number of hours actually worked, subject to the
provisions of Section 14.15 of this Agreement.
Section 19.2. For all holidays, those employees whose shift begins on the actual day of the
holiday shall be considered to have "worked" the holiday and shall receive the premium pay.

ARTICLE20
VACATION

Section 20.1. Each employee shall be credited with paid vacation time on January pt of each
year based upon length of service with the City as follows:
Length of Service

0-1

I

Hours of Paid Vacation
I 40 hours prorated

18

1-4 years
5-9 years
10-14 years
15 years
16 years
17 years
18 years
19 years
20 years

80hours
120 hours
140 hours
160 hours
168 hours
176 hours
184 hours
192 hours
210 hours

Employees hired into this bargaining unit with prior police service credit with an Ohio political
subdivision may be granted up to seven (7) years service credit for vacation earning purposes at
the discretion of the City Manager, based upon the employee's experience and abilities.
Employees who separate from employment with the City prior to December 31 st shall only be
paid for a pro-rated portion of their unused vacation time credited on January 1st of the year in
which they separate. If the employee has used more vacation time than the pro-rated portion
due, the excess vacation time previously paid during the current year shall be withheld from the
employee's final pay.
Section 20.2. Employees may carry over up to one (1) year's worth of vacation time entitlement
plus fifty (50) hours of their unused vacation to the next succeeding year.
Section 20.3. All vacations will be scheduled by the Police Chief, who will not arbitrarily deny
requested vacation. All vacation requests made will be granted on a first come, first served
basis, and seniority will prevail to determine requests submitted at the same time. Vacation shall
be taken in increments no smaller than one (1) hour.
Section 20.4. An employee hospitalized for twenty-four (24) hours or more while on vacation
shall, upon request and upon sufficient evidence of the hospitalization, be entitled to change his
vacation status to sick leave for all days hospitalized and any subsequent days necessary for
recovery. Upon submission of the request with evidence, vacation charged to the employee for
the duration of the illness shall be restored to his credit.
Section 20.5. In the case of the death of an active employee with more than one (1) year of
continuous service with the Employer, the employee's earned but unused vacation shall be
converted to a lump sum payment, payable to the employee's beneficiary as previously
designated by the employee to the Employer in writing, on the official form provided by the
Employer. If there is no valid designation of beneficiary, the payment shall be made to the
employee's estate, upon application by the fiduciary of the estate.
Section 20.6. If through no fault of the employee, vacation that is properly scheduled is canceled
by the Employer, the employee, at his option may elect to be paid for the scheduled but canceled
portion of his vacation, or may carry over scheduled but canceled vacation to the next year. If
the employee elects to carry over scheduled but canceled vacation, the maximum carry over, as
stated in Section 20.1 of this section, will be increased by the number of days that were
scheduled but canceled.

19

Section 20.7. Employees may elect to fund an LR.A. or approved Deferred Compensation with
wages or vacation pay. In the case of vacation pay, an employee may not use vacation leave to
fund an LR.A or Deferred Compensation more often than once per year, and a balance of eighty
(80) hours vacation must remain available to employee.

ARTICLE21
SICK LEAVE

Section 21.1. Employees shall accumulate sick leave at the rate of ten (10) hours for each full
month of service.
Section 21.2. The Chief of Police may require an employee to furnish a certificate from a
physician, dentist, or other practitioner who is treating the employee, when the employee is
absent for three (3) or more consecutive days for employees working eight (8) or ten (10) hour
schedules, when an employee is absent for two (2) or more consecutive shifts for employees
working a twelve (12) hour schedule, or a demonstrated pattern of sick leave use.
Section 21.3. Sick leave shall be granted to an employee for the following reasons:
1.

Illness or injury to the employee, or a member of the employee's immediate
family living in the employee's household, or the employee's child, mother,
father, grandmother, grandfather, or grandchild. Up to a maximum of forty (40)
working hours for each illness or injury, when the illness or injury is to a member
of the employee's immediate family. Sick leave in excess of forty (40) hours
shall be granted for the care of an ill or injured family member where the absence
would qualify under the Family and Medical Leave Act.

2.

Medical, dental or optical examination or treatment of the employee or a member
of his immediate family which requires the presence of the employee.

3.

Exposure of the employee to a contagious disease when such exposure, in the
opinion of a licensed physician, would render the employee a hazard to the health
of others, or would further jeopardize the employee's health or well-being.

4.

Death of a member of his immediate family. Sick leave may be used to a
maximum of forty (40) hours. Vacation and compensatory time may also be
used.
a.
For purposes of funeral leave only, Immediate family is defined as:
Spouse, child, mother, father, brother, sister, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, grandmother, grandfather or grandchild; and any
aunt, uncle, nephew, niece, or in-law who was at the time of their death a
permanent resident of the employee's household.
b.
Death of any other relative, not defined as a member of the employee's
immediate family, and also including the death of a close personal friend of the
employee. Sick leave may be used to a maximum of one (1) work day, unless the
employee requests and receives the Employer's advanced approval of additional
time off.
20

c.
The forty (40) hour restriction on bereavement applies to funeral leave
only. An employee requiring additional time due to related mental stress, and
with appropriate medical verification, would be pennitted to draw upon their sick
leave as necessary.
Section 21.4. Sick leave can be accumulated in an unlimited amount during the employee's
active service to the City. A maximum of 1248 sick leave hours may be utilized in the final
conversion of sick time as specified in Article 25 of this Agreement.
Section 21.5. Laid off employees who return to active duty status shall have placed to their
credit all accumulated but unused sick leave existing at the time of their layoff.
Section 21.6. Certified Sick Leave From Other Government Units. Members who have been
employed by the State of Ohio or any political subdivision, shall be credited with any certified,
unused and unpaid balance of accumulated sick leave earned in such service when such persons
are employed in this bargaining unit, provided employment with the City occurs within ten (10)
years after leaving his prior position.

ARTICLE22
INJURY LEAVE

Section 22.1. Any employee who is disabled because of any injury suffered in the actual
performance of law enforcement activities and which injury arises out of the performance of law
enforcement activities and is of such nature that would not occur to the general population, shall
receive paid injury leave for absences due to the injury which shall not be deducted from sick
leave.
Section 22.2. Injury leave will take effect on the first working day after the employee suffers
said injury.
Section 22.3. Injury leave shall be available during a period 1440 working hours from the date
of the injury. Absences beyond 1440 working hours shall be charged to the employee's earned
sick leave.
Section 22.4. The granting of injury leave is contingent upon the employee filing for Workers'
Compensation and reimbursing the Employer with benefits received for lost wages for any time
during which injury leave was provided. Reimbursement shall not exceed the amount paid as
injury leave pay. The Employer reserves the right to implement a wage continuation plan in lieu
of Workers' Compensation lost income benefits.
Section 22.5. Whenever an employee is required to leave work because of a work related injury,
he shall be paid for the remaining hours of that work day or shift at their regular rate of pay.
Such time shall not be charged to leave of any kind.
Section 22.6. An injury in the line of duty which aggravates a previous injury incun-ed in the
line of duty will be considered an independent injury.

21

Section 22.7. An employee requesting injury leave may, upon request of the Employer, submit
to an examination by the Employer's physician who shall determine the extent of the injury
leave.
Section 22.8. No injured employee shall be returned to work without the written approval of
competent medical authority.

ARTICLE23
TUITION REIMBURSEMENT

Section 23 .1. Employees shall be eligible for tuition reimbursement for courses approved in
advance by the Police Chief or the City Manager
Section 23 .2. The City shall provide reasonable assistance in scheduling time off. An employee
must maintain a passing grade average to be eligible for tuition reimbursement. No disciplinary
action will be taken against an employee who fails to maintain a passing average.
Section 23.3. Employees receiving tuition reimbursement agree to remain in the City's
employment for one (1) year after receipt of said reimbursement. Employees departing prior to
one (1) year shall reimburse the City for the cost of the tuition reimbursement.
Section 23.4. Tuition reimbursement is available for courses or classes taken at an accredited
school or university. The availability of tuition reimbursement is subject to the personnel
development needs of the City, which include that the coursework must be related to the
employee's bargaining unit classification, and upon sufficient availability of funds. In the month
of October of each agreement year, bargaining unit employees will be polled as to their
coursework intent for the following calendar year. The Employer will attempt to budget an
amount necessary to meet employee requests. Employees and the bargaining agent will be
notified in the month of December of the amount budgeted for tuition reimbursement.
ARTICLE24
PAID ABSENCE DAY

Section 24.1. An employee who does not utilize sick leave, excluding sick leave use for
bereavement leave, for any one hundred twenty (120) consecutive calendar day period shall be
entitled to one (1) paid absence day, equal to the employee's normal work day. Paid absence
days off must be requested a minimum of seven (7) calendar days in advance, and are subject to
the approval of the Employer based on work load requirements. The one hundred twenty (120)
consecutive calendar day period begins in the first day following the last incident of sick leave
usage excluding sick leave use for bereavement leave. For purposes of this section cash in of
sick leave pursuant to Section 18.3 shall not constitute utilization of sick leave.
The employee and Employer may waive the seven (7) day notice period upon mutual agreement.
The bereavement leave exclusion under this article is limited to spouse, children, mother, father,
sister, brother, mother/father-in-law, grandmother, grandfather, and grandchildren.
ARTICLE25
SEVERANCE
22

Section 25.1. Upon tennination from employment for any reason, the employee shall receive
compensation for all hours worked but unpaid, all hours credited but unpaid, as well as any
earned but unused vacation time. The City may withhold final payment for the failure to tum
back City equipment or uniforms, or for used but unaccrued vacation.
Section 25.2. Employees retiring from active police service shall convert all unused sick leave
credits at one-half(½) the value of accrued credits. The aggregate value of accrued but unused
credits shall not exceed the value of 1248 hours accrued but unused sick leave.
Section 25.3. In the event of death to an employee, any severance pay to which the employee
would have been entitled shall be made directly to the employee's beneficiary, or estate if no
beneficiary is named.
Section 25.4. In computing the amount of said payments, the rate of pay in effect on the
employee's last date of work shall be used.
Section 25.5. When a full-time officer of the Police Division, who has a minimum of fifteen (15)
years continuous, uninterrupted service with the City of Loveland retires, the City shall make his
or her service weapon and extra magazines available to him or her for purchase at the cost of one
dollar ($1.00). The City may deny this purchase if there is pending disciplinary action
punishable by dismissal, or when the City has reasonable grounds to believe that the transfer of
the weapon may pose a risk to the safety of the public. The City shall also retire the officer's
badge number and allow the retiring officer to keep his or her badge. Additionally, the City shall
collect the officer's active duty identification card and issue an identical type card indicating
"retired" in the block marked "rank."
Section 25.6. The beneficiary or the estate of an employee killed in the line of duty shall receive
one hundred percent (100%) of the aggregate amount of sick time up to a maximum of 1248
hours at the employee's rate of pay on their last day of employment.
ARTICLE26
SEVERABILITY

Section 26.1. This Agreement supersedes and replaces all pertinent statutes, rules and
regulations over which it has authority to supersede and replace. All provisions listed in the
index of this Agreement are intended to supersede and/or prevail over conflicting and/or
additional subjects found in O.R.C. Sections 124.01 through 124.56, and the rules and
regulations of the Civil Service Commission of the City of Loveland. If a court of competent
jurisdiction finds any provision of this Agreement to be contrary to any statute, such provision
shall be of no further force and effect, but the remainder of the Agreement shall remain in full
force and effect.
•
Section 26.2. The parties agree that should any provision of this Agreement be found to be
invalid, that they will schedule a meeting within thirty (30) days at a mutually agreeable time to
negotiate alternative language.
ARTICLE27
WAIVER IN CASE OF EMERGENCY

23

Section 27 .1. In cases of emergency declared by the President of the United States, the Governor
of the State of Ohio, the Federal or State Legislature, or the City of Loveland, where such acts of
God affect the safety and health of the citizens of the City of Loveland, the following conditions
of this Agreement shall automatically be suspended:
1.

Time limits for processing of grievances.

2.

All work rules and/or agreements and practices relating to the assignment of all
employees.

Section 27.2. Upon the termination of the emergency, any grievances existing as of the time of
the declaration of the said emergency shall be processed in accordance with the provisions
outlined in the grievance procedure, and shall proceed from the point in the grievance procedure
to which they (the grievance[ s]) had progressed as of the time of the declaration. Grievances
arising during the said emergency shall toll from the date of termination of the emergency.

ARTICLE28
WELLNESS

Section 28.1. The Employer and the Association have a mutual interest in the wellness of the
members of the Loveland Police Department and their ability to provide a service to the
community.
Section 28.2. During the life of this Agreement, the Association and the Employer may elect to
meet and establish a mutually acceptable fitness standard based on specific occupational needs
for the Loveland Police Department. The parties will jointly encourage any voluntary
participation in any wellness related activities. Incentives may be provided to enhance
participation.
Section 28.3. The City may, at its sole option and sole expense, offer an employee wellness
program during the life of this Agreement. Employee participation in this program, if offered, is
voluntary, subject to the penalties provided in Section 18.3 of this Agreement. Prior to the
beginning of any health insurance plan year (either calendar year or health insurance renewal
year, as determined and announced by the City), the City shall give all employees and the
Association notice of what will be required for employees to be considered participating in and
complying with the wellness program. Employees covered by this Agreement shall only be
subject to requirements applicable to all City employees covered by health insurance generally.

ARTICLE29
DRUG/ALCOHOL TESTING

Section 29.1. It is the policy of the Loveland Police Department that the public has the absolute
right to expect persons employed by the Police Depa1iment will be free from the effects of drugs
and alcohol. The City, as the Employer, has the right to expect its employees to report to work
fit and able for duty and to set positive example for the community. The goals of this policy
shall be achieved in such a manner as not to violate any employee's administrative or
constitutional rights.
24

Section 29.2. Employees are prohibited from consuming or possessing alcohol at any time
during, or just prior to the beginning of the workday except as may be necessary in the
performance of their lawful duties. Employees are further prohibited from possessing, using,
selling or delivering any illegal drug at any time or at any place except as may be necessary in
the lawful performance of their lawful duties.
Section 29.3. The Employer may randomly test employees for drug or alcohol use or when he
has reasonable suspicion to suspect the use of drugs or alcohol.
Reasonable suspicion that an employee used or is using drugs or alcohol in an unlawful or
abusive manner may be based upon, but not limited to:
1.

Observable phenomena, such as direct observation of drug or alcohol use or
possession and/or the physical symptoms of being under the influence of a drug or
alcohol;

2.

A pattern of abnormal conduct or erratic behavior;

3.

Arrest or conviction for a drug or alcohol-related offense, or the identification of
an employee as the focus of a criminal investigation into illegal drug or alcohol
possession, use or trafficking;

4.

Information provided either by reliable and credible sources or independently
corroborated;

5.

Evidence that an employee has tampered with a previous drug test; and

6.

Facts or circumstances developed in the course of an authorized investigation of
an accident or unsafe working practice.

Section 29.4. Drug/Alcohol testing shall be ordered by the Employer solely for administrative
purposes. The results obtained cannot be used in a criminal proceeding. The results of
drug/alcohol screening or testing will not be released to a third party. The following procedure
shall not preclude the Employer from other administration action but such actions shall not be
based solely upon the initial testing results alone.
Section 29.5. All drug screening tests shall be conducted by medical laboratories meeting the
standards of the Department of Health and Human Services. No test shall be considered positive
until it has been confirmed by a gas chromatography/mass spectrometry full scan test. The
procedures utilized by the employer and testing laboratory shall include an evidentiaiy chain of
custody. All samples collected shall be contained in two (2) separate containers for use in the
prescribed testing procedures. All procedures shall be outlined in writing and this outline shall
be followed in all situations arising under this Article. A Medical Review Officer shall review
all confirmed positive results from the laboratory.
Section 29.6. Alcohol testing shall be done in accordance with the law of the State of Ohio to
detect drivers operating a motor vehicle under the influence.
Section 29.7. The results of the testing shall be delivered to the Employer and the employee
tested. An employee whose confirmatory test results are positive shall have the right to request a
25

certified copy of the testing results in which the vendor shall affirm that the test results were
obtained using the approved protocol methods. The employee shall provide a signed release for
disclosure of the testing results to the Employer only. A representative for the Bargaining Unit
shall have a right of access to the results upon request to the Employer, with the employee's
consent. Refusal to submit to the testing provided for under this Agreement shall be grounds for
discipline.
Section 29.8. If a drug screening test is positive, a confirmatory test shall be conducted utilizing
the samples collected in the manner prescribed above.
Section 29.9. After the testing required above has produced a positive result the employee shall
be permitted to participate in any rehabilitation ot detoxification program covered by his
insurance, or of his choice. Any discipline allowed by the positive findings provided for above
shall be deferred pending successful rehabilitation of the employee within a reasonable period.
An employee who participates in a rehabilitation or detoxification program shall be placed on
medical leave of absence for the period of the rehabilitation or detoxification program. Prior to
being placed on leave without pay, the employee may use any accrued leave. Upon satisfactory
completion of such program, as verified in writing by the treatment facility and upon receiving
results from a retest demonstrating that the employee is no longer abusing a controlled substance,
the employee shall be returned to his former position. Such employee may be subject to periodic
retesting upon his return to his position for a period of two (2) years from the date of his return to
work. Any employee in a rehabilitation or detoxification program in accordance with this
Article will not lose any seniority or benefits, should it be necessary for the employee to be
placed on medical leave or absence with/without pay, for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days.
Section 29 .10. If the employee refuses to undergo rehabilitation or detoxification or if he tests
positive during a retesting after his return to work from such a program, the employee shall be
subject to disciplinary action, including removal from his position and termination of his
employment.
Section 29.11. Costs of all drug screening tests and confirmatory tests shall be borne by the
Employer except that any test initiated at the request of the employee shall be at the employee=s
expense.
Section 29.12. Any member may voluntarily present themselves as an alcohol abuser or a person
with tendencies toward drug abuse and volunteer for rehabilitation or detoxification or any other
relevant/applicable employee assistance without fear of punitive action.
Section 29 .13. The provisions of this Article shall not require the Employer to offer a
rehabilitation or detoxification program to any employee more than once.

ARTICLE30
PROFESSIONAL INSURANCE

Section 30.1. The Employer agrees to indemnify and defend any bargaining unit employee from
actions arising out of the lawful perfonnance of his official and/or assigned duties.
Section 30.2. The Employer shall provide defense colmsel for an employee concerning his
professional actions arising out of the lawful perfonnance of his official and/or assigned duties.
26

ARTICLE31
DURATION

Section 31.1. This Agreement shall be effective upon execution by the parties, unless otherwise
provided for herein, and shall remain in full force and effect from May 5, 2020 through May 1,
2023.
Section 31.2. If either party desires to modify or amend this Agreement, it shall give written
notice of such intent no later than ninety (90) calendar days prior to the expiration date of this
Agreement.

27

SIGNATURE PAGE
[N WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereunto signed by their autho1ized
2020.
representatives this Vt> day of

MA-i4

,

FOR THE LOVELAND POLICE
ASSOCIATION

FOR THE CITY OF LOVELAND

I

\

Sean

II BE• Lazarus & Lewis LLC.

Adopted by the Council of the City of Loveland, Ohio on April 14, 2020. Resolution number
2020-14.

28
