STATE OF NEW JERSEY
PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS COMMISSION
PO Box 429
TRENTON, NEW JERSEY 08625-0429

www.state.nj.us/perc
ADMINISTRATION /LEGAL
(609) 292-9830

For Courier Delivery
495 WEST STATE STREET
TRENTON , NEW JERSEY 08618

CONCILIATION /ARBITRATION
(609 292-9898

FAX: (609) 777-0089
EMAIL : mail@perc.state.nj.us

UNFAIR PRACTICE /REPRESENTATION
(609) 292-6780

January 22, 2015
TO:

Commissioners

FROM:

Counsel Staff

SUBJECT:

Report on Developments in the Counsel’s Office Since December 10, 2014

Commission Cases
No New Appeals.
Court Decisions Received
Interest Arbitration: Award Affirmed
Borough of Tenafly, v. PBA Local 376, 2015 N.J. Super. Unpub. LEXIS 37
The Appellate Division of the Superior Court affirms the Commission’s decision
[P.E.R.C. No. 2013-87, 40 NJPER 90 (¶34 2013)], which upheld an interest arbitration award
issued to resolve an impasse over the terms of a successor agreement between Tenafly and the
PBA. The Court concludes, “PERC's findings on the sufficiency of [Arbitrator Robert] Gifford's
award are well-supported by record evidence, and PERC was firmly within its statutory authority
to interpret N.J.S.A. 34:13A-16.7 via adjudication and not rulemaking.” The Court did not
accept the PBA’s assertions “that PERC should have proceeded by rulemaking and not
adjudication; PERC erred by failing to remand and direct the arbitrator to "cost-out the modified
provisions for each year of the CBA; and PERC was obligated to remand because the arbitrator
did not adequately explain his decision on two of the nine statutory factors.” The court’s 13-page
opinion reviews the interest arbitration and comprehensively dissects the parties’ arguments and
the Commission’s analysis.

New Jersey Is An Equal Opportunity Employer

Scope of Negotiations: Refusal to Restrain Arbitration Affirmed
In re Twp. of Edison, 2014 N.J. Super. Unpub. LEXIS 2946
The Appellate Division of the Superior Court affirms the Commission’s decision
[P.E.R.C. No. 2013-89, 40 NJPER 56 (¶21 2013)], which declined to restrain arbitration of a
grievance filed by Local 1197 of the International Association of Firefighters (IAFF) regarding
compensation of certain firefighters who were also trained and licensed emergency medical
technicians (firefighter/EMTs). The Court quoted and affirmed the Commission’s identification
of the issues presented for arbitration and its reasoning that:
[T]he contractual claim for pay differential for performance of
EMS duties may be arbitrated because it does not significantly
interfere with the employer's prerogative to eliminate the
Firefighter/EMT rotation and hire more civilian EMTs. What EMS
duties the Firefighter/EMTs are now performing, and whether
those duties are eligible for the Article 49, Section 6 salary
differential, are questions for the arbitrator to decide.
Other Cases
Authority to enter into subcontract for provision of detention and penal facilities
Essex County Corrections Officers PBA Local No. 382, et al. v. County of Essex, et al., ___ N.J.
Super. ___, 2014 N.J. Super. LEXIS 176 (App. Div.)
In a published, thus precedential, decision, the Appellate Division of the Superior Court
holds that the majority representative of Essex County Corrections Officers is entitled to a
plenary trial court hearing on its claim that Essex County lacked authority to contract with a
private company to provide the core services of operating detention and penal facilities. The
court upholds the County’s contract with a private company to provide substance abuse treatment
and related rehabilitative services. The appellate court reverses a Superior Court decision
granting summary judgment to the County and dismissing the PBA’s complaint.
Employee Discipline
Employee may withdraw civil service disciplinary appeal and seek relief in court.
Thomas Hunt v. Borough of Wildwood Crest, 2014 N.J. Super. Unpub. LEXIS 2892
The Appellate Division of the Superior Court affirms a decision of the Civil Service
Commission allowing an employee to withdraw a disciplinary appeal. After he was terminated,
Hunt, a police sergeant, appealed to the CSC. He also filed a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court
alleging his firing was retaliation for engaging in union activities. A day into his administrative
hearing, the New Jersey Supreme Court held, in Winters v. North Hudson Regional Fire and
Rescue, 212 N.J. 67 (2012), that where the CSC issues a final decision on a disciplinary appeal,
-2-

the employee is barred from challenging the personnel action in another forum. Hunt then
moved and was granted permission to withdraw his CSC appeal. Calling the circumstances
unique, the appellate court holds that the CSC’s approval of the withdrawal request was not
arbitrary or capricious and that Winters does not bar Hunt from pursing his retaliation claim in
federal court.
Dismissal of marijuana possession charges does not mandate teacher’s reinstatement
Rasmussen v. Vineland Board of Education, et al., 2014 N.J. Super. Unpub. LEXIS 2929
The Appellate Division of the Superior Court upholds an arbitration award sustaining the
mid-year termination of a non-tenured teacher. Rasmussen had a contentious relationship with
supervisors and administrators and made “whistle-blowing” type complaints (e.g. collusion in
grading). He was twice recommended for termination, but the Board refused to let him go on
both occasions. The second time the Board and Rasmussen entered into a written settlement
agreement. However, shortly after the teacher signed the agreement, he was arrested for
marijuana possession in Atlantic City. The Board then terminated his employment. A month
later the charges against him were dismissed. The arbitrator concluded that despite the dismissal
of the criminal charges, the Board had just cause to terminate the teacher. The Court notes:
As the arbitrator found, there was sufficient proof that
[Rasmussen] possessed marijuana. [Rasmussen] refused to provide
information to counter the charges, even after the dismissal of his
charges in November, weeks before his termination was to take
effect. . . [U]nrefuted evidence was ultimately bolstered by the
State Lab report.
Insubordination: Work Now-Grieve Later
Zielinski v. City of Wildwood, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 170717
The United States District Court dismisses a police officer’s retaliation claims based on
the Fair Labor Standards Act and the First Amendment. Zielinski and other officers filed FLSA
claims that the City’s refusal to compensate them for muster time violated federal law. However,
Zielinski repeatedly refused to report for duty 15 minutes prior to his shift and was disciplined
and ultimately terminated for doing so. In ruling against the officer the Court observed:
The fundamental mistake in plaintiff's argument is his insistence
that he was engaged in protected activity when he reported late for
work. The Court agrees that plaintiff's oral and court complaints
were protected activity. However, plaintiff's decision to knowingly
flaunt the work requirement that he report to work fifteen minutes
before his shift started was not protected activity but instead was
-3-

insubordination. . . This is true even if it is the case, as plaintiff
argues, that he was not paid for his muster time. Plaintiff's recourse
was to seek compensation for his muster time, which he did in this
case by filing his complaint, rather than to defy his work rules.

-4-
