THE TOWN OF GUILFORD
AND

THE GUILFORD EMPLOYEE ASSOCIATION
JULY 1,2016 TO JUNE 30,2020

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE

ARTICLE 1 - RECOGNITION

ARTICLE 7 - LONGEVITY

9

ARTICLE 8 _ DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS
ARTICLE 9 _ LEAVES OF ABSENCE

...................10
.......10

ARTICLE 10 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ...........

.....................17

ARTICLE 11 - AGENCY FEE

.....................19

ARTICLE 12 _ SALARIES
ARTICLE 13 _ GENERAL SAVINGS CLAUSE.

..,......2I

ARTTCLE 14 - DTSCRIMINATION AND COERCION..............

...................21

ARTTCLE ls - NO STRIKE/NO LOCKOUT............

.....................21

ARTICLE 16 - RETIREMENT PLANS....

....................21

ARTICLE 17 - DURATION

.......23

1

AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into by and between the TOWN OF GUILFORD
(hereinafter referred to as the "Town") and GUILFORD EMPLOYEE ASSOCIATION

(hereinafter referred to as the "Association").

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION

Sectionl'1 The Town hereby recognizes the Association as the sole and exclusive

representative of a bargaining unit consisting of all Full-Time employees of the Town of
Guilford and all Part-Time employees working regularly established work weeks of twenty (20)
or more hours per week on a regular year-round basis. Excluded from such unit are those
employed by the Guilford Board of Education; uniformed and investigatory employees of the
fire department; uniformed and investigatory employees of the police dJpartment; all employees
of the public works department who are members of the Teamsters bargaining uniq all
dispatchers; all elected officials, administrative offrcials and board and commirrion
-i-bers; all
confidential employees; and supervisors and Department Heads as defined in the Municipal
Employees Relations Act.
Coincident with entering into this Recognition Agreement, the parties have agreed on a
job
list of
titles presently to be included in the bargaining unit. the iist is attached hereto as
Exhibit A. All employees with those job titles who meet the definitions as Full-Time or partTime Employees shall be included. All other employees shall be excluded from the unit. Should
the parties disagree in the future as to additions to, deletions from, or modifications of the list of
job titles to be included in the unit, each party shall be free to seek resolution of
the question
the Connecticut State Board of Labor Relations in accordance with the law.

by

Section 1.2 (a) Full-Time Employee. An employee who works a regularly established work
schedule of thirty-five (35) or more hours per week. Full-Time .-ptoy".r are eligible for
employee benefits in accordance with the eligibility requirements of the uutio,r, benefit
filunr.

(b) Part-Time Empiovee. To be included in the bargaining unit, part-Time

Employees must be regularly scheduled to work at least twenty (20) hours but less than thirtyfive (35) hours per week. To be entitled to medical benefits and life insurance, employees must
be regularly scheduled to work at least thirty (30) hours per week. Employees regularly
scheduled to work at least twenty-four Q$ hours per week are entitled to pro-ratei Holidiy pay,
pro-rated Funeral Leave, and Sick Leave according to the Town of Guilford Part-Time
fmpfoye.
Paid Sick Leave Policy, but no other benefits.

(c) Probationarv Period. A working test period of up to three (3) months during
which time an employee is required to demonstrate ability to meet acceptable standards of
performance. If deemed necessary, the Department Head will inform the employee in
writing of
the need to extend the Probationary Period for a period of up to six (6) additional months.

When an employee is hired into an Association position, the Town will provide the
Association President a written notice of the person's name, the Department position and the
required hours to be worked.

ARTICLE 2
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Section 2.1 Unless expressly and specifically limited, modified, abridged or relinquished by a
specific provision of this Agreement, and whether exercised or not, the rights, powers and
authority heretofore held by the Town, pursuant to any charter, general ot .p.iiul statute,
ordinance, regulation agreements regarding reorganization, or other lawful proviiion, over the
complete operations, practices, procedures and regulations with respect to employees of the
Town shall remain solely and exclusively in the Town, including but not limited to the
following: to determine the standards of services to be offered by Town employees; determine
the standards of selection for Town employment; direct its employees; take disciplinary action;
relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons; issue
work rules and regulations, personnel policy manuals, personnel procedures and policies, to
enforce them, and from time to time in its discretion change them; maintain the efficiency of
governmental operations, determine work schedules; determine the methods, means and
personnel by which the Town's operations are to be conducted; determine the content of job
classifications and job descriptions; exercise complete control and discretion over its
organization and technology of performing its work; and fulfill all of its legal responsibilities.
Section 2.2 It shall be the policy of the Town that work which can be properly, safely and
economically performed by bargaining unit employees covered by this Agreement shalr be
assigned to and performed in accordance with this Agreement. In the event that the Town deems
it necessary to subcontract work that has been assigned and performed by employees in the
bargaining unit, it agrees to give the Association an explanatiorrof the workio be subcontracted
and an opportunity to bargain over the effects of the decision to subcontract.

ARTICLE 3
SENIORITY

Section3.l Seniority Defined. Seniority shall be the paramount factor when qualified

employees are considered for lay-offs. Seniority is the continuous full-time service of the
employee in the Town computed in years, months, and days from the date of hire. part-time
service shall be credited for seniority pu{poses only on a proportionate basis.
Section 3.2 Loss of Senioritv. An employee shall lose seniority if the employee:

o Quits or resigns.
o Sustaineddischarged.
o When called from layoff, fails to return to work within ten (10) working
days after notification was sent by regular and certified mail.
2

o Fails to observe the terms and reasons for which a leave of absence has
been granted or has engaged in work during such leave of absence.

o Is absent from work for more than five (5) consecutive days without a
s ati

sfactory explanation.

Section 3.3 Senioritlr List. The Town shall maintain a list of employees by seniority and shall
furnish the Association President with a copy no less than once annualiy.

ARTICLE 4
LAYOFFS' INVOLUNTARY TRANSFERS OR DEMOTIONS
Section 4'1 Layoffs. When a permanent layoff for any reason occurs, the employee with the
least seniority in the classification will be laid off first, providing such least senioi employees
cannot be used in another classification. It is further provided that retained employees must
be
capable of doing the available work.

o Laid off employees with the most seniority will be rehired first to
positions which they are qualified to do before hiring new employees.

e Employees will be given at least one (1) month notice before layoffs are
made, when feasible.
a

t

In the event of layoff, an employee shall be retained on the recall list for
one (1) year from the date oflayoff.
Employees who are laid off from work, excluding the definitions of ,.euits
and Fires," are eligible to apply for unemployment compensation.

Section 4.2 Rate of Palz for Transfer or Demotions. When an employee is transferred from
a
position in one class to a position in another class at the same pay rate, or is transferred with
no
change in class, he/she shall continue to be paid at the same rate. When an employee is
demoted
to a lower classification level, his or her salary shall be set at the rate in the lower pay grade
which provides the smallest decrease in pay. The First Selectman has the authority to ta]rsfer
employees between departments depending upon the needs of the Town.
Section 4.3
for
t
When an employee is
temporarily assigned via personnel action to a position in a class with a higher minimum rate of
pay (working out of classification) for periods of more than three (3) consecutive weeks, the First
Selectman shall grant apay increase at the starting rate of that class or a higher rate of pay which
provides a pay increase, beginning after three (3) consecuti ve weeks for the duration of
the
temporary assignment.

a

J

ARTICLE 5
WORK SCHEDULE
Section 5.1 Work Schedule. Employees shall work the schedule as defined by their
Department Head. All employees are entitled to two (2) fifteen minute rest periods (one in the
morning and one in the afternoon) at a time designated by the Department Head as well as a one
(1) hour lunch period. Department Heads and supervisors shall record all absences, tardiness,
and early departures. Absences, tardiness and early departures for unsatisfactory reasons shall be
grounds for disciplinary action by the Department Head or supervisor. Employees shall not be
paid for time lost due to absences, tardiness or early departure for unsatisfactory reasons.
Doctors' and dentists' appointments should be scheduled other than during working hours,
whenever possible.
Section 5.2 Overtime. Non-exempt employees shall receive time and one half (l%) pay or
compensatory time at the discretion of the employee for all hours worked over forty (40) hours in
any one week. Non-exempt employees who are regularly scheduled to work less than forty (40)
hours per week, will receive straight time pay or compensatory time off during the sarne pay
period for any hours worked up to forty (40) in any one week. If such employees work over
forty (a0) hours in any one week, they shall receive time and one half (1%) pay or compensatory
time at the discretion of the employee for hours worked. When calculating overtime puy fo. trooexempt employees, paid holidays, personal days, and vacation days ire considered as time
worked. Sick days are not considered as time worked. When called in to work while on
vacation, an employee will be paid time and one-half (l %) for hours worked plus pay for the
vacation, or paid time and one-half (l %) for hours worked and reschedule vacation anotler time.
Section 5.3 Overtime Administration. Department Heads may prescribe reasonable periods of
overtime work to meet operational needs. Complete records of overtime shall be maintained.
Overtime work requires prior approval of the Department Head or First Selectman.

ARTICLE 6
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
Section 6.1 Group Health Insurance. The Town shall provide a Group Health Insurance and
Dental Insurance for ail Full-Time Employees and eligible dependents. Coverage will be
effective the first of the month following sixty (60) days from the date of hire.

The Town shall provide the Full Service Dental Plan for individual employees and eligible
dependents, including additional basic benefits with the limiting age being under nineteenllg)
for unmarried dependent chiidren.
Full-Time Employees at retirement with at least ten (10) years of service at age fifty-five (55) or
later may have their medical benefits continued at their expense until age sixty-five (65).

It is understood that the Town may change insurance carriers/administrators. Such change in
carriers shall result in comparable benefits to those enjoyed under the policy/policies being
replaced.

4

Employees will make cost sharing payments via payroll deduction for the plan chosen with pretax dollars as long as that option is available under law.
Employee cost sharing will be as follows, based on the choice of the employee. Once chosen the
employee may only change plans during the yearly open-enrollment period, or in accordance
with qualifying events, consistent with IRS Section 125.

PPO Plan
The PPO Plan shall continue to be offered as an option only through June 30, 2018 and shall be
eliminated effective June 30, 2018. Employees who choose the PPO Plan shall continue to
contribute through payroll deductions nineteen percent (I9%) for the PPO and Dental coverage,
and maintain contributions at that level through June 30, 2018.
PPO-20 Plan
The PPO-20 Plan shall be offered for the life of the contract.

Full-Time Employees who choose the PPO-20 PIan ($20.00 Office Visit, 3 Tier Prescription
Plan, Unlimited Rx) during the period July 1,2016 through June 30,2018 shall continue to
contribute, through payroll deductions, eighteen percent (IS%) premium sharing for PPO-20
and Dental coverage and maintain contributions at that level through June 30, 2018.
Full-Time Employees who choose the PPO-20 Plan ($20.00 Office Visit, 3 Tier Prescription
Plan, Unlimited Rx) during the period July 1, 2018 through June 30,2019 shall contribute,
through payroll deductions, eighteen percent (18%) premium sharing for the H.S.A. plus the
difference in the allocation rates of the PPO-20 and H.S.A. Plans, offset by the value of the
Town's H.S.A. deductible funding.
Full-Time Employees who choose the PPO-20 Plan ($20.00 Office Visit, 3 Tier Prescription
Plan, Unlimited Rx) during the period July 1,2019 through June 30,2020, shall contribute
through payroll deductions, nineteen percent (I9%) premium sharing for the H.S.A. plus the
difference in the allocation rates of the PPO-20 and H.S.A. Plans, offset by the value of the
Town's H.S.A. deductible funding.
During the period July 1 2018 through June 30,2019, Full-Time Employees will pay eighteen
percent (18%) of the Dental Premium as a cost sharing contribution for enrollment in the Dental
Plan. During the period July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020, Full-Time Employees will pay
nineteen percent (19%) of the Dental Premium as a cost sharing contribution for enrollment in
the Dental Plan.
(Appended to this Agreement is Exhibit B, consisting of Plan Summaries for the PPO, ppo-20,
and H.S.A. Plans.)

5

Hieh Deductible/Health Savines Account (H.S.A.) Plan
Effective July 1,2018 through June 30,2020, in accordance with the provisions set
forth below, the core health plan will be a High Deductible/Health Savings Account
(H.S.A.) Plan.
Effective July 1, 2018, the H.S.A. Plan shall be the core insurance plan. For any
employee who remains enrolled in the PPO-20 plan during the 2018-19 and.lor 20lg2020 contract years, the Town will pay the same total dollar amount toward the
premium cost for the PPO-20 plan as the Town pays toward the premium cost for the
H.S'A. Plan for an employee enrolled at the same coverage level (individual, twoperson or family). The employee shall pay 100% of the difference between the
Town's total dollar premium contribution and the total premium cost for the ppO-20
plan; as applicable, offset by the value of the Town's H.S.A. deductible funding.
Premium contributions and premium costs are determined utilizing allocation rates.
Effective July 1,2018 through June 30,2019, employees who choose the H.S.A. plan
shall contribute, through payroll deductions, eighteen percent (ls%) premium
sharing.
Effective July 1, 2019 through June 30,2020, employees who choose the H.S.A. plan
shall contribute, through payroll deductions, nineteen percent (19%) premium
sharing.

The H.S.A. plan will include the following components

In-Network
Annual Deductible
(individual I aggr e gate familv)
Co-insurance

Out-of-Network

$2,000/4,000

N/A

20Yo after deductible

up to co-insurance
maximum
Co-insurance Maximum
(individual I aggr egate family)
Cost Share Maximum
(individual I aggr e gate familv)

N/A

$3,000/$6,000

$5,000/10,000

Lifetime Maximum

Unlimited

Preventive Care

Deductible not applicable

Prescription Drug Coverage

deductible, subject to coinsurance limits
Treated as any other medical expense, subject to
post-deductible drug co-payments as set forth
below.

6

20o/o co -insurance aft er

Following exhaustion of the deductible, prescription drugs shall be subject to postdeductible co-payments of $5/15125 (retarl), and at two times co-payment for mail
order.

For each Participating Employee, the Town will fund sixty percent (60%) of the
applicable deductible amount for the contract year July I, 2018 through June 30,
2019. For that contract year, the Town shall deposit its portion of the contribution
toward the H.S.A. plan deductible into the H.S.A. accounts on or about July 1, Z0lB.
For the July 1, 2019 through June 30,2020 contract year, the Town will fund fifty
percent (50%) of the applicable deductible amount. The Town shall in that contract
year deposit its portion of the contribution toward the H.S,A. accounts in semi-annual
increments on or about July 1, 2al9 and on or about January L,2020. The Town,s
contribution toward the funding of the deductible shall not be deemed an element of
the underlying insurance plan. Rather, the Town's contribution toward the funding of
the deductible shall relate solely to the manner in which the deductible shall be
funded for actively employed Full-Time Employees. The Town shall have no
obligation to fund any portion of the deductible for retirees or other individuals upon
their separation from employment.

If within the first six (6) months of the July 1, 2018 effective date of H.S.A. coverage,
a Participating Employee can demonstrate to the Town that he/she has incurred
individual/aggregate family covered medical bills in the full amount of the
individual's or aggregate family's Annual Deductible ($2,000 or $4,000), the Town
upon request will loan the individual Employee an amount not to exceed the
Employee's required contribution towards the applicable deductible amount for the
July 1, 2018 through June 30,2079 contract year. That loan shall be repayable in its
full amount no later than June 30,2019.

VOLUNTARY WAIVER
Full-Time Employees who are eligible for health insurance coverage under this section may
voluntarily elect to waive such coverage, in whole or in part, provided that such waiver does not
conflict with the rules, regulations and requirements of the appropriate insurance canier(s).
In order to exercise this waiver option, Full-Time Employees must apply in writing to the Human
Resources Office. All waiver applications must be accompanied by^a signed waiver of coverage
document acceptable to the Town, with proof of insurance provided. Said waiver is only payable
if the employee is included as one of the individuals waiving coverage and shall remain in effect
until revoked as provided below.

Full-Time Employees electing such waiver and hired prior to July l, 2007 shall receive a
monthly payment from the Town in the amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the Town's ppo20 cost for the individual's waived insurance coverages. As of July 1, 2018, Full-Time
Employees electing such waiver shall have their payments frozen at $400.00 per month for
waiving single coverage, $900.00 per month for waiving two person coverage, and $1200.00 per
month for waiving family coverage. There shall be no waiver payment for only waiving Dental
Coverage.

7

Full-Time Employees hired on or after July 1, 2007 andprior to December 1,2014 electing such
waiver shall receive a monthly payment from the Town in the amount equal to twenty five
percent (25%) of the Town's PPO cost for the individual's waived insurance coverages. As of
July 1, 2018, Full-Time Employees hired on or after July 1, 2007 and,prior to December 1,2014
electing such waiver shall have their payments frozen at $200.00 per month for waiving single
coverage, $450.00 per month for waiving two person coverage, and $600.00 per month for
waiving family coverage. There shall be no waiver payment for only waiving Dental Coverage.
Full-Time Employees hired on or after December 1,2014 and prior to July 1,2015 electing such
waiver shall receive a monthly payment from the Town in the amount equal to twenty five
percent (25%) of the Town's PPO-I cost for a single person insurance coverage. As of July l,
2018, Full-Time Employees hired on or after December 1, 2014 and prior to July l, 2015 shall
have their payments frozen at $200.00 per month. There shall be no waiver payment for only
waiving Dental Coverage.
Full-Time Employees hired on or after July 1, 2015 electing such waiver shall receive a monthly
payment from the Town in the amount equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the Town's ppo-20
cost for a single person insurance coverage. As of July 7,2018,Full-Time Employees hired on or
after July I, 2015, shall have their payments frozen at $200.00 per month. There shall be no
waiver payment for only waiving Dental Coverage.

Any Full-Time Employee who would otherwise be eligible for Group Health Insurance through
another employee or retiree of the Town of Guilford will be ineligible to receive uny puy-"nt
through the health waiver process.

Any Full-Time Employee who obtained a voluntary waiver of health insurance coverage
pursuant of this section may revoke this waiver at any time by serving written revocation notice
to the Human Resources Department. Upon receipt of such revocation notice, the Human
Resources Department will noti$' the appropriate insurance carrier(s) of the reinstatement
request and take steps to have the coverage(s) reinstated. All such reinstatements shall be subject
to all requirements of the applicable carier(s) including, but not limited to, any mandaiory
waiting periods.
Section 6.2 Life Insurance. Effective the first of the month following sixty (60) days from the
date of hire, Full-Time Employees are covered in the amount of $100,000 for Term Life
Insurance with double indemnity for Accidental Death and Dismemberment. Such insurance
wili be reduced by 35% at age seventy (70) and reduced by 50% at age seventy-five (75).
Section 6.3 Clothing Allowance. Clothing Allowance (not to exceed $300 per fiscal year) for
the following full-time positions: Assistant Town Engineer/Public Works Director; Custodian;
Engineering Technician-Facilities Coordinator; Golf Course Superintendent; Highway
Superintendent; Maintenance Custodian; Municipal Animal Control Officer; Parks Foriman;
Parks Maintainer; Sanitarian; Waste Transfer Station Foreman; Waste Transfer Station Worker,
and Zoning Enforcement Officer. This allowance will be for work-related gear, pants and shirts,
and for work shoes not including sneakers. The employee will purchase the various items, turn

8

the receipts in to their Department Head, and a check will be issued to the employee in a timely
mannel
Section 6.4 Short-Term Disability. Full-Time Employees will be paid 66 2l3yo of salary for
Short-Term Disability (with a maximum of $100.00 per day), with benefits commencing after all
accrued sick leave is expended. This benefit is payable for a maximum of sixty-five (65fworking
days.

The following guidelines will be followed:

In order to receive this benefit, the employee must:

a. Be employed by the Town of Guilford full-time for six (6) months;

b. Be under the care of a doctor during the entire period of disability ;
and
c

Complete and submit completed and signed Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
Form WH-380-E to the Human Resources Office. This form is to be used to
determine eligibility for Short-Term Disability benefits even if the employee is
ineligible for FMLA at the time.

LIMITATIONS

a. If disabled twice by the same cause, and these periods of disability are separated by
less than three (3) weeks of work, the employee would be eligible for one Maximum
Period of benefits. If these periods of disability are separated by three (3) weeks or
more of work, the employee would be eligible for a Maximum Period of benefit for
each period of disability.

b' This benefit does not cover disability caused by: war or any act of war; illness or
occupational injury for which the employee is entitled to Workers' Compensation.

c. If a paid holiday falls during an approved short-term disability period, such holiday
will also be subject to the same salary limitation of 66 213% of salary.
ARTICLE 7
LONGEVITY
Section 7.1 Longevity Payments. Regular full-time employees who were receiving Longevity
payments at the $240, $320, or $460 level when Longevity payments were frozen effective on
June 30, 2014 and who have continued to receive frozenpayments on their anniversary dates up
to the date of the 2018 signing of this Agreement, shall continue to be eligible io receive
Longevity payments in the same amounts up through the June 30,2020 expiration date of this
Agreement.

9

No employee who was ineligible to receive a Longevity payment in the '13-'14 Fiscal year shall
receive any Longevity payment during the term of this Agreement. Effective on June 30,2020,
the Longevity Payment Program shall be discontinued in its entirety. Also on June 30, 2020, the
amount of the last Longevity payment made to each eligible employee during the Fiscal year
2019-2020 shall be built into the base wage rate of such employee and included in the base wage
rate of such employee effective for wage payments to be made on and after July 1,2020.

ARTICLE 8
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS

SectionS.l TvpesofDisciplinaryAction. The type of disciplinary action taken will vary
with the severity of the situation in accordance with the following graduated disciplin.
-.urur"r'
oral and/or written reprimand, suspension, discharge. Discharge of the employee may be
necessary if, after remedial and/or disciplinary measures have been tried, an employees'
performance, conduct or other satisfactory behavior does not improve. Certain offenies may
occur which are of such seriousness that withholding of increment, suspension or immediate
dismissal of an employee may be necessary. Notwithslanding the foregoirrg, no employee shall
be disciplined, including discharged, except for just cause.
ARTICLE 9
LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Section 9.1 General Polic)'. Leave is any authorized absence during regularly scheduled work
hours that is approved by proper authority. Leave may be authorized with or without pay and
shall be considered in accordance with Section 9.2 below.
Section 9.2 Procedure for Requestinq Leave. All leaves other than holiday, sick or injury
leave, must be requested and approved by the Department Head prior to taking the leave. In the
case of a request for sick leave, employees shall notifli the Department Head. Requests for leave
without pay must be made in writing and approved by the Department Head and the First
Selectman. An employee will not be paid for any absence from scheduled working hours unless
such absence is approved in advance by the Department Head. A copy of all leaves granted to
employees will be filed promptly with the First Selectman.
Section 9.3

Leave of Absence with Pav: Holidays. The following holidays for Full-Time and
Part-Time Employees shall be granted with pay (on a prorated basis for re part-Time
Employees):

FULL TrME EMPLOYEES (12)
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
President's Day
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Independence Day

Labor Day
Columbus Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Day After Thanksgiving
Christmas Day
10

PART TIME EMPLOYEES (5)*
New Year's Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day

Independence Day
Memorial Day

Holiday benefits to be pro-rated based on a forty (40) hour week for Part-Time
Employees (e.g. an employee who regularly works a twenty-four (24) hour week
will be entitled to six (6) hours of pay for a holiday).

,1.

Employees will be paid for the above listed holidays provided the following conditions are met:
a

The employee would have been scheduled to work on such day if it had
not been observed as a holiday.

o

The employee must have worked the last scheduled work day prior to and
the next scheduled work day after such holiday unless the absences on
both days are approved by their Department Head.
The employee is not on leave of absence (including unpaid FMLA time),
or layoff.

Section 9.4 Holiday Fallins on Weekend. If any of the above listed holidays fall on Sunday,
the following Monday shall be considered the holiday; if on Saturday, the preceding Friday will
be considered the holiday.
Section 9.5
Work on Holidays. Employees who perform work on holidays shall be entitled to
comparable time off on another day within the work week or receive overtime pay plus Holiday
pay except when such hours are part of an employee's normal work schedule in which case
employees shall be paid at their regular rate of pay upon mutual agreement of the supervisor and
employee.
Section 9.6 Vacation Leave. Vacation leave shall be available to Full-Time Employees only.

All Full-Time Employees shall earn annual Vacation based upon their normally scheduled woik
hours and at their current rate of pay based upon length of service as of July l't of each year. All

vacation time shall be taken in a Fiscal year (July l-June 30) except that up to five (5) vacation
days may be carried over to the following August 15th.
Date of Emplovment

Vacation Period

January I through June 30

After completion of six (6) months service,
two (2) weeks in the Fiscal Year beginning
July 1

July 1 through October 31

After completion of six (6) months service,
one (1 week in the Fiscal Year hired

l1

November 1 through December 31

No vacation until July 1 of the following
year, at which time they will be granted
two (2) weeks vacation

After Completion of:
5 years service

3 weeks vacation

10 years service

4 weeks vacation

20 years service

5 weeks vacation

Pay in lieu of vacation will not be granted; however, the carryover date may be extended in
special cases upon written request of the employee and approval by the Board of Selectmen. In
the event of a layoff, retirement, or a voluntary resignation with proper notice, the accrued
vacation at the time of termination will be paid. If a holiday occurs during a vacation period, an
extra day of vacation will be granted.
Section 9.7 Holiday Celebrated During Vacation. Observed holidays shall not be considered
in the computation of vacation credit nor as part of vacation time.
Section 9.8 Sickness While On Vacation. An employee who becomes ill while on vacation
may not charge such illness to sick leave unless confirmed by a medical certificate in writing to
the First Selectman from a practicing physician.
Section 9.9 Sick Leave. All Full-Time Employees shall be granted time off with pay for sick
leave according to the following schedule:
a.

New Employees

1. Date of Hire from January l-June 30
After completion of six (6) months' service, ten (10) days sick leave.

2. Date of Hire from July 1- October 31
After completion of six (6) months' service, five (5) days sick leave.

3. Date of Hire from November i-December 31
No sick leave until July l't of the following year, at which time they will be
granted ten (10) days sick leave.

b.

Current Full-Time Employees

On the July 1st two years after receiving an allotment of ten (10) sick days, all Full-Time
Employees will be granted one additional day of sick leave. On the July lst following
12

that and for each successive year, all Full-Time Employees will be granted one additional
day of sick leave. (Example- An employee who begins work on September l,2}I4would
receive five (5) days sick leave March 1, 2015 and then ten (10) additional days sick
leave on July 1, 2015. The same employee would receive eleven (11) days sick leave on
July 1, 2017 andtwelve (12) days sick leave on July 1, 2018).

Notwithstanding the above, effective beginning on July l,2Ol5, Full-Time Employees
may earn up to a maximum of fifteen (15) additional days, with a maximum total of
twenty-five (25) days per year.
a

"Sick Leave" is to be used only with the approval of the employee's Department
Head and only for personal illness, quarantine or personal injury. Employees may use
sick time to attend doctor's appointments and for medical procedures which cannot be
scheduled outside normal working hours.

a

Up to three (3) days may be granted for each initial occuffence of illness in the
immediate family, defined for these purposes as spouse, child, grandchild, mother,
father, mother-in-law, or father-in-law.

If an employee is out ill or injured for five (5) consecutive calendar days or if absent
again after only one (1) day return to work, he or she must submit a doctor's
certificate stating the nature of the illness or injury and the expected duration. Failure

to provide such certificate shall be sufficient to deny payment for such leave. The
doctor's certificate will use the same code and explanation that will be submitted to
the employee's insurance carrier. If an employee is out ill or injured for five (5) or
more consecutive calendar days, the employee shall request Family and Medical
Leave Act (FMLA) time by completing and submitting the appropriate form to
Human Resources. If FMLA time is approved the employee will be required to utilize
any remaining sick leave, personal time, or vacation time in that order during their
absence.

Unused and unpaid sick days accrue as of June 30th of each year up to a maximum of
one hundred-forty (140) days.

.

Cumulative sick days up to seventy (70) days shall be paid at retirement with at least
ten (10) years of service atage fifty-five (55) or older. Employees who were hired
after July I,1992 will receive no payment for unused sick time upon retirement.

Section 9.10 Personal Leave. After successful completion of the probationary period, a FullTime Employee will be allowed four (4) personal leave days with pay each fiscal year. Such
time off shall not be accumulated from year to year.

o An employee is required to make a request in writing to the Department Head four (4)
days in advance, except in the case of an emergency or special circumstance, a verbal

request will suffrce.

l3

a

The First Selectman may approve payment of a personal absence if the employee is
unable to report for work due to compelling reasons which the employee is unable to
take care of outside the regular work schedule, e.g. doctor's or dentist's appointments,
legal appointments, major financial transactions, death and funeral of a friend, serious
illness of an immediate family member, graduations or weddings.

Section 9.11 Civil Leave. An employee shall be granted leaves of absence, designated as civil
leave, for jury or other civic duty requiring the appearance before a court or other public body.
Such leave shall only be during that part of the day that appearance is required. Such employees
shall receive their regular salary. Fees received from Court must be turned in to the Town.
Section 9.12 Funeral Leave. Full-Time Employees shall be granted a leave of absence with
pay for a period of up to five (5) working days when a death has occurred in their immediate
family (mother, father, brother, sister, spouse, child, grandparent, grandchild, father-in-law or
mother-in-law) upon request to their Department Head for attendance at the memorial service or
funeral and for a period of bereavement. This time may be extended by the First Selectman in
exceptional cases on the recommendation of the Department Head. One (1) day with pay will be
granted for death of any other relative providing the employee attends the memorial service or
funeral. Part-Time Employees shall be granted one (1) pro-rated day of Funeral Leave for each
individual death according to the terms of this Section 9.I2 (e.g. an employee who regularly
works a twenty-four (24) hour week will be entitled to six (6) hoqrs of pay for Funeral Leave).
Section 9.13
of Absence
The First Selectman may grant a leave of
absence without pay for personal reasons for periods beyond those allowable with pay (for
example, marriage up to five (5) days), provided the Department Head involved is willing either
to allow the position from which is taken to remain yacant, or to fill it by temporary appointment
until the expiration of such leave. Leave of absence without pay shall not be granted for more
than twelve (12) months except for military leave.

Upon expiration of a regularly approved leave without pay, the employee shall be reinstated to
the position held at the time leave was granted, without loss of seniority, status, or benefits.
Failure on the part of an employee on leave to report promptly at its expiration, or within a
reasonable time after notice to return to duty, may be cause of dismissal.
Section 9.14 Employee Request. An employee requesting a leave of absence must state in
writing the reasons for such request and the time requested. Failure to return to work after the
expiration date or failure to request an extension renewal in advance will be deemed sufficient
reason for terminating employment.

Section 9.15 Maternity Leave. Maternity leave of absence will be granted when an employee
requests such leave including approximate dates and anticipated duration, to allow time to
prepare for staffing adjustments.

T4

The purpose of the following guidelines is to provide fair and equitable administration and
reasonable leave of absence for temporary disability resulting from pregnancy.

a'

A personal physician's statement concerning the anticipated date and a
certification of the employee's ability to perform her full duties during pregnancy
is required.

b

c

d.

Disagreements between the Town's physician and the employee's personal
physician may be settled by an independent third party physician, chosen by the
Town.
Department Heads may require monthly physician's statements regarding the
advisability and capability of the employee to continue work.

An employee may return with full seniority if she has contacted management.
She must keep the Town informed of her desire to work. If the employee cannot
retum to work within ninety calendar days, she must furnish proof of continuing
temporary disability to extend beyond the maximum time limit. Reemployment
will be provided for the same or an equivalent position except where business
necessity makes this impractical.

e

Employees may use all accumulated sick leave pay during a maternity absence.
Employees without accrued sick leave may keep their Group Medical Insurance
in effect by paying their applicable cost sharing per Article 6 directly to the Town.

f.

The Town should provide gainful employment and make use of employee's skills
for as long as the employee is incapacitated. In addition, the Department Head
should always be aware of all working conditions and modify work duties as
requested by a physician.

Section 46a-60 of the Connecticut General Statutes makes it unlawful to: (1) terminate an
employee because of pregnancy, (2) refuse a reasonable leave of absence for disability resulting
frompregnancy, or (3) to denyto said employee, who is disabled as aresult of pregnan"y,uny
compensation to which she is entitled as a result of the accumulation of disability or leave
benefits accrued pursuant to plans maintained by said employer. The law also requires
reinstatement to the original or an equivalent job with full seniority bnd benefits unlesi the
employer's circumstances have so changed as to make it impossible or unreasonable to do so.
The employee is responsible for obtaining the required maternity leave of absence form from the
Human Resources Office and completing the form at the time of her request for leave of absence.
The completed form with the required written information from the employee's doctor should be
sent to the Director of Human Resources for prior approval.

At the conclusion of maternity leave, an employee may return to work upon furnishing a doctor,s
statement certifying the employee's ability to return to work. The employee will be reinstated to
her original position or an equivalent job with fulI seniority and benefits unless the employer,s
circumstances have so changed as to make it impossible or unreasonable to do so,

l5

Additionally a fuIl-time employee wishing part-time work upon her return from maternity leave
may be allowed temporary part-time work under the following conditions:

a.

Part-time work must be available in the Department;

b.

It does not place unreasonable stress upon the Department or its employees;

c.

It does not incur unreasonable costs to the Town;

d.

It must be fully approved by both the Department Head and the First Selectman or
the Board of Selectmen;

It must be for no more than a combined total for both leave and part-time
employmcnt of sixteen (16) consecutive weeks;
f.

It must be agreed that at the end of the part-time employment the employee will
return to full-time work;

o

Benefits during the part-time period will be based on actual hours worked and the
employee may be required to pay for continuation of benefits until her return to
full-time employment.

b'

Section 9.16 Militar)'Leave. Employees of the Town who are members of a Reserve Unit of
the Army, Navy, Marines Corps, Coast Guard or Air Force of the United States or Connecticut
shall be entitled to absent themselves from their duties while engaged in required field training in
such a unit. No such employee shall be subjected to any loss or reduction of seniority, vacatlon
or holiday privileges. While engaged in such training, the Town shall pay the difference between
the employee's compensation for military activities and his/her regular compensation, up to a
maximum of ten (10) working days per fiscal year.

The following shall apply in accordance with 57-462 of the Connecticut General Statues. Any
employee who leaves the service of the Town for the purpose of entering the armed forces of thl
United States.shall be reinstated in his/her former position and duties, provided he/she makes
application for return to such service within ninety (90) days after he/she has received a
certificate of satisfactory service from the armed forces. The First Selectman shall certify in
writing that such employee is able and qualified to perform the work required and that there is
work available. In considering the factor of availability of work, the Town shall replace by the
returning employee any employee, with less service, who was employed for the purpose of
filling the position vacated by such returning employee. Any employee returning to ihe service
of the Town shall be credited with the period of such service in the armed forces to the same
extent as though it had been part of the term of service to the Town.

t6

This Section 9.16 shall not apply to any employee of the Town for a period of more than three
years in addition to war service or compulsory service and the ninety (90) day period
hereinbefore provided for.

Section9.l7 Irduryleave. Injury leave, as distinguished from sick leave, shall mean paid
leave given to an employee due to absence from duty caused by an accident, injury, or
occupational disease that occurred while the employee was engaged in the performance of
hisArer duties within the meaning of the Connecticut Workers' Compensation laws. Employees
of the Town of Guilford are covered by Workers' Compensation insurance and are paid stated
amounts due to injuries sustained on the job. Injuries must be reported immediately to the
supervisor or Department Head and proper forms completed to qualify for insurance coverage
which is regulated by the State.
Section 9.18
'C
Employees who are unable to work because of
compensable injuries and who are found eligible to receive Workers' Compensation benefits and
are receiving the same, shall have their employment continued on injury leave for a period of
twelve (12) months (except in cases of assault which shall be unlimited) from the date of the first
absence or until they are able to return to work, whichever is the shorter period. During such
injury leave, employees shall receive the difference between the monies received from Worker's
Compensation and their weekly base pay for up to three (3) months and only the monies received
from Workers' Compensation for up to nine (9) additional months without reduction in sick
leave. If the employee is unable to return to work at the end of the twelve (12) month period,
he/she shall be separated from service of the Town and shall be eligible to receive thereafter
whatever Workers' Compensation benefits and/or Pension benefits to which the employee may
be entitled, if any.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, no employee shall be separated from the Town after such one (l)
year period without first having a medical review to determine if the employee may be suitable
for appointment to another open position within the Town.
Section 9.19 Attendance Incentive. Any Full-Time Employee who has a record of three (3)
months perfect attendance, not interrupted by sick leave, unauthorized absences, suspension, or
leaves of absence with or without pay as measured from July i to September 30, October 1 to
December 31, January 1 to March 31 and April 1 to June 30, shall be entitled to one (1) vacation
day. Qualified employees have the opportunity to earn up to four (4) additional vacation days
each fiscal year. Such days earned must be used in accordance with Anicle 9 Section 9.6
Vacation Leave with the exception that such time cannot be paid in lieu of taking days off. In
addition, a new employee who earns a vacation day in this manner prior to completion of the
Probationary Period, may use such day prior to the end of the Probationary Period, only with
approval from their Department Head.

ARTICLE 10
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
S
10.1
Grievance Defined. A Grievance for the purposes of this procedure, shall mean a
dispute concerning the interpretation andlor application of any of the specific provisions of this

T7

collective bargaining agreement. A Grievance may be filed by an individual employee or the
Association, both referred to as the "Grievant"
Section 10.2

Procedure.

Step One. Within twenty (20) calendar days from the date the Grievant knew, or in the exercise
of reasonable diligence should have known, of the event or facts giving rise to the Grievance, the
Grievant shall present the Grievance in writing to the Department Head. The Grievance must set
forth a brief description of the claim (on which the Grievance is based) and specify the Article
and Section of this Agreement allegedly violated. The Department Head shall respond to the
Grievance in writing within twenty (20) calendar days of his/her actual receipt of it.
Step Two. If the Grievant is dissatisfied with the response at Step One, the Grievant may within
seven calendar days of the date of the Department Head's response submit the Grievance in
writing to the First Selectman for review. Within twenty (20) calendar days of the receipt of the
Grievance, the First Selectman shall convene a meeting to review the nature of the facis of the
Grievance. He/she shall call the employee, his/her Association representatives, the Department
Head, or any person involved in the Grievance to attend such meeting. Within twenty (20)
calendar days following such meeting, the First Selectman shall render a decision in writing to
all concerned.

Step Three. In the event that the Grievant is not satisfied with the decision at Step Two and
wishes to proceed further, the Association must file a Demand for Arbitration wittr the American
Arbitration Association within fifteen (15) calendar days of the Step Two reply, for processing of
the Grievance in accordance with the AAA Voluntary Rules for Labor Arbitration. The Demand
for Arbitration must be made in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, with a copy to
the First Selectman postmarked within fifteen (15) calendar days immediately following the
Grievant's receipt of the First Selectman's response at Step Two. Nothing herein, however, shall
preclude the parties from mutually agreeing to select an arbitrator of recognized competence
independent of AAA.

The Arbitrator's jurisdiction to make an award shall be limited by the submission and confined
to the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Agreement. The Arbitrator shall not
have jurisdiction to make an award which has the effect of amending, altering, modifying,
enlarging or ignoring the provision of this Agreement in effect at the time of the occulrence. The
Arbitrator shall be limited by the submission of the parties. The Arbitrator may order
reinstatement of the discharged employee, modifli discipline and,lor penalties and may issue
remedy orders including but not limited to back pay, reinstatement of benefits, reinstatement of
seniority and to otherwise make the employee whole for any and all losses resulting from the
discipline. The decision of the Arbitrator shall be final and binding upon all parties, provided it
is in accordance with the law. This shall not preclude either party from exercising its right to file
an application to confirm, modify or vacate the arbitration award in accordance with Connecticut
General Statutes. Arbitration filing fees and expenses shall be shared equally by the parties.
Each party shall be responsible for the cost of presenting its respective case.

18

Section 10.3 Time Limits. The time limits specified herein are of the essence and may only be
extended by mutual agreement of the Town and the Association. Failure by the Grievant to
process a Grievance within the time limits provided herein shall be deemed a waiver of such
Grievance, and the Grievance shall be considered resolved in accordance with the position of the
Town. Failure by the Town representatives to respond to the Grievance within the time limits
provided herein shall permit the Grievant or the Association, as appropriate, to process the
Grievance to the next step provided they do so within the time limits set forth herein.
Section 10.4 Association Grievance. The Association may file a Grievance on its own
initiative only if the alleged facts on which the Grievance is based directly affect employees in
different departments or the bargaining unit as a whole, such as, for example, a claim that the
Town failed to observe a holiday recognized by this Agreement. Grievances filed by the
Association must be filed at Step Two directly with the First Selectman, but in all other respects
must comply with the provisions of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 11
AGENCY FEE
Section 1 1.1
a.

Agency Fee.

Upon hire, each employee will either (i) become and remain a member of the
Association in good standing by tendering to the Association the regular dues
uniformly required of all Association members, or (ii) in lieu, thereof, pay to the
Association a regular, uniform service fee in an amount determined by the
Association in accordance with applicable law.

b. Within fifteen (15) normal work days after receipt of the written request from the
Association, the Town shall discharge any employee who has failed to comply with
the requirements contained in subsection a. above.

c. The First Selectman will furnish to the President of the Association the names of
newly hired employees, together with their address, the effective date of employment,
the classification to which they will be assigned initially and their starling rate of pay.

Section 11.2 Dues Checkoff. The Town shall make deductions from each regular paycheck it
issues to each employee required to pay Association dues or a service fee in uo u-ount equal to a

pro rata portion of the regular annual membership dues uniformly required of Association
members or the uniform annual service fee, as appropriate. The amounts so deducted shall be
transmitted to the Association no later than the fifth (5th) day of the month following the month
in which such deductions are made. Notice of increases in the regular annual memblrship dues
-of
and fees of the Association must be given to the Town at least sixty (60) days in advance
u.ry
increased deduction.
Section11.3 Hold Harmless. The Association shall indemnify and hold the Town harmless
against any claim made by any employee against the Town or any of its offrcers or officials by
reason of any action taken by the Town pursuant to the provisions of this Article.
I9

ARTICLE 12
SALARIES
Section 12.1 Attached as Exhibit C is a Salary Schedule showing wages for the period July 1,
2016 - June 30, 2017, July 1, 2017 - June 30, 2019, July i, 20rg June 30, 2019, and ruly 1,
2019 - June 30, 2020 for those bargaining unit employees on Steps.
12.2 Salaries Per Fiscal Year.

S

a.

Effective and retroactive to July 1, 2016, all employees shall be entitled to a two and
one-half percent (2.50%) General Wage Increase with no Step movement on the
Salary Schedule. New rates are reflected in Exhibit c Salary Schedule.
-

b.

Effective and retroactive to July 1, 2017,all employees on the Salary Schedule will
move up one (1) Step which constitutes on average a two and three-quarter percent
(2-75%) increase. All employees not on the Salary Schedule will receive a two and
three-quarterpercent (2.75%) increase. As of July I,2017, Step 1 and Step 15 will be
eliminated from the Salary Schedule. New rates are reflected in Exhibit C Salary
Schedule,

c' Effective on July 1,2018, all employees on the Salary Schedule will move up one (1)

Step which constitutes on average a two and three-quarter percent (2.75%) ln...ur".
All employees not on the Salary Schedule will receive a two and three-quarter percent
(2.75%) increase. As of July 1, 2018, Step 2 and Step 14 will be eliminated from the
Salary Schedule. New rates are reflected in Exhibit C - Salary Schedule.

d. Effective on July I, 2019, all employees shall be entitled to a two and one-half
percent (2.50%) General Wage Increase with no Step movement on the Salary
Schedule. New rates are reflected in Exhibit c Sarary Schedule.
-

To be paid any retroactivity, an employee must remain in the employ of the Town on the date of
ratification of the contract.
Section 12.3 Employee Certification.
a.

Each employee shall be eligibie for tuition refund for courses taken toward special andlor
advanced certification in their job classification.

b

An employee wishing to take advantage of the tuition refund program must prior to
beginning the course provide to his/her Department Heard and the birector of Human
Resources a description of the Special or Advanced Certification being sought, the entity

sponsoring the certification course, and the tuition cost.
c.

Upon successful completion of the certification course, the employee must present to the
Director of Human Resources a copy of the certification obtained and a receipt showing
payment of tuition. Whereupon, the Town shall (1) reimburse the employee the tuition
20

cost and (2) provide the employee with a one-time an incentive stipend of $500.00 to be
payable one month following the submission of the certificate to the Town, as long as the
employee is still employed in the GEA bargaining unit on that date.

d. Only one stipend may be earned by any employee whiie employed in the same job
classification.

ARTICLE 13
GENERAL SAVINGS CLAUSE
Section 13.1 If any provision of this Agreement is adjudicated invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this Agreement shall continue in full force and effect.

ARTICLE 14
DISCRIMINATION AND COERCION
Section 14.1 The policy of the Town and the Association is not to discriminate against any
employee due to race, color, sex, age, creed, marital status, political affiliation or Association
activities.
Section 14.2 Neither the Association nor any of its representatives shall intimidate or coerce
employees nor will they solicit members or conduct any Association activities during working
hours other than those essential to collective bargaining and handling of grievances in thi
manner so provided herein.

ARTICLE 15
NO STRIKE/NO LOCKOUT
Section 15.1 The Association agrees that pursuant to Section 7-475 C.G.S., it will neither call,
support nor encourage any work stoppage, strike or engage in any slowdown, sick-out, refusal to
work open shifts or mandated overtime, or any other activity which affects the employee's
performance of his/her work.
Section 15.2 The Town shall not lock out any employees covered by this Agreement during
this Agreement.

ARTICLE 16
RETIREMENT PLANS
Section 16.1 Defined Benefit Pension Plan. Any member of the Association who was
as of November 30, 2014 covered by and participating in the Town of Guilford
Employees' Pension Plan (Pension Plan) as amended from time to time by the Board of
Selectmen, shall be entitled to such coverage as provided by the terms of the pension
Plan for the duration of the Agreement, with the following amendments that will be
made to the Pension Plan:

2t

a

Effective for retirements or terminations on and after January r,2016, an
Employee shall not be eligible to elect to receive his/her pension benefit in
the form of a lump sum payment as described in the pension plan.

b

Effective December 1, 2014, an employee's maximum Credited Service will
be capped at thirty-five (35) years. When an employee reaches thirty-five
(35) years of Credited Service as defined by the Pension Plan, their
Compensation Base as defined by the Pension Plan will be frozen and will not
increase or decrease due to subsequent potential earnings if the employee
continues to work for the Town. In addition, when an employee rbaches
thirty-five (35) years of Credited Service as defined by the Pension plan, they
will no longer be required to contribute to the Pension Plan as described
therein, even if the employee continues to work for the Town. However, any
employee with more than thirty five (35) years of Credited Service as defined
by the Pension Plan as of June 30,2013 will have their maximum Credited
Service capped at forty (40) years. when such employee reaches forty (40)
years of Credited Service as defined by the Pension Plan, their Compensation
Base as defined by the Pension Plan will be frozen and will not inirease or
decrease due to subsequent potential earnings if the employee continues to
work for the Town. In addition, when such employee reaches forty (40) years
of Credited Service as defined by the pension plan, they will no longlr be
required to contribute to the Pension Plan as described therein, even if the
employee continues to work for the Town.

Effective on January l,2016, the employee contribution rate increased from 2.75yo ro 3.00yo.
Effective July 1, 2016 and continuing through the term of this Agreement, the employee
contribution shall remain at 3.00o/o.

Section 16.2 Defined Contribution Plan. Full-Time Employees hired by the Town of
Guilford on or after December I,2014, shall not be covered by or allowed to become
Participants in the Town of Guilford Employees' Pension Plan. Rather, those hired or
transferred into a Full-Time position within the Association on and after December 1,
2074, will be enrolled in a Defined Contribution Plan as approved and amended from
time to time by the Board of Selectmen. An exception to the foregoing shall be as
follows: if the Town of Guilford transfers a then-current Guilford employee to a FullTime Association position on or after December I,2014, and the employee is on the
last workday prior to the effective date of the transfer a Participant in the Town of
Guilford Employees' Pension Plan, that employee shall be allowed to continue
participation in the Defined Benefit Pension Plan according to its terms as amended
from time to time, in lieu of coverage under the Defined Contribution Plan.
The initial Defined contribution Plan will follow these guidelines:

a'

Members of the Association beginning employment r,vith the Town on or
after December I,2014 will have three percent (3%) of their base salary

22

deducted from each pay period for a minimum contribution to a Defined
Contribution Plan.

b.

Participants may contribute additional amounts in full percentage values
up to a total of eight percent (8%) of their base salary each pay period.

c.

The Town will match the participant's contributions, beginning with the
minimum contribution of three percent (3%) and up to the maximum
contribution of eight percent (B%).

d.

Employee contributions are vested immediately.

e.

Town contributions are vested under the following schedule:
up to one (1) year continuous service: 0%
one (1) year continuous service:
20%
two (2) years continuous service:
40%
three (3) years continuous service:
60%
four (4) years continuous service:
S0%
five (5) years continuous service: 100%

Section 16.3 Plan Language Prevails. Sections 16.1 and 16.2 above contain summaries

of expected plan provisions. The final amended language of the Defined Benefit

Pension Plan and the final language of the Defined Contribution Plan incorporating the
above provisions shall prevail over the summary language contained in this Article.

Section 16.4 Part-Time Emplo)'ees. Part-Time Employees may at the employee's
option, participate in the Social Security Alternative 457 Master Retirement plan in lieu
of Social Security. Such employees will contribute 7.5% of their compensation pre-tax
into such plan as administered by the Town of Guilford.

ARTICLE 17
DURATION
Section 17.1 The parties agree that the above sections constitute the full and complete
agreement between them and supersede all prior understandings, practices, procedures and
policies for the employees covered by this Agreement, whether written or oral.
Section 17'2 The provisions of this Agreement and the attached salary schedule shall be
effective as of July I,2016 and shall remain in full force and effect until JunL 30.2020.
Section 17'3 Each party agrees that with respect to the terms applicable to all bargaining unit
personnel they have bargained over all mandatory subjects of bargaining and neithe; part/shall
be required to bargain over any subject matter of any kind during the life of this Agreement
unless having agreed to do so in writing.

z)

This Agreement was signed and dated as of fr*turA q

at Guilford, Connecticut.

/i , ZOt8 by the respective parties

EMPLOYEE ASSOCIATION TOWN OF GUILFORD

By:
ancy w
President
Dated:

T.

III

First Selectman

2018

24

Dated

201 8

EXHIBIT A
TOWN OF GUILFORD EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION
POSITIONS
Adrninistrative Assistant ro Library
Adrninistrative Assistant to Engineering
Administrative Assistant to Human Reiources
Admirisrrative Assistan! to In-House Counsel
Administrative Assistant to Narural Resources
Adminisnarive Assistant to Parks and Recreation
Administrarive Assisrant ro Planning and Zoning
Administrativc Assistant to Social Scrviccs
Adrninistrative Assistanr ro Youth and Family Services
Assessment Aide
Assessor's Clerk

Assistant Assessor
Assistanr Cook
Assistant Tax Collector
Assistant Tolvn Clerk
Assisrant Town Engineer/Pub[c Works Director
Assistant Library Direcror
Children's Services-Supen'isory Librarian

Clinical Director
Clinician
Custodian-Library
E ngincering Techniciaii/Faci-Liries Coor.d i n acor

Golf Course Superinrendent

Highway Superinrendent
In-formarion Technology Analyst

Kitchcn Assistant
Kirchen Supervisor and Cook
Library Assisranr II
Library Assistanr III
Library Circulation Supervisor
Maintenance Custodian
lvlaintenance Custodian-Commllnity Cenrer
Maintenance Cusrodian-Library
Municipal Animal Conrrol Officer
Parks Foreman
Parks ]vlaintainer
Payroll System Coordinaror
Police Record.s Clerk
Program Director-Youth and Fanrily Services
Public Service Librarian II
Recreation Program Coordinator
Recreation Specialist
Recreation Supervisor
Adult Services-Supervisory Librarian

Librarian I
Sanitarian
Secretary-Building Departmenr
Secrerary-Health Departmenr
Secretary ro Fire Deparrment
Senior Accounr Specialisr
Seniors Program Coordinator
Social Services Program Coordinator
Srudent Assiscant Counselor
Wasre Transfer Station Foreman

Waste Transfer Station Worker

Youth Prevention Specialist
Zoning Enforcement Officer

EXHIBIT B

Anthsm,@W
GEA-PPO PLAI\
Town of Guilford
Firm # 003846-001
Century Preferred - $51$0/$25l$0
Benefils at a Glance

In Network
You pay:
Copayment

Hospita Copayment
ent

- teaived

Outpatient Surgery

ent (OPS)

Youpry:

$5

Deductible &

$0

Deductible &
Coinsurancee

$25
$25

Not covered

$0

Not applicable

o nsurance

Out-of-Network

+ member

s25
Deductible &
Coinsurance
$200/$400/ss00
20Yo after deductible
uD to
$ I,000/s2,000/$2,s00

Unlimited

Unlimited

No Charee
No Charse
No Charqe

Deductible &
Coinsurance

PREVENTTVf CARE
examrnatron
t

exams - one exam

v

- one exam

No Charee

I baseline age 35 -- 39 years ! screening per year age 40"

No Charge
Additional exams when
No Charge

Primary care

vls

No
No Copavment

care

No Copayment

care - initial visit

to

no

er6y
Olfice visits/testing

AL

No Copayment
No Charce
No Charse
$5 Copayment
No Charee

80 visils in 3

vata room

Deductible &
Coinsurance

- Prior auilt
care
to 120
a

calendar

No
No
No Copayment
No Charge
No Copayment

&
Coinsurance

EMERGENCY CARE
Walk.in centers

$5 Copayment

-al

- alr

$25 Copayment
$25 Copayment
lo

Deductible &
Coinsurance
Not covered

No Charee

No charge

TH CARE
50 visit maximumfor PT, OT, ST and Chiro per.vear

$5 Copayn'rent

&
Coinsurance

AIYCE
npatient

Deductible &

OV

Coinsurance

* Schedule of health examinations:

Age0uptbagel-Tvisits

Age I uptoage5-Tvisits
Age 5 up to age 12 - I everyyear
Age 12 up to age 22- I every year
\ge 23+ - I every year
Note: ln situations where the member is responsible for obtaining the necessary precertification or prior
authorization
and fails to do so, benefits may be reduced or denied.
Please refer to the SpecialQffers@Anthent (previously Heallhy Opportunities) brochure in your

information on the discounts we offer on health-related services and products:.

**Dependents covered to

enrollment kit for

age 26

This does not constitute your health plan or insurance policy. It is only a general description
of the plan. The following
are examples of services NOT covered by your Century Preferred Health Plan. Please irqr, to youi
Certificaie/Evidence
Coverage/Sutnmqry Bookletfor more details: Cosmetic surgeries and services,.
care; genetii testing;
7f
hearing aids; refraclive eye surgery; serttices and supplies related to, as well as the"rr,oiiol
performor", o7 sex changJ
operations; surgical and non'surgical sertices related to TMJ syndrone; travel t*pinirt; vision
tfierapy; ,uii"",
rettdered prior lo your cantraca effective date or rendered afier your contrad terndnation
date; and wiikers,

compensation.

A product of Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shieldserving residcnts and businesses in the State ofconnecticut,

,{nthem.&W
TOWN OF GUILFOI{O
FD 001,100,141, 142,143,144 & 145

85 COPAYMENT GENEMC DRUGS
$IO COPAYMENT BNAND NAME DRUGS

Unlimited Maximum

For Century Preferred PIan
Descrintion of Benefits
Generic drugs

You aav:
The term "generic" refcrs to lhe active chcmical ingrcdient contalned ln a
prescription drug. Generic drugs must contain the same active ingredient as tleir
brand-name counterpart

Brond-name drugs

The term "brand-name" refers !o the advertislng name ofa prescription

Annual Maximum

Per member per calendsr year

drus.

$s

$lo
unllrni'led

Pharmacy Programs
Voluntary Mail-scrrlce Program
Members have access to Anthem Rx. the volunlary mait-service drug progran for members who regularly take
one tr more types of maintenance drugs,
Members can order up to a 100-day supply of these medications and trave them de livered direcrly ri ttt.ii hor.,
Thcre is , dj .opryr.nt when using rhr
nail order service. The unlimited maximum applies.

National Pharmacy Network
Members also have access to a nctwork of more than 53,000 participating pharmacies rhroughout the country. Membcre
should go to;
wrryru,A{them.c0m to locate a participating pharmacy when traveling oubide the state.

Points to Remember

Full Payment for Prescription Drugs Purchased at A participoting pharmacy
Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield will provide covcrage for prescription dnrgs dispensed by a participating pharmacy when
prescription drugs are medically
necessary and dispensed pursuant to a prescription issued by a physician. subject to copaymenl

Prescription Drugs From A Non-particlpating Pharmacy
Mcmbcrs rvho fill prescriptions at a non-participating pharmacy arc responsible for payment at thc time thc presoiption
is filled, Memben must submit claims
to An6em Blue Cross and BIue Shield lor reimburscment and payment will be sent to the member. Membirs
who usc non-participaring phannacies will pay
20o/oof he in-netwo* allowance plus the difference behveenArthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield's payment and
tle pharmacist's actual charge,

Llnu\s and Exclwiora
Tl e moxinum suppu ora prcscilPllon dfuLlot which benelils will be provlded when disperced,under any
one prcsuiption

is a 100-do! suppl! ot 1\\-unit dose,
whlchVel is greote4 and up to a l1a-doy supply Jor any covered drug ased Iot the truilmeil of certain cironic'condiiots,
All prxutittons'aie sublect to the
quanilO limitotiow imposed by state andlederal stututes,
Th.is drug tider doa not provide drugt dispensed by othy lhan a,licensed, rctail phatmocy. An! dtug not
rcqaircdlot the trc4meil ot pta,enlion of illness ot

facility; arugs 1ot ui in connecrioniilh arug idiiction; angt rhat may be purchosed
toothpastesBels rnd mourhiasheshinsa.
This is not a legol contncl It is only a generul desulptton olthe Sigenerict$lb bntnd nome Cop-ayment Pracrtplion
Drug Ridsr with an untinlted ilaxlrrum

co-vered drug; ptacilptions dlspensed ln a hosPitot ot sktued ilunlng
t

'ithoat

a prcscdptlon (non-Iegend &ugs); antibacteilat soaps/de*rgents, sndnpioi,

&lthem"@rW
GEA PPO-20 PLAJ\
Firm fl)03846-001
Town of Guilford
Cenfury Preferred - $20l$l 50/$ I 00/$t 50
BeneJits st a Glurce

In Network
You pay:

Out-of-Network
You pay:

$20

Deductible &
Coinsursnce
Deductible &
Coinsurancee
Not covered

(ov)
(rrsP)

$r50
$7s

ent

Outpatient

admitted

sl 00

$100

$1s0

Not applicable

Deductible &
Coinsurance
s200i$400/$s00
20oh alter deductible
up to

Unlimited

Unlimited

No Charse
No Charge
No Charse
No Charse
No Charge

Deductible &
Coinsurance

rgery Ccpayment
uctible

membet

ce

rance

+ member

Maximum
CARE

2
- one exam
one
exam
-

I bateline age 35 - 39 yean I screenlng per year age 4tt

Addtrtonal exams when

'- covered

OVCopayment

CARE
care
OV Cooayment
OV Copavment

car€
care - initlal visit

to

Deductible &
Coinsursnce

ov

no

No Charse
No Charge

and

Allergy Services
Ol/ice visits/testng
Iniections--40 visits in 3 vearc

$20 Copayment
No Charge

AL CARE -

room
newborn care
to 120

lo
h

calendat
calendar

of

HSP Copayment
HSP Copayment
No Charse
OS Conavment

Deductible &
Coinsurance

ENCY
Walk-in centers

-ut

$75 Copayment
cenlefs

$75 Copsvment

waived

$100 Cooavment

No Charse

OTTIER
TH
Outpatient reha
50 vlslt moxtmunfor PT, OT, $T and Chiro per year

Sl0 Copapnent

&
covered
$100 Conavment
No chrrge

Deductible &
Coinsurance

No charge
No charge

MENTAL

ABUSE CA-RX
m

OV Copsvment

Deductible &
Coinsurance

* Schedule of health examinations:

Age0uptoagel-Tvisits
Agelupto4ge5-Tvisits
Age 5 up to age 12 - I every year

Age 12 up to age 22 - I every year
Age23+ - I everyyear
Note: In situations where the member is responsibte for obtaining the necessar5i precertification
or prior
authorization and fails to do so, benefits may be reduced or denied.
Please refer to the sp.eciooffers@4nrhem(previously Heatttty opportunities) brochure

information on the discounts we offer on health-related serryices and products.

in your enrollment kit for

**I)ependents covered to age26
This does not constitute your health plan or insurance poticy, It is only a general descriplion
of the plan. The
are examples of semices NoT covered by yoir Century erejenJa neakh ptai, please refer your
to
Qilotv:ng
CertificatdEvidence of Couemgdsantmary Bookletfor more ditaitsi cosmetic surgeiles and semlceslcustodid
care;
genetic testinS; hearing aids; refractive eye surgery; semices and supplies relarcd
6, as well as the performance oJ,,
sex change operations; surgical and non-surgical services retated ti TMJ syndromel
travel expenses; vision therapy;
services rendered prior to your conlrncl effeclive date or rendered after yoir controct termination
datel and workers,
compensalion,

A product of Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield serving residents and businesses in the State

of Connecticut.

Anthem.t&W
GEA PPO.2O PLAN
Town of Guilford
FD #003846
CENTURY PREFERRED PIan
MANAGED R)L 3 TIER
Benefits at a Glence
65 COPAYMENT GENENC DRUGS

8I 5 COPAYMENT LISTED BMND.NAME DRUGS
$2 5 COPAYME NT NON.LISTED BMND.NAME DRAGS

IIow To Use 3-Tier Managed Rx

Unlimited Annual Maxlmum

3-Tier Managed Rx hss three different levels (or "tiers") of copayments, dependlng on the type of prescription
drug you purchase (see the chart below for details). Your copayments will be tower when you use generic or
brand-name medications that are on our list of preferred prescription drugs. The medications on this list are
selected for their qualityr safety end cost-effectiveness. You'll still have coverage brand-name drugs that are not
on the list, but your copayment will be higher,

Talk to your provider about using generic drugs or listed brand-neme drugs. It's a simple way to save out-ofpocket expenses.

Copayments and Day Supplies

'
'

You will be responsible for one copayment when purchasing a 30-day supply of prescription drugs from a
retail pharmacy.
You'll be responsible for two copayments when purchasing a 30-day to 100-day supply of maintenance drugs
through the voluntary mail-service progrem (see chart for details).

Generic Drugs }fave the Lowest Copayment
Your coomtment;

Tler l: Generic drugs

The tenn "generic" rcfers to a pr.escription dmg thst is not
protected by a trademark It is required to meet the same
bioequivalency test as the original brand-name drug. Tier I
copayment applies.

$5

Tier 2; Listed brrnd-name

The term'(listed brand-namett refens to a brand-name
prescription drug that ls on Anthem Blue Cross and Blue
Shield's list of preferred prescription drugs. Tier Z

$r5

drugs

C.0DaYnt€nt applies,

Tier 3: NonJisted bnrnd-name
drugs

Mail Service
Annual Maximum

The term'tnon-listed brand-nrme" refers to a brand-name $Zs
prescription drug that is not on Anthem BIue Cross and Blue
Shield's list of preferred prescription drugs. Tier 3
coDevment applies.

lTwo) copayment(s) per l{X)
Per member per calendaryear

sl0, st0, $50
Unllmlted

Seneric Substitution
Prescrlptions will be lilled with the generic equivalent when there is one evailable. Exception: If your doctor
indicates "Dispense as Written." In this case you will receive the brand-name drug-and you will be responsible
(I)ispense
for the appticable listed brand or non-listed brand copayment. NOTE: If your doctor does zot indicate
as Written," you will be responsible for the applicable listed brand or nonJisted brand-name copayment as well as
the difference in cost between the generic and listed brsnd or non-listed brcnd name drug.

Volunta rv Mail-Service Prosram

Exnress Sciints. our votuntarv mail-servicc drug Drogramr can $$ve you time anil exFeuse if vou regularly tnke
on6 or more iypes of maintenance drugs" You cfu oriler uf to a l0t)-iiay supply of thbse medicationi and have
them delivered directly to your home.

Two mail-service copayments will apply as follows: $10, $30' $50

National Pharmacy Network
Members also have access to a network of more than 65,000 retail pharmacies throughout the country. Members
may call l-E00-962-E192- to locate a participating pharmecy when traveling outside the state.

Non-Participating Pha rmacies
Members who fill prescriptions et a non-perticipating pharmacy are responsible for payment at the time the
prescription is lilled. Members must submit claims to Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield for reimbursement, and
payment will be sent to the member. Members who use non-participating pharmacies will pay 20Yo of the in-network
allowance, plus the difference between Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shieldts payment and the pharmacist's actual
charge.

Limits and Exclusions
Benefits are llmlted to tro more than a 30-day supply for covered drugs purchased at a retail pharmacy, and no
more than a 100-day supply for covered drugs purchased by mail service. All prescriptions are subject to the
quantity limitations imposed by state and federal statutes.
Benefits for prescription birth control and Sexual Dysfunction medications are optional for groups such as yours.
Check with your benefits administrator to find out whether or not you have such benelits.
This is not a legal conlracl It ls only a general description of the Managed Rx, 3 Tier version, Please consult the
Evidence of Coverage or prescription drug riderfor a complele description of benelits and exclusions applicable to

your coverage.

Lumenos HSA plan Summary

Anthem"@W

The lumenoss HSA plan is designed to empower you

\

to take control of your health, as well as
the dollars you spend on your hearth care, lhis pran gives you the
benefits you wcurd reeeive
from a typical hearth pran, plus hearth care dofiarsio spend your
way. And you'il haue
access to personalized services snd online tools to help you reach your
health potential.

Your Lumenos HSA Plan

First. Use your HSA to pay for covered services:
Health Savings Account
With the Lumenos Health Savings Account (HSA),
you can contribute pre{ax dollars to your HSA

account. Others may also contribute dollars to your
account. You can use these dollars to help meet your
annual deductible responsibility. Unused dollars can
be saved or invested and accumulate through

Gontributions to Your HSA
For 2018, contributions can be made to your HSA up to the following

$3,450 individual coverage
$6,900 family coverage

Note: These limits apply to all combined contributions from any source,

retirement.

Plus - To help you stay healthy, use;

Preventive Care

Preventive Care

100% coverage for nationally recommended services,

No deductions from the HSA or out-of-pocket costs for you

lncluded are the preventive care services that meet the
requirements of federal and state law, including certain
screenings, immunizations and physician visits.

Plus

-

Your Bridge Responsibility
The Bridge is an amount you pay out ofyour pocket
until you meet your annual deductible reiponiiUitity.

as long as you receive
your preventive care from an in-network provider, lf you
choose tdgo to an out-ofnetwork provider, your deductibre or Traditionar Heaith coverage

binefits wiil appry

Bridge
Your Bridge responsibility will vary.

Annual Deductibte Responsibitity
ln Network and Out of Network providers

Your Bridge amount will vary depending on how

$2,000 individualcoverage

many of your HSA dollars, if any, you choose to

$4,000 family coverage

spend to help you meet your annual deductible
responsibility. lf you contribute HSA dollars up to the
amount of your deductible and use them, your Bridge

willequal $0.
HSA dollars spent on covered services plus your
'
Bridge Responsibility add up to your annual
deductible responsibility.
Health Account + Bridge Deductible
=

lf needed -

Traditional Health Goverage

Your Traditional Health Coveragebegins after you
have met your Bridge responsibility.

Additional protection;
For your protection, the total amount you spend out
of your pocket is limited. Once you spend that
amount, the plan pays 100% of the cost for
covered services for the remainder of the plan year

Traditional Health Coverage
After your Bridge, the plan pays:
100% for in-network

providers

B0% for oulof_network providers

Annual Ouhof.Pocket Maximum
ln-Network

Providers Out-of.Network providers
coverage $ 5,000 individual coverage
coverage $10,000 famity coverage

$3 000 individual
$6,000 family

Your annual out-of-pocket maxrmum consists of funds you spend
from your HSA, your Bridge
responsibility and your coinsurance amounts.

lf you have questions, please call toll-free l_ggg-224_4g96.
Town of Guilford cEA FD # 003846-001 ptan eff I -1-2018

Lu menos HSA Pla n Su m ma ry

Anthem"&W
1'.,,,ii]

. r.

\ \\
..\

Tools and Personalized Services

You will have access to our award-winning online health site and the following programs to help you reach your health potential:
Future Moms: lndividualized obstetric support for expectant high-risk and non-high+isk mothers, .
Online Wellness Toolkit: All covered adults can join the program, complete the Well-Being Assessment and set up a Well-Being plan.
Enroll in ConditionCare: Disease management for prevalent, high-cost conditions (asthma, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
coronary artery disease and heart failure). Members who have more than one health problem will enroll in one combined program
not

-

separate ones for each condition.
Graduate from Conditioncare Members who have more than one health problem will graduate from one combined program
separate ones for each condition.

- not

Summary of Covered Servlces

Preventive Care
Anthem's Lumenos HSA plan covers preventive services recommended by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, the American
Cancer Society, the Advisory Committee on lmmunization Practices (ACIP) and the American Academy of Pediatrics. The preventive
Care benefit includes screening tests, immunizations and counseling services designed to detect and tieat medical conditions to
prevent avoidable premature injury, illness and death.
All preventive services received from an in-network provider are covered a]100%,are not deducted from your HSA and do not apply to
'
your deductible. lf you see an out-of-network provider, then your deductible or out-of-network coinsurance, responsibility
will apply.
The following is a list of covered preventive care services:

well Baby and well child Preventive care

Adult preventive care

Office Visits through age 18; including preventive vision exams.

Office Visits after age 18; including preventive vision exams.

Screening Tests for vision, hearing, and lead exposure. Also
includes pelvic exam, Pap test and contraceptive management for
females who are age 18, or have been sexually active.

Screening Tests for vision and hearing, coronary artery disease,
colorectal cancer, prostate cancer, diabetes, and osteoporosis. Also
includes mammograms, as well as pelvic exams, pap test and
contraceptive management.

lmmunizations:
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Diphtheria, Tetanus, Pertussis (DtaP)
Varicella (chicken pox)
lnfluenza - flu shot
Pneumococcal Conjugate (pneumonia)
Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) - cervical cancer
H. lnfluenza type b
Polio

lmmunizations:
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Diphtheria, Tetanus, Pertussis (DtaP)
Varicella (chicken pox)
lnfluenza - flu shot
Pneumococcal Conjugate (pneumonia)
Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) - cervical cancer

Measles, Mumps, Rubella (MMR)

lf you have questions, please call toll-free I-8A8-224-4896,
Town of Guilford cEA FD # 003840,001 plan eff 7-1-2018

Anthem"4W
,

']i

Lumenos HSA Plan Summary

lt

r:'

Summary of Covered Services {Continued}

Medical Care
Anthem's Lumenos HSA plan covers a wide range of medical services to treat an illness or
injury. You can use your available HSA funds
to pay for these covered services. once you spend up to your deductible amount for covered'services,
you will have Traditional Health
Coverage available to help pay for additional covered services.
The following is a summary of covered medical services under Anthem's Lumenos HSA plan:

r Physician Office Visits
r lnpatient Hospital Services

. Outpatient Surgery Services
. Diagnostic X+ays/Lab Tests
. Emergency Hospital Services
. lnpatient and Outpatient Mental Health and Substance Abuse

r Maternity Care

. Chiropractic Care
. Prescription Drugs
. Home health care and hospice care
. Physical, Speech and Occupational Therapy Services

r Durable Medical Equipment

Services

some covered services may have limitations or other restrictions, with Anthem's Lumenos HSA plan,

.
r'

the following services are limited:

skilled nursing facility services limited to 100 days per member per calendar year,
Home Health care seryices limited to 200 visits per member per calendar year,
lnpatient rehabilitative services limited to 100 days per member per calendar year,

PT/OT/ST and chiropractic services limited to a combined total of 50 visits pei member per calendar year
.' lnpatienthospitalizations require authorizations.
' Your Lumenos HSA plan includes an unlimited lifetime maximum for in- and out-olnetwork services.

* For a complete

list of exclusions and limitations, please reference your certiflcate of coverage,

Prescription Drugs - copay after deductible (when purchased from a network pharmacy*)
Retail (30 day supply)

$5Tierl copayment
$15 Tier 2 copayment
$25 Tier 3 copayment
*

Mail Order (90 day supply)
$10 Tier 1 copayment
$30 Tier 2 copayment
$50 Tier 3 copayment

For the out-of-network benefit, refer to the Traditional Health Coverage section

This summary of benefits has been updated to comply with federal and state requirements, including
applicable provisions of the recenfly
enacted federal health care reform laws. As we receive additional guidance and clarification
on the-new'health care reform laws from the U.s.
Department of Health and Human Services, Department of Labor aid lnternal Revenue
Service, we may ne required to make additional
changes to this summary of benefits,

lf you have questions, please calltoll-free t-ggg-Z}4-4gg6
Town of Guitford cEA FD # 003846-001 ptan efIT-t_2018

Lumenos HSA Plan Summary

Anthem,ffiW
'\

\

Ihis sumnary is a brief outline of tbs benefits 6[d eoveruge provided undrr the tumenos plln, lt is n0t
c0flrplete list 0f th? benefilr 0f ths Flan. This summary is for a firlt year in the Lumenos plBfi. tfyou
a qualified change

intended to bo a

i0in the plnn mi*year 0r have

ofstatus, your a0tual boneft levels may vrry.

Additional limitations and exclusions may apply.

Anthem"'&W

of llew llanpshire' lnc' ln Maine. Anthem Sluo 0rors and the $hield is tho trade name of Anthem Health Plaus
0lu0 Cr0ss and Bhts shi0ld Ass0clalitn.

$ R8gisterert mtrks 8fu0 cr0s.s aild Slus

of l4aino, lne., lndependent licensees of the

Shield Association. rt LUMtfl0s is a regislsrrd trademark.

lf you have questions, please calltoil-free t-g}g-Z}4_4gg6,
Town of Guilford cEA FD # 003846-001 ptan eff 7-1-2018

EXHIBIT C
SALARY SCHEDULE - Juty 1,2016-lune 3;0, 2017

B TAALE (HOURLY RATE}
STEP

B5

a4
B3

82
B.l

2

1

$ {6.29 $ 16.76
$ 15.38 $ 1s.8r
$ 14.51 $ 14.91
$ r3.70 $ 14.06
$ 12.90 $ 13-26

3

4

5

6

s 17-21 $ 17.69 s 1a-t7 $ 18-68
$ 16.23 $ 16.69 s 17-14 $ 17.52
$ 1s.32 $ {5-75 $ 16.16 $ 16.63
$ r4.4s $ 14.85 s {5.25 $ {s.68
$ 1s.62 $ 13.99 $ 12L38 $ 14.78

7

$ 19-18
$ 18.10
$ 17.07
$ {6.10
$ ls.r8

I

8

to

s 19.7t $ 2025 ffi-e2

$ {8.59 s 19.r { $ rr.63
$ 17.54 $ 18.O2 $ 18.52
$ 16.s4 $ 17.Or $ 17.48
$ 15.60 $ 16.03 $ 16.47

11

T-r.ss ffi

12

ffi

13

$ 2018 $ ,o?3 $ ,{30
19.O4 $ 19.s5 $ 20.09
17.96 $ 18.44 $ 18.e7
$ r6.93 $ 17.38 $ 17.87
$
$

14

ffi'

ffi

15

$ ?t-90 T
$ 20.6s $

zs16

$
$

20-o2
14.a7

19.47
18.35

$
$

21.21

N TABLE (HOURLY RATE)
STEP

N7
N6
N5

l{4
Irt3

N2

N{

1

2

3

4

$ 16-35 $ 16.80 $ 17.26
$ {5.41 $ 1s.85 $ 16.27
$ {4.56 s {4.96 $ {5.36
$ 13.74 $ 14.10 $ 14.sO
$ 12.94 $ 13.30 $ 13.68
$ lLn $ 1?-s? $ 12-90
$ 1.t-54 $ 11.84 $ 1Zn

$ 17.73
$ 16.74
$ 15.79
$ 14.90
$ 14.04
$ '1326
$ 1252

5

6

7

I

a

1(,

$ 18.22 $ 18.7s $ {9.23 $ 19.77 $ 20.3{ $ ,0.8?
$

17.17

$

17.66

$

18.24

$ {6.2{ $ 16.67 $ r7.1t
$ 15.30 $ 15.74 $ {6.rs
$ 1444 $ 14.84 s 15.24
$ 1353 $ l4.oo $ 1
5 12^8s $ 13.21 $ 13.s8

$ {8.64 $ 19.{ 5
$ 17.s9 $ { 8.O8
$ 16.62 $ 17.o5
$ 1s-66 $ {6.08
$ 14.7A $ 15.39
$ 13.94 $ 14.33

$
s
$

$
$
s

19-68

18.5?
17.54
16.s2
1s.60
14.73

11

ffi

12

{3

ffi-

ffi

14

t5

ffieo''

s
2|0'22 $ 20?8 s 2135 $ 21.94 $
-i.45
$ {r.o8 $ {g$t $ 2015 $ 20.69 $
$ {8.O{ $ {a,st $ {9.O3 $ 1g.ss $
$ {6.9e $ 17.45 $ {7.94 $ 18.42
$ 16.03 $ {6.47 $ r6,93 $ 17.38
$ { s.11 $ 15.ss $ 1s.97 $ 16.41

$
$
$

2254
2126
20.04
18.93
17.AA

16.86

E TABLE (ANilUAL SALARY. /TO HRS/UYEEIq

STEP
E7
E6
E5
E4
E3
E2

E'

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

a

$ 69,939.S7

I

$ 71,863.22

10

11

12

$ 75,A7O.O4

$ 77P56.47

l3

14

$ ao,loo.27

15

$ a2,3O3.O3

$ 84,565.36

$ 86,891,94

i a9,2A1,47

$ 91,736.70

$ 69,597.53

$ 94,259.46

$ 71F11.47

$ 96Fsr.6O

$ 73,478.04

$ 99,5{5.O2

$ 7s,498.6a

$ 77,574.a9

s

$ 102,251.6A

$ 63,a43.19

$ 6s,59a.a9

$ 57,4O2.a5
$ 6{,a45.93

$ 7't,160.98

^,r""r" $$ 75,128.65 $ 44,152.43 $ a6,466.63 $ aa,s44.46

$ 9f,2A7.68

$ 69,256.rtit

$

$ 63,5116.69

$ 651294.23

$ 73t.t17.90
$ 67,089.A2

$ 56,749.69

$ 5a,3ro.3t

$ s9,913.84

$ 61,s61.47

$ 52,056.54

$ 54,959.02

$ 64{57.64

$ 65,92r.9A

$ 73,A39,46
$ 67,734.83

$ 5a,453,1a

I 60,471.53

$ 62,,t34.49

$ s4ool.o3
$ 49 551.21

$ s5,486.Os

$ 57,01{.92

$ 5a,579.75

$ 5O,19O.6a

$ 50,913-a7

$ 5a314.OO

$ s3,7s2.64

$ 45,1153.37

$ 46,703.35

$ 47,987.68

$ 49,3O7.3s

$ 41,682,36

$ 42,a2A.62

I 44,0lJ6.41

$ 45,216.s9

$ s5,23o.a4
$ 50,6$.29
s 46,460,04

$ 47,737.69

$ 53,4a8,lo
5 49,0S!.47

$ 38,23a.16

$ 39,289.7t

$ 4O,37O.17

$ 41,4aO.35

$ 42,621.06

$ 43,793.14

$ 44.g97.4s

ar,9oo.ta

$ 77,r94.69

93,79A.O9

$ 79,3r7,5s $ 8r,498.78
$ 72,77A34 $ 74,779.74

$ 58,934.2'
$ 63,254.41

$ 7O,a3O.sO

$ 5a,o23.32

$ 59,6{8,97

$ 501399.36

$ 56,47O.3a
$ 51,7a535

$ 53,2o9./r5

$ s4,672.7O

$ 46,234.88

$ 47,505.34

I 4a,a72.76

$ a3,739.99 $ 86,042.84
$ 76,A36.18 $ 78,949.1A
$ 66'7A1.24 $ 6a,539.24 $ 7O,5O4.7t $ 72,rt43.54
$ 61,2s8.49 $ 62,943.09 $ 64,674.03 $ 66,452,56
$ 56,175.20 $ 57,721.05 $ 59,308.38 $ 60,939.36

$ 5O,1s5.12

$ 51,534.3a

$ 52,951.57

$ s4,4O7.75

t2

13

'14

$ 64,993.9{

$ 55,903.95

E TABLE (ANilUAL SALARY - 35 HRSTWEEK)

STEP

I

2

3

4

5

6

EE

7

$ 6{,196.91

I

$ 6aa79.82

I

$ 64,609.0t

{o

11

$ 66,3as.76

$ 6a,2{1.36

$ 72,014.58

$ 57,681.27

$ 59,267.st
$ s4367.2s

$ 7A,120.66

$ 62,s72.(A

$ 40,268.99

$ 66,060,A2

$ 73,994,98
$ 67,a7t.4!t

$ 76,O29.a4

5 6(),A97.37

$ 7O,Oa7,r9
J 64,292,77

$ a2,476.38 $ 8,4744.45 $ a7,o74A4

$ 69,744.13

$ 711662.09

$ 55,a62.36
$ s{,2s6.a7

$ 73,632.aO

$ 57,398.56

$ 5a,977-O3

$ 6O,59a.89

$ 62,265.36

$ 63,977.66

$ 55,737.(H

$ 75,6s7.7O
$ 69,402.3{

S 52,666-114

$ 54,'114.76

$ 5s,6O2.91

$ s7,l32.OO

$ 5a,7O3.13

$ 60,317.46

$ 67,544.A2
$ 61,976.19

$ 4a,326.s9

$ 49,655.sA

$ sl,o2r.1t

$ 52,424..t9 $ s3,a6s.86

$ ,14,330.03

$ 45,549.11

E7
E6
E5
E4
E3
E2

-El

$ s6,.t37.49
$ 51,496.03

$ 52,912.16

$ 47,2s0.s2

$ 44,549.91

$ 49,aA5.04

$ 43,356.96

$ 44,549.28

$ 45,774.39

$ 391771.39
$ 3q471,7-l

$ 4O,a65.1O

I 41,9Aa.89

$ 47,O33.r9
s 43,r4s.59

$ 46,AOr.7t

$ 4a,oaa.75

$ 37,474.75

$ 3A,5O5.3O

$ 39,564,19

$ 4O,6s2.21

$ 41,770-15 $ 42,91A.a2

s 34.37A.22

$ 35,323.62

$ 36,295.02

$ 37,293.13

$ 34,318.69

s 33,458.12

$ 39,372.115

$ 77t738'25
$ 7t,3lo.a6

$ 69,079,9A
$ 63,387.63
$ 58,145.s3
$ 53,321.52
$ 4a,9{s.57

$ zt4rogg.ut

$ 55,347.16
$ 49A11-2O $ 5O!77O.OO
$ 45,311.a2 $ 46,5s7.9O

$ 47,a3A.23

$ 79,a76.O8
3 7s,271.92
$ 63,6aO.54 $ 6s,431.76 $ 67,23r.13
$ sa,433.r2 $ 60,040.03 $ 6{,69t.12
$ 53,600.76 $ 55,O74.7A $ 56,5a932
$ 49,'t53.79 $ 5O,5Os,52 $ 5l!a94.41

$ 4O,455.2O

$ 41,567.72 $ 42,71O,A3

$ 43,Aa53a

$ 45,092.22 $ 46,332.26 $ 47,606.39

$ s6,a69,21
$ 52,{66.19

15

$ a9,469.51
$
"rnrr.68
$ 75,286.a9

EXHIBIT C
SALARY SCHEDULE - Juty 1,2017^Iune 30, 201g

B TABLE (HOURLY RAIE)
STEP

a5
84
E:I

82

B'

2

3

$ 15.76 $ 17.21
$ {5.8{ $ { 6.23
$ 14,91 $ 15-32
$ 14.06 $ 14.4s
$ {3.26 $ 13.62

$
$

$
$
$

4
17.69
16.69
15.7s
:t4.8s
13.99

6

5

7

$ {8.17 $ 18.68 $ r9.18
$ 17.14 $ {7-62 $ {8.10
$ 15.16 $ {6,63 $ 17.07
$ 15.25 $ 1s.68 $ 16.'rO
s 14.38 $ 14.78 $ 15-18

I

a

$
$

19.71

18.59

{o

11

12

14

13

$ 20.25 $ 20-a2 $ 21.38 $ 21.97 $ 22.5A $ 23.20
$ r9.{1 $ 19.63 $ 20.18 $ 20.73 $ 21.30 $ 21.90
$ r8.o2 $ 18.52 $ 19.o4 $ 19.56 $ 20.09 $ 20.65

$ 17.s4
$ 16.s4 $ {7.O{ $ {7.48 $ { 7.96 $ 18.44 $ {8.S7 $ 15.47
$ rs.60 $ 16.03 $ 16.47 $ 15.S3 $ 17.38 $ 17.A7 $ 18.3s

N TABLE (HOURLY RATE)

STEP
IrlT

N6
N5
H4
N3
N2

NI

2

$

s
$
$
$
$
$

16.80
15.8s
14.96
14.tO
13.30
12.57
{ 1.84

3

4

5

$ 17.26 j 17.73
$ 16.27 $ 16.74
$ 15.36 $ {s.79
$ 14.50 s 14.90
$ {3.68 $ {4.04
$ l2-90 $ 13.26
$ 12.17 $ 12.52

6

7

I

I

10

11

$ 18.22 $ 18.73 $ {9.23 $ 19.77 $ 20.31 $ 20.87 $ 21-4s
$ 17.17 $ r7.66 s 18.24 $ {8.64 $ {9.{s $ {9.68 $ 20..22
$ 16.21 $ 16.67 $ 17.11 $ 17.59 $ { 8.08 $ 18.57 $ 19.O8
$ 15.30 $ t s.74 $ 16.15 $ r5.62 $ 17-06 $ {7.54 $ 18.O1
$ 14.44 $ 14-84 $ 15.24 $ 15.66 $ r 6.08 $ 16.s2 $ 15.9e
$ {3.53 $ {4.OO $ 14.38 $ 14.78 $ {5.39 $ 15.60 $ {5.O3
$ {2.8s $ 13-21 $ {3.sa $ 13.94 $ {4.33 $ 14.73 $ r 5.11

12

13

$ 22.04 $ 22.64
$ 20,78 $ 21.3s
$ { 9.61 $ 20.{5
s 18.5{ $ 19.03
s 17.4s $ 17.94
$ {6.47 $ {6.93
$

15.55

$

15.97

14

$ 23.27
$

21.94

$ 20.69

$ r g.ss

$ {8.42

$ 17.38
$ {6.41

E TABLE (ANHUAL SALARY. 40 HRS/WEEK)

STEP

2

3

4

5

EA

$ 71,A63,22

$ 73,a39.46
$ 67,734.83
$ 52,134.49

$ 75,A7O.04

$ 77,956.47

E7
E6
E5
E4
E3
E2
ri

EI

6

7

a

$ 8O,rOO.27 $ 82,303.03 $ 84,566.36
$ 65,92r.9a
$ 59,s97-53 $ 71,511.47 $ 73,47A.O4 $ 7s,49a.68 i 77,574.a9
$ 60,471,53
$ 63ra43..t9 $ 65,59A.89 $ 67,402.8s $ 69,256.43 $ 71,150.98
$ 5s,486.O5 $ 57,Ot{.92 $ 58,579.75 $ 60,190.6A $ 51,a45.93 $ 63,546.69 $ 65,294.23
$ 50,913.a7 $ 52,314.00 $ 53,752.64 $ 55,230.84 $ 56,749.69 $ 58,3tO.31 $ 59,9t3.84
$ 46,703.35 $ 47,987.58 $ 49,307.35 $ 50,653.29 $ 52,Os6.54 $ 53,488.10 $ s4,959.02
$ 42,A29'62 $ 44,OO6-4t $ 45,216.59 $ 46,460.04 s 47,737-69 $ 49,O5O-47 $ 50,399.36
$ 39,289.7t $ 40,370.17 $ 41,460.35 $ 42,621.06 $ 43,793.t4 $ 214,997.4It $ 46,234.88

9

to

11

12

$ 86,A91.94

$ 89,28{.47
$ a1,gOO.tA

$ 91,736.70
$ a4J52.43

$ 94,259.46
$ a6,466.63

$ 73,t 17.90

$ 75,12a.65 $ 77,r94.69
$ 68,934.79 $ 7O,a3O.5O
$ 61,s6.t,47 $ 63,254.41 $ 64,993,91
$ 55,470.38 $ 58,023.32 $ 59,61a.97
$ 5r,785.35 $ s3,2O9.45 $ 54,672.70
$ 47,s06,34 $ 48,a12.76 $ 50,r55.12

$ 79,317.55

$ 67,089.82

$ 72,'17A34
$ 65,781.24
$ 6,t,258.49
$ s6,176.2O
$ 51,5343a

$ 79,7OA.2O

13

14

$ 96,A51.60 $ 99,s15.02
$ 88,844.46 $ 91,287.6a
$ 81,498.7a $ 83,739.99

$ 74,779.74 $ 76,a36.1a
$ 6A,639.24

$ 701504.71

$ 62,943.09

$ 64,674,03

$ 57,721.05

$ 593oa.3a

$ s2,951.57

$ s4,4O7-75

ETABLE (ANNUALSALARY- 35 HRSTWEEK)
STEP

2
3
$ 62,879.82 $ 54,609.01

4

5

6

$ 66,385.76
$ 60,a97.37

$ 68,211.36
$ 62,572.04

$ 70,O87.t9

$ 55,A52,36
$ s1356.87

$ 57,39A.56

$ 52,666.44

$ 44,549.28 $ 4s,774-39

$ 47,033.{9

$ 48,326.59

$ 4o,a6s-to $ 4r,988.89
$ 37,474-75 $ 38,505.30
$ 34,A7A-22 $ 35,323.52

$ 43,t43-59

$ 114,330.03

$ 72,O14-5A
s 64,292.77 $ 66,060.82
$ sE,977.03 $ 50,s9a.89
$ 54,114.75 $ 55,602.9{
$ 49,65s.5a $ 51,O2t.tr
$ 4s,s49.rl $ 46,aot.71

$ 39,554.19

$ 40,652.21

$ 36,295.02

$ 37,293.13

E8
E7
E6
E5

$ s7,68r-27
$ 52,912..16

E4
E2

E{

$ 48,549-9t

$ s9,257.s1
$ 54,357.25
$ 49,a85.04

7

a
$ 23,994.98

9

{o

11

12

{3

14

$ a4,744-1A
s 77,73A2A

$ a7,o74.a4

$ 79,a76.Oa

$ 71,3,r0.86

$ 73..271.92

$ sz,r32.OO

$ 76,029.84 $ 78,t2O-66 $ 40,26a.99
$ 69,744.13 $ 71,662.09 $ 73,632.EO
$ 63,977.66 $ 65!737.04 $ 67,544-E2
$ 58,703.t3 $ 60,317.46 5 6.r,976.t9

$ 52,424.19

$ 53,a6s.86

$ 55,347.16

$ 56,A69.21

$ 4E,O8a.75

$ 49,411.20

$ so,77o.oo

$ 52,166.19

s 41,770-15 $ 42,9rA.82

$ 45,311.82

$ 46,557.90

$ 47,a38.23

$ 38,3rA.69

$ 55,O74.7a
$ 50,505.52

$ 56,589.32

$ 44,099.09

$ 42,476.38
$ 75,6s7.7O
$ 69,402.31
$ 63,680.54
$ 58,2xt3.12
5 53,600.76
$ 49,1s3.79

$ 4O#s5.2O

$ 41,567,72 $ 42,7tO.83

$ 43,aE5JA

$ 45,092.22 $ :16,332.26

$ 47,606.39

$ 39,372.45

$ 67,A77.49
$ 62,265.35

$ 65,431.75 s 67i231.13
$ 5O,O4O.03 $ 61,691.12
$ 51,a94.41

B TABLE

RATE)

STEP

85

3

$

17.21

v

$ {6.23

B:I

$
$
$

92

BI

EXHIBIT C
SALARY SCHEDULE - July 1, 2018June 30, 2019

15.32
14.45
13.62

4

5

$ { 7.6e $ 18-17
$ 16.69 $ 17.r4
$ 15.7s $ {6,16
$ r4.8s $ t5.2s
$

13.99

$

14.38

5

$
$
$

7

8

$ 19.1a $ {9.71
17.62 $ {8.10 $ 18-s9
16.63 $ 17.07 $ r7.s4
$ {s.68 $ 16.10 $ 16.54
$ 14.78 $ 15.18 $ 1s-60
18.68

$
$
$

9
20.25
I 9.11
18.O2

10

$
$

20.82
19.63

11

12

13

$ 2{.38 $ 21-97 $ 22.5a

$

20.18

$

20.73

$

21.30

$ {8.s2 $ r 9.o4 $ {9.s6 $ 20.09

s t7.ol $ 17.4a $ {7.96 $ 1A.44 $ 18.97
$ 16.03 $ 16.47 $ 16.9s $ {7-3A $ 17.A7

N TABLE (HOURLY RATE}

STEP
N7

N6
N5

N4
N3
N2

NI

3

4

5

s {7.26 s 17.73 s 18.22

6

7

$ 18.73 $ {9.23
$ 16.27 $ 16.74 s 17.17 $ 17.66 $ 1A.24
$ 1s.36 s {s.79 s 16-2r $ :15.67 s 17-11
s 14-50 $ 14.90 $ 15-30 $ 1s.74 $ {6.15
$ ts.68 $ 14.04 $ 14.44 $ 14.84 $ 15.24
$ {2.90 $ 1s.26 s {3.s3 $ t4.oo $ 14.38
$ 12.17 $ 12.52 $ 12.8s $ 13.21 $ 13.58

$
$
$

a
19.77
18.64
17.59

$ {6.62
$ 1s-66
$

$

14.78
1s.94

{o

9

11

12

$ 20.31 $ 20.87 $ 21.45 s 22-04
$ 19.r5 $ 19.68 $ 20.22 $ 20.78
$ { 8.08 $ {8-57 $ {9.OA $ { 9.6r
$ r 7.05 $ 17.54 $ l8.o{ $ r8.s1
$ t6.08 $ {6.s2 $ r 6.99 $ {7.45
$ 15.39 $ r5.60 $ {6.03 $ 16.47
$

14.33

$

14.73

$

15.11

$

15.55

13

$ 22.64
$ 21.3s
$ 20.{5
$
$
$
$

19.O3

17.94
16.93
15.97

E TABLE (ANNUAL SALARY- 40 HRSiWEEK)

STEP

3

4

5

6

7

a

E8
E7
E6
E5
E4
E3
E2

I

$ 73,a39.46
$ 67,734.83

$ 75,A7O,O4
$ 69,597.s3

$ 77,956.47

$ 80,'t00.27
$ 73,47A.O4
$ 67,402.A5

$ 42,303.03

$ 44,566.36

$ E6,A91.94

$ 52,314.00 $ 53,752.54
5 47,987.68 $ 49,307.35
$ 114,005.41 $ 45,2t6.59

E{

$ ror370.17

$ 62,134.49 $ 63,a43.19
$ 57,01t.92 $ 58,s79.75

$ 41,480.35

10

11

12

$ 89,281.47 $ 9r,736.70
$ 81,gOO.t8 $ a4'{52.43

$ 94,259.46
$ 71,511.47
$ 75!498.6a s 77,574-89 $ 79,70a.2O
$ a6,466.53
$ 65,59a.A9
$ 69,2s6.43 $ 71,t60.98 $ 73,r17.9O $ 75,128.6s $ 77,194.69 $ 79,317.55
$ 60,190.68 $ 61,a45-93 $ 63,s46.69 $ 65,294.23 $ 67,089.82 $ 68,934.79
$ 70,83O-5O $ 72.77A34
$ 55,230.84 $ 56,749.69 $ 58,31O.3J $ s9r913.84 $ 6r,56{.47 $ 63,2s4.41
$ 64,993.91 $ 66,781.24
$ 50,663.29 $ 52,056.54 $ 53,488.10 $ 54,959.02 $ 56,470,38 $ 58,023.32
$ 59,61a.97 $ 61,25a.49
$ 46,460.04 $ 47,737-69 $ 49,O5O.47 $ 50,399.36 $ 511785.35 $ 53,209.45
$ 54,672.70 $ s6,176.20
$ 42,621.06 $ 43,793-14 $ 44,997.45 $ 46,234.88 $ 47,506.34 s 4a,a12-76
$ 50,155.12 $ 5r,534.38

13
$ 96,a51_6O

$ 88,8.t4.46
$ 41,49a.7A
$ 74779,74
$ 58,639t4
$ 62,943.09
$ 57,721.05

$ s2,95.t.57

ETABLE (ANNUALSALARY- 35 HRS/IUEEK)
STEP
E8
E7
E6
E5
E4
E3

E2

E{

3
$ 54,609.0r

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
$ 65,3E5.76 $ 68,211.36 $ 70,O87.t9 $ 72,014.58 $ 73,994.98 $ 76,029.84 $ 78,120.66
$ 59,257-51 $ 60,a97.37 $ 62,572.04 $ 64,292.77 $ 66,060.82 $ 67,a77.49
$ 69,744.13 $ 71,662.09
$ 54,367-25 $ ss,a62.36 $ s7'39a-56 $ 58,977.03 $ 6ors9a.89 $ 62,265.36
$ 63,977.66 $ 65,737.04
$ 49,88s.04 $ 51,256.87 $ 52,665.44 $ s4,rt4-76 $ 5s,602.9r $ s7,13z,OO
$ s8,7o3-t3 $ 60,317.46
$ 4s,774.39 $ 47,033.19 $ 48,326-59 $ 49,655.58 $ s1,o2l.rl
$ 52,424.19 $ 53,A65.86 $ 55,347.16

$ 41,98a.89 $ 43,r43.s9 $ 44,33O.O3 $ 45,549-ll $ 46,A0l.7r
$ 3a,505.3O $ 39,564.19 $ 40,6s2.21 $ 4t,77O-t5 $ 42,i,1A.A2
$ 35,323.52 $ 36,295.02 $ 37,293.t3 $ 38,3rA.69 $ 39,372.45

11

12

13

$ 40,268.99

$ a4,7r14.4a
$ 77,73A-2A
$ 71,31O.85
$ 55,431.76
$ 60,040.03
$ 55,O74.7a
$ 50,505.52

$ 45,092.22 $ 461332.26

$ 48,O8A.7s

$ 49,4t1.2O

$ 50,77O.OO

$ 4.1,O99.o9

$ 45,311.82

$ 46,557.90

$ a2,476.38
$ 73,632.80 $ 75,557.70
$ 67,s44-a2 $ 69,402.31
$ 61,976.{9 $ 63,590.54
$ 56,A69.21 $ 58,433.12
$ s2,t66-19 $ 53.600.76
$ 47,A3A.23 $ 49,'t53.79

$ 4O,455.2O

$ 41,s6't.72

$ 42,710.83

$ 43,a85.38

EXHIBIT C
SALARY SCHEDULE - Juty 1,2019-June 30, 2020

B TABLE (HOURLY RATE)

STEP
B5

B4
B:T

82
B,I

3

4

$ t7.64 $
$ 16.64 $

18.13
17.11

$
$

15.22

5

$

$

$ 1s.70 s {6.14 $
{4.81
'13.96

$

$

$ 14.s4 s

18.52
17.s7
16.56
15.63
14.74

6
7
I
9
{o
$ 19.{4 $ r9.66 $ 2fJ-2(J $ 20.76 $ 21.34
$ {8.06 $ 18.s5 $ t9.o5 $ r9-s9 $ 20.12
$ 17.04 $ {7,50 5 17.9a $ 18.47 $ 18.98
$ 15.08 s 16.sO $ l6-95 $ 17.43 $ 17.91
$ 15.r5 $ 1s.56 $ 1s.99 $ r 6-43 $ 16-88

12

11

13

$ 21.9{ $ 22.52 s

23.14

$
$

20.60

$ 20.68 s 21.24 $ 2r.83
19.51
18.41

$ 17.3s

$
$
$

20.04
18.90
17.A2

$
$
$

19.214

18.32

r{ TABLE (HOURLY RATE)
STEP

N7
N6
H5

t{4
N3
N2
l{,1

3

4

$ {7.69 $ 18.{8
$ 16.68 $ 17.16
$ r5.7s $ 16.18
$ {4.87 $ 1s-27
$ 14,02 $ 14.39
$ 13.22 $ 13-59
$ 12.48 $ 12.83

E TABLE (ANNUAL SALARY

3

4

E8

$ 75,6a5.44

$ 77,766-79

E7

$ 69,428,20

E6

$ 63,687.85

E4
E3

$ 71,337-47
$ 6s,439.27
s saA37.22 $ 60,044.24
$ 53,621.as $ s5,096-46
$ 5O,54O.O3

E2

$ 49,187-37
$ 45,106.57

E{

s 41,379.42

18.58
17.60
16.62
15-68
14-80

13.87
13.17

6

$
$
$

I

7

$ 19.72
$ 18.70
$ 17.54
$ 15.r 3 $ 16.55
$ 1s.2{ $ 15.62
$ {4.3s $ 14.74
19.20
18.{O
17.08

$
$

20.27
19.{ 1

$ 18.o3
$ {7-O3
$ 16.05

$ 1s.15
$ {3.s4 $ r3.92 $ 14.29

9

10

$ 20-82 $ 21.39
$ 19.63 $ 20'-17
$ {8.53 $ 19.O4
$ 17.4s $ {7.98
$ 16.4A $ 16.94
$ 15.78 $ 15.99
$ {4.69 $ r5.10

't3

12

17

$ 21.99
$ 20.72
$ 1S.s6
$ 18-46
$ 17.41
$ 16.43

$
$

$
$
s 20.ro $
$ 1A.97 $
$ {7.89 $
$ r6.a8 $
22.59
21.30

$ 1s.49 $ rs.94 $

23.21

21.a8
20.65
19,50
{ 8.39
17.35
16.37

- 40 HRS/WEEIq

STEP

E5

5

$
$
$
$
$
$
$

$ 46,347.00
$ 42,517,36

5

6

7

lo

11

s 79,905.38
$ 73,299.25

$ a2,1o2.7a
$ 75,314.99
$ 69,087.93
$ 63,392.08

$ 84,360.61

$ 91,513,51
$ 83,947.69
$ 77,006.87
$ 70,658.,16

$ 94,O3O..i2
$ a6,256.24
$ 79,124.56
$ 716tJ1.26
$ 66,618.75
$ 61,{09.44

8
9
$ a6,58O.52 $ 891064.24
$ 77,386.'t4 $ 79,5t4-26 $ ar,700.91
s 67,23a,A6
I 7O,987.a4 6 72,94O.O1 5 74,945.Es
$ 61,695.45
I 65,135.36 $ 66,926.59 $ 68,767.07
$ s6,611.6.1 s 58,16a.43 I s9,76A,O7 $ 5t,4r.r-69 $ 63,10O.5O
$ 5r,s29,88 5 53,357.95 $ 9,82s.3O $ 55,333.OO $ 57,A82.14
$ 47,621.s4 $ 48,931.14 $ 501276.74 $ 51,6s9.35 $ s3,o79.98
s 43,6a6.59 s 44,Aa7.97 $ 46'122.39 5 47,390.75 $ 48,694.00

$ 64,a35.77

12

13

$ 96,615,9s $ 99A72.89
$ a4,628.29

$ 9{,065.57

$ at,3oo.48

$ 83,s36.25
$ 76,649.23
$ 70,355.22

$ 74,597.aO

$ 68,450.77

$ 59,473.90
$ 62,7A9.95 $ 64,516.67
$ 54,s39.68 $ 56,039.52 $ s7,5a0.60 $ 59,164.07
$ 5O,O33.OA $ 51,4O9.OO $ 52,A22,74 $ s4'275.36

ETABLE (AfiI{UALSALARY- 35 HRSAYEEK)
STEP

3

4

5

6

7

E8

$ 66,224.23
$ 50,749.20
$ 55,726.43
$ 5{,r32.16

$ 68,0.Lt.41

$ 69,916.65

$ 7r,a39.37

I73,8t4.95

$ 62,4r9.a0

$ 64,136.34
$ 54,833.53
s 53,9a3"to

5 5ota96.97

$ 42,914.40

$ 52,296.64
s 47,971.75
$ 43,99t-79

$ 39,276.66

s 4{r,3s6.76

E7
E6
E5

E4
E3

E2
E1

$ s7,258.92
$ 52,s38.29

s 46,9t8-7s $ 4A,2O9.O2 $ 49,534.76
$ 43,O3E.62 $ 44,222.'a 5 45,43a.2a
$ 39,467.93
$ 36306-7r

$ 40,553.30 $ 41,66a,5.r
$ 37,202.39 5 3a,22$46

I

$ 7s,844.8s
I 65,900.09 J 6it,712,34 $ 69F74.43
s 60,45{.45 $ 62,1t3,86 $ 63,a22.0O
5 55,467.63 $ 56,992.99 $ s8,56O-3O
5 46,6A7.a4

s 53,734-79
3 49,290.97
$ 45,201.57
$ 4r,466-sa

I

10

11

$ 77,930.59 $ 80,O73.6a $ a2,275.71
$ 71,4A7-73 $ 73,4s3.64 J 15,473.62
$ 5s,s77.11 $ 67,380,47 $ 69,233.tt4
$ 60,{7O,7O $ 61,825r'(, $ 63,525.60
$ 55,2t2.5O $ s6,73O.84 5 5A,29O.S4
$ so,646.48 s 521039.25 $ s3,47O.34
$ 45,a14.5,1 $ 47,721-A4 $ 4S,034.,t9
$ 42,606.9{ $ 43,778.60 $ 449A2.s2

12

13

$ a4,538.29 $ 86ra63.O9
$ 77,s49.1s $ 79,6ar.74
$ 71,137,36 $ 73,093.64
$ 6s,272-56 $ 67,O67-5s
$ 59,A93.95 $ 6l,s4r.o3
$ 54,940,77 $ s6r51.65
$ 50,382.63 $ s1,768.15
$ 46,219.53 $ 47,490.s6
