4•4

September 10, 2018
Stallings Town Hall
315 Stallings Road

8tallirig5
Time
7:00 p.m.

item

Stallings, NC 28104
704-821-8557
www.stallingsnc.org

Presenter

Invocation

Wyatt Dunn,

Pledge of Allegiance

Mayor

Action Requested/Next Step
NA

Call the Meeting to Order
7:05 p.m.

Public Comment

Wyatt Dunn,

NA

Mayor
1

7:15 p.m.

Consent Agenda Approval
A. 2018 Constitution Week Proclamation

Wyatt Dunn,

Approve Consent Agenda

Mayor

(All items on the Consent Agenda are
considered routine, to be enacted by one
motion. If a member of the governing body
requests discussion on of on item, the item will
be removed from the Consent Agenda and
considered separately.)

B. Domestic Violence Awareness
Proclamation

Motion: 1 make the motion to:

1) Approve the Consent
Agenda as presented; or
2) Approve the Consent
Agenda with the following
changes:
.
2

7:17 p.m.

Reports
A. Report from Mayor

Council and

NA

Staff

B. Report from Council Members/Town
Committees
C. Report from Town Manager/Town
Departments
3

7:40 p.m.

Agenda Approval

Wyatt Dunn,

Approve agenda as written.

Mayor

(ADD, IF APPLICABLE: with changes as
described by Mayor Dunn)

Motion: I make the motion to:

1) Approve the Agenda as
presented; or
2) Approve the Agenda with
the following changes:
•

4

7:45 p.m.

TX18.06.02 Accessory Structures
Consideration of a text amendment to Article 2.10-2

Lynne Hair,

Approve/Deny request.

Town Planner

No Accessory Structure in Setback and Article 8.4-2
Single Family Residential Districts (SFR-1, SFR-2, SFR-3
to clarify and create consistency for accessory
structures in the ordinance.

Motion: 1 make the motion to approv■
TX18.06.02 Accessory Structures

A. Open public hearing
B. Information from staff
C. Comments from the public
D. Close public hearing
E. Council vote
5

6

7:50 p.m.

8:05 p.m.

Pay and Classification Study

Alex Sewell,

Note: This ¡tem was tabled at the July 9, 2018 Council
Meeting.

Town Manager

2020-2029 TIP Development Program

Neil Burke,

Approve/Deny contract.
Motíon: I make the motion to
approve the contract with the MAPS
group to conduct a Pay and
Classification Study.

Presentation and Information

CRTPO
Planning
Coordinator
7

8:25 p.m.

Downtown/Old Monroe Road Small Area Plan

Demetri

Presentation and Possible

Baches,

Action

Metrocology
8

9

9:25 p.m.

9:40 p.m.

Downtown Grant Funds

Alex Sewell,

Discussion and Possible

Note: This item was tabled at the August 13, 2018 Council
Meeting.

Town Manager

Action

Whetstone Road Abandonment Resolution

Lynne Hair,

Adopt/Deny resolution.

Town Planner
Motion: I make the motion to adopt
the Whetstone Road Abandonment
Resolution.

10

9:45 p.m.

Road Resurfacing Bids Contract

Kevin Parker,

Approve/Deny contract

Asst. Town
Engineer

Motion: I make the motion to give

the Town Manager authority to
execute a contract with
in the
amount of ..... .. for the road
resurfacing contract 2018.

11

12

9:55 p.m.

10:25

Performance Evaluation System:
Alex Sewell,
A. Performance Review and Employee
Town Manager
Development Program
B. Performance Pay Policy
C. Employee Certification and Training Policy

Approve/Deny Performance
Evaluation System and
Policies.
Motion: I make the motion to
approve the:
A. Performance Pay Policy
B. Performance Review and
Employee Development
Program
C. Employee Certification and
Training Policy

P.m.

NCLM Annual Conference Voting Representative
Appointee

Alex Sewell,
Town Manager

Appoint Council
Representative for voting
items.

13

10:30

Stallings Fest Booths

Alex Sewell,
Town Manager

Discussion and Possible
Action

14

P.m•
10:45

Adjournment

P.m.

Agenda Item # A._ .A .

efrocia,nationofth-eX-Wis of4taffinis
4cfarínj

tonestítution lreek2018
WHEREAS, the Constitution of the United States of America, the guardian of our liberties, embodies
the principles of limited government in a Republic dedicated to rule by law; and
WHEREAS, September 17, 2018 marks the two hundred thirty first anniversary of the framing of the
Constitution of the United States of America by the Constitutional Convention; and
WHEREAS, it is fitting and proper to accord official recognition to this magnificent document and its
memorable anniversary, and to the patriotic celebrations which will commemorate it; and
WHEREAS, Public Law 915 guarantees the issuing of a proclamation each year by the President of the
United States of America designating September 17 through 23 as Constitution Week
NOW, THEREFORE, I, Wyatt Dunn, by virtue of the authority vested in me as Mayor of the Town of
Stallings in the State of North Carolina, do hereby proclaim the week of September 17 through 23 as

tonstitution lreek
AND ask our citizens to reaffirm the ideals the Framers of the Constitution had in 1787 by vigilantly
protecting the freedoms guaranteed to us through the guardian of our liberties.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the Town to be affixed
this 10th day of September of the year of our Lord two thousand and eighteen.

Wyatt Dunn, Mayor

Attest:

Erinn E. Nichols, Town Clerk

Elizabeth R. Gibson
John Foster Chapter
North Carolina Society Daughters of the American Revolution
1300 West Franklin Street, Monroe, NC 28112-4506
(704) 283-4791 elizabeth_gibson@msn.com

August 6, 2018

Town of Stallings
Mayor Wyatt Dunn
315 Stallings Road
Stallings, NC 28104
Dear Mayor Dunn,

Once again the John Foster Chapter Daughters of the American Revolution in Monroe
is working to promote patriotism in our cornmunity. The week of September 17-23 is designated
as Constitution Week by Public Law 915 which was signed by President Dwight D. Eisenhower
on August 2, 1956. Every year we try to bring to the attention of our citizens this anniversary of
the signing of the Constitution of the United States of America. I am pleased to report to you
that 100% of the Union County municipalities participated in this project last year. I have
included a sample proclamation with this letter that I hope you will complete, sign, and impress
with the Seal of the Town of Stallings. After the proclamation has been signed, we encourage
you to add it to your website, post it in your town hall, or just include a statement "Celebrate
Constitution Week Sept. 17-23" to your website
The John Foster Chapter appreciates your cooperation as we work to remind the public of
the importance of this document. It has been a pleasure to work with you for the past few years.
Sincerely,
Elizabeth R. Gibson
John Foster Chapter NCSDAR
Monroe, NC

HISTORY OF CONSTITUTION WEEK
Miss Gertrude S. Carraway, while President General of the National Society Daughters of
the American Revolution, was responsible for the annual designation of September 17-23 as
Constitution Week. The DAR made its own resolution for Constitution Week which was
adopted April 21, 1955.
Members of the United States Congress received the DAR resolution and on June 7,
1955, the resolution was discussed in the Senate. The first resolution to observe Constitution
Week was made June 14, 1955, by Senator William F. Knowland of California. Following
passage of the resolution by both Houses of Congress, President Eisenhower issued his
proclamation on August 19, 1955.
The first observance of Constitution Week was so successful that on January 5, 1956,
Senator Knowland introduced a Senate Joint Resolution to have the President designate
September 17-23 annually as Constitution Week. The resolution was adopted on July 23 and
signed into Public law 915 on August 2, 1956. This is the 60th anniversary of the first resolution
by the U.S. Congress to observe Constitution Week.
For his patriotic aid and interest, Senator Knowland received an Award of
Commendation from the NSDAR Continental Congress in April of 1956.

North Carolina has a special interest in the story of how Constitution Week came to be
signed into law because Miss Gertrude S. Carraway is the only North Carolinian ever to be
elected to the position of President General of the National Society Daughters of the American
Revolution. She served from 1953-1956. She was a lifelong resident of New Bem, North
Carolina.

Agenda Item # J. R

PROCLAMATION
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AWARENESS MONTH

WHEREAS, domestic violence affects all Union County residents, and far too many people suffer
abuse at the hands of a spouse, partner, parent, child, or sibling; these victims can be of any age, race,

religion, or econonnic status and the resulting damage is inflicted not only on the victims, but their
children, families, and communities; and
WHEREAS, domestic violence includes not only physical but also mental abuse, emotional
abuse, financial abuse, sexual abuse, and isolation; and
WHEREAS, domestic violence is widespread, including one in three Americans who have

witnessed an incident of domestic violence with an annual cost to US companies of $3.5 billion in lost
work time, increased health care costs, higher turnover, and lower productivity; and
WHEREAS, according to the North Carolina Coalition Against Domestic Violence, there have

been 1,244 women, men, and children murdered as a result of domestic violence since January 1, 2002
in North Carolina; and
WHEREAS, according to the North Carolina Council for Women, domestic violence programs
across the state responded to over 119,000 crisis calis and provided services to over 50,000 victims last
year; and
WHEREAS, the key to prevention is education, community awareness, having zero tolerance for

domestic vioence, and requiring accountability by the abuser; and
WHEREAS, Union County recognizes the importance of having collaborations by multiple

partners to promote social norms, policies and laws that support gender equity and foster intimate
partnerships based on mutual respect, equality, and trust; and
NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that I, Wyatt Dunn, Mayor of the Town of Stallings, do hereby
proclaim October 2018 as Domestic Violence Awareness Month in Union County and urge all citizens to
support this observance. I further urge our citizens to increase their awareness and education of this
destructive force which deeply affects a large number of families in our State each year and to become

part of the efforts to stop violence in families.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the Town of

Stallings to be affixed this the 10th day of Septmeber, 2018.

Wyatt Dunn, Mayor
Attest:
Erinn E. Nichols, Town Clerk

ofb
4.4 PLANNING

.Nnenda Item

fa••••
ZONING
wD
TOWN of STALLINGS

Memo:
TO:

Town Council

FROM:

Lynne Hair, Planning Director

SUBJECT:

TX18.06.02: The purpose of this text amendment is to clarify the
placement of accessory structures and to maintain consistency of
accessory structures throughout the ordinance.

DATE:

September 4, 2018

On February 26, 2018, the Town Council adopted the new Stallings Development
Ordinance.
After adoption, staff recognized inconsistencies within the ordinance that pertain to
accessory structures. To clarify and create consistency for accessory structures
throughout the ordinance, Staff is recommending the following text amendments to
Article 2, 8, & 9 of the Stallings Development Ordinance:

1. Article 2.10 Structures and Uses Limited in Yards
2.10- 2 Accessory Structures located in Setback. Except as otherwise provided in this
article, accessory structures located within an established setback or required side
yard can be no closer than five (5)feet of a side or rear lot line and meet
requirements established in Article 9 for Building Type. Accessory structures on
corner lots must meet the established side yard setbacks and accessory structures in
double frontage lots must meet established rear yard setback. Where permitted,
accessory dwellings may be located no closer than four (4) feet to the right-of-way
or easement of an abutting mid-block alley, nor closer than five (5) feet to an
abutting rear property line. Fences, walls, security gates, paths, walkways,
mailboxes, utility poles, lighting fixtures, patios at grade, and similar features may
be located in an established setback or required yard, so long as the sight triangle
on corner lots is protected according to the provisions of section 2.11 of this
Ordinance.
2. Article 8.4-2 Single Family Residential Districts (SFR-1, SFR-2 and SFR-3)
( 1)

Accessory structures shall comply with the requirements set forth in Article 2
and 9.

Planning Board Recommendation
At their August 20, 2018 meeting, the Planning Board unanimously recommended approval
of the requested text amendment.

TX18.06.02

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE "STALLINGS DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE" OF
THE TOWN OF STALLINGS, NORTH CAROLINA

WHEREAS, on February 26, 2018 the Town Council adopted the new Stallings Development
Ordinance; and,
WHEREAS, the clarification of accessory structures will mediate the inconsistency of accessory
structures within the ordinance; and,
WHEREAS, the clarification of the ordinance will create easy to follow ordinance standards for
the public and staff;
THEREFORE, THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF STALLINGS DO ORDAIN
AMENDING THE STALLINGS DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE AS FOLLOWS:

1. Article 2.10 Structures and Uses Limited in Yards
2.10-2 Accessory Structures located in Setback. Except as otherwise provided in
this article, accessory structures located within an established setback or
required side yard can be no closer than five (5) feet of a side or rear lot line
and meet requirements established in Article 9 for Building Type. Accessory
structures on comer lots must meet the established side yard setbacks and
accessory structures in double frontage lots must meet established rear yard
setback. Where permitted, accessory dwellings may be located no closer
than four (4) feet to the right-of-way or easement of an abutting mid-block
alley, nor closer than five (5) feet to an abutting rear property line. Fences,
walls, security gates, paths, walkways, mailboxes, utility poles, lighting
fixtures, patios at grade, and similar features may be located in an
established setback or required yard, so long as the sight triangle on comer
lots is protected according to the provisions of section 2.11 of this
Ordinance.
2. Article 8.4-2 Single Family Residential Districts (SFR-1, SFR-2 and SFR-3)
(I)
Accessory structures shall comply with the requirements set forth in
Article 2 and 9.

This ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its adoption.
ADOPTED this the _th day of

, 2018.

Wyatt Dunn

Erinn Nichols

Mayor

Town Clerk

4#4 PLANNING
••••• ZONING
TOWN of STALLINGS

Statement of Consistency and Reasonableness
(As per NC General Statue 160-383)
Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning amendment, the governing body shall adopt a statement describing
whether its action is consistent with an adopted comprehensive plan and explaining why the board considers the
action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest. The planning board shall advise and comment on whether
the proposed amendment is consistent with any comprehensive plan that has been adopted and any other officially
adopted plan that is applicable. The planning board shall provide a written recommendation to the governing body
that addresses plan consistency and other matters as deemed appropriate by the planning board, but a comment
by the planning board that a proposed amendment is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan shall not preclude
consideration or approval of the proposed amendment by the governing body.

CONDITIONAL ZONING:

TX18.06.02

REQUEST:

To amend Article 2, Section 2.10 Structures and Uses Limited in Yards; and Article 8, Section 8.4-2 Single
Family Residential Districts of the Stalling Development Ordinance to clear up inconsistencies within the
ordinance pertaining to accessory structures.
STATEMENT OF CONSISTENCY AND REASONABLENESS:

The Stallings Town Council hereby finds that the proposed text amendment is consistent with the 2017
Stallings Comprehensive Land Use Plan adopted November 27, 2017 based on consistency with goals
and objectives set forth in the document to allow for accessory structures. At their September 10, 2018
the Stallings Town Council voted to recommend APPROVAL of the proposed text amendment and stated
that the, Board finds and determines that the text amendment is consistent with the key guiding
principles, goals, and objectives of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and hereby recommends its
approval.
The statement and motion was seconded and passed

Wyatt Dunn, Mayor

Erinn Nichols, Town Clerk

THIS MEMO WAS PULLED FROM THE JULY 9, 2018 AGENDA.

Agenda !tem #

5

40 4.•
04, lib.
..4141 „.
8tallin
-g§

TO: Mayor Dunn; Town Council
FR: Alex Sewell
DATE: 7/5/18
RE: Pay & Classification Study Contract
Purpose: This memorandum's purpose is to educate the Town Council on the timeline
for the pay & classification study and request formal approval of the pay & classification
study contract.
Background: On May 14, 2018, the Town Council approved by consensus conducting a
pay and classification study using an outside expert consultant.
Timeline: The process would start in November with the goal of being completed in
March 2019 in time for the budget process. Enclosed is a summary overview of the
process.
Recommendation: Approve the contract with the N.C. League of Municipalities for a
comprehensive pay and classification study.

THIS MEMO WAS PULLED FROM THE JULY 9, 2018 AGENDA.

Classification and Pay Study Information
Conducting a classification and pay study typically takes approximately 2.5 to 4 months, depending on the size of the
organization. The MAPS Group's approach is to make the process as transparent and understandable as possible. We believe
this is important because a good study can have a negative morale impact if employees misunderstand it or if the study lacks
credibility with employees.
We also strongly recommend undertaking a study only when there is commitment to follow through with funding the
implementation. The negative impact on morale is significant if a study is not implemented. Implementation costs are the greater
cost, not the fee to conduct the study. We work with organizations to phase the study in over two or three years if the
implementation costs are greater than can be allocated in one year.
Questionnaires. All employees who are in the retirement system are typically included in the study and each employee in the
study should complete a Position Description Questionnaire. These can be downloaded in either Word or PDF from our website
vwwy.themapsgroup.com . The Word document can be completed digitally and then printed and signed. Hand written form
completion on the PDF version is fine as well.
On-site Meetinqs and Interviews. Once we receive the completed questionnaires, we schedule an on-site visit that includes
meetings and interviews. We usually start with a meeting with management and department heads and go over the process
and methodology of the study, answer questions, discuss time lines, and identify a list of organizations to include in the salary
survey. We then have orientation meetings for employees to attend to hear about the process and methodology and ask
questions. The number of these meetings depends on the size of the workforce. These meetings can be videotaped if not all
employees are able to attend the scheduled sessions.
During this trip we also conduct interviews with employees. We interview at least one employee with each different set of duties
as described on the questionnaires regardless of job titles. The purpose of the interviews is to make sure we accurately
understand duties and responsibilities listed on the questionnaires so we can accurately classify the jobs and make accurate
salary comparisons.
Analysis and Report Preparation. After interviews we conduct the salary survey, write a narrative report with our findings,
prepare organization charts that reflect recommended classification titles, prepare the recommended salary chart and assign
each classification to a salary range based on market data, identify which positions are exempt for FLSA purposes, perform a
benefits survey, and write or update class specifications (job descriptions). All of this is then sent back to the organization in
draft form for review and to provide us with feedback before finalizing the study and presenting it to elected officials.
Personnel Policy Update. ln most classification and pay studies, we also review and make recommendations to update the
personnel policy. Review is for modern, effective and best practices approaches as well as legal and regulatory compliance.
Presentation to Elected Officials. We have found that a presentation to elected officials on the process and methodology of the
study prior to providing the recommendations to them helps them understand and review the study with better context and
acceptance. It is best to present the study in a work session environment because it takes approximately 1 to 1.25 hours. We
typically do a 30 to 45 minute presentation (depending on questions) and then pass out the study documents and walk elected
officials through the document. We then leave it with them for review and come back when they are ready to address any
questions or issues.
For municipalities and NCLM Associates, these studies are performed on a contract with the NCLM with The MAPS Group as
a subcontractor.

150 FAYETTVILLE STREF.T
SUITE 300

OF MUNICIPALITIES

Good govemment. Great hometowns.

RALEIGH, NC 27601
919-715-4000 i WWW.NCLM.ORG

May 14, 2018
Mr. Alex Sewell
Town Manager
Town of Stallings
315 Stallings Road
Stallings, NC 28104
Dear Alex:
We are pleased to be able to offer the enclosed Memorandum of Agreement to the Town of
Stallings to perform the specified personnel services as described herein.
This contract will be performed through an agreement between the North Carolina League of
Municipalities and the MAPS Group. This private consulting firm consists of former and current
practicing human resource management professionals in the public sector who specialize in human
resources and general management. They are, or have been, employed in human resources
departments at the state and municipal level of government and undertake consulting assignments
for the North Carolina League of Municipalities.
I will have overall responsibility for this project to determine that all contractual obligations ofthis
study are successfully met.
If you have any questions, or need clarification on any item contained within our Memorandum of
Agreement, please contact me at the League Office.
Sincerely,

*v~ell Wttgtitt/ki
Hartwell Wright
Human Resources and Employee Relations Consulting Manager
HW/kb
Enclosures

MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
PERSONNEL SERVICE
TOWN OF STALLINGS

THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this
day of
, 2018 by
and between the North Carolina League of Municipalities, an unincorporated association,
hereinafter called "League", and the Town of Stallings, an incorporated municipality hereinafter
called "Town."
WITNESSETH
In consideration of the amounts of money hereinafter agreed to be paid, and in
consideration of the other conditions hereinafter agreed to by the Town of Stallings, the League
offers to perform the following services:
Scope of Services
The League agrees to provide through its subcontractor The MAPS Group the services
described and set forth in Attachment "A", Scope of Services, which is incorporated into and
made a part of the Memorandum of Agreement by reference.
Time for Performance
The time for performance will be approximately three (3) months. The contract can
begin at a time mutually agreed upon between The MAPS Group and the Town.
Cost
The fee for the proposed work is eight thousand six hundred eighteen dollars ($8,618.00).
ln addition, the Town will be billed for actual itemized expenses for mileage, meals, lodging,
printing and supplies (estinnated at around $500.00).
I n consideration of the services performed by the League, the Town agrees to abide by
and perform the following:
The MAPS Group will bill the Town for one payment of $2154.50 at the beginning of
the study, the same amount upon completion of the interviews, the same amount upon
completion of the draft of the study, and a final payment of the same amount plus actual
itemized expenses when the study is completed. This cost includes ten (10) copies of the
completed study document. The Town agrees to remit payment to The MAPS Group upon
receipt of each of the statements referred to above.

NC-141AG
OF MUNICIPALITIES

Execution
lf this Memorandum of Agreement is not executed and returned to the League Office
within thirty (30) days from the submission date, the time frame for performance may have to
be renegotiated.
lf the terms of this contract are acceptable, please sign two (2) copies and return one
to the League office.

SUBMITTED BY:

ACCEPTED BY:

NORTH CAROLINA LEAGUE OF
MUNICIPALITIES

STALLINGS

41,~ell7,P.u:94t/U
Hartwell Wright
Human Resources and Employee
Relations Consulting Manager

Name

05/14/2018
Submission Date

Title

Date

This instrument has been preaudited in the
manner required by the Local Government Budget
and Fiscal Control Act.

(Signature of Finance Officer)

UE

NCT1AG

OF MUNICIPALITIES

ATTACHMENT "A"

SCOPE OF SERVICES

PAY AND CLASSIFICATION STUDY

SCOPE OF SERVICES
Objectives of Study
The primary purpose of this study is to conduct a comprehensive pay and classification study for
the Town of Stallings to include the following work study objectives:
To study and evaluate all positions covered by the NCLGERS within the Town for
the purpose of determining the proper position classification and salary for each
employee.
To conduct a comprehensive salary survey of appropriate public and private sector
organizations to determine that the Town's salaries, benefits and wages are
competitive within the applicable job market.
To prepare or update class specifications for each position class based upon
current job duties and requirements, outlining appropriate ADA information.
To prepare a pay plan for the Town as required to maintain a competitive system
of salaries and wages.
To identify those classes of positions that are "exempt" and "non-exempt" in
compliance with the Fair Labor Standards Act (F.L.S.A.) of 1983 as amended in
1985.
To review and make recommendations concerning the effectiveness of the Town's
overall compensation system including compression issues.

Study Work Components
A.

Preparation of the Classification and Pay Plan

1.

Conduct a comprehensive review of the Town s Personnel system for the purposes of staff
orientation and to provide data and information to be used in the preparation of the
classification and compensation data and related Personnel components.

2.

Conduct a meeting with Town Manager and department heads to discuss the various work
components of the study and to explain the study methodology and approach. At this
meeting we will also discuss the appropriate labor market for surveying salary data and
the project schedule.

3.

Conduct orientation sessions with employees to cover the purposes and process of the
study. These meetings help establish realistic expectations with employees and reduce
mis-information. The meetings will cover:

purposes of the study;
steps in conducting the study;
study methodology;

what the study will and will not cover;
distribution and review of how to complete questionnaires; and
answer any questions
4.

Survey existing employee positions. This task will involve a review of the completed
questionnaires, desk audits with representative employees in each class, and conferences
with each department head to review and verify information presented on the
questionnaires and in the desk audits. The purpose of this task is to determine that The
MAPS group obtains comprehensive, factual, and accurate data and information. This
task also resolves any conflicting information or data.

5.

Following the review and field audit of existing employee positions, class specifications
(often called job descriptions) will be prepared. These class specifications will be written
to comply with OSHA and ADA regulations. The MAPS Group will use the following factors
to classify jobs:
Difficulty, complexity, and variety of work
Education and experience requirements of the job
Nature and extent of public contact
Physical effort and hazards; and
Supervision given and received.

B. Development of the Pay Plan
1.

A survey of salary plans will be performed utilizing public sector jurisdictions and other
organizations for the purpose of recommending wage and salary schedules that are
competitive and sufficient to attract and retain qualified employees. The identification of
competitive organizations will be made by the Town in consultation with The MAPS Group.
The salary survey will request hiring and maximum salaries for each position surveyed.

2.

A comprehensive analysis of the salary survey will be prepared.

3.

Following analyses of all inputs considered previously in Study Components A and B, all
classes of positions will be allocated to the recommended salary schedule.

C.

Preparation of the Employee Allocation List

1.

Following completion of the classification plan and compensation schedule, an allocation
list will be prepared showing employees by name, present classification, proposed
classification, present salary grade, proposed salary grade, recommended salary, and
proposed increase amount (if applicable).

2.

Costs for implementation options of the plan will be provided. Up to three options will be
provided with graphs illustrating impact of each option on salary compression as well as
costs. Options will be designed specifically to address compression if needed and
desired.
lf more than three options are needed, there will an additional charge of $250 per
additional option.

FLSA Status
As part of this study, the MAPS Group will identify and recommend positions that the Town may
consider Exempt from the Wage and Hour Provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Personnel Policy
The MAPS Group will review and make recommendations for updating the Town's personnel
policy to be consistent with modern and effective human resource management and current laws
and regulations. The personnel policy is reviewed for policy versus procedural language and is
recommended to meet a balance of providing guidance without including unnecessarily restrictive
or detailed procedures. lf needed, a new policy will be provided.
Communication with the Town
During the study, MAPS principals will be available to Town management to clarify any steps,
current stage of the study, or other issues related to the study by phone and Email. ln addition,
while MAPS principals are on site for orientation and/or interviews, personal consultations are
available as necessary to the study. A draft of the study will be sent to management for review
and MAPS will make one visit to discuss management reactions to the study prior to finalizing it.
After the draft review, the MAPS Group will make a presentation to the Town Council/Board of
Commissioners and then return once more to respond to discussion and questions. Any
additional trips will require additional fees.
inyolyement of Town Staff
Town staff members will be required to complete position description questionnaires for each
position, prepare organization charts, participate in interviews if selected (all department directors
will be interviewed), provide copies of personnel policy and current job descriptions, provide
current employee data including copies of current salary plan and employee information by
department with name, current classification, current grade, date of hire, date of entry to current
position, and current annual salary. These last components are needed for calculating the costs
of implementation options.
Results of the Study
The study will result in the publication and delivery to the Town of ten (10) copies of the report to
include the classification plan, class specifications, compensation plan, and implementation costs.
The MAPS representative will formally present the study to the Town Council/Board and be
available to respond to questions.
Plan Maintenance
Once the study is complete and implemented, the MAPS Group will provide assistance to Town
staff on maintenance of the plan including the classification of new or revised positions, market
revisions to the pay plan and other assistance as needed. The MAPS Group will provide
telephone consultation and will classify new or revised positions as needed for up to five years
following the study for $200 per position. Additional work may be performed on a maintenance
contract.

ln addition, the MAPS Group will provide the Town with a linked spreadsheet that will allow for
market adjustments (cost of living increases) to automatically update the salary schedule and
class listings and provide the Town with a digital copy of all class specifications.
Pro ect Staff
The project manager will be Cheryl Brown. Additional team members will be subject to approval
by the Town.

Arlenda Item #

•*%4 t;
114lb.gdp■
•e
8talling

TO: Mayor Dunn, Town Council
FR: Alex Sewell
DATE: 9/5/18
RE: State Awarded Downtown Revitalization Grant
Purpose: This memorandum's purpose is to provide requested options for how to spend
remaining downtown revitalization grant funds and to seek direction.
Background: The Town has received $50,000 in State grant funds for downtown
revitalization. On 8/13/18, the Town Council approved $30,000 for the CEM Campus
Small Area Plan and directed staff to provide some options on how the remaining funds
could be spent.
Options:
1.) Town Hall Streetscape — The funds could be used towards streetscape design for
Town Hall. The plan includes several components including curb and gutter, onstreet parking, street trees, multi-use paths, and hardscape components that include
benches, knee walls, and signage. While the conceptual design is extensive, the
Town could seek to complete design on adding curb/gutter and parking as a start.
a. Enclosed is a preliminary estimate of costs.
2.) Land Banking — To help purchase property in the general area defined by the Small
Area Plan as the Town Center. Acquiring property would give us the ability of
direct control of development through a public/private partnership. As a result, it
would increase the likelihood that this node would develop as envisioned by the
Town.
3.) Any other option the Council deems appropriate related to downtown
revitalization.
Timeline: The State indicates the Town should submit paperwork notifying the State of
how the funds will be spent no later than 10/5/18. As a result, a decision is needed no
later than the 9/24/18 Town Council Meeting (barring a special meeting being called
prior than 10/5/18.

Stallings Town Hall
Preliminary Estimate of Probable Construction Costs
Material
Phase 1: Curb, Gutter and Parking on Stallings Road
Survey and Construction Staking
Site Prep and Demolition
Incidental Grading
Traffic Management
Curb and Gutter
Stormwater Infrastructure
Paving, Striping
Subtotal
Engineering & Permitting (16%)
Mobilization Costs (3%)
Contingency (7%)
Phase 1 TOTAL
Phase 2: Add Sidewalks and Streetscape
Survey and Construction Staking
Incidental Grading
Street Trees & Soil
Tree Grates & Protection
Colored Concrete Sidewalk
Brick Pavers
Street Lighting & Electrical
Subtotal
Engineering & Permitting (16%)
Mobilization Costs (3%)
Contingency (7%)
Phase 2 TOTAL
Phase 3: Plazas & Side Parking
Demolition
Incidental Grading
Survey and Construction Staking
Benches
Brick Pavers
Lattice brick wall
Landscape Materials and Installation
Pergola & Tables
Plaza Lighting (includes recessed lighting)
Raised Planters
Sculpture
Slate (Flagstone)
Side (Angle) Parking
Site Prep and Demolition
Curb and Gutter
Paving, Striping
Subtotal
Engineering & Permitting (16%)
Mobilization Costs (3%)
Contingency (7%)
Phase 3 TOTAL
Total Estimate

Unit

Quantity*

ls
ls
ls
Is
lf
ls
sf

1
1
1
1
443
1
3460

ls
ls
ea
ea.
sf
sf
ea.

1
1
8
8
2128
2005
7

ls
Is
ls
ea.
sf
sf
Is
Is
Is
sf
allow
sf
ls
lf
sf

1
8
2356
1624

Cost i
Unit ($)
$

$
$
$

$
$
$
$
$
$

Total ($)

8,000,00 $
$
$
15,000,00 $
26.00 $
$
7.50 $
$
$
$
$
$

8,000.00
15,000.00
7,500.00
15,000.00
11,518.00
64,000.00
25,950.00
146,968.00
23,514.88
4,409.04
10,287.76
185,179.68

2,000.00 $
$
900.00 $
1,200.00 $
13.00 $
16.00 $
8,000.00 $
$
$
$
$
$

2,000.00
7,500.00
7,200.00
9,600.00
27,664.00
32,080.00
56,000.00
142,044.00
22,727.04
4,261.32
9,943.08
178,975.44

$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$

8,000.00
7,500.00
2,000.00
9,600.00
37,696.00
23,304.40
65,000.00
22,000.00
35,000.00
8,328.00
5,000.00
49,881.00

$
26.00 $
7.50 $
$
$
$
$
$
$

9,500.00
6,084.00
34,642.50
323,535.90
51,765.74
9,706.08
22,647.51
407,655.23
956,990.03

694

$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$

2,000.00
1,200.00
16.00
14.35
65,000.00
22,000.00
35,000.00
12.00

2558

$

19.50

234
4619

$
$

If=linear feet; Is=lump sum; sf=square feet; allow=allowance

Destination by Design

6.22.18

PLANNING
ZONING

f■ nenda Item

TOWN of STALLINGS

Memo:
TO:

Town Council

FROM:
Lynne Hair, Planning Director
SUBJECT: Right of Way Abandonment — Whetstone Drive
DATE:
September 4, 2018

The Town has received a request to abandon an approximately .474-acre portion of
Whetstone Drive. While this road in in the Town's maintenance system, it is not built to
Town standards and the portion being requested for abandonment is overgrown and
lacks pavement.
The applicant, Chestnut of Union, LLC is requesting the abandonment to utilize the
property as a portion of their proposed future development to be located on adjacent
properties (see attached exhibit). By request of Council, the applicant has conducted
an appraisal of the property to assess market value. Morrison Appraisal Services
provided an analysis showing the appraised value of the adjacent 10-acre parcels to be
approximately $600,000, making value of the .474-acre portion requested for
abandonment $31,000. Attached is a copy of the appraisal for your review.
The process for right of way abandonment involves council adoption of a resolution and
calling for a public hearing date to be established. The resolution will then be published
for four consecutive weeks prior to the hearing, and a copy sent to certified mail to all
adjoining property owners. A sign signifying the Towns intent to abandon will also be
posted on the property. Staff would request that Council adopt the resolution and set
the public hearing date for October 8, 2018.

RESOLUTION DECLARING INTENT TO CLOSE
A PORTION OF WHETSTONE DRIVE AND CALL A PUBLIC HEARING ON THE
QUESTION ACCORDING TO NCGS §160A-299
WHEREAS, the Town of Stallings has been in communication with the property
owner adjoining a portion of Whetstone Drive concerning the closing of a portion of
Whetstone Drive from the southeastern corner and end of tax parcel 07-132-0031 until
the end of the road which is adjacent to tax parcels 07-132-003F and 07-132-003E owned
by Chestnut of Union, LLC; and consisting of approximately 20,638 square feet/ 0.474
acres as depicted in the attached Exhibit; and
WHEREAS, this portion of Whetstone Drive consists mainly of broken up
asphalt, weeds, and gravel and is not in a suitable condition for vehicles to travel and is
currently not being used for ingress or egress to any adjoining parcels; and
WHEREAS, the portion of Whetstone Drive from Potter Road that is adjacent to
the Timothy Buboltz property tax #07-132-003J and H.W. Taylor Property tax #07-1320031 will remain open; and
WHEREAS, the property owner adjacent to the portion of Whetstone Drive to be
closed has requested that it be closed by the Town and abandoned for the future
development; and
WHEREAS, the closing will not be detrimental to the public interest; and
VvrHEREAS, the Town of Stallings would retain utility right of ways through said
corridor.
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED by the Town Council of the Town of
Stallings, North Carolina that:
1.

That the Town of Stallings declares its intent to close and vacate a portion
of Whetstone Drive from N 2° 3149" E 30.37 until the road ends S
17°04' 37" E 30.90, consisting of approximately 20,638 square feet or
0.474 acres.

2.

That all water and sewer right of ways will be retained by the Town of
Stallings.

3.

That Chestnut of Union, LLC understands it will be responsible for
maintenance of this portion of Whetstone Drive if the ordinance
abandoning the road is adopted;

4.

That a public hearing will be held on the 8th day of October, 2018 at 7
p.m. at Stallings Town Hall on said closure with notice to all persons as
required by NCGS §160A-299 to be given by the Town Clerk.

Adopted this the

day of

, 2018.

MORRISON APPRAISAL INC
613 Euclid Street
Monroe, NC 28110
704-283-2286

June 12, 2018

Chestnut Developers Inc
5615 Potter Road
Matthews, NC
28104

Property Client File No. Case No. -

Whetstone Drive
Stallings, NC 28104
Chestnut Developers Inc
ChestnutDevelopersInc

Dear :
In accordance with your request, I have prepared an appraisal of the real property located at
Whetstone Drive, Stallings, NC.

The purpose of the appraisal is to provide an opinion of the market value of the property described in
the body of this report.
Enclosed, please find the report which describes certain data gathered during our investigation of the
property. The methods of approach and reasoning in the valuation of the various physical and
economic factors of the subject property are contained in this report.

An inspection of the property and a study of pertinent factors, including valuation trends and an
analysis of neighborhood data, led the appraiser to the conclusion that the market value, as ofJune 12,
2018 is :

$575,000
The opinion of value expressed in this report is contingent upon the Limiting Conditions attached to
this report.
It has been a pleasure to assist you. If I may be of further service to you in the future, please let me
know.
Respectfully submitted,
MORRISON APPRAISAL INC

Rob Morrison
NC Certification #A400

File NoChestnutDev

LAND APPRAISAL REPORT

Census Tract 203.14
Prieb Refefeme See addendum
Chestnut Developers Inc
Pmperry Addcess Whetstone Drive
z
counly Union
staie NC
3P Code 28104
o alY Stallings
l=
.:( Leflei Demndlion Deed books 4788-669, 4728-419. 4025-764, 4507-686,4728-419
o sa. Plioa sNA
Propety Rights Appraised Eil Fee L
.1 Leasnirctd, De Minirre PUD
Date riSale NA
ti
I= Aduai Real Estate Taxes $11,807(2017) (yr.)
z
Mdress 5615 Potter Road, Matthews. NC 28104
cfient Chestnut Developers Inc
inst.eti. to Appraiser Provide opinion of value
- occupam Vacant
Appr2ise, Rob Morrison
inleMed Use: Right of way purchase
intended User Chestnut Dey Ipoers Inc
Locadon

I

Fkilt Up
GroMh Rate

,__I Suburban

Over 75%

Xj 25%to 75%

12d Rural
1111 Under 25%

01 Steady
01 Stabie

SuPOY
1-1 Over 6 Mos,

1-7 Fully Dev. Ell Radd

Properly Values

Li Increeeing

3110M9It
LJ Under
3 Mas.

Dernand/Supply
Marketing Torne
o Present Land Use

j Urban

% 2-4 Far
o 100.000000
%Industrial 34 %Vacent
o
X
ct Orange e Present Land Use
EI Net Likely
o
oe
X
o Predorninant Occupancy
ru- Stngle Farntly Pnce Range
z

LJ X i

Slcm

Cenvenience to Empioyrrent

E X El

ri Dedining

Ccnvenienceto Shcoping

E IFSI IEI E

Convenience to Schools

.01 111.1

Adequacy of Public Transportation

01 E El
.
01 ••

Fl 0.,

X ln Balance

E3 4-6 Mos.

65 % 1 Farnity

Good Avg. Fie Poor
Employment Slablity

% Ads.
%
Ukely r)

% Cendo

% Cornmenzial

Adequacy ca Uklities

—1-7

Property Compatiblity

Rotenon from Detnmental Coxlitions

_
—.1 W 111 —/

% Vacant

Pdice and Fire Protection

:— :51 le —/

General APPearerre of PrcOntins
Aapeal to Market

LJ M E

L___I Tenant

01 Oarer

to $ 500,000
PredoWnent Value $ 200,000
$ 80,000
yrs.
New
ws. to 100
yrs. PAKI0rIbwIt &94 40

Single Family Age

le IU ell i
n X ell

Li Taking Placa r)

To

()Fnan

Recreational Facilities

,

X 11. •

Comments including those factors, favorable or unfavorable, affeding markelablity (e.g. public parks. schools, ndse) The subject property is located

on Whetstone Drive and Potter Road in Stallings. The area is made up of single family houses and scattered commercial
sites. There are a variety of houses with no clear predominant age or value. This is typical for the area and has no adverse
affect on the marketability.
.
Comw Lat
See tax map
= 9.296 acres
Din.voixts
Present ird:rovements
Li do Li donot calorm to zming regulations
Zoning Classificalion CUGR
lighest and best use:
Li Present ase r
jiCi other (specity) Mixes use
OFF SITE IMPRONEMENTS
Other (Desaibe)
Topo Fairly level
Pudic
i X I Public
I.Idvate size Average for area
Elec.
IF:j1
Street Access:
Gas
Ell
Stklace Asphalt
ShaPe Fairly rectangular
Water
Ei
mairrk.c.
17 Public 1Privm. vse« Residential/Commercial
)
(7) San. Sewer 01
CitaIrla0a Appears adequate
CIAII/Guner
LJ SlOrMS8~,
.

111 Undargrtand Elect. & Td.

ell Sidamek
n Sheet Lights ls the property Iccated in a HUO Identified Speciai Rood Haead kee?
X No 0 WIS
C.omments (favorable or untavorade mcluding eny apperent acherse easements, encroechments ca other advense conctilions) The subject property is not

located in flood zone. A physical survey was not available at the time of inspection. This appraisal assumes there are no
adverse easements, encroachments or other adverse conditions that would affect the site.
The undersigned has recited three recent sales of properties rrast sirdier and proernate to subject and has considered these on the market analysis. The description indudes a tbler
adjustment. ndlecting norket reacticn to those itens of significant varialion beMeen me subject and coeparable proberties. 11 a sognoficant itern in Bre corrpareble property is supdior lo, or
mcve favorable than, the subject property. a rrinus (-) adjustment d mede. Ihus reduang the indicated value or suaed. h a significark ■tern tn the ccrnparatie is infericr to, or less tavaable
than, the sutaed property, a plus (+) adustmera is made, thus increasing the inicated value d the subject.

For the Market Data Analysis
I X I See gnd below.
JJ See narrative attacknere
ITEM
Subject Property
COMPARABLE NO 1
Address
'Wesley Chapel Stouts Road
Whetstone Drive
Proxinity to Sula.
u, Sales Price

u) Rioe
).«

-:i Data Scurce
":=(-:. 03. of Sria and
.4 li" Mustment
a.
o Localion
1tu SiteA4ew
ce Site Anse

‹c

COMPARABLE AAD. 3

04/04/2016
106/12/2018
iWhetstone Drive
Wesley Chapel Stouts
iOpen/Resid.CommeOpn Wds/Resd Com
19.296 acres

1/29/2018
+9/22/2016
Old Monroe Road
Stallings Road
Open/Resid,Commer
Wds/Residn/Comm
+418.000
-308,000 3.807 acres
+192,305 13.69 acres

4.62 acres

I
Tax parcel #

See addendum

J07-069-001
i

07-129-343

07-102-026

Sales arFleandng
Concesdcns

None

None

None

None

I El Plue

Indcated Value

ot Subjed
Ce,nrnerls or, Market Data

-308.000 13CI Flus r"."-I kfinua $

418,000

708.000

z
o Comments and Condobons of Appraisal:

1=
a
.7,

8ILI Finti RecorldlIalIcn

( 1 Lfinue
192 3051 J-7 Rkr;15-

Gross 32.1%
; Gross 144.1%
Gross 101.2%
652.000 Net 144.1% $
Net 101.2% $ 382.305
Net -32.1% $
The three sales are located in Indian Trail or Stallings. They are fairly similar in size.

Net Ad. (Talai)

ce

CCIMPAFtABLE NO. 2

Old Monroe Road
Stallings Road
Stallin ,,, NC 2810AIndian Trail. NC 28079
Stallings, NC 28104
Stallings, NC 28104
3.49 miles E
0.64 miles NE
1.89 miles NE
$
$ 190 000
$ 960 000
$ 290 000
NA
$
$
$
$
41 126
70 124
76 175
Public Records
.
Inspection_
Public Records
Public Records
4.12!...
$
I A4,..,
DESCRIPTION
DESCRIPTION
DESCRIPTION
DESCRIPTION
ent

Minus $

$

it is assumed that the site is suitable for development.

The three sales produced a range of $382,305 to $708.000. Based on these sales the value of the subject

is $575.000 or $62,000 per acre. SEE ADDENDUM

I ESTIMATE THE MARKET VALUE, AS DEFINED, OF SUBJECT PROPERTY AS OF

June 12

MORRISON APPRAISAL INC

. 2018

to be s575,000

Fole No.

ChestnutDeyelooersInc

ADD1TIONAL COMMENTS
Intended User
Property Address

Chestnut Deve19_pers Ine.
Whetstone Drive

Stallings

Coty
Cloent

county Union
Chestnut Developers Inc

NC

zip code 28104

SCOPE OF THE APPRAISAL
The scope of the appraisal includes an exterior inspection of the subject property and observation of the
surrounding area. Information such as property values, supply and demand, etc. will be gathered by the
appraiser. Information on comparable land sales will be gathered and analyzed for the sales comparison
approach. Thc data will bc rcsearched and vcritied from reliable public/private sources. The opinions and
conclusions will be reported in this appraisal. This appraisal is intended to meet USPAP requirements.
Any extrordinary assumptions or hypothetical conditions used in the report may have affected the assignment

results.
All information in this report is contained in the work fíle, computer, and/or office.

TAX PARCELS
07-132-003H, 07-132-003G, 07-132-003F, 07-132-003E, 07-132-003D, 07-132-003C, 07-132-002

FINAL RECONCILIATION
Chestnut Developers Inc. wishes to buy the right of way of Whetstone Drive where they own property on both
sides. A survey was provided showing 20,638 sq. ft. or .474 of an acre in the right of way. In order to determine
the value of the land in the right of way, the subject is valued before the land is added and after the land is
added. The difference in the two values is the value of the land in the right of way.
Value of 9.296 acres
Value of 9.77 acres

$575,000
$605,740 or rounded to $606,000

The difference in value is S31,000, which is the value of the land in the right of way.

VALUE OF .474 ACRES 1N THE RIGHT OF WAY
$31,000
AS OF JUNE 12.2018

MORRISON APPRAISAL INC

FtPe No.rhectmitnevelonerçlnc
This appraisal report is subject to the scope of work, intended use, intended user, definition of market value, statement of
assumptions and limiting conditions, and certifications. The appraiser may expand the scope of work to include any additional
research or analysis necessary based on the complexity of this appraisal assignment.
SCOPE OF WORK:

The scope of work for this appraisal is defined by the complexity of this appraisal assignment and the

reporting requirements of this appraisal report form, including the following definition of market value, statement of
assumptions and limiting conditions, and certifications. The appraiser must, at a minimum: (1) perform a complete visual
inspection of the subject property, (2) inspect the neighborhood, (3) inspect each of the comparable sales from at least the street,
(4) research. verity, and analyze data from reliable public and/or private sources, and (5) report his or her analysis, opinions, and
conclusions in this appraisal report.
DEFINITION OF MARKET VALUE: The most probable price which a property should bring in a competitive and open
market under all conditions requisite to a fair sale, the buyer and seller, each acting prudently, knowiedgeably and assuming
the price is not affected by undue stimulus. Implicit in this definition is the consummation of a sale as of a specified date and
the passing of title from seller to buyer under conditions whereby: (1) buyer and seller are typically mobvated; (2) both
parties are well informed or well advised, and each acting in what he or she considers his or her own best interest (3) a
reasonable time is allowed for exposure in the open market; (4) payment is made in terms of cash in U. S. dollars or in terrns
of financial arrangements comparable thereto; and (5) the price represents the normal consideration for the property sold
unaffected by special or creative financing or sales concessions • granted by anyone associated with the sale.
*Adjustments to the comparables must be made for special or creative financing or sales concessions. No adjustments are
necessary for those costs which are normally paid by sellers as a result of tradition or law in a market area; these costs are
readily identifiable since the seller pays these costs in virtually all sales transactions. Special or creative financing
adjustments can be made to the comparable property by comparisons to financing terms offered by a third party institutional
lender that is not already involved in the property or transaction. Any adjustment should not be calculated on a mechanical
dollar for dollar cost of the financing or concession but the dollar amount of any adjustment should approximate the market's
reaction to the financing or concessions based on the appraiser's judgment.
STATEMENT OF ASSUMPTIONS AND LIMITING CONDITIONS:

The appraiser's certification in this report is

subject to the following assumptions and limiting conditions.
1. The appraiser will not be responsible for matters of a legal nature that affect either the property being appraised or the title
to rt, except for information that he or she became aware of during the research involved in performing this appraisal. The
appraiser assumes that the title is good and marketable and will not render any opinions about the title.
2.

The appraiser has examined the available flood maps that are provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency

(or other data sources) and has noted in this appraisal report whether any portion of the subject site is located in an
identified Special Fiood Hazaro Area. Because the appraiser is not a surveyor, he or she makes no guarantees, express or
implied, regarding this determinafion.
3. The appraiser will not give testimony or appear in court because he or she made an appraisal of the property in question,
unless specific arrangements to do so have been made beforehand, or as otherwise required by law.
4: The appraiser has noted in this appraisal report any adverse conditions (such as the presence of hazardous wastes, toxic
substances, etc.) observed during the inspection of the subject property or that he or she became aware of during the research
involved in performing this appraisal. Unless otherwise stated in this appraisal report, the appraiser has no knowledge of any hidden
or unapparent deficiencies or adverse conditions of the property (such as, but not limited to, the presence of hazardous wasles,
toxic substances. adverse environmental conditions, etc.) that would make the property less valuable, and has assumed that there
are no such conditions and makes no guarantees or warranties, express or implied. The appraiser will not be responsible for any
such conditions that do exist or for any engineering or testing that might be required to discover whether such conditions exisl.
Because the appraiser is not an expert in the field of environmental hazards, this appraisal report must not be considered as
an environmental assessment of the property.

Page 2 ora

MORRISON APPRAISAL INC

File No.rhectnntnext.li-Ine,,[nL

APPRAISER'S CERTIFICATION:

The Appraiser certifies and agrees that:

1. l have, at a minimum, developed and reported this appraisal in accordance with the scope of work requirements stated in
this appraisal report.
2. I performed a complete visual inspection of the subject property.
3. I performed this appraisal in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal
Practice that were adopted and promulgated by the Appraisal Standards Board of The Appraisal Foundation and that were in
place at the time this appraisal report was prepared.
4. l developed my opinion of the market value of the real property that is the subject of this report based on the sales
comparison approach to value. l have adequate comparable market data to develop a reliable sales compahson approach
for this appraisal assignment. l further certify that I considered the cost and income approaches to value but did not develop
them, unless otherwise indicated in this report.
5. I researched, verified, analyzed, and reported on any current agreement for sale for the subject property, any offering for
sale of the subject property in the twelve months prior to the effective date of this appraisal, and the prior sales of the subject
property for a minimum of three years prior to the effective date of this appraisal, unless otherwise indicated in this report
6. I researched, verified, analyzed, and reported on the prior sales of the comparable sales for a minimum of one year prior
to the date of sale of the comparable sale, unless otherwise indicated in this report
7. I selected and used comparable sales that are locationally, physically, and functionally the most similar to the subject property.
8. l have reported adjustrnents to the comparable sales that reflect the market's reaction to the differences between the subject
property and the comparable sales.
9. l verified. from a disinterested source, all information in this report that was provided by parties who have a financial interest in
the sale of the subject property.
10. l have knowledge and experience in appraising this type of property in this mar-ket area.
11. I am aware of, and have access to, the necessary and appropriate public and private data sources, such as multiple lisling
services, tax assessment records, public land records and other such data sources for the area in which the property is located.
12. I obtained the information, estimates, and opinions fumished by other parties and expressed in this appraisal report from
reliable sources that l believe to be true and correct.
13. I have taken into consideration the factors that have an impact on value with respect to the subject neighborhood, subject
property, and the proximity of the subject property to adverse influences in the development of my opinion of market value. I
have noted in this appraisal report any adverse conditions (such as, the presence of hazardous wastes, toxic substances,
adverse environmental conditions, etc.) observed duhng the inspection of the subiect property or that I became aware of duhng
the research involved in performing this appraisal. l have considered these adverse conditions in my analysis of the property value,
and have reported on the effect of the conditions on the value and marketability of the subject property.
14. l have not knowingly withheld any significant information from this appraisal report and, to the best of my knowledge, all
statements and information in this appraisal report are true and correct.
15. I stated in this appraisal report my own personal, unbiased, and professional analysis, opinions, and conclusions, which
are subject only to the assumptions and limiting conditions in this appraisal report.
16. I have no present or prospective interest in the property that is the subject of this report and I have no present or
prospective personal interest or bias with respect to the participants in the transaction. l did not base, either partially or
completely, my analysis and/or opinion of market value in this appraisal report on the race, color, religion, sex, age, mahlal
status, handicap, familial status, or national origin of either the prospective owners or occupants of the subject property or of the
present owners or occupants of the properties in the vicinity of the subject property or on any other basis prohibited by law.
17. My employment and/or compensation for performing this appraisal or any future or anficipated appraisals was not conditioned
on any agreement or understanding, written or otherv4se, that I would report (or present analysis supporting) a predetermined specific
value, a predetermined minimum value, a range or direction in value, a value that favors the cause of any party, or the attainment of a
specific result or occurrence of a specific subsequent event.
18. I personally prepared all conclusions and opinions about the real estate that were set forth in this appraisal report. If I relied on
significant real property appraisal assistance from any individual or individuals in the performance of this appraisal or the
preparation of this appraisal report, l have named such individual(s) and disclosed the specific tasks performed in this appraisal report
certifii that any individual so named is qualified to perform the tasks. I have not authohzed anyone to make a change to any itern
in this appraisal report; therefore, any change made to this appraisal is unauthorized and I will take no responsibility for it.
19. l identified the client in this appraisal report who is the individual, organization, or agent for the organization that
ordered and will receive this appraisal report.
20. I am aware that any disclosure or distribution of this appraisal report by me or the client may be subject to certair
laws and regulations. Further, I am also subject to the provisions of the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice
that pertain to disclosure or distribution by me.
21. If this appraisal report was transmitted as an "electronic record" containing my "electronic signature," as those terms are
defined in applicable federal and/or state laws (excluding audio and video recordings), or a facsimile transmission of this
appraisal report containing a copy or representation of my signature, the appraisal report shall be as effecfive, enforceable and
valid as if a paper version of this appraisal report were delivered containing my ohginal hand written signature.
Page 3 d 4

MORRISON APPRAISAL INC

File No. ch

SUPERVISORY APPRAISER'S CERTIFICATION:

tnutD vel ersInc

The Supervisory Appraiser certifies and agrees that:

1. l directly supervised the appraiser for this appraisal assignment, have read the appraisal report, and agree with the appraiser's
analysis, opinions, statements, conclusions, and the appraiser's certification.
2. l accept full responsibility for the contents of this appraisal report including, but not limited to, the appraiser's analysis, opinions,
statements, conclusions, and the appraiser's certification.
3. The appraiser identified in this appraisal report is either a sub-contractor or an employee of the supervisonj appraiser (or the
appraisal firm), is qualified to perform this appraisal, and is acceptable to perform this appraisal under the applicable state law.
4.

This appraisal report complies with the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice that were adopted and

promulgated by the Appraisal Standards Board of The Appraisal Foundation and that were in place at the time this appraisal
report was prepared.
5.

If this appraisal report was transmitted as an "electronic record" containing my "electronic signature," as those terms are

defined in applicable federal and/or state laws (excluding audio and video recordings), or a facsimile transmission of this
appraisal report containing a copy or representation of my signature, the appraisal report shall be as effective, enforceable and
valid as if a paper version of this appraisal report were delivered containing my original hand written signature.

SUPERVISORY APPRAISER (ONLY IF REQUIRED)

APPRAISER
Signature
Name Rob Morrison

47.&

Signature
Name

Company Name MORRISON APPRAISAL INC

Company Name

Company Address 613 Euclid Street

Company Address

Monroe, NC 28110
Telephone Number 704-283-2286
Email Address morrisonappraisal@carolina.rr.com
Date of Signature and Report June 12, 2018
Effectiye Date of Appraisal June 12, 2018
State Certification # A400
or State License #
or Other
State

Telephone Number
Email Address
Date of Signature
State Certification
or State License#
State

State #

Expiration Date of Certification or License

NC

Expiration Date of Certification or License

6/30/2018

SUBJECT PROPERTY

ADDRESS OF PROPERTY APPRAISED

Did sot inspect subject property

Whetstone Drive
Stallings, NC 28104

Did inspect exterior of subject property from street

APPRAISED VALUE OF SUBJECT PROPERTY $ 575,000

Did inspect interior and exterior of subject property

CLIENT

Date of Inspection

Name
Company Name Chestnut Developers Inc

Date of Inspection

COMPARABLE SALES

Company Address 5615 Potter Road

Did not inspect exterior of comparable sales from street

Matthews NC 28104

Did inspect exterior of comparable sales from street

Email Address

Date of Inspection
Page 4 of 4

MORRISON APPRAISAL INC

File No.

DEFINITION OF MARKET VALUE:

ChestnutDevelopersInc

The most probable price which a property should bring in a competitive and

open market under all conditions requisite to a fair sale, the buyer and seller, each acting prudently, knowledgeably
and

assuming the price is not affected by undue stirnulus. lmplicit in this definition is the consummation of a sale

as of a specified date and the passing of title from seller to buyer under conditions whereby: (1) buyer and seller
are typically motivated; (2) both parties are well informed or well advised, and each acting in what he considers his
own best interest; (3) a reasonable time is allowed for exposure in the open market; (4) payment is made in terms
of cash in U.S. dollars or in terrns of financial arrangements comparable thereto; and (5) the price represents the
normal consideration for the property sold unaffected by special or creative financing or sales concessions* granted
by anyone associated with the sale.
'Adjustments to the comparables must be made for special or creative financing or sales concessions. No adjustments
are necessary for those costs which are normally paid by sellers as a result of tradition or law in a market area;
these costs are readily identifiable since the seller pays these costs in virtually all sales transactions.

Special or

creative financing adjustments can be made to the comparable property by comparisons to financing terris offered
by a third party institutional lender that is not already involved in the property or transaction. Any adjustment
should not be calculated on a mechanical dollar for dollar cost of the financing or concessions but the dollar
amount of any adjustment should approximate the market's reaction to the financing or concessions based on the
appraiser's judgment.

STATEMENT OF LIMITING CONDITIONS AND APPRAISER'S CERTIFICAT1ON
CONTINGENT AND LIMITING CONDITIONS:

The appraiser's certification that appears in the appraisal report

is subject to the following conditions:
1.

The appraiser will not be responsible for matters of a legal nature that affect either the property being appraised

or the title to it. The appraiser assumes that the title is good and marketable and, therefore, will not render any
opinions about the title _ The property is appraised on the basis of it being under responsible ownership.
2.

The appraiser has provided a sketch in the appraisal report to show approximate dimensions of the improvements

and the sketch is included only to assist the reader of the report in visualizing the property and understanding the
appraiser's determination of its size.
3.

The appraiser has examined the available flood maps that are provided by the Federal Emergency Management

Agency (or other data sources) and has noted in the appraisal report whether the subject site is located in an
identified Special Flood Hazard Area.

Because the appraiser is not a surveyor, he or she makes no guarantees,

express or implied, regarding this determination.
4.

The appraiser will not oive testimony or appear in court because he or she made an appraisal of the property in

question, unless specific arrangements to do so have oeen made beforehand.
5.

The appraiser has estimated the value of the land in the cost approach at its highest and best use and the

improvements at their contributory value.

The separate valuations of the land and improvements must not be

used in conjunction with any other appraisal and are invalid if they are so used.
6.

The appraiser has noted in the appraisal report any adverse conditions (such as, needed repairs, depreciation, the

presence of hazardous wastes, toxic substances, etc.) observed during the inspection of the subject property or that
he or she became aware of during the normal research involved in performing the appraisal. Unless otherwise stated
in the appraisal report, the appraiser has no knowledge of any hidden or unapparent conditions of the property or
adverse environmental conditions (including the presence of hazardous wastes. toxic substances, etc.) that would
make the property more or less valuable, and has assumed that there are no such conditions and makes no
guarantees or warranties, express or implied, regarding the condition of the property. The appraiser will not be
responsble for any such conditions that do exist or for any engineering or testing that might be required to discover
whether such conditions exist Because the appraiser is not an expert in the field of environmental hazards, the
appraisal report must not be considered as an environmental assessment of the property.
7.

The appraiser obtained the information, estimates, and opinions that were expressed in the appraisal report from

sources that he or she considers to be reliable and believes them to be true and correct. The appraiser does not
assume responsibility for the accuracy of such items that were furnished by other parties.
8.

The appraiser will not disclose the contents of the appraisal report except as provided for in the Uniform

Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice.
9.

The appraiser has based his or her appraisal report and valuation conclusion for an appraisal that is subject to

satisfactory completion, repairs, or alterations on the assumption that completion of the improvements will be
performed in a workmanlike manner.
10.

The appraiser must provide his or her prior written consent before the lender/client specified in the appraisal

report can distribute the appraisal report (including conclusions about the property value, the appraiser's identity
and professional designations, and references to any professional appraisal organizations or the firm with which the
appraiser is associated) to anyone other than the borrower; the mortgagee or its successors and assigns; the mortgage
insurer; consultants; professional appraisal organizations; any state or federally approved financial institution; or any
departrnent, agency, or instrumentality of the United States or any state or the District of Columbia; except that
the lender/client may distribute the property description section of the report only to data collection or reporting
service(s) without having to obtain the appraiser's prior written consent.

The appraiser's written consent and

approval must also be obtained before the appraisal can be conveyed by anyone to the public through advertising,
public relations, news, sales, or other media
Freddie Mac Form 439 6-93

Page 1 of 2

Fannle Mae Forrn 1004B 6-93

File No

APPRAISER'S CERTIFICATION:

ChestnutDevelopersInc

The Appraiser certities and agrees that:

I have researched the subject market area and have selected a minimum of three recent sales of properties most
similar and proximate to the subject property for consideration in the sales comparison analysis and have made a
dollar adjustment when appropriate to refiect the market reaction to those items of significant variation. lf a
significant item in a comparable property is superior to, or more favorable than. the subject property, t have made
a negative adjustment to reduce the adjusted sales price of the comparable and, if a significant item in a comparable
property is infenor to, or less favorable than the subject property, I have made a positive adjustment to increase the
adjusted sales price of the comparable.

2.

I have taken into consideration the factors that have an impact on value in my development of the estimate of

market value in the appraisal report. I have not knowingly withheld any significant information from the appraisal
report and I believe, to the best of my knowledge, that all statements and information in the appraisal report are
true and correct.

3.

I stated in the appraisal report only my own personal, unbiased, and professional analysis, opinions, and

conclusions, which are subject only to the contingent and limiting conditions specified in this form.

4.

I have no present or prospective interest in the property that is the subject to this report, and I have no present

or prospective personal interest or bias with respect to the participants in the transaction, I did not base, either
partially or completely, my analysis and/or the estimate of market value in the appraisal report on the race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of either the prospective owners or occupants of the subject
property or of the present owners or occupants of the properties in the vicinity of the subject property.

5.

I have no present or contemplated future interest 0 the subject property, and neither my current or future

employment nor my compensation for performing this appraisal is contingent on the appraised value of the property.

6.

I was not required to report a predetermined value or direction in value that favors the cause of the client or

any related party, the amount of the value estimate, the attainment of a specific result, or the occurrence of a
subsequent event in order to receive my compensation and/or employment for perforrning the appraisal. I did not
base the appraisal report on a requested minimum valuation, a specific valuation, or the need to approve a specific
mortgage loan.

7

l performed this appraisal in conforrnity with the Uniform Standards of Protessional Appraisal Practice that were

adopted and promulgated by the Appraisal Standards Board of The Appraisal Foundation and that were in place as
of the effective date of ths appraisal, with the exception of the departure provision of those Standards, which does
not apply.

I acknowledge that an estimate of a reasonable time for exposure rn the open market is e condrticr.

the definiLon ol market value and ihe estimate i deveioped rs consistent with the markefing time noted in the
neighborhood section of this report, unless I have otherwise stated in the reconciliation section.

8.

I have personally inspected the interior and exterior areas of the subject property and the extenor of all properfies

listed as comparables in the appraisal report. I further certify that I have noted any apparent or known adverse
conditions in the subject improvements, on the subject site, or on any site within the immediate vicinity of the
subject property of which I am aware and have made adjustments for these adverse conditions in my analysis of
the property value to the extent that I had market evidence to support them. I have also commented about the
effect of the adverse conditions on the marketability of the subject property.

9.

l personally prepared all conclusions and opinions about the real estate that were set forth in the appraisal report.

lf I relied on signn5cant professional assistance from any individual or rndividuals in the performance of the
appraJsal or the preparation of the appraisal report, I have named such individual(s) and disclosed the specific tasks
perforrned by them in the reconclhation section of this appraisal report. I certify that any individual so named is
qualified to perform the tasks. l have not authohzed anyone to make a change to any item in the report; therefore,
if an unauthorized change is made to the appraisal report. I will take no responsibility for it.

SUPERVISORY APPRAISER'S CERTIFICATION:

lf a supervisory appraiser signed the appraisal report, he or she

certifies and agrees that: I directly supervise the appraiser who prepared the appraisal report, have reviewed the appraisal
report, agree with the statements and conclusions of the appraiser, agree to be bound by the appraisees certifications
numbered 4 through 7 above, and am taking full responsibility for the appraisal and the appraisal report.

ADDRESS OF PROPERTY APPRAISED:

Whetstone Drive Stallings, NC 28104

APPRAISER:

SUPERVISORY APPRAISER

(only if required):

r,7

2.2/44‹

Signature:

Signature:

Rob Morrison
Date Signed: June 12 2018
State Certification #:
A400
Name

Name.
Date Signed:
State Certification fir:

or State License #:
State:

or State License St:

NC

State:

Expiration Date of Certification or License:

6/30/201 8

Expiration Date of Certification or License:
Did

Freddie Mac Form 439 6-93

Page 2 of 2

MORRISON APPRAISAL INC

P Cfid Not Inspect Property

Fannie Mae Form 1004B 6-93

File No. CheStrlIttDeVd_QDCrSinC

USPAP COMPLIANCE ADDENDUM
sorrowe,« owne,Chestnut Developers Inc
Whetstone Drive
city Stallings
county Union
Lender or Chent
Chestnut Develo • ers Inc
Properly Address

state

zlo code 28104

NC

Purpose of the Appraisal

The purpose of the appraisal is to provide an opinion of the market value for Chestnut Developers Inc.

Scope of Work

The appraiser has completed an exterior inspection of the subject property as described within the contents of the report.
Public Records were also utilized in preparation of the report. The aooraiser has coliected and analvzedntained
within the public records of Union County and the local multiple listing service. This data will be utilized in the process of
analyzing the value of the subject property. The scove of the appraisal includes gathering and analyzing information from
the sub'ect's area in order to develop a sales comparison approach. The income and cost approaches are not effective
wtpp
ii a raising vacant land.

Report of the prior sales history for the subject property
Is the subject properly currently itsted?

, ---,
Has the property sold dunng the pnor three years?,

Yes M No

List Price: 5

Yes ,X No

11 yes, desaibe below

Exposure Time
Descnbe below the basa (rabonale) for your esanate?
4 to 6 months
The exposure time should be 4 to 6 months is the property is priced competitively.

What is your esanate of exposure Orne for the subject property?

Non-real property transfers
Does the transactron involve the transfer of personal property, fixtures, or intangibles that are not real property?

Yes

El No

If yes, provale desenplion and valuafion below

Additional Limiting Conditions or Additional Comments
The highest and best use is commercial use because commercial use is legally permissible,physically possible, financially
feasible and maximally productive

Additional Certification Statements or Additional Comments

--

Dat e: June 12, 2018

Apprafser(s):

Rob Morrison
._ie

_ Revmw Appramer(s).
Copynght (c) 1994 Software for Real Estate Professionals

MORRISON APPRAISAL INC

Fle No.

Chestnut -v- “ersIne

SITE PLAN
Chestnut Developers Inc
Properly Address
Whetstone Drive
eounty Union
cay Stallings
Chen1
Chestnut Develo ers Inc
Intended User

MORRISON APPRAISAL INC

Zip Code

28 111.4 _

n9 coee 28104

C

N.

..._
1
tor Illl

\ ''''' '''W

I

I

i
""" 117

i

I

1

BLAT 666 F. TKE 7s6

(01 • 71 1

u»rrio i

L 0 r 050 1

I

i

__I.

_. ___.

i

STONEWOOD
SUf3D1VISION

1

i
:OT 666

I

i

,or 664

LOT 043

I

i

LOT x63

!

LOTSG7 1 Lor .6, i

I

i

I

N',
'.

-,...s,
-......„..

I
R1 T CAB F. EK I 407

4.07•67 1

tor..68

I
\
107 160

LO l'
\.,,,,

S."Z.
0

LOT 126

-„ ,...
-- --,

1

.. -cr, -„
\LOT if.73

CHESTNUT of UNrON. / re

1

-1:71

BK 4708-609
TAX 607 ,132 002

o

\ \

state NC

ANctENT OAKS SUODIVISIOP.I.

7:
20.
:7,i.kos,:l
wo
OLTZ
ikuj
Oe 206 RG. ASCI

o

f txv
..
TADFS CFN
.
:207
.0.;.10
,..0.
41A1

PLAIBX 6, Pf.; 107

______

\
I

nounir Union

03
Ch
0

.

.15,

u)

7.,

..c .4 ....
c.) . a.)

.2

'@

7

i

ZOPRO R70

I

,
X4,07, 13,7•30.18

I

122231

NE , 2107W 00
-,,,-CRES:N17
.<1.0F
n...
ufsoN
,. LLC
20Nen R20
AX Ni1,4,2-003C

Z62 77

arEra

?0.5 01Y

Ne7.3r3B3N
--

6167•457.216/
-

676,07Nur oF tptrG.1. u.c
, 9..< •025765

........_
C" 7 0
.TZ,.. ,..
~.1
. kte

tr:"~C, ■GV

AX 001.1:1240:10

-

I

LOT
422

ZONCO 1229
TA3 7 ,314767C
_

\

I

,

"

- --'''

Au. A0.10;NER PROPERTY OWN6R WFORMATION 13 TAKEN FROm

- '?...)'
.K....K

CURRENT OEEos ASO TAx RECOROS ANO ARC CONSWWRFR -NC7w
OR FORMERi xOTNER IJNOFRONOUND U1(7 ES MAY ExiEr flur EmEm 4. 0c,L NEws
ARE NOT KNOWN

it ,C PURPOSE OF 7766 Exututr mAy ts
SHOW THE PORTION OF WHETSTONE
,.,,,tc,o.,
TNA,T,E
,,,,Qut
04
0,
,,,07
.
.THEv ,,
1A0.10JiinipEaneROP
rio.i Ewom
nr

ALL DISrANCES .5Howiv ARE HOWZONrAt. OROUND OisTANCES

[

N

.c

5

0« 4953,0»

OCNNIS.RXINNOR t/C
11% 1.131451
PONCO RX
rnx oor 137.0.0

$?7 -00-irt

f 30 00LOT 1,73

"X
SC"
Z
:
r
---.ED
111
.
'''"°
:::

ARBAS COMPIJTEOLTSWG COOPE:»HA TE GERWE r, r

...,
0.>

'S

,

BK .6.3.36
ZONEO MO
TAX •01.,32-0c4A

E:Ml

, Zur:
»„D,.,70
.,x.

I --1.5117•217, -E

MISCELILAIVE.00JWNOTES

.9. C
el.) •-■

D

firt •rior 10
rA31
,CO,N

oresrlwretVEr.OPEAS. .C.

1

CrIESTrw r OEVELOPERS, INC

tOrt2A
C.Sthrur c, uraOn ,. t c
OK. •50,
606

.,,
, ::: Ç
J13.-1 1 ----PRIONV , OF LRRON. (l(nerx (30,6141

P.
I______

I

\

if

1.
3.E
7.
WHE TSTONE DRIVE- " :.5 4-9-

i

0

....---

20.838 sq 11
0.474 60335

PI (T)

o
.37.

tf>

\
111(iNt OF WAY ,o n&
M ANOCOR 0

,41

.0
493

-;;.,
.,.e. -1" .
Z..‘

u,

II
It

MORRISONAPPRAISALINC

\

2013A Van eUrel Ave.
InCildn Trad. NC 28079
(704)882-4222
www•9gleonbne.n0,

V1C1N1TY MAP
.0, rorrourk

RIGHT OF WAY
ABANDONMENT EXHIBIT
OEROMEORY

Su»

*

FOR: eir.
N/A

1" s 100'

C,WeN w (.0.
RL W

04

1712/2018

RL W

xxitNumpAA
8257

WHETSTONE DRIVE
STALLINGS, UNION CO., N.C.

G 12 APHIC SC ALE
0

PROPERTY OF
CHESTNUT OF UNION. LLC

,00.

2913

( IN FECT )
I inoh - 1 oo Tt.

1

Fie No.

ChestnutDevelooersInc

Location Map
Intended User

Chestnut Developers Inc

ProPanY Address Whetstone Drive
COy

Cliere

CounlY
Stallings
Chestnut Develo e Inc

Union

State

bp code 28104

NC

Hemby Bridge

Lake Park
indian Trail

è>"

Stouts

0,

.n
9.
`i

z,

o.

Ç
44" Monr«

„e* Airpesrl

Wesley
Cnapel
kNocklmgeo^ Moo.M.

1.(‘°

5000 ket 442' •

Bing

• 2018 HERE

MORRISON APPRAISAL INC

1 xr,

2018 0.1ceSsoft Cofeerator

FoN

ChestnutDevelopersIr

PHOTOGRAPH ADDENDUM
Intended User
ProPertY Mdress

Chestnut Developers Inc

Whetstone Drive
State NC

city Stallings
county Union
Chestnut Developers Inc

5pccee 28104

cent

Whetstone Drive
MISC

Whetstone Drive
MISC 2

Whetstone Drive
MISC 3

Whetstone Drive
MISC 4

,IP
-.-

•

,r.

Whetstone Drive
MISC 5

Whetstone Drive
STREET SCENE

MORRISON APPRAISAL INC

oaa•

F e No

hestnutDevelo erslric

PHOTOGRAPH ADDENDUM
Intended User
Propedy Address

CheStIRII. Developers Inc

Whetstone Drive

c,ty Stallings
county Union
Client
Chestnut Developers Inc

state NC

Zip Code

28104

COMPARABLE #1

Wesley Chapel Stouts Road
Indian Trail, NC 28079

Price
Price/SF
Date
Site Area

Value Indication

$190,000
41,126
04/04/20 I 6
4.62 acres

$382.30:,

COMPARABLE #2

Old Monroe Road
Stallings, NC 28104

Price
Price/SF
Date
Site Area

Value Indication

$960.000
70,124
1/29/2018
13.69 acres

$652.000

COMPARABLE #3

Stallings Road
Stallings, NC 28104

Price
Price/SF
Date
Site Area

Value Indication

$290,000
76,175
9/22/2016
3.807 acres

$708,000

STONEWOOD
SUBDIVISION
FIL407
T
P AT CAB. F,

PLAT dAB. F, FILE 254
LOT #72

LOT #73

LOT #71

LOT #70

LOT #69

LOT #68

LOT #67

LOT #66

LOT #65

LOT #64

LOT #63

LOT #62

LOT #61

LOT #60

LOT
\#59

\LOT #25
CHESTNUT OF UNION, LLC
BK. 4788-669
TAX #07-132-002

RIGHT OF WAY TO BE
ABANDONED

20,638 sq.ft.
0.474 acres

ANCIENT OAKS SUBDIVIS101
TIMOTHY BUBOLTZ
DB. 286, PG. 456
ZONED: R20
TAX #07-132-003J

H.W. TAYLOR
D.B. 262, PG. 496
ZONED: R20
TAX #07-132-003I

PLAT BK 6, PG 107

CHESTNUT OF UNION, LLC
BK. 4507-686
ZONED: R20
TAX #07-132-003G

CHESTNUT OF UNION, LLT
BK. 4728-419
ZONED: R20
TAX #07-132-003H

DENNIS HOLDINGS, LLC
BK. 5357-858
ZONED: R20
TAX #07-132-004D

817°0437E
30.90'
LOT #23

N2°31'49"E
30.37'
N87°21.03W

CHESTNUT DEVELOPERS, INC.
BK. 4843-456
ZONED . R20
TAX #07-132-004A

CHESTNUT OF UNION, LLC
BK. 4507-686
ZONED: R20
TAX #07-132-003F

S87°3602E

S87°2121E

WHETSTONE DRIVE

LOT #24

CHESTNUT DEVELOPERS, INC
BK. 4953-834
ZONED. R20
TAX #07-132-003B

CHESTNUT OF UNION, LLC
BK. 4728-419
ZONED: R20
TAX #07-132-003C

N87°3738W

N87°4522"1/41

CHESTNUT OF UNION, LLC
BK. 4025-764
ZONED: R20
TAX #07-132-003D

CHESTNUT OF UNION, LLC
BK. 4025-764
ZONED: R20
TAX #07-132-003E

M1SCELLANEOUS NOTES
AREAS COMPUTED USING COORDINATE GEOMETRY.
ALL ADJOINER PROPERTY OWNER INFORMATION IS TAKEN FROM
CURRENT DEEDS AND TAX RECORDS AND ARE CONSIDERED "NOW
OR FORMERLY"

THE PURPOSE OF THIS EXHIBIT MAP IS
SHOW THE PORTION OF WHETSTONE
DRIVE THAT THE ADJOINING PROPERTY
OWNERS WOULD LIKE PETITION FOR
ABANDONMENT.

OTHER UNDERGROUND UTILITIES MAY EXIST BUT THEIR LOCATIONS
ARE NOT KNOWN.

VICINITYMAF' _

ALL DISTANCES SHOWN ARE HORIZONTAL GROUND DISTANCES

NOT TO SCALE

EAG L E

ENGIN ERING

2013A Van Buren Ave.
Indian Trail, NC 28079
/ -7r1A1 00 ,) A ,
>•)',

RIGHT OF WAY
ABANDONMENT EXHIBIT
DES1GNED BY

.qt-alén

DRAWN BY

N/A

CHECKED BY

RLW

WHETSTONE DRIVE
STALLINGS, UNION CO., N.C.

GRAPHIC SCALE
0

PROPERTY OF
CHESTNUT OF UNION, LLC

100'

( IN FEET )
1 inch = oo ft.

200'

41Nwnda !tem #
0■0
••
04ip
1■411>

Memo
To:

Mayor and Town Council

From:

Kevin P. Parker, E.I., Assistant Town Engineer

Date:

September 05, 2018

Re:

Contract Execution Concurrence
2018 Resurfacing Contract

In accordance with the Stallings Bid Policy and NCGS §143-129 for road construction/repair, staff
advertised the project manual for the 2018 resurfacing contract with formal bidding procedures on
August 1, 2018. The submittal deadline was August 22, 2018 at 2:00 p.m. Only two sealed bids were
received by this date. The project manual was re-advertised with the submittal deadline extended
one week until August 29, 2018 at 2:00 p.m. Three sealed bids were received and read at 2:01 p.m.
on August 29, 2018.
The bids were reviewed by staff for clarity, completeness. errors, and omissions. The apparent low
bidder for the contract is Red Clay Industries.
Below are some key items:
•
•
•
•
•

45-day construction period for the contract
$500/day liquid damages
Performance bond retained through warranty period
Resource loaded schedule
Individual mailer, website and social media notification
2018 Resurfacinq Contract List of Roads
Subdivision

Road
Type

From

To

Blarney

Shannamara

CT

Clifden Dr.

Cul-de-sac

Brad

Kerry Greens

CT

Kerry Greens Dr.

Cul-de-sac

Parkside

CT

Parkview Way

End

29
28
30

DR

Aspen Ln.

Quince Ct.

30

Sapwood
Hawthorne

Country Woods
East

Value

Shadow Lake

Willowbrook

LN

Green Ashe Ln.

Wild Rose Ct.

Fairforest

Fairforest

DR

Chestnut Ln.

Stonehedge Dr.

Apple Tree

Fairfield Plantation

CT

Stoney Ridge Rd.

Cul-de-sac

31
31
31

LN

Hawthorne Dr.

Cul-de-sac

31

Aspen

• Page 1

PCI

Road Name

Country Woods
East

Action Requested:
Requesting motion to authorize the Town Manager to execute the 2018 resurfacing contract with Red
Clay I ndustries for the amount of $345,432.09.

• Page 2

go.%,

ii esitr
oe■

ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT
BID TABULATION
9/5/2018

TOWN OF STALLINGS
315 STALLINGS ROAD
STALLINGS. NORTH CAROLINA 28104

3tallifig5

2018 Resurfacing
PROJECT:
Formal
BID TYPE:
BID SUBMISSION DATE Wednesday. August 29. 2018 at 2:00 p.in.
N/A
DBE GOAL:
ENGINEER'S ESTIMATE $375.000
ITEM DESCRIPTION

Item

Red Clay Industries

CONTRACTOR

Quantity

Unit

1
14.748
1.239
1.239
270

I_S
SY
"IN
FN
1.I'

1

LS

Unit Price

l Bid Amount

Tnill Contracting LLC

Barton Contracting Corp.

Unit Price

Bid Amount

Unit Price

Bid Amount

$10.004.04
55.00
5101.00
5101.00
$35.00

$10,004.04
573.740.00
$125.139.00
5125.139.00
$9.450.00
$343,472.04
568,694.41
$412,166.45

$10.110.65
54.85
$98.00
$108.00
538.00

$10.110.65
$71.527.80
5121.422.00
$133.812.00
$10.260.00
$347,132.45
569.426.49
$416,558.94

Contract (Community Park, Emerald Lake, Hunley Creek, Shannamara,
Stonewood, Willowbrook, Woodbridge)

I
."
3
4
5

Mobilization (3% of Bid Itein Costs)
3" Mill
1.5" Intennediate
1.5" Surface
Remove & Replace Curb and Gutter

6

20% Contingency

58.384.27
$3.10
$89.00
$94.00
$26.00

Subtotal
Total

$8,384.27
545.7 I 8.80
$110.271.00
$116.466.00
57.020.00
$287,860.07
$57,572.01
$345,432.09

Potential Unknown Quantity Unit Price

I
2
3
4
5

- rN
- rN

ABC Unclercut
Asphalt Undercut
Adjust & Repair Catch Basin as Neecled
Borrow Underctit
Geo-Grid

EA
CY
SY

This is to certify thai the bids herein were publicly opened and read aloud at 2:01 pin on August 29. 2018
in the Council Chambers of Stallings Town Hall at 315 Stallings Rd. Stallings. NC 28104.

0111H, iltiili,,
■

-<‘

s.s•(„z.
0

$100.00
5200.00
52.000.00
$50.00
$10.00

Corrected Amount

Witnessed by:
Kevin l'arker
Associalc Engineer

s5o.0O
5125.00
5350.00
525.00
53.00

,,,,,

CA

---SSi

<

SEAL
‘\,.., L.
040268
;

...'?`. •

cf 1 ,:-I

1

•
, =

=

.

,..4...i
...v:
..:'

$75.00
5150.00
51.250.00
545.00
56.00

Agenda Item #

TO: Mayor Dunn; Town Council
FR: Alex Sewell
DATE: 8/31/18
RE: Performance Evaluation System
Purpose: This memorandum's purpose is to provide draft policies related to
Performance Evaluation for the Council's consideration that would meet the Council's
goal of having a written performance evaluation system in place.
Background: On 2/20/18, the Town Council set its expectations for the Town Manager.
One of those expectations was to have a written performance evaluation system in place
by the end of calendar year 2018. An initial steering committee was created, a defined
workplace culture ("The Stallings Way") was identified, and an action plan developed.
Update: The steering committee, department heads, and the entire Town staff have
collaboratively created three policies: 1.) Performance Review and Employee
Development Program; 2.) Performance Pay Program; and 3.) Certification & Training
Program.
Commentary: The Performance Review and Employee Development Program policy
will, if approved, serve as the foundation of the Town's performance evaluation system.
The last two policies are necessary and logical extensions of the first because the Town
currently budgets a 2% aggregate of payroll each year for merit increases but provides
vague direction on how such merit increases are distributed. Without a sufficiently
detailed performance evaluation process, the pragmatic result has been that almost all
employees have received a 2% merit increase.

To address this distribution issue, the Performance Pay and Certification and Training
Programs provide an objective framework to distribute merit increases based on the
performance review process. However, these distributions are projected to stay within
the annual aggregate 2% merit increase budgetary allocation.
' Current Town policy indicates that merit increases "are determined by the employee's supervisor and
Town Manager based on job performance during the previous fiscal year."

On a related note, as staff were reviewing the personnel policy there is one potential area
for improvement that came up: Sec. V11.6. of the Personnel Policy which touches on
Performance Bonuses. Staff would propose exploring improvement options for what to
do with this 1%. A complete compensation structure includes compensation for base
pay, cost-of-living, merit, and longevity. With the adoption of the three policies
discussed herein, the Town will have all compensation areas except for longevity
covered. I'd like to research whether turning this 1% bonus into a longevity bonus
structure would be more effective for the Town.
Timeline: If Town Council approves the enclosed policies, next steps will be for staff to
create the job instruments in a process that should take several months to finalize.
Enclosed is a copy of a sample job description for certain police officer positions. If
Town Council approves the relevant policies, then the Town is positioned to have written
performance evaluation in place by the end of the calendar year.
Recommendation:

• Approve adding the Performance Review and Employee Development Program
Policy to the Town's Personnel Policy.
• Approve adding the Performance Pay Program Policy to the Town's Personnel
Policy.
• Approve adding the Certification and Training Policy to the Town's Personnel
Policy.
• Authorize and direct the Town Manager to implement the above policies and have
them formatted to ensure uniformity with the existing portions of the Town's
Personnel Policy.
• Approve changing Sec. V11.5 Merit Pay and Increases of the Town's Personnel
Policy per the enclosed.
• Authorize the Town Manager to explore potential improvement options for Sec.
11.6 regarding Performance Bonuses.

Performance Review and Employee Development Program
Town of Stallings
I.

Purpose
To establish and maintain a performance review and employee development program that
contributes to organizational excellence, increases accountability, and focuses on continuous
employee development and recognition of the performance levels of all employees. This will be
accomplished through the following objectives:

II. Objectives
1. Continuous Performance Improvement: To regularly discuss the performance of all Town
employees based on job-related criteria; to provide performance coaching, encouragement,
and exploration of optional approaches where needed; to identify during discussions both
accomplishments and areas for employee performance development; to discuss specific
plans to bring about continuous improvement for each employee and the organization as a
whole that translates into increasing service excellence for our customers and citizens.
2. Communications: To create and nurture an atmosphere for open and direct two-way
communications between supervisors and employees concerning job performance and
requirements. To ensure that performance is discussed on a regular, on-going basis
between supervisors and employees so that there are no surprises in the annual
performance review. To build a partnership based on mutual respect and increase the trust in
the relationship between employees and supervisors. To provide a format for supervisors,
when they choose, to request and receive feedback from employees. To ensure that
employees know how their jobs and their goals fit into overall organizational and
departmental mission and goals.
3. Recognition: To establish a program of on-going feedback whereby employees receive
recognition and appreciation for their good performance, accomplishments and
achievements and feel affirmed for the contributions they make to the organization.
4. Retention: To encourage employee development and engagement with their work and with
the organization and discuss employee needs in a way that results in enhanced employee
retention.
5. Employee Traininq /Career Development: To develop information which can be used
jointly by supervisors and employees to determine appropriate training needs and resources
including on-the-job training. To discuss and identify how employees can prepare for
potential advancement opportunities where appropriate.
6. Goal-settinq: To enable employees to establish clear, challenging and achievable goals in
collaboration with their supervisors. To ensure that employees know how their jobs and their
goals fit into the overall organizational and departmental mission, processes, and goals.
7.

Service Excellence: To communicate, promote, and provide accountability for the Town's
commitment to service excellence.

8.

Reinforce "The Stallinqs Way": To reinforce and promote the Town's unique culture
known as "The Stallings Way" including teamwork, respect, commitment. integrity, &
collaboration.

9. Personnel Actions: To provide background information and objective and accurate
documentation for consideration as a basis for any personnel actions or decision that may
arise, including performance pay, disciplinary actions, and promotions.
Draft Last Updated 8/30/18

Performance Review and Employee Development Program
Town of Stallings

III. Instruments
1. Performance Review and Employee Development Program Instruments. Instruments
will be developed for use with employees of the Town based on the occupational groups as
identified in the Addendum. The instruments contain performance criteria that are
behaviorally anchored for each of the five levels of performance identified in Section V of this
policy. The Town Manager is authorized to change the occupational groups as he/she
deems necessary.
2. Performance criteria. Performance criteria refer to the behaviorally anchored language
mentioned in number one above and are developed based on input by employees and
supervisors. Performance criteria are written using the following criteria:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Clearly job-related
Stated in terms of behavior that can be observed
Specific and descriptive of the behavior
Focused on results/outputs, not inputs, effort, etc.
Measurable when possible and feasible

3. Weights. Weights should be established in a meeting jointly with the employee(s) and
supervisor(s) at the beginning of the performance review period as part of communicating
and understanding job requirements. All weights should add up to 100%. Weights should be
established individually where jobs are unique and in a team approach where multiple
employees have the same job duties. Weights should be reviewed annually by those who
originally established them to determine if they are still accurate.

IV.

Responsibilities
Each person or group identified below has a very important role to play in the Performance
Review and Employee Development Program to ensure the overall program's success.
Because this program has a significant interdependence component, the effectiveness of
each person in performing each aspect of his/her role may substantially affect the overall
effectiveness of the program for the Town.
Town Council. The Council's responsibilities include:
•

providing a clear mission and vision to guide the organization;

•

supporting the program;

•

adopting policies to govern the program; and
reinforcing the Council-Manager form of government by valuing and supporting the
Town Managers role as program administrator.

2. Town Manager. The Town Managers responsibilities include:
• educating, promoting, and keeping the Board informed of program status;
•

ensuring a policy is developed and maintained to guide the program;

•

monitoring the program for )> consistency from department to departnnent,
• adherence to policies and procedures,

Draft Last Updated 8/30/18

Performance Review and Employee Development Program
Town of Stallings

•

> training needs,
> consistency with other personnel actions,
> legality, and
> overall effectiveness;
jointly developing management performance criteria with department heads,
communicating job requirements and giving feedback to department heads on their
individual performance throughout the year, coaching them in the effective use of the
program, fairly and objectively conducting performance review meetings with
department heads;

•
•

fairly and objectively conducting employee appeals of performance ratings; and
designate the month performance evaluations will occur.

3. Department Heads. The responsibilities of department heads include:
• helping develop and communicate organizational and departmental goals and
objectives to their employees;
•

educating, promoting, and involving employees in program development,
implementation, use, monitoring, and insuring that new employees are oriented to the
program;

•

providing on-going feedback to their direct reports, including identifying specific ways
employees can improve performance:

•

identifying employee development and advancement needs and interests and
recommending appropriate training opportunities;

•

supporting the training activities of the program;

•

ensuring that Performance Review and Employee Development meetings are
conducted and documented in a timely fashion;

•

ensuring that interim performance reviews are completed when supervision changes
occur;

•

keeping management informed on the effectiveness of the program and monitoring
the performance ratings in their departments for logical documentation and
consistency among divisions and different supervisors to ensure departmental
fairness;

•

ensuring that the program is being conducted within departments in accordance with
Town policies and procedures and legal requirements;

•

fairly and objectively conducting Performance Review and Employee Development
meetings with employees answering directly to the department head; and

•

fairly and objectively conducting any employee appeals and making decisions based
on valid performance ratings.

Department heads are accountable for the quality and effectiveness of the program in their
departments.
4. Supervisors. The responsibilities of supervisors are:
• communicating department goals and performance requirements regularly, as well as
the benefits of the performance review program;
•

clarifying specific performance criteria, communicating them to employees, and

Draft Last Updated 8/30/18

Performance Review and Employee Development Program
Town of Stallings
providing on-going performance feedback including identifying specific ways
employees can improve their performance;
•

conducting thorough Performance Review and Employee Development meetings and
documenting them in a timely fashion, including making performance rating
recommendations;

•

keeping department heads informed on the effectiveness of the program including the
contents of the performance review forms and following the chain of command to
recommend changes necessary to maintain an accurate and fair program:

•

following policies and procedures established for the program and applying them
fairly and consistently;

•

identifying employee development and advancement needs and interests and
recommending appropriate training opportunities;

•

fairly and objectively considering all performance rating appeals; and
training new employees in the Performance Review and Employee Development
program purpose, objectives, procedures, and performance requirements of
employees as well as reviewing forms and performance criteria and relating them
specifically to the job while setting weights as appropriate.

Supervisors are accountable for the Performance Review and Employee Development
forms they complete and recommendations regarding employee performance they make.
5. Employees. Each employee is responsible for
•

working with his/her supervisor on a mutual understanding of job requirements;

•

providing input and feedback into the Performance Review and Employee
Development meeting including identifying accomplishments and areas for
improvement;

•

following the policies and procedures established for the program;

•

following the chain of command to express concerns and make appeals;

•

providing candid open feedback to supervisors concerning their satisfaction with the
performance review program; and

•

making suggestions regarding any needed changes in the performance criteria
related to their jobs.

Human Resources Director. Human Resources Director or designee is responsible for:
•

providing internal consultation on the use of the program to employees, supervisors,
and management;

•

working with department heads to make recommendations for any needed
improvements to the program;

•

•

monitoring the program for consistency, adherence to policies and procedures,
training needs, consistency with other personnel actions, legality, and overall
effectiveness;
processing personnel transactions and insuring appropriate documentation;

•

keeping materials and resources up to date and communicating all changes;

•

providing feedback where needed to departments regarding timeliness,

Draft Last Updated 8/30/18

Performance Review and Employee Development Program
Town of Stallings
thoroughness, legal issues, fairness, consistency, and program statistical data;
•

ensuring there is regular training on performance review and scheduling new
supervisors and department heads for ESMP at the UNC School of Government as
funding allows:

•

orienting new employees to the program; and

•

maintaining all records for the performance review & employee development
program.

V. Performance Categories
The overall performance of all employees will be rated in one of the following four levels:
Important Note: The purpose of the Performance Review and Employee Development form
is not to dictate a performance rating to the supervisor, but rather to help the supervisor 1)
focus on job-related criteria; 2) review the whole period (three months, six months, or a year),
not just most recent months; 3) give feedback on relevant aspects of the employees
performance; 4) help document performance, and 5) think through a logical decision on the
overall performance rating. The performance criteria are not necessarily the only indication of
performance; some categories or performance criteria are more important than others: other
important aspects for consideration, such as disciplinary actions, may only be found in the
summary comments. The supervisor is expected to use reasoned logic and good judgment
in determining the overall rating of performance. Documentation is available to support the
rating level. Employees should be rated against job requirements, not aqainst each other.
Outstanding: Fully meets all job requirements identified for the position. ln addition,
performance consistently and significantly exceeds job requirements in important aspects of
work. Work is performed at a sustained high level of proficiency. The employee also
expands the scope of tasks and responsibilities or the amount of work performed resulting in
increased productivity for the work unit. The employee accomplishes the most difficult and
complex assignments with minimum supervision and maximum quality. Specific examples of
such performance are readily available.
Exceeds Job Expectations. Fully meets all major job expectations identified for the
position. In addition, performance frequently exceeds job expectations in several areas.
Supervision is required only for special or unusual assignments or problems.
Achieves Job Expectations. Meets all major job expectations in a competent manner. The
employee may occasionally exceed some job expectations. Accomplishes duties in a
reasonable and consistent manner demonstrating full proficiency in the job. lf there are
occasional lapses in performance, they do not create any substantial problems for the
organization, nor have any major impact on service delivery. Normal supervision is required.
Needs Improvement. Performance meets job expectations in important categories at least
marginally. However, performance is inconsistent or unreliable in one or more performance
categories. The employee needs to improve proficiency to more fully meet the needs for
which the position was established. Remedial attention and close supervision are required.
Fails To Meet Job Expectations. Performance is inconsistent and one or more major job
expectations are not met. Work tasks are not performed or must be repeated due to low
Draft Last Updated 8/30/18

Performance Review and Employee Development Program
Town of Stallings
quality. Remedial attention and close supervision are required.
Failure to correct
performance deficiencies in an appropriate amount of time may result in suspension,
demotion, or dismissal. A rating at this level should be coordinated with the progressive
disciplinary process.

Vl. Procedures
1.

Performance Review and Employee Development Meeting Dates. Performance
Review and Employee Development dates will typically be the same month for all
employees as designated by the Town Manager.1

2.

Performance Coaching. (The "No Surprises Approach" to performance review) An integral
part of the Performance Review and Employee Development Program is on-going
performance feedback and coaching. Whenever a supervisor observes good performance or
performance needing improvement, the supervisor should provide specific, timely feedback
to the employee. Performance improvement feedback should be designed to help the
employee become more successful. Other coaching activities include helping employees
identify optional approaches and develop problem-solving skills, planning projects, providing
encouragement for difficult tasks, identifying training and resource possibilities, and general
problem-solving discussions designed to help employees learn, develop their capacities, and
develop their careers. The "No Surprises Approach" also includes keeping documentation on
both positive and improvement feedback provided to employees throughout the year to
ensure accurate details at performance review time

3.

Performance Review and Employee Development Meetings. Performance Review
meetings with all Town employees will be conducted and documented within the month
designated by the Town for Performance Evaluations. Prior to Performance Review
meetings. employees will submit a self-evaluation using the applicable instrument to their
Supervisor. Performance Review and Employee Development meetings will be conducted
by the employees supervisor who may also be accompanied by the next level of supervision.
The meeting will encompass one year.
Supervisor will conduct an initial performance review meeting with the employee to discuss
the self-evaluation prior to completing the final performance review form. Informal interim
Performance Review and Employee Development meetings may be conducted when needed
or according to departmental policies. Prior to communicating a rating of "Outstanding" or
"Fails to Meet Job Expectations" to an employee, Department Heads will receive approval
from the Town Manager.

4.

Additional Performance Review and Employee Development Meetings.
Six Month for New & Promoted Employees: Performance Review meetings with new or
promoted employees will be conducted and documented within a 30-day window before
the end of the six-month period following the date of initial employment/promotion.
Additional Meetings: Additional meetings for any employee may be held at the employees
or supervisors request. A probationary employee must receive a rating of no less than
"Achieves Job Expectations" to move from probationary to regular status. A probationary

1

During the initial implementation of the program, the Town Manager may alter scheduling & process.

Draft Last Updated 8/30/18

Performance Review and Employee Development Program
Town of Stallings
employee whose performance needs improvement but shows clear promise of successful
performance may have the probationary period extended for three months and up to a
maximum of an additional six months. This provision in no way restricts the Town from
dismissing an employee whose performance or conduct is considered unsatisfactory at
any point in the probationary period.
5.

Performance Review and Employee Development Instrument. The purpose of the
instrument is to document the performance review meeting. The instruments may be
revised and updated as needed based on input from employees, supervisors and
department heads and approved by the Town Manager.

6.

Coordination with Discipline. Overall performance ratings of "Fails To Meet Job
Expectations" are considered "unsatisfactory job performance" in the Town's progressive
disciplinary policies and procedures. Such a rating requires a performance improvement
plan and may be followed by a written warning if one has not been issued. When such a
rating is earned, additional counseling sessions and performance review sessions will be
conducted in six to 12 weeks and careful performance monitoring and coaching will occur.
ln no case should an employee's performance remain in the "Fails To Meet Job
Expectations" level for more than six months. The time frames above are guidelines and
this provision in no way restricts the Town from dismissing an employee prior to the end of
the suggested timelines and/or following the above procedures if in the best interest of the
Town.
Overall performance ratings of -Needs Improvement" may be considered by the supervisor
as "unsatisfactory job performance" in the -f own's progressive disciplinary policies and
procedures based on the circumstances.

7.

Changes in Supervision. When a change in supervision is imminent due to promotion,
transfer or other action involving the employee or supervisor, the current supervisor should
conduct an interim Performance Review and Employee Development meeting including
meeting with the employee and completing all necessary forms. The review should be
conducted within 30 days. The interim Performance Review and Employee Development
information should be considered by the new supervisor, along with performance observed
and documented by the new supervisor in determining the employee's overall rating for the
performance period.
ln addition, when there is a change in supervision, the new supervisor and employee should
jointly review the employee's performance criteria, discuss performance criteria, and set
weights within 30 days.

8.

Documentation. All Performance Review and Employee Development forms will be signed
by the employee, supervisor, intermediate levels of supervision, and department head and
forwarded to the Human Resources Director and Town Managers Office. The supervisor will
offer to print a copy of the performance evaluation instrument for the employee to keep after
all signatures and comments have been completed. Intermediate levels of supervision
and/or department heads should not make changes to the forms unilaterally. Instead
changes should only be made after discussing the reasons for the changes with the
employee and his/her immediate supervisor, following the chain of command up and down in
these discussion as appropriate. All relevant sections of Performance Review and Employee
Development forms, including comments sections and all signatures, will be completed by
the appropriate person prior to processing the forms in the Human Resources Office. A

Draft Last Updated 8/30/18

Performance Review and Employee Development Program
Town of Stallings
personnel action form may accompany all forms.
9.

Appeals. Any employee who believes that the application of this policy or his or her
performance rating is unfair or inaccurate may make a formal appeal by writing the specific
disagreement(s) and filing it following the Town's Grievance Procedure. A copy of the
Grievance Procedure is available from the Town Manager or Town Clerk. A copy of all
appeals and grievances will be provided to the Human Resources Director.

10.

Training. Department heads are responsible for identifying training needs of supervisors
and insuring that these are met so that Performance Review and Employee Development
meetings are conducted effectively. New supervisors will participate in some form of training
in the Town's policies and procedures as well as effective techniques for conducting
Performance Review and Employee Development meetings prior to performing them. The
HR Director will coordinate this training.

Draft Last Updated 8/30/18

Performance Review and Employee Development Program
Town of Stallings
Occupational Groups
Department Heads
Deputy Town Manager/Town Clerk
Director of Administration/HR
Finance Officer
Town Planner
Town Engineer
Public Works Supervisor
Parks & Recreation Director
Police Chief

Public Works
Public Works Maintenance

Administrative and Fiscal
Administrative Accounting Clerk
Planning Technician
Communication Specialist/Deputy Town Clerk
Police Records
Parks & Recreation Office Assistant

Enciineering
Associate Engineer

Parks & Recreation
Special Events Coordinator

Police
Patrol Officer
Crime Scene Investigator
Code Enforcement Officer

Police Supervision
Police Corporal
Police Sergeant
Police Captain

Draft Last Updated 8/30/18

Performance Pay Program
Town of Stallings

1.

Purposes
The purposes of the Performance Pay Program are:
1.

To provide a systematic program to reward employees based on job performance,
accomplishments, and contributions to the organization within budgetary allocations;

2.

To provide recognition and demonstrate appreciation for job performance;

3.

To provide a method of moving employees within the salary range that results in a
competitive actual salary and employee retention; and
To provide incentive for continuous performance improvement and productivity and
to maintain a high level of employee performance and morale.

11.

Definitions
Calendar Month — the period from a particular date in one month to the same date in the
next month. For example, from April 4th to May 4th.
The pay table will be designed with the following rates for each grade:
Minimum - the entry level rate for the pay grade. Employees meeting the requirements on
their respective class specification should be hired at the Minimum Rate. Employees who
significantly exceed the education and experience requirements on their respective class
specification may be considered for hiring above the minimum.
Maximum - a rate that is 50% greater than the Minimum Rate.

111.

Responsibilities
Town Manager. The Town Manager will recomnnend to the Board sufficient funding to
insure an effective Performance Pay program. The Town Manager will make decisions
regarding when to award Performance Pay to department heads. The Town Manager will
monitor the Performance Pay program in the organization for consistency, fairness,
accurate and complete information, and sufficient documentation. The Town Manager may
overturn the decision of department heads to award performance pay increases due to
inconsistencies, failure to follow established policies and procedures, funding availability,
lack of sufficient documentation, or other circumstances dictate. The Town Manager will
designate the month for employees to conduct the annual performance evaluations.
Department Heads. Department heads will make performance pay decisions in the
department, subject to the review and approval of the Town Manager based on completing
and/or reviewing the Performance Review and Employee Development forms completed by
immediate supervisors and upon any other information that is needed. Department Heads
will make performance pay decisions regarding increases for their subordinates.

Performance Pay Program
Page 2
Prior to communicating a rating of "Outstanding" or "Fails to Meet Job Expectations" to an
employee, Department Heads will receive approval from the Town Manager. For all other
ratings, Department Heads will communicate their recommendations to employees,
explaining that the recommendation is subject to the review and approval of the Town
Manager. Department Heads will monitor the Performance Pay program in their respective
department to ensure consistency, fairness, accuracy, complete information, and sufficient
documentation. Department Heads are responsible for ensuring that performance pay
increases stay within budgetary allocations.
HR Director. The HR Director will monitor the Performance Pay program in the
organization for consistency, fairness, accurate and complete information, and sufficient
documentation. The HR Director will provide internal consultation on the policy and use of
the program to employees, supervisors, and management. The HR Director will also
provide recommendations for any needed improvement to the program and provide
administrative support to management.
IV.

Performance Pay Amounts
Performance pay amounts (including performance bonus) will be awarded based on the
overall performance rating the employee receives for the full year on the final performance
review form.
Performance pay amounts may vary from year to year depending on budget availability and
market adjustment amount. Unless the Town Council decides otherwise, the following
schedule will apply:

Performance
Categories
Outstanding

Instrument
Rating

Percentage
Increase

3.76 - 4.00

4%

3.51 - 3.75
Exceeds Job
Expectations
Achieves Job
Expectations
Needs
I mprovement

3.26 - 3.50

3.5%
3%

2.75 - 3.25

2.5%

2.26 - 2.75

2%

1.75 -2.25

1.5%

1.26 - 1.75

0%

.071 - 1.25
Fails to Meet
Job
Expectations

0.36 - 0.70
0.00 - 0.35

0%

Performance Pay Program
Page 3
This funding is not a guarantee, and the Town Manager may overturn the decision of
department heads to award performance pay increases and/or performance pay bonuses
due to inconsistencies, failure to follow established policies and procedures, funding
availability, lack of sufficient documentation, or other circumstances dictate.
An employee whose performance fails to meet expectations will have the performance
review scheduled again in no more than three months. lf the employees performance is
rated "Needs Improvement" or "Fails To Meet Expectations" the disciplinary process will
continue.
An employee hired or promoted less than three full calendar months prior to the start of the
month designated by the Town Manager for employees to conduct performance evaluations
is not eligible for a Performance Pay increase. However, an employee hired or promoted
three or more full calendar months but less than twelve full calendar months before the start
of the month designated for employees to conduct performance evaluations is eligible to
receive a pro-rata portion of the appropriate performance pay amounts. For example, if the
month designated for employees to conduct performance evaluation starts October 1st and
an employee was hired or promoted on September 15m, the employee would not be eligible
for a performance pay increase. Similarly, an employee hired or promoted on July 16th
would not be eligible for a performance pay increase. ln contrast, an employee who was
hired or promoted on April 1st (i.e. 6 full calendar months prior to October 1st) would be
eligible for 50% of the performance pay amount as determined by this policy. Using the
example where the employee was hired or promoted on Aprii 15 t and this emDloyee was
scored for a 2% increase, then the employee would receive 1% (6 out of 12 full calendar
months = 50% multiplied by 2%).

V.

Performance Pay Bonus.
Employees who are at the Maximum Rate of the salary range for their position classification
are eligible to be considered for a Performance Pay Bonus. These bonuses shall be
awarded based upon the performance of the employee as described in the Performance
Review and Employee Development forms.
An employees base salary may not move above the maximum of his or her assigned salary
range. Therefore, if an employees current salary is below the maximum of the salary range
but awarding the full performance pay amount places an employee above the maximum,
then 1) the employee will receive the amount in base pay that places him or her at the
maximum of the range; and 2) the employee will receive the amount that would place him
or her above the maximum in a lump sum amount.
Part-time employees are not eligible for the performance pay increases except as follows.
Permanent part-time employees, who have worked an average of 10 hours or more per
week for a full-year prior to the evaluation, are eligible for a performance pay bonus.

Vl.

Procedure

Performance Pay Program
Page 4
1.
Performance Pay Eligibility Dates. Employees will be considered for a performance pay
increase following the designated month for employees to conduct performance
evaluations. Performance pay begins on the first day of the payroll period immediately
following the review date or as otherwise determined by the Town Manager.
Documentation. All Performance Review and Employee Development forms will be signed
by the employee, supervisor and department head and forwarded to Human Resources and
the Town Manager with any accompanying memoranda and/or other documentation for
review and filing. The employee shall be given access to a copy of the forms and other
documents to keep as requested.
Appeals. Any employee who believes that his or her performance pay decision is unfair or
inaccurate may make a formal appeal by following the grievance procedure in the
Personnel Policy.

Last Draft Update 8/28/18

Town of Stallings
Training and Certification Policy

Purpose of the Certification and Training Policy
The purpose of this program is to encourage and reward employees to complete training, development,
and certification programs that provide them with knowledge, skills, and abilities that will enable the
Town of Stallings to become more flexible and adaptable, improve client services, ensure that work is
performed in a safe manner, and develop capacity to provide continuous services at a high level into the
future.
Training and Certification Programs Covered
The program covers training and certification beyond the minimunn training and certification
requirements listed in job descriptions and classification specifications and/or otherwise deemed
necessary/beneficial/non-routine to the job by the Town, and any others that are required and specified
upon hire or promotion. Employees may request training or certification from a list of training and
certifications approved by the Department Head, Human Resources Director, and Town Manager or
other training or certification that is related to their jobs and the purpose of the Training and
Certification Program.
Program Description and Operation
The program operates on a fiscal year basis. Participation in the Training and Certification Program is
voluntary on the part of employees. Employees who elect to participate must submit a Request for
Training and/or Certification form for each certification or training program they request. The Request
for Training and/or Certification form shall include the following information:
•

Training or certification program requested;

•

The cost of the training or certification, the location of any training, and its duration;

•

A brief description of how completion of the certification or training program will benefit job
performance, client services, safety, and/or ability of the Town to provide services in a
continuous manner into the future; and

•

A statement documenting that any pre-requisites have been met.

Upon receipt of a form, the Department Head, Human Resources, and Town Manager (final decisionmaker) will either approve or reject requests considering the following factors:
•

The extent to which the training or certification enables the employee to perform higher level
duties required by the Town, improves client services, ensures that work is performed in a safe
manner, and/or develops capacity to provide continuous services at a high level into the future;

•

Employee workload;

•

Employee performance;

•

Departmental needs; and

•

Funds available.

Last Draft Update 8/28/18

Upon approval of a Request for Training and/or Certification, management will indicate to the employee
the compensation that they will receive if the training and/or certification is successfully completed and
any conditions that must be met such as:
•

Continuing education if that is required to continue certification into the future;

•

Demonstration of new knowledge, skills, and abilities on the job after training/certification is
complete; and

•

Timing issues regarding compensation.

Any compensation changes may be delayed for up to six months after completion of a training and/or
certification program for management to determine if the training and/or certification was successful.
All compensation changes are contingent on funding availability, which may be delayed indefinitely until
funding becomes available.
Upon completion of training or certification, employees shall be responsible for providing proof of
successful completion to management. Management shall enter information regarding the training or
certification into the Employee Training and Certification Record.

Compensation
Compensation may be in the form of a one-time bonus or a continuing salary increase according to the
following criteria:
Compensation

Criteria

One-time bonus

Certification or training results in improved employee performance
or is related to the ability of the Department to provide continuous
services into the future

Permanent salary increase

Certification or training results in the employee performing
additional duties that are at a significantly higher level or which
result in a considerable increase in the variety of work performed
and ability of the Department to provide continuous services into
the future

The increase amount shall be the amount on the list of training and certifications approved by the
Department Head, Human Resources Director, and Town Manager (final decision-maker). For training
and certifications not included on the list, the Department Head, HR Director, and Town Manager (final
decision-maker) shall determine the compensation amount, if any, considering the difficulty of completing
the training or certification, higher level duties that result, improvement to client services or on-the-job
safety, and improved capacity to provide continuous services at a high level into the future. ln no case
shall employees be eligible for more than a 2.5% increase per fiscal year, except employees earning either
their Professional Engineer License (P.E.) or Certified Public Accountant License (C.P.A.) may be eligible
for up to a 5% increase if approved per this policy. Any P.E. or C.P.A. increases are not automatic and are
subject to the Program's approval process.
lf an employee loses a certification that resulted in a bonus or continuing salary increase, the employee
may be required to reimburse the bonus amount or be subject to a reduction in pay.

SECTION VII: THE PAY PLAN
VII.5. Merit Pay and Increases
a) All employees will be considered for an annual merit increase in accordance with the
Town 's Performance Pay Program.
b) Merit increases are not automatic, but instead are determined in accordance with the Town's
Performance Pay Program. by the employees supervisor and Town Manager based on job

c) Individual merit increases can range from zero (0) to five (5) percent, with two (2) percent
being the normal merit increase for an employee meeting job performance standards or as
otherwise determined by the Town's Performance Pay Program. No individual annual merit
increase will exceed five (5) percent.
d) Under normal conditions, the Town will budget payroll for an aggregate annual two (2)
percent merit increase. The sum total merit increase to all employees will not exceed two
(2) percent unless approved by Town Council.
e) Individual merit increases are annual and take effect at the beginning of each fiscal year.
