BEFORE THE ARBITRATOR

In the Matter of the Arbitration of a Dispute Between
GENERAL TEAMSTERS UNION, LOCAL 662,
AFFILIATED WITH THE
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS, AFL-CIO
and
SCHOOL DISTRICT OF NEW RICHMOND,
NEW RICHMOND, WISCONSIN
Case 50
No. 60182
MA-11555

Appearances:
Ms. Jill M. Hartley, Previant, Goldberg, Uelmen, Gratz, Miller & Brueggeman, S.C.,
Attorneys at Law, 1555 North RiverCenter Drive, Suite 202, P.O. Box 12993, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin 53212, for General Teamsters Union, Local 662, affiliated with the International
Brotherhood of Teamsters, AFL-CIO, referred to below as the Union.
Ms. Kathryn J. Prenn, Weld, Riley, Prenn & Ricci, S.C., Davis & Kuelthau, S.C., Attorneys at
Law, P.O. Box 1030, Eau Claire, Wisconsin 54702-1030, for School District of New Richmond,
New Richmond, Wisconsin, referred to below as the District, or as the Employer.
ARBITRATION AWARD
The Union and the District are parties to a collective bargaining agreement which was in
effect at all times relevant to this proceeding and which provides for the final and binding
arbitration of certain disputes. The parties jointly requested that the Wisconsin Employment
Relations Commission appoint Richard B. McLaughlin, a member of its staff, to serve as
Arbitrator to resolve a grievance filed on behalf of Rick Spinks, who is referred to below as the
Grievant. Hearing on the matter was held on November 7, 2001, and on February 12 and 13,
2002, in New Richmond, Wisconsin. No transcript was made of the hearing. The parties filed
briefs and reply briefs by April 23, 2002.

6401

Page 2
MA-11555
ISSUES
The parties stipulated the following issues for decision:
Did the District have just cause to terminate the Grievant?
If so, what is the appropriate remedy?
RELEVANT CONTRACT PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 5
SENIORITY
Section 1. Seniority. For purposes of this Agreement, seniority shall be
determined by length of continuous regular employment with the District in this
bargaining unit. Seniority status shall not be lost for reasons of vacation, leave of
absence, temporary layoff due to lack of work, or other economic reasons,
conscription or reserve military service, illness, accident or any other reason
mutually agreed upon.
...
Section 3. Loss of Seniority. Seniority shall be forfeited if:
(a)

An employee is absent due to illness or accident for more than one
(1) year and did not secure a leave of absence.
...

(c)

The employee quits or is terminated for just cause.
...
ARTICLE 9

DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE
Section 1. The Employer will not discipline, suspend, or discharge an employee
without just cause.

Page 3
MA-11555

Section 2.
1.2.3.4.-

The normal disciplinary procedure is:
Verbal warning
Written warning
Suspension
Discharge

The above procedure need not be followed in cases of serious misconduct.
The number of warnings or length of suspension shall be determined by the
Employer in accordance with the gravity of the violation, misconduct, or
dereliction involved, taking into consideration that such steps are intended to be
corrective measures.
...
ARTICLE 24
LEAVE OF ABSENCE
Section 1. Sick Leave. An employee who misses work due to illness or accident
for up to sixty (60) days shall be considered on leave of absence and shall be
required to provide Employer with written documentation of inability to work and
expected date of return. Any employee who anticipates being absent for more than
one (1) year shall obtain a written leave of absence from the Employer by the
eighth (8th) month to be accompanied by a doctor’s certificate of inability to
perform duties, and explaining why employee cannot reasonably be expected to
return to work. Failure to comply with this Section will result in loss of seniority.
Section 2. Any employee desiring a leave of absence from his/her employment for
more than seven (7) days (other than that referred to in Section 1), shall secure
written permission from both the Local Union and the Employer. Failure to
comply with this provision shall result in the complete loss of seniority rights.
BACKGROUND
Dr. Jim Wold, the Employer’s District Administrator, issued a letter of termination to
the Grievant dated May 9, 2001, which states:

Page 4
MA-11555
In a letter dated May 18, 2000, you were advised that your medical leave time
would be counted toward the time to which you were entitled under the state
and federal Family Medical Leave laws, a maximum of 12 weeks. Those 12
weeks have expired. In addition you have exhausted your accrued vacation and
sick leave.
According to your most recent medical report, you are still subject to
significant work restrictions. Based on the District's review of that
information, the District has determined that there is no work available within
those restrictions. Therefore, since you have exhausted your available leave,
this letter is to advise you that your employment with the District will be
terminated effective May 10, 2001.
Your name will, however, be placed on a preferential rehire list should your
medical condition improve and should there be a position for which you are
qualified. Thank you for your years of service to the School District of New
Richmond. We wish you well in the years ahead.
The Union filed a grievance on May 11.
At the November 7, 2001 hearing, the District added additional bases for the
termination, asserting newly discovered evidence. After discussion, the parties agreed to hear
the entire matter as a single grievance. Wold summarized the discussion in a letter to the
Union dated November 8, 2001, which states:
This letter confirms that the District advised Mr. Spinks during the
November 7, 2001, session with Arbitrator McLaughlin that his employment
with the District was being terminated for two reasons, each of which the
District believes independently supports termination.
The first reason is that the District has verified that Mr. Spinks was convicted of
a felony on August 31, 1989, for the manufacture/delivery of cannabis in an
amount greater than 500 grams. Yet, when Mr. Spinks applied for employment
with the District on December 2, 1992, he stated on the application form filed
with the District that he had not been convicted of a felony within the last seven
years.
The second independent reason for termination is that the District has
determined that Mr. Spinks misrepresented the circumstances of his knee injury
on or about September 12, 1999, and that his worker's compensation claim
arising out of that injury is fraudulent in that the injury did not occur while at
work.

Page 5
MA-11555
This letter will also confirm that the District has agreed to waive both of these
additional independent causes of termination directly to arbitration and to
consolidate them with the case currently pending before Arbitrator McLaughlin.
The background unique to each basis for the termination will be set forth separately, with
undisputed matters prefacing an overview of witness testimony.
The District employed the Grievant as a full-time Custodian from December 22, 1992
until his discharge. Prior to December 22, 1992, the Grievant worked as a part-time
Custodian for the District. While employed as a full-time Custodian, the Grievant filed twelve
Worker’s Compensation (WC) claims. In August of 1994, the Grievant injured his back. In
August of 1995, he underwent a “Functional Capacities Evaluation” (FCE) that determined he
had limitations on his ability to bend, kneel, lift and carry. The Grievant experienced varying
levels of restrictions due to his back from this time until his discharge.
The Knee Injury
Sometime in August or September of 1999, the Grievant injured his left knee and foot.
The Grievant worked Sunday overtime on September 12, 1999, and left a voicemail message
for his supervisor, Jerry Davis, that he had stepped into a hole and twisted his left knee and
foot. He reported to work on September 14, and consulted a physician on September 15. On
his doctor’s instructions, he did not return to work. On September 15, he filed a written work
injury report on that stated the injury occurred at “East Side High School” while he was
“taking out broken chairs.”
The injury did not improve, and the Grievant went to a specialist, A. Hamid Khan, who
determined the Grievant had “sustained some ligament and cartilage damage.” Kahn placed
him in a leg brace, and informed him to take four weeks off from anything other than sit-down
work prior to another evaluation. The Grievant did not return to work, and learned at the
subsequent evaluation that he would undergo knee surgery. The surgery took place on
October 28, 1999. In a letter to Davis dated November 16, Kahn released the Grievant for
light duty. On Kahn’s recommendation the District placed the Grievant in a work hardening
program summarized in a November 16 letter from Kahn to Davis that states:
...
He should not keel, squat, pivot, climb, crawl, stand and or walk for long
periods of time. He should be allowed to ambulate & sit during his work hours.
He may, at times, need to apply ice to the left knee. He will continue with
physical therapy and will be evaluated again on/or about 12/2/99 at which time
his restrictions will be addressed. Work hardening hours:

Page 6
MA-11555
11/17/99 through 11/23/99 2 hours/day
11/24/99 through 11/30/99 3 hours/day
12/1/99 through 12/7/99 4 hours/day
12/8/99 through 12/14/99 5 hours/day
12/15/99 through 12/21/99 6 hours/day
12/22/99 through 12/28/99 7 hours/day
12/29/99 through 01/01/00 8 hours/day
The schedule listed above will be in effect as long as the patient is able to
tolerate his work duties. As previously noted he will be checked again on
12/2/99 and any changes in his activity levels will be addressed at that time.
...
The Grievant continued to experience pain. The District, unconvinced he could return to the
full-time requirements of his job, requested the Grievant to undergo an FCE. The FCE, dated
January 26, 2000, states the following:
Activity
12 “ to waist lift -- 46”
Waist to eye level lift -- 72”
Two handed carrying
One handed carrying
Pushing
Pulling
Sitting
Standing
Work arms over head-standing
Work bent over-standing/stooping
Work kneeling
Work bent over-sitting
Work squatting/crouching
Work arms over head-supine
Climbing stairs
Repetitive squatting
Walking
Crawling
Climbing a ladder
Repetitive trunk rotation-standing
Repetitive trunk rotation-sitting

N = Never

Abilities
38 lbs (Occas.)
62 lbs (Occas.)
68 lbs (Occas.)
55 lbs (Occas.)
50 lbs (Occas.)
50 lbs (Occas.)
F
O
O
O
O
O
N
F
O
N
F
F
N
N
F

O=Occasionally

Job Demand
75 lbs
25 lbs
50 lbs
25 lbs
10 lbs
10 lbs
N
C
O
F
O
O
N
N
RARE
O
C
O
O
F
O

F= Frequently

C=Constantly

Match?
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes

Page 7
MA-11555
The District permitted the Grievant to return to work. He continued to experience knee
problems, however, and his last shift of work occurred on March 22, 2000.
The Grievant underwent a second surgical procedure on his knee that necessitated an
extended rehabilitation. In a letter to the Grievant dated May 18, 2000, Brian Johnston, the
District’s Director of Fiscal & Building Operations informed the Grievant that his continuing
absence from work “is being considered an approved leave under the federal and state Family
and Medical Leave Act.”
In a letter to the Grievant dated December 20, 2000, Johnston addressed the Grievant’s
“Medical Leave/Employment Status” thus:
...
The District’s records indicate that your eighth month of continued leave
occurred on or about November 23, 2000. As of this date, the District has not
received nor acted upon a request from you for a leave of absence. It is the
District’s understanding that your absence will exceed the one-year limit. If that
is the case, you have failed to comply with the eight-month timeline set forth in
Article 24, Section 1, and as a result of that failure, your seniority will have
been lost and your employment relationship with the District will have been
severed.
Before taking any final action in this regard, the District wishes to provide you
the opportunity to present any evidence you may have which would indicate that
your absence will not exceed the one-year limit. If you have such information,
that documentation must be provided to the District Office within seven calendar
days of the date of this letter. If no such information is provided, it will be the
District’s understanding that you will be unable to return to work within the
one-year timeline.
...
After receiving this letter, the Grievant gave the District the following note, dated “Oct 24
2000”, that states:
To whom it may concern I Rick Spinks am letting the district know that I do not
anticipate being off more then a year. But at any time I find that I’ll exceed the
one year I’ll let the district know at that time if this is not sufficient please let
me know.

Page 8
MA-11555
The Grievant and Johnston met sometime after this, and the Grievant gave Johnston a copy of
a document entitled “Rehabilitation Protocol For Opening Wedge Proximal Tibial Osteotomy
With Allograft Bone Graft.” The protocol stated Robert LaPrade as the doctor, and was a
form document that covered the goal of the surgery and gave an overview of the standard postoperative rehabilitation procedure. The protocol anticipated “return to full low impact
activities as tolerated” five to six months after the surgery.
Johnston responded to the Grievant in a letter dated January 16, 2001, which states:
Upon review of your documentation I find the doctors information leads me to
the conclusion that you will be off for more than one year. If you are unable to
return to your normal duties within the one year timeline I will recommend to
the board that the contract language be followed and that your employment with
the district be terminated.
On January 25, LaPrade issued a “Work Restrictions/Report of Workability” form that noted
the Grievant needed crutches, and should not work through March 15. In a letter to the
Grievant dated February 23, Johnston stated that “I would expect you to return to work on or
before March 23rd, 2001.” The Grievant obtained a work release from LaPrade dated
March 15 that released him to work without restriction beyond “ice at breaks as needed” and
“No repetitive outstretched reaching.”
The District doubted whether the March 15 release established the Grievant was capable
of returning to work. Johnston placed the Grievant on paid administrative leave effective
March 23, and scheduled an FCE exam for the Grievant. The Grievant performed the exam
on April 27. The FCE report, dated May 2 and signed by Gwen K. Jensen, a physical
therapist, states the following:

Activity
Floor to waist lift (46”)
Waist to shoulder level lift (69”)
Two handed carrying
One handed carrying- Right
Pushing
Pulling
Sitting
Standing
Work arms over head-standing
Work bent over-standing/stooping
Work kneeling

Abilities
62 lbs (Occas.)
82 lbs (Occas.)
82 lbs (Occas.)
55 lbs (Occas.)
95 lbs (Occas.)
83 lbs (Occas.)
F
F
F
O
C

Job Demand
75 lbs
25 lbs
50 lbs
50 lbs
10 lbs
10 lbs
O
F
O
F
O

Match?
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Page 9
MA-11555

Work bent over-sitting
Work squatting/crouching
Work arms over head-supine
Climbing stairs
Repetitive squatting
Walking
Crawling
Climbing a ladder
Repetitive trunk rotation-standing
Repetitive trunk rotation-sitting

N = Never

O=Occasionally

F
O
C
F
F
F
F
F
F
F

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

O
O
N
O
O
F
O
O
F
O

F= Frequently

C=Constantly

Johnston provided the job description that was used as the basis for these conclusions. The
position description then in effect for Custodian demanded a lifting requirement of fifty
pounds. Jensen added the following “Impressions and Recommendations:”
1.

2.

3.

According to job description for Custodian . . . Mr. Spinks’ tolerances
for low level lifting (floor to waist) and for stooping did not meet job
requirements. Participation in a short term aggressive work hardening
program may assist Mr. Spinks in increasing tolerance for these activities
to meet job demands.
Several activities in the mobility section were heart rate limited and may
be indicative of reduced cardiovascular endurance and deconditioning.
An aggressive work hardening program would also promote overall
reconditioning through aerobic strengthening activities.
Mr. Spinks reported low back pain as his primary symptom during
testing. Work hardening participation may also be beneficial in assisting
Mr. Spinks in learning techniques to manage symptoms related to
performance of functional activities.

After consideration of the FCE, the District determined to issue the termination letter. The
background sketched to this point is undisputed. The balance of the background is best set
forth as an overview of witness testimony.
James Ohlfs
In the summer and fall of 1999, Ohlfs and the Grievant worked the same shift as
Custodians. During the summer, they worked from 6:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m. With the start
of the school year, each moved to the 3:00 p.m. until 11:00 p.m. shift.

Page 10
MA-11555
Ohlfs testified that on a Monday during the summer, the Grievant came into work with
his leg noticeably swollen. During a morning break, the Grievant sought to ice it. The
swelling in the left knee area was so bad that the Grievant could not raise his pants over the
knee, and had to drop his pants to ice it. The Grievant stated that the injury occurred when
someone pushed him during a grueling basketball game the prior weekend. Ohlfs was
“absolutely” sure this incident occurred while they worked the day shift, most probably in
August. The swelling continued for “quite a long time” after this.
Sometime shortly after the start of the school year, the Grievant stated that he had
stepped in a hole near a dumpster at the back of the high school building. Ohlfs was familiar
with the hole, which was caused by washout from a downspout. The Grievant stated that he
had stepped in the hole while carrying broken chairs to the dumpster. The injured area was the
same as that Ohlfs had observed the Grievant icing during the summer. Ohlfs was
unconvinced that the Grievant had stepped in the hole, but did not report the incident until the
subject came up in a conversation with Davis, well after the injury.
Ernest Spinks
Ernest Spinks, referred to below as Spinks, is a mechanical engineer, and the
Grievant’s brother. Spinks testified that the Grievant’s wife phoned him during an altercation
between the Grievant and his daughter on September 9, 1999. The Grievant’s wife told him
that the Grievant had attacked their daughter. In a phone conversation sometime after this, the
Grievant informed Spinks that he had injured his knee during the altercation. Perhaps two
weeks later, Spinks visited the Grievant, and noticed the knee was still swollen. Sometime
between September 9 and this visit, the Grievant informed Spinks that he was going to see if
the hole near the dumpster had been filled. If not, he would report that he had stepped in it
and injured his knee. He knew another employee had fallen in the hole, and thought this
would create a sufficiently plausible account for the injury to permit him to collect WC
benefits. He repeated this story to Spinks in a phone conversation sometime after Spinks
visited the Grievant’s home. Spinks was unsure when the Grievant filed a WC claim, but
thought these conversations preceded the filing.
Spinks knew well before his brother’s felony conviction that the Grievant was selling
drugs. The Grievant openly admitted it, claiming to have made a sale of over two hundred
pounds of marijuana. Spinks informed a friend, who is a manager in the FBI, of the matter.
The agent asked Spinks to assist in an investigation. Spinks did so, accompanying the Grievant
to Arizona to purchase drugs, then informing law enforcement of the transaction.
The Grievant informed Spinks that he could have passed the final FCE he took, but
held back on the exercises that affected his back. He knew he risked “shooting himself in the
foot”, but did not want to expose himself to heavier duties, such as shoveling snow, if returned

Page 11
MA-11555
to work. The back injury was a pre-existing condition, and he thought he needed only to
“pass” the portions of the test relating to the knee injury.
Spinks acknowledged that he and the Grievant had differences regarding the sale of
their mother’s home in West Virginia during the summer of 2001. The sale predated Spinks’
contact with the District concerning his brother’s felony conviction and the WC claim. He
acknowledged that he and his brother do not share a friendly relationship, but added that this
was “not on my choice.”
Brian Johnston
Johnston serves as the District’s Director of Fiscal and Building Operations. He noted
that after perhaps two weeks in the 1999 work hardening program, the Grievant complained of
knee pain, and stopped working. The District’s WC insurance carrier requested the January,
2000 FCE.
The Grievant and Johnston met regarding his condition sometime after Johnston issued
the December 20, 2000 letter. The Grievant supplied Johnston the handwritten note and the
rehabilitation protocol summarized above.
Johnston noted to the Grievant that his
rehabilitation appeared to require more than the year permitted under Article 24. The Grievant
did not comment, and offered no insight on when the second surgery had occurred or when the
rehabilitation could be expected to be complete.
Johnston continued to follow through regarding the one-year leave, and was
“surprised” to receive the LaPrade’s general work release dated March 15, 2001. LaPrade’s
January 26 report increased Johnston’s skepticism regarding the quick recovery, and prompted
Johnston, in a letter dated March 21, to put the Grievant on paid administrative leave and
direct another FCE. The FCE exam took place in late April, and was the third appointment.
The reluctance of one of the Grievant’s physician’s to provide a release of certain information
put off one appointment, and the Grievant cancelled another.
After receiving the final FCE, Johnston and Wold concluded that the Grievant could not
return to work within one year. Johnston did not discuss the matter with the Grievant. The
District discharged the only other employee who missed more than one year of work.
Johnston acknowledged that the District had worked with the Grievant’s back restrictions. It
modified his duties to exclude vacuuming, snow removal and certain bathroom cleaning duties.
These duties had to be assigned to other employees. The District faces hundreds of thousands
of dollars in budget cuts, and no longer has the ability to carry an employee incapable of
performing all of a position’s duties.

Page 12
MA-11555
Johnston supplied the job description used by Jensen in the final FCE. It lists the
relevant lifting requirement at fifty pounds. In a phone conversation with Jensen, Johnston
supplied the weight demands noted in the table set forth above. Johnston thought the seventyfive pound entry reflected the current demands of the position, which demands the lifting of
lunch tables weighing at least seventy pounds.
Spinks approached him sometime before the WC hearing to assert that his brother’s
claim was bogus. Johnston considered the Grievant’s injury record to reflect a “moving
target.” The Grievant never seemed to improve. Rather, the nature of his injuries would
change. In his view, it was always difficult to figure out what he could do and what he could
not. The Grievant’s WC file is perhaps one and one-half inches thick.
Jerry Davis
Davis is the direct supervisor of custodial staff. The Custodian job description states
twenty-nine “Essential Functions.” The Grievant was incapable of performing the following of
those functions:
...
3.
6.
9.
11.
20.
25.
26.
27.

Shovel, plow, and sand walks, driveways, parking areas, and steps, as
appropriate. . . .
Scrub, clean down, and disinfect toilet floors and clean drinking
fountains and sinks (as) needed. . . .
Assist with loading and unloading of trucks. . . .
Perform such yard keeping chores as grass cutting, tree trimming, and
the like, as necessary, to maintain the school grounds in a safe and
attractive condition. . . .
Move furniture or equipment within buildings as requested for various
activities. . . .
Load, transport, and unload hot lunch storage containers.
Transport mail and deliveries between buildings.
Assist food service staff in maintaining well-organized freezer and
storage areas. . . .

Beyond this, the Grievant could not perform any duty demanding bending and stooping. These
limitations were evident from the time of the Grievant’s back injury as well as during the work
hardening program in November of 1999. The work hardening program consisted of the
Grievant performing lighter duties taken from other custodial employees. The Grievant left the
program, but did return to work between January and March of 2000. He did try to do his job
and did improve somewhat during this period. He could, on some days, do his work, but

Page 13
MA-11555
could not on a consistent basis perform all of the required duties. He complained often of
knee pain, stated he could not stand for eight hours, and could not bend or squat. He left work
in mid-March of 2000.
On March 15, 2001, the Grievant met with Davis at 9:00 a.m., prior to an appointment
with LaPrade at 10:00 a.m. They discussed what he needed to be able to accomplish to return
to work. Davis’ notes of that meeting read thus:
He stated that he is coming back to work no matter what. He is not going to
(lose) his job. He also stated that he cannot stand 8 hrs. a day, his leg hurts too
much. He said his leg muscles are sore.
He asked when his year is up and when he had to be back to work. He stated he
would be back with a Dr. slip saying he could go back to work on that day,
implying that he will tell the Dr. what to do instead of the Dr. making the
decision??
The following day, the Grievant gave Davis the release stated above. Davis asked how he got
it and the Grievant responded that after being informed his job was in the balance, LaPrade
responded that he did not want to cost the Grievant his job.
Two other employees successfully completed work hardening programs after injuries.
The only other employee to miss more than one year was discharged. Davis has responded to
budget restrictions by reducing the full time equivalent custodial positions at the high school
from 4.5 to 4.0.
Davis does not believe the Grievant injured his knee at work in mid-September of 1999.
He stated he saw the Grievant limping for two to three weeks prior to September 15, although
he could not recall which leg he limped on. He overheard the Grievant complaining about a
rough basketball game on break on a Monday. Davis acknowledged, on cross-examination,
that he was out of the District from September 3 through September 12. He thought the
District had attempted to work with the Grievant’s restrictions as long as possible, but could
not continue to do so. Three other employees complained about having to perform the
Grievant’s duties, and the District is not staffed to indefinitely allow it to farm out the duties he
cannot perform.
Sarah Canfield
Canfield is the Grievant’s daughter, and a Unit Administrator in the National Guard.
On September 9, 1999, she and her father had a fight, “a push and shove kind of thing” that
lasted about ten minutes. She may have hit his knee at some point, but not enough to injure it.

Page 14
MA-11555
She and her mother left home for a while, then returned. She did not see her father limp, and
was not aware of any injury to his knee until he injured it several days later, when he informed
her that he had hurt it at work.
She acknowledged that the fight left her with a black eye, and that she consulted a
specialist regarding it. Her brothers and father play basketball competitively. The Grievant
played in “3 on 3” tournaments that summer, typically on weekends. She could not recall her
father complaining about a basketball injury. She denied that she or her mother spoke with
Spinks as a confidant. Neither like him, and Canfield does not speak to him. She
acknowledged the police were called, and that she filed a written statement regarding the
incident. She noted she was upset at the time of the statement, dated September 15, 1999, and
thought it might be somewhat exaggerated. The statement reads thus:
. . . I heard my brother crying and asking my dad why he had hit him. I knew
right away that he was going to hit my brother again – which he has done in the
past. My brother was running from him and I stepped in front of him & told
him to stop it. He said “get out of my way or I’ll hit you.” I said no – you hit
me I’ll throw this hot chocolate at you.” He hit me & then I threw the hot
chocolate at him. Then he started hitting me in the head back and forth . . .
The statement notes that the fight continued outside of the house, where she again attempted to
get between the Grievant and her brother. She and the Grievant then confronted each other by
her car. The statement alleges he hit her in the head, punched her in the stomach and kneed
her in the crotch before the incident ended.
The Grievant
The Grievant noted that the back injury in 1994 was to his lower back. Prior to the
injury, he worked at an elementary school that had predominately carpeted floors. Vacuuming
hurt his lower back. At roughly the same time as the injury, he successfully posted to a
position at the High School, which has tile floors. To his knowledge, the District made no
accommodations regarding the back injury. The move to the High School effectively
addressed the back injury. He could not perform heavy snow removal. He could effectively
lift, unless he had to stoop to do so. This meant the only lifting he could not do was of objects
closer than two feet to floor level. Beyond these, he could not perform repetitive vacuuming.
At no point from the time of his back injury did any District representative ask him for an
unrestricted release to work.
On September 12, 1999, he worked a Sunday, from 7:30 a.m. until 2:00 p.m. A
church group used the High School. To prepare the facility, he turned the alarm system off,
then went to open the choir and band rooms, and to turn lights on. While doing so, he noted

Page 15
MA-11555
two cracked chairs. He decided to take them to a dumpster at the rear of the building. He left
the building through an unlit entry near the science lab, with the two chairs over his left
shoulder. The dumpsters were located along the same wall as the door he exited through,
roughly fifty feet away. Between the lab doorway and the dumpster was the downspout that
had a roughly one foot wide and one foot deep area of washed out ground surrounding it. He
was, at the time, unaware of the hole. The day was sunny, but he was looking straight ahead
and did not see the hole before his left foot dropped into it. He did not experience any pain
immediately, but the right knee hurt more as the day wore on. At sometime between 8:30 and
9:00 a.m., he called Davis, leaving a voice mail concerning the incident.
He reported for work the next day, and the knee was “a little sore.” He told other
workers of the accident. The more he worked, the more pain he felt. He attempted to work
on September 14, but by the end of the day was limping badly. The following day he went to
his doctor, who found nothing broken, but told him to take a week off and come back for
another exam. As noted above, the knee did not get better and required surgery.
Spinks returned to work, and was able to successfully perform his duties as before,
after a period of work hardening. He submitted to the FCE in January of 2000, and returned
to work. Swelling and pain in his knee, however, led his physician to prescribe further
surgery. A dispute between his physician and the District’s WC insurer put the surgery off for
a period of time.
He acknowledged Johnston had informed him of the one-year period set by Article 24
well before he issued the December 20 letter. The Grievant, however, never anticipated that
the rehabilitation would take the time it did. After receiving the December 20 letter, he gave
the October 24 note to the District receptionist, and was surprised the District had not received
it in October. He kept the District informed of his progress after each visit to the doctor. He
did require crutches for some time, but was off of them well before March 15, 2001.
As of March 15, 2001, the knee was effectively healed. He did not have full flexibility
in the joint, and could not bend as deeply as before the injury, but outside of swelling when the
knee was worked too hard, it was functional. He did not influence LaPrade’s opinion on
March 15, but did tell him of the need for him to return to all of his duties on a full-time basis
or lose his job. He gave LaPrade’s release to Davis, who agreed that he should be ready to
work the following Monday or Tuesday. He had no further discussions with District
representatives prior to being placed on administrative leave and being asked to undergo
another FCE.
He noted at the first FCE that the 75 pound lifting requirement did not match the job
description’s requirement of fifty pounds. The evaluator consulted Johnston, noted the absence
of a physician’s release, and the first appointment thus ended. The final FCE noted that the

Page 16
MA-11555
Grievant was out of shape, but a subsequent stress test demonstrates that this concern has no
bearing on his ability to work.
The Grievant denied showing his knee to Ohlfs, and denied telling anyone he suffered it
during a basketball game. He denied telling his brother that he made a bogus WC claim to
cover his absence, or manipulated the FCE results. He has long term disability insurance, and
did not need to worry about pay during the rehabilitation. He did inform his brother that he
hurt the knee by stepping in a hole at work.
Spinks, with one of their brothers, sold their mother’s home in West Virginia in June of
2001, then misappropriated the proceeds. The Grievant holds power of attorney for their
mother, and made formal complaints to officials in West Virginia regarding Spinks’ actions.
Spinks has complained to Wisconsin officials about the Grievant’s care for their mother. The
relationship has broken down over these issues, and the Grievant and one other brother are
suing Spinks and the other brother over their handling of their mother’s property.
The Employment Application
The Grievant first worked for the District as a part-time Custodian in October of 1990. In
1992, a full-time District Custodian suffered a stroke, and when it became apparent he could not
return to work, the District started the hiring process to fill the position. The Grievant applied for
the opening, completing a four-page written application form dated December 2, 1992. The first
page of the four page application form directed applicants to give a “Yes” or “No” response to a
series of questions, including the following: “Have you been convicted of a felony within the last
7 years?” The Grievant’s application includes an “x” in a box adjacent to the “No” response.
The original four page application form is in the possession of the hearing examiner in the WC
proceeding. The copy submitted into evidence in the arbitration proceeding includes only the first
and third pages. This reflects that the form is a two page form, copied on both sides of each page,
while the copy made for the arbitration hearing is a one sided copy of the two page form. The
fourth page of the form states the signature line for an applicant.
In September of 1988, the Grand Jury for Cook County, Illinois indicted the Grievant for
possession of more than five hundred grams of cannabis with intent to deliver. This resulted in a
judgment, dated August 31, 1989, based on a finding of guilt. The judgment, signed by the
Grievant, placed him on probation for four years, assessed him $2,500 in fines and court costs,
and directed him to perform five-hundred hours of community service.
After an interview process, the Board approved hiring the Grievant as a full-time
custodian. A memo from Johnston to the Board dated December 15, 1992 states his formal
recommendation that the Board hire the Grievant to fill the full-time vacancy.

Page 17
MA-11555
Brian Johnston
Johnston started his position with the District on November 16, 1992. At the time of his
hire, Thomas Kleppe was the District’s Superintendent and Johnston’s immediate supervisor.
Mark Christianson was Johnston’s predecessor.
Spinks supplied Johnston copies of Cook County Circuit Court records establishing the
Grievant’s felony conviction on the first day of the arbitration hearing. Spinks had informed
Johnston earlier that his brother had a criminal record, but Johnston informed him the District
could find no documentation of his allegation. Spinks responded by supplying the court
documents. Johnston had also received, via an interdepartmental mail envelope, an inmate ID
card for the Grievant. Johnston does not know who mailed him the card, but he did give it to a
law firm to determine its origin. The Grievant ultimately asked for the ID card, and Johnston
returned it to him. The Grievant did not mention what it was.
On redirect examination, Johnston stated that Christianson’s last day with the District was
October 9, 1992. Johnson produced a letter from Kleppe to Christianson dated August 24, 1992,
that states:
This is to officially notify you that at their August 17, 1992 meeting the Board of
Education approved your resignation. Per our discussions your last day on the job
will be October 9, 1992. . . .
Johnston recommended, by written memo dated December 15, 1992, that the Board hire the
Grievant to fill the full-time vacancy. Neither Kleppe nor Christianson played any role in the hire
of the Grievant to fill the full-time vacancy. Kleppe formally stated a recommendation at a Board
meeting, but did not interview applicants for the vacancy. Johnston interviewed five to seven
applicants before determining to recommend the Grievant. Johnston developed the application
form filled out by the Grievant for the full-time opening. He did so because the form used by the
District prior to his involvement asked applicants for their age and marital status which Johnston
felt was a violation of state and federal law. The “No” response to the felony question was
completed when Johnston reviewed the application. Breault never asserted to Johnston that the
Grievant had been convicted of any crime. The District and Breault have a long history of conflict
that predates Breault’s termination.
Roger Breault
Breault is a building engineer for the Osceola Medical Center, and worked for the District
from 1978 through 2000 as a Custodian. From 1986 through 1995, he worked as a Leadman. He
was, throughout his employment, a member of the bargaining unit and he served the Union as a
Steward and as a member of its bargaining team. At the time the Grievant applied for full-time

Page 18
MA-11555
employment, Breault, as Leadman, played a role in the hiring process. At that time, applications
would go to the main office, then would be routed to Christianson and Breault, who would meet
with other District employees and conduct interviews with the applicants.
The Grievant came to Breault to discuss his application for full-time employment. Breault
reviewed the four page form with him. The Grievant advised Breault that he was on probation for
a felony and was concerned with the impact this might have on his application. Breault did not
think the Grievant had made a response to the printed question concerning a conviction for a
felony. They discussed the matter, and specifically the Grievant’s prior experience with the
District as a part-time employee. Breault informed the Grievant that he would take his application
to the administration building and discuss the matter with Christianson and Kleppe. They asked
Breault about the quality of the Grievant’s work. Breault responded that the Grievant was a good
worker, then checked with another school district for which the Grievant worked on a part time
basis to verify his opinion. Breault informed Kleppe and Christianson that the Grievant was on
probation for a drug-related offense, but was willing to refer them to his probation officer for a
reference. Breault left the application with Christianson and Kleppe. They interviewed the
applicants, and ultimately recommended to the Board that the Grievant fill the vacant full-time
position. Breault could not recall being on the interview panel.
When asked if he had filled in the “No” response to the printed application form’s question
regarding a felony conviction, Breault responded “not that I am aware of.” He added that there
was “no doubt” in his mind that he had spoken with Kleppe and Christianson regarding the
Grievant’s application. Sometime in 1995 the District terminated the Leadman position, created a
Maintenance Mechanic position and moved Breault to a custodial position. The Union
unsuccessfully grieved the matter, including Breault’s desire to fill the Maintenance Mechanic
position. The District terminated Breault in 2000 because he was off work for more than one
year. At the time of hearing Breault and the District were in litigation over the termination.
The Grievant
The Grievant discussed the felony question on the application form with his probation
officer, who recommended that he discuss the matter with the District. The Grievant approached
Breault, informing him that he was on probation for “possession of marijuana.” Breault advised
him that Breault would take the matter to the administration. Breault did not take the application
with him. Breault ultimately informed the Grievant that the District had no problem with the
conviction, and that it was no one’s business in the District beyond those who needed to know.
Breault then asked him what he wanted Breault to do, and he responded that he wanted Breault to
complete the answer to the felony question so that the Grievant would not be put in a position of
lying. Breault said “I’ll mark it” and did so.

Page 19
MA-11555
On December 22, 1992, the Board of Education hired him. Prior to his hire, Kleppe
interviewed him as one of the top three applicants at the District’s old Board Room. He noted that
he learned of the vacancy by word of mouth, which is how part-timers then were advised of fulltime openings. Johnston never interviewed him. Christianson was the Business Manager at all
times during his hire. At a going-away breakfast at a local café, Christianson and Kleppe noted
that there had been stiff competition for the openings, and Kleppe welcomed the Grievant to the
District.
Sometime in 2001, the Grievant lost an inmate ID card that he had in a briefcase. The
briefcase was stolen from the Teachers’ Lounge. He kept the ID card as a constant reminder that
“I messed up.” Johnston called the Grievant and advised him that he had received the card in an
inter-departmental mail envelope.
On cross-examination, the Grievant stated that until he saw the Cook County Circuit Court
documentation at hearing, he had thought his sentence rested on a charge of possession not on
possession with intent to sell. He did not dispute the accuracy of the court documents. He has
never discussed the felony with Johnston.
Further facts may be set forth in the DISCUSSION section below.
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
The District’s Brief
After a review of the evidence, the District contends that the Grievant had been off work
for nearly fourteen months as of the date of his discharge. Under Article 24, Section 1, the
District thus had just cause to terminate, since he had failed to obtain the required written leave of
absence. Article 5, Section 3 underscores this conclusion.
In its letter of December 20, 2000, the District afforded the Grievant “the opportunity to
present any evidence that his absence would not exceed the one-year limit.” The Grievant
responded with a post-dated handwritten note and a physician’s protocol. Neither undermines the
District’s action to terminate. The protocol in fact affirms that the Grievant could not be expected
to return to work within the contractual time limits. Nor will events following the District’s letter
support a challenge to the termination. The March 15, 2001 work release confirms that the
Grievant could not perform the necessary duties of his job. The April 27, 2001 FCE supports
this, as does the Grievant’s physician’s June 1, 2001 statement. At all points in his injury history,
the Grievant has presented a “moving target” to the District.

Page 20
MA-11555
An examination of the evidence affords reason to believe the Grievant manipulated the
results of his rehabilitation documentation. The District’s lengthy attempts to rehabilitate the
Grievant had no effect. The District’s financial position precludes “carrying” an employee who
cannot perform all the duties of a position. Beyond this, the District terminated the only other
custodian who took a medical leave exceeding one year, and “has no duty to continue to provide .
. . light duty assignments.”
Significantly, the Grievant’s claim to have been injured at work on September 12, 1999,
cannot be credited. Ohlfs’ testimony establishes that the Grievant was injured off the job, well
before his report of a workplace accident. Davis’ testimony confirms this. The Grievant’s
brother’s testimony establishes that the Grievant lied on the injury report. Significantly, none of
these witnesses, unlike the Grievant, had “anything to gain by shading the truth.” The falsification
of the District’s injury report and the WC claim constitute cause for immediate termination as a
matter of common sense as well as arbitration precedent.
Nor is this the sole falsification warranting summary termination. The Grievant lied on his
employment application, by checking “no” to answer whether he had been convicted of a felony.
At the first day of hearing, the District learned that the Grievant had been convicted “of a felony
on August 31, 1989, in Cook County, Illinois, for the possession of cannabis with intent to
deliver.” The Grievant’s attempt to explain this lie “were incredible.” The lie “was not just any
lie,” since the Grievant attempted to obscure that he was a convicted drug dealer, a crime of selfevident significance to the operation of a school district.
Arbitration precedent establishes that the District was well within its rights to terminate the
Grievant without benefit of progressive discipline. It necessarily follows “that the Arbitrator
(should) dismiss the grievance in its entirety.”
The Union’s Brief
After a review of the evidence, the Union argues that the District based the discharge
on the assertion that it had no work within the Grievant’s physical restrictions. Since the
evidence establishes that it had such work available, the discharge cannot stand. The evidence
establishes that the Grievant’s physical restrictions had improved “as compared to those he had
worked under for the previous five to six years.” The 1995 FCE established notable
limitations on his ability to work. In spite of this, the District returned him to full-time work
as a custodian in 1995. After a back injury in 1997, the Grievant was again returned to work
even though he had suffered permanent restrictions to his ability to work. He worked at the
essentially the same duties from 1995 through the date of his discharge. The District’s failure
to inform him at any time during this period that he was at risk of termination dooms its claim
to have just cause for the termination.

Page 21
MA-11555
The remaining bases for discharge turn on allegations of a severity demanding proof
beyond a reasonable doubt to support summary termination. Arbitration precedent establishes
that allegations of “moral turpitude, such as dishonesty or falsification . . . generally require
the criminal standard of proof.”
The evidence fails to establish that the District proved that the Grievant “intended by
his answers on the application to defraud or deceive the District.” That the District failed to
provide the complete employment application dooms its case standing alone. Among the
missing pages is that containing the Grievant’s signature. Beyond this, the Grievant informed
his Leadman of the dilemma the application posed regarding his felony. The evidence
establishes that the Grievant notified his Leadman of the conviction, who informed District
administrators. Breault did not specifically advise the Grievant how to fill out the application,
but he did inform the then incumbent Superintendent and Business Manager, who informed
Breault that they would consider the matter. At most, this establishes that the Grievant filled
out the form incorrectly, and neither attempted “to hide anything from the District” nor
intentionally misrepresented his criminal background.
A detailed examination of the evidence fails to discredit either Breault’s or the
Grievant’s testimony. Even if the Grievant falsified the application, the District did not
demonstrate that it suffered any harm, and thus “discharge was too harsh and (the Grievant)
should be reinstated and made whole.” The evidence fails to even “suggest that (the Grievant)
was a poor employee or that he was dishonest with regard to any other aspect of his
employment.” That Johnston was aware that the Grievant had a prison I.D. card roughly a
year before the termination establishes the difficulty of concluding that the District felt the
Grievant had been improperly hired.
Even assuming the evidence establishes the need for discipline, arbitration precedent
requires that the reasonableness of the discipline be reviewed. The evidence establishes that
discharge is too harsh a penalty. That the Grievant feared the impact of the conviction is
understandable, and should not obscure that he afforded the District eight years of full-time
employment “without incident.”
The evidence will not establish that the Grievant falsified any injury claim. The District
supplied two theories to establish he did not suffer the injury at work. It proved neither.
Ohlfs’ testimony is vague regarding when he observed swelling around the Grievant’s knee.
Beyond this, it fails to undercut the Grievant’s claim to have injured the knee by stepping in a
hole during work hours. Davis’ testimony is even less reliable concerning the date of the
injury since he claimed to have observed the Grievant limping at work when Davis was in fact
at a fishing tournament. Nor is the assertion that the Grievant injured his knee during an
altercation with his daughter any more credible. The testimony of the Grievant’s brother is
“completely incredible” and not reconcilable to reliable evidence, such as that of the

Page 22
MA-11555
Grievant’s daughter. Nor will an assessment of the “incentive to lie” support the District’s
views. That attributed to the Grievant is entirely speculative, but the Grievant’s brother’s
incentive to lie to cover up his wrongful handling of their mother’s financial affairs is proven.
The Union concludes that the discharge lacks just cause. As the appropriate remedy,
the Grievant “must be reinstated immediately and made whole for all lost wages and benefits
suffered as a result.”
The District’s Reply Brief
The evidence establishes that, if anything, the District “can be faulted for trying too
hard to work with the grievant over the course of several years and through multiple and
various injuries.” The evidence indicates “that during the grievant’s last two years of
employment he was off work nearly as much as he was on the job.” Thus, there is no support
for an assertion that the Grievant worked since 1995 in the same position without warning that
his employment was at risk. Rather, he “did not work at all for his last fourteen months of
employment” and he learned no later than December 20, 2000, that his job was at risk.
The evidence establishes that the Grievant set a “moving target” by which he
manipulated tests to establish just enough capability to work without having to perform onerous
tasks. Whatever “the grievant’s true physical capabilities may be” the District had a right to
rely on the April, 2001 FCE, which establishes that he could not perform significant parts of
his job.
Arbitration precedent will not support the Union’s assertion that the basis for the
discharge must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. In any event, the evidence establishes
that the Grievant falsified his employment application. Nor is his intent relevant. Even if it is,
his deliberate checking of a “no” response to a question regarding prior felony convictions
establishes all that is necessary for just cause.
A detailed review of the testimony affords no support for the Union’s defense. The
Grievant’s testimony regarding the employment application is incredible and stands in marked
contrast to Johnston’s. Breault’s testimony, even if credited, fails to reliably demonstrate that
the District administration knew anything regarding the conviction. Nor does arbitration
precedent require the District to prove harm from the falsification. Johnston attempted,
without success, to determine why the Grievant had a prison I.D. card. The Grievant afforded
no assistance on the point.
The evidence establishes that “discharge is not too harsh.”
appropriate penalty.”

Rather, it “is the

Page 23
MA-11555
The Union’s Reply Brief
The District cannot credibly assert that the Article 24 supports the discharge, since it
failed to make this claim at the time of the discharge. Even if the claim can be considered, it
lacks merit. The Grievant never anticipated being off work as long as he was. Thus, he was
under no obligation to supply the District the written notice the District claims was untimely
filed. The contention masks that the District had no evident basis to issue the December 20,
2000, letter, and that the letter itself misstates the requirements of Article 24.
To the extent the District lacked faith in the Grievant’s physician’s statement releasing
him to work without restriction, it failed to demonstrate its faith had a factual basis. It refused
to let him return to work, placing him on administrative leave. In any event, the termination
letter fully states the basis for discharge, and the stated basis does not include Article 24,
Section 1. To conclude otherwise violates fundamental concepts of due process.
The District’s assertion that the April 27, 2001 FCE establishes that the Grievant could
not perform his job is false. At most the FCE establishes a minimal difference “between (the
Grievant’s) ability and the stated job demand.” No other documentation supports District
claims that the Grievant could not perform effectively as a full-time employee. The assertion
that the District permitted the Grievant to work “for four to five years with the thought that he
would eventually recover and be able to return to his regular job is disingenuous.” In fact, the
Grievant was in better condition in April of 2001 than he had been in years.
It follows that the discharge is “without just cause.” The Grievant “must be reinstated
immediately and made whole.”
DISCUSSION
The issue on the merit of the grievance is stipulated, but requires some discussion. It
presumes the termination is disciplinary, while the operation of Article 24, Section 1 arguably
is not.
As the Union points out, Article 24, Section 1 does not, standing alone, support the
discharge. The section is procedural, and the evidence does not establish that the District
demanded strict compliance with it. The District acknowledged granting the Grievant a leave
in Johnston’s letter of May 18, 2000. His letter of December 20 cites Article 24, Section 1,
but does not demand strict compliance with it. Rather, it affords the Grievant an opportunity
to comply within “seven calendar days”. In any event, the final sentence of Article 24,
Section 1 does not in itself extinguish seniority. Rather, it highlights the operation of
Article 5, Section 3(a). Under that section the Grievant “forfeited” his seniority if he was
absent “for more than one year” and “did not secure a leave of absence.” Johnston’s

Page 24
MA-11555
December 20, 2000 letter establishes that the District did not extend the leave beyond one year.
The letters of January 16 and February 23, 2001 underscore this, whether or not they demand
strict compliance with Article 24, Section 1. The decision not to grant a leave beyond one year
terminated the Grievant’s seniority under Article 5, Section 3(a). The reasonableness of that
decision is source of the dispute. On this record, the plainly disciplinary assertion that the
Grievant misrepresented the cause of his knee injury and the existence of his felony record is
indistinguishable from the decision to deny a leave exceeding one year. Thus, the discussion
below follows the stipulated issue and treats each basis for the termination as discipline.
In my opinion, when the parties do not stipulate the standards defining just cause, two
elements define it. First, the employer must establish conduct by the Grievant in which it has a
disciplinary interest. Second, the employer must establish that the discipline imposed
reasonably reflects its interest.
The procedural background is somewhat tortuous, but the District asserts three areas of
conduct in which it has a disciplinary interest. As noted above, two are plainly disciplinary as
stated in Wold’s November 7, 2001 letter. The first is that the Grievant misrepresented fact on
his employment application. The second is that he misrepresented the cause of his knee injury.
As noted above, the third is less plainly disciplinary, and traces from Johnston’s letters of
May 18 and December 20, 2000 through the termination letter. It is that the Grievant was
absent for work beyond one year without an approved leave of absence.
That the District has a disciplinary interest in a truthful response from the Grievant
regarding his felony record demands little discussion. The District has an interest in the
Grievant’s conviction for possessing, with the intent to deliver, a significant amount of drugs,
if only to consider its impact on its policies and on its students. Beyond this, the District has a
disciplinary interest in employee misrepresentation of fact.
The evidence establishes that the Grievant misrepresented fact on the employment
application. The Grievant’s and Breault’s testimony together form the defense to the District’s
allegations. That testimony does not stand in the absence of refutation and is not reconcilable
to established fact.
Their accounts fail to establish an internally consistent account of the application
process. Breault’s account leaves the application, perhaps completed, perhaps not, in either
Christianson’s or Kleppe’s hands. The Grievant’s account leaves the application in the
Grievant’s hands, with the felony question unanswered until after Breault’s consultation with
the administration, when Breault completed it.
The incompatibility of these accounts on this point is compelling. Under the Grievant’s
view, he did not answer the felony question to avoid lying and its complications. Breault’s
testimony does not support this and manifests the same reluctance to assume responsibility for

Page 25
MA-11555
the misrepresentation.
This shared unwillingness to state personal responsibility for
completing the form establishes that they understood the fraudulent nature of the act. It
undermines the credibility of their accounts, and magnifies the significance of other conflicts.
For example, the Grievant testified that Breault participated in the interview process. This is
consistent with Johnston’s recall, but not Breault’s.
Beyond this, the accounts fail to establish a plausible explanation of why the form was
filled out with a “No” response to the felony question. Breault’s account implies the form was
filled out by one or both of the departing administrators. It affords no insight on why they
would do so. Its claim to plausibility is that they discussed the Grievant’s work and agreed the
conviction should not stand in the way of his hire. Assuming they were willing to hire the
Grievant in spite of the conviction, why would they misrepresent fact to do so? The Grievant’s
account affords no greater insight. Under either view, the administrators effectively authorized
a fraudulent statement of fact to permit the Grievant an interview. Why the administrators
would authorize the misrepresentation of fact to permit an interview is troublesome, for it
assumes the existence of other applicants. Presumably, need for applicants does not account
for the misrepresentation. Principle is no better an explanation. Why would the “principled”
administrators authorize a lie, then pass on the risk of the lie? It is of some significance that
both Breault’s and the Grievant’s accounts assert that the Grievant never addressed the matter
with the administrators who actively advanced his interests. Each thus fails to account for how
the “conspirators” developed the bond that warranted misrepresenting fact.
In sum, without regard to conflicting evidence, Breault’s and the Grievant’s accounts
establish their active involvement in an effort to misrepresent material fact on the Grievant’s
application.
Other evidence establishes the incredibility of their accounts. It is undisputed that the
Board hired the Grievant in late December of 1992. The Grievant’s account has the hiring
process wired at least in part by a Business Manager who left the District in October of 1992.
It denies any role to Johnston, who supplied, in mid-December, the written recommendation
that the Board acted on. Johnston’s account is reconcilable to the documentary evidence,
including the date of the application form. The Grievant’s and Breault’s are not.
Other bases cited by the parties to guide the determination of the credibility of witness
testimony do not offer meaningful assistance. The District points to Breault’s history of
difficulties with it. Without determining the merit of that conflict, it is unpersuasive to
conclude anything other than the District and Breault had differences. The record in this case
affords no basis for anything beyond speculation on the merit of the conflict.

Page 26
MA-11555
The District’s inability to supply the complete application form has no determinative
bearing on this issue. The Grievant does not dispute that he signed the form, or that it
contained a material misrepresentation of fact. Rather, he disputes his responsibility for it.
Standard indicators of credibility such as the demeanor of witnesses underscore the conclusions
reached above.
In sum, the record establishes that the Grievant, at a minimum, engineered the
misrepresentation of fact on his employment application. In my opinion, whether Breault or
the Grievant completed the form is inconsequential. His active and causal role establishes the
existence of conduct in which the District has a disciplinary interest.
The evidence on the second basis for the discharge is sufficiently troubling that the
District acknowledges it is probably impossible to determine when and how the Grievant
injured his knee. There is no evident basis to discredit Ohlfs’ testimony, and sound reason to
credit it. He has no evident interest to lie, and no evident malice toward the Grievant. The
lack of detail in his testimony does not undercut his credibility. However, he did wait a
considerable time to come forward. In any event, his testimony affords little clarity on when
the injury occurred. Was the Grievant obviously limping around the District for a month
waiting for a chance to fake an injury? Davis’ testimony affords some corroboration to Ohlfs,
but affords no more clarity on when the injury occurred. Beyond this, Davis testified that he
observed swelling in the Grievant’s knee during a period of time he later acknowledged he was
absent from the District. Spinks’ testimony complicates this milieu. Spinks had difficulty
dating the conversations during which he alleges his brother informed him of his intent to lie
about stepping into a hole. His testimony puts the conversations well past the date the Grievant
made the injury report with the District, which undercuts his assertion that the Grievant spoke
to him prior to making a bogus claim. However, the Grievant did file a WC injury report in
late October which is consistent with Spinks’ recall of the timing of the conversations.
Canfield’s testimony arguably corroborates Spinks’ by establishing the incident that gave rise
to the conversations that led to the Grievant’s admissions. However, it undercuts the account
to the extent she is credited, since she denies her mother would speak to Spinks. Beyond this,
it clouds the attempt to isolate the time of injury, since the District implies the knee injury may
have occurred at that point. These complications are a pale reflection of the difficulty of
sorting out the conflicting interests of the Grievant and his brothers.
The Grievant’s testimony affords little greater insight. The accident occurred on a
Sunday when the Grievant was working alone. It is difficult to understand why he chose that
Sunday to remove the chairs, why he chose his path to the dumpster, or how on a sunny
morning he could not see a one foot wide and one foot deep hole.

Page 27
MA-11555
On balance, the record is sufficiently opaque that reliable conclusions are difficult, if
possible, regarding when and how he injured his knee. This conclusion makes it arguably
impossible to conclude that the District has proven that he misrepresented the source of the
injury. The “arguably” reflects that definitive conclusions on this point are not necessary to
evaluate the District’s discharge decision. The record developed concerning the reporting and
treatment of the injury has a direct and significant bearing on the final asserted basis for the
discharge, and this precludes the need to make a definitive conclusion on when or how the
Grievant injured his knee. For purposes of this record, this means the District has not proven
that the Grievant misrepresented the source of the injury.
As touched upon above, the third reason for the discharge turns on the reasonableness
of the District’s decision not to extend the Grievant’s leave beyond one year. Whether or not
the Grievant misrepresented the cause of his knee injury, his conduct during the leave bears
directly on this reason. Johnston testified that the Grievant presented a “moving target”
regarding the reporting and treatment of the knee injury.
The record supports Johnston’s view. The point is subtle, but significant. The
determination of a lie poses a vexing point. This is true on many levels, including when a
fixed “truth” is definable. For example, the Grievant’s back injury either does or does not
cause him sufficient pain to limit his activities. Only the Grievant can know this. His
testimony is evidence, or an assertion of the truth. Other evidence can exist such as Spinks’
statement that the Grievant admitted he held back on the test to avoid strenuous assignments.
The determination of which account to credit, and thus take for “true” is one level of difficulty
even when a fixed “truth” is at issue. Another level of difficulty is that perception inevitably
colors “truth.” For example, the Grievant, perceiving past back pain could hold back on a test
due to perceived symptoms of the past pain. If this perception is inaccurate in the sense that he
could have performed the test without re-injury, his testimony would be “true” in the sense
that he stated an honest perception, but “not true” in the sense that the perception does not
correspond to physical reality.
The record in this case poses both levels of difficulty and more. Davis stated that he
thought the Grievant tried to rehabilitate. Davis also stated that the Grievant lied about the
cause of the knee injury. Johnston’s point on the “moving target” nature of the Grievant’s
conduct is subtle in the sense that it does not turn on whether the Grievant “lied” in the
“misrepresentation of known fact” sense.
Rather, it asserts that whether based on
misrepresentation or perception, the Grievant’s conduct during and after the knee injury is
uncooperative and unhelpful. This is a significant point regarding the provision of a leave
beyond one year. Article 24, Section 1 need not demand the automatic extinguishment of the
Grievant’s seniority to put his employment at risk, since it and Article 5, Section 3 demand
that the District authorize leave beyond one year to permit the Grievant to keep his

Page 28
MA-11555
employment status. It is unnecessary to determine whether the Grievant “lied” in the
“misrepresentated fact” sense to conclude his conduct did not warrant the extension of a leave.
The evidence establishes a manipulative and unhelpful course of conduct from the
Grievant. This is true from the time of his application for employment. Crediting his account
establishes that he approached Breault, the most likely District employee of influence who
could be expected to be sympathetic. He informed Breault that he was on probation for the
drug related offense of “possession.” The Grievant’s assertion that he was unaware that the
offense was possession with intent to deliver is not credible. Even if he was not aware of the
charge as a technical matter, he was aware of the offense and it is apparent he said no more
than necessary to secure Breault’s involvement. His assertion that he did not complete the
form, but let Breault complete the answer to the felony question is similarly remarkable.
Whether or not the account is true, it sets a tone underlying the Grievant’s conduct and
testimony. His responses were calculated, and became detailed to the degree necessary to
achieve a desired result or to respond to specific, contrary fact.
This pattern is evident throughout the course of the knee injury. In testimony, the
Grievant asserted he was able to work a full-duty eight hour shift during the work hardening
effort of November and December of 1999. He similarly asserted he worked essentially as
before the injury after the January 2000 FCE. This underscores his general contention that his
work effort was consistently high without assistance from the District and was diminished only
by pain. This supports his post-termination desire to prove fitness for work. However, it
offers little insight on why he terminated the 1999 work hardening program, or went off work
in March of 2000. It is not reconcilable to Davis’ perception of his work performance and has
no persuasive support in the documentary evidence of the injury and rehabilitation. Nor is his
testimony internally consistent on details. On direct examination, he generally asserted that he
neither required nor received light duty except in rare response to a direct order from a
physician. However, when pressed on specifics on cross-examination, he acknowledged that
he was unable to vacuum as a repetitive activity, perform tasks that involved deep bending or
stooping, or shovel anything heavier than a “medium” snowfall. This reflects a consistent
tendency in his testimony to make a general assertion, then back away from it as required
when confronted with specific evidence.
This tendency is manifested in his conduct to secure a leave beyond one year.
Johnston’s December 20, 2000 letter notified him that his employment was in jeopardy, but
allowed him to respond. The Grievant responded by supplying the handwritten note dated
October 24, 2000, and a form stating a general rehabilitation protocol. The Grievant’s
assertion that he supplied the District this note prior to receipt of Johnston’s letter is incredible,
since it responds to Johnston’s citation of Article 24, Section 1.

Page 29
MA-11555
Even if the assertion is credited, the note and the document supplied with it are
significant for how little they offer. The handwritten note does not seek a leave, and the
documentation says nothing of his condition. Article 24, Section 1 demands “written
documentation of inability to work and expected date of return” for injury based absences of
“up to sixty (60) days.” It further demands a “written leave of absence from the Employer”
by the eighth month of an absence, and documentation “of inability to perform duties” as well
as an explanation of why an injured employee “cannot reasonably be expected to return to
work.” The Grievant’s response falls far short of the detail demanded, and thus manifests a
continuing pattern of offering only sufficient detail to secure a personally desired result.
Johnston emphasized his intention to terminate the leave at one year in a letter of
January 16, 2001. The Grievant supplied a report of workability dated January 25, 2001, that
noted he needed crutches and should not work through March 15. In late February, Johnston
confirmed that the one-year leave would end March 23. On March 15, the Grievant supplied a
work release. His testimony acknowledges he was, at best, sufficiently healed to try to work.
More to the point, his response underscores the pattern noted above. When forced, he acted to
the degree necessary to secure a desired result. His testimony asserts that he was progressing
steadily through rehabilitation and had no idea it would take more than one year. The absence
of unprompted documentation of this effort is noteworthy. His conduct affords no reason to
believe he would have responded at all absent Johnston’s prompting.
Against this background, Johnston’s conclusion that the Grievant afforded a “moving
target” is reasonable, whether or not the Grievant misrepresented the cause of any specific
injury. As a factual matter, the District has never afforded a leave exceeding one year. It has
required other employees to successfully complete work hardening. As a contractual matter,
Article 24, Section 1 and Article 5, Section 3 establish that extending a leave of absence
beyond one year is a significant act of discretion. The Grievant’s injury history is significant,
and his attempt to document his rehabilitation effort is fitful at best. Nothing in the evidence
establishes that the Grievant, through his work record prior to the knee injury or through his
rehabilitation effort earned the exercise of discretion from the District that he asserts as his
right in this proceeding. The District has undergone a partial layoff at its high school. Its
conclusion that it could not afford to carry the Grievant beyond one year cannot be dismissed
as unreasonable under any view of the facts.
That the Grievant secured a work release prior to the completion of the one year period
does not alter this conclusion. Johnston’s skepticism regarding the release is reasonable, and
the Grievant’s testimony acknowledges that his healing was incomplete. The final FCE at best
establishes that he was capable of work hardening after the one year leave expired.

Page 30
MA-11555
In sum, the District has a proven disciplinary interest in the first and third asserted
bases for the discharge. The analysis thus turns to whether discharge reasonably reflects this
proven interest.
The two asserted bases of discharge are similar in the sense that they turn on a pattern
of manipulation, if not misrepresentation, of fact. The misrepresentation of fact on the
employment application is, in my view, egregious. The felony is for conduct directly bearing
on the provision of educational services. That a school district has a significant interest in
assessing the significance of a conviction for possession of drugs with the intent to deliver for
an employee assigned or assignable to a school facility demands, in my view, no proof of
actual harm. This is not to say the District could not choose to hire the Grievant, knowing his
record. Rather, it underscores the need to know and the egregious nature of the Grievant’s
conduct in masking the fact. The conviction could have served as a basis to make the hire, if
the District concluded it made no difference or served to set an appropriate example. The
Grievant chose not to risk that possibility. Under Article 9, Section 2, the progressive
discipline procedure “need not be followed in cases of serious misconduct.” Misrepresentation
of an application form is conduct that cannot be corrected in the sense of Article 9, Section 2.
Standing alone, the misconduct arguably warrants discharge.
The conduct does not, however, stand alone. Even if the Grievant did not misrepresent
the source of the knee injury, his conduct reflects no more than an effort to manipulate the
leave of absence process. He took no unprompted effort to secure the written leave required
for an absence exceeding one year. When prompted, he first responded with documentation
that does not meet the demands of Article 24, Section 1. When again prompted as the one year
period ended, the Grievant responded with a general release of debatable worth. The District
was under no contractual or factual compulsion to grant the Grievant a leave exceeding one
year. The evidence establishes that its conclusion that the Grievant presented them a “moving
target” regarding his injuries was reasonable, as was its conclusion that it could not afford to
carry the Grievant beyond one year. Against this background, the discharge determination was
reasonable and thus consistent with Article 5, Section 3 and Article 9, Sections 1 and 2.
Before closing, it is appropriate tie this conclusion more closely to the Union’s
arguments. Those arguments have persuasive force. The strength of the Union’s case is that
the District, contrary to the assertions of the May 9, 2001 discharge letter, had work within the
Grievant’s restrictions. The May 2, 2001 FCE appears an improvement over that of
January 26, 2000, which appears an improvement over the 1995 FCE. Johnston’s raising of
the weight limitation for the May 2, 2001 FCE over that stated in the job description supports
the assertion that the District wanted the final FCE to justify an already made decision to
terminate rather than to evaluate the Grievant’s ability to perform his job.

Page 31
MA-11555
The difficulty with the Union’s argument is that it ignores events following the letter of
termination, which are significant under the stipulation to address all of the asserted bases for
the discharge. It is evident that Johnston doubted the Grievant’s sincerity well before evidence
surfaced of the Grievant’s falsification of his employment application or of possible
misrepresentation of the cause of the knee injury. The termination letter turned solely on the
District’s attempt to enforce a one year limit to the leave of absence. The more plainly
disciplinary bases for the discharge emerged after this.
More to the point, Article 24, Section 1 and Article 5, Section 3(a) establish that the
provision of a leave beyond one year is a contractually significant exercise of discretion. The
strength of the Union’s argument is eroded by the Grievant’s conduct. The difficulty of
determining the cause of the Grievant’s knee injury cannot obscure that his conduct regarding
the employment application and his conduct to secure a leave beyond one year are marred by
an evident effort to manipulate and to misrepresent fact. Work within the Grievant’s
restrictions outside of a one year leave is not a matter of right. The District’s actions were
reasonable and thus authorized by Articles 5 and 9.
AWARD
The District did have just cause to terminate the Grievant.
The grievance is, therefore, denied.
Dated at Madison, Wisconsin, this 8th day of July, 2002.

Richard B. McLaughlin /s/
Richard B. McLaughlin, Arbitrator

RBM/gjc
6401.doc
