Upper Moreland Township
Board of Commissioners - Regular Meeting
October 4, 2021, 2021 Meeting Minutes

Board of Commissioners Members:
Commissioner and President, Kevin C. Spearing;
Commissioner and Vice President Charles M. Whiting; Commissioners Cheryl Lockard, Kip
McFatridge, Anthony S. Prousi, Nicholas O. Scull and R. Samuel Valenza.
I.

Call to Order: The Regular Meeting of the Board of Commissioners of Upper Moreland
Township was called to order by the President of the Board of Commissioners, Kevin C.
Spearing.

II.

Moment of Silent Meditation/Pledge of Allegiance

III.

Roll Call: Commissioner and Board President Spearing, Commissioner and Vice President
Whiting; Commissioners Lockard, Prousi, Scull and Valenza. Absent: Commissioner
McFatridge. Also present: Randall K. Schaible, Assistant Township Manager & Director of
Finance, in the absence of Matthew H. Candland, Township Manager, and Sean Kilkenny,
Township Solicitor.

IV.

Presentations/Announcements:
A. Recognizing personnel for their efforts due to the remnants of Hurricane Ida:
 Police Chief Andrew Block described details from several floodwater rescue operations
that occurred on the evening of September 1, 2021 and presented the following:
 Commendation for Heroism Awards for a rescue at Bonnet Lane to: Officer Layla
Cruz, Officer Matthew Snyder and Detective Todd Smith.
 Commendation for Heroism Awards for a rescue at Masons Mill Road to: Officer
Preston Moyer, Sergeant James Robb, Officer Clarence Dickerson, Detective Mark
Bouldin, and Lieutenant Goodson from the Philadelphia Police Department on
behalf of Officer Sean O'Malley.
 Commendation for Heroism Awards for a rescue at Mill Road near the railroad
tracks to: Officer William Nagy, Officer Matt Snyder and also Officer Alex
Bruckner of Hatboro Police Department.
 A Citizen Commendation Award to Chuck Beaudet, who assisted officers with his
front-end loader to rescue victims trapped at the In and Out Store and
Mediterranean Delight Restaurant.
 Unit Citation Awards for officers who answered over 61 calls during the evening's
storm events to: Lieutenant Mark Drakeley, Lieutenant Kelly Ruddell, Sergeant
Jim Robb, Sergeant Timothy Lynch, Detective Officer Mark Bouldin, Officer Layla
Cruz, Officer Michael Davido, Officer Clarence Dickerson, Detective Francis
Gallagher, Officer Christopher Hens, Officer Kevin Kramer, Officer John
McCleary, Officer Scott Metheny, Officer Andrew Misner, Officer Preston Moyer,
Officer William Nagy, Detective Todd Smith, Officer Matthew Snyder, Officer
Thomas Sokolis, Clerk Tina McGuckin and Clerk Daniel Steely.
 Commissioner Spearing presented a Citation Award for outstanding leadership to Chief
Andrew Block.
 Commissioner Spearing presented Unit Citation Awards to the following Second
Alarmers Rescue Squad who responded to numerous serious situations and provided
aid to the Community Ambulance Association of Ambler and the Upper Dublin
-1-

Upper Moreland Township
Board of Commissioners - Regular Meeting
October 4, 2021, 2021 Meeting Minutes

community: EMT Kimberly Garrett, Paramedic Michael Smaltini, EMT Megan Todd,
Paramedic John Hill, EMT Mickeem Watson, Paramedic Joseph Petty, EMT Darian
Pearlmutter, Paramedic Todd Vreeland, EMT Ernest Brown, Paramedic Stephen
Terrill, EMT Carl Perkins, Paramedic Eugene Dorotov, EMT Charlene Taylor,
Paramedic Jeffrey Gunning, and EMT Emily Cordero.
 EMS Chief Ken Davidson gave recognition for exemplary service and presented Unit
Citation Awards and bars for their uniforms to: EMT Emily Cordero, EMT Kimberly
Garrett, Paramedic John Hill and Paramedic Tod Vreeland.
 Fire Chief Chuck Jones discussed floodwater rescue operations that occurred at various
locations and presented Citation Awards to: Bud Tucker, Tim Focht, Dante Newman,
John Juel, Jake Ross, Ed O'Neill, Dan Williams, Kate Valesky, Brian Drennen, Chuck
Jones, Sr., Charles Jones, III, Chris Jones, Lauren Jones, Paul Nowell, Davin Rucker,
Javier Rucker, and Captain John Fugelo.
 Commissioner Spearing presented a Citation Award to Fire Chief Chuck Jones, Jr.
REGULAR MEETING
V.

Public Comments - Nothing to report.

VI.

Treasurer’s Activity Report – September 2021:
 Commissioner Spearing read details from the report.
 Commissioner Spearing motioned, seconded by Commissioner Valenza and the Board of
Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0, the report as submitted.

VII.

Approval of Minutes - September 13, 2021 Regular Meeting and September 20, 2021
Special Meeting:
 Commissioner Prousi amended the September 20, 2021 Special Meeting minutes to include
his name on page one, first item, "Board of Commissioners Members" and section "IV.
Roll Call".
 The Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0 the minutes, as amended.

VIII.

Committee Recommendations:
A. Finance & Administrative Committee – The Committee recommends the Board of
Commissioners take action on the following:
1. Appointments/Reappointments:
a. The reappointment of Annmarie Mangin on the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Council as a representative of Ward 6, to serve a new two-year term that will
expire on August 4, 2023.
b. The reappointment of David Cooper on the Uniform Construct Code (UCC) Local
Appeals Board to serve a new five-year term that will expire on August 5, 2026.
c. The appointment of Gerry Foley as a representative of the Advisory Planning
Agency on the Transportation Advisory Committee to fill the vacancy left by Dan
Barber.
 Commissioner Valenza motioned, seconded by Commissioner Lockard and the
Board of Commissioners approved the above reappointments/appointment by a
vote of 6-0.
-2-

Upper Moreland Township
Board of Commissioners - Regular Meeting
October 4, 2021, 2021 Meeting Minutes

2. List of Bills Payable:
 Commissioner Valenza motioned, seconded by Commissioner Lockard and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
3. Aqua General Funds Bills:
 Commissioner Valenza motioned, seconded by Commissioner Lockard and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 5 (one (1) abstention:
Commissioner Spearing, Aqua employee).
4. Other Items:
a. Motion to Approve the Ratification of the Collective Bargaining Agreement
between Upper Moreland Township and Teamsters Local 107 Blue Collar
Employees:
 Commissioner Valenza motioned, seconded by Commissioner Lockard and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
b. Motion to Approve a Tax Settlement between the Township, the School District of
Upper Moreland and the tax payer, Ernest and Gail Farabella, 2301 Computer
Avenue:
 Commissioner Valenza motioned, seconded by Commissioner Lockard and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
c. Motion to Approve the Township’s Solicitor, KILKENNY LAW, LLC, 2022
hourly rate of $155.00:
 Commissioner Valenza motioned, seconded by Commissioner Lockard and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
d. Motion to Approve the purchase of three (3) Chevy Tahoe Police Vehicles.
 Commissioner Valenza motioned, seconded by Commissioner Lockard and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
5. New Business - Nothing to report.
B. Community Development Committee - The Committee recommends the Board of
Commissioners take action on the following:
1. Code Enforcement - Nothing to report.
2. Land Development/Subdivision Applications:
a. Motion to Approve Resolution R-2021-32 – Approving the Fair Oaks Park Lot
Line Adjustment Plan:
 Commissioner Prousi motioned, seconded by Commissioner Spearing and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
3. List of Upcoming Zoning Hearing Board Applications - October 2021:
 Commissioner Prousi read two applications to be presented at the meeting on
October 14, 2021.
4. Other Items:
a. Motion to Approve Resolution R-2021-33 – Authorizing the submission of a
Traffic Signal Maintenance Agreement, submission of any future modifications to
the agreement and the submission of any future applications with the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation:
 Commissioner Prousi motioned, seconded by Commissioner Valenza and the
-3-

Upper Moreland Township
Board of Commissioners - Regular Meeting
October 4, 2021, 2021 Meeting Minutes

Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
b. Motion to Approve the bid award to James D. Morrissey, Inc. for roadway
improvements at Davisville and Byberry Roads as part of the Intersection
Improvement Project:
 Commissioner Valenza directed Mr. Schaible to post the start date on the
Township website.
 Commissioner Prousi motioned, seconded by Commissioner Valenza and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
c. Motion to Approve the proposal for engineering services during the construction
of the traffic signal improvements associated with the Green Light Go Grant at the
intersection of Davisville and Byberry Roads as part of the Intersection
Improvement Project:
 Commissioner Prousi motioned, seconded by Commissioner Valenza and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
d. Motion to Approve the proposal for engineering services during the construction
of the road widening project associated with the Multimodal Transportation Fund
Grant at the intersection of Davisville and Byberry Roads as part of the Intersection
Improvement Project:
 Commissioner Prousi motioned, seconded by Commissioner Valenza and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
e. Motion to Approve the Green Light Go Award Traffic Signal Design Proposal for
signal upgrades along York Road from Terwood Road to Newington Road:
 Commissioner Prousi motioned, seconded by Commissioner Valenza and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
f. Motion to Approve the Snow and Ice Removal Contract with Montgomery
County:
 The Committee recommends including additional roads and will continue a
discussion at the October 11, 2021 Community Development Committee
meeting.
 Commissioner Prousi motioned, seconded by Commissioner Valenza and the
Board of Commissioners approved on the condition of including other roads by
a vote of 6-0.
g. Motion to Approve the design and color of the Upper Moreland Township Flag:
 The recommendation at the September 20, 2021 Community Development
Committee meeting was the yellow/gold background for the flag.
 Commissioner Prousi motioned, seconded by Commissioner Valenza and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
h. Motion to Approve a Waiver of Fees for the Upper Moreland School District:
 Commissioner Spearing commented that discussions will continue with the
School District about charging fees to residents for use of athletic fields.
 Commissioner Prousi motioned, seconded by Commissioner Valenza and the
Board of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
C. Parks and Recreation Committee - September 27, 2021 – The Committee recommends
the Board of Commissioners take action on the following:
-4-

Upper Moreland Township
Board of Commissioners - Regular Meeting
October 4, 2021, 2021 Meeting Minutes

1. Motion to Approve Resolution R-2021-34 – Authorizing an application to the PECO
Green Region Open Space Program for the Fair Oaks Park Basin Project:
 Commissioner Scull explained that seeding and plant plugs will promote Best
Management Practices for stormwater control measures at the basin's floor.
 Commissioner Scull motioned, seconded by Commissioner Valenza and the Board
of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
2. Motion to Approve the request from the Upper Moreland Middle School Home School
Association:
 Commissioner Scull explained that a mini-photo shoot fundraiser will be held on
Saturday, November 6-7, 2021, at Masons Mill Park.
 Commissioner Scull motioned, seconded by Commissioner Valenza and the Board
of Commissioners approved by a vote of 6-0.
D. Public Health & Safety Committee - Nothing to report.
IX.

Commissioner Comments:
 Commissioner Valenza commented that Montgomery County Board of Elections is
considering moving the polling location for residents of Ward 6 from the Upper Moreland
High School to the YMCA.
 Commissioner Whiting commented that the Eastern Center for the Arts and Technology
polling location is not conducive for Ward 3-1 and 3-2, which will be discussed at the
County's meeting.
 Commissioner Spearing expressed appreciation to the Second Alarmers, Police and
Volunteer Fire Company for their services and leadership in the community.
 Commissioner Whiting invited the public to attend the Fire Prevention Event, which will
be held at the Fire House on Thursday, October 7, 2021.
 Commissioner Spearing announced that the Environmental Advisory Council in
conjunction with the Audubon Society will hold an educational Bird Event at Fair Oaks
Park on Saturday, October 16, 2021.
 Chief Block announced that "Faith & Blue", a national event, will be held on Saturday,
October 9, 2021 at Hatboro Baptist Church.

X.

Visitor Comments - Nothing to report.

XI.

Adjournment: There being no further business to discuss, the meeting was adjourned at 8:30
p.m.

Respectfully submitted by Kathleen Kristire.

-5-
