COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
Between
THE TOWN OF SEYMOUR
And
SEYMOUR PUBLIC WORKS EMPLOYEES
LOCAL 1303-24 OF COUNCIL 4
AFSCME, AFL-CIO
July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2021

{01023959.DOCX Ver. I}

Table of Contents
ARTICLE I

RECOGNITION ..................................................................................... !

ARTICLE2

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS .................................................................... I

ARTICLE3

UNION SECURITY ............................................................................... 2

ARTICLE4

SENIORITY ........................................................................................... 2

ARTICLES

HOURS OF WORK ............................................................................... 6

ARTICLE6

BENEFITS ............................................................................................. 7

ARTICLE 7

HOLIDA YS .......................................................................................... l 0

ARTICLES

VACATIONS ....................................................................................... !!

ARTICLE9

LEAVE PROVISIONS ........................................................................ 12

ARTICLE 10

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE .............................................................. 15

ARTICLE II

SAFETY AND HEALTH .................................................................... 16

ARTICLE 12

PRIOR PRACTICE .............................................................................. 16

ARTICLE 13

UNION ACTIVITIES .......................................................................... 16

ARTICLE 14

NO STRIKE/NO LOCK OUT PROVISION ....................................... 17

ARTICLE 15

WAGES ................................................................................................ 17

ARTICLE 16

MISCELLANEOUS ............................................................................. IS

ARTICLE 17

LONGEVITY PAY .............................................................................. 20

ARTICLE 18

DISCIPLINARY ACTION .................................................................. 20

ARTICLE 19

FULL AGREEMENT, COPIES, AND DURATION
OF AGREEMENT ............................................................................... 21

APPENDIX A

HDHP/HSA SUMMARY LISTING OF BENEFITS .......................... 23

APPENDIXB

DENTAL PLAN ................................................................................... 26

{01023959.DOCX Ver. I}

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
Between
THE TOWN OF SEYMOUR
And

SEYMOUR PUBLIC WORKS EMPLOYEES
LOCAL 1303-24 OF COUNCIL 4
AFSCME, AFL-CIO
This Agreement entered into effective July I, 2017 by and between the Town of Seymour,
hereinafter referred to as the "Town" and Local 1303-24 of Connecticut Municipal Council
4, American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, AFL-CIO, hereinafter
referred to as the "Union".
ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
Section 1.0
The Town hereby recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive representative of all
employees in the Highway Department and Transfer Station, also known as Public Works
Department, who were not elected and who do not have the right to hire and fire, other
than seasonal employees, for the purpose of bargaining with respect to wages, hours of
work and conditions of employment. Specifically excluded from this Agreement are the
Director of Public Works and Clerical Staff of the Public Works Department. Supervisors
shall mean Director or designee.
ARTICLE 2
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Section 2.0
Except as otherwise modified or restricted by an express provision of this Agreement, the
Town reserves and retains exclusively, whether exercised or not, all the lawfi.ll and
customary rights, powers and prerogatives of Management. Such rights include, but shall
not be limited to, the right to direct and control the workforce, establishing standards of
productivity and perfonnance of its employees; detem1ining the objectives of the Town
and the methods and means necessary to fulfill those objectives, including the creation or
discontinuation of services, departments or programs in whole or in part; the detem1ination
or the content of job classifications for newly created positions; the determination of the
qualifications for employees based upon the content of available job descriptions; the
appointment, promotion, assignment, direction and transfer of personnel; the suspension,
demotion, discharge or any other appropriate disciplinary action against its employees for
just cause; the relief from duty of its employees because of lack of work or other legitimate
reasons; the establishment of reasonable work rules; and the taking of all necessary actions
to catTy out its objectives in emergencies

{0!023959.DOCX Ver. I}

Section 2.1
Such rights and responsibilities are inherent in the Town by virtue of statutory and Charter
provisions, therefore actions with respect to these rights and responsibilities are not subject
to review except as specifically abridged or modified by this agreement.
ARTICLE3
UNION SECURITY
Section 3.0
All new employees shall, upon the signing of this Agreement, either become members of
the Union after thirty (30) days of employment or refrain from joining the Union, and so
long as they remain non-members, as a condition of employment, pay to the Union a
service fee equivalent to the dues uniformly required of the members. Employees who
withdraw or refrain from joining the Union, shall, as a condition of employment, execute
in writing, a deduction authorization for the limited purpose of authorizing the Town to
deduct from their wages such services fees fixed and certified in writing by the Union
which would be payable by such non-union employees.
Section 3.1
The Employer agrees to deduct dues and/or fees weekly, as ce1tified by AFSCME from the
wages of all employees covered by this Agreement. The Union shall save the Town
hannless from any and all claims, demands, suits or judgments arising from the
implementation of sections 3.0 and 3.1.
Section 3.2
The dues deduction for each month will be made weekly, and the total amount so deducted
will be remitted to the Council 4 office along with an itemized list of employees showing
the amount of dues deducted by the end of the month for which said deductions have been
made.
ARTICLE4
SENIORITY
Section 4.0

Definition of Seniority and Loss of Seniority

The Town shall prepare a list of regular employees showing their seniority in length of
service with the Town and deliver it to the Union each year on July I. Seniority shall be
defined as the length of an employee's continuous unbroken service with the Town.

{01023959.DOCX Ver. 1}

2

An employee shall lose seniority for the following:
a.

Having quit voluntarily;

b.

Discharged for just cause;

c.

An absence, except in case of lay-off, for three (3) consecutive working
days without notifying the Town;

d.

Failure to return to work on the first day following a period of approved
leave of absence except as otherwise provided by law;

e.

Retirement; or

f.

If recall from lay-off time has expired.

Section 4.1

Vacancies

When a vacancy exists that is to be filled or a new position is created as a Union position,
it shall be posted in the Garage for five (5) work days and the Town will consider seniority
and qualifications, and where qualifications are substantially equal, the most senior
employee shall be given first opportunity to fill the position. If he/she refuses the
opportunity, and all other factors are substantially equal, it shall be the next senior
employee. A break-in and probationary period for the promotional vacancy shall be fortyfive (45) working days.
The Human Resources Manager will review all written applications submitted for new
employment positions (non-promotional vacancies) and then submit the applications of
applicants who meet the minimum qualifications to the Board of Public Works and the
First Selectman. The Board of Public Works shall be responsible for interviewing all
applicants for new employment positions and making recommendations to the Board of
Selectmen. The Human Resources Manager and First Selectman may review and comment
upon the hiring recommendations made by the Board of Public Works to the Board of
Selectmen.

Section 4.2

Layoffs

Should there be a financial need to implement a reduction in force, employees within the
classification of Laborer shall be laid off first. Should there still be a financial need to
have a reduction in force, the employee with the least seniority shall be laid off next. Laid
off regular employees with the most seniority shall be rehired first and no new employee
shall be hired until all employees have been given the oppmtunity to return to work within
two (2) years and provided the employee recalled is qualified to fill the vacancy. In the
event of a layoff; an employee shall retain his seniority status for two (2) years from the
date of his/her layoff.

(01023959.DOCX Ver. 1}

3

Section 4.3

Probationary Period

New employees shall have a probationary period of one hundred twenty (120) calendar
days after which they shall be classified as regular employees. The probationary period
may be extended up to seventy-five (75) days if necessary to qualify an employee in snow
plowing. No seniority rights shall accrue during the probationary period, however upon
completion of the initial probationary period, the employee's seniority shall revert back to
the latest date of hire. After the initial probationary period, no employee shall be
terminated except in accordance with Section 4.5.

Section 4.4

Work Assignments

Department Supervisors shall be responsible for assignments of work to employees in their
sections at all times. They must be consistent with respect to types, and hours of work shall
impartially be assigned to employees in each classification.

Section 4.5

Terminations for Just Cause

No employee shall be terminated except for just cause. The Town shall notify the Union in
writing of all such terminations within twenty-four (24) hours of termination.

Section 4.6

Subcontracting (Use of Outside Contractors)

A. No outside contractors shall be hired to do work normally perfonned by regular
Town Employees unless an emergency required the necessity and only after regular
employees are being utilized.
B In the event equipment other than Town owned equipment is needed to meet an
emergency, such equipment and operators may be utilized for the duration of said
emergency.
C. No Public Works equipment is to be used unless qualified bargaining unit
employees operate it. If all qualified bargaining unit employees are utilized at the
highest available rate, then the Town may temporarily hire outside personnel to
operate such equipment. The Director of Public Works, Foreman/Supervisor and
Mechanics can also operate said equipment.
D. Notwithstanding any of the above, the Town shall have the right to subcontract any
services as needed, provided that no incumbent bargaining unit employees shall be
laid off as a direct result of such subcontracting.
E. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Article, or any article hereof, the
Director of Public Works and Foreman/Supervisor may perform any work normally
performed by members of the bargaining unit without a grievance being filed,
providing there is no member of the bargaining unit already assigned other duties
who is willing and able to perform such work.

{01023959.DOCX Ver. ll

4

Section 4. 7

Recall from Layoff

Employees recalled from layoff must return to work within ten (I 0) working days of recall
notice, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon.

Section 4.8

Bridging of Seniority If Rehired Within Two Years

An employee in the Public Works Department whose service with the Department is
terminated for other than cause, but who is rehired within two (2) years of leaving, shall
have his prior actual service added to his future service, after having been on the payroll of
the Department for the latter period of at least one (I) year

Section 4.9

Working in Higher Classification

When an employee is required to work in a classification higher than his regular
classification, he shall be compensated at the rate of pay of the higher classification. Such
higher rate shall not apply to incidental work, assignments of less than one (I) hour
duration.

Section 4.10 Minimum Staffing & Limit on Number of Laborers
Irrespective of any other provision of this Collective Bargaining Agreement, the Town
agrees to maintain and to fill the following minimum number of positions within the
bargaining unit:
a.
b.

Truck Drivers - 12
Mechanics - 2

The maximum number of Laborers is limited to fifty percent (50%) of the combined
number of Truck Drivers and Mechanics. For example, if there are twelve (12) Truck
Drivers and one (I) Mechanic, a maximum number of six (6) Laborers may be employed,
and if there are twelve (12) Truck Drivers and two (2) Mechanics, a maximum of seven (7)
Laborers may be employed.
Laborers shall not be required to hold and/or maintain a COL license and will not be in the
rotation for snow plow duties of COL trucks. Furthermore, the classification of Laborer
will not be used to reduce any customary ovettime duties currently performed by the Truck
Drivers. Laborers who hold COL licenses may be temporarily assigned to operate trucks
in accordance with past practice.

{01023959.DOCX Ver. 1}

_,c

ARTICLE 5
HOURS OF WORK
Section 5.0

Hours of Work and Changed Shifts

Regular hours of employment of all bargaining unit employees shall be forty (40) working
hours a week, Monday through Friday, eight (8) working hours a day between 7:00a.m.
and 3:00 p.m. Memorial Day through Labor Day summer hours shall be between 6:00a.m.
and 2:00p.m. There shall be a paid twenty (20) minute lunch period each day. The
Director of Public Works may assign different reporting hours as necessitated by specific
job related conditions between December I and March 31 provided employees are given
three (3) days advance notice. Volunteers by seniority will be asked to work the changed
hours first. If there are no volunteers, employees will rotate weekly beginning with the
least senior employee first. No employee will have to work the changed hours more than
two (2) weeks each month. The changed shift shall not start earlier than five (5:00a.m.) or
end later than ten (10:00 p.m.). Up to four (4) employees may work the changed shifts.
Employees working a changed shift will receive a premium of8% of their regular straight
time rate for each hour worked up to eight (8) hours, and will receive time and a half their
straight time rate with the 8% premium for all hours worked in excess of eight (8) hours on
any changed shift.
A.

Notwithstanding the above provisions:
I. The nonnal work week for the transfer station operations shall be Tuesday
through Saturday.
2. The Director of Public Works may assign the Sweeper Operator to work an
8-hour shift with an earlier starting time in accordance with past practice.

Section 5.1

Overtime

Any hours an employee is required to work above the normal, regularly scheduled hours of
work week or over eight hours in a work day shall be compensated at time and one-half of
the regular rate, except that an employee required to work on Sunday shall be paid double
time. The time period begins at 12:01 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on such day to determine
double time pay.

Section 5.2

Minimum Call-Back Guarantee

Any employee called back to work after completing his work day, shall be granted a
minimum of four (4) hours at the rates specified in this contract.

Section 5.3

Advance Notice of Overtime Assignments

An assignment of overtime work, other than emergencies, shall be made at least four (4)
hours in advance by the employee's supervisor.

{01023959.DOCX Ver. I}

6

Section 5.4

Equalization of Overtime

All overtime work shall be distributed equally among eligible employees as far as practical
within classification. A list of specified employees shall be established weekly for possible
weekend assignments to be on call. An employee summoned for emergency overtime who
refuses to come in shall be dropped to the bottom of the call-in overtime list. Employees
called in on an emergency overtime and reporting before his normal position on the
overtime list shall be dropped to the bottom of said list, provided however; that to be
eligible for overtime and emergency work, an employee must have worked the work day
immediately preceding the overtime period.
ARTICLE 6
BENEFITS

Section 6.0
A.

Group Health Insurance

Group Health Insurance Plans

As used in subsection A of Section 6.1, the terms "full-time employees," "eligible
employees," and "employees" mean employees regularly scheduled to work forty (40) hours
per week or otherwise required by law to be provided with group medical insurance.
Effective July I, 2017, the Town will provide only a High Deductible Health Plan (HDHP)
for full-time employees and their eligible dependents. All current full-time employees and
their eligible dependents covered by the Anthem Blue Cross/Blue Shield Century Preferred
PPO Plan who want to continue to participate in the group health insurance offered by the
Town must switch to the HDHP effective July I, 2017.
The HDHP shall have an annual deductible of $2,000 individual and $4,000 family for innetwork and out of network services. Once the annual deductible is met, the plan will pay
100% for in-network services excluding prescription drug co-payments. Out-of-network
services shall be subject to an 80%/20% coinsurance to a coinsurance maximum of $3,000
for individual coverage and $6,000 for aggregate family coverage. The shared in-network
and out-of-network out-of-pocket annual maximum shall be $5,000 for individual coverage
and $10,000 for aggregate family coverage. Prescription co-pays of $5 for generic drugs,
$25 for listed brand name drugs, and $40 for non-listed brand name drugs made after the
annual deductible is satisfied will count towards the out-of-pocket maximum. A summaty
listing of benefits is provided in Appendix B.
A HSA shall be established by the Town for each eligible employee who participates in the
HDHP. For the plan years beginning on the dates below, the Town shall contribute by
direct deposit to the eligible employee's HSA a portion of the in-network annual
deductible based on the following percentages and schedules:

{Ol023959.DOCX Ver. l}

7

7/l/2017
7/l/2018
7/1/2019
7/l/2020

50%
50%
50%
50%

full amount paid on July 1, 2017
full amount paid on July I, 2018
Y, paid in July and Y, paid in January
Y, paid in July and Y, paid in January

For employees ineligible to contribute to a Health Savings Account (HSA), a Health
Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) will be established and funded by the Town by direct
deposit to the employee's HRA in the same amount that would have been paid into an
HSA had the employee been eligible and at the same times. HRA balances will roll over
year to year up to the full deductible amount. HRAs are owned by the Town, and
employees forfeit their HRA balances at the end of their employment.
If an employee commences participation in the HDHP mid-plan year, the first employer
contribution to the HSA or the HRA will be prorated based on the first full month of
coverage.
Effective July 1, 2017 eligible employees will pay 1% of the premium and will continue to
pay 1% of the premium for the plan year beginning July I, 2018. Effective July 1, 2019
eligible employees will pay 2% of the premium. Effective July 1, 2020 eligible employees
will pay 2% of the premium.
The plan year for the HDHP/HSA option shall be July 1st through June 30th.
Section 125 Plan: Employee payments for premium cost shall be made through a payroll
deduction, which will be done by the adoption of an IRS Code Section 125 pre-tax
premium conversion account so that health insurance contributions may be made from pretax dollars.
FSA Plan: Eligible employees participating in the HDHP/HSA Plan will be allowed to
participate in the FSA for dependent care only. All eligible employees will be allowed to
deposit monies into a FSA under Section 125 of the IRS Code for the purpose of
dependent care expenses. These monies may be expended for medical care and/or
dependent care under Section 129 of the IRS Code. Eligible employees may also
voluntarily contribute additional monies into their FSA in accordance with Sections 125,
129, and 105(h) of the IRS Code.
The Town's cost for the FSA shall not exceed eight hundred ($800) dollars for start-up,
two hundred and fifty ($250) dollars for aruma! renewal and five ($5) per participant each
month. Any additional costs associated with the FSA will be borne by all the participants
in the plan.
The foregoing benefits are subject to the terms and conditions of the carriers' master
policies which shall control in all cases.
B.

Change in Insurance Plan: The Town may change carriers during the life of the
Agreement provided the level of benefits is substantially equivalent to those set
forth above.

{Ol023959.DOCX Ver. l)

8

C.

Waiver of Group Insurance Benefits: Employees may waive all group health
insurance benefits and be paid $5,000 each year provided the spouse of any such
employee is not also an employee of the Town or Board of Education, covered by a
collective bargaining agreement, and receiving medical benefits under the
agreement.

D.

Life Insurance: Each employee shall be covered by a Life Insurance Policy
predicated upon one and one-half(l-1/2) times annual salary in accordance with
the Insurance policy, the cost of which shall be assumed by the Town. Life
Insurance in the amount ofTen Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) will be provided for
retirees and Five Thousand ($5,000.00) Dollars for spouses. This cost will be paid
by the Town.

E.

Retiree Medical Insurance:
I. An employee hired before June I, 2017, who retires prior to age fifty-five (55)
and receives a pension benefit from the Town, shall have his/her medical
coverage for them and their spouse continued if they so elect. The Town and
the employee shall share equally the cost of such coverage. An employee hired
before June I, 2017 who retires after reaching the age fifty-five (55) and
receives a pension benefit from the Town, shall have his/her medical coverage
(same as active) for them and their spouse continued at no cost to the employee.
This coverage shall continue until age sixty-five (65). The Town will provide
Blue Cross 65 High Option and Blue Shield 65-82

2. No retiree medical insurance will be provided to employees hired on or after
June I, 2017.
F.

Dental Coverage: All members of the bargaining unit and their dependents shall be
covered by Blue Cross Blue Shield Full Service Dental Plan with Riders A & D
with a $1,500.00 maximum on orthodontics in Rider D at no cost to the employee.
This coverage is extended to retirees under the same guidelines as provided for in
subsection E2. of Section 6.1. A description of the dental plan is set forth in
Appendix D.

G.

Shmt Te1m Disability Coverage: For employees who work thirty (30) or more
hours per week, the Town shall provide, at no cost to the employees, weekly
income insurance with a weekly income benefit of seventy percent (70%) of the
employee's average weekly straight time wage over the course of the twelve
months preceding the date the employee becomes disabled trom work.

H.

Vision Coverage: Blue Cross Vision Care rider, subject to premium cost share.

{01023959.DOCX Ver. I}

9

Section 6.2
The Town shall, at its expense, replace, repair, or sharpen such tools and personal property
whenever such replacement, repairing, or sharpening are required because of the direct
need solely by work performed for the Town. This is at the sole discretion of the Director
of Public Works.

Section 6.3

Retirement/Pension

All employees who customarily work the number of hours a week to qualify for
membership (which currently is at least 20 hours every week) shall be covered by the
provisions of the Connecticut Municipal Employee's Retirement Fund.

Section 6.4

Option to Pay for Group Health Insurance During Layoff

The Town shall give employees the option of paying for their Insurance Coverage at the
group rate for the allotted time an employee retains his seniority status according to Atticle
4, Section 4.2.

Section 6.5

Excise Tax IRS Code Section 49801 Reopener

Upon written notice (including email) by either party after June 30, 2016, the parties agree
to meet to negotiate concerning the excise tax set forth in IRS Code Section 49801 (the
Cadillac tax). Negotiations will commence within 30 days from receipt of the notice.

ARTICLE7
HOLIDAYS
Section 7.0

Contractual Holidays

Employees shall be paid for and have the following days off as holidays:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Fourth of July
Labor Day
Columbus Day

Veteran's Day
3 Floating Holidays
Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas Day
Day after Christmas

Floating Holidays will be scheduled in advance with the Director of Public Works. One (l)
floating holiday will be taken the day before or the day after a scheduled vacation,
whichever is agreed to with the Director of Public Works. The day after Christmas will be
substituted for Christmas Eve day for all employees except transfer station attendant, who
will take Christmas Eve day as the holiday unless he can find a substitute or unless
Christmas falls on a Saturday.

{01023959.DOCX Ver. l}

10

Section 7.1

Observance of Holidays Falling on Sunday or Saturday

If a holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be considered the Holiday. If a
holiday falls on a Saturday, the holiday shall be observed the preceding Friday.

Section 7.2

Double Time for Holiday Worked

If an emergency makes it necessary for an employee to work on a holiday, he/she shall be
paid double time, plus the holiday pay.

Section 7.3

Additional Holiday if New National or State Holiday is Declared

In the event of an unforeseen National or State holiday and it is declared as such and is, in
fact, celebrated by the Municipality, each employee shall receive an additional holiday
whether or not the employee worked on such date.

ARTICLE 8
VACATIONS
Section 8.0

Vacations

Employees hired on or before December 31, 2014 shall be granted time off with pay for
vacation according to the following schedule annually.
Completed six (6) months continuous service
Completed one (I) year continuous service

Five (5) working days
Ten (I 0) working days

Completed five (5) years continuous service

Fifteen ( 15) working days

Completed ten (I 0) years continuous service

Twenty (20) working days

Completed fifteen (!5) years continuous service*

Twenty-five (25) working days

*Employees hired between July I, 2008 and December 31,2014 shall receive twenty-five
(25) working days after completion of twenty (20) years of continuous service.
Employees hired on or after January 1, 2015 shall be granted time off with pay for vacation
according to the following schedule annually:
Completed six (6) months continuous service
Completed one (!) year continuous service
Completed five (5) years continuous service
Completed ten (I 0) years continuous service

Section 8.1

Five (5) working days
Ten (I 0) working days
Fifteen (15) working days
Twenty (20) working days

Call Backs to Work While on Vacation

Employees shall not be called back to work while on vacation except for emergency work,
and if called back, shall receive the regular vacation pay plus time and one-half for the
hours they worked.

{0102J959.DOCX Ver. I}

II

Section 8.2

Vacation Preference by Seniority and When Vacations Taken

Employees shall be granted their vacation by seniority preference throughout the year
subject to the demands of service as determined by the Director of Public Works. All
vacation must be taken between July l ''and June 30'h except for the months of December,
January, February, and March. By mutual agreement, the dates may be extended from
December l" to March 31" by seniority an employee can take their vacation, but only a
maximum of five (5) days in each of those months.

Section 8.3

Vacation Must Be Taken in Year Earned; No Accumulation

Vacation time shall not accumulate from year to year and must be taken in the year earned.
Vacation pay is granted only in advance for the pay period before their vacation time. No
vacation pay is given before such time.

Section 8.4
Retiring employees and the surviving spouse or in the absence of a surviving spouse a
deceased employee's estate will receive pay for unused vacation in the year earned. Pay
for unused vacation will not be prorated unless the employee retires in July or August.
Unused vacation to employees who retire in July or August will be paid pro rata based on
the number of full months worked that year rounded to the next highest whole number.

ARTICLE 9
LEAVE PROVISIONS
Section 9.0

Sick Leave

All employees shall receive one and one-quarter days of sick leave for each completed
month of work up to the beginning of the fiscal year. All employees at the beginning of the
fiscal year shall receive fifteen (15) days sick leave to be drawn upon the coming year and
can be paid out if not taken by the end of the year. Unused sick days maybe accumulated
to a maximum of sixty (60) days. Sick leave is not to be considered as extra vacation time.
Supervisors have the right to investigate all sick leave claims if they feel leave is being
abused.
In the final pay period of each fiscal year, each employee shall bank any remaining sick
days. At the employee's option, the Town shall pay the employee, at the then current rate
of pay, for up to fifteen ( 15) days of his/her remaining unused sick days.
Any "banked" sick days may be used by the employee or the employee's spouse or child
for: ( l) illness, injury, or health condition; (2) medical diagnosis, care, or treatment of a
mental or physical illness, injury, or health condition; or (3) preventive care.
Current sick leave time must be utilized before any banked sick leave is charged.

(0!023959.DOCX Ver. I}

12

Section 9.1

Bereavement Leave

Five (5) days special leave with pay shall be granted for the death in the immediate family
if the death occurs during the work week. Should the leave period include days not
scheduled normally as work days, only the actual work days necessary to complete the five
(5) day period shall be allowed. Immediate family shall mean wife, husband, sister,
brother, father, mother, children, mother-in-law, father-in-law, or grandparents. Extended
leave may be granted for special cases with the approval of the Director of Public Works.
One (I) day special leave with pay shall be granted for death of (aunt, uncle, sister-in-law,
brother-in-law) provided the employee attends the funeral and it occurs on a working day.

Section 9.2

Dependent Survivors' Payment

In the event of the death of an employee, his dependent survivors shall receive his norl]lal
weekly wage for one (I) month following his/her last eamed pay for four (4) consecutive
weeks.

Section 9.3

Leave of Absence Without Pay

Leaves of absence without pay or benefits to a maximum of one (I) year may be granted at
the discretion of the Director of Public Works, if requested in writing at least ten (10) days
prior to the requested leave.

Section 9.4

Unused Sick and Earned Vacation Payout on Retirement or Death

Upon retirement or separation from employment for any reason except discharge for cause
or resignation in lieu of discharge, the employee will be paid a lump sum equal to I 00% of
their accumulated sick time up to a maximum of sixty (60) days.
The surviving spouse or if there is no surviving spouse the estate of a deceased employee
shall be paid for unused, accumulated sick leave up to a maximum of sixty (60) days at the
rate of pay in effect at the time of the employee's death.

Section 9.5

Personal Leave

Employees may use up to three (3) days of their sick leave annually for personal business,
subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works, provided at least twenty-four (24)
hours advance notice is given. The days so used shall be charged against the employee's
accumulated sick leave. All employees shall be entitled to two (2) personal days with pay
annually, subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works and provided at least
twenty-four (24) hours advance notice is given to the Director of Public Works.

Section 9.6

Jury Duty

In the event a member of the bargaining unit 1s called for jury duty, the Town will make up
the difference between any compensation he/she may receive for such appearance, and his

{01023959.DOCX Ver. I}

13

regular wages, provided he/she works for the Town during such hours when, because the
jury is not sitting, he/she is responsibly available for work. The Town's obligation shall be
limited to four (4) weeks in any one (I) calendar year.

Section 9.7

Volunteer Firefighters and EMS Personnel

Employees who are active members of the Seymour Volunteer Fire Department or
Ambulance Corps, may be granted time off to answer emergency fire calls, provided,
however; that they are to return to work upon completion of such emergency calls during
their scheduled shift.

Section 9.8

Workers' Compensation Differential Pay and Notice of Changes in
Status

A.

Employees shall receive Workers Compensation Insurance if they are injured on
the job and shall receive the difference between Workers Compensation benefits
and ninety percent (90%) of their regular base pay for long tenn disabilities not to
exceed one (I) year. Such long tern1 absence shall not be charged to sick leave.

B.

Employees must immediately report all work related injuries to the Director of
Public Works regardless of whether or not medical attention is sought.

C.

Employees on Workers' Compensation leave must notify the Director of Public
Works by phone, text or email of their change in status within twenty-four (24)
hours from the time they are:
I.
2.
3.

Section 9.9

Released to return to work with work restrictions;
Informed of any change in their work restrictions; or
Released to return to full duty.

Family Medical Leave

Any employee who is an "eligible employee" as defined under the Federal Family and
Medical Leave Act (FMLA), 29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq., shall be granted a leave of absence
in accordance with the provisions of the FMLA, including as follows:

I.

Up to twelve ( 12) weeks of FMLA leave during a twelve (12) month period
in accordance with the FMLA. Any paid leave time must be exhausted first
in situations where the leave being taken by the employee is covered by the
FMLA, and said paid leave time shall be included in (and shall not be in
addition to) the aforementioned twelve (12) weeks of allowable FMLA
leave. A medical certificate acceptable to the Town shall be required for the
FMLA leave situation.

(01023959.DOCX Ver. I}

14

2.

Up to twelve (12) weeks ofFMLA leave for certain qualifying exigencies
arising out of a covered military member's active duty status, or notification
of an impending call or order to active duty status in support of a
contingency operation.

3.

Up to twenty-six (26) weeks ofleave in a single 12-month period to care for
a covered service member recovering from a serious injury or illness
incurred in the line of duty on active duty. Eligible employees are entitled
to a combined total of up to 26 weeks of all types ofleave during the single
12-month period.
ARTICLE 10
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Section 10.0

Grievances involving the interpretation or application of a Section of this Agreement
which are submitted in writing within ten (I 0) working days after the occurrence (or
knowledge of the occurrences, or with reasonable diligence should have known) of the
event giving rise to it shall be processed in the following manner:
A.

The employee's immediate steward shall present the grievance to the
Director of Public Works, who shall answer it in writing within five (5)
working days. Such written answer is to be given to the Union and the
employee.

B.

If no satisfactory settlement is reached, the grievance may be submitted to
the First Selectman within five (5) working days from the first step answer.
The First Selectman will give a written answer to the employee within
seven (7) working days. Such written answer is to be given to the Union and
the employee.

Section 10.1

If the grievance is not settled through the infonnal procedure above, the Union, with notice
to the Town, may file a notice of appeal within fifteen (15) working days to submit the
matter to binding arbitration by the State Board of Mediation and Arbitration. Such notice
must be sent within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of the decision in Section 10.0 (B)
Step. The arbitration decision shall be final and binding on both parties.
Section 10.2

One (I) officer of the Local Union or that Union representative who actually represents the
employee(s) at any steps of the grievance procedure shall be permitted reasonable time off
without loss of pay for all time actually spent in hearings. The same shall apply for the
principal participants.

{01023959.DOCX Ver. I}

15

ARTICLE 11
SAFETY AND HEALTH
Section 11.0

Both parties to this Agreement acknowledge the importance of the enforcement of safety
rules and regulations.
Section 11.1

Should any employee complain that his/her work required him/her to be in unsafe or
unhealthy situations, in violation of acceptable safety rules, the matter shall be considered
immediately by Representatives of the Town and the Union. If the matter is not adjusted
satisfactorily, a grievance may be processed according to the grievance procedure of this
Agreement.
Section 11.2

When employees are working overtime or are assigned to emergency duties, and when in
the judgment of the Director of Public Works and the employee additional help is needed,
the Director of Public Works will dispatch assistance.
ARTICLE 12
PRIOR PRACTICE
Section 12.0

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as abridging any rights, benefit or privilege
that employees have enjoyed heretofore, unless it is specifically stated that said practice
has been superseded by a provision of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 13
UNION ACTIVITIES
Section 13.0

Union Officers, not to exceed two (2), shall be allowed to attend official Union
conferences without loss of pay for the period required to attend the function.

{Ol023959.DOCX Ver. l}

16

ARTICLE 14
NO STRIKE/NO LOCK OUT PROVISION
Section 14.0
During the life of this Agreement, there shall not be any strike, slowdown, suspension or
stoppage of work in any part of the Town's operation by any employee or employees, nor a
lockout by the Town in any part of the Town's operation. Violation of the above shall be
grounds for disciplinary action.
Section 14.1
No employee shall be required to cross a picket line which will put the employee or his
equipment in physical danger, provided, however, that such employees shall immediately
report the situation to his superior and if the superior determines in his sole discretion that
no danger exists, or if the protection of a police officer is available or provided, the
employee shall not refuse to cross the picket line. Such refusal shall be grounds for
disciplinary action.
ARTICLE 15
WAGES
Section 15.0
The wage schedule shall then be increased as follows:
Effective July l, 2017: 2.49%; effective July 1, 2018: 2.49%; effective July l, 2019:
2.49%; effective July l, 2020: 2.49%.
Classification
Driver
Transfer Station
H.E. Operator
Mechanic
Crew Leader

7/1/2017 7/1/2018 7/1/2019
32.79
33.61
34.45
34.73
35.59
36.38
36.03
36.93
37.85
34.64
35.50
36.38
37.32
38.25
39.20

7/1/2020
35.30
37.39
38.79
37.29
40.18

The wage step progression for all new hires shall be as follows:
HIRE RATE

70% OF CLASSIFIED JOB RATE

END OF PROBATION

80% OF CLASSIFIED JOB RATE

I YEAR ANNIVERSARY

90% OF CLASSIFIED JOB RATE

2 YEAR ANNIVERSARY

100% OF CLASSIFIED JOB RATE

Laborers are not subject to the wage step progression. Newly hired Laborers will be paid
$15 per hour. That new hire rate is a frozen rate and is not subject to general wage
increases. Once an employee is hired as a Laborer, the employee will receive the same
general wage increases as all other employees.

{0l023959.DOCX Ver. l}

17

All hours worked in Heavy Equipment shall be compensated at H.E Rate. The following
equipment shall, for payroll purpose, be considered Heavy Equipment: BULLDOZER,
BUCKET TRUCK, BACK-HOE, PAY-LOADER, SWEEPER, BRUSH CUTTER, and
ROLLER, any vehicle with a GVW over 35,000 lbs when used for plowing snow
regardless of classification of the individual worker.

Section 15.1
Each full-time employee (employees regularly scheduled to work forty (40) hours per week)
will receive the following lump sum bonuses less standard deductions and withholdings:
One thousand five hundred dollars ($1 ,500) payable in the first paycheck of the fiscal
year that begins on July l, 2017.
One thousand five hundred dollars ($1 ,500) payable in the first paycheck of the fiscal
year that begins on July l, 2018.
One thousand five hundred dollars ($1 ,500) payable in the first paycheck of the fiscal
year that begins on July l, 2019.
One thousand five hundred dollars ($1 ,500) payable in the first paycheck of the fiscal
year that begins on July l, 2020.

ARTICLE 16
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 16.0 Laborers May Operate Heavy Equipment and Trucks When
Regular Operators Not Available
If regular operators are not available, Laborers will be allowed to operate Heavy
Equipment and Heavy Trucks, provided they are qualified. At least five (5) employees
shall be trained on the Bucket Truck.

Section 16.1 Transfer Station Attendant
A. Wash-up period of fifteen (15) minutes shall be allowed before quitting time as in
the past.
B. There shall be at least five (5) bargaining unit employees that will have the proper
license to operate the Transfer Station.
C. Employees will be asked on voluntary bases to attend the class necessary to receive
the license.
D. If less than five (5) employees volunteer, then the least senior employees will be
required to get and maintain the license. All current employees with a Transfer
Station License must maintain said license for the duration of this Agreement.

(Ol023959.DOCX Ver. I}

18

E. The Town will be responsible for all fees required for receiving and maintaining
the license.
F. The Town will be responsible for all fees required for receiving and maintaining
the license in a timely manner.
G. The attendant working as the shift operator in direct charge of the operation of the
Transfer Station shall have a current license/certification.

Section 16.2 Power Sweeper Operator
The Power Sweep Operator shall be allowed sufficient time each morning to wash down
the machine, fill the water and grease machine. Also, allowed wash up-time of fifteen (15)
minutes prior to quitting.

Section 16.3 Drivers to Comply with DOT Regulations
The Driver is responsible for the operation and driver maintenance of the tmck and all
equipment towed by the truck he is driving. Drivers shall comply with all applicable laws
and DOT regulations, including but not limited to, 49 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
§ 396.11 concerning daily vehicle inspection.

Section 16.4 DOT Medical Examination
If DOT physical examinations required for employees to maintain or renew their
commercial driver's licenses are not covered by the group medical insurance plan, the
Town will reimburse employees for the cost of DOT physical examinations required to
maintain their CDLs up to a maximum of one hundred fifty-dollars ($150) per exam, not to
exceed one exam every 12 months, provided that the exam is conducted by a medical
examiner certified by the FMCSA and that the employee produces documentation for
reimbursement.

Section 16.5 Winter Stipend
In addition to the wages described in Section 15.0, all bargaining unit employees shall
receive an additional stipend of Eighty-Five Dollars ($85.00) per month for four (4)
months, from December 1" to March 31 ''.This stipend is for making themselves available
for additional overtime during that period.

{Ol023959.DOCX Ver. l}

19

Section 16.6 Safety Shoe and Clothing Reimbursement
Effective July I, 2010, employees shall be reimbursed Five Hunched Dollars ($500.00)
annually for the purchase of safety shoes and work clothing to comply with OSHA
standards payable by September I each year.
ARTICLE 17
LONGEVITY PAY

Section 17.0
Employees hired prior to January 1, 2015 shall receive a special payment in recognition of
longevity of service. Annually in the pay period following the employee's anniversary date
of completed years of continuous full time service, each employee shall receive a payment
equal to the following compensation (overtime pay, any extra pay or any differential pay,
are not included in the longevity pay):
Completed Years
At Least 5 Years, Less Than 8 Years
At Least 8 Years, Less Than 12 Years
At Least 12 Years, Less Than 17 Years
At Least 17 Years, Less Than 22 Years
More Than 22 Years

Percentage
1.5%
1.75%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%

Section 17 .l
Years of service shall be computed from the records in the Finance Office that show the
date of starting the job at Public Works for each employee.

Section 17.2
Longevity payments shall be made in the employee's next paycheck following his/her
Anniversary date.

ARTICLE 18
DISCIPLINARY ACTION

Section 18.0
Disciplinary action shall be for just cause. The steps of progressive discipline generally are
as follows:
I.
2.
3.
4.

{Cl023959.DOCX Ver. l}

Documented oral waming;
A written warning or reprimand;
Suspension with or without pay; and
Discharge.

20

The steps of progressive discipline are merely guidelines applied to correct performance
issues or where the infraction or offense is minor. The parties recognize that the seriousness
and/or consequences of the infraction or offense may in appropriate circumstances warrant
skipping one or more steps of progressive discipline and in some instances proceeding
immediately to discharge.

Section 18.1
The Public Works Director can suspend an employee without pay for a maximum of five
(5) working days for serious Infraction/s or Violation/s of the Department Rules and
Regulations such as but not limited to, abusing the Director or fellow employees or the
public, or misconduct with any of the equipment or tools, verbal abuse, and/or refusing to
do a job.

Section 18.2
A disciplinary hearing will be conducted by The Board of Public Works to determine the
seriousness of the infraction or violation and detetmine to reinstate employee or terminate
his/her employment.

Section 18.3
Written warnings will be placed in the employee's personnel file. Documented oral
warnings aud written warnings will be removed from the employee's record one year after
violation unless the employee receives a second warning or further discipline within the
one year period. If such a warning is not removed, then it becomes a pennanent part of the
employee's personnel file. This section does not prevent the Director of Public Works from
taking other disciplinary action.

ARTICLE 19
FULL AGREEMENT, COPIES, AND DURATION OF AGREEMENT
Section 19.0 Full Agreement
This Agreement contains the fully and complete Agreement between the Town and the
Union on all bargaining issues, and neither party shall be required during the term hereof,
to negotiate or bargain upon any issue whether or not it is covered in this Agreement. All
prior Agreements, understandings, practices, policies, and obligations are void and of not
force or effect unless reduced to writing and approved by the signatures hereto and
executed after the effective date of this Agreement.

{01023959.DOCX Ver. I}

21

Section 19.1

Copies of Agreement

The Town will provide each employee with a copy of this Agreement within thirty (30)
days after signing of this Agreement. New employees will be provided with a copy of this
Agreement at the time of hire.

Section 19.2 Term of Agreement
This Agreement shall be in full force and effect from the date of its acceptance until June
30, 2021. Negotiation for a successor agreement shall be conducted according to the
provisions of the Municipal Employee Relations Act. The parties will commence
negotiations no later than January 1, 2021.
In witness whereof, the parties have set their hands this day
FOR THE TOWN OF SEYMOUR

&rl'nof June, 2017.

FOR LOCAL 1303-24 OF COUNCIL 4
AFSCME, AFL-CIO

W. Kurt Miller, First Selectman

Negotiating Committee Member

Negotiating Committee Member

Kelly sh nan, Staff Representative,
Council 4, AFSCME, AFL-CIO

{0 I023959.DOCX Ver. I }

22

APPENDIX A
HDHP/HSA SUMMARY LISTING OF BENEFITS

Anthem.+.U

Lumenos HSA Plan Summary
lhe Lunen)l' ll!:.\ pi!Ill! d:!lgrteC r,o mp~A'<I ~nJ1o IJJ ~~ Cln 1ml
of ~ 0 11 h!o~h . as 11~11 as 1hedolars )Uuspe.1d M)~Ur hoa'th core.
lhiJ p~n go\'.?S jDJl hE bnl!trts l':tl tiOlf~ rec(j\•? from 3 t1pl~l
hE"Jitl! pl!n, rJUShBllll'l Cite dllittE tO3p£lld )UU1' Ll3f. ~nf, )UU
CEof1 w nre11n·ds by11f.4ng cor1onllap1 to lrr~ l(llo yct~r herilh.

Lumen~

~·our l111nurii>S HSA Pl~n

!Firs.\ · u se ~our HSA to pa)' fDr ro~E(I sEAi tcS:

Health SaviniJS Account
With 1~.e LUmEIIOS Heallh Sil~ingsAoooun.t (HSA], :fOUcan
con1Jillrlll2 pre-!al crorars t:lj~:~ ur HSA ilCG()unt cr.rers OO)' at>o
conrner.re d ~ la JS to )'Colli =unt You can "'e lhese acnars ~
hElp rr~t )'Our d!lfudible ~f)Jnsi!llirJ. U~ed l!ollars can ~
s;m~~ ~~ ilu~ted aoo: accumulale IN:Iugn ~fremen.t

Contributions to Your HS.A
Foo :ro12, c;onlr.,m:ms can De rma~e ~)jiYJIH5J\ up t' Ul e rctlowing:
SS; aol iooi\iMI w ;'Ei"ilge
$6,2'50 f.k"!''l )• 00\~r.l~

Pl1.5 · io ~.Efp)oostayhea!Vl)', use:
Preventive Care
!CO% c;overage fOI mfo."U I~ reccmm~ ser.ices.
lncru~ell ate Ire pre\~li·~ c;;ue senfces Ulil1meet ~"'>i!
r;;oqui:errP-nts 01 ~ raJ ilnd stale law, ioouaing CEftlin
So:Hai~~ imnwniza:'oos ana pn)-sici;ua ~ists..

Preventive Care
No deductions !tom lteHSA ooout•af.9:x;rel ·oo~lsllr yoo a~ fO.'lQ as )I:IU
re.:eiile your pre\~ti•-e ca:e 1\.'0m an in-M'r•m pliY;i ~ er . 11 you ctoo~ In
go to an CCJ'!-1:1'-networa pxrvi:ler, )t"Jl ~e:luclitte or lla~ ifcrol tfeann

·ca.sase oenellts ·•i ~ a.?PIJ'.

Then ·
Your Bridge Resp onsib ility
Tt.e S!i~;e is an urnoun.t )'D'J p;~ yout O! }~:~ur podtel untii)'O'J
meet yoor i!IVrJal res(:«<>iti(t)'. YO'Jr lillidge omoun.t wil \'a'Y
depEI14ngcn tiC's 11'\111)' of}~:~ur tf5J\ couars, if iltTJ, i lrJ
Cl'oo~ 1D spEIICI ID·i'.Eip )'O'Jmeet )'0011 a·eo:~ ulililfe
fe5pOMibilly. If )'OIU rontribute HSA. ~oUars up ID,rre amC£~~1 ~~
'!'lXI! aecturull:e aoo u~e 1nem, yoor BriG~ ·• imequal $D.
HSA a011ars spem on covered ser;ices ptus )IYJr sro;e
RespcmiDtily aact up to )17..1 a~J&l bl:e r:espcmibiity.

Bridge
Y-our Bri~ge respcruit:tfty 'lill•taty'.
Dedutlllhl~ Rcspoosibility

$2,000 iooi\tawl ca.'E!!ilge
$4,GOJ larn)j' ·OO'L'-' ~

Hnallh Acc.ount t Bri~c =Dedut1iblc
If Needed ·
Traditio nal Health Coverage
Y.our rrnaitioni!l Healil CO'i'tr.Jge ~ins after )I:IU oo!•e 01et
)~:lUI E~i3;re I!SpoMiblit}'.

Trad itional Health Coverage
AliEf }'IIUI l:ridg!l, tlteplan pli)'S:

Ad ditional Protection
Foo your prol!ction, tile lolaI amqJnt you spt.'U out 01 )I:IUr
pca et is timil!ll. once )'O'J spen<l lllat arruJn~ the plan
pilys 1DIY* Of ~e c;ost rcr covered s.e!Vi:E-S ~ ll:e
re."flaiMer 01 tne pLan )'ear.

Out-of-Pocket Maximum

fln d (!IICR·

Earn Rewards
wn.rs spe ~ <!bout your Lumeoos HSA proo is wl }'3Uma'l
eill'n ri?'a;ud aooars to redeem rw gill c;arcts to,sel2&1 rE-U tets.
It'S M'll:fOUI LU!l'P.OOSplan l~oii'Jt<IS you fW tJ.3ing steps to
i:npl(lo~ i'O'JI ~P-aM.

ICCffl. ~ in-ret.IQ,'I; pl(lotd&"'S

ln- l~i'1Wtd: aDd•OUI<Df-Net'lol:lrX ArO\~il.'f'S
$ s ,OlD inai\•i1Jal oo1~e

$l O,OJD faJII'f c;o v er~e
"'l'·:&P tiJ1-0'fp:()ft ne»nm .z:,:rd~b cttm:ll ~t.4J :.peN l"Km )OJ! H34 1 )O.l'P B~.:IQ!
n!f:lQ•!bl U en d , c•Jt cdWJ•tr.:e: a.n:U11l..

Earn Rewards
If yoo oo tt.is:
CG.mpP-Le II'.P. M)lliE\lllll Assessmer~ onfne
E nro~ in me M)t1E\lllll CUilC~' Program
Gr.lOHt~ ~':lm~M Mylieall'l CCil);llPol~lilrn
eoorpl21e cur ii<ub-.oo:. f ' ee f'llogl!ilm
CocnpP-1! ~ur t5?alltry 'A'eghl Program

Yoo can l'am:
$5()
StDO
S2110
$50
$50

If yOIJ ll<Wr:! CJUCSI IOI)S, I)INlSC! cal l loll-frt:l! 1-8.88-224-4896.
t:rv. ' U111 ~ b ' ll

OC-HSA61JS WGCRX ~\'S NGF PY (11'12~

(01 023959.DOCX Ver. I}

23

APPENDIXB
DENTAL PLAN
Town of Seymour
How It Works
This dental plan provides coverage for a wide range of dental services up to contractual
maximums listed below per insured person per calendar year for the services listed below:

(Category 1) Diagnostic and Preventative Services
Payable at 100% of usual, customary and reasonable charges at participating dentists:
• Initial oral exams- l/36 months
• Periodic Oral exams - 2/Y ear
• Prophylaxis -2/Year
• Topical application of Fluoride - 2/Y ear to age 19
• Space maintainers to age 19
• X-rays
• Emergency Treatment
Unlimited Maximum with category I, 2, 3
(Category 2) Basic Services
Payable at 80% of usual, customary and reasonable charges at participating dentists:
• Fillings
• Root canals
Deductible: $50 Individual
Family:
• Stainless steel clowns (Primary Teeth)
$150 Family
• Extractions
• Oral Surgery
• Repair of dentures - 1/Year
• Relining of dentures - II 2 Years
• Re-cement crown
• Re-cement bridge
• Repair bridge
Unlimited Maximum with category I, 2 3

{Ol023959.DOCX Ver. l}

26

Town of Seymour -Dental Plan Continued
(Category 3) Major Services
Payable at 50% of usual, customary and reasonable charges at participating dentists:
• Crowns - 1/Tooth/5 Years
• Post and core -1/Tooth/5 Years
Deductible: $50 Individual
• Inlays- l/Tooth/5 Years
Family:
$150 Family
• Onlays 1/Tooth/5 Years
• Periodontics
• Prosthodontics - 1/Tooth/5 Years
Unlimited Maximum with category 1, 2, 3.
(Category 4) Additional Services
Payable at 50% of usual, customary and reasonable charges at participating dentists:
• Orthodontics
Maximum of$1,500 per lifetime.
Principal Limitations and Exclusions:
Services received from a dental or medical department maintained by an employer, a
mutual benefit association, labor union, tmstee or other similar person or group; Services
for which the member incurs no Dentists Charge or which are services of a type ordinarily
performed by a physician, or charges which would not have been made if insurance was
not available; Services with respect to congenital malformations, Services, treatment or
supplies furnished by or at the direction of any government, state or political subdivision:
Any items not specifically listed in this Policy: Lost or stolen dentures or denture
duplication; Gold foil restorations; Temporary services and appliances; such as crown or
tooth preparations and temporary fillings, crowns, bridges and dentures; Application of
sealants, regardless of reason; Services as determined by the company, that are rendered in
a manner contrary to normal dental practice. This is not a legal policy or contract. It is only
a general description ofyour Anthem Blue Cross & Blue Shield benefits. If there are
discrepancies between the dental rider and this summary, the dental rider shall control.

{0!023959.DOCX Ver. I}

27
