AGREEMENT BETWEEN
TOWN OF DANVERS
AND
LOCAL 2038, INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
FIREFIGHTERS, AFL-CIO, CLC
(FY 2025-2027)

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 1 of 43

Contents

ARTICLE 1: RECOGNITION............................................................................................................. 3
ARTICLE 2: MANAGEMENT’S RIGHTS........................................................................................ 3
ARTICLE 3: DISCRIMINATION AND COERCION ...................................................................... 4
ARTICLE 4: GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION .......................................................................... 4
ARTICLE 5: HOURS OF WORK ....................................................................................................... 6
ARTICLE 6: OVERTIME .................................................................................................................... 6
ARTICLE 7: ASSOCIATION REPRESENTATIVES ...................................................................... 7
ARTICLE 8: HOLIDAYS..................................................................................................................... 8
ARTICLE 9: VACATIONS .................................................................................................................. 9
ARTICLE 10: SICK LEAVE ............................................................................................................. 11
ARTICLE 11: LEAVE FOR PERSONAL NECESSITY ................................................................ 13
ARTICLE 12: BEREAVEMENT LEAVE ........................................................................................ 14
ARTICLE 13: CLOTHING AND PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT ................................................. 14
ARTICLE 14: HEALTH AND WELFARE ...................................................................................... 15
ARTICLE 15: COMPENSATION ..................................................................................................... 16
ARTICLE 16: INDEMNIFICATION ................................................................................................ 20
ARTICLE 17: PAID DETAILS AND FIRE WATCH DUTY......................................................... 20
ARTICLE 18: SAFETY ...................................................................................................................... 21
ARTICLE 19: FUNERAL AND BURIAL EXPENSES ................................................................... 21
ARTICLE 20: PROMOTIONS .......................................................................................................... 21
ARTICLE 21: EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE ................................................................................ 21
ARTICLE 22: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ......................................................................... 24
ARTICLE 23: PHYSICAL EXAMINATION................................................................................... 27
ARTICLE 24: LONGEVITY.............................................................................................................. 28
ARTICLE 25: SAVINGS CLAUSE ................................................................................................... 28
ARTICLE 26: RESIGNATION.......................................................................................................... 28
ARTICLE 27: EARNED TIME ......................................................................................................... 29
ARTICLE 28: DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY ........................................................ 29
ARTICLE 29: DURATION ................................................................................................................ 41
Appendix A ........................................................................................................................................... 43

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 2 of 43

This Agreement, entered into by the Town of Danvers, hereinafter referred to as the “Employer” or
“Town” and Local 2038, International Association of Firefighters, AFL-CIO, CLC, hereinafter
referred to as the “Association”, has as its purpose the promotion of harmonious relations between the
Employer and the Association, the establishment of an equitable and peaceful procedure for the
resolution of differences and the establishment of rates of pay, hours of work, and other conditions of
employment.
ARTICLE 1: RECOGNITION
SECTION 1: The Employer recognizes the Association as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for
the purpose of establishing salaries, wages, hours, and other conditions of employment for Town of
Danvers Fire Department, excluding the Chief and the Deputy Chief.
SECTION 2: The term “employee(s)” as used in this contract refers to all individuals within the units
set forth in Section 1 of this Article.
SECTION 3: The Employer will not aid, promote, or finance any labor group or organization which
purports to engage in collective bargaining, or make any agreement with any such group or individual
for the purpose of undermining the Association or changing any condition contained in this
Agreement.

ARTICLE 2: MANAGEMENT’S RIGHTS
Except as otherwise expressly and specifically provided in this agreement, the Association recognizes
and agrees that the supervision, management and control of the Town’s business, operations, working
force and facilities are exclusively vested in the management of the Town. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, the Association recognizes and agrees that the right to plan, direct and
control the Town’s business, operations and working forces; to hire, promote, transfer and lay-off
employees and lawfully and for just and proper cause, to demote, discipline, suspend or discharge
employees; and the right to determine the hours, schedules and assignments of work, the work tasks,
classification, and standards of performance for employees is vested exclusively in the management of
the Town.
The foregoing shall not be taken, however, as a limitation upon the rights of the Association to
represent the employees covered hereby in the procedures provided in this Agreement. Nothing in this
Agreement shall contravene any of the provisions of Chapter 31 of the General Laws.
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 3 of 43

ARTICLE 3: DISCRIMINATION AND COERCION
SECTION 1: There shall be no discrimination by the Employer against any employee because of
their activity or membership in the Association. The Employer further agrees that there will be no
discrimination against any member for their adherence to any provision of this Agreement.
SECTION 2: The Association, its officers, or members, shall not intimidate or coerce employees in
exercising their legal right from joining or refraining from joining an employee organization.

ARTICLE 4: GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION
SECTION 1: Any grievance which may arise between the parties, including the application, meaning
or interpretation of this Agreement and the imposition by the Employer of any form of discipline
including discharge, shall be settled in the following manner, except those grievances involving
disciplinary action shall be started at Step 3:
Step 1: The aggrieved employee, with their Association representative, shall take up the
grievance or dispute orally with the Deputy Fire Chief. Such supervisor will respond orally
within twenty-four (24) hours of the date of the grievance. The parties shall exert all efforts to
settle the grievance at this step.
Step 2: If the grievance cannot be settled, it shall be presented in writing to the Fire Chief
within ten (10) working days after the Deputy Fire Chief’s response. The Fire Chief shall
respond to the representative of the Association in writing within 3 days after having heard the
grievance. The Fire Chief’s response shall relate the Town’s position regarding the grievance
and the reasons for such position.
Step 3: If the grievance remains unsettled, the documents from Step 2 shall be turned over to
the Town Manager within ten (10) working days after the response of the Fire Chief is
received. The Town Manager or their designee shall hold a meeting within ten (10) days of the
receipt of the grievance papers at the third step. Three (3) Association representatives shall be
present at such meeting. The Town Manager shall provide the Association with the
Employer’s decision as to the grievance with the reasons for such decision within twenty-one
(21) days of the third step grievance meeting.
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 4 of 43

The time limits as set forth in this Article may be extended by written mutual agreement of the
Association and the Employer.
SECTION 2: It is mutually agreed that in the interpretation of the provisions herein relating to Step 1,
2 and 3:
a)

The word “respond” shall mean to make a meaningful reply rather than to make a
definitive decision.

b)

The time of absence of any of the parties from their normal duty shall be added to any
of the time limitations set forth.

SECTION 3: Any grievance which remains unsettled after having been fully processed pursuant to
the provisions of Steps 1, 2 and 3 which involves either:
a)

The interpretation or application of a provision of this Agreement; or,

b)

A disciplinary penalty (including discharge) imposed on or after the effective date of
this Agreement, which is alleged to have been imposed without just cause:

Shall be submitted to final and binding arbitration at the option of the Association within fifteen (15)
days after the reply of the Town Manager pursuant to the following procedure:
Step 4: The arbitration proceeding shall be conducted by a person qualified in labor relations
to be selected by the Employer and the Association within ten (10) days after notice has been
given. If the parties fail to select an arbitrator, the State Board of Conciliation and Arbitration
shall be requested by either or both parties to provide a panel of five (5) qualified persons.
Both the Employer and the Association shall have the right to strike two (2) names from the
panel. The party requesting arbitration shall strike the first name; the other party shall then
strike one name. The process will be repeated, and the remaining person shall be the arbitrator.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the parties mutually agree in writing after Step 3 of the
grievance procedure to submit the grievance to the American Arbitration Association, said
grievance shall be submitted to said Association in accordance with the voluntary labor
arbitration rules of said Association.

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 5 of 43

The award of an Arbitrator so selected upon any grievance subject to arbitration as herein provided
shall be final and binding upon all parties to this Agreement, provided that no arbitrator shall have any
authority or jurisdiction to add to, detract from, in any way alter the provisions of this Agreement.
The expense for the arbitrator’s services shall be borne equally by the Employer and the Association;
however, each party shall be responsible for compensating its own representatives and witnesses.

ARTICLE 5: HOURS OF WORK
SECTION 1 The regular work week for uniformed members of the bargaining unit shall be forty-two
(42) hours, worked in two (2) twenty-four (24) hour shifts commencing at 7:30 AM. For purposes of
leave time, a twenty-four (24) hour shift can be further divided into a ten (10) hour day tour
commencing at 7:30AM and a fourteen (14) hour night tour commencing at 5:30 PM.
Sample Shift Tour: 24 hours on / 24 hours off / 24 hours on / 120 hours off
SECTION 2: The regular work schedule of full-time uniformed specialists of the department covered
by the Agreement may be four consecutive ten (10) hour shifts or five (5) consecutive eight (8) hours
shifts: provided, however, that employees so assigned shall receive the same number of regular days
off annually as will employees working the standard work schedule.
SECTION 3: The “payroll period” shall begin at 7:30 AM each Sunday and continue for seven (7)
calendar days.
ARTICLE 6: OVERTIME
SECTION 1: Employees covered by this agreement shall be paid overtime at the rate of one and onehalf times their regular hourly rate of pay for work in excess of normal shift hours in one day and
normal shift hours in one week.
SECTION 2: Any employee held over beyond the conclusion of their regular tour for one half (½)
hour or more, any employee called back to work after leaving the work upon the conclusion of their
regular tour, and any employee called into work one (1) hour or more prior to the commencement of
their regular tour shall be paid at time and one-half their regular hourly rate of pay for all hours
worked on such hold-over, recall or call-in, and they shall be guaranteed a minimum of three (3) hours
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 6 of 43

pay at time and one-half (1/2) their regular hourly rate of pay on each such occasion of hold-over,
recall or call-in; provided, however, that such employee shall be guaranteed a minimum of four (4)
hours pay at time and one-half (1/2)their regular hourly rate of pay on each such occasion of holdover, recall or call-in occurring on a contractual holiday.
SECTION 3: All overtime pay shall be computed based on one forty-second (1/42nd) of the
applicable weekly salary.
SECTION 4: Overtime shall be equally and impartially distributed among personnel in each area
who ordinarily perform such related work in the normal course of their work week. The low person in
each group on the overtime roster shall be given the initial opportunity to work overtime with
succeeding offer to be given to employees who have worked the comparative least amount of overtime
as shown on the roster. It is understood that the foregoing is not intended to waive whatever rights the
Employer may have to require overtime work.
SECTION 5: In case of a grievance involving overtime, records in each division time book of the
overtime work shall be subject to examination by the Association representative with the Fire
Department Officer charged with maintaining such records.

ARTICLE 7: ASSOCIATION REPRESENTATIVES
SECTION 1: A written list of Association representatives shall be furnished to the Employer
immediately after their designation, and the Association shall notify the Employer of any change.
SECTION 2: The following Association representatives shall be granted reasonable time off during
working hours after arrangement with the immediate superior with pay and without benefit loss for the
following purposes:
a)

One (1) representative for the investigation of and attempted settlement of grievances at
Step 1 and 2 of the contractual grievance procedure;

b)

One (1) representative for the purpose of investigation of grievances at the Step 3 level;
An additional two (2) representatives for the purpose of investigation of grievances at
the Step 3 level where such investigation is confined to stations where said
representatives are assigned, and further provided that such representatives respond to

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 7 of 43

alarms as assigned, and three (3) representatives to participate in the presentation of
grievances at Step 3 of the contractual grievance procedure;
c)

In each case where an arbitrator has been selected or appointed three (3) representatives
of the Association will be allowed up to eight (8) hours each of preparation time with
pay provided that such representatives shall confer at the Central Fire Station and
respond to emergency calls as assigned. Three (3) representatives to participate in the
presentation of grievances in arbitration pursuant to the contractual grievance
procedure; and

d)

Three (3) representatives to participate in collective bargaining negotiations with the
Employer.

SECTION 3: The President of the Association or their designee shall be entitled to three (3) shifts off
with pay to attend official meetings or functions of the Professional Firefighters of Massachusetts or
the International Association of Firefighters, provided they gives two weeks advance written notice,
when possible, to the Chief of the Department. The Chief of the Department shall grant the President
or their designee’s the shift(s) off with pay, provided at the time the notice is provided the department
shall not be obligated to hire back an employee to fill. The President of the Association or their
designee shall be entitled to four (4) shifts off without pay to attend such meetings or functions,
provided they give to the Chief of the Department two (2) weeks advance written notice, whenever
possible.

ARTICLE 8: HOLIDAYS
SECTION 1: The following twelve (13) days shall be considered paid holidays:
New Year’s Day
Labor Day
Martin Luther King Jr. Day
Columbus Day
Presidents’ Day
Veterans Day
Patriots’ Day
Thanksgiving
Juneteenth
Christmas Eve effective July 1, 2026
Memorial Day
Christmas Day
Independence Day
SECTION 2: Holiday pay, whether actually worked or not, for all twelve (13) holidays shall be
computed on the basis of twelve (12) hours pay.

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 8 of 43

SECTION 3: If a paid holiday occurs within an employee’s vacation period, the employee may either
receive vacation pay for that holiday or take an additional day off. If the employee opts for the
additional day, they will not be compensated for the vacation pay for that holiday. Furthermore, the
employee must notify the Chief or Deputy Chief in writing of their intent to receive an additional day
off in lieu of vacation pay at least seven (7) days prior to the holiday.
SECTION 4: There shall be two (2) compensatory work shifts afforded each employee per year, to be
utilized in the same manner as Vacation Leave.
SECTION 5: In addition to any other compensation to which employees are entitled pursuant to the
provisions of this Agreement, for all hours of duty actually performed within the twenty-four (24) hour
period constituting the holidays of July 4th, Labor Day, Veterans’ Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas
Day, and employees shall receive an extra half-time, times their regular rate of compensation for each
such hour. This additional compensation period shall begin at 7:30 AM on each of the above stated
holidays and continue for the following twenty-four (24) hours.
SECTION 6: If a holiday occurs on a normally scheduled workday of the Fire Prevention Officers
(FPO) work schedule and all Town offices are closed, the FPO office shall also be closed and the FPO
shall receive their regular compensation in addition to the agreed upon holiday compensation in
section two (2) of this article.

ARTICLE 9: VACATIONS
SECTION 1: Employees appointed to the Danvers Fire Department on or before January 16, 2002,
shall be entitled each calendar year to vacations with pay pursuant to the following schedule:
Length of Continuous Service
Vacation Time Awarded
6 months to 1 year
One (1) tour
1-4 years
Two (2) tours
5-9 years
Three (3) tours
10-19 years
Four (4) tours
20 or more years
Five (5) tours
Employees appointed to the Danvers Fire Department on or after January 17, 2002, shall be entitled
each calendar year to vacations with pay pursuant to the following schedule:
Length of Continuous Service
6 months to 1 year
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Vacation Time Awarded
One (1) tour
Page 9 of 43

1-4 years
5-9 years
10 or more years

Two (2) tours
Three (3) tours
Four (4) tours

Newly hired employee shall be awarded prorated vacation leave accruals based on their start date in
accordance with the chart below:
Start Date
January – March
April – June
July – September
October – December

Vacation Time Awarded
4 shifts
3 shifts
2 shifts
1 shift

SECTION 2: For the purpose of this contract, the phrase “tour of duty” shall be equivalent to four (4)
shifts. A shift can be either a ten (10) hour period or a fourteen (14) hour period. A “tour of duty” is a
varying period of time from an employee’s first day of work until the end of their last night’s work
shift in accordance with the Fire Department work schedule.
SECTION 3: The length of vacation to which an employee is entitled shall be based upon the
employee’s length of accumulated service in the employ of the Employer as of December 31st of the
calendar year involved.
SECTION 4: An employee shall not lose their vacation time because of injury or sickness; however,
they shall take the same as soon as possible after the first of each year.
SECTION 5: Vacation & Personal Leave accrual while on injured-on-duty status:
1. A bargaining unit member on injured-on-duty leave status shall accrue paid sick leave and
paid vacation leave only during the first twelve (12) months of said leave status; if such
bargaining unit member remains on injured-on-duty status in excess of twelve (12) months,
vacation leave benefits (Article 9), personal leave (Article 11) and compensatory work
shifts (Article 8, §4) shall neither accrue nor be paid. Paid sick leave shall continue to
accrue beyond the first twelve (12) months.
2. In the calendar year that such bargaining unit member returns to active duty, said unit
member shall be eligible to earn a prorated portion of that calendar year’s paid vacation
leave, as follows:
a. Prior to April 1st: 100% of paid vacation leave for the year;
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 10 of 43

b. On or after April 1st, but prior to July 1st: 75% of paid vacation leave for the year;
c. On or after July 1st, but prior to September 30th: 50% of paid vacation leave for the
year;
d. On or after September 30th: 25% of paid vacation leave for the year.
SECTION 6: Vacations shall be selected by groups according to seniority by rank in accordance with
the following procedure:
1. On the first round of picks, two (2) consecutive tours vacation may be selected by each
employee. If an employee wishes not to select two consecutive tours, they may select one
(1) tour vacation, foregoing their second tour vacation until the second round of selections.
Their third tour vacation may be postponed until the third round of selections, and the
fourth tour vacation postponed until the fourth round of picks.
2. The vacation schedule for the next year shall be posted no later than December 15 of each
year and shall be completed by January 15 of the vacation year.
3. If an employee fails to pick their vacation by the January 15 deadline of the vacation year,
their picks for vacation will have to be put into available open slots in their group’s
vacation schedule according to seniority.
4. After January 15 of their vacation year, employees may change days or tours on the
completed vacation roster to available open slots on their group’s roster with the approval
of the Chief of the Fire Department.

ARTICLE 10: SICK LEAVE
SECTION 1: All unit employees shall accrue sick leave at the rate of one and one-quarter (1¼) days
for each full month of employment. In the year in which a unit employee dies or retires, the sick leave
shall be credited for a full year on January 1. Employees shall accumulate unused sick leave days
from year to year to a maximum accumulation of two hundred and fifty (250) days.
SECTION 2: After twenty (20) years of service, a unit employee who has exhausted their sick leave
benefits may continue to receive their regular pay for a period not to exceed sixty (60) calendar days
while hospitalized or confined to a nursing home or extended care facility. During such period, the
employee shall continue to remain eligible for service benefits, and their sick leave benefits accruing
during the sixty (60) days shall be used during such hospitalization or confinement.
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 11 of 43

SECTION 3: Upon employment termination, other than discharge for just cause, an employee shall
be compensated for accumulated, unused sick leave as of the termination date at the pay rate
applicable to such employee’s rank as of the termination date on the basis of one-fifth (1/5) of the
employee’s weekly compensation pursuant to the following formula: for every two (2) unused sick
leave days, an employee will receive one (1) day of unused sick leave compensation.
SECTION 4: An employee shall be charged one (1) day of sick leave for each full scheduled shift
which they miss due to sickness. Any approved Vacation Leave, Personal Leave, Funeral Leave and
Non-Scheduled work shifts or any combination thereof (including sick leave utilization less than a
payroll week) taken by any employee shall be charged on a day-for-day basis. Provided that should the
employee not work any scheduled shift in the payroll week, the employee shall be appropriately
charged four (4) days, but in no event shall the employee be charged in excess of four (4) days of
accrued time off.
SECTION 5: Should any member of the bargaining unit working under the 24-hour shift call out sick
at the start of a shift 7:30AM, they shall be out on sick leave for the full 24-hour period and shall be
charged two (2) days of sick leave; however, the use of sick leave may be split between the day and
night shift, rather than charging the individual two (2) full sick days. Under this change it is
permissible for a member of this unit to be out sick for the day or night shift. In addition, any member
that is out on sick leave for any portion of the twenty-four (24) hour shift shall not be eligible to work
overtime or details for ten (10) hours following the period of sick leave.
An employee shall be charged one (1) day of sick leave based on the following circumstances:
1. Missing a full day tour or a full night tour due to sickness
2. Missing more than five (5) hours of a scheduled day tour
3. Missing more than nine (9) hours of a scheduled night tour
An employee shall be charged two (2) days of sick leave for each full scheduled twenty-four (24) hour
shift missed due to sickness.
SECTION 6: Sick Leave Bank
Should the total number of days in the sick leave bank drop below one hundred (100), each unit
member shall donate one (1) sick day per calendar year and may also donate up to an additional two
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 12 of 43

(2) days per calendar year, until a balance of two-hundred-fifty (250) days is reached in the sick leave
bank. Donated days are solely for the purpose of maintaining an adequate sick leave bank and will not
influence individual unit member’s sick leave use or incentives.
Any member of the bargaining unit who has exhausted all of their leave (sick, vacation, personal,
earned time and compensatory time) and is unable to return to work due to illness or injury is eligible
to draw from the sick leave bank provided they are under a physician’s care and have obtained a note
from said physician indicating that the unit member is unfit for duty. After each thirty (30) day period
while drawing from said sick leave bank, the unit member must provide updated documentation from
said physician verifying that the unit member remains unfit for duty.
Any days drawn from the sick leave bank that are subsequently determined to be injury leave shall be
returned to the said sick leave bank.
After a member has been using the sick bank for six (6) months, the Town may choose to have the
employee evaluated by a Town doctor to see if they are fit for duty. If deemed fit for duty the
employee may be removed from the sick bank.
ARTICLE 11: LEAVE FOR PERSONAL NECESSITY
An employee shall be entitled to receive up to two, three-hour periods, and two Personal Days (one
personal day is either ten (10) or fourteen (14) hour period), with pay each calendar year. Such
personal leave period will not be charged to any other leave benefit. The employee shall notify or
cause the Fire Chief or their designee to be notified as soon as possible of their request for the personal
period.
Bargaining unit members may carry over unused personal leave from one year to the next only under
the following circumstances: if a bargaining unit member (1) is called into active military, or (2) is out
on injured-on-duty status for six (6) months or more during a calendar year, and in either case does not
return to work before December 1st of said calendar year, then that bargaining unit member may carry
over their personal leave to the following calendar year, but under no circumstances can more than two
(2) personal days and two three-hour periods be carried over from one year to the next. Any carried

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 13 of 43

over personal leave is subject to the existing contractual rules under Article 11, including that it must
be used by the end of that calendar year or forfeited.

ARTICLE 12: BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
SECTION 1: Employees covered under this Agreement shall be granted Bereavement Leave with
regular pay in the event of deaths as outlined in this Article.
SECTION 2: Each employee shall be entitled, in connection with a death in the immediate family,
four (4) paid bereavement shifts, plus one (1) additional paid day if unusual travel conditions exist.
Immediate family includes, spouse, children, parents, siblings, grandparents, grandchildren, parentsin-law, step-parents, step-children, or a person residing within the employee’s household at the time of
the death.
SECTION 3: Each employee shall be entitled, in connection with a death of other relatives, two (2)
paid bereavement shifts. Other relatives include siblings-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew or
spouse’s grandparents.
SECTION 4: Bereavement days are not to be charged against an employee’s accumulated sick,
vacation, or personal time.

ARTICLE 13: CLOTHING AND PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
SECTION 1: If any employee is required to wear a work uniform, protective clothing, or any type of
protective device as a condition of employment, such uniform, protective clothing, or protective
device shall be furnished to the employee by the Employer, and the Employer shall replace all worn
parts of such protective clothing and protective devices, including all rubber goods and helmets with
eye shields with new parts. Such replacement shall be within the discretion of the Chief, provided that
such replacement shall not be unreasonably withheld. In addition to the foregoing, the Employer will
provide, at no cost to unit employees, the initial supply of any changes in the current work uniform
items. After such initial supply, replacement of such new work uniform articles shall be purchased
pursuant to Section 4 of this Article.
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 14 of 43

In addition to the foregoing, the Employer shall supply to all employees and shall repair or replace as
needed the following articles of protective equipment: Nomex hood and night hitch set with boots.
SECTION 2: The Employer agrees to provide and replace all materials and equipment required to
perform the duties assigned to the employees covered by this Agreement.
SECTION 3: The Employer agrees to provide and replace or repair if damaged in the line of duty
work uniforms consisting of three (3) long-sleeve shirts, three (3) short-sleeve shirts, three (3) pairs of
pants and a light jacket for all employees. It is mutually agreed that these work uniforms provided by
the Employer shall be worn at all times, except when off duty, and shall be neat and clean.
SECTION 4: No later than the last pay period of January each year, each unit employee shall be
credited with a Five-Hundred Twenty-Five Dollar ($525) clothing allowance against which clothing
purchase requisitions shall be placed to provide replacement for the work uniforms.
SECTION 5: The Employer agrees to provide full dress uniforms for employees at the time of their
first employment and whatever additions to dress uniforms are necessary when employees are
assigned to higher ranks. The Fire Prevention Officer shall be provided with a new dress uniform
every five (5) years.

ARTICLE 14: HEALTH AND WELFARE
SECTION 1: Cost contribution for the medical plan coverage provided herein will continue to be on
the following basis:
Town share
Unit Employee share

70%
30%

SECTION 2: Unit participating employees will be entitled to participate in the so-called IRS “Section
125” Plan regarding pre-tax deduction for health insurance premium payments, as permitted by the
provisions of Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code.
SECTION 3: The Town warrants that the current Health Plans offered are in full compliance with the
mandatory sections of c. 32B of the general laws.
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 15 of 43

SECTION 4: It is agreed should any changes occur in the statutes affecting health and welfare
insurance policies, this Agreement will be immediately re-opened by either party for negotiation on
this subject; provided, however, that through FY 1997, any change in such subject matter must be by
agreement of Local 2038 and of the Town; and further provided that any change in such subject matter
to be effective after FY1997 will be subject to the respective legal rights of Local 2038 and of the
Town.
SECTION 5: Upon expiration of any contracts presently in effect and all future contracts between
insurance carriers and the Employer dealing with medical coverage, the Association will be fully
informed of any negotiations dealing with coverage that affects its members and may make inquiries
and advise the Employer of desires of the employees. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town and
Local 2038 agree that through FY1997, any change in such subject matter must be by agreement of
Local 2038 and of the Town, and that any change in such subject matter to be effective after FY1997
will be subject to the respective legal rights of Local 2038 and of the Town.

ARTICLE 15: COMPENSATION
SECTION 1: The annual weekly and hourly salaries, effective July 1, 2024, through June 30, 2027,
are set forth in Appendix A of this agreement, which is incorporated into and made part of this
agreement, and shall reflect the following across-the-board increases to the base pay at the rank of
firefighter:
Effective (first payroll of July):
June 30, 2024
June 29, 2025
June 28, 2026

3.0%
3.0%
3.0%

The salaries paid to the Lieutenants and the Captains are based on the following differentials:
Lieutenant
Captain

17% above Firefighter top step
17% above Lieutenant top step

The Chief may require that all Captains and Lieutenants attend bi-monthly (approximately two [2]
hours each) "Officers Meetings" at a date selected by the Chief. Reasonable notice (at least two [2]
weeks) will be given regarding the scheduling of these meetings, and they will generally begin at 5:00
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 16 of 43

PM. Good-faith attempts will be made to schedule these meetings throughout the year to ensure that
each group will have meetings while they are "On Duty".
Unless an officer is "On-Duty" at the time of the meeting, they will not be compensated for their
attendance. No Lieutenant or Captain will be required to attend more than four (4) of these meetings
on a day when they are not "On Duty". If an officer is unable to attend a meeting, they shall notify the
Chief or Deputy Chief in advance. In lieu of "Officers Meetings", the Chief may, at their discretion,
conduct meetings with the captains alone. The same rules governing the full "Officer's Meeting"
would apply.
It is expressly agreed that the above-referred increase of the rank differential from 16% to 17%,
effective July 1, 2004, was done in recognition of the fact that some of these meetings will be attended
at a time when an officer is off-duty and for any additional work that one may be assigned. The one
percent (1%) differential increase constitutes the sole consideration for the employee’s off-duty
attendance at these meetings, their participation in the meetings, and their on-duty performance of any
assignment handed out at one or more of these meetings.
SECTION 2:
a) Each employee who works a full night shift, on a straight time or overtime basis, shall
receive a night differential pay for each such shift; provided that where an employee is
prevented from fully working said shift because of illness or injury, they shall receive
the full night shift differential pay for such night shift. Payment of night shift
differential shall be made in the payroll week immediately following the tour in which
such night shift work is performed.
b) For purposes of this Section 2, the night-shift differential weekly entitlement of
employees eligible pursuant to this Section shall be nine percent (9%) of a minimum of
thirty-eight (38) hours at the firefighter maximum rate for employees in all ranks
whether worked or not, paid in each payroll week.
Night shift differential shall be included in the calculation of retirement contributions and benefits.

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 17 of 43

SECTION 3: Emergency Medical Services Coordinator (EMS). It is agreed to establish the stipend
position of EMS Coordinator, with the annual stipend set at $2,000, which is added to their base pay.
The proposed duties of the position are included below, and may be revised by mutual consent:
The Town of Danvers and the Danvers Firefighters Association enter jointly in agreement to create an
“Emergency Medical Services Coordinator” (EMSC) position for the Danvers Fire Department. This
position will be held by a member of the Danvers Firefighters Association chosen by the Chief of the
Department following an application and interview process. An annual stipend of $2,000 will be paid
to the EMSC. The stipend will be considered ordinary compensation included in said employee’s base
pay for the purpose of calculation of overtime, pension, fringe benefits, and all Leave compensation.
The duties of the EMSC shall include:
(a) Organize and provide and/or arrange all EMS related training for members of the Danvers
Fire Department. The EMSC shall outline, apply for and conduct OEMS approved
Continuing Education EMT classes, EMT refresher classes, CPR training classes and any
other relevant EMS classes for the department.
(b) Record and maintain EMS training records for all department members and at the request
of the Chief provide the needed documentation for payment of EMT stipends.
(c) Maintain supply levels of the medical service equipment and with the approval of the Chief
order supplies as needed.
(d) Maintain current Epi-Pen and defibrillator equipment.
(e) Maintain a current Basic Life Support Affiliation Agreement between the Danvers Fire
Department and Northeast Health System.
(f) Maintain, routinely sanitize, and evaluate the need for replacement of medical kits and
oxygen bags.
(g) Act as a liaison between the Town Ambulance provider and the Fire Department
Management concerning EMS.
(h) Act as the Department Infectious Control officer and implement and maintain infectious
control standards and policies.
(i) Attend Essex County Chiefs Association EMS meetings as the Danvers Fire Department
representative.

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 18 of 43

The majority of duties of the EMSC will be performed while on regular duty. Any time the EMSC is
required to attend a meeting, training class or teach a class while off duty, they will be compensated at
overtime rate as per current collective bargaining agreement. Any overtime for the EMSC must first be
approved by the Fire Chief or their designee.
SECTION 4: Fire Alarm Specialist: The person so assigned will receive a base increment of $7,500
per annum, paid in the weekly rate, and as such base increment will be included with base pay for the
purpose of computing hourly rate, overtime, all holiday pay, and any contractual benefits calculated
using the employee’s base rate of pay, as well for pension calculation purposes.
SECTION 5: Fire Prevention Officers: The Fire Prevention Officer is an administrative position that
may be held by any qualified member of the Department, excluding the Chief and Deputy Chief. The
Fire Prevention Officer receives a $10,000 annual stipend added to their base pay. They also receive a
$500 annual stipend as one of the Fire Investigators for the Department, as outlined in Article 16,
section 3. The Fire Prevention Officer works four (4) 10-hour days, Tuesday through Friday.
1. A member of the department appointed to the Fire Prevention Officer position will be
required to remain in that position for a minimum of three (3) years.
2. The Fire Prevention Officer may choose to return to a line position, if the following
conditions are met:
a. The Fire Prevention Officer must maintain their proficiency in fire suppression tactics
by attending at least twelve (12) documented training sessions per calendar year,
involving fire suppression procedures, tools, and equipment.
b. If the Fire Prevention Officer chooses to return to a line position, they must provide the
Chief of the Department written notice at least six (6) months in advance of a return. In
those six months, the FPO must attend at least twelve (12) training sessions in
preparation for return to a line position.
c. An open position must be available at the same rank as the Fire Prevention Officer. For
example: if the Fire Prevention Officer is a Lieutenant, there must be an open
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 19 of 43

Lieutenant’s position on one of the groups for the Fire Prevention Officer to return to a
line position.
d. If promoted while in the Fire Prevention position, the member must remain in Fire
Prevention for three (3) years from the date of promotion before returning to the line.
2. Provided the FPO maintain their proficiency in fire suppression by attending the training
outlined above, they will be eligible to work line overtime, so long as the overtime shifts do not
interfere with their normal work schedule.
ARTICLE 16: INDEMNIFICATION
SECTION 1: Incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement are the provisions of
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 41, sections 100, 100A, 100B and 100D.
SECTION 2: The Town will hold a firefighter harmless from any liability arising out of the acts of
the firefighter while acting as a firefighter, where simple or no negligence be associated with the
firefighter’s act.

ARTICLE 17: PAID DETAILS AND FIRE WATCH DUTY
SECTION 1: Employees’ detail rate for private/non-Town details shall be $55.06 effective July 1,
2017, $56.16 effective July 1, 2018, and $57.42 effective July 1, 2019. Each year thereafter this rate
shall be increased by the negotiated base wage increase, if any. Uniformed members shall be
compensated at the agreed upon rate of compensation, with a minimum guarantee of four (4) hours
pay, or eight (8) hours after exceeding four (4) hours on each occasion of working a private/non-Town
extra paid detail, or fire watch duty. Such members shall be compensated time and one half the agreed
upon rate of compensation on each occasion for each hour of working an extra paid detail or fire watch
duty in excess of eight (8) hours.
SECTION 2: Only off-duty uniformed members shall work such extra paid details or fire watch duty.
Opportunities for such work shall be equitably distributed among off-duty personnel. Rosters shall be
maintained for the purpose of insuring equality of distribution.

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 20 of 43

SECTION 3: The Fire Prevention Officer and one (1) line officer will be designated as the
Department’s Fire Investigation Unit (FIU). These two designated Investigators will each receive an
annual stipend of five hundred ($500.00) dollars, in addition to any other stipends he may receive,
while designated as an Investigator. These stipends shall be considered as part of the employee’s
regular or base pay and shall be included in the calculation and retirement contributions and benefits.
Additionally, the Investigators may attend up to two (2) days of approved training at the Town’s
expense, provided any additional training is pre-approved by the Fire Chief without loss of benefit
provided by the contract. There will be no “redlining” while the Investigator(s) attend related training
or are testifying in a related litigation proceeding. The members of the FIU Team will respond to
investigate fires of unknown origin as determined by the Chief or their designee. They will respond as
a Team, provided they are both available. Each member will have an equal opportunity to respond to
fire investigation scenes.
SECTION 4: A Paid Detail Fund, pursuant to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 44 Section 53c, is
established in the amount of $15,000, which sum is intended, to the extent feasible, to pay employees
for paid details worked within the two (2) or three (3) weeks after they have been worked.

ARTICLE 18: SAFETY
The Employer shall provide and maintain safe equipment for the use of bargaining unit employees.

ARTICLE 19: FUNERAL AND BURIAL EXPENSES
The Employer shall provide payment of funeral and burial expenses of firefighters pursuant to the
terms and conditions set forth in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 41, Section 100G.

ARTICLE 20: PROMOTIONS
All permanent promotions within the Department through the rank of Chief shall be made as a result
of competitive examination given and granted by the Division of Civil Service.

ARTICLE 21: EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE
SECTION 1: After one (1) year of service in the department, unit employees of the Danvers Fire
Department shall receive educational incentive payments as are set forth herein to further their
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 21 of 43

education in courses in a Fire Science program at an approved college level educational institution as
follows:
a) The Employer will reimburse the employee for one half (1/2) of their necessary books actually
purchased in the course. The Employer shall reimburse the employee for full cost of the
necessary books purchased for the courses for which credits are earned provided the books are
returned, in good condition and not underlined, to the Town of Danvers Fire Department
Library. When the required text is in the library it will be loaned to the employee instead of
purchase of a new book. Payments owed employees pursuant to this sub-section shall be made
by the Employer at the same time as all other Fire Department bills are normally paid monthly,
after the employee’s submission to the Employer of a receipted bill. Tuition reimbursement
shall be 100% for an “A” or “B”, 50% for “C”, 0% for “D” or lower. Any course(s) for which
reimbursement will be requested, requires prior notification (by November 1 for the upcoming
fiscal year) to the Chief or their designee.
b) Ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid annually up to a maximum of four hundred and fifty
($450.00) dollars to the employee for each credit earned at the institution(s) attended, but
payment, is subject to payment provisions below, shall not be earned or made until fifteen
college credits have been earned by the employee.
c) Upon an employee’s obtaining an Associate’s Degree in Fire Science, Public Administration,
Architecture, Structural Engineering and other related degree programs approved in writing by
the Town Manager, they shall annually receive 4% of the Firefighter-at-top-step base rate as of
FY26 (July 1, 2025).
d) Upon the employee’s obtaining a Bachelor’s Degree in Fire Science, Public Administration,
Architecture, Structural Engineering and other related degree programs approved in writing by
the Town Manager, they shall annually receive 6% of the Firefighter-at-top-step base rate as of
FY26 (July 1, 2025).
e) Upon the employee’s obtaining a Master’s Degree in Fire Science, Public Administration,
Architecture, Structural Engineering and other related degree programs approved in writing by

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 22 of 43

the Town Manager, they shall annually receive 8.25% of the Firefighter-at-top-step base rate as
of FY26 (July 1, 2025).
f) The payments specified in the above sub-sections (B), (C), (D) and (E) above are subject to the
following provisions:
(1)

Proof by certification that the credits in excess of the first fifteen and degree(s)
have been so earned;

(2)

Qualifying employees shall notify on or before November 1, in writing, the
Chief of the Fire Department of all credits earned or to be earned during such
year in the Fall and/or Spring school sessions and the Town shall pay in
accordance with the terms of this Article upon proof by certification no later
than September of the following fiscal year;

(3)

That payments made in Subsection (B) shall continue for seven years and shall
not be paid thereafter; the payments earned in sub-sections (C), (D) and (E)
shall be paid to the employee for the duration of their employment;

(4)

Credits earned in such a fire science program prior to the present employee’s
service as a unit member with the Employer shall be compensated subject to all
the terms of this Article, provided the credits earned were earned within the past
four years; however, eligibility for payment shall also expire each June 30th for
any course completed more than five (5) years prior to that date.

SECTION 2: Employees who have received educational incentive payments for an approved
Associates Degree, Bachelor’s Degree, and/or Master’s Degree, may be assigned, while on duty,
assignments related to the degree skills and education acquired. Compensation under this section
(Sections 1, 1B, 1C, 1D and 1E) shall be paid to eligible employee(s) in a lump sum payment on the
last regularly scheduled payday in December of each year. A written notice of eligible employees
shall be posted thirty (30) days prior to the payment date.
SECTION 3: Employees who, at any time, have completed the Emergency Medical Technician
Training course work and who have also received certification from the Massachusetts Department for
Certification of Emergency Medical Training, or the National Registry, shall receive five percent (5%)
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 23 of 43

of the base rate paid to Firefighter-at-top-step. Effective, July 1, 2022, the rate shall increase to six
percent (6%) of the base rate paid to Firefighter-at-top-step. The EMT stipend amount attributable to
that year, while not becoming part of one’s base pay, for purposes of calculating successor year’s
negotiated wage increases, nor overtime and fringe benefits, will nonetheless be included in the
calculation of pension contributions only.
Employees shall have an equal opportunity to pursue Emergency Medical Training Course work and
certification. Compensation under this section (Section 3) shall be paid to eligible employee(s) in a
lump sum payment on the last regularly scheduled payday in July of each year. A written notice of
eligible employees shall be posted thirty (30) days prior to the payment date.

ARTICLE 22: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION 1: Bulletin Board: Announcements shall be posted in conspicuous places where
employees enter or leave the premises. Parties to this Agreement may use the bulletin boards for
notices of routine nature.
SECTION 2: Should any provisions of this Agreement be found to be in violation of any Federal or
State Law by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions of this Agreement shall remain in
full force and effect for the duration of this Agreement and any benefit, as set forth in the Rules and
Regulation of the Danvers Fire Department but not specifically covered by this Agreement, shall
remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 3: The Association agrees not to engage in, induce or encourage any strike, work
stoppage, slowdown or withholding of services by employees in the bargaining units.
SECTION 4: The Employer shall maintain a reporting system that will enable the department head’s
office to respond fully and completely with up-to-date information as to the sick leave and other leave
balances of an employee upon the request of any employee. The Employer’s accounting office also
shall fully and completely respond to any reasonable request for more detailed information concerning
such employee records.

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 24 of 43

SECTION 5: Should the Fire Chief or their authorized designee assign a replacement who is working
out of grade, such replacement, if they are assigned to replace an employee of higher rank, shall
receive the bottom step rate of pay for the rank in which they worked, but in no case, shall an
employee receive less than their standard rate of pay.
SECTION 6: The Employer acknowledges responsibility for exercising authority to prohibit
unauthorized persons from riding on, or operating fire apparatus, using firefighting tools and
equipment or entering on to premises during firefighting or over-hauling operations. Authorized
persons would normally include, but would not be limited to departmental employees, police officers,
call firefighters, certain Town of Danvers officials, utility workers involved with water and power
services, ambulance and medical aid personnel and property owners or their agents.
SECTION 7: The life insurance benefit for each employee shall be $5,000.00.
SECTION 8: Jury Duty – Should an employee be required, while on duty, to sit as a juror, the Town
agrees to make up the difference in the employee’s wages between the normal week’s pay and the
compensation received for actual time sitting as a juror or required to be away from their duty station
due to juror obligations. The employee must report back to work, if scheduled to be on duty, when not
so obligated for the remainder of any shift. Such compensation shall not be charged to personal day,
vacation, or any other leave benefit of the employee.
SECTION 9: If management determines, through the means used in the past practice, that there is not
sufficient manpower for a shift, it may holdover employees from the prior shift on a rotating basis
using inverse order of seniority.
SECTION 10: An employee who is required by the Town or is otherwise required to attend the
Massachusetts Firefighting Academy in Stow, Massachusetts, shall receive compensation for such as
follows:
(a) The employee who attends the Academy shall usually be trained at the Academy, Monday
through Friday, and shall generally work a ten (10) hour day including travel time to and
from the Academy.

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 25 of 43

(b) Compensation will be based on the employee’s forty-two (42) hour work week. They shall
be paid forty-two (42) hours at straight time and eight (8) hours at time and one-half.
(c) If the employee is required to use to sick, funeral, or personal day while attending the
recruit training course, they shall be charged with the appropriate leave for that day and the
Town shall deduct two (2) hours overtime for that day that the employee was not attending
the Academy. If during the period of Academy attendance, a holiday is celebrated on a
workday and there is no class(es), but the class(es) is made up on another day, including a
weekend day, the employee will receive their regular holiday pay for the holiday and will
be granted compensatory time off at one and one-half (1 ½) times the hours worked. Such
time is to be taken at a future day within the calendar year and shall not be taken when a
hire-back or hold-over shall be required because of the employee’s absence.
(d) The employee who drives their personal car to the Academy shall be reimbursed for use of
their motor vehicle at the established Town mileage rate, provided they are not receiving
compensation from others when they may be driving to the Academy.
SECTION 11: The Town will pay an annual stipend of $300 to each member of the bargaining unit, up
to a maximum of eight (8) persons, who volunteers to serve, and does so serve, for an entire fiscal year
as a Child Safety Seat Specialist. This stipend will be paid in a lump sum in the first pay period of
June of the fiscal year in which it was earned. In the event that more than eight (8) people volunteer
for these positions, it is agreed that the Chief reserves the right to choose those eight (8) persons whom
they believe, in their sole discretion, are best suited for these positions. An employee who is among
the designated persons receiving the car seat stipend, shall upon their biannual renewal of the licensure
required to install car seats be reimbursed for that expense upon presentation of documentation of
payment.
SECTION 12: Effective July 1, 2017, the Town will add four (4) additional Lieutenant
positions. The promotions to Lieutenant will come from within the current Firefighter staffing
levels. Those Firefighter positions will not be backfilled, and the promotions will not change the total
number of employees in the Fire Department.

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 26 of 43

SECTION 13: Training/Compensatory Time: An Employee who attends an approved training class
pertaining to their duties as an employee of the Town of Danvers (not including higher education
classes), shall be eligible to earn up to six (6) shifts of compensatory time per year, however:
a. All trainings require pre-approval by the Chief of the department or their designee;
b. If the advertised training program is five (5) hours or less, the employee earns ½ shift; if
training program is more than five (5) hours, the employee earns full shift;
c. One “full shift” is either ten (10) or fourteen (14) hours;
d. Use of training comp time must be in full shift increments (either ten (10) or fourteen (14)
hours) and may not cause overtime, in the same manner as vacation and compensatory time per
Article 8, Section 4, and Article 9 of this CBA;
e. Training comp time must be used by December 31 of any given year or is lost. However,
training comp time earned on or after December 1 of any given year may be carried into the
next year.
f. In the event that a ½ shift of earned training comp time remains at the end of the calendar year,
it may be carried into the next year.
g. Town sponsored trainings may also be eligible for earned training comp time, if pre-approved
by the Chief of the department or their designee.
h. Town approved mental health trainings may also be eligible for earned training comp time
under this section.
SECTION 14: The Town and the Union agree to form a committee to discuss a light duty policy for
the department. This committee shall consist of representative from the union (3 representatives) and
management (3 representatives). The committee shall meet no later than June 30, 2022.
SECTION 15: The residency requirement for Danvers firefighters is governed by M.G.L Ch. 41
s.99A, meaning that firefighters must live in Massachusetts within 15 miles of the Town of Danvers as
the crow flies.
ARTICLE 23: PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
In the event the Chief of the Fire Department has evidence than an employee in the Fire Department is
unable to continue to perform their regularly assigned duties, for physical or mental reasons, they may
require the individual employee to undergo a physical examination. The employee shall select the
physician and undergo the examination within a reasonable period of time. A report from the
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 27 of 43

physician to the Fire Chief shall indicate whether or not, in their medical opinion, the employee is
capable of performing their duties. The entire cost shall be paid by the Employer. If the employee is
placed on Administrative Leave, the employee has fourteen (14) days to be evaluated by a doctor of
their own choosing. If the employee does not do so within fourteen (14) days, the Town may choose
to send the employee to a Town designated physician for an evaluation.

ARTICLE 24: LONGEVITY
SECTION 1: Longevity: The Town will provide for the annual payment of longevity increases to
employees pursuant to the following schedule:
Length of Continuous Services
10 to 14 years
15 to 19 years
20 to 24 years
25 to 29 years
30 years or more

Percentage Paid
0.63% of Firefighter top step
0.86% of Firefighter top step
1.1% of Firefighter top step
2.0% of Firefighter top step
2.6% of Firefighter top step

The foregoing percentage longevity benefits for all bargaining unit employees shall be applied to the
Firefighter rank maximum annual salary and shall be included in the calculation of retirement
contributions and benefits. Employees shall be paid their annual longevity increments in the second
week of December of each year. A notice of eligible employees shall be posted thirty (30) days prior
to the payment date.

ARTICLE 25: SAVINGS CLAUSE
Provided that they are mandatory subjects of collective bargaining, all benefits, conditions, and
practices enjoyed by employees and not specifically covered by this Agreement shall be maintained
for the duration of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 26: RESIGNATION
Employee(e) shall provide four (4) weeks written notice of their intent to resign. The employee shall
be entitled to use one (1) of the four (4) weeks to take approved benefits for which they are entitled.
The Town may in its discretion reduce or waive the notice requirement of four (4) weeks written
notice.

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 28 of 43

ARTICLE 27: EARNED TIME
Effective upon the mutual ratification of this agreement, an “earned time” protocol shall be
implemented under the following conditions: For purposes of accessing “earned time” the Town will
be operating under the twenty-eight (28) day, two hundred twelve (212) hour work cycle. The first
work cycle shall start on the first Sunday following mutual ratification of this contract. An employee
may designate that the first additional full shift (ten-hour day, fourteen-hour night, or in the case of a
“support function” the length of the first shift in the support function) they work (beyond their regular
Group work schedule) in the twenty-eight (28) day work cycle as “earned time.” The administration
should be notified of the employee’s choice by 8:00 A.M. on the Sunday immediately following the
shift on which the first additional shift was worked. Should an employee choose “earned time” it will
only accrue at “straight time” (regular pay without any differentials such as night/weekend, etc.)
Employees may only choose to accrue “earned time” for full (10-hour day or 14-hour night) additional
shifts worked. In addition, Employees working in a support function may accrue less than ten (10)
hour days or fourteen (14) hour nights. “Earned time” may only be taken in blocks of four (4) hours or
more.
An employee may opt, by written notice to the administration by December 1st, to carry forward a total
of up to forty (40) hours of earned time from one calendar year into the next. Any remaining unused
“earned time” (beyond that being carried forward) which remains at the end of a calendar year will be
paid out as overtime, at one and one-half (1 ½) times the employee’s rate of pay. Said payment will be
made not later than the last pay period of January. The provisions of this Article are not intended to
interpret or apply to any other terms or provisions of this collective bargaining agreement.

ARTICLE 28: DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY
INTRODUCTION
To ensure a safe, healthy, and productive work environment, to protect the health and welfare of the
citizens of Danvers, the parties to this collective bargaining Agreement have adopted this policy to
address any drug and/or alcohol abuse by members of the bargaining unit. These procedures provide
the Department with reasonable measures to ensure drug and/or alcohol use does not jeopardize the
public or the Department’s ability to serve its citizens. It is the general intent of this policy to create a
humanitarian program. Treatment and discipline are both important aspects of the plan. Drug and
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 29 of 43

alcohol testing, which will be part of this program, is intended in part as a means of identifying those
who need help.
The method of implementing this program shall be: RANDOM testing of employees and where facts
are sufficient to constitute REASONABLE SUSPICION of controlled substances or alcohol abuse as
further described under the REASONABLE SUSPICION portion of this policy.
PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR
Drugs: An employee covered by this policy shall not report for duty or remain on duty when they use
any drugs, except when the use is pursuant to the instructions of a physician who has advised the
employee that the substance does not adversely affect the employee’s ability to safely perform their
duties as a firefighter. The prohibited drugs are the following substances or derivatives thereof (herein
“Drugs”):
Amphetamines
Cocaine
Marijuana
Opiates
Phencyclidine
Alcohol: This policy also prohibits the misuse of alcohol from any source during the required hours of
compliance defined herein. Misuse is defined as having an alcohol concentration of 0.04 or greater
(herein “positive for Alcohol”). Alcohol concentration (or breath alcohol concentration) means the
amount of alcohol in a volume of breath expressed in terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of
breath. This measurement is intended to be equivalent to the percent of “blood alcohol concentration”
commonly used in “driving while intoxicated” situations. Herein, alcohol concentration (or BAC or
Breath Alcohol Concentration) is defined as grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath. Herein, BAC
will be used to define “alcohol concentration”.
Alcohol means the intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol or other low molecular weight
alcohols, including methyl and isopropyl alcohol.
REQUIRED HOURS OF COMPLIANCE
The required hours of compliance for prohibited behavior (as defined above) relating to drug and/or
alcohol use are as listed below:
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 30 of 43

Drugs: A firefighter is prohibited from the use of the defined drugs at any time on or off duty.
Alcohol: A firefighter must not consume alcohol within four (4) hours prior to being
scheduled to perform firefighter-related duties.
CIRCUMSTANCES FOR DRUG AND/OR ALCOHOL TESTING
Firefighters will be required to submit to approved drug and alcohol tests in the circumstances listed
below:
Random: Members of the bargaining unit are subject at any time to random drug and/or
alcohol testing while on duty. When notified, firefighters will proceed immediately to the
collection site. Random selection shall be by a system to be agreed to by the local in which
selection is made by a neutral or blind criterion in which the identity of the firefighters is not
known as part of the selection process. No member of the bargaining unit will be randomly
selected more than two (2) times in a period of twelve (12) months. Further:
•

Members of the bargaining unit will be part of the larger DOT pool of persons drawn
for testing.

•

A maximum of 35% of the members of the bargaining unit would be tested in any
given year.

•

Each test, whether alcohol or drug, counts as one (1) test. If both tests are given at
once, it counts as two (2) tests.

Reasonable Suspicion: If the Department has reasonable suspicion to believe that a member of
the local is impaired while on duty by drug use and/or alcohol misuse, the Fire Chief (or in
their absence the Acting Fire Chief) may require the firefighter to submit to immediate drug
and/or alcohol testing based upon the “Reasonable Suspicion” definition listed below. The
Department must put the entire basis for this reasonable suspicion, including the identity of
each person relied upon, in writing and give a copy to the local and the firefighter prior to the
test.
Reasonable Suspicion Definition: Reasonable Suspicion is a belief, based on objective facts
sufficient to lead a reasonably prudent person to suspect that an employee is using or is under
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 31 of 43

the influence of drugs or alcohol, so that the employee’s ability to perform their duties is
impaired. Reasonable Suspicion shall be based on information of objective facts obtained by
the Department and the rational inferences which may be drawn by those facts. The credibility
of the sources of information, the reliability of the facts or information, the degree of
corroboration, the results of the investigation or inquiry and/or other factors shall be weighed
in determining the presence or absence of Reasonable Suspicion. Such determination shall be
made by the Fire Chief (or in their absence, the Acting Fire Chief) in each instance.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the determination of Reasonable Suspicion shall comport with
Constitutional guarantees and limits.
In circumstances where the facts are sufficient to constitute a Reasonable Suspicion that an employee
is a user of certain non-prescription controlled substances, or misusing alcohol, the Fire Chief shall
have the right to require that employees submit without delay to a urinalysis test or evidential breath
test.
Review Committee: A Review Committee shall be established to be composed of a member
selected by the Fire Chief, one (1) by the local and a third member selected by the first two.
The reviews of the Chief’s directive must be completed within twenty-four (24) hours. The
review shall be an informal process with the purpose of determining whether the Fire Chief had
reasonable suspicion to order the drug and/or alcohol test. The firefighter, however, must
submit the test sample prior to the Review Committee’s determination. The firefighter shall
have the right to submit any relevant information to the Review Committee, including the
results of any independent blood or alcohol test, the observations of any individual as to the
items listed as giving reasonable suspicion and any other information relevant to reasonable
suspicion.
Post-Accident: After involvement in an automobile accident while on duty, a firefighter will
be subject to post-accident drug and alcohol testing if any one of the following conditions is
met:
•

The vehicle operated by the employee was in motion and there is $5,000 or more
damage to any vehicle involved in the accident and the employee was found at fault by
the OIC or investigating officer.

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 32 of 43

•

Any person injured in the accident is transported from the scene by ambulance or is
seeking medical attention and the employee was found at fault by the OIC or
investigating officer.

Return to Duty: A return-to-duty drug and/or alcohol test is required after assessment by a
Substance Abuse Professional (SAP) and completion of treatment, if any is required, when an
employee tests positive in a drug and alcohol testing program, before that firefighter is allowed
to perform their regular duties. To pass, an alcohol test must have a result of less than 0.02
alcohol concentration, and a drug test must be a verified negative test result. Without a
successful test result, that individual is not medically qualified to continue to perform workrelated functions.
Follow-Up: Upon resumption of firefighter-related duties following a positive drug and/or
alcohol test, an individual will be selected for additional, unannounced, tests for a follow-up
period recommended by the SAP, but not to exceed three (3) years, with no more than three (3)
tests per year. Tests may be for both drugs and alcohol, independent of the type of test with a
positive result.
TESTING PROCESS INTEGRITY
Drugs: The actual drug test analysis will be conducted only at laboratories that are certified by the
Department of Health and Human Services. Vendors utilized in connection with drug testing will
comply with all Department of Transportation regulations intended to ensure the accuracy and
confidentiality of test results and the fair and respectful treatment of persons being tested. There are
various testing result thresholds of the presence of drugs before they will be reported as a presumed
positive to the Medical Review Officer (MRO).
Initial Test Cutoff Levels (ng/ml)
Amphetamines: Amphetamine
Cocaine metabolic (Benzoylecgonine)
Codeine
Marijuana metabolic (Carboxy-THC)
Methamphetamine
Opiates: Morphine
Phencyclidine
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

1,000
300
300
100
1,000
300
25
Page 33 of 43

Confirmation Test Cutoff Levels ng/ml)
Amphetamines: Amphetamine
Cocaine metabolic (Benzoylecgonine)
Codeine
Marijuana metabolic (Carboxy-THC)
Methamphetamine
Opiates: Morphine
Phencyclidine

500
150
300
15
500
300
25

The initial test shall use immunoassay screen (i.e., “EMIT”) which meets the requirements of the
Food and Drug Administration for commercial distribution. A urine sample which is defined as
positive on an initial test will be confirmed using gas chromatography/mass spectrometry
techniques before results are sent by the laboratory to the MRO. The testing service will send
known specimens to the laboratories used in a “blind specimen” program to periodically test the
integrity of the laboratory. Results of these tests will be provided to the employee upon request.
These blind specimens are both known positives and known negatives. Individuals tested will be
in direct visual contact with their specimen until the collective process is complete. There will
be tamper-proof seals on the collection containers, coded by the donor, and the specimens will be
sealed in tamper-proof containers with chain of custody paperwork. There will be a rigorous
“chain of custody” process that directly follows a specimen from initial collection through final
testing. If there are irregularities in this process, the test is declared a “broken chain of custody”,
and it is cancelled. All individuals who are tested will be identified via picture identification or
by authorized Department personnel to ensure that the individuals tested are the correct
individuals. Employee numbers will be used to track the identification process.
Alcohol: Tests will be performed by a qualified private company. An initial alcohol screening
test will measure the BAC of the employee at the time of the test. A second test on the evidential
testing device will be required to reconfirm the initial result before it is a final test result. Before
the confirmation test is completed, a fifteen (15) to twenty (20) minute wait period will be
required to reduce the impact of mouth alcohol. The confirming testing process will only be
performed on evidential breath testing equipment utilizing air blanks to assure that ambient
conditions are not negatively affecting the testing process. In addition, the alcohol breath testing

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 34 of 43

equipment will be periodically checked and calibrated with samples containing known alcohol
concentrations.
COLLECTION PROCEDURES
Upon notification, the employee will be accompanied by a procedures officer assigned to
supervise and be responsible for proper conduct and uniform procedures of urine sampling and
alcohol confirmation testing. The employee will be assigned a test code identification for the
purposes of maintaining anonymity and to ensure privacy throughout the sampling and testing
process. Certain situations may require that a specimen be discarded, and a new collection may
be initiated. During the collection process, individuals may only consume fluids in permitted
quantities.
REFUSAL TO SUBMIT
“Refusal to Submit” is prohibited. Behavior that constitutes “Refusal to Submit” includes:
•

Direct refusal to take a drug or alcohol test.

•

Failure to provide sufficient quantities of urine within the policy’s time limit, or the
failure to provide sufficient quantities of breath or other fluids without a valid medical
explanation.

•

Tampering with or attempting to adulterate the specimen

•

Engaging in conduct that obstructs the testing process.

•

Not reporting directly to the collection site after notification.

A “Refusal to Submit” shall be considered equivalent to a positive test result for that test.
OPPORTUNITIES FOR RE-TESTS
Drugs: If an employee has a positive drug test result after the Medical Review Officer (MRO)
review, the employee will have the option to have the split specimen re-tested at any DHHS
certified laboratory of their choice. The option cannot be selected after seventy-two (72) hours
from the time of notification by the MRO unless there is significant reason acceptable to the
MRO why the individual was delayed, such as an injury. If this option is selected, the employee
must verbally notify the Town’s laboratory or the MRO for the request of the re-test and send a
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 35 of 43

written notification to the laboratory with a statement that the employee will accept any other
DHHS certified laboratory, or specified DHHS certified laboratory, name, location, address, and
telephone number if selected. The employee must provide a copy of this request to the Town’s
drug and alcohol program manager, the Assistant Town Manager. The Town will be responsible
for payment of the split sample test should such test be negative. A positive result will be paid
by the employee.
Alcohol: There will be no option available for an alcohol split specimen collection, and
therefore, there will be no opportunity for an alcohol re-test.
TESTING PROCEDURES
Drugs: This program will utilize the MRO, a licensed physician who has appropriate knowledge
and medical training to interpret and evaluate an individual’s initial confirmed positive test
result, together with his or her medical history and any other relevant biomedical information.
The MRO’s responsibility will include providing a review of the laboratory’s “chain of custody”
documentation to ensure that it has properly tracked the handling and storage of the urine
specimen. Before determining that an initial positive test result is a “FINAL” positive, a
canceled test, or a negative test result, the MRO shall review all medical records made available
by the tested employee when a confirmed positive test could have resulted from legally
prescribed medication and will give an individual an opportunity to discuss the test results. No
test result caused solely by a prescribed or “over the counter” medication shall be deemed
positive.
The MRO shall conduct the interview (either in person or via telephone) with the employee and
shall determine if a prescribed medication is applicable. The MRO shall verify the prescription
with the treating physician, if indicated, before the Town is notified of a positive test result.
It is the employee’s responsibility to contact the MRO within 24 hours upon receiving a message
from the MRO to return a telephone call. Failure of the firefighter to contact the MRO within
this time frame will result in a FINAL determination of the result of the presumed positive drug
test without input from the firefighter. If the employee is incapacitated for any reason and is

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 36 of 43

unable to contact the MRO within the required time frame, the MRO may extend the twenty-four
(24) hour time frame described above.
Alcohol: Alcohol testing will be performed utilizing approved testing equipment and techniques.
Breath Alcohol Technicians (BATs) are those individuals who have completed mandatory
training on required collection and testing procedures and on the proper operation of equipment
and approved alcohol testing procedures. Alcohol testing will be performed by a qualified
private company.
There will be two types of breath tests administered:
(1) Initial Screening Test: This test will be administered using an authorized alcohol
testing device by approved collection personnel. Any result less than 0.04 BAC will
be considered a negative test and no further screening will be conducted and no entry
made into the personnel records. If the initial screening test is 0.04 BAC or greater,
an alcohol confirmation test will be conducted.
(2) Confirmation Test: If the initial screening test is 0.04 or greater, a confirmation test
will be performed by a BAT on an Evidential Breath Testing (EBT) device following
a specified procedure after a specified waiting period. The EBT will have the
capability of printing out the evidential test result.
CONSEQUENCES FOR USE OF DRUGS AND MISUSE OF ALCOHOL
Drugs: In the event of a first positive drug test result (or a refusal to submit as defined in this
Policy), the employee will have the following consequences:
1. Be placed on vacation, sick or personal leave to the extent such leave is available, and
management may impose a five (5) day suspension.
2. Be referred to a Substance Abuse Professional (SAP). The Town will be responsible for
the cost of the SAP services to determine if the firefighter needs help in dealing with a
drug test result, follow-up test monitoring and additional required services after
completion of a treatment program, if any. If any treatment is prescribed, any cost not
covered by insurance, if any, will be at the expense of the Town.

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 37 of 43

3. Be required to complete prescribed treatment defined by the SAP, if any. If the
firefighter fails to complete the required treatment, the Town reserves the right to impose
disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal, subject, however, to provisions of
M.G.L. c31, Sections 41-45 and of this Agreement.
4. Be required to pass a return-to-duty test before duties are resumed. The Town will pay
for the return-to-duty test.
5. Be placed on a follow-up testing program until completed. The cost of all follow-up tests
will be at the expense of the Town. This follow-up testing program shall not exceed
three (3) years, with no more than three (3) tests per year.
In the event of a second positive drug test result within five (5) years of a previous positive
result, the employee will be medically unqualified to perform their job responsibilities. The
Town reserves the right to impose disciplinary action up to and including dismissal, subject,
however, to the provisions of M.G.L. c31, Sections 41-45, and of this Agreement.
Alcohol: in the event of a first positive alcohol test result (BAC of 0.04 or greater or a refusal to
submit as defined in this Policy), the firefighter will have the following consequences:
1. Employee is issued a written warning for first offense and placed on vacation, sick or
personal leave to the extent such leave is available.

Employee will be referred to a

Substance Abuse Professional (SAP). The Town will be responsible for the cost of the
SAP services to determine if the firefighter needs help in dealing with an alcohol test
result, follow-up test monitoring and additional required services after completion of a
treatment program, if any. If any treatment is prescribed, any cost not covered by
insurance, if any, will be at the expense of the Town.
2. Be referred to an SAP. The Town will be responsible for the expense of the SAP services
to determine if the firefighter needs help in dealing with a drug or alcohol test result,
follow-up test monitoring and additional required services after completion of a treatment
program if any. If any treatment is prescribed, any cost not covered by insurance, if any,
will be at the expense of the Town.
3. Be required to complete prescribed treatment defined by the SAP, if any. If the
individual fails to complete the required treatment, the Town reserves the right to impose
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 38 of 43

disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal, subject, however, to the provisions of
M.G.L. c31, Sections 41-45, and of this Agreement.
4. Be required to pass a return-to-duty test (or tests, if both a drug and alcohol test is
required by the SAP) before duties are resumed. The Town will pay for the return-toduty test.
5. Be placed in a follow-up testing program until completed. The cost of the follow-up
test(s) will be at the expense of the Town. The follow-up testing program shall not
exceed three (3) years, with no more than three (3) tests per year.
In the event of a second positive alcohol test result within five (5) years (BAC of 0.04 or greater
or a refusal to submit as defined in this Policy), the employee will have the following
consequences:
1. Be placed on vacation, sick or personal leave, to the extent such leave is available, and
management may impose a five (5) day suspension.
2. Be referred to an SAP. The Town will be responsible for the expense of the SAP services
to determine if the employee needs help in dealing with an alcohol test result, follow-up
test monitoring and additional required services after completion of a treatment program,
if any. If any treatment is prescribed, any cost not covered by insurance, if any, will be at
the expense of the Town.
3. Be required to complete prescribed treatment defined by the SAP, if any. If the
individual fails to complete the required treatment, the Town reserves the right to impose
disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal, subject, however, to the provisions of
M.G.L. c31, Sections 41-45, and of this Agreement.
4. Be required to pass a return-to-duty test before duties are resumed. The Town will pay
for the return-to-duty test.
5. Be placed in a follow-up testing program until completed. The costs of all follow-up
testing will be at the expense of the Town. The follow-up testing program shall not
exceed three (3) years, with no more than three (3) tests per year.
6. Be required to complete prescribed treatment defined by the SAP, if any. If the
individual fails to complete the required treatment, the Town reserves the right to impose

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 39 of 43

disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal, subject, however, to the provisions of
M.G.L. c31, Sections 41-45, and of this Agreement.
Employee Rights: An employee’s refusal to be drug tested on a reasonable suspicion basis may
subject them to disciplinary action by the Town, up to and including dismissal, subject, however,
to provisions of M.G.L. c31, Sections 41-45, and this Agreement, permitting an employee to
elect arbitration of such disciplinary action.
Confirmation of the presence of one of the specific drugs, if non-prescription, as provided above,
in an employee’s urine sample, after first occasion of drug testing and successful counseling,
treatment and rehabilitation, may, as with his refusal to be drug tested or his refusal to fully
participate in, and successfully complete, said program(s), set in motion the operation of M.G.L.
c31, Sections 41-45, as aforesaid, and employee election to arbitrate any disciplinary action
resulting therefrom. Said Sections 41-45 protect and provide the legal rights to a full Town
hearing and a subsequent de novo Civil Service Commission hearing, or arbitration, at all of
which the Town has the burden of proving the charges against the employee. The Town shall
bear the burden of proving the presence of such non-prescription drugs or alcohol.
TRAINING
The Town will provide a minimum of two (2) hours training for supervisors on alcohol misuse
and controlled substances use, including what constitutes reasonable suspicion. Training will
also be provided to employees on the Town Policy, testing procedures and the integrity of the
testing process which safeguards the validity of test results prior to this policy going into effect.
RECORDS
All drug and alcohol testing and medical records and information will be kept in a confidential
file and maintained by the MRO. Each member of the local shall have the right to have a copy
of his/her drug and/or alcohol test results upon written request.
Any test result upon “reasonable suspicion” will be discarded if it is later determined that
reasonable suspicion did not exist. The results of the test cannot be used to establish reasonable
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 40 of 43

suspicion. If the firefighter tests negative for drugs or alcohol, the firefighter will be
compensated for any regularly scheduled hours of work they would have worked during this
period.
A failure to follow any procedures set forth in this policy shall also render any test invalid and
cause it to be discarded. A discarded or invalid test will be a nullity and have no effect on the
firefighter. It may not be used for any purpose, including discipline or further testing, and no
record of it shall be kept.
If a test is invalidated for any reason, the firefighter shall be compensated for all regularly
scheduled hours. Any sick leave or vacation leave shall be credited back to the firefighter.
The parties to this Agreement will, at the end of the first year, agree to review the testing
procedures to identify and correct any deficiencies that might exist.

ARTICLE 29: DURATION
SECTION 1: This contract shall be effective on July 1, 2024, unless otherwise specified and
shall continue through June 30, 2027. Either party intending to modify the agreement shall give
notice of such intent no less than one hundred and twenty (120) days prior to June 30, 2027.
Upon such notice, the parties will commence negotiations, and if no new agreement is executed
by June 30, 2027, this contract shall remain in full force and effect until a new agreement is
executed. All new or increased benefits of an economic nature unless otherwise specified shall
be effective the nearest Sunday to July 1, of each fiscal year.
SECTION 2: The agreement executed on April 8, 1994, between the Association and the
Employer regarding the establishment of the bargaining unit position of Training Officer is
incorporated into and is made a part of this Agreement.

FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 41 of 43

Appendix A
FIRE PAY SCALE FY 2025
July 1, 2024: 3.00%
Firefighter

A

B

C

D

E

F

Hourly

27.9954

29.149

30.282

31.4871

32.5892

33.8149

Lieutenant

A

B

C

Hourly

37.0213

38.1319

39.5673

Captain

A

B

C

Hourly

43.0965

44.6143

46.2939

STIPEND/SPECIALIST Position
(Current practice of paying the following stipends remains in place and does not change)
Emergency Medical Services Coordinator (EMS)
$2,000 annually
Fire Alarm Specialist
$7,500 annually
Fire Prevention Officer
$10,000 annually
Fire Investigator
$500 annually
Child Safety Seat Specialist
$300 annually
Mechanic Specialist
$100 more than top step LT annually
Analyst Specialist
$2,500 annually
Training Officer
$3,000 annually
Night Differential 9% of 38 hours
28hrs *9%= 79.17 + 107.40 = 186.57
42hrs *9%= 118.71 + 107.40 = 226.11
Out of Range
FY22
FF 10 Hour Shift
FF 14 Hour Shift

28.01
39.22

LT 10 Hour Shift
LT 14 Hour Shift

32.77
45.88

107.40

14hrs*9% = 39.57 + 107.40 = 146.97

EMT
FY22
5% of base rate paid to firefighter-at-top-step
Top Step July 1,2021
$6
FY25 – FY27 Fire Union Contract

Page 43 of 43
