AMERICAN ARBITRATION ASSOCIATION
In the Matter of Arbitration Between
BRAINTREE POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION LOCAL 365
-ANDTOWN OF BRAINTREE
(Grievance: CSO Evening Shift Differential)
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Issued: January 20, 2016
______________________________________________________________________________
Arbitrator: Timothy J. Buckalew, Esq.
Appearances: Leigh A. Panettiere, Esq., for Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365
(“the Union”); Brian M. Maser, Esq., for Town of Braintree (“the Town”).
PRELIMINARY STATEMENT

On October 29, 2015, the parties convened in Braintree, Massachusetts under the rules
and auspices of the American Arbitration Association and their Collective Bargaining Agreement
(“CBA”) providing for binding arbitration. This Opinion an Award is based on evidence
adduced at that hearing, and arguments made at the hearing and in post-hearing memoranda filed
on or before December 18, 2015.
ISSUE
The parties agreed on the issue:

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 2
Did the Town violate Article 29 “Specialists” as modified by paragraph 3 of the parties’
2013-2016 MOA, when it failed to compensate Community Service Officers with the
night shift differential?
If so, what shall be the remedy?
RELEVANT CONTRACT AND MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT LANGUAGE
ARTICLE 29- SPECIALISTS
Specialists appointed by the Chief and approved by the Mayor are as follows:
A. DETECTIVES
B. ADMINISTRATIVE AIDE TO THE CHIEF
C. SCHOOL RESOURCE OFFICER
D. TRAFFIC OFFICER
E. JUVENILE OFFICERS
F. COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER
….
ARTICLE 30- NIGHT DIFFERENTIALS
Permanent and assigned officers who regularly work a night shift (between the hours of
2:30 p.m. and 6:30 a.m.) will receive a night differential of seven percent (7%). Effective
July 1, 1996, the night differential shall increase to nine percent (9%). Any officer not
regularly assigned to the night shift will receive said shift differential for any night shift
worked.
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
3. Specialist: Community Service Officer

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 3
d. The position of Community Service Officer shall be developed by the Chief and added
to the list of Specialist positions. The CSO will work a Monday through Friday flexible
hours schedule in the same fashion currently worked by the Narcotics Unit.

FACTS
Stipulation
At the October 29, 2015, hearing the parties stipulated:
Members of the narcotics unit work flexible day and night hours Mondays thru Fridays
and receive the full night shift differential for all work regardless of which hours of the
day or evening are worked.
Grievance History

This arbitration arises from a grievance contesting the Town’s interpretation of the
meaning of paragraph 3 in their 2013-16 MOA creating the new specialist position of
Community Service Officer. The October 6, 2014, grievance lists August 31, 2014, as the date of
violation. The grievance states:
Nature of the Grievance: Failure to assign and pay Community Service Officers as
bargained.
Factual basis of grievance: The Chief informed the Union President that he would assign
Officers Meredith Golden and Edwin Woo to the new Community Service Officer
position assigned to the day shift from 06:30- 14:30 Hours. The Officers are not being
paid the evening shift differential and are not assigned to work the evening shift with
flexible hours as was negotiated during collective bargaining. The language that was
negotiated being: “The CSO will work a Monday through Friday flexible hours
schedule in the same fashion currently worked by the Narcotics Unit.”
Remedy Requested: Assign Officer Golden and Officer Woo to the evening shift, Monday
through Friday, with a flexible hours schedule. Pay Officer Golden and Officer Woo

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 4
evening shift differential pay and any retroactive evening shift differential pay that would
be owed to them back to the date of their assignment as CSO.

Chief Russell W. Jenkins denied the grievance in an October 17, 2014, letter. In relevant
part, it states:
As this is a position proposed by the Town and specifically by me, I think I am best
qualified to state what my intention was when we negotiated for the CSO’s to be allowed
to work a flexible hours schedule in the same fashion currently worked by the Narcotics
Unit. That being that they would be assigned a specific shift, but would have the
flexibility to change their work hours to address such assignments as, but not limited to,
attending community meetings, possibly administer a citizen’s police academy and
address issues or other problems brought to their attention. In fact, in the “Town’s Initial
Proposals to Amend CBA with Police Patrol Officers Association,” dated May 31, 2013,
which you and your team were provided a copy of, a job description of sorts for the
community service officer was outlined. Specifically, this job description stated, “The
hours of work would primarily be Day Shift hours, with the flexibility to assign the
officer to meet in the evening with a neighborhood group or address a particular
problem.”
Accordingly, I am denying this grievance on the grounds that the intent of the
negotiations was to assign the community service officers to a Day Shift schedule and
allow them the flexibility to work flexible hours as their job required.

The Town denied the grievance at Step 2 after a hearing in which Mike Coughlin, the
Mayor’s Chief of Staff, did not find that “Managements’ [sic] actions in filling and assigning the
CSO position without the provision of a night shift differential violates the MOA between the
parties.” This arbitration followed.
Background

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 5
The Town initially proposed the CSO position during a bargaining session for the
2013-2016 CBA on May 31, 2013. The initial proposal states:
Create a specialist position of Community Service Officer, who would be engaged in
community activities and problems. The CSO would work with the School Resource
Officer, or fill in when he/she is unavailable. The CSO could also assist the juvenile
officer, work with the elderly, organize and work with neighborhood watch groups and
other organizations. As various problems are brought to the CSO’s attention, he/she
could then address those problems, with or without the assistance of the traffic unit, etc.
Problems such as cars speeding through the neighborhood, illegally parked cars, kids
hanging out at the park, etc. The hours of work would primarily be Day Shift hours, with
the flexibility to assign the officer to meet in the evening with a neighborhood group or
address a particular problem.

The parties did not substantively discuss the CSO position again until the bargaining session on
January 21, 2014. These discussions resulted in the language of paragraph 3 of the Draft MOA:
The position of Community Service Officer shall be developed by the Chief and added to
the list of Specialist positions. The CSO will work a Monday through Friday flexible
hours schedule in the same fashion currently worked by the Narcotics Unit.

Peter Morin, Town Solicitor, and Nathan Killeffer, then Union President, signed and dated the
Draft MOA on April 18, 2014.
On July 24, 2014, the Chief e-mailed the Department about the new CSO position:
With the start of the new school year, I would like to fill the position of Community
Service Officer. I will probably fill one position now, scheduling this officer to work the
same schedule as our School Resource Officer. As the job develops, I will consider a
second CSO and make a decision as to the hours of work for this second officer. They
may be the same daytime hours, or they might be evening hours….
Any officer interested in this position should submit a memo or e-mail to my attention, no
later than close of business on August 6, 2014. I would like to hear your ideas and

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 6
suggestions for making this position successful and beneficial to the town and the
Department and I’m happy to answer questions, but as I’m sure you can see, I’m still
feeling my way through this position as well.

On or about August 27, 2014, the Chief appointed Officers Edwin Woo and Meredith
Golden as CSOs. On September 25, 2014, Officer Woo e-mailed Union leadership to inform
them that the CSOs were not receiving the night shift differential. The parties were unable to
resolve the matter and the Union filed a grievance.
Hearing Testimony

Nathan Killeffer is currently a detective in the Narcotics Unit and an executive board
member of the Union. At the time of the execution of the MOA, Killeffer was the president of
the Union. Killeffer testified he works “flexible hours” and this means his hours depend upon
the needs of the day, but regardless of when he works he receives the night differential of nine
percent (9%).
Killeffer testified regarding the CSO position that it was the Chief’s idea. The parties
negotiated the position as a specialist position, meaning the Chief can pick candidates without
regard to seniority. The parties agreed that the Chief would formulate the exact job description at
a later date. According to Killeffer, the Chief said the CSO hours would be sometimes during the
day and sometimes during the night. The Chief said they would work flexible hours at night
rather than overtime. The parties agreed that the hours for the CSO position would be flexible

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 7
due to needs.¹ Killeffer testified he understood that the CSO position would get the night
differential.
Killeffer testified that after negotiations concluded he presented the MOA to the Union
for a vote. Consistent with his understanding of the negotiations, he communicated to the Union
that the CSO position would “work flex hours on a Mon-Fri basis.” He testified the Union
understood that “flex hours” for the CSO position would be like “flex hours” for the Narcotics
Unit.
Officer Edwin Woo works as a CSO. He interviewed with the Chief for the position in
early August and testified his first day as a CSO was an August 27, 2013, meeting at Braintree
High School. According to Woo, he understands “flex hours” to mean that he would work the
day shift and get the night differential. Woo “just understood” he would get the night
differential; the Chief did not tell him he would receive the night differential. He has not
received the night differential as a CSO. Woo primarily works 9 am to 5 pm, but works 12 pm to
8 pm, or 3 pm to 11 pm, depending on the needs of the day. According to Woo, by working 9-5
he misses overtime and detail opportunities.
Officer Meredith Golden worked as a CSO from the initial meeting on August 27, 2013,
until January 2015. Golden worked the 6:30 am to 2:30 pm shift as a CSO. On a few occasions
she worked after 2:30 pm. At no time did she receive the night shift differential. She testified
that she never discussed the night shift differential with the Chief during the interview process.

¹

Killeffer’s handwritten notes from the January 21, 2014, bargaining session state that for the CSO position
the “Chief wants flex hours M-F, 5 & 2.”

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 8
Detective Charles Paris was President of the Union in 2013 and Vice President in 2014.
He was part of the bargaining team that negotiated the MOA. Paris is a general detective and not
a narcotics detective, so he only receives the night shift differential when he works the 3 pm to
11 pm shift. According to Paris, the Chief said during the negotiations that he envisioned
something “along the lines of flex hours.” Paris testified “flex hours” is a term that is only used
in relation to the narcotics unit. The parties did not explicitly discuss the differential during
negotiations.
Detective Brian Cohoon is a narcotics detective assigned full-time to a federal task force.
He was a member of the bargaining team for the current MOA. He works flexible hours and
receives the night differential for all shifts. Cohoon testified the CSO position was one of the
Chief’s “babies” and it “was new to us.” According to Cohoon, the Chief presented the CSO
schedule as “flex hours,” and the only people that work flexible hours are the detectives in the
narcotics unit, who are paid the night shift differential due to their flexible hour schedule.
Cohoon testified his impression was that the CSO position would involve working day and
evening hours.

Sergeant Robert Joseph is a narcotics detective and was a member of the bargaining team.
He testified the CSO negotiations contemplated a Monday through Friday schedule with flexible
hours like the narcotics unit depending on when they were needed. He assumed the CSO
position would receive the night differential due to the reference to “flex hours.” The parties did
not explicitly discuss compensation.

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 9
Karen Shanley has been the Director of Human Resources for the Town for seven years.
She negotiated the MOA on behalf of the Town. According to Shanley, the Chief wanted the
right of assignment over for the CSO position and also wanted flexible hours to attend night
meetings if needed.² The parties did not discuss a night differential for the CSO position. On
cross-examination, Shanley testified she did not become aware that the Narcotics Unit received
the night differential until after negotiating the MOA.
Chief Jenkins testified the Department has a twenty year practice of narcotics detectives
working flexible hours. Detectives work an eight hour shift, but the shift begins depending on
the needs of the day. They receive the night differential regardless of when they work and are
carried on the evening shift.
The Chief testified he developed the CSO position because he felt the Department needed
a stronger presence in the community beyond the presence of the School Resource Office. The
CSO would work in schools, support the SRO, work with the elderly population, and maintain a
neighborhood presence. The CSO would work primarily days, but the Chief wanted the
flexibility to have them working at night. The Chief did not consider the night differential when
proposing the CSO position because the hours would be primarily day hours.
The Chief testified the language of the MOA gave clarity to the concept of working
flexible hours. The Town, according to the Chief, did not intend the language to include the
night shift differential.

²

Shanley’s handwritten notes from the January 21, 2014, bargaining session state: “Chief wants Flexible
hours for CSO. It would administrative M-F with (5 and 2) Flexible hours”

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 10
ARGUMENT
The Union
The Union argues the Town violated Article 29 of the CBA, as modified by paragraph 3
of the MOA, when it failed to compensate CSOs with the night shift differential. The parties
agreed that CSOs would work a flexible hours schedule like the Narcotics Unit, and be paid the
night shift differential like the Narcotics Unit. The Union offers four reasons supporting its
interpretation.
First, the Union argues requiring night shift differential pay for the CSO is the most
reasonable interpretation of the MOA. In a police setting, a contractual reference to “hours of
work” can reasonably be expected to cover the pay for those hours, particularly where there is a
pay differential for night work. In light of the language of the MOA, it would be contrary to
principles of contract interpretation to conclude that the parties agreed on the hours of work, but
not the rate of pay. The Chief stated CSOs would work flex hours like the Narcotics Unit in
response to Killeffer asking him if CSOs would receive overtime for working outside their
regular schedule. The Chief can reasonably be said to have conveyed that CSOs would receive
the night shift differential like the Narcotics Unit instead of overtime.
Second, the Union argues the term “flexible hours schedule” is an industry term of art
known to both parties, and it should be given its generally accepted meaning. The term refers to
the unpredictable schedules of the Narcotics Unit officers. According to the Union, everyone at
the bargaining table understood “flexible hours” to mean working a flexible schedule in
exchange for the night shift differential. If the Town meant otherwise, it should have stated as
much in the MOA.

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 11
Third, the Union argues the Town has paid the night shift differential to officers working
a flexible hours schedule for twenty years, and this practice is binding. To hold otherwise would
allow the Town to change a binding past practice without any clear and unambiguous language
demonstrating the parties bargained for such a change.
Finally, the Union argues the bargaining history leading to the 2013-2016 MOA supports
the Union’s interpretation. The Union did not at first want to accept the proposal because the
position would be filled by the Chief, instead of by seniority, and because the hours were
unpredictable and the incumbents would not receive overtime. The Town convinced the Union
to accept the proposal because the CSO would receive the night shift differential that Narcotics
officers receive. The Union would not have accepted the new position without the differential
because doing so would have required a sacrifice of its interests without obtaining a benefit in
return. The Chief’s representation could only give rise to the understanding that “flex hours”
meant what it had always meant: being paid the night shift differential regardless of what hours
are worked.
As a remedy, the Union seeks an order requiring the Town to compensate the CSOs at the
night shift rate, retroactively and with interest.
The Town
The Town initially argues it did not violate Article 29 of the CBA because Article 29 does
not require the Town to pay the night shift differential to Community Service Officers. There is
no reason to consider extrinsic evidence because the language of the agreement is clear and
unambiguous and not susceptible to the Union’s interpretation. The existence of an ambiguity

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 12
must be determined from the four corners of the instrument without resort to extrinsic evidence.
Citing Arbitrator Kerrison, the Town argues,
Where one party meant what the contract clearly says and the other intended something
else, the former should be adopted. The parties are presumed to have understood the
terms used, and there can be no relief to one because he failed to realize the full
implication of the language used. Where the language of the contract is plain and
unambiguous that language must govern.

The agreement is limited to the type of schedule that CSOs would work. The reference to
the Narcotics Unit, according to the Town, merely provides that the CSOs schedule would be in
the “same fashion” as the Narcotics Unit. The agreement does not reference a night differential
or any additional compensation. No reasonable interpretation of this language would require the
Town to pay any additional compensation to CSOs for working such a schedule.
No ambiguity requires considering extrinsic evidence in this case. If the parties agreed
and understood that CSOs would receive the night differential then this would have been
reflected in the express terms of the agreement. It is highly improbable the parties would have
neglected to include any provision in the agreement regarding a significant amount of additional
compensation. Instead, the language focuses exclusively on the type of schedule to be worked.
The Union is attempting to include terms in the agreement never discussed during
negotiations. The Union seeks to create an ambiguity in order to achieve what it could not
achieve through collective bargaining. No such ambiguity exists.
The Town next argues its evidence compels a finding that CSOs are not entitled to the
night shift differential. According to the Town, the Union failed to prove its claim that a binding
past practice requires the Town to pay the Night Shift Differential to any bargaining unit member

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 13
working a flexible schedule. The Union attempts to expand a limited benefit that historically
only the Narcotics Unit has received, and there is no evidence the parties agreed to modify or
extend any existing past practice. Furthermore, a binding past practice cannot apply to the CSOs
because the position did not exist when the Town began paying the night shift differential to
members of the Narcotics Unit. The Town could not possibly have anticipated paying the night
shift differential to CSOs or any other position that might work a flexible schedule in the future.
The Town next argues the Union failed to communicate its understanding or seek
clarification regarding the night shift differential during negotiations. The Town’s proposal did
not mention the night shift differential and the parties never discussed it during their months of
bargaining. The proposal indicated the Town intended the position to work primarily during the
day shift with the School Resource Officer. The work of the Narcotics Unit, on the other hand, is
inherently different from the CSO. The fact that the Narcotics Unit receives the night shift
differential does not mean that all employees working a flexible schedule are similarly entitled to
it.
The Town next argues the Union’s interpretation is unreasonable and would lead to an
unduly harsh and absurd result. The only reasonable interpretation of the language is the literal
interpretation of the language: that the parties agreed to allow the CSOs to flex their schedules.
The Union’s interpretation that the Town must pay the night shift differential in perpetuity simply
because CSOs flex their schedules is unreasonable, unduly harsh, and burdensome. The Town
should not be required to pay such additional compensation where there was clearly no
agreement or meeting of the minds regarding said compensation.

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 14
Finally, the Town argues the Arbitrator does not have the authority to add to or otherwise
amend the parties’ CBA. The CBA does not require the Town to pay the night shift differential
to CSOs, and any order obliging the Town to do so would exceed the scope of the Arbitrator’s
authority.
DISCUSSION
As the party bringing the grievance, the Union bears the burden of proof in this matter.
The totality of the evidence supports the Union’s interpretation of the language in paragraph 3 of
the MOA. I therefore sustain the grievance.
The language at issue states: “The position of Community Service Officer shall be
developed by the Chief and added to the list of Specialist positions. The CSO will work a
Monday through Friday flexible hours schedule in the same fashion currently worked by the
Narcotics Unit.” As I read it, the meaning of the second sentence depends upon the answer to
two questions. First, what does “flexible hours schedule” mean within the Braintree Police
Department? Second, what does “in the same fashion currently worked by the Narcotics Unit”
mean within the Braintree Police Department?
The evidence establishes that the Department has a longstanding practice of allowing
Narcotics Unit officers to work a flexible hours schedule. Rather than work overtime, they are
allowed to “flex” their schedule so as to align their work hours to coincide with the demands of
the job on any given day. To compensate the narcotics officers for their varying schedules, the
Town carries them on the night shift and pays them the night shift differential regardless of the
shift they work.

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 15
Given that the evidence establishes that only the Narcotics Unit works a flexible
schedule, the meaning of the term must derive from the only context in which it exists within the
Department. As applied to the CSO position, flexible hours means that rather than work
overtime, the officers in the position will be allowed to flex their schedules to meet the demands
of the job on any given day. This approach makes sense given that as late as July 24, 2014, little
more than one month before the position became active, the Chief was still undecided as to what
shift the CSOs would work. In fact, his e-mail explicitly contemplates a scenario where a second
officer might work evening hours instead of day hours. It states, “As the job develops, I will
consider a second CSO and make a decision as to the hours of work for this second officer. They
may be the same daytime hours, or they might be evening hours.” Both parties contemplated
that the position would require flexibility in scheduling.
If the language of the MOA stated only that the CSOs would work a “flexible hours
schedule” then the Town’s position might prevail. The MOA, however, says more. The Town’s
position reads out of the sentence the final phrase “in the same fashion currently worked by the
Narcotics Unit.” As I read it, this provision of the MOA obliges the Town to compensate the
CSOs with the night differential.
The “fashion” in which the Narcotics Unit officers work their flexible schedules is that
they are carried on the night shift and earn the differential regardless of the shift they work. This
language entitles the CSO position to the same benefit. To read the entire sentence as providing
only that CSOs could flex their schedule, and not receive the differential, ignores the “same
fashion” language referencing the Narcotics Unit.

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 16
As the Town argues, the meaning of the language and not the subjective intent of one
party must control. The Chief may not have intended to provide the night shift differential, but
the MOA says otherwise. The language of the MOA, and not the Chief’s intent, must control.
I note that this matter involves the longstanding practice of compensating Narcotics Units
officers with the night shift differential, but the right of CSOs to also receive the differential
derives from the language of the MOA and not simply from the practice. Although this outcome
does result in the incongruous scenario in which the CSO, a support position to the SRO,
receives the differential while the SRO does not, it results directly from language in the MOA.
Neither the CBA nor the MOA provide that the SRO will work a “flexible hours schedule in the
same fashion currently worked by the Narcotics Unit.” The MOA thus sets the CSO position
apart from the SRO, and if the Town finds this unacceptable, it can seek to modify the language
at a future date.
I also find persuasive the Union’s argument that it would not have agreed to the position
without receiving some kind of bargained for exchange. As the Union notes, the CSO position is
ffilled by the Chief without regard to seniority. The position is largely ineligible for details and
overtime work. In fact, Killeffer testified the Chief told him CSOs would work flexible hours
instead of overtime. If all the Union gained from agreeing to the position was that the CSO
could work flexible hours without the differential, then the Union gained nothing. The Union did
not agree to the position until the end of the negotiations after the Town offered flexible hours in
the same fashion as the Narcotics Unit. The evidence suggests this language, proposed by the
Town, meant the same thing to every member of the Union who heard it. If any confusion arose
over the choice of words, it is not the fault of the Union.

Braintree Police Officers Association Local 365 and Town of Braintree
AAA Case Number: 01-15-0002-6429
Page 17
In sum, the language in the MOA regarding the CSO position means what it says. CSOs
will work a flexible hours schedule in the same fashion as the Narcotics Unit. They will be
carried on the night shift and receive the differential regardless of the shift they work. If this
were not the case, they would not be working flexible hours in the same fashion as the Narcotics
Unit.
AWARD

I sustain the grievance. The Town violated Article 29, as modified by paragraph 3 of the
2013-2016 MOA, when it failed to compensate CSOs with the night shift differential. As a
remedy, the Town must compensate the CSOs with the night shift differential retroactive to their
first day on the job. So long as the language of the MOA remains part of the CBA, the Town
must likewise compensate CSOs with the night shift differential for shifts they will work in the
future.

Respectfully submitted,

Timothy J. Buckalew, Arbitrator
