COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board
IN THE MATTER OF THE EMPLOYES OF

WARMINSTER TOWNSHIP

:
:
:
:
:

Case No.

PF-U-17-80-E1

PROPOSED ORDER OF UNIT CLARIFICATION
On October 26, 2017, the Warminster Township Police Benevolent
Association (Association or Union) filed with the Pennsylvania Labor
Relations Board (Board) a Petition for Unit Clarification pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Labor Relations Act (PLRA) and Act 111, seeking to include the
positions of Chief of Police and Lieutenant in a bargaining unit of police
officers employed by Warminster Township (Township or Employer). On November
7, 2017, the Secretary of the Board issued an Order and Notice of Hearing,
assigning February 2, 2018 in Harrisburg, as the time and place of hearing,
if necessary. The hearing was subsequently continued to April 20, 2018 at
the Township’s request and without objection from the Association.
The parties eventually agreed to submit stipulations of fact in lieu of
appearing for a hearing. The Board received the duly executed stipulations
on April 18, 2018. The parties each filed post-hearing briefs in support of
their respective positions on May 17, 2018.
The Examiner, on the basis of all of the matters and documents of
record, makes the following:
FINDINGS OF FACT
1.
The Township is a public employer and political subdivision under
Act 111 as read in pari materia with the PLRA.
2.
The Association is a labor organization under Act 111 as read in
pari materia with the PLRA.
3.
The Township is a Second-Class Township as classified by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Joint Exhibit 1)2
4.
The governing body and appointing authority of the Township is
the Board of Supervisors. (Joint Exhibit 1)
5.
Township.

The Township Police Department provides police services to the
(Joint Exhibit 1)

6.
The Department employs 43 officers, including 40 patrol officers,
two Lieutenants, and one Chief of Police. (Joint Exhibit 1)

1
2

The caption appears as amended by the Hearing Examiner.
The duly executed stipulation of facts has been marked as Joint Exhibit 1.

7.
The Township has voluntarily recognized the Association as the
exclusive bargaining agent for officers employed by the Township. (Joint
Exhibit 1)
8.
Since the voluntary recognition, the Township and the Association
have been parties to collective bargaining agreements dating back in excess
of 20 years. (Joint Exhibit 1)
9.
Through negotiations, the Township and the Association agreed
that the proper scope of the unit represented by the Association includes
“all [p]olice [e]mployees whom the Township employs on either a full-time or
part-time bases (sic) as sworn [p]olice [o]fficers, excluding the rank of
Lieutenant and the Chief of Police.” (Joint Exhibit 1)
10.
This definition of the unit has been included in the parties’
collective bargaining agreement (CBA) for at least the last 20 years. (Joint
Exhibit 1)
11.
the unit.

The position of Chief is not, nor has it ever been, included in
(Joint Exhibit 1)

12.
The duties of the Chief, as detailed in Department Policy 7.12.1,
dated December 6, 2011, include the following: fiscal management and planning
for the Department, including development of the annual budget; evaluate
potential recruits and decide, in conjunction with the Township Manager and
Board of Supervisors, which recruits to hire; review findings of disciplinary
investigations and impose discipline on officers when necessary; determine
the internal organization of the Department; organize, direct and control all
resources of the Department; develop and implement policies for education and
training requirements and programs; develop and implement Department
emergency response plans; and develop and conduct a public relations program
to promote public confidence in the police. (Joint Exhibit 1)
13.
The holder of the position of Chief of Police has discharged the
above duties and exercised discretion in those areas. (Joint Exhibit 1)
14.
To the extent the Chief of Police does not have express authority
to act in certain areas, such as the hiring, suspension or discharge of
police officers, the parties agree that he has effectively recommended that
such actions be taken. (Joint Exhibit 1)
15.
Since the parties agreed to exclude the position of Chief of
Police from the collective bargaining unit, there has not been any material
change in the duties of the Chief. (Joint Exhibit 1)
16.
the unit.

The rank of Lieutenant is not, nor has it ever been, included in
(Joint Exhibit 1)

17.
The duties of the Lieutenants, as detailed in Department Policy
7.12.1, dated December 6, 2011, include the following: issue or recommend
discipline, including issuance of reprimands, cautionary letters and
suspensions. The effectiveness of the Lieutenants’ involvement was evidenced
where a Lieutenant recommended a police officer be discharged and the
recommendation was accepted. The Lieutenants also develop and maintain
minimum standards for officers assigned to specialized units. The exercise
of this authority is evidenced by the Lieutenant being in the process of
completely changing and restructuring the Department’s Field Training Program
2

for all new police officers and reporting his progress to the Chief of
Police. The Lieutenants additionally develop and maintain minimum
requirements for selection to specialized units. Exercise of this authority
was evidenced in making recommendations to the Chief of Police for selection
of police officers for specialized units, and those recommendations are
routinely accepted. (Joint Exhibit 1)
18.
Since the parties agreed to exclude the position of Lieutenant
from the collective bargaining unit, there has not been any material change
in the duties of the Lieutenant position. (Joint Exhibit 1)
DISCUSSION
The Association has petitioned the Board to include the positions of
Chief of Police and Lieutenant in the bargaining unit, alleging that neither
position is managerial. The Township opposes the petition and contends that
both positions are managerial in nature, and should therefore be excluded
from the bargaining unit.
As a result, the issue depends on the test set forth in Fraternal Order
of Police Star Lodge No. 20 v. Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board, 522 A.2d
697 (Pa. Cmwlth, 1987), aff’d 522 Pa. 149, 560 A.2d 145 (1989). Under Star
Lodge, the burden of proving that a position is managerial is on the party
seeking to exclude the position. The party must prove that the position
meets one of the six criteria of managerial status, which the Court
identified as follows:
Policy Formulation – authority to initiate departmental policies,
including the power to issue general directives and regulations;
Policy Implementation – authority to develop and change programs
of the department;
Overall Personnel Administration Responsibility – as evidenced by
effective involvement in hiring, serious disciplinary actions and
dismissals;
Budget Making – demonstrated effectiveness in the preparation of
proposed budgets, as distinguished from merely making suggestions with
respect to particular items;
Purchasing Role – effective role in the purchasing process, as
distinguished from merely making suggestions;
Independence in Public Relations – as evidenced by authority to
commit departmental resources in dealing with public groups.
522 A.2d 697, at 705.
Significantly, the test for managerial status under Act 111 is
disjunctive and not conjunctive, such that performance of any one of these
functions results in a finding of managerial status. In the Matter of the
Employes of Elizabeth Township, 37 PPER ¶ 90 (Final Order, 2006).
In this case, the Township has sustained its burden of proving the
Chief’s duties meet four of the criteria for managerial status under Act 111.

3

Indeed, the record shows that the Chief’s duties satisfy the policy
implementation, overall personnel administration responsibility, budget
making, and independence in public relations elements of the Star Lodge test.
Therefore, the Chief position must be excluded from the bargaining unit.
First of all, the record shows that the Chief has exercised discretion
in developing and implementing policies for education and training
requirements and programs. This satisfies the policy implementation
criteria, as the Chief clearly has the authority to develop and change
programs of the department as a result. Likewise, the record supports an
exclusion under the budget making criteria, as the parties stipulated the
Chief has exercised discretion in fiscal management and planning for the
department, including the development of the annual budget. Thus, the Chief
has demonstrated effectiveness in the preparation of proposed budgets, as
distinguished from merely making suggestions with respect to particular
items. What is more, the Chief’s duties also satisfy the overall personnel
administration responsibility element of the Star Lodge test in that the
Chief evaluates potential recruits and decides, in conjunction with the
Township Manager and Board of Supervisors, which recruits to hire. The Chief
reviews findings of disciplinary investigations and imposes discipline on
officers when necessary. And, the Chief has exercised discretion in
discharging these duties. Furthermore, to the extent the Chief does not have
express authority to act in certain areas, such as hiring, suspension or
discharge of police officers, he has effectively recommended that such
actions be taken. As such, the Chief has effective involvement in hiring,
serious disciplinary actions, and dismissals. See North Wales Borough, 39
PPER 10 (Final Order, 2008)(overall personnel administration responsibility
requires a showing of all three functions; hiring, serious disciplinary
actions, and dismissals). Finally, the Chief has also exercised discretion
in developing and conducting a public relations program to promote public
confidence in the police, which satisfies the independence in public
relations element of the test.
The Association contends that application of Star Lodge in the
disjunctive has become so fraught with the potential for misuse by employers
as to remain unworkable. The Association urges the Board to employ a
balancing analysis instead to determine if a police officer is truly more
managerial than not. However, I am without authority to depart from the
consistent line of precedent from the Board and the Commonwealth Court in
this area, and therefore, I decline to adopt a balancing test for managerial
status under Act 111 and the PLRA.
Based on this record, the Chief of Police clearly meets several of the
factors deemed indicative of managerial status under the PLRA and Act 111.
Accordingly, the Chief position will remain excluded from the bargaining unit
as a managerial employe. However, a different result must obtain with regard
to the Lieutenant position.
The Township contends that the Lieutenant position meets the policy
formulation, policy implementation, and overall personnel administration
responsibility elements of the Star Lodge test. However, the record does not
support a managerial exclusion under the overall personnel administration
criteria. The record shows that the Lieutenants issue or recommend
discipline, including issuance of reprimands, cautionary letters and
suspensions. The effectiveness of the Lieutenants’ involvement was evidenced
where a Lieutenant recommended a police officer be discharged and the
recommendation was accepted. As the Association points out, there is no
4

evidence that the Lieutenants have any involvement in the hiring process.
Therefore, the Lieutenants do not have effective involvement in hiring,
serious disciplinary actions and dismissals. See North Wales Borough, supra
(overall personnel administration responsibility requires a showing of all
three functions; hiring, serious disciplinary actions, and dismissals).
Neither does the record support an exclusion under the policy
formulation or implementation prongs of the test. There is no evidence that
the Lieutenants have initiated departmental policies, including the power to
issue general directives and regulations. As such, the Lieutenant position
does not satisfy the policy formulation criteria. Similarly, with regard to
the policy implementation criteria, the record shows that the Lieutenants
develop and maintain minimum standards for officers assigned to specialized
units. The exercise of this authority is evidenced by the Lieutenant being
in the process of completely changing and restructuring the Department’s
Field Training Program for all new police officers and reporting his progress
to the Chief of Police. However, as the Association correctly notes, this
evidence does not demonstrate that the program has actually been changed or
that the Chief has accepted any proposals on which the Lieutenant may be
working. The Association persuasively maintains that there is no indication
that the Lieutenant has even accomplished anything in this regard other than
notifying the Chief of his progress. Indeed, the record suggests that the
Chief will ultimately decide which of the Lieutenant’s ideas will be accepted
or rejected. This is not sufficient to sustain the Township’s burden under
the policy implementation element of the test. See Dravosburg Borough, 35
PPER 82 (Proposed Order of Unit Clarification, 2004)(no finding of managerial
status where the employe in question has not actually revised or changed the
policy manual).
Finally, the record shows that the Lieutenants develop and maintain
minimum requirements for selection to specialized units. Exercise of this
authority was evidenced in making recommendations to the Chief of Police for
selection of police officers for specialized units, and those recommendations
are routinely accepted. This is evidence of nothing more than supervisory
functions and not indicia of managerial authority. Butler Township, 41 PPER
43 (Proposed Order of Unit Clarification, 2010)(overseeing training,
evaluating personnel, and recommending promotion are supervisory in nature
and not sufficient to support an exclusion from an Act 111 bargaining unit).
In the alternative, the Township contends that the Association’s
Petition for Unit Clarification should be dismissed on estoppel grounds.
Specifically, the Township posits that the parties have agreed through more
than 20 years of negotiations that the positions of Chief of Police and
Lieutenant are properly excluded from the unit and the Association should not
be able to avoid the consequences of such a provision during the term of a
collective bargaining agreement. However, the Board has rejected the notion
that a clause in a collective bargaining agreement that excludes specific
positions from the bargaining unit is a clear and unmistakable waiver of the
bargaining representative’s right to file a unit clarification seeking a
Board determination on the inclusion of those positions. In the Matter of
the Employes of Berks County, 35 PPER 25 (Final Order, 2004). Nor does FOP
v. Hickey, 452 A.2d 1005 (Pa. 1982) change the analysis, as alleged by the
Township. Indeed, the Board has distinguished Hickey from a situation
substantially similar to the instant matter because that case involved the
inability of a party to argue the illegality of an agreed-upon provision in a
collective bargaining agreement to avoid having to comply with that
provision. Here, by contrast, the Association is “merely seeking to
5

prospectively include the petitioned-for positions in its unit after having
agreed to their exclusion.” Berks County, 35 PPER at 83. It is well settled
that the Board will process petitions for unit clarification at any time
during a collective bargaining agreement and that such an agreement, which
includes a description of a bargaining unit, is not a clear, express, and
unequivocal waiver of the union’s right to have the Board process such a
petition. In the Matter of the Employes of Chambersburg Area School
District, 20 PPER ¶ 20149 (Final Order, 1989). Accordingly, the Petition is
not barred on estoppel grounds and will be granted with respect to the
Lieutenant position.
CONCLUSION
The Hearing Examiner, therefore, after due consideration of the
foregoing and the record as a whole, concludes and finds:
1. The Township is public employer and political subdivision under Act
111 as read in pari materia with the PLRA.
2. The Association is a labor organization under Act 111 as read in
pari materia with the PLRA.
3.

The Board has jurisdiction over the parties.

4. The position of Chief of Police is managerial, and is properly
excluded from the bargaining unit.
5. The position of Lieutenant is not managerial, and is properly
included in the bargaining unit.
ORDER
In view of the foregoing and in order to effectuate the policies of the
PLRA as read with Act 111, the Hearing Examiner
HEREBY ORDERS AND DIRECTS
that the Petition for Unit Clarification is granted and the position of
Lieutenant is included in the bargaining unit.
IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ORDERED AND DIRECTED
that in the absence of any exceptions filed with the Board pursuant to 34 Pa.
Code § 95.98(a) within twenty (20) days of the date hereof, this order shall
be and become absolute and final.

6

SIGNED, DATED and MAILED at Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, this 13th day of
June, 2018.
PENNSYLVANIA LABOR RELATIONS BOARD

__________________________________
JOHN POZNIAK, Hearing Examiner

7
