MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE CITY OF BUFFALO

AND
THE BUFFALO PROFESSIONAL FIREFIGHTERS ASSOCIATION,
. LOCAL 282, IAFF, AFL~CIO . .

The City of Buffalo ("City" or "Employer") and the Buffalo Professional Firefighters
Association, Inc., Local 282, IAFF, AFL-CIO ("Local 282" or "Union") hereby agree to the
following terms for a successor Collective Bargaining Agreement:

1. The parties agree to a successor Collective Bargaining Agreement for the period of July
1, 2017 to June 30, 2025.
2. The term "effective upon ratification of this Agreement" shall mean effective at such
·time as this Agreement has been executed by the parties; ratified by the members of
Local 282; reviewed and commented upon by the Buffalo Fiscal Stability Authority; and
approved by the Buffalo Common Council.
3. Effective July 1, 2017, all salaries shall be increased by 0%. Effective July 1, 2018, all
salaries shall be increased by 2%. Effective July 1, 2019, all salaries shall be increased
by 4%. Effective July 1, 2020, all salaries shall be increased by 4%. Effective July 1,
2021, all salaries shall be increased by 4%. Effective July 1, 2022, all salaries shall be
increased by 4%. Effective July 1, 2023, all salaries shall be increased by 3%. Effective
July 1, 2024, all salaries shall be increased by 3%.
4. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the following salary steps from the 2013
Agreement shall be eliminated: "A," "5," "7," and "10." The new salary steps for
Firefighters shall be as set forth and as numbered in the following chart. Firefighters
hired on or after the date of ratification shall be placed in Step 1 and shall remain in Step
1 until second anniversary of their date of hire, whereupon they shall be placed in Step 2.
Thereafter, upon each anniversary of their date of hire, all Firefighters shall be placed in
the next higher Step until such time as they have reached Step 9, i.e., the highest Step. In
addition, upon ratification of this agreement, Classes 09-01, and 10-01 shall be placed at
Step 9. All subsequent step increases shall occur on the. member's Buffalo Fire
Department seniority date, except for Classes 11-01 and 12-01, which shall step up every
July 1~1, as per the 2013 Agreement, until they reach Step 9.

1

New Salary Steps for Firefighters:
7/1/17

7/1/18

7/1/19

7/1/20

7/1/21

7/1/22

7/1/23

7/1/24

Step 1

$38,500.00

$39,270.00

$40,840.80

$42,474.43

$44,173.41

$45,940.35

$47,318.55

$48,738.11

Step 2

$41,233.00

$42,057.66

$43,739.97

$45,489.57

$47,309.15

$49,201.51

$50,677.56

$52,197.89

Step 3

$43,946.00

$44,824.92

$46,617.92

$48,482.63

$50,421.94

$52,438.82

$54,011.98

$55,632.34

Step 4

$46,669.00

$47,602.38

$49,506.47

$51,486.73

$53,546.20

$55,688.05

$57,358.69

$59,079.45

Step 5

$49,392.00

$50,379.84

$52,395.03

$54,490.83

$56,670.47

$58,937.29

$60,705.41

$62,526.57

Step 6

$54,838.00

$55,934.76

$58,172.15

$60,499.04

$62,919.00

$65,435.76

$67,398.83

$69,420.80

Step7

$60,284.00

$61,489.68

$63,949.27

$66,507.24

$69,167.53

$71,934.23

$74,092.26

$76,315.02

Step 8

$63,007.00

$64,267.14

$66,837.83

$69,511.34

$72,291.79

$75,183.46

$77,438.96

$79,762.14

Step 9

$68,461.00

$69,830.22

$72,623.43

$75,528.37

$78,549.50

$81,691.48

$84,142.23

$86,666.49

Officer Pay Shall Increase as Follows:
7/1/18

7/1/19

7/1/20

7/1/21

7/1/22

7/1/23

7/1/24

Lieutenant
1
$73,436.50

$74,905.23

$77,901.44

$81,017.50

$84,258.20

$87,628.52

$90,257.38

$92,965.10

Lieutenant
2
$78,412.00

$79,980.24

$83,179.45

$86,506.63

$89,966.89

$93,565.57

$96,372.54

$99,263.71

$82,118.00

$83,760.36

$87,110.77

$90,595.21

$94,219.01

$97,987.77

$100,927.41 $103,955.23

Battalion
$89,049.00
Chief

$90,829.98

$94,463.18

$98,241.71

$102,171.38 $106,258.23 $1°09,445.98 $112,729.36

Division
Chief

$99,391.86

$103,367.53 $107,502.24 $111,802.33 $116,274.42 $119,762.65 $123,355.53

7/1/17

Captain

$97,443.00

5. Effective January 1, 2019, all line work shifts (i.e., those following the platoon schedule)
shall be changed to twenty-four (24) hours, with the current four (4) platoons remaining
intact. Accordingly, one (1) work tour shall now consist of working one (1) twenty-four
(24) hour shift, followed by being off for one (1) twenty-four (24) hour shift, followed by
working one (1) twenty-four (24) hour shift, followed by being off for five (5) twentyfour (24) hour shifts. Therefore, each tour shall still consist of forty-eight (48) hours of
work. In addition, members shall be permitted to exchange an unlimited number of shifts
(i.e., members shall be permitted unlimited "swapping"); see "Buffalo Fire Department
Swapping Guidelines," attached as "Appendix A." _Shift change shall be at 0800 hours.
In no event shall members be permitted or required to work more than forty-eight (48)
consecutive hours, and those members working forty-eight (48) consecutive hours shall
be required to be off for at least twenty-four (24) hours, except in cases of emergency.
2

6. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement: Vacation Time must be taken in twentyfour (24) hour increments. During the Summer Vacation Schedule, Vacation time must
be taken as an entire tour (i.e., forty-eight [48] consecutive work hours); during the rest of
the year Vacation time may be taken in a single twenty-four (24) hour shift.
Compensatory Leave Time ("C Time") must be taken in twenty-four (24) hour
increments, is no longer required to be taken as an entire tour (i.e., forty-eight [48)
consecutive work hours), and cannot be taken during Summer Vacation Schedule; Sick
Time must be taken in twenty-four (24) hour increments; and Personal Leave Time ("PL
Time") may be taken in either twenty-four (24) hour increments, fifteen (15) hour
increments beginning at 1700 hours, or nine (9) hour increments beginning at 0800 hours.
A member may take PL time in any of these agreed-upon allotted increments as long as
they remain under the fifty-seven (57) hour threshold. A member shall be entitled to take
Vacation Time provided the mefnber has given prior notice to the member's Battalion
Chief no later than the end of the member's prior tour. A member shall be entitled to
take C Time or PL Time provided the member has given prior notice to the member's
Battalion Chief no later than twenty-four (24) hours prior.
7. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the following change shall be made to
Article IX of the existing Collective Bargaining Agreement: Section E is modified to read
as follows: "All members shall accrue Sick Leave at eight (8) hours per month."
8. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the following shall replace Section 5 of the
2013 Collective Bargaining Agreement:
"5.

The following shall be added to Article XXVI:
A.

From the ending of the Summer Vacation Schedule through the beginning
of the Summer Vacation Schedule of the following year, one (1) Fire
Company, and no more than one (1), may be removed from service when
there are five (5) or more employees out on Sick Leave (i.e., "off sick"),
subject to the following conditions:
1.

The Buffalo Fire Department minimum manpower for shift line
company manpower (i.e., nineteen [19) Engines, nine [9] Ladders,
and one [1] Rescue) is one hundred seventeen (117).

11.

In order for a company to be closed pursuant to this provision
therefore, the shift manpower for line companies must be at minus
four (-4), i.e., one hundred thirteen (113).

iii.

From the ending of the Summer Vacation Schedule through the
beginning of the Summer Vacation Schedule of the following year,
3

only an employee's Sick Leave absence or absences during the
first single tour of a Sick Leave absence shall be counted toward
the five (5) employees out on Sick Leave for the purposes of this
provision, and a member's Sick Leave absences in consecutive
subsequent tours shall not be counted towards the five (5) members
out on Sick Leave (i.e., "off sick") required to trigger the Company
removal from service.
B.

From the beginning of the Summer Vacation Schedule through the ending
of the Summer Vacation Schedule, one (1) Fire Company, and no more
than one (1), may be removed from service when there are five (5) or
more employees out on Sick Leave, subject to the following conditions:
1.

The Buffalo Fire Department minimum manpower for the
following shift positions: line company members (i.e., nineteen
[19] Engines, nine [9] Ladders, and one [1] Rescue), the one
Division Chief, the four (4) line Battalion Chiefs, the one (I) F-40,
the one (1) F-20, and the three (3) members of the Service Station
members, is one hundred twenty-seven (127).

11.

In order for a company to be closed pursuant to this provision
therefore, the shift manpower for those positions must be at minus
three (-3), i.e., one hundred twenty-four (124).

111.

From the beginning of the Summer Vacation Schedule through the
ending of the Summer Vacation Schedule, a member's sick leave
absence shall be counted towards the manpower calculation for
every shift they are off sick, and shall count toward the five (5)
employees out on Sick Leave for the purposes of this provision.

C.

The Commissioner shall provide the Union with a list of the five (5)
employees who are out on Sick Leave leading to the removal of a
Company from service at the beginning of any shift in which a Company
is to be removed from service.

D.

This provision shall be suspended during the period of any Common
Council approved temporary closing of one ( 1) or more Fire Companies
by the City.

E.

This provision shall immediately expire upon the permanent closing of
one (1) or more Fire Companies by the City.

4

F.

A member with a pending IOD or in an IOD dispute who is out on Sick
Leave ~hall not count towards closure of companies pursuant to this
provisiot?."

9. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the policy of Home Confinement as it
relates to members who call in sick shall be conducted pursuant to the established Fire
Department Home Confinement Policy; see "Buffalo Fire Department Home
Confinement Policy/' attached as "Appendix B." The City may conduct Home
Confinement checks only on the twelve (12) agreed-upon holidays or once a member is
off sick for more than two (2) consecutive twenty-four (24) hour shifts. If a member is
off sick for four (4) consecutive twenty-four (24) hour work shifts that member may be
required to provide reasonable proof of illness to the Commissioner. If a member is off
sick for more than eight (8) twenty,..four (24) hour shifts within a calendar year, the
Commissioner may direct that member to submit to an Independent Medical Examination
to verify their off-duty illness or injury. To utilize Sick Leave, a member must call in
sick to the Alarm Office of the Buffalo Fire Department and to the member's fire station.
If a member remains off sick, that member must call in sick again at the beginning of
each subsequent tour. During business hours members may check back in telephonically,
but must speak with a Buffalo Fire Department Headquarters staff member to ensure that
a slip is filled out and that 14-day clock information is verified.
10. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, members shall be permitted to take Sick
Leave for care of family members covered under Article XI of the Collective Bargaining
Agreement, including those family members added by paragraph 12, below.
11. Effective upon ratification of this agreement, Article XI, Section 11.1 of the existing
Collective Bargaining Agreement shall be amended to read as follows: "Bereavement
Leave shall be granted to any permanent employee who has suffered a death in their
immediate family, and such Bereavement Leave shall begin on the day of such death.
However, because ofthefirefighters' work schedule (one [1] on, one [1] off, one [1] on,
five [5] off), all members shall receive two (2) consecutive twenty-four (24) hour work
shifts off when death occurs while on their scheduled days off. If death occurs while
member is working, member shall receive the day of death and the following twenty~four
(24) hour shift. Bereavement Leave shall be non-cumulative."
12. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, Article XI, Section 11.2 shall be amended
to include Bereavement Leave for the death of step-relatives (e.g., step-parents, stepchildren, step-siblings, step-grandparents, step-grandchildren, etc.) and any relative of the
member or member's spouse residing in their household.
13. The existing Perfect Attendance Incentive shall continue as previously agreed between
Local 282 and the City.

5

14. Effective January 1, 2019, members shall receive the generic equivalent of all newly
prescribed medications.
a. Any members choosing to receive a name-brand medication in lieu of that
medication's generic equivalent shall be required to pay that name-brand
medication's co-pay along with the difference in retail cost between that namebrand medication and its generic equivalent.
b. Generic maintenance medications shall be dispensed in ninety (90) day supplies
through the mail rather than in-person. A maintenance medication is agreed to be
a medication which is prescribed on a recurrent basis to treat a chronic condition.
Those members currently receiving maintenance medications shall not be
required to change medications when this section is implemented.
c. Any members prescribed name-brand or specialty medications for which there is
no generic equivalent shall be entitled to receive those medications as prescribed,
and shall pay only the indicated co-pays for said medications.
d. The prescription co-pay schedule shall be set at $5 for generic medications, $20
for name-brand medications, and $35 for specialty medications. The co-pay for
ninety (90) day maintenance medications shall be two-and-one-half (2½) times
the scheduled co-pay for a thirty (30) day supply.
15. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, there shall be one (1) biddable Captain
position, and three (3) biddable Lieutenant positions at the Service Station. Overtime
assignments at the Service Station shall not be limited to those members assigned to work
at the Service Station.
16. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the Planning Office of the Buffalo Fire
Department may be staffed with the following non-biddable positions: four (4)
Firefighters, two (2) Lieutenants, and one (1) Captain. Any member who accepts
assignment to the Planning Office shall forfeit their bid position immediately upon
accepting said assignment. These positions in the Planning Office must be filled with
members already holding these ranks and no temporary appointments may be utilized to
fill them; i.e., there shall be no acting out of title. The members holding positions at the
Planning Office shall be required to work either five (5) eight (8) hour shifts from
Monday through Friday, 0800 hours until 1600 hours, or four (4) ten (10) hour shifts
between Monday and Friday, 0700 hours until 1700 hours, at the discretion of the
Commissioner. Those members holding positions at the Planning Office shall not be
eligible to work overtime in line shifts, and any overtime they work shall count towards
their overtime eligibility if they leave their position(s) at the Planning Office and return to
working line shifts.

6

17. The positions of Special Operations Division Chief and Safety Battalion Chief shall
remain biddable. The Battalion Chief of the Training Bureau shall remain non-biddable.
There shall be a position of Captain of EMS, and it shall be non-biddable.
18. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the Training Bureau of the Buffalo Fire
Department shall be staffed with the following biddable positions: two (2) Firefighters,
four (4) Lieutenants, and one (1) Captain. At the discretion of the Commissioner there
may also be additional positions at the Training Bureau, which may or may not be
biddable. In addition, there may be one (1) additional, and non-biddable, Firefighter
position at the Training Bureau to be filled by a member chosen by the Chief of the
Training Bureau, and that position shall be designated the Chief of the Training Bureau's
Assistant. Any member who accepts assignment as the Chief of the Training Bureau's
Assistant shall forfeit their bid position immediately upon accepting said assignment.
Those members holding positions at the Training Bureau shall be required to work either
five (5) eight (8) hour shifts from Monday through Friday, 0800 hours until 1600 hours,
or four (4) ten (10) hour shifts between Monday and Friday, 0700 hours until 1700 hours,
at the discretion of the Commissioner. Those members holding positions at the Training
Bureau shall not be eligible to work overtime in line shifts, and any overtime they work
shall count towards their overtime eligibility if they leave their position(s) and return to
working line shifts.
19. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the City and Local 282 agree that in the
event that the Training Bureau commences with training of outside agencies and/or
personnel, the parties shall meet to discuss the potential for the sharing of any profits
generated by such training, except for recruit academies and first line officer training
(i.e., "flip school").
20. Effective twenty-four (24) months from the ratification of this Agreement, any training
beyond daily shift training shall only be conducted through the Buffalo Fire Department
Training Bureau. Any EMS training must be conducted by the EMS Captain, F-20s, the
Deputy Commissioner of EMS, or the Training Bureau. If there are no qualified
instructors therein, trainings shall only be provided by qualified and certified instructors
from outside of the Buffalo Fire Department. Any training offered to members shall first
be offered to members assigned to the Training Bureau. No members shall be removed
from their companies to perform training except for recruit academies or first line officer
training (i.e., "flip school"). Members shall be utilized fortraining only within their own
·companies and only as an assistant to a Training Bureau member.·
21. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, when an officer position becomes vacant
for any reason and results in the number of members holding that position falling below
the agreed-upon minimum, the City shall promote from the then-existing promotional
list, pursuant to Civil Service Law, within sixty (60) days of the position becoming
vacant. If a member is not so promoted, on the sixty-first (61 s~ day after the position
7

became vacant the salary of the next member from the then-existing promotional list shall
be increased to that of the rank to which the member was eligible to be promoted. A
member so being paid the salary of a higher rank shall not serve in the capacity of that
rank unless and until the member is actually promoted. The member shall be treated
according to their lower rank and shall not be counted towards the agreed-upon minimum
number of officers at that rank. However, the member so being paid may act according
to the existing rules concerning acting time. If the then-existing promotional list expires,
the member who was not promoted shall continue to receive such increased salary until
the next promotional list is certified. In the case of multiple officer positions becoming
vacant, the City shall promote members from the then-existing promotional list, pursuant
to Civil Service Law, within sixty (60) days of the positions becoming vacant. If
members are not so promoted, on the sixty-first (61 st) day after the positions became
vacant, the salaries of the next members from the then-existing promotional list shall be
increased to that of the rank(s) to which those members were eligible to be promoted.
Any members so being paid the salary of a higher rank shall not serve in the capacity of
that rank unless and until they are actually promoted. The members shall be treated
according to their lower ranks and shall not be counted towards the agreed-upon
minimum number of officers at that rank. However, the members so being paid may act
according to the existing rules concerning acting time. If the then-existing promotional
list expires, those members who were not promoted shall continue to receive such
increased salaries until the next promotional list is certified. The City agrees to staff the
Buffalo Fire Department with at least the following officer positions: one hundred ten
(110) Lieutenants; forty (40) Captains; nineteen (19) Battalion Chiefs; and five (5)
Division Chiefs. These numbers shall be subject to modification in the event that the
City of Buffalo either closes or opens a fire company in the future.
22. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the Buffalo Fire Department shall furnish
officers and firefighters to provide emergency services (i.e., "Special Details") at public
events expected or anticipated to last in excess of four (4) hours when the Commissioner
or the Commissioner's designee determines that such events would require fire and/or
Emergency Medical Services. All such Special Details shall be conducted with off-duty
members on overtime and shall not include assignment of any on duty members.
Members so detailed shall be properly equipped to cope with all anticipated
contingencies. Any such event requiring services furnished by the Buffalo Fire
Department shall require at least four (4) members to be called in on overtime. However,
this paragraph shall not apply when the Buffalo Fire Department line companies are
"overstaffed," which shall mean whenever minimum manning requirements (i.e., one
hundred seventeen [117] members) for the line companies (i.e., the nineteen [19] Engine
companies, nine [9] Truck companies, and one [1] Rescue company) are exceeded. In
such case, if the Fire Department is overstaffed for a shift with a "Special Detail," those
members who are assigned to overstaffed companies may be utilized for the Special
Detail thereby reducing the number of call-ins accordingly. The call-ins for Special

8

Details described in this paragraph shall be made pursuant to the Memorandum of
Agreement dated September 3, 2014.
23. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the "IOD Policy," attached as "Appendix
C," shall supersede and replace the Injured On Duty ("IOD") policy previously in
existence.
24. The changes to the IOD Policy reflected in paragraph 23, above, shall only apply to
members whose injuries have occurred on or after the date of ratification of this
Agreement, and members already on IOD status as of the date of ratification of this
Agreement who have not yet applied for a G.M.L. §207-a retirement shall be subject to
Sections 7 and 8 of said IOD policy.
25. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the Union agrees to actively participate
with the City's efforts to enter into agreements with those individual members presently
receiving G.M.L. §207-a benefits and who are, or who shall become, eligible for
retirement. In addition, the Union, in cooperation with the City, shall meet with those
members receiving G.M.L. §207-a benefits who are identified by the City as potential
candidates for such agreements, and shall encourage those members to enter into such
agreements.
26. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, Section 14(K)(l) of the 2002
Memorandum of Agreement shall be modified to read as follows: "It is agreed that light
duty assignments for members that are disabled due to off-duty illness or injury shall be
limited to work at the Service Station and Fire Prevention Bureau. Such light duty
assignments shall be further limited to one (1) non-manpower light duty position on days
(i.e., 0800 hours to 1600 hours) at the Service Station, four (4) non-manpower light duty
positions on platoon schedule at the Service Station, eight (8) manpower light duty
positions on platoon schedule at the Service Station, and two (2) modified duty positions
at the Fire Prevention Bureau. The light duty positions at the Service Station and the
modified duty positions at the Fire Prevention Bureau shall not exceed a period of twelve
(12) months per person per occurrence of injury or illness. Members who are injured off. duty shall be assigned to the Service Station and/or the Fire Prevention Bureau even if the
thirteen (13) available positions at the Service Station and the Fire Prevention Bureau are
already filled with members who were IOD. In such event, those members injured offduty shall replace the members IOD, and those members injured on-duty shall be
permitted to remain off-duty." Section 14(K)(3) of the 2002 Memorandum of Agreement
shall be amended to remove the clause "until member .has exhausted all sick time," and
Section 14(K)(6) of the 2002 Memorandum of Agreement shall be amended to remove
the clause "This section shall not apply to disability due to pregnancy or maternity."
Therefore, upon a pregnant member's request, that pregnant member shall be entitled to·
the same benefits as a member who has suffered an off-duty· injury.

9

27. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the City shall increase the Automobile
Allowance to $22 per day.
28. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the City shall provide Local 282 with the
bi-weekly payroll records of all members. These records shall be provided in order to
allow Local 282 to accom;it for all overtime worked by members. These records shall be
used to place members in the overtime call-in system administered by Local 282.
29. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the maximum number of members
assigned to line duty in the twenty-nine (29) fire companies (i.e., the nineteen (19]
Engine companies, the nine [9] Ladder companies, and the one [1] Rescue company) who
may be off on Vacation Time and C Time for any given shift shall be thirty-one (31).
These numbers shall be subject to modification in the event that the City of Buffalo either
closes or opens a fire company in the future.
30. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the parties agree to immediately commence
with Labor-Management Committee Meetings which shall thereafter occur on at least a
monthly basis. This Labor-Management Committee may address issues including, but not
limited to changes in Departmental operations, member health care, job specifications,
and safety.
31. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement, the parties shall immediately commence
negotiations towards producing an updated Collective Bargaining Agreement which is
intended to incorporate all previous contract settlement agreements, interest arbitration
awards, memoranda of agreement, and grievance arbitration awards, including this
Agreement.
32. All terms and conditions of employment, contract provisions, Interest Arbitration
Decisions, and past practices currently in effect that are not specifically modified or
replaced by provisions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect, unless
mutually agreed to be modified by the parties, and shall be incorporated into the updated
Collective Bargaining Agreement which is contemplated by paragraph 31, above.
33. This Agreement is subject to approval of the Buffalo Common Council and ratification
by the membership of Local 282. It is understood that this Agreement shall be presented
first to Local 282's mernbership for ratification, at which time Local 282's Negotiating
Committee shall recommend the Agreement and utilize its best efforts to secure
ratification. Following ratification by Local 282, this Agreement shall be presented to the
Buffalo Fiscal Stability Authority for review and comment, and then shall be presented to
the Buffalo Common Council for approval, at which time the City's Negotiating
Committee will recommend the Agreement and utilize its best efforts to secure approval.
FOR THE CITY OF BUFFALO:
10

FOR THE CITY OF BUFFALO:

COMMISSIONER OF FIRE

~~&A
/
DONNA ESTRICH,
COMMISSIONER OF ADMINISTRATION,
FINANCE, POLICY & URBAN AFFAIRS

FOR THE BUFFALO PROFESSIONAL FIREFIGHTERS
ASSOCIATION, LOCAL 282, IAFF-AFL-CIO:

VINCENT A. VENTRESCA,
PRESIDENT

11

APPROVED AS TO FORM ONLY:

TIMOTHY A. BALL,
CORPORATION COUNSEL

12

Appendix A
Buffalo Fire Department
Swapping Guidelines
1.

Members shall first attempt to swap within their own company, and then within their
respective battalion, before seeking a city-wide swap.

2.

Swaps shall be rank for rank.

3.

All swaps must be completed within the budgetary year (i.e., July 1st to June 30th ).

4.

The member who is scheduled to work a shift shall be responsible for that shift. If no
member reports for a swapped shift, the scheduled member shall be penalized with the
forfeiture of time in the following order: Vacation time, then C time, then PL time, then
Sick time. If that member has no accrued time available then that member will be
considered AWOL, and appropriate disciplinary actions shall be taken.

5.

All swap requests will be made at least a full twenty-four (24) hours in advance.

6.

All swap requests shall be recorded in the Journal by the Company Officer.

7.

Shift change shall be at 0800 hours. In no event shall members be permitted, or required,
to work more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours, and those members working fortyeight (48) hours shall be required to be off for at least twenty-four (24) hours, except in
cases of emergency.

8.

A member may not swap a shift that has already been swapped.

9.

Approval for swapping shall begin at the Company Officer level, and must follow the
Chain of Command, with the Division Chief being the final approving authority.

13

Appendix B
Buffalo Fire Department
Home Confinement Policy
1.

Local 282 shall be informed as to whom or which entity will be conducting home
confinement checks.

2.

The individual(s) conducting the home confinement checks shall follow the following
parameters: upon arrival at the member's home address, the individual shall call the
member's cell phone and
A.

B.

If phone contact is made:
1.

The individual conducting the home confinement check shall approach the
member's residence to verify that the member is home;

11.

The individual conducting the home confinement check shall show the
member valid employer and personal identification;

iii.

The individual conducting the home confinement check shall provide the
member with written documentation of their home confinement check.

If phone contact is not made:

i.

The individual conducting the home confinement check shall leave a
voicemail message on the member's cell phone;

11.

The individual conducting the home confinement check shall take
photographs of the member's home and driveway;

iii.

The individual conducting the home confinement check shall then
approach the member's home and ring the doorbell (if any) and knock on
the door.

1v.

Once ten (10) minutes have passed, the individual conducting the home
confinement check shall leave written documentation of the home
confinement check adhered to the door of the member's home.

v.

When there has been no response from the member following this ten (10)
minute period, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the member has
violated the Buffalo Fire Department's Home Confinement Policy.

3.

A member may be subjected to a home confinement check up to two (2) times in a shift
for which they are off sick.

4.

Once a member is presumed to have violated the home confinement policy, such member
shall not be subject to another home confinement policy in the same shift.
14

5.

6.

Once the Buffalo Fire Department has decided to initiate home confinement checks for
members off sick, it shall either:
A.

Check every member who is off sick for a given shift; or

B.

Contact the President of Local 282 or the President's designee; and
1.

Inform the President that random home confinement checks for those
members off sick are to be initiated;

11.

Notify the President of the number of members off sick;

iii.

Notify the President of the number of members who shall be subjected to a
home confinement check; and

1v.

Obtain from the President a random list of numbers which shall be utilized
to select those members from the Commissioner's list of members off sick
who shall be subjected to a home confinement check.

Once the Buffalo Fire Department has decided to initiate home confinement checks for
members off IOD it shall either:
A.

Check every member who is off IOD for a given shift; or

B.

Contact the President of Local 282 or the President's designee; and
1.

Inform the President that random home confinement checks for IOD are to
be initiated;

11.

Notify the President of the number of members off I OD;

111.

Notify the President of the number of members who shall be subjected to a
home confinement check; and

iv.

Obtain from the President a random list of numbers which shall be utilized
to select those members from the Commissioner's list of members off 1OD
who shall be subjected to a home confinement check.

15

Appendix C

IOD Policy
1. Section 1: Intent and Definitions
a. This procedure is intended to implement the express language of §207-a of the
New York State General Municipal Law and is not intended to reduce any
benefits that firefighters are entitled to pursuant to G.M.L. §207-a, including any
benefit, requirement, or limitation under statute or case law the effective date of
which is subsequent to the enactment of this policy.
b. The parties hereto specifically acknowledge that the purpose of this agreement is
to enact procedural requirements for the provision of G.M.L. §207-a benefits in
the Buffalo Fire Department. The enactment of this policy is in no way intended
to alter the coverage available under G.M.L. §207-a for any particular type of
injury/illness, nor does it supersede any applicable case law concerning when
coverage applies or is available.
c. For the purposes of this procedure, "business day" shall mean Monday through
Friday excluding any holiday when City Hall is closed for regular business.
d. For the purposes of this procedure, "member" shall mean any member of the
Buffalo Fire Department who is covered under the provisions of G.M.L. §207-a.
e. For the purposes of this procedure, "Commissioner" shall mean the
Commissioner of Fire, or the Commissioner's designee.
f. "Physician" shall refer to a medical doctor, physician's assistant, chiropractor,
nurse practitioner, doctor of osteopathy, medical specialist, or other similarly
qualified medical professional.

2. Section 2: Notice of Disability or Need for Medical or Hospital Treatment
a. A member, or anyone acting on a member's behalf, who claims a right to benefits
under G.M.L. §207-a either because of a new illness or injury or the recurrence of
a prior illness or injury that was approved for 10D status, shall make written
applicati'on for those benefits within ten (10) business days of when the member
reasonably should have known that the illness or injury would give rise to the
16

claim of entitlement to G.M.L. §207-a benefits. The member shall have the
continuing right to supplement or amend their application with any information
obtained subsequent to the filing of such application, which shall re-start the
application process. Any dispute arising over an alleged failure of the member to
file application within the time limits set forth herein shall be subject to the
dispute resolution procedure provided for in Section 6, below. The application to
be filed shall include:
1. Form F-51 (Buffalo Fire Department Injury Report);
11.

New York State Fire Service Casualty Report;

111.

Member's and witness(es)' statements, which are to be provided on
separate Form-8s;

1v. HIPP A Release forms (i.e., those agreed to by the City and Local 282)
relating to treatment for claimed illness/injury from any and all providers;
v. Form F-51-1, if applicable (Buffalo Fire Department Infectious Exposure
Form);
vi. Members shall provide the discharge paperwork from the emergency
facility at which they were treated for their initial injury visit; and
v11. Members are also encouraged to submit any additional medical
documentation available to them at the time of their application
concerning their claimed illness/injury.
b. The failure to satisfy any time limits specified in Section 2(a), above, shall render
a notice of filing untimely and shall preclude an award of any benefits pursuant to
G.M.L. §207-a; provided, however, that the Commissioner shall have the
discretionary authority to excuse a failure to provide notice or file a report upon
good cause shown. Any alleged failure to satisfy the time limits under this
section shall be subject to the dispute resolution procedure set forth in Section 6,
below.
c. Upon submission of the member's application for G.M.L. §207-a benefits, the
Commissioner shall have five (5) business days (exclusive of the date of filing) to
object to the form and completeness of the application.
d. If the Commissioner declares that the application is improper in form or is
incomplete, the member shall receive an email and a telephonic notification, with
an email and telephonic notification to Local 282, which email shall include the
17

basis for the declaration that the member's application is improper in form or is
incomplete. This declaration shall serve to toll the Commissioner's five (5)
business day deadline.
e. When the member has been so notified by the Commissioner, the member shall
have the right to supplement and/or amend their application with any forms or
information necessary to make said application complete and proper. Such
supplement and/or amendment shall be made within five (5) business days of the
Commissioner's notification to the member.
f. The Commissioner shall then notify the member by email and telephonically with
an email to Local 282 whether the member's submission of additional materials
has completed the member's application, or whether any additional materials or
information are still necessary to complete said application.
g. In such case, the member shall have the right to supplement and/or amend their
application with any additional forms or information necessary to make said
application complete and proper. Upon the member's submission of such
additional forms or information, the Commissioner's five (5) business day
deadline shall no longer be tolled.
h. If no such email and telephonic notice is received by Local 282 and the member
within the Commissioner's five (5) business day deadline (exclusive of the date of
filing), the member's application shall be deemed to have been properly made. In
the case of an application deemed to have been properly made, that application
shall not then be denied based upon the incompleteness or improper form of said
application.
3. Section 3: Status Pending Determination of Eligibility for Benefits
a. The member shall be placed on Sick Leave pending determination of the
member's eligibility for G.M.L. §207-a benefits.
b. If the member's G.M.L. §207-a application is approved by the Commissioner, the
City shall reimburse the member for all Sick Leave expended during the
determination period within thirty (30) business days of the date of approval of
said application (exclusive of the date of the approval).

18

4. Section 4: Benefit Determinations
a. Once the member's application for G.M.L. §207-a benefits has been deemed to
have been properly made, the Commissioner shall promptly review that
application and either approve or deny it within ten (10) business days (exclusive
of the date the application is accepted).
b. To facilitate the Commissioner's determination of the member's application, the
Commissioner may send the member to a physician(s) of the Commissioner's
choosing for a medical examination at the City's expense. Whenever a member is
sent for a medical examination the member shall be paid a minimum of two (2)
hours of overtime at the member's then-current salary unless the examination is
scheduled during the member's. regularly-scheduled work shift.
c. The Commissioner shall have the right to obtain any and all medical records
pursuant to the authorizations in the member's application for G.M.L. §207-a
benefits. The Commissioner shall then provide the member, without cost to the
member, a copy of those records and reports provided to the City pursuant to said
authorizations. The medical authorizations shall be specifically limited to the
illness or injury for which benefits are claimed pursuantto Section 2(a), above.
d. The Commissioner's determination shall be made in writing to the member by
email, with a copy to Local 282 by email, setting forth in detail any and all
reasons for said determination.
e. In the event that the application is denied, the written denial shall include, without
cost to the member, a copy of all medical or other information produced or
acquired by the Commissioner in connection with the member's application for
G.M.L. §207-a benefits. The Commissioner shall continue to provide the member
with additional medical information subsequently produced or acquired.
f. Denial of G.M.L. §207-a benefits is appealable, at the member's option, pursuant
to the terms of Section 6, below. The Commissioner's determination shall include
notice and instructions to the member regarding how to initiate the appeal
process.
g. If the Commissioner fails to make a determination on the member's application
for G.M.L. §207-a benefits within ten (10) business days (exclusive of the date
the application is accepted) the member's application shall be deemed to have
been approved in all respects on the next (i.e., eleventh) business day.

19

h. The Commissioner shall also notify the appropriate Retirement System and
Comptroller in writing of the member's approved application for G.M.L. §207-a
benefits upon the Commissioner's approval of the member's application.
5. Section 5: Assignment from 1OD to Full Duty/Manpower Light Duty/Non-Manpower
Light Duty
a. The Commissioner may review the medical status of any member receiving
benefits under G.M.L. §207-a to make a determination as to that member's fitness
to return to full duty.
1.

To facilitate the Commissioner's determination of the member's fitness for
duty, the Commissioner may send the member to a physician(s) of the
Commissioner's choice for a medical examination at the City's expense.
Whenever a member is sent for a medical examination the member shall be
paid a mi?imum of two (2) hours of overtime at the member's then-current
salary unless the examination is scheduled during the member's regularlyscheduled work shift.

ii.

If the physician chosen by the Commissioner determines that the member is
fit for full duty, the member shall have ten (10) business days from the date
the member receives notification of that determination, which shall be made
in writing by email and telephonically to the member with a written copy
emailed to Local 282, to submit conflicting medical information indicating
that the member is not fit to return to full duty. If no conflicting medical
information i~ presented by the member or anyone acting on the member's
behalf, the member may be removed from 1OD status on the eleventh (11 th)
business day.

iii.

If there is a disagreement between the physician chosen by the
Commissioner and the member's physician as to the member's fitness to
return to full duty, the Commissioner may opt to send the member to an
agreed..upon Independent Medical Examiner (IME) for evaluation at the
City's expense; any and all IMEs shall be selected as provided for in
paragraph Se, below. If the IME is in agreement that the member may
return to full duty, then the Commissioner may direct the member to return
to full duty. It is understood that a member shall not be returned to full duty
until after the IME has made its determination of the member's fitness. If
the IME is in agreement that the member is not fit to return to full duty, then
the member continues to receive G.M.L. §207-a benefits.

20

b. As authorized by the provisions of G.M.L. §207-a(3), the Commissioner may
assign a disabled member specified light duties, consistent with the member's
status as a firefighter. There shall be two (2) types of specified light duties:
manpower light duty, and non-manpower light duty.
1.

Members who are assigned to manpower light duty shall be those deemed fit
to perform those duties agreed-upon by and between the Commissioner and
Local 282, at the Buffalo Fire Department Service Station. There shall be
twelve ( 12) positions for manpower light duty at the Service Station, three
(3) per platoon, and four (4) of which may be filled with non-manpower
light duty members, one (1) per platoon.

11.

Members who are assigned to non-manpower light duty shall be those
deemed fit to perform those limited duties agreed-upon by and between the
Commissioner and Local 282, at the Buffalo Fire Department Service
Station. There shall be (4) positions for non-manpower light duty at the
Service Station on the platoon schedule, one (1) per platoon.

111.

If the positions referenced in Section 5(b)(i) and S(b)(ii) are already filled,
whether by members injured on-duty or off-duty, the member shall
continue to receive G.M.L. §207-a benefits and remain off-duty.

c. After a period of seventy (70) calendar days (exclusive of the date the application
is approved) the Commissioner may advise the member receiving benefits under
G.M.L. §207-a that the member may be evaluated to determine whether the
member can perform manpower light duty.
1.

To facilitate the Commissioner's determination of the member's fitness to
perform manpower light duty, the Commissioner may send the member to a
physician(s) of the Commissioner's choosing for a medical examination at
the City's expense. Whenever a member is sent for a medical examination
the member shall be paid a minimum of two (2) hours of overtime at the
member's then-current salary unless the examination is scheduled during the
member's regularly-scheduled work shift.

11.

_If the physician chosen by the Commissioner determines that the member is
fit for manpower light duty, the member shall have ten ( 10) business days
from the date the member receives written notification of that determination
to submit conflicting medical information indicating that the member is not
fit to perform manpower light duty. If no conflicting medical information is
presented by the member or anyone actirig on the member's behalf, the
member may be placed on light duty on the eleventh (11 th ) day.

21

111.

If there is a disagreement between the physician chosen by the
Commissioner and the physician of the member's choosing as to the
member's fitness to perform manpower light duty, then the Commissioner
may opt to send the member to an agreed-upon Independent Medical
Examiner (IME) for evaluation at the City's expense; any and all IMEs shall
be selected as provided for in paragraph 5e, below. If the IME is in
agreement that the member is fit to perform manpower light duty, then the
Commissioner may assign the member to manpower light duty. It is
understood that a member shall not be assigned to manpower light duty until
after the IME has made its determination of the member's fitness. If the
IME is in agreement that the member is not fit to perform manpower light
duty, then the member continues to receive G.M.L. §207-a benefits.

d. After a period of one-hundred ten (110) calendar days (exclusive of the date the
application is approved) the Commissioner may advise the member receiving
benefits under G.M.L. §207-a that the member may be evaluated to determine
whether the member can perform non-manpower light duty.
i.

To facilitate the Commissioner's determination of the member's fitness to
perform non-manpower light duty, the Commissioner may send the member
to a physician(s) of the Commissioner's choice for a medical examination at
the City's expense. Whenever a member is sent for a medical examination
the member shall be paid a minimum of two (2) hours of overtime at the
member's then-current salary unless the examination is scheduled during the
member's regularly-scheduled work shift.

ii.

If the physician chosen by the Commissioner determines that the member is
fit for non-manpower light duty, the member shall have ten (10) business
days from the date the member receives written notification of that
determination to submit conflicting medical information indicating that the
member is not fit to perform non-manpower light duty. lfno conflicting
medical information is presented by the member or anyone acting on the
member's behalf, the member may be placed on non-manpower light duty.

iii.

If there is a disagreement between the physician chosen by the

Commissioner and the member's physician as to the member's fitness to
perform non-manpower light duty, then the Commissioner may opt to send
the member to an agreed-upon Independent Medical Examiner (IME) for
evaluation at the City;s expense; any and all IMEs shall be selected as
provided for in paragraph 5e, below. If the IME is in agreement that the
member is fit to perform non-manpower light duty, then the Commissioner
may assign the member to non-manpower light duty. It is understood that a
member shall not be assigned to non-manpower light duty until after the
22

IME has made its determination of the member's fitness. If the IME is in
agreement that the member is not fit to perform non-manpower light duty,
then the member continues to receive G.M.L. §207-a benefits.
e. The IME shall be chosen by a joint Labor-Management Committee consisting of
two (2) Local 282 members to be chosen by the President of Local 282, and two
(2) individuals who are employed by the City of Buffalo but are not members of
Local 282, to be chosen by the Commissioner. Once chosen, the IME shall be
required to tour the Service Station and become fully familiar with the physical
requirements of all light duty assignments. If the joint Labor-Management
Committee is unable to agree upon an IME, then the matter shall be submitted to
arbitration pursuant to the terms of Section 6, below. Pending the resolution of
said arbitration, the member shall continue to receive all G.M.L. §207-a benefits
to which the member is entitled.
f. Members who had been receiving G.M.L. §207-a benefits and who are working at
the Service Station in manpower light duty positions may accept overtime at the
Service Station if contacted for such overtime; however, those members shall not
exclusively be selected for those overtime assignments. In addition, thos~
members in manpower light duty positions who are eligible may act in officer
positions as per the existing policy.
g. Members who had been receiving G.M.L. §207-a benefits and who are working at
the Service Station in non-manpower light duty positions shall not be entitled to
overtime opportunities, and shall not be eligible to act in officer positions.
h. It is understood that assignment to manpower light duty and non-manpower light
duty for members who had been receiving G.M.L. §207-a benefits is temporary,
and in no event shall a member who had been receiving G.M.L. §207-a benefits
be held in any type of manpower light duty and non-manpower light duty
position(s) for more than one (1) year, six (6) months, except as noted in Section
8, below.

6. Section 6: Dispute Resolution Procedure
a. In the event that the Commissioner initially denies a member's application for
G.M.L. §207-a benefits; seeks to discontinue G.M.L. §207-a benefits; there is an
issue with respect to outside employment; there is an issue regarding whether a
memb.er has waived the member's benefits; the parties are unable to agree upon
an IME pursuant to Section Se, above; or any other dispute concerning continued
entitlement to G.M.L. §207-a benefits, the matter shall be submitted to an
23

impartial arbitrator for determination pursuant to the procedure outlined in this
section, below.
b. An arbitrator shall be appointed from a panel agreed to by the parties, based upon
a rotating schedule of availability. Said panel shall be subject to annual review
and each party may strike an arbitrator from the panel on an annual basis with
written notice to the other party by December 1st of each year. The parties shall
then mutually select a replacement for each stricken arbitrator. A hearing shall be
held within thirty (30) calendar days of appointment except that the deadline may
be extended upon mutual consent in writing. The arbitrator shall render a
decision within thirty (30) calendar days of the hearing date. The arbitrator's
determination shall be based upon the submissions made at the hearing, and the
parties shall not be permitted to submit post-hearing briefs or arguments, unless
mutually agreed to.
c. The parties shall have the option, upon mutual consent and whenever practicable,
to submit their respective evidence and positions to the arbitrator upon a
stipulated record and written arguments, without necessity of a hearing. In this
case, such submission shall be made to the arbitrator on or before day thirty (30),
measured from the date of the Commissioner's contested determination.
d. Should the arbitration process extend beyond ninety (90) calendar days measured
from the date of the Commissioner's contested determination, the member shall
be placed on interim G.M.L. §207-a leave until such time as the arbitrator makes
a final determination. Any leave time advanced pursuant to this paragraph shall
be recouped by the City, in the event that the arbitrator finds that the member's
application for benefits should be denied.
e. Should the arbitrator's decision award the member G.M.L. §207-a benefits, the
member shall have restored to the member any accruals expended during the
hearing process within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of said decision.
f.

The determination of the arbitrator shall be final and binding upon the City and
the member, but shall not preclude further review at a subsequent date based upon
new or supplemental medical or other information. The cost of the arbitration
shall be borne equally by the City and Local 282. The costs of any transcript, or
medical testimony, shall be borne by the person/party requesting the same.

24

7. Section 7: Disability Retirement
a. Consistent with G.M.L. §2O7-a, the City may file an application on the member's
behalf for retirement under Sections 363 or 363-c of the New York State
Retirement and Social Security Law. Any injured or sick member who is
receiving G.M.L. §2O7-a benefits shall permit reasonable medical inspections in
connection with such an application for accidental disability retirement or
performance of duty disability retirement. Whenever a member is sent for a
medical examination the member shall be paid two (2) hours of overtime at the
member's then-current salary unless the examination is scheduled during the
member's regularly-scheduled work shift.
b. Salary payments provided by G.M.L. §2O7-a shall terminate upon the member
being retired pursuant to an accidental disability retirement or a performance of
duty disability retirement as set forth in the Retirement and Social Security Law.
Upon such retirement, the member may also be entitled to those benefits provided
for under G.M.L. §2O7-a. The City reserves the right to make a determination
independent of the findings of the New York State Comptroller as to whether_ the
member is entitled to G.M.L. §2O7-a benefits, including those benefits available
under G.M.L. §207-a(2). Notwithstanding the member's retirement status, the
member shall be entitled to appeal any denial of, or failure to process, a request
for G.M.L. §207-a benefits to binding arbitration pursuant to Article XXIII of the
Collective Bargaining Agreement.
8. Section 8: Assignment to Modified Duty
a. Modified Duty shall consist of positions created at the Fire Prevention Bureau and
at the Service Station to be filled by those members who have been denied both
an accidental disability retirement two (2) times, as well as a performance of duty
disability retirement two (2) times. Modified duty is understood to be the
equivalent of what is commonly referred to as "desk duty." These newly-created
positions are in addition to any other agreed-upon positions.
b. A member who has been denied an accidental disability retirement two (2) times
as well as a performance of duty disability retirement two (2) times may then be
evaluated to determine the member's fitness to perform Modified Duty.
c. The Commissioner may notify the member who has been denied an accidental
disability retirement two (2) times as well as a performance of duty disability
retirement two (2) times that the member's fitness to perform Modified Duty is
being reviewed. The Commissioner may then send the member to the
physician(s) of the Commissioner's choosing for a medical examination at the
City's expense.
25

d. If the physician chosen by the Commissioner determines that the member is fit to
perform Modified Duty, the member shall have ten (10) business days from the
date of the Commissioner's determination to submit conflicting medical evidence.
If no conflicting medical information is presented by the member or anyone
acting on the meniber's behalf, the member may be placed on modified duty on
the eleventh (11 th) business day.
e. If there is a disagreement between the physician chosen by the Commissioner and
the member's physician as to the member's fitness to perform Modified Duty, the
Commissioner may opt to send the member to an agreed-upon Independent
Medical Examiner (IME) for evaluation at the City's expense; any and all IMEs
shall be selected as provided for in paragraph Se, above. If the IME is in
agreement that the member is fit to perform Modified Duty, then the
Commissioner may assign the member to Modified Duty. It is understood that a
member shall not be assigned to Modified Duty until after the IME has made its
determination of the member's fitness. If the IME is in agreement that the
member is not fit to perform Modified Duty, then the member continues to
receive G.M.L. §207-a benefits.
f. In the case of a member assigned to Modified Duty, the member's Modified Duty
assignment shall become the member's permanent assignment in the Buffalo Fire
Department. That member shall then be trained to fulfill all of the duties and
responsibilities of that Modified Duty position and will become eligible to work
overtime in that position.
9. Section 9: Continuation of Contract Benefits
a. For the first one-hundred eighty (180) days ofleave pursuant to G.M.L. §207-a, a
member shall continue to accrue all contract benefits. After one-hundred eighty
(180) days from the date of the member's injury, the member shall not accrue any
contract benefits except for wages, applicable longevity, health and dental
insurance; however, nothing contained herein shall operate to restriqt any benefit
available under G.M.L. §207-a.
10. Section 10: Outside Employment
a. If, as a result of an investigation, the Commissioner determines that a member has
engaged in paid outside employment while simultaneously receiving salary
pursuant to G.M.L. §207-a, the Commissioner shall provide written notice of such
determination to the member with a copy to Local 282. The notice shall specify
· in detail any and all reasons and the factual basis for those reasons for the
determination. The member may appeal the determination pursuant to Section 6,
26

above. The arbitrator shall have the authority to determinethe amount of benefit
to be reimbursed, if any, and direct the manner in which such reimbursement shall
be made. The member must provide the City, upon request, with a W-2 form or
tax returns or other proof other than sworn statements. The member may redact
irrelevant information from the income tax information requested by the City,
e.g., spousal income. Additionally, the Commissioner shall have the right to
discipline the member pursuant to Article XXIV of the Agreement.

27

Attachment 1 to IOD Policy
Manpower Light Duty

DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF THE CLASS
An incumbent to a position in this class drives or rides while responding to an alarm of fire and
other emergency calls on F9 or other Service Station apparatus. Duties include working a 24hour shift, manual repetitive work, hooking up and unhooking air bottles from air-packs,
delivering of supplies, daily house work, applicable training.

TYPICAL WORK ACTIVITIES
Work a 24-hour shift.
Drive or Ride apparatus specific to the service station (excluding Fire Engines/Trucks)
sometimes in emergency conditions (Lights and Sirens) to all levels of critical incidents;
Entering Service Station vehicle (F9, subject to change) 18.5 inches from ground to first step, 15
inches first step to second step, 15 inches second step into vehicle, all steps are straight up
leading to cab;
Deliver Supplies, loading and unloading: Full ½ hour bottles- 11 lbs, Full 1 hour bottles- 18 lbs.,
Air-pack, only- 17 .1 lbs., Full large 02 bottle- 18 lbs., Full small 02 bottle- 8 lbs;
Loading and unloading of Monthly Supplies with assistance: Boxes of supplies up to 50 lbs., Oil
Absorbent- 50 lbs., Fire Ade 2000- 40 lbs., Extinguishers weighing up to 40 lbs., Tools weighing
up to 50 lbs., Turnout Gear weighing up to 30 lbs., Case of bottled water- 30 lbs;
Fill Air Bottles: Pushing while twisting to tum off bottles, unscrewing bottle connection,
removing bottles from air-packs, hook empty bottles up to filling station, removing bottles from
chest to knee height, replacing bottles on air-packs, lifting empty and full Hour and half hour
bottles, load and unload water cooler, full of ice and water, repetitive bending, twisting and
lifting of bottles;
Duties at Service Station: Load and unload bottles from apparatus, load and unload bottles from
cart, wheel bottles to filling station, load bottles into filling station, connecting bottles to filling
station;
Housework: Sweeping, mopping, moving chairs, washing dishes, washing BFD apparatus;
Watch duties: Responsible for monitoring and recording, flow of personnel and equipment,
incoming alarms, notifying appropriate personnel for response, recording supply orders, deliver
correspondences locally;
Attend or perform necessary and applicable training.

28

Attachment 2 to IOD Policy
Assignment for Manpower Light Duty Members

A member MUST be able to perform ALL of the following duties in order to be recommended
for Manpower Light Duty assignment.
_Drive apparatus specific to Service Station (excluding Fire Engines/Trucks), in some cases
while responding to critical incidents under full emergency conditions (lights and sirens).
_Ride apparatus specific to Service Station (excluding Fire Engines/Trucks), in some cases
while responding to critical incidents under full emergency conditions (lights and sirens).
_Do the repetitive work of Filling Air Bottles, in some cases at emergency scenes.
_Deliver Supplies
Housework
Stand Watch
Work a 24-hour shift

29

Attachment 3 to IOD Policy
Non-Manpower Light Duty

DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF THE CLASS
An incumbent to a position in this class responds as a passenger to an alarm of fire and other
emergency calls on F9 or other Service Station apparatus. Duties include working a 24-hour
shift, assisting other Service Station Personal at quarters and emergency scenes, assist with
deliveries, daily housework, applicable training.
TYPICAL WORK ACTIVITES
Work a 24-hour shift.
Ride apparatus specific to the Service Station (not Fire Engine/Truck), including under full
emergency conditions (lights and sirens) to all levels of critical incidents;
Entering Service Station vehicle (F9, subject to change) 18. 5 inches from ground to first step, 15
inches first step to second step, 15 inches second step into vehicle, all steps are straight up
leading to cab;
Deliver Supplies: Assisting Manpower members to the level that they are medically capable;
Fill Air Bottle: Assisting Manpower members to the level that they are medically capable;
Housework: Sweeping, mopping, moving chairs, washing dishes, washing BFD apparatus.
Watch duties: Responsible for monitoring and recording, flow of personnel and equipment,
incoming alarms, notifying appropriate personnel for response, recording supply orders, deliver
correspondences locally.
Attend or perform necessary and applicable training.

30

Attachment 4 to IOD Policy
Assignment for Non-Manpower Light Duty Members

A member MUST be able to perform ALL of the following duties in order to be recommended
for Non-Manpower Light Duty assignment.
_Ride Service Station apparatus (not Fire Engine/Truck), in some cases while responding to
critical incidents under full emergency conditions (lights and sirens).
_Assist with Delivering Supplies
Housework
Stand Watch
Work a 24-hour shift

31
