MASTER AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE
COLDWATER COMMUNITY SCHOOLS
BOARD OF EDUCATION
and the
COLDWATER EDUCATION ASSOCIATION
07-1-24 through 06-30-2027

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I

RECOGNITION

3

ARTICLE II

TEACHER AND ASSOCIATION RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

4

ARTICLE III

BOARD RIGHTS

5

ARTICLE IV

PROFESSIONAL COMPENSATION

6-7

ARTICLE V

TEACHING HOURS AND ASSIGNMENTS

8-10

ARTICLE VI

TEACHING CONDITIONS

11-12

ARTICLE VII

SENIORITY

13

ARTICLE VIII

LEAVES OF ABSENCE

15-20

ARTICLE IX

INSURANCE PROTECTION

22

ARTICLE X

TEACHER EVALUATION

24

ARTICLE XI

MENTOR TEACHING

25

ARTICLE XII

RETIREMENT

26

ARTICLE XIII

PROTECTION OF TEACHERS

27

ARTICLE XIV

WAIVER CLAUSE

28

ARTICLE XV

DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE

29

ARTICLE XVI

PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES FOR CONTINUATION
OF THE EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM

30

ARTICLE XVII

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

31-33

ARTICLE XVIII

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

34

ARTICLE XIX

DURATION AND RATIFICATION OF AGREEMENT

35

APPENDIX A

SALARY SCHEDULE

36-39

APPENDIX B

SCHEDULE OF REMUNERATION FOR ATHLETIC
EXTRA-DUTY ASSIGNMENTS

APPENDIX C

40-41

SCHEDULE OF REMUNERATION FOR NON-ATHLETIC
EXTRA-DUTY ASSIGNMENTS

42-43

APPENDIX D

GRIEVANCE REPORT FORM

44-45

APPENDIX E

EMPLOYEE ABSENCE FORM

46

APPENDIX F

MENTOR GUIDELINES

47-48

APPENDIX G

DANIELSON EVALUATION TOOL

49

CALENDAR

50-51

LOAS

52-55

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

2

ARTICLE I - RECOGNITION
A. The Board of Education (the “Board”) of Coldwater Community Schools (“the District”), hereby
recognizes the Coldwater Education Association the ("Association") as the sole and exclusive
bargaining representative as defined in Act 336 of the Public Acts of 1947 as amended, for all
certified teaching personnel under contract, librarians, middle and high school guidance counselors,
and school social workers, but excluding substitutes, per diem appointment teachers, and nonregularly employed part-time teachers, administrators, supervisors, casual employees, and
volunteers of the Adult Education programs, and all other supervisory personnel, including but
not necessarily limited to the following: the Superintendent, Assistant Superintendent, Principals,
Assistant Principals, and all office, clerical, and maintenance and operating employees.
1. The term “Teacher”, when used in this Agreement, shall refer to all employees
represented by the Association in the bargaining unit including certified teachers, social
workers and counselors and singular shall include plural.
2. The term “the Board” shall include its officers and agents, including administration.
B. The board agrees not to negotiate with any other organization other than the association
for the duration of this agreement.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

3

ARTICLE II - TEACHER RESPONSIBILITIES AND ASSOCIATION RIGHTS
A. The Association shall have the right to use school buildings at reasonable hours for meetings,
provided they have prior approval from the building principal and/or superintendent. Bulletin
boards, mailboxes, mail distribution and daily bulletins shall be made available to the Association
and its members. The Association shall be responsible for any material placed upon the bulletin
boards or distribution through mailboxes or any mail distribution or daily bulletins.
B. The Association may use the email system for, among other things, notification of Association
events, meeting dates and times, collection of personal contact information, notification of
Association elections/dates/times, and notifying members of contract provisions and rights. The
Association understands there is no expectation of privacy with any communications on the
District’s system. The Association shall assume responsibility for contents of communications and
shall comply with the applicable provisions of the District’s Technology Acceptable Use and Safety
Policies when using its e-mail. The Association shall not use the District’s mailboxes or e-mail
service to disseminate information supporting or opposing a candidate or a ballot proposal or for any
other unlawful reason.
C. Upon written request, the Board agrees to furnish the Association available information concerning
the financial resources of the district, adopted budgets, and such other information as the
Association may reasonably require to be informed and constructively develop programs on
behalf of its membership, prepare for negotiations, and process grievances. Items exempted by
the Michigan Freedom of Information Act, of 1977, (“FOIA”), as amended, will not be provided
unless otherwise required by the Public Employees Relations Act (“PERA”). The Association shall
pay fees for producing such documents in accordance with FOIA. The Association and its agents
will provide the district information requested necessary for negotiations and grievances, as required
by PERA.
D. The Association shall have the rights as afforded to it by law, the Constitutions of the State of
Michigan, and the United States.
E. The Association and the teachers recognize that the professional duty of each teacher is to use
t h e i r skills and expertise in the most effective and proper manner to improve the quality of
the educational process in the District.
F. The Board agrees to allow payroll deductions for any ( MESSA), and current deductions will be
continued provided such deductions are duly authorized and paid for by the individual teacher
involved. By October 1 of any school year, all authorization will be filed with the payroll
department of the business office. Once filed, authorization shall continue in effect until a written
and signed revocation by the individual teacher involved is submitted to the payroll department.
G. Teachers will have reasonable access to their building during the summer months.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

4

ARTICLE III - BOARD RIGHTS
A. The Board, on its own behalf and on behalf of the electors of the district, retains and reserves unto
itself, without limitation, all powers, rights, authority, duties and responsibilities conferred upon and
vested in it by the laws and constitution of the State of Michigan, and the United States, including,
but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the right:
1. To the executive management and administrative control of the school system and its
properties and facilities, and the activities of its employees;
2. To hire all employees and, subject to the provisions of law and this Agreement, to
determine their qualifications and the conditions for their continued employment, or their
dismissal or demotion, and to promote and transfer all such employees;
3. To establish grades and courses of instruction, including special programs, and to provide
for athletic, recreational and social events for students, all as deemed necessary or advisable
by the Board;
4. To decide upon the means and methods of instruction, the selection of textbooks and
other teaching materials, and the use of teaching aids of every kind and nature, after
considering the recommendations of a committee representing the teaching staff concerned;
5. To determine class schedules, the hours of instruction, and the duties, responsibilities, and
assignments of teachers and other employees with respect thereto, and non-teaching
activities, and the terms and conditions of employment, subject to the terms of this
Agreement.
6. To adopt reasonable rules and regulations, including establishing reasonable provisions for
health, safety, and first aid of employees on grounds and at District-related events.
7. To participate in cooperative educational programs with any entities.
B. The exercise of the foregoing powers, rights, authority, duties and responsibilities by the Board,
the adoption of policies, rules, regulations and practices, and the use of judgment and discretion
shall be limited only by the specific and express terms of this Agreement and then only to the extent
such specific and express terms hereof are in conformance with the Constitutions and laws of the
S t a t e o f M i c h i g a n a n d t h e United States. Nothing contained herein shall be considered
to deny or restrict the Board of its rights, responsibilities, and authority under the Michigan General
School Laws or any other national, state, county, district, or local laws or regulations as they pertain
to education.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

5

ARTICLE IV - PROFESSIONAL COMPENSATION
A. Salaries of teachers are set forth in the attached Appendix A. The salaries contained therein shall
be full compensation for the service performed by the teacher.
B. The salary schedule is based upon a normal weekly duty load as defined in articles having to do
with teaching hours, loads, and assignments.
C. A teacher assigned an additional academic class above the normal teaching load, will be
compensated on pro-rata amount of their annual base salary.
D. A teacher engaged during the school day in negotiating on behalf of the Association with any
representative of the Board shall be released from regular duties without loss of salary, provided
the time for such negotiation has previously been set up by mutual agreement of the parties.
E. Within the guidelines of reasonable judgment by the building principals and within budget,
teachers may be released for educational conferences. If such teacher is released to attend the
educational conference, the teacher shall receive no pay loss. Expenses approved by the employer
will be allowed.
F. Compensation is based upon the number of contractual days. For a teacher's absence not chargeable
to the absences permitted in Article VIII, there shall be deducted from the teacher's salary a per
diem share of the annual contract salary.
G. Basic salaries for teacher will be based on twenty-six (26) pay periods unless a teacher notifies the
payroll office by August 1 of the upcoming contract year that the teacher desires to be paid in twentyone (21) pay periods. Based on the teacher’s election, their choice will remain in effect for all
future school years unless the teacher notifies the payroll office by August 1 of the upcoming school
year.
H. Compensation for extra-duty assignments outside the normal teaching load shall be paid in
accordance with Appendix B and/or Appendix C. The teacher shall have the right to decline extraduty assignments, except where such duties directly relate to teaching assignments such as band and
choir.
I.

Teachers who, at the superintendent's request, agree to do curriculum development work outside
the school day, and/or calendar year, will be compensated at the rate of $40 (forty dollars) per
hour. The number of hours and other conditions of the work will be agreed upon by the
teacher and the superintendent prior to the work time.

J.

Teachers, who at the superintendent’s request, attend professional development outside the school
day, and/or calendar year, will be compensated at the rate of $40 per hour.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

6

K. When initially hired, the Board has the right to place a newly-hired teacher at any salary step, up to
and including, the step commensurate with the teacher’s experience. The Board agrees to exercise
appropriate legal discretion in granting salary step placement and to remain in accordance with all
state and federal civil rights laws.
L. Credit for military service and/or Peace Corps service may be granted for a maximum of two (2)
years on the appropriate salary schedule. Said Military service credit will be granted on the basis
of record of honorable discharge.
M. Initial placement on the salary schedule shall not be subject to the grievance procedure.
N. Teachers traveling from building to building within the district, while conducting school business,
shall be reimbursed at the standard IRS mileage rate as stated January 1 for the calendar year. The
same allowance shall be given for the use of personal cars for other school business providing the
teacher has prior approval of the Superintendent or Assistant Superintendent for such trips.
O. Teachers who are called upon to assist for classroom coverage by the building administration will
be paid at the rate of $40.00 (forty dollars) per hour. Time will be calculated in one-quarter hour
increments (one-quarter hour minimum) rounded to the next quarter- hour. Teachers shall be
required to assist in hourly classroom coverage during their planning time when directed by their
building administrator.
P. Elementary teachers will be paid $40.00 a day or $20.00 a half day when they are required to split
up another teachers class due to the lack of a substitute teacher.
Q. Absent an emergency, substitute teachers will be hired if the teacher is absent a half day or more,
for all teachers including interventionist, elementary vocal music, art, media technology, and
physical education teachers when said teachers are absent.
R. Teachers with less than a full-time assignment will be classified a s part-time. Part-time teachers
will have a prorated salary and fringe benefits, provided the teacher works at least half time.
S. The Board will reimburse teachers up to $250.00 per semester credit hour for six (6) hours in a two
(2) year period for course work pre-approved by the Superintendent provided that the teacher
receives a minimum of a “B” grade.
T. Building and district teams may be established by the administration to promote continuous district
and school improvement. When teams are required to meet outside of the school day or calendar
year, team members will be compensated at the rate of $40.00 per hour. The number of hours and
other conditions of the work will be agreed upon by the team members and the Superintendent prior
to the work time.
U. Employees who receive an “effective,” or better evaluation, and who will not progress to another
step at the start of the upcoming school year because they are at the top of the scale or a cap in the
steps will receive a six-hundred dollar ($600) bonus at the start of the next school year, and retirees
will be payable by June 30th of the school year in which they received their evaluation.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

7

ARTICLE V - TEACHING HOURS AND ASSIGNMENTS
A. It is the responsibility of each individual teacher, as well as the Board, to provide the highest
quality educational program practicable for every s t u d e n t in the school district. To this end,
the teacher should maintain practices inherent in th e ir profession such as: (1) carefully written
daily preparation; (2) attendance at staff meetings; and (3) encouraged participation in activities
of the school and community.
B. The school year shall include one (1) pre-service, professional development, and one-half (½)
post- service days as determined by the negotiated calendar and three (3) additional evening
events to include (i.e, open houses, orientations, graduations, and student celebrations) outside
the negotiated calendar as determined by the building principal. The three (3) additional evening
events will be determined and shared on building calendars at the start of each school year.
C. The Board will provide a minimum of 30 (thirty) hours of qualifying SCECH professional
development for tenured teachers and a minimum of 35 (thirty-five) hours of qualifying SCECH
professional development for untenured teachers. Professional Development days are to be
negotiated as part of the yearly calendar. The Board and the Association will establish a district
wide professional development advisory committee in accordance with MCL 388.1701 (10).
D. Definitions:
1. “Student contact time” is the time during which the teacher is responsible for
providing direct classroom instruction to students, supervising an approved student
activity, or carrying out an activity necessary for the implementation of student
instruction.
2. “Planning time” is time allocated for instructional planning and completing responsibilities
inherent to one’s teaching and is free from student supervision responsibilities. The last
thirty-five (35) minutes of PLC time shall be considered planning. Teachers will have at
least fifty (50) minutes of planning each student day, in addition to PLC time.
3. “Pre-service time” is paid work time before the first student contact day which the teacher
will use for planning and the preparation of individual workstations. This time will be no
longer than the teacher workday.
4. “Professional Development time” is paid work time within the negotiated calendar year.
Students shall be excused from all identified classes, and teachers shall be provided
with activities for professional development. This time will be no longer than the teacher
workday.
5. “Post-service time” is paid time after the last student contact day each semester/trimester
and are to be used to finalize grades, update records, or to perform other activities
necessary for the closure of a semester/trimester. This time will be no longer than the
teacher workday.
6. “Instructional time” shall consist of the time necessary for a student to meet the state
mandates. Additionally, the parties agree to meet any changes required by the School
Code for the life of this contract.
7.

“Early release PLC teamwork” is time allocated for collaborative meetings, free from
student supervision, in order to discuss data, share strategies and work on curriculum

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

8

within the contract day. PLC time is seventy-five (75) minutes and may include up to three
(3) PD days. Teachers will not require compensation for these three (3) days of PD.
8.

The “teacher workday”, including social workers/counselors, shall extend a total of twenty
(20) minutes either before or after the start of the instructional day. These 20 minutes shall
be considered student supervision and is on a rotational basis for teachers. Each building’s
administrator will determine the needs of the building when determining before or after
school supervision. A committee of teachers, as determined by the Association, and the
building administrator will determine the supervision schedule. Any additional time beyond
this, as determined by the principal, will be paid at $40.00 per hour.

9.

Each certified teacher, excluding social workers/counselors, shall be assigned a
minimum of two hundred eighty-five (285) minutes of planning time allocated per week
and a daily minimum of thirty (30) minutes for duty-free lunch (but not less than a
student’s allocated lunch period) except on board- approved professional development
days.

10.

The teacher’s workday shall be contiguous with no split schedule unless mutually agreed
upon by the Association, the administration and all the teachers directly involved.

11. The school social worker’s/counselor’s day shall include a daily thirty (30)-minute dutyfree lunch except on board-approved professional development days. Assignment and
schedule flexibility for counselors, social workers and interventionists will be determined
by need and subject to administrative review upon request of the assigned administrator.
12. The teacher “work year” will not exceed 186 days Monday through Friday. The Elementary
work day is seven (7) hours and no minutes, a n d t h e Secondary work day is six (6) hours
and fifty (50) minutes. This excludes a thirty (30) minute duty-free lunch. Elementary
teachers will be paid $500 per year as an offset for the longer day. The stipend will be paid
in May. Teachers working part time, or less than a year will be paid at a pro rata basis.
E. Assignments:
Assignments shall be made at the discretion of the Administration and within the area of the
teacher's competency and certification.
F. Teacher Building Meetings:
1. General faculty meetings are intended as a means of communication between
Administration and all staff. Staff representatives and the principal may cooperate in
setting agenda, location, frequency, and length of such meetings.
2. General faculty meetings will not exceed twelve (12) per year in number, excluding inservice, grade level, departmental, and emergency meetings. Attendance at general faculty
meetings is mandatory unless excused by the building principal. Whenever possible,
direct notice will be given twenty-four hours in advance. Part-time teachers shall attend
all meetings. Itinerant teachers will attend a proportional number of meetings in both or
all buildings to which they are assigned as agreed to by the principals involved. Excessive
use of faculty meetings should be discouraged.
3. Staff meetings shall not exceed a duration of 60 minutes.
Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

9

F. Principals will prepare non-instructional duty schedules and make assignments with the exception
of lunchroom duty.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

10

ARTICLE VI - TEACHING CONDITIONS
A. The parties recognize that optimum school facilities for both student and teacher are desirable to insure
the high quality of educational environment.
B. The Board and the Association recognize the importance of reducing the pupil/ teacher ratio in certain
areas of instruction and that for the most effective learning experience the following class sizes within
the grade levels indicated are desirable:
Grade

Maximum

Young 5’s

20 or less

Kindergarten

26

First & Second Grade

28

Third Grade

30

Fourth and Fifth

30

Grade

Maximum

6-12 Co-Taught

28

6-12 PE

38

6-12 Performing Arts

No Maximum

6-12

All other classes 34

In the event of a teacher overload, the administration shall meet with the teacher (and the representative
of the Association) to seek a workable solution to the problem(s) identified. In the event that the limits
are exceeded, one of the following methods of relief shall be granted:
a. Mutual consent between the teacher and the administration (and a representative of the
association) that the education of students is not being adversely affected;
b. Pay overload compensation of two dollars ($2) per day (pro-rated for secondary and
enrichment teachers) per student in excess of the limits.
C. The Board will continue its effort to keep the schools reasonably and properly equipped
and maintained.
D. The Board shall make available in each new school building or school building hereafter remodeled:
an adequate lunchroom, and lavatory facilities exclusively for teacher use, and at least one room
appropriately furnished which shall be reserved as a faculty lounge. This would apply to
extensive modifications only.
E. In order to provide adequate general supervision of the building, the following guidelines will apply:
1. In each building the principal shall exercise the necessary authority to assign an
appropriate professional staff person or persons to be responsible for the general
supervision of the building in the absence of the principal.
2. In each building, the requisite planning procedures will be established by the principal
Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

11

with representative staff members to insure that there is at all times an appropriate
professional staff person or persons in charge of the building. Said person or persons
are empowered by the delegation to make decisions in those extraordinary situations which
require immediate attention.
F. Principals may institute professional development during the school hours. Implementation of
such programs shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

12

ARTICLARTICLE VII –SENIORITY, PLACEMENT, LAYOFF AND RECALL
A. Seniority shall be defined as the length of unbroken service within the bargaining unit beginning
with the first date of hire or transfer into the bargaining unit.
B. The first date of hire shall be defined as the first day teachers report to work. Employees on unpaid
leave shall not accumulate seniority. Employees on lay-off shall continue to accumulate seniority.
C. Unpaid leave shall be defined as more than 90 days (91 full days or more) during a school year.
D. The updated seniority list shall be published with notation of certification/approvals of each
employee and emailed to employees.
E. Employees shall file objections to the seniority list with 10 days, thereafter the list shall be final
and conclusive.
F. All teachers deemed to have the same date of hire shall be placed on the seniority list based upon
the highest last four digits of the employees social security number. The teacher with the highest
last four digits shall be placed as the more senior.
G. Decisions about placement, reduction and recall of a teacher shall comply with Revised School Code
Section 1248.
H. The Superintendent or designee decides placement decisions, when a vacancy exists and when a
posting is made. A “vacancy” shall be defined as an unassigned, open position or a newly created
position which the district intends to fill. Vacancies shall be posted at least ten days prior to being
filled.
I.

Acting within the approved budget, the Superintendent is responsible for establishing the number
and nature of teaching assignments to implement the approved curriculum. If the Superintendent
determines that insufficient funds are budgeted for existing staff or that a reduction in teaching staff
is necessary due to a program, curricular, or other operational consideration(s), the Superintendent
will recommend to the Board the teaching positions to be reduced. Prior to issuance of layoff notices,
the CEA will be given an opportunity to make specific recommendations regarding the particular
implementation of layoff procedures planned by the district.

J.

The Superintendent or designee has discretion to place, transfer, or layoff or recall a Bargaining Unit
member into a position for which they are certified for, for a reason that is not arbitrary or capricious
including, but not limited to, the following clear and transparent factors:
1) Compliance with State and Federal laws, regulatory standards, and state grant, and
categorical funding requirements.
2) Qualifications determined by the district, including but not limited to credentials necessary
for school or program accreditation.
3) Disciplinary record.
4) Effectiveness based on previous evaluations.
5) Length of service in the grade level or subject area.
6) Professional development, special training, additional training, additional certification(s),
and experiences that lend themselves to the classroom.

K. The Teacher and the Association will be notified in person, and outside of the working day, of the
anticipated placement change and the reason for the change by the Superintendent or designee.
Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027
13

L. A Teacher is eligible for recall for 18 months from the date the district implemented the reduction in
force. Teachers placed on layoff will continue to receive all insurance benefits until the end of the
month of the layoff notice. Teachers wishing to continue insurance beyond that point may do so on
their own by purchasing COBRA continuation coverage. Teachers returning from layoff will be
considered active employees upon receiving notice. Should a Teacher refuse to return from layoff
within five business days, or ten calendar days during the summer break, they shall be deemed to have
voluntarily quit. All fringe benefits will be restored to Teachers returning from layoff.
M. Probationary Teachers cannot grieve any aspect of this Article. Tenured Teachers may grieve alleged
violations of this Article through mediation.

Coldwater Education Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027
c

14

ARTICLE VIII - LEAVES OF ABSENCE
A. Sick Leave:
1. All full-time and regularly employed part-time teachers absent from duty because of personal
illness, injury (except as provided in Paragraph E of this article), or critical or emergency illness
in the immediate family shall be allowed ten (10) days of leave with pay (pro rata for
regularly employed part-time teachers) per year. Immediate family shall be defined as the
mother, father, child, husband, wife, sister, brother, grandfather, grandmother, grandchildren,
mother-in-law, father-in- law, brother-in-law, sister-in- law, son-in-law, or daughter-in-law of
the teacher or the grandfather or grandmother of the teacher’s spouse, significant other, or
any IRS dependent.
2. Sick leave allowances granted above shall be subject to the following conditions:
a. Each day of sick leave shall accrue as of the first day of the month during the school
year beginning with August and ending with May. If a teacher shall use days in advance
of accrual, an adjustment in pay shall be made as of the close of the school year, or
upon termination of the teacher's employment, if prior to the end of the school year.
b. Teachers shall be required to notify the building principal, or other designated authority,
in the event of an absence due to personal, critical, or emergency illnesses, ninety (90)
minutes prior to the beginning of each school's instructional day of the expected day of
absence so that a substitute may be obtained, unless circumstances make such
notification impossible or unreasonable. In order to be eligible for payment for the date
of absence without notification to the principal or designate at the time specified, it will
be necessary for the teacher to file with the principal a written statement concerning
the reasons for the failure to notify. Based upon said reason or reasons, the principal
shall have the discretion to waive notification.
c. In the case of an extended absence for personal illness or disability, a teacher may use
sick leave days, unpaid leave days, or a combination thereof. When a teacher desires to
have such an absence construed as a leave of absence, or a combination of sick leave
days and a leave of absence, the teacher must notify the Superintendent in writing.
Such leaves, wherever practical, should coincide with the beginning of a semester or
grading period.
d. A teacher who is unable to teach because of personal illness or disability and who
has exhausted all sick leave available, may be granted a leave of absence without pay
for the duration of the illness, for a period of time up to the balance of the contract year.
e. When a teacher is on unpaid leave due to personal illness and has exhausted the Family
Medical Leave Act (FMLA) provisions, insurance benefits will be continued only until
the end of the month in which the unpaid leave began except where the teacher may be
entitled to certain insurance premiums that the Board is obligated to pay as a result of
the requirements of (FMLA). Such benefits may be extended at the discretion of the
superintendent. A teacher on FMLA who fails to return on their own volition shall
reimburse the district the health insurance premiums paid.
f. A teacher may apply in writing for a continued leave of absence into the next contract
Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

15

year without pay or benefits.
g. In all leaves for illness, the Board reserves the right to require an examination by
a physician of its choice.
h. A teacher, upon return from a leave for illness, shall be restored to their teaching
position or to a position of like nature and status, whenever possible.
i.

Sick day accrual shall be capped at one hundred eighty (180) days. Those teachers who
have accumulated more than 180 days by June 1, 2010 will be grandfathered in and
capped at their current agreed-upon number.

j.

A teacher may opt to receive remuneration for unused sick days and personal days,
accumulated by June 1 of the current school year at the rate of $80 per day up to a
maximum of thirteen (13) days. If a teacher chooses the “remuneration for unused
sick and or personal days” option, the days for which payment is to be made shall
not be allowed to accumulate and shall be forfeited annually. Payment for unused sick
days, as previously described, shall be made annually and paid out by the end of the
district’s fiscal year.

k. The Board agrees to pay for and provide a long-term disability policy for each teacher.
l.

Requests for leaves of absence are subject to Board approval. Any denial must be for
good cause and the individual teacher shall receive a written statement of such reasons
in the event a denial of a request is made.

m. A teacher on leave of absence due to illness may return to employment prior to the
expiration of the leave upon certification of fitness from their physician.
n. A teacher on leave for illness or disability who fails to return at the expiration of the
leave shall be considered as having resigned.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

16

B. Personal Days
1. Each teacher will be allowed three (3) personal days of absence, non-cumulative, during each
school year without loss of salary; within the limits of the restrictions placed upon the
use of these days. Teachers are expected to use discretion in the application of these days
but a teacher is not required to give a reason for the use of a personal day, except in the
event of suspected misuse. The building principal must be notified at least 24 hours in advance
of the expected absence. The 24-hour notice may be waived at the discretion of the building
principal or their designee. Such days of absence shall not be deducted from the teacher's sick
leave days. A teacher hired after the completion of the first semester will receive 1.5 personal
days for the remainder of the school year.
2. Any unused personal time, at the end of each school year, will be added as hours to the
teacher's sick leave total or paid out as remuneration pursuant to Article VIII Section A-2j.
3. Generally, personal days are provided for use of the teacher to conduct business that cannot
be done outside of school time. Therefore, personal days are not to be used for vacations
or to extend vacation time and/or holiday breaks. When it is necessary for personal days
before or after a scheduled vacation period and/or holiday breaks, these days may be
approved at the sole discretion of the Superintendent.
C. Bereavement Leave:
A teacher shall be entitled to a leave of up to five (5) days per occurrence in the event of the death
of a family member, relative who resides in the same household as the teacher, or in the event of
the death of the mother, father, child, husband, wife, sister, brother, grandfather, grandmother,
grandchildren, mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, son-in-law, or daughterin-law of the teacher or the grandfather or grandmother of the teacher’s spouse significant other,
or any IRS dependent. In the event of the death of any other member of the teacher's family or
where such teacher is responsible for funeral arrangements or in the event that a teacher is asked
to serve as a pallbearer, the superintendent may grant leave. Such days of absence shall not be
deducted from a teachers personal/sick days. Teachers shall be entitled to a leave of up to (2) days
for the death of a niece or nephew or aunt or uncle. Upon request, added leave time for travel, may
be granted by the Superintendent.
D. Childcare Leaves:
1.

Childcare leave without leave pay is available to all teachers. The length of the leave shall not
exceed one (1) year, renewable at the discretion of the Board, and shall be for a minimum of one
(1) semester.

2. In order to provide for continuity within the classroom between pupil and teacher, the teacher
shall notify the Superintendent and the building principal in writing at least four (4) months prior
to the expected date of the commencement of the leave so that necessary arrangements can be
made to procure the teacher's replacement. The Superintendent, at their sole discretion, may
waive any part of the notification period.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

17

3. The ending date of childcare leaves shall conform to the beginning of a school year or
semester. The teacher shall specify a prospective termination date of the childcare leave at
the time of request for the leave.
E. Worker’s Compensation Leave:
Any teacher who is absent because of an injury or disease compensable under the Michigan
Worker's Compensation Law shall receive from the Board the difference between the disability
benefits provided by Worker's Compensation and the sick leave benefits herein provided. To the
extent that the Board makes payment to a teacher for that portion of t h e i r salary not
reimbursed under Worker’s Compensation, said partial payments shall be charged pro-rata against
the teacher's accumulated sick leave days.
F. Association Officer Leave:
Tenured teachers who are elected officers of the National or State Association may, upon proper
application, be given a leave of absence without pay or increment for a period of one (1) year.
G. Military Service Leave:
A leave of absence for military service shall be granted in accordance with state and federal law.
H. Public Office Leave:
The Board may grant a leave of absence without pay to any tenured teacher to campaign for, or serve
in, a public office, but any leave granted under this paragraph shall be for a period of not less
than one (1) semester nor more than two (2) consecutive years.
I.

Sabbatical Leave:
The Board may, at its sole discretion, grant a sabbatical leave in accordance with the
requirements of the Revised School Code, as stated:
1. Notice of intent to apply for leave of absence shall be made on or before April 15 of the school
year previous to the school year for which leave of absence is requested. Request for such leave
must be made on or before May 15. The total number of teachers on sabbatical leave in any
one year shall not exceed three percent (3%) of the contractual staff.
2. Before beginning the sabbatical leave, the teacher shall enter into a contract to return to active
service in the District for a period of at least one (1) year after the expiration of such leave.
A teacher who does not fulfill this agreement shall repay to the Board within two (2) years
the amount received by them during the sabbatical leave. This rule does not apply in cases
where the t e a c h e r becomes incapacitated or in cases where the rule is waived by the Board.
3. Any teacher on sabbatical leave shall receive a salary equal to one-half (1/2) of the contractual
amount they would have received had they remained. Such salary will be paid on the regular
pay periods during the leave.
4. A teacher upon return from a sabbatical leave shall be restored to their position or to a position
of like nature and status. Increments shall be added as if the teacher had been teaching in the
school district during the time of sabbatical leave. Said teacher shall be entitled to participate
in any other benefits that may be provided under the Master Agreement in accordance with State
statutes.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

18

J.

Court Leave:
A teacher called for jury duty or subpoenaed as a witness in any court or administrative tribunal
of the State, in a matter rising out of their employment with the District where the teacher or
Association is not a party to the suit and specifically excluding arbitration and unfair labor
practice cases, shall be compensated for the difference between the regular daily rate of pay
and the pay received for the performance of such obligation. The Association and the Board
shall be responsible for salaries of their own witnesses in unfair labor practices and arbitration
cases except in situations where the witnesses elect to use unused personal leave time. If teachers
use personal leave time to appear as witnesses, the Association agrees to pay the cost of substitute
teachers.

K. Association Business Leave:
1. The Board agrees to grant the Association eight (8) days with pay each year for Association
business. The Association will reimburse for the substitute pay and retirement costs. These days
will be used at the discretion of the Association and shall not be used for purposes other than
those having a direct benefit relationship with the Association or the District. Use of these
days must be arranged no less than two (2) school days in advance of the leave date and directed
to the Superintendent after approval of the Association President or their designee.
2.

The Board additionally agrees to provide up to an additional eight (8) days to be utilized by
the A s s o c i a t i o n President or their designee, for the purpose of resolving
Association/District issues. The Superintendent solely has the right to grant these additional
days and the substitute pay and fringe benefits will be borne by the District. The purpose of
this is to foster better relations between the Association and the District and to prevent s mall
issues from becoming major problems.

3. The Association and the Board shall be responsible for salaries of their own witnesses in unfair
labor practices and arbitration cases except in situations where the witnesses elect to use
unused personal leave time. If teachers use personal leave time to appear as witnesses, the
Association agrees to pay the cost of substitute teachers.
L. In-Service Education Leave:
Teachers may be allowed time to visit other classrooms within or out of t h e District for inservice education. Such visitations shall be subject to the approval of the building principal and the
Superintendent. Said approval shall be without loss of pay or "leave days.”

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

19

M. Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993:
1. Any full-time or part-time employee who meets the criteria under p a r a g r a p h 2a below
will be afforded up to twelve (12) continuous or intermittent weeks of unpaid leave in any
twelve (12) month period for any of the following reasons:
a. The birth or adoption of a child or placement of a foster child in the employees care,
regardless of the child’s age.
b. Serious illness of an employee’s spouse, parent or child who is under the
age of eighteen (18) or handicapped.
c. Employee’s own serious health condition.
d. Other reasons as specified under FMLA.
2. FMLA includes the following:
a. Employees must have at least twelve (12) months of service (not necessarily
consecutive) and must have worked at least 1,250 hours in the twelve (12)-month
period immediately before the leave begins.
b. The District may require employees to take available paid sick leave and
personal leave as part of their FMLA leave.
c. The District must guarantee employees the right to return to the previous or
an equivalent position with no loss of benefits at the end of the FMLA leave.
An exception may apply when an employee’s return would cause substantial
economic injury to the District.
d. Employees are entitled to continue medical and dental benefits under the group
health plan while on FMLA leave under the same conditions as when they were
on the job. The District must continue any group health insurance premium
contributions during FMLA leave, but may recover such amounts if the employee
fails to return to work for a reason other than disability.
3. Employees are obligated to notify the District thirty (30) days in advance for birth, adoption,
foster child or planned medical treatment when the need for the leave is foreseeable. However,
when the leave is needed on an emergency basis, notice will not be required. Two (2) employed
spouses may take a total of twelve (12) weeks for the birth or adoption of a child or the placement
of a foster child or care for a sick parent. Employed spouses may not take FMLA leave
concurrently for birth or adoption of a child or placement of a foster child or care of a sick
parent.
N. Upon return from any leave granted under this article, the teacher shall have their unused sick leave
restored. During any leave a teacher, at their own expense, may continue their health or life
insurance. Increments or other benefits shall not be allowed during the leave except as specified
in Section I, Paragraph 4 above.
O. It is understood that an approved paid leave of absence is exclusive. Employees on such leave may
not supplant these days with other paid leave days for the duration of the initial leave. For example,
but not limited to, an employee on approved paid medical leave may not take a bereavement
leave during the duration of the initial medical leave.
Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

20

P. The Superintendent may request a physical or psychiatric examination of any teacher and/or require
a statement from the treating physician. Whenever an examination is required, the request shall be
accompanied by a written statement with valid reasons for the request. The teacher may select
the physician who shall furnish a report of the examination to the Superintendent. If the examination
and the records show that the teacher is not in proper condition to perform their duties, they may be
required to take a leave of absence until they can furnish satisfactory evidence of their ability to
return to work. All examinations shall be conducted by a qualified physician. All examinations
requested by the Board are to be paid for by the District. The Board may require such teacher to
submit to examination by a physician selected by the Board. If the two physicians’ conclusions
disagree, the parties shall mutually select a third physician.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

21

ARTICLE IX – INSURANCE PROTECTION
A. Medical Insurance:
1. The Board of Education will create and maintain a Section 125 Cafeteria Plan that includes a
Flexible Spending Account so that employee contributions will be made from pre-tax income,
and payroll deducted in equal bi-weekly amounts. The Board of Education will pay 80% of the
premium cost of the MESSA Package medical options described below, and provide 50% of the
annual deductible funding to the employee’s “Health Equity” (HEQ) Health Savings Account
(HSA) for each medical benefit plan coverage year for employees enrolling in the ABC medical
plan. Employees enrolled in an HSA may not contribute to an FSA in the same medical plan
year. The deductible funding will be paid in four (4) equal parts. One quarter (25%) will be paid
on the first business day in January, April, July, and September. Additionally, the Board shall
vote annually, as required by PA 152, to maintain this 80/20 cost-sharing provision during the
life of this Agreement.
Should the employee leave the district prior to completing the three (3) month deductible
funding cycle they will need to repay the pro-rata amount through payroll deduction. If a
payroll deduction is not possible the District may use all other legal measures at its
disposal to recoup the funds.
2. Medical Coverage Benefits: Employees will have a choice of one (1) of the following four (4)
plans effective January 1, 2025.
•

MESSA Choices $500/$1,000, 10% Co-Insurance, 5-Tier Drug Card.
$20 Office Visit: $20 Specialist: $25 Urgent Care: $50 ER

•
•
•

MESSA ABC HSA Plan 1 $1,650/$3,300 with 0% Co-Insurance, 5-Tier Drug Card.
MESSA ABC HSA Plan 2 $2,000/$4,000 with 0% Co-Insurance, 5-Tier Drug Card.
MESSA Essentials $375/$750 with Co-Pay, 20% Co-Insurance, 5-Tier Drug Card.
$25 Office Visit: $50 Specialist: $50 Urgent Care: $200 ER

3. Employees who do not elect medical coverage will not receive ancillary benefits. At the request
of the District those employees not receiving medical insurance will provide proof of medical
insurance coverage that meets the minimum value and coverage of the Affordable Care Act.
B. Ancillary Benefits:
1. All other non-medical Ancillary Benefits described shall be fully paid by the employer
to all employees who take insurance.
Dental Insurance

80/80/80/80 $1,000 annual max. $1,000 Orthodontic maximum

Vision Insurance

VSP 3G

Life Insurance

$50,000

AD & D Insurance $50,000
Long Term Disability 66 2/3rds of max. salary, $6,000 monthly max., social security
offset-Single.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

22

C. Optional Benefits:
1. All employees of the bargaining unit will be eligible during the open enrollment period, or during
a qualifying event to sign up for Optional benefits. Selected Optional Benefits will be paid pretax through the 125 Cafeteria Plan.
D. Part Time Benefits:
1. Part Time teachers are defined as those who work less than one-hundred (100) percent of a full
time teaching position. Since a part time position is less than one-hundred (100) percent of a full
time position the district will pay for medical coverage, and ancillary insurance equal to the
employees work status.
Example:

An employee working forty (40) percent of the day will have forty (40)
percent of their medical coverage, and ancillary insurance paid by the
District.

2. In the event that an employee’s full time status is involuntarily reduced to part time after the start
of the school year the employee shall continue their full time benefits until the start of the next
school year. Should an employee have their status reduced prior to the start of the school year
they will be covered as stated in Article IX, D, 1.
3. The District at any time may “buy up” a part time employee’s benefits to full time. Upon doing
so the District will notify the employee and the union.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

23

ARTICLE X - TEACHER EVALUATION
A. Teacher evaluations currently correlate with state requirements and mandates. Should state
requirements and/or mandates change, this will be renegotiated.
B. Teachers who receive an effective or highly effective annual evaluation shall move up a step on the
Appendix A Salary Schedule for the following school year. Those teachers whose step increase
has no financial gain shall be paid a $600 lump sum amount in September of the following school
year.
C. Teacher retirees who provide notice by April 1st of their retirement and are highly effective or
effective on their final evaluation shall receive their stipend on their last pay of June.
D. All district teachers, including all teachers of record, will be evaluated pursuant to the Danielson
performance evaluation system, which is attached to this agreement as Appendix G. The District
will measure student growth as 20% of the evaluation. For the 2024-2025 school year, student
growth will be measured administered as it was for the 2023-2024 school year excluding the state
assessments unless otherwise agreed. The parties will meet by April 15, 2025 to determine whether
the metrics should be changed for subsequent contract years
E. Student growth data from specific students with extreme circumstances that prohibit an accurate
measure of growth will not be included in a Teacher’s student growth component if written consent
is provided by the Teacher’s principal/evaluator.
F. Prior to classroom observations, the teacher shall be provided a copy of the district evaluation form
and an explanation of how the observation process works.
G. If a tenured teacher has been rated “highly effective” or “effective” for three (3) consecutive year
end evaluations, they shall be evaluated every third year thereafter. If a teacher is placed on an
IDP, moves to a new assignment, or is subsequently rated below “effective” on a year-end
evaluation, the Teacher may in the district’s discretion be evaluated annually until receiving an
“effective” rating for an additional three (3) consecutive years. Unless otherwise agreed, the
District and Association shall meet prior to September 15 each contract year to comprise a list of
tenured teachers and their evaluation status for the current school year.
H. Probationary Teachers cannot challenge any aspect of the evaluation process, including
observations, the IDP, the mid-year performance review or their assigned rating.
I.

An alleged violation of this Article is not subject to arbitration in the grievance process. An
Arbitrator, however, has jurisdiction to consider a grievance filed under the grievance procedure
by a tenured teacher who receives two (2) consecutive ratings of “needing support”

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

24

ARTICLE XI - MENTOR TEACHING
A. Mentor Teacher shall be defined as a Master Teacher per Section 1526 of the School Code.
B. Each bargaining unit member in their first three (3) years in the classroom shall be assigned a
Mentor Teacher in accordance with state mandates. The Mentor Teacher shall be available to
provide professional support, instruction and guidance in a non-threatening collegial fashion.
C. A Mentor Teacher shall be assigned as follows:
1. Participation as a Mentor Teacher shall be voluntary.
2. The Administration shall immediately notify the Association of those members
requiring the assignment of a mentor. The Administration shall assign mentors from a
list of available teachers who are willing to participate in the program.
3. Only one Mentee shall be assigned to one Mentor at a time.
4. The Mentor Teacher assignment shall be for three (3) school years and
subject to annual Administrative review in May.
5. The Mentor Teacher shall be paid according to Appendix F.
D. The Board and the Association will mutually agree upon Mentor Teacher guidelines. *See Appendix
F for Mentor Teacher guidelines.
E. As mandated by the state, Mentees shall be provided with a minimum of fifteen (15) days of
professional development instruction during their first three (3) years of classroom teaching. In the
event that this training is not scheduled within the parameters of the regular school day, the
Mentee shall be compensated at the current professional development hourly rate (Article IV,
Section I).

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

25

ARTICLE XII - RETIREMENT
A. The Board shall notify the Association and all teachers before April 1 if a retirement incentive
is to be offered for the current school year. However, if the Board decides after April 1 to offer a
retirement incentive at the end of the current school year, all teachers who have previously stated
their intentions to retire effective at the end of that school year shall be offered the same retirement
incentive.
B. Terminal leave payment will be paid to retiring teachers who have twenty (20) or more years of
service to the district. A terminal leave payment of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year will be
made for each year served teaching full-time in the District, or eighty dollars ($80) for each unused
sick day, whichever amount is greater. Teachers who taught part-time prior to July 1, 1995, will
receive pro-rata amounts equal to the fraction of their years of part-time teaching in the bargaining
unit.
C. Unless the teacher is accepting a retirement incentive from the Board, a letter of resignation shall
be submitted to the superintendent not later than April 1 of the retirement year in order to receive a
terminal leave payment.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

26

ARTICLE XIII - PROTECTION OF TEACHERS
A. The Board recognizes its responsibility to give support and assistance to teachers with respect
to maintenance, control and discipline of the classroom. Whenever it appears that a particular pupil
requires the attention of special counselors, social workers, law enforcement personnel,
physicians, or other professional persons, the Administration will take steps to assist the teacher with
respect to such pupil.
B. Any case of assault upon a teacher that had its inception in a school-centered problem shall be
reported as soon as possible, in writing, to the Superintendent and the appropriate building principal.
In the event of such an assault, the teacher involved may request assistance of the Board in the
matter. These requests shall be made in writing to the Superintendent.
C. The Board shall, upon recommendation of the Superintendent, reimburse a teacher for any
damage or destruction caused by a student to or theft of clothing, p e r s o n a l p r o p e r t y , o r
personal vehicle while such teacher is on duty in the school, on school property, or on schoolrelated functions, up to $500.00 and not covered by the teachers insurance, unless such loss or
damage is caused by the negligence of the teacher or by an act of God. Each teacher will be
provided with the ability to lock away personal items within the teacher’s classroom or office.
Requests for reimbursement shall be submitted to the Superintendent in writing.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

27

ARTICLE XIV - WAIVER CLAUSE
The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which resulted in this Agreement each had the
unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with respect to any subject or matter not
removed by law from the area of collective bargaining and that the understandings and agreements
arrived at by the parties after the exercise of that right and opportunity are set forth in this Agreement.
Therefore, the Board and the Association, for the life of this Agreement, each voluntarily and
unqualifiedly waives the right, and each agrees that the other shall not be obligated to bargain collectively
with respect to any subject or matter referred to or covered by this Agreement and with respect to any
subject or matter not specifically referred to or covered in this Agreement, even though such subject or
matter may not have been within the knowledge and contemplation of either or both of the parties at the
time that they negotiated or signed this Agreement.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

28

ARTICLE XV - DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE AS
PER BOARD POLICY SECTION 3139-3140
A. For tenured teachers, consistent with the Teachers’ Tenure Act, discipline may only be issued for
reasons that are not arbitrary or capricious and the parties subscribe to the concept of progressive
discipline as required by law. The district reserves the right to apply disciplinary measures consistent
with the severity of the infraction.
B. All discipline will be in writing and placed in an individual’s personnel file, and the teacher will be
forwarded a copy. A teacher may attach a rebuttal in a personnel file up to five sheets of 8.5 x 11 in
paper. Non disciplinary directives will not be placed in an individual’s personnel file.
C. Probationary teachers cannot grieve discipline. Tenured teachers may only grieve discipline up to
arbitration. This article does not limit a tenured teacher’s right to appeal a “demotion” or “termination”
pursuant to the protections outlined in the Michigan Teachers Tenure Act.
D. Employees shall have full Weingarten Rights. New hires and teachers will be notified of their
Weingarten Rights annually.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

29

ARTICLE XVI - PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES FOR CONTINUATION OF THE
EDUCATION PROGRAM
The Association and the Board recognize that the cessation or interruption of professional services by
teachers as defined in current state law is contrary to law and public policy. The Board and the
Association agree, in keeping with the high standards of the teaching profession, that all differences
between them shall be resolved by the orderly procedures provided herein, without interruption of the
school program. Accordingly, the Association and the teachers agree that during the term of this Agreement
they will not direct, instigate, participate in, encourage or support any cessation or interruption of
professional services by any teacher or group of teachers and pledge themselves to the purpose of
insuring continuation of the educational program. If the Association disclaims in writing to the Board any
responsibility for any cessation of professional services and directs its members in writing to resume their
normal duties, it shall not be liable in any way. Teachers who participate in any such act may be
disciplined or discharged.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

30

ARTICLE XVII - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
A. A grievance shall be an alleged violation of the expressed terms of this agreement. The
following matters shall not be the basis of any grievance.
1. The termination of services of or failure to re-employ or discipline or discharge any teacher.
2. The termination of services, hiring or failure to re-employ any teacher to a position on the
extra duty schedule, may be appealed to the superintendent level (Step 3).
3. Those areas for which the Tenure Act prescribes a procedure or authorizes a remedy (discharge
and/or demotion).
4. The evaluations, lay-off and recall, assignment of teacher.
B. Written grievances (see Appendix D for form) as required herein shall contain the following:
1. It shall be signed by the grievant or grievants. Association grievances shall be signed by the
Association President.
2. It shall be specific
3. It shall contain a synopsis of the facts giving rise to the alleged violation.
4. It shall cite the section or subsections of this agreement alleged to have been violated.
5. It shall contain the date of the alleged violation.
6. It shall specify the relief requested.
C. Any written grievance not substantially in accordance with the above requirements may be
rejected as improper. Such rejection shall not extend the limitations hereinafter set forth.
D. The purpose of this article is to secure a settlement of a grievance as rapidly as possible. If a grievance
is not processed within the required timelines by the Association, it shall be considered withdrawn
and processed no further. If the Board does not respond to the grievance within the required
timelines, the grievance shall advance to the next level. The procedures herein stated shall be the
sole and exclusive remedy for the handling of grievances. Both parties agree that the grievance
proceeding shall be kept as confidential as may be appropriate at each step of the procedure.
E. Step One: Supervisor - Informal Level:
In the event that a teacher or the Association believes that a grievable incident has occurred, the
teacher or the Association shall request a meeting with the supervisor within ten (10) working
days of the occurrence of such grievable incident or knowledge of the occurrence. If the supervisor
fails to resolve the grievance or refuses to provide such meeting within ten (10) working days of the
request, the claim or complaint may be formalized in writing as provided hereunder.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

31

F. Step Two: Supervisor - Formal Written Level:
If the grievance is not resolved in Step One, the grievance may be formalized as a Formal
Written Grievance (see Appendix D for form). A Formal Written Grievance shall be submitted
within ten (10) working days of the meeting between the supervisor and the affected teacher or
within twenty (20) working days of the occurrence if no Step One meeting is held. A copy
of the grievance shall be submitted to the Association and the affected supervisor. The immediate
supervisor shall within ten (10) working days of receipt of a written grievance render a written
decision. A copy of this decision shall be forwarded to the grievant and the Association.
G. Step Three: Superintendent Level:
If the grievance is not resolved at Step Two or if the supervisor has not made a disposition within ten
(10) working days of receipt of the Formal Written Grievance, the grievant or the Association
shall transmit the Formal Written Grievance to the superintendent within ten (10) working days.
The superintendent (or their designee) shall meet with the parties on the grievance within ten (10)
working days after the grievance has been submitted. The superintendent shall, within ten (10)
working days of the conclusion of the meeting, render a written decision thereof and send copies
to the supervisor, grievant, and the Association.
H. Step Four: (Optional) Grievance Resolution Through Mediation
If the grievant is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at Step Three, or if the
superintendent has not made a disposition within ten (10) working days of the meeting, the
Association may file the grievance to mediation through the Michigan Employment Relations
Commission (MERC) within ten (10) working days following the receipt of the Step III Superintendent
response or of the date the response was due, from the Superintendent or designee. A copy of the filing
will be provided to the District by the Association. If satisfactory resolution is achieved through
mediation, the resolution shall be final and binding upon the parties. If no satisfactory resolution can
be reached, either side may terminate mediation through written notification of the other party.
I.

Step Five: Arbitration:
If the grievance is not satisfactorily resolved at Step Four, the Association may, within ten (10)
working days of the date of receipt of the Board’s final disposition of the grievance or written
notification of termination of the mediation by either party, submit an appeal for binding
arbitration to the American Arbitration Association (AAA). The rules of the AAA shall govern
the selection of the arbitrator. Should the teacher fail to institute the grievance within the time limits
specified, all further proceedings shall be barred. The time limits specified herein may only be
extended by mutual written and signed agreement.

J.

Step Six: Pre-hearing:
Neither party to the grievance may raise a new defense or grounds at Step Five which have not
been raised previously or disclosed at other written levels. Each party shall submit to the other
party not less than thirty (30) working days prior to the Arbitration hearing, a pre-hearing
statement alleging facts, grounds and defenses which will be raised at the hearing. A conference
will be held at that time in an attempt to settle the grievance.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

32

K. Powers of the Arbitrator - It shall be the function of the arbitrator and he/she shall be empowered,
except as their powers are limited below, after due investigation, to make a decision in cases of
alleged violation of the specific articles and sections of this Agreement:
1. They shall have no power to add to, subtract from, disregard, alter, or modify any of the terms of
this agreement.
2. They shall have no power to establish salary scales or change any salary.
3. They shall have no power to change any practice, policy, or rule of the School Board nor to
substitute their judgment for that of the Board as to the reasonableness of any such practice,
policy, rule, or any action taken by the Board. They powers shall be limited to deciding
whether the Board has violated the express articles or sections of this Agreement; and they
shall not imply obligations and conditions binding upon the Board from this Agreement, it
being understood that any matter not specifically set forth herein remains within the reserved
rights of the Board.
4. They shall have no power to decide any question that which, under this Agreement, is
within the responsibility of management to decide. In rendering decisions, an arbitrator shall
give due regard to the responsibility of management and shall so construe the Agreement so
that there will be no interference with such responsibilities, except as they may be specifically
conditioned by this Agreement.
5. If either party disputes the arbitrability of any grievance under the terms of this
Agreement, the arbitrator shall rule in writing upon arbitrability before proceeding to
the merits of the case.
6. The fees and expenses of the arbitration shall be shared equally by the Board and the
Association. All other expenses shall be borne by the party incurring them, and neither party
shall be responsible for the expense of witnesses called by the other. Teachers who appear
as witnesses may use unused personal days.
L. Both parties agree to be bound by the award of the arbitrator, subject only to legal remedies
afforded by courts of competent jurisdiction.
M. Claims for Back Pay - All grievances must be filed in writing within ten (10) working days from
the time the alleged violation was to have occurred. The Board shall not be required to pay
back wages accruing and due an individual teacher covering more than forty-five (45) work days.
1. All claims for back wages shall be limited to the amount of wages that the employee would
otherwise have earned, less any compensation that he may have received from any source
during the period of the back pay.
2. No decision in any one case shall require a retroactive wage adjustment in any other case.
N. Any grievance occurring during the period between the termination date of this Agreement and
the effective date of a new agreement shall not be processed. Any grievance which arose prior to the
effective date of this Agreement shall not be processed.
O. Working days shall be defined as those days the central administrative offices are open for business.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

33

ARTICLE XVIII - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
A. This Agreement shall supersede any rules, regulations or practices of the School Board which shall
be contrary to, or inconsistent with, its terms. It shall likewise supersede any contrary or
inconsistent terms contained in any individual teacher contracts heretofore in effect. All future
individual teacher contracts shall be made subject to the terms of this Agreement. The provisions
of this Agreement shall be incorporated into and be considered part of the established policies of the
Board.
B. This Agreement shall constitute the full and complete commitments between both parties and may
be altered, changed, added to, deleted from or modified only through the voluntary, mutual consent
of both parties in written form.
C. If any provision of this Agreement or any application of the Agreement to any teacher or group
of teachers shall be found contrary to law, then such provision or application shall not be deemed
valid and subsisting except to the extent permitted by law, but all other provisions or applications
shall continue in full force and effect. In the event laws change affecting current Agreement and/or
board policy, both parties agree to bargain affected issues in good faith.
D. The Board shall have the final determination in setting the yearly school calendar. The
Administration shall bargain with the Association prior to the superintendent's recommendation
of the calendar to the Board.
E. If the State of Michigan continues to penalize districts not making up inclement weather days, the
following plan will be used for these make ups. In accordance with the Revised State School Aid
Act 94 of 1979, Section 388.1701 (4), the first 30 hours for which pupil instruction is not provided
because of conditions not within the control of school authorities, such as severe storms, fires,
epidemics, or health conditions as defined by the city, county, or state health authorities, shall be
counted as hours of pupil instruction. This will be done with no additional pay for teachers. When
all district schools are closed because of inclement weather or an act of God, teachers are not
required or expected to report for work. When an individual building is closed, teachers in that
building may be required to report for work.
F. If inclement weather days occur causing the district to make up hours of instruction, the School
Board agrees to negotiate with the Association as to how that time will be made up.
G. If an Emergency Financial Manager is appointed by the state under PA4 of 2011, Fiscal
Accountability Act, the Emergency Manager may reject, modify, or terminate the collective
bargaining agreement in their sole discretion. This authority is a prohibited subject of bargaining
PERA.
H. It shall be the responsibility of each teacher to present and maintain the certification as required by
the State of Michigan.
I.

The Board will provide advance notification, verbally or through written communication, to the
teacher should their personnel file be requested under FOIA. Such advance notice provision shall
not prevent the district from complying with time limits set forth in the Act. The employee will be
provided the opportunity to review the contents before the release of the file and may request
Association representation in this review. Information released will comply with FOIA and the
Bullard-Plawecki Employee Right to Know Act.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

34

Coldwater
c Education Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

35

APPENDIX A SALARY SCHEDULE
A. It is understood that college or university credit hours determine placement on the various salary
schedule categories. These categories will be:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Bachelor's Degree
Bachelor’s Degree plus 20 hours
Master's Degree
Master’s Degree plus 15 hours

B. For placement on the Bachelor's degree plus twenty (20) scale, the teacher must be a holder of
twenty (20) semester or thirty (30) term hours of graduate credit beyond the Bachelor's degree.
Placement may be implemented during the contractual year subject to the teacher submitting
an appropriate official transcript of records from the designated college or university granting
graduate degrees.
C. For placement on the Master's degree scale, the teacher must be a holder of the Master's
degree in an education-related field. Placement may be implemented during the contractual year
subject to the teacher submitting an appropriate official transcript of record from an institution
granting graduate degrees.
D. For placement on the Master's degree plus fifteen (15) scale, the teacher must be a holder of
fifteen (15) semester or twenty-four (24) term hours of graduate credit beyond the Master's degree.
Placement may be implemented during the contractual year subject to the teacher submitting an
appropriate official transcript of record from a designated college or university granting graduate
degrees. Master’s level courses must be completed after the attainment of the Master’s Degree
to be compensated under this provision. Employees who have taken graduate level courses
beyond those required for their Master’s Degree should compile a list and submit to the
Superintendent for compensation consideration to be advanced to the MA plus schedule.
E. Teachers who have begun employment after the start of the school year shall qualify for one-half
year of service credit if at least sixty (60) teaching days are served during said contract year in
no more than two distinct segments of at least thirty-five (35) days each. The teacher will receive
a full year of service credit if at least one hundred sixty (160) teaching days are served in said
contract year. At the discretion of the teacher, days served may include sick- leave days.
F. Undergraduate credits will be accepted for advancement when the following steps are followed:
1. prior approval of the class is given by the superintendent;
2. the class is directly related to their content area as determined by the principal; and
3. all grade records are presented for the teacher’s member’s personnel file.
G. To qualify for placement on the BA plus 20, Master’s, and Master’s plus 15 scales, all required
course work must be complete and submitted to the Superintendent by September 1st and January
15th to advance on the appropriate salary schedule.

Coldwater cEducation Association July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

36

COLDWATER COMMUNITY SCHOOLS SALARY SCHEDULE
2024-2025 SCHOOL YEAR
3% Increase
Step

BA

BA+20

MA

MA+15

1

$ 47,385

$ 49,740

$ 52,097

$ 54,454

2

$ 49,740

$ 52,097

$ 54,454

$ 56,815

3

$ 52,097

$ 54,454

$ 56,815

$ 59,171

4

$ 54,454

$ 56,815

$ 59,171

$ 61,526

5

$ 56,815

$ 59,171

$ 61,526

$ 63,886

6

$ 59,171

$ 61,526

$ 63,886

$ 66,240

7

$ 61,526

$ 63,886

$ 66,240

$ 68,598

8

$ 63,886

$ 66,240

$ 68,598

$ 70,961

9

$ 66,240

$ 68,598

$ 70,961

$ 73,312

10

$ 68,598

$ 70,961

$ 73,312

$ 75,672

11

$ 70,961

$ 73,312

$ 75,672

$ 78,034

12

$ 71,669

$ 75,672

$ 78,034

$ 80,389

13

$ 71,669

$ 76,430

$ 80,389

$ 82,742

14

$ 71,669

$ 76,430

$ 81,190

$ 83,573

15

$ 71,669

$ 76,430

$ 81,190

$ 83,573

16

$ 73,460

$ 78,340

$ 83,220

$ 85,662

17

$ 73,640

$ 78,531

$ 83,422

$ 85,871

18

$ 73,999

$ 78,914

$ 83,829

$ 86,289

37

COLDWATER COMMUNITY SCHOOLS SALARY SCHEDULE
2025-2026 SCHOOL YEAR
2% Increase
Step

BA

BA+20

MA

MA+15

1

$ 48,332

$ 50,734

$ 53,139

$ 55,543

2

$ 50,734

$ 53,139

$ 55,543

$ 57,952

3

$ 53,139

$ 55,543

$ 57,952

$ 60,355

4

$ 55,543

$ 57,952

$ 60,355

$ 62,757

5

$ 57,952

$ 60,355

$ 62,757

$ 65,164

6

$ 60,355

$ 62,757

$ 65,164

$ 67,565

7

$ 62,757

$ 65,164

$ 67,565

$ 69,970

8

$ 65,164

$ 67,565

$ 69,970

$ 72,380

9

$ 67,565

$ 69,970

$ 72,380

$ 74,778

10

$ 69,970

$ 72,380

$ 74,778

$ 77,185

11

$ 72,380

$ 74,778

$ 77,185

$ 79,595

12

$ 73,103

$ 77,185

$ 79,595

$ 81,997

13

$ 73,103

$ 77,958

$ 81,997

$ 84,397

14

$ 73,103

$ 77,958

$ 82,814

$ 85,244

15

$ 73,103

$ 77,958

$ 82,814

$ 85,244

16

$ 74,930

$ 79,907

$ 84,885

$ 87,376

17

$ 75,113

$ 80,102

$ 85,090

$ 87,589

18

$ 75,478

$ 80,492

$ 85,505

$ 88,015

38

COLDWATER COMMUNITY SCHOOLS SALARY SCHEDULE
2026-2027 SCHOOL YEAR
2% Increase
Step

BA

BA+20

MA

MA+15

1

$ 49,299

$ 51,749

$ 54,202

$ 56,654

2

$ 51,749

$ 54,202

$ 56,654

$ 59,111

3

$ 54,202

$ 56,654

$ 59,111

$ 61,562

4

$ 56,654

$ 59,111

$ 61,562

$ 64,012

5

$ 59,111

$ 61,562

$ 64,012

$ 66,467

6

$ 61,562

$ 64,012

$ 66,467

$ 68,916

7

$ 64,012

$ 66,467

$ 68,916

$ 71,370

8

$ 66,467

$ 68,916

$ 71,370

$ 73,827

9

$ 68,916

$ 71,370

$ 73,827

$ 76,274

10

$ 71,370

$ 73,827

$ 76,274

$ 78,729

11

$ 73,827

$ 76,274

$ 78,729

$ 81,186

12

$ 74,565

$ 78,729

$ 81,186

$ 83,636

13

$ 74,565

$ 79,517

$ 83,636

$ 86,085

14

$ 74,565

$ 79,517

$ 84,470

$ 86,949

15

$ 74,565

$ 79,517

$ 84,470

$ 86,949

16

$ 76,428

$ 81,505

$ 86,583

$ 89,123

17

$ 76,615

$ 81,704

$ 86,792

$ 89,340

18

$ 76,988

$ 82,102

$ 87,216

$ 89,775

39

APPENDIX B SCHEDULE OF REMUNERATION FOR ATHLETIC EXTRA-DUTY
ASSIGNMENTS
A. The payments shall be per the schedule below.
B. Positions listed shall be posted, filled, or left vacant at the sole discretion of the Board. The
following criteria will be observed:
1. All posted positions shall be made available to teachers and outside candidates who
meet the posted qualifications. The most qualified candidate shall be selected based
on specified criteria included in the language of the posted position. The Varsity coach
in that sport, in conjunction with the Athletic Director, will recommend assignment of
assistant coaches as long as the above criteria are followed.
2. All employees holding an Appendix B position may be evaluated on an annual basis
and may be terminated for any reason satisfactory to the employer. All Appendix B
extra-duty positions are non-tenured.
*If a coach returns to a previous or lesser position within ten (10) years, he/she will not be
considered a new hire.

Position: Schedule B

1st
Step

2nd
Step

3rd Step

Step 4

Step 5

Step 6

Head Football Coach

6000

6383

6790

7223

7684

8174

Assistant Football

3600

3830

4074

4334

4610

4905

Legg Football

2367

2518

2679

2850

3032

3225

Head Basketball Coach

6000

6383

6790

7223

7684

8174

Assistant Basketball

3600

3830

4074

4334

4610

4905

Legg Basketball

2367

2518

2679

2850

3032

3225

Head Wrestling Coach

4421

4703

5003

5322

5662

6023

Assistant Wrestling

2653

2822

3002

3193

3397

3614

Legg Wrestling

1737

1848

1966

2091

2225

2367

Head Baseball

4421

4703

5003

5322

5662

6023

Assistant Baseball

2653

2822

3002

3193

3397

3614

Head Softball

4421

4703

5003

5322

5662

6023

Assistant Softball

2653

2822

3002

3193

3397

3614

Head Track

4104

4366

4645

4941

5257

5592

Assistant Track

2462

2620

2787

2965

3154

3355

Legg Track

1737

1848

1966

2091

2225

2367

Head Volleyball Coach

3980

4234

4504

4791

5097

5422

Assistant Volleyball Coach

2388

2540

2702

2875

3058

3253

Legg Volleyball

1737

1848

1966

2091

2225

2367

Head Cross Country Coach

3158

3360

3574

3802

4045

4303

Legg Cross Country Coach

1421

1512

1608

1705

1808

1916

40

Head Tennis Coach

3158

3360

3574

3802

4045

4303

Assistant Tennis

1895

2016

2144

2281

2427

2582

Legg Tennis

1262

1343

1429

1520

1617

1720

Head Golf Coach

2842

3023

3216

3421

3639

3872

Head Soccer Coach

3158

3360

3574

3802

4045

4303

Assistant Soccer

1895

2016

2144

2281

2427

2582

Legg Athletic Coordinator

3633

3865

4112

4374

4653

4950

Head Spirit

2051

2182

2321

2469

2627

2794

Assistant Spirit

1231

1309

1393

1481

1576

1677

Head Gymnastics

3792

4034

4291

4557

4831

5122

Assistant Gymnastics

2367

2518

2679

2840

3010

3191

Head Bowling

2842

3023

3574

3802

4045

4303

Head Swimming/ Dive Coach

6000

6383

41

6790

7223

7684

8174

Split
Between
Coaches

APPENDIX C SCHEDULE OF REMUNERATION FOR NON-ATHLETIC EXTRADUTY ASSIGNMENTS
A. The payments shall be per the schedule below.
B. Positions listed shall be posted, filled or left vacant at the sole discretion of the Board. The
following criteria will be observed:
1. All posted positions shall be made available to teachers and outside candidates who
meet the posted qualifications. The most qualified candidate shall be selected based on
specified criteria included in the language of the posted position. The Varsity coach in
that sport, in conjunction with the Athletic Director, will recommend assignment of
assistant coaches as long as the above criteria are followed.
2. All employees holding an Appendix C position will be evaluated on an annual basis and
may be terminated for any reason satisfactory to the employer. All Appendix C extraduty positions are non-tenured.

Position: Schedule C

1st
Step

2nd
Step

3rd Step

Step 4

Step 5

Step 6

Marching Band

3158

3360

3574

3802

4045

4303

Marching Band Assistant

1579

1680

1787

1901

2022

2151

Pep Band

1325

1410

1500

1596

1698

1806

Flag Corp

1209

1286

1368

1455

1548

1647

HS Musical

1944

2068

2200

2340

2490

2649

CHS Instrumental (Solo/Ensemble)

884

940

1000

1064

1132

1204

Legg Instrumental

884

940

1000

1064

1132

1204

HS Yearbook-if no scheduled class
Legg Yearbook-if not scheduled
class

1579

1680

1787

1901

2022

2151

1579

1680

1787

1901

2022

2151

Alternative Yearbook

788

838

892

949

1009

1074

Balladiers-if no scheduled class

1367

1518

1679

1786

1900

2021

Vocal Music CHS

884

940

1000

1064

1132

1204

Vocal Music LMS

884

940

1000

1064

1132

1204

Mirror-if no scheduled class

1579

1680

1787

1901

2022

2151

Student Council Advisor CHS

2209

2350

2500

2660

2829

3010

Student Council Advisor LMS

1060

1128

1200

1277

1358

1445

MS Science Olympiad

947

1007

1071

1139

1212

1289

Elementary Science Olympiad

947

1007

1071

1139

1212

1289

CHS Curriculum Chairs

1149

1222

1300

1383

1471

1565

LMS Curriuclum Chairs

1149

1222

1300

1383

1471

1565

Elementary Curriculum Chairs

1149

1222

1300

1383

1471

1565

National Honor Society

884

940

1000

1064

1132

1204

National Art Honor Society

884

940

1000

1064

1132

1204

Youth in Government-CHS

1447

1507

1571

1671

1778

1891

42

Youth in Government-LMS

1133

Senior Class Advisor

1750

Junior Class Advisor

1600

Sophomore Class Advisor

1450

Freshmen Class Advisor

1300

Percussion Instructor

1209

1173

1216

1294

1376

1464

1350

1500

1596

1698

1806

**High School – no stipend if it’s a scheduled class
**Legg Yearbook – no stipend if it’s a scheduled class

**Balladiers – no stipend if it’s a scheduled class.
**Mirror – no stipend if it’s a scheduled class.
*** Mentor Teacher – See Article F

43

APPENDIX D: COLDWATER EDUCATION ASSOCIATION Coldwater Community
Schools Grievance Report Form
Grievance #
Name of Grievant

Date Filed

Building

Assignment
STEP 1

A. Date Cause or Knowledge of Grievance Occurred
B. Date of Request for Informal Meeting with Supervisor
C. Date of Informal Meeting with Supervisor
STEP 2
A.
1. Statement of Grievance
2. Article of the Agreement violated
3. Relief Sought

Date:

Signature:

B. Disposition of Supervisor/Principal

Signature:

Date:

C.Disposition of Grievant and/or Association

Signature:

Date:

*If additional space is needed for Statement of Grievance (Step 2, Section A), attach additional sheet.

44

STEP 3
A. Date received by Superintendent or Designee
B. Disposition by Superintendent or Designee

Signature:

Date:

C. Position of Grievant and/or Association

Signature:

Date:

STEP 4
A. Date Grievance Filed to Mediation
B. Recommendation of Mediation or Date of Termination of Mediation
Signature:

Date:

C. Position of Grievant and or Association
Signature:

Date:

STEP 5
A. Date Submitted to Arbitration
B. Disposition and Award of Arbitration
Signature:

Date:

45

APPENDIX E: Coldwater Community Schools Employee Absence Form
If not submitted within 2 days of return to work, the employee will NOT be paid for those
days.
Submit all three copies of this report to your Principal or Supervisor, who will then submit them to the
Superintendent. Copies will be distributed as follows: white copy – to the Payroll Department yellow copy –
to the Principal or Supervisor and pink copy – to the Employee.

Today’s Date:
Employee Name:
Employee #:

Hours in Normal Day:

I was absent

request absence as follows:

No. of days:

Dates:

a.m.

p.m.

Reason for

absence: Requires Principal Signature: Requires ASC Approval: Personal
Illness

**Absent without pay

Family Illness

**Vacation

Personal Business

**Conference

(24 hours advance notice: CEA)

(Approval: CESPA) **Personal Business

(To extend vacation or holiday)

Bereavement

Relationship?

**Athletics

Jury Duty

**Explanation required:
Personal business may not be used for vacation, outside paid employment or before or after a
holiday.
I
understand that falsification or abuse of leave may result in denial of the leave, or discipline.
Approved
Employee Signature Not Approved
Principal or Supervisor
Athletic Director (if
relevant) Without Salary
Superintendent

46

With Salary

APPENDIX F: Mentor Guidelines
Goal: To facilitate and encourage professional growth so a smooth and positive transition can occur
into our school community.
What is a mentor?
A mentor is…
• A professional resource and confidant
• A coach
• A good listener
• Willing to learn
• A good role model
• A building block for professional development
A mentor is not…
• An evaluator
• There to pass judgment
• A negative voice
Program Outline:
Previously Tenured Staff:
• Two year participant in program, or until tenure received
• Minimum of 1 meeting per month; Mentor pay: maximum of $500 (at rate of
$28/hour)
o Submit hours by June 1st (and tracking documentation)
• Year 1:
o Develop IDP: personal, professional, and PLC growth goals
o DnA
o Stages
o Building mechanics: supply orders, building personnel, lunch procedures,
PLC format, staff meetings, safety drills, copier, phone system, busing,
building tour
o Building programs: ie: Backpack Buddies, Focus hour, special events, etc...
• Year 2:
o Continue IDP and refine building and program knowledge
New Teachers:
•
•
•

Three year participant in the program
Year 1:
Minimum of 1 meeting per month (up to 1 hour minimum). Mentor pay: maximum
of $500 (at the rate of $28/hour), meetings must happen outside the contract day.
Recommended schedule:
o Submit hours by June 1 (and tracking documentation)
o 1 mentor meeting in September/October
▪ Create IDP, housekeeping, set personal and professional growth goals
o 1 mentor meeting before parent-teacher conferences
▪ How to prepare for conferences, report card procedures, data
collection

47

1 mentor meeting before holiday vacation
▪ How not to lose momentum after the holidays
o 1 mentor meeting in May
▪ Supply orders, closing the year
Year 2: Minimum of 1 meeting per month (up to 1 hour minimum); stipulations the
same as above.
o Continue IDP--modify and expand
o Professional and personal growth goals
o Data collection, analysis, and collaboration with peers
Year 3: Minimum of 1 meeting per month((up to 1 hour minimum); stipulations the
same as above.
o Continue IDP--modify and expand
o Professional and personal growth goals
o Data collection, analysis, and collaboration with peers
o

•

•

48

APPENDIX G: Danielson Evaluation Tool

49

2024-25
Coldwater Community Schools Calendar
180 Student Days - 1098 Hours - 5 Professional
Days Please Print In Color if
Possible!
AUGUST
M

T

W

180
OCTOBER

SEPTEMBER
T

F

M

T

W

T

F

1

2

NS

3

4

5

6

M

T

W

T

F

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

9

10

11

12

13

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

16

17

18

19

20

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

23

24

25

26

27

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

NS

28

29

30

31

9

30

NOVEMBER
M

T

W

T

20
DECEMBER

22

JANUARY

F

M

T

W

T

F

1

2

3

4

5

6

M

T

W

T

F

NS

NS

NS

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

NS

NS

NS

NS

NS

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

NS

NS

NS

NS

NS

27

28

29

30

31

18

FEBRUARY
M

T

W

T

15
MARCH

F

M

T

W

APRIL
T

F

M

T

W

T

F

1

2

3

4

3

4

5

6

7

3

4

5

6

7

7

8

9

10

11

10

11

12

13

14

10

11

12

13

14

14

15

16

17

NS

NS

18

19

20

21

21

22

23

24

25

24

25

26

27

28

28

29

30

19

19

17

18

19

20

21

NS

NS

NS

NS

NS

T

F

16

21

31
MAY
M

T

W

JUNE
T

F

1

2

M

T

W

September 2

Labor Day

5

6

7

8

9

2

3

4

5

6

November 28

Thanksgiving
Day

12

13

14

15

16

9

10

11

12

13

December 25

Christmas Day

19

20

21

22

23

16

17

18

19

20

January 1

New Year's Day

NS

27

28

29

30

23

24

25

26

27

0 January 20

21

50

MLK Jr Day

February 17

Ag/Presidents
Day

April 18

Good Friday

May 26

Memorial Day

August 12 Teacher Work Day
First Student Day - August 19
August 13, 14, 15; October 11; January 20 - Prof. Dev. Days
February 14 - 1/2 Day of School Mid-Winter Break
February 17 - No School Farmer's Day
March 24-March 28 - Spring Break
December 19, 20 - 1/2 day students, 1/2 day Record's Day
May 29,30 - 1/2 day students, 1/2 day Record's Day

NS - No School - Holiday/Scheduled Break
October 22 Evening Conferences
October 23 Half day for Students/ Afternoon & Evening Conferences
Early Release

51

52

53

54

55
