Upper Moreland Township
Board of Commissioners - Regular Meeting
May 1, 2017 Meeting Minutes

Board of Commissioners Members: Commissioner and President, R. Samuel Valenza; Commissioner
and Vice President, Joseph A. Lavalle; Commissioners Donald B. Tucker, Jr., Kevin Spearing, Donna
D. Parsell, Kip McFatridge, and Donald G. Warner
I.

Call to Order: The Regular Meeting of the Board of Commissioners of Upper Moreland
Township was called to order by the President of the Board of Commissioners, R. Samuel
Valenza, at 7:00 p.m.

II.

Moment of Silent Meditation/Pledge of Allegiance

III.

Roll Call: Commissioners Tucker, Jr., Spearing, Parsell, Lavalle, McFatridge, Valenza and
Warner. Others Present: David A. Dodies, Township Manager and Kate Harper, Township
Solicitor.

IV.

Presentations/Announcements:
Commissioner Valenza introduced Senator Stewart J. Greenleaf who initiated the presentation of
a citation in honor of William C. Seiberlich, Jr., recognizing his 32 years of dedicated and
distinguished service to the residents of Upper Moreland Township. Representative Thomas P.
Murt expressed his thanks to Mr. Seiberlich and recollected some specific contributions to the
Township as well as his distinguished career as a school teacher and principal in the Philadelphia
School District. Commissioner Valenza read aloud from the plaque and presented it on behalf
of the Township and Mr. Dodies included his personal congratulations and gratitude. Mr.
Seiberlich expressed his thanks to everyone for the acknowledgements and presentation.
Public Hearing #1933:
Commissioner Valenza announced the cancellation of tonight's Public Hearing #1933 to consider
a Conditional Use Application filed by MEH Investments, L.P., equitable owners of properties
located at 432-514 Davisville Road, Willow Grove in the C-2 District to redevelop the properties
into a transit oriented mid-rise apartment development with a single four story 70-unit apartment
building with parking underneath it as well as outside the building.

REGULAR MEETING
V.

Public Comments – Non-Agenda Items Only - Nothing to report.

VI.

Treasurer’s Activity Report – March 2017: The Treasurer's Activity Report was unanimously
approved as submitted.
Approval of Minutes – March 6, 2017: The Regular Meeting Minutes were unanimously
approved as submitted.

VII.

VIII.

Committee Recommendations:
A. Finance and Administrative Committee:
1. Appointments/Reappointments:
The Board of Commissioners unanimously approved the appointment of Linda Jones to
the Upper Moreland Township Parks and Recreation Advisory Council to serve a 2-year
term to expire on March 1, 2019.

-1-

Upper Moreland Township
Board of Commissioners - Regular Meeting
May 1, 2017 Meeting Minutes

2. List of Bills Payable: The List of Bills were unanimously approved as submitted.
3. Other Items:
a. The Board of Commissioners unanimously approved by a vote of 7-0, the Ratification
of Collective Bargaining Agreement between Upper Moreland Township and
Teamsters Local 107 White Collar Non-Professional Employees.
 Mr. Dodies reported that the Township Negotiating Committee and
representatives of Teamsters Local 107 have reached an agreement on the new
four-year collective bargaining contracts.
White Collar Non-Professional
employees will receive increases of approximately 3% per year for the four-year
term and, in exchange, the Township will receive an increase in contributions
toward the cost of employees' healthcare insurance during each of the four years.
Mr. Dodies said that the terms of the contracts were fair for the Township,
employees and taxpayers. He thanked and noted the members of the Negotiating
Committee: Commissioners Spearing and Warner, Mr. Schaible, Mrs.
DeLaurentis, and himself, and representatives of the Teamsters. Mr. Dodies
stated that the Teamsters already voted and he is encouraging the Board of
Commissioners to vote in favor of the contracts that will expire on December 31,
2020.
b. The Board of Commissioners unanimously approved by a vote of 7-0, the Ratification
of Collective Bargaining Agreement between Upper Moreland Township and
Teamsters Local 107 Blue Collar Employees. Blue Collar Teamsters' employees will
receive increases of approximately 3% per year for the four-year term.
 Jean Scherp Cunningham, 4210 Davisville Road, inquired to know what is the
increase in contributions toward the cost of employees' healthcare insurance. Mr.
Dodies confirmed that the increase starts at 2.5% and will double over the term of
the contract.
4. New Business - Nothing to report.
B. Community Development Committee:
1. Code Enforcement – Nothing to report.
2. Land Development/Subdivision Applications - Nothing to report.
3. List of Upcoming Zoning Hearing Board Applications: Commissioner Lavelle read
the list of four petitions scheduled for a Public Hearing on Thursday, May 11, 2017 at
7:30 pm in the Council Room of the Municipal Building.
4. Other Items:
a. The Board of Commissioners unanimously approved by a vote of 7-0, Resolution
No. 2017-15 – the waiver from land development process from Cellco Partnership
d/b/a Verizon Wireless, at 2895 Terwood Road in Willow Grove.
b. The Board of Commissioners unanimously approved by a vote of 7-0, a revised
resolution after edits were made following a discussion of Resolution No. 2017-16 –
a land development request from MCAP Willow Grove, LP (The Landing at Willow
Grove) – Phase 4, at 1120 Old York Road.
 Commissioner Lavelle read from a list of seven waivers and discussed in detail
further design options for designating a cross-walk or other safe route from the
building to York Road.

-2-

Upper Moreland Township
Board of Commissioners - Regular Meeting
May 1, 2017 Meeting Minutes

 Ms. Harper noted comments and will add minor edits to the list of seven waivers
in the Resolution.
c. The Board of Commissioners unanimously approved by a vote of 7-0, Resolution
No. 2017-17– to advertise a public hearing to be held on June 5, 2017 at 7:00 p.m. to
consider an Ordinance related to medical marijuana.
 Commissioner Warner inquired if purchases must be cash transactions and Ms.
Harper confirmed that was not the case.
d. The Board of Commissioners unanimously approved by a vote of 7-0, Gilmore and
Associates’ fee of $5,000 ($2,500 each) to prepare Act 13 Grant Applications to the
Flood Mitigation and Watershed Restoration Protection programs for funds to be used
to construct Fair Oaks Park Basin.
C. Parks and Recreation Committee: Commissioner Spearing reported that the Library
successfully secured a grant to develop educational programs within the park system. He
also announced that Friends of Boileau Farmstead is holding their annual event on Saturday,
May 6, 2017.
D. Public Health and Safety Committee: The Board of Commissioners unanimously
approved by a vote of 7-0, Resolution No. R-2017-18 – the Blair Mill and Easton Roads
Traffic Signal Application and Resolution (Horsham Township Land Development Project).
 Commissioner McFatridge noted that the Township controls the traffic signal in the area
of the northwestern corner of Route 611 where a project is currently being constructed
and, therefore, the Township is responsible to place an application for a new traffic
signal.
 Mr. Dodies stated that McMahon Associates, the Township Engineer, provided a review
and approved the plans as designed.
IX.

New Business - Nothing to report.

X.

Commissioner Comments:
 Commissioner McFatridge noted that Thompson Lexus opened for business today.

XI.

Adjournment: There being no further business to discuss, the meeting was adjourned at 8:30
p.m.

Respectfully submitted by: Kathleen Kristire.

-3-
