AGREEMENT
By and between the

CITY OF LOGKPORT
And

Givil Service Employees Association, lnc.
Local 1000 AFSCME, AFL-CIO
Slnce 19tO

|{ew Yodr'e I"EAD|I{C Unlon

City of Lockport Unit 7651
Niagara Gounty Local 832

January 1,2015, through December 31 ,2026

TABLE OF CONTENTS
AGREEMENT

I

ARTICLE II - LEGISLATIVE REVIEW

,

ARTICLE III - THE ESTABLISHMENT OF WORK RULES

1

ARTICLE V. EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION LEAVE

4

ARTICLE VII_INFORMATION

ARTICLE X - MEDICAL BENEFITS PLAN

...................5

9

ARTICLE XI - JOB POSTINGS

....................19

ARTICLE XIII - WORK DAY AND WORK W88K........

......,..,,...,,,,..2I

ARTICLE XrV - CALL BACK COMPENSATrON..........

.....................21

ARTICLE XV - OVERTIME COMPENSATION

22

ARTICLE XIX. BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

....,.,,,,,,,........26

ARTICLE XX. JURY DUTY LEAVE
ARTICLE XXI. LEAVES OF ABSENCE.

,.........26
.,,.,.,,.,,.,,,......,.,27

ARTICLE XXII - TRAVEL POLICY.....

.......28

ARTICLE XXIII - PERSONNEL FILE

........29

ARTICLE XXV - DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE..................

,.,,,,.,.,,32

ARTICLE XXVI - REDUCTION IN FORCE.......

.............35

ARTTCLE XXVIr - EQUAL OPPORTUNTTIES

35

ARTICLE XXX _LONdEVITY

38

ARTICLE XXXI. DENTAL/MEDICAL VISITS
ARTICLE XXXII . OUT-OF-GRADE WORK...

.............38
39

ARTICLE XXXV. SICK 8ANK.........
ARTICLE XXXVr - RESTDENCY REQUTREMENT

42

APPENDIX A - CSEA APPLICABLE POSITIONS....

Enor! Bookmark not defined.

HEALTH SUMMARY _ BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD

54

AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT made and entered into this 26th day of January, 2015, by and
between the CITY OF LOCKPORT, a political subdivision of the state of New York
(hereinafter refer to as the "City"), and the Civil Service Employees Association, lnc.,
Local 1000, AFSCME, AFL-CIO, the certified Union for the City of Lockport Employee
Unit Local 832 (hereinafter referred to as the "Union").

ARTICLE I . RECOGNITION
The City of Lockport recognizes the Civil Service Employees Association, lnc., Local
1000, AFSCME, AFL-CIO, the certified Union forthe City of Lockport Employee Unit Local

832 pursuant to the terms of the certification issued in April of 1984, as the exclusive
representative for collective negotiations with respect to salaries, wages, hours and all
other terms and conditions of employment for all job titles listed in Appendix B, which is
attached hereto and made a part of this Agreement.

I

Alljob titles similarly created in the future.

)

It is understood by the parties that the Confidential Secretary to the Mayor is
exempt from the provisions of this contract.

3

a. lt is further understood the temporary employees whose employment is
expected to exceed six (6) months, shall be covered by the terms and
conditions of this Agreement.

b. Temporary employees whose tenure is expected to be less than six (6)
months shall be exempt. ln the event they surpass six (6) months continuous
duty, the terms and conditions of this contract shall apply.

I

Part-Time Employees
The definition of Part-Time Employee is an employee that is scheduled to work less than

35 hours per week. The number of part-time employees shall be capped at 10o/o of the
total number of CSEA membership.

ARTICLE II . LEGISLATIVE REVIEW
It is agreed by the parties that any provisions of this Agreement requiring legislative action

to permit its implementation by amendment of law or by providing the additional funds
thereof, shall not become effective until the appropriate legislative body has given
approval.

ARTICLE III - THE ESTABLISHMENT OF WORK RULES
The City may establish and enforce binding rules and regulations in connection with its
operation and maintenance of discipline, provided such rules and regulations are not in
conflict with the provisions of this Agreement. Prior to implementation of Work Rules, the
Union shall have the opportunity to give input into any such proposed rules.

ARTICLE IV. UNION RIGHTS

A. Access to Employees
The City agrees to permit representative of the Union to enter City of Lockport
property at any time for individual discussion of working conditions with bargaining
unit employees, provided care is exercised by such representatives that they do

not interfere with the performance of duties assigned to the employees, after
obtaining permission from the Department Head.

The City agrees that no other representative or organization offering benefits or
programs similar to those offered or sponsored by the Civil Service Employees
Association, lnc., shall be provided access to the bargaining unit employees during
working hours. The City further agrees that it will not permit any other organization,

or union, to hold meetings for the purpose of discussing terms and conditions of
2

employment or be provided meeting space on property or premises owned or
occupied by the City of Lockport, except for challenge periods.

B. Pledqe Aoainst Coercion
The Employer agrees not to interfere with the rights of Employees to become
members of the Union. There will be no discrimination, interference, restraint, or

coercion by the Employer or any Employer representative against any Employee
because of his/her Union membership or because of an employee activity in an
official capacity on behalf of the Union.

C. Bulletin Boards
The City shall provide exclusive bulletin board space in an accessible place in the
following locations for the purpose of posting bulletins, notices and material issued

by CSEA, which shall be signed by the designated official of CSEA, or the
appropriate department representative.
Municipal Building

Water Department
Department of Highways and Parks

Wastewater Treatment Plant
There shall be no bulletin board space reserved exclusively for this use of any

other employee organization except employee organizations which have been
certified or recognized as the representative for collective bargaining negotiations
of other City employees at such locations. No such material shall be posted which

is profane or obscene, or defamatory of the City or its representatives of which
constitutes election campaign material for or against any person, organization or
faction thereof.

J

ARTICLE V - EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION LEAVE
With prior notification, members of the bargaining unit who are elected or appointed
officers or officials of the Civil Service Employees Association, lnc. shall have the right to

leave, without charge to accumulated credits, for the conduct of Union business as
follows:

A.

The President or is designee shall be granted twelve (12) days leave per

year, without charge to accumulated credits, to conduct Unit, Local or
regional business or to attend Board of Director's meetings.

B

Up to two employees who are delegates to the CSEA annual convention

shall be granted five (5) days total leave per year, without charge to
accumulated credits, to attend the CSEA annual convention.

C.

Up to two employees that are elected or are appointed officials of Region 6

CSEA, shall be granted five (5) days total leave per year without charge to
a cumulative credits, to attend meetings and official functions, as called by

the Regional President.
D.

The maximum number of organization leave days under the above
provisions shall be twenty-two (22) days per year.

ARTICLE VI . DUES DEDUCTION
The City of Lockport shall deduct dues and fees as called for by CSEA from all employees
covered by this agreement who have affirmatively authorized the deduction of such dues
and fees and to remit such dues and fees to CSEA. CSEA as the exclusive representative

of employees covered under this agreement, agrees to promptly provide the City of
Lockport, upon demand by the City to CSEA, with a list of members who have authorized

the deduction of union dues and fees, and a list of members who have not authorized
deduction of union dues or any other fees, and to promptly update said list when changes
occur to it. CSEA agrees to promptly refund non-members for any dues or agency fees
4

that are erroneously remitted to it. CSEA further agrees to defend, indemnify and hold the

City of Lockport harmless from and against any claims, actions or proceedings by any
person or entity arising from deductions made by the Employer and/or other actions by
the Employer for the purpose of complying with this Article.

ARTICLE VII - INFORMATION

On the effective date of this Agreement, the City shall supply to the Unit a list of all
employees in the bargaining unit showing the employee's full name, home address, social
security number, job title, date of birth, work location, and first date of employment. Such
information shall hereafter be provided to the Unit on a yearly basis.

The employer shall supply to the Unit on a per occurrence basis, the same information
for all new employees and those who terminate their employment.

ARTICLE VII - LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
There shall be a Labor Management Committee consisting of three (3) CSEA
representatives and three (3) City representatives. ln addition, the Labor Relations
Specialists may attend.

The Committee shall meet on a monthly basis or as necessary to discuss problems of
mutual concern. An agenda of items to be discussed will be exchanged at least seven
(7) calendar days before such meetings.

The employee representatives shall suffer no loss of time and pay if the meeting occurs
during their work hours.

5

ARTIGLE IX SICK LEAVE

A, Statement of Purpose
Sick Leave is hereby defined as leave of absence from duty, with pay granted to an
employee by reason of such employee's own sickness or disability. Under no
circumstances is sick leave to be construed as additional vacation due an employee, or
as an excuse for leave of absence with pay, or for any other purpose.

Sick leave shall be construed only as insurance or a protection to the employee provided
by the City against the employee's loss of income due to legitimate sickness or disability
provided that such employee has met certain conditions and has accumulated sufficient

sick leave credits to cover the period of sickness or disability allowed for the calendar
year,

B. Sick Leave Accumulation
Each full-time employee shall be allowed to accumulate sick leave credits without a limit

at the rate of one and one quarter (1 %) working days for each month completed in

service. Sick leave credits shall be computed from the first day of service provided,
however, that no sick leave shall be authorized until the employee has completed six
months continuous employment. These credits, together with any previous sick leave
credits which would have been usable on that date shall become cumulative.

The unit of computation of sick leave time used shall not be less than one-half (%) day.
Credits cannot be earned for any month in which an employee is absent without pay in
excess of two days.

For the calculation of sick leave credits, the time recorded on the payroll at full rate of pay

shall be considered as time "served" by the employee, provided, however, that sick leave
credits shall not accumulate after an employee has been on sick leave for a continuous
period exceeding one year, no after an employee is absent on Worker's Compensation
disability for a continuous period exceeding one year.
6

C. Eliqibility
1. Upon proper evidence of a bona fide illness, an employee shall be able to draw on his
accumulated and unused sick leave credits.

2. ln order to apply for sick leave, proof of disability must be provided by the employee,
satisfactory to the Department Head. The employee, or his agent, must report such a
sickness or disability within thirty minutes of his scheduled starting time on each and every
day of sickness or disability.

3. The Department Head may require a physician's certificate for any absence where the
illness or disability is of long duration, a physician's certificate may be required for each

five (5) days of continuous absence. ln any case, the Department Head may require an
examination by the City Physician, and the Department Head shall arrange such an
appointment. Whenever an employee has been on sick leave for thirty (30) successive
days, the Department Head must require that the employee be examined by the City
Physician before he returns to duty. The Department Head will arrange for the
examination to be held within two (2) working days, ln the event such employee shallfail

to submit or refuse consent to such medical examination, he shall be deemed to have
waived his rights under this Article.

4. Where an employee received compensation under the Worker's Compensation Law
on account of disability, he shall receive sick leave with pay during the period of disability

for which he received compensation. The compensation payments, to which such
employee is entitled, shall be received directly by the City, and the employee shall be
credited with sick leave credits equal to the pro-rata payments of compensation so
received.

5. Whenever an employee shall be absent on sick leave and the period for which he is
absent includes a day or days upon which such employee was not scheduled to work,
such day(s) shall not be charged against his accumulated sick leave credits.

6. The Department Head shall maintain records of accumulated sick leave credits for
each employee and a record of the total sick leave granted to each employee.

D. Extended Sick Leave
7

An employee with five (5) years continuous service with the City immediately prior to his
application for benefits under this provision, shall be eligible for Extended Sick Leave as
follows:

1. Such employee shall receive one (1) week sick leave al % pay for each year of
consecutive service up to a maximum of 26 weeks at% pay.

2. Health insurance shall be provided by the City for the period of earned extended sick
leave. The City may require the proof of disability from two qualified physicians.

3. Any employee who utilized extended sick leave under this provision will earn the same
benefits he/she would have earned while on regular sick leave.

4. Frequency of certification of illness shall be set forth in Sick Leave provisions of this
contract.

5. An employee shall be eligible for extended sick leave on only ONE occasion during
his/her career and may apply for extended sick leave only after exhausting all other
accruals.

6. No payment shall be made at retirement or at any other time for any unused earned
extended sick leave.

E, Sick Leave lncentive
An employee shall earn additional Personal Days for limited use of sick days as follows:

1.

Zero sick days used in calendar year:

3 additional Personal Days earned

2.

One or two sick days used in calendar year:

2 additional Personal Days earned

3.

Three sick days used in calendar year:
1 additional Personal Day earned

Such personal days utilized shall be charged against an employee's accumulated sick

leave credits but shall not be charged as sick days used for purposes of computing
entitlement to additional day hereunder.

F. Familv lllness
8

At the discretion of the Employer, sick leave days may be used for serious illness of a

spouse, child, parent, grandchild or grandparent. The Employer shall not be
unreasonable in approving such leave when requested by an employee. Such leave shall
be charged against the sick leave accruals of the employee taking the leave described in

this Section F.

G. Part-Time Employees
Any employee hired to work less than full-time (35 hours) per week shall be entitled to
accrue this benefit in fractional proportion to fulltime employees.

ARTICLE X - MEDICAL BENEFITS PLAN
For purpose of this Agreement, the definition of the term 'active employee' shall include
any employee who is on the payroll including, but not limited to, those employees on paid
leave of absence. The definition of the term 'retiree' shall include any employee that from
October 27,2010 fonvard, retires from employment with the City of Lockport.
Hospital and Medical Care Benefits

The 'core' medical insurance plan shall be the POS 298/298 Plus.
The City of Lockport agrees to pay the full cost of all referenced medical insurance
benefits, as follows:

Active Emplovees

9

The parties hereto agree that there shall be provided to each active employee, family or
single medical insurance benefits fully paid by the City of Lockport. Active employees

shall have a choice of the following medical plans as agreed upon jointly by the City of
Lockport and bargaining unit CSEA as follows:
Option One = POS 298 Class 0021002+
Option Two = POS 298 Class 003/003+
Option Three = POS 298 Class 0041004+
Benefit summaries for these plans are as outlined in attachments and are part of this
Agreement.

The employee shall have the opportunity to switch options during the annual open
enrollment period each year.

Retirees

A. Employees hired before date of ratification of this agreement shall be eligible to
continue health coverage for themselves and any eligible dependents in
retirement at no cost to themselves, provided they have met the following
requirements:
a. Completion of a minimum of ten years of service, the last ten of which shall
be continuous with the City of Lockport during which the employee was
eligible to receive Health lnsurance; and
b. The employee must be employed with the City at the time of Retirement; and
c. The employee must retire pursuant to New York State Retirement or Social
Security Law and provide the City proof of the same.

B. Employees hired after the date of ratification of this agreement, shall be
eligible to continue health coverage for themselves and any eligible
dependents in retirement and shall be required to contribute ten percent
(10o/ol of the applicable premium equivalent toward their health insurance
coverage in retirement, provided they have met the following requirements:
a. Completion of a minimum of twenty years of service, the last ten of
which shall be continuous with the City of Lockport during which the
employee was eligible to receive Health lnsurance; and
b. The employee must be employed with the City at the time of
Retirement; and
c. The employee must retire pursuant to New York State Retirement or
Social Security Law and provide the Gity proof of the same.
10

C. Part-time employees that qualify for retirement health insurance pursuant
to subsection A above shall be required to contribute fifty percent (50%) of
the applicable premium equivalent toward their health insurance coverage
in retirement.
D. The parties agree that retirees that are eligible to receive health insurance
coverage upon retirement shall receive the same health insurance and
prescription benefits and coverage as enjoyed at the time of their retirement from
the City.

E. All employees retiring pursuant to this agreement shall have the option of single
or family coverage. All City of Lockport retirees shall be entitled to remain
enrolled in the City of Lockport Health lnsurance Plan enjoyed by the employee
at the time of their retirement for the life of the retiree. The right of health
insurance in retirement is a vested right, effective the date of retirement, provided
that the employee meets the requirements to receive retirement health
insurance.
All employees retiring under this agreement shall have the option of single, double or
family medicat coverage, offered by the City of Lockport. All City of Lockport retirees
shall be entitled to membership in the City of Lockport Health Insurance Plan as
outlined in this agreement or in a plan that offers equal to or better healthcare coverage
benefits, for the life of the retiree. The right to health insurance in retirement is a vested

right. The right becomes valid on the date of retirement.
The employees retiring under this Agreement shall have the opportunity to switch
options during the annual open enrollment period each year. The open enrollment
period shall be held during the month of October each year. ln the event that the Union
and the City agree to an alternate date for the open enrollment period, the City shall

notify all retirees via U.S. mail at least ten (10) days prior to the alternate open
enrollment period.
ln addition, any employee that had previously opted out of the Medical Benefits program
and received the lump-sum annual buy-out may at any time, opt to receive the Medical
Benefits listed in this agreement.
All retired employees shall have the opportunity to switch options during the annual
open enrollment period each Year.

ll

Retirees shall have the option of single, double or family medical coverage fully paid by

the City of Lockport, as follows:

RETIREES LIVING WITHIN THE COUNTIES OF WNY
NOT Medicare Eliqible. Livinq within the 8 Counties of WNY

All employees, NOT Medicare eligible, retiring under this agreement and living
within the 8 counties of WNY may enroll in the following BC/BS of WNY insurance
plans:
Option One = POS 298 Class 0021002+
Option Two = POS 298 Class 003/003+
Option Three = POS 298 Class 0041004+

Medicare Eligible Livino within the 8 Counties of WNY
All employees who retire under this agreement and the retirees spouse, who
become Medicare eligible, living within the 8 counties of WNY may enroll in the BC/BS
of WNY Medicare Advantage Plan PPO 799 $5/$5/$5/$5 with the City of Lockport
reimbursing the retiree hired prior to 11112015 and their spouses Part B premium in full.

Any retiree that was hired after 11112015 will be responsible to pay all Medicare Part B
premiums and expenses upon retirement.
ln the event that the retiree or their spouse has not become Medicare eligible, he
or she shall remain enrolled in one of the current POS plans of their choosing at a single
rate until he or she becomes Medicare eligible, at which time the retiree or spouse will

enroll in BC/BS of WNY Medicare Advantage Plan PPO 799 $5/$5/$5/$5, with the City
of Lockport reimbursing the retiree and/or their spouses Part B premium in full.
When a retiree becomes Medicare eligible and the retiree's spouse is not
Medicare eligible, the spouse shall enroll in the POS single plan of his/her choice. The

spouse is not entitled to the HRA. However, if the spouse becomes Medicare eligible,
before the retiree, and the spouse enrolls in the BC/BS of WNY Medicare Advantage

Plan PPO 799 and the retiree goes into the POS single plan of his/her choice, the
t2

retiree shall be entitled to the difference between the core 201 $5 plan and the single
plan the retiree elects, in the form of an HRA.
lf a retiree becomes Medicare eligible and has legal dependents, that retiree shall
have the right to maintain BC/BS POS 201 ,203,204 family plan with a HRA until such

time as the dependent(s) are no longer eligible for healthcare coverage under this
Agreement, at which time the retiree will enroll in the BC/BS of WNY Medicare
Advantage Plan PPO 799.

RETIREES LIVING OUTSIDE 8 COIJNT F.S of WN Y

NOT Medicare Eliqible, Living Outside the 8 Counties of WNY

All employees, not Medicare eligible, retiring under this agreement, living outside
the 8 counties of WNY shall be enrolled in the BC/BS PPO 812Plan.

Medicare Eliqible Livinq Outside of 8 Counties of WNY

All employees who retire under this agreement and the retiree's spouse, who
become Medicare eligible, living outside the I counties of WNY will enroll in the BC/BS
of WNY 2009 Traditional Blue Medicare PPO 799 Out of Area Plan $1/$1/$1/$1 plan

with the City of Lockport reimbursing any retiree who was hired before 11112015 and
their spouses Part B premium in full.
lf the retiree becomes Medicare eligible and the retiree's spouse is not Medicare

eligible, the spouse shall enroll in the single BC/BS PPO 812 plan. lf the spouse is
Medicare eligible and the retiree is not Medicare eligible, then the retiree shall be
enrolled in the single BC/BS PPO 812 plan.
lf the employee retiring under this agreement becomes Medicare eligible and has

legal dependents, the retiree will have the right to maintain BC/BS PPO 812 family plan
until such time as the dependent(s) are no longer eligible for healthcare coverage under
this agreement. At such time the retiree shall be enrolled in the BC/BS of WNY 2009
Traditional Blue Medicare PPO 799 Out of Area Plan.

t3

The PPO 812 will be available only to those retired employees who reside in an
area outside the eight WNY Counties currently served by BC/BS POS plans listed
above for more than 180 days in a calendar year.

Any retiree who chooses to relocate outside the eight WNY Counties served by the
POS plans any time during their retirement can opt into the PPO 812 National Plan.
Benefit summaries for these plans are as outlined in the attachments and are part
of this agreement.

All retirees participating in the PPO 812 National Plan may be required to submit to
the City of Lockport proof of their residency outside the POS Plan coverage area.
Acceptable proof of residency will be any one of the following:
* Valid driver's license

" Utility bill showing the mailing address outside the POS Plan coverage area
" Rental agreement for a property located outside the POS Plan coverage area
RETIREE BUYOUT OPTION

Any active employee who retires, from October 27,2010 fonryard, who does not avail
himself/herself of the coverage provided herein shall receive a lump-sum of $1000 or

the amount stated in the respective bargaining agreement contracts, if that amount is
higher, by reason of such non-participation. Said sum shall be paid to such retired
employee on the first payday in December, each year, and will be pro-rated if
necessary.

Those individuals, who chose to receive the savings by virtue of their not participating in
the medical insurance plan provided, may rejoin the plan during any open enrollment
period, or upon the death of their spouse, or upon any qualifying life-changing event.
EM PLOYEE/RETI REE DEATH

t4

The City shall allow the spouse of all employees, active and retired, to continue
participation in the Medical Benefits Plan upon death of the employee/retiree at the
surviving spouse's own expense.

OPEN ENROLLMENT

The City shall make written notification to the President and Vice President of each
bargaining unit as listed above, ten (10) days prior to the open enrollment period,
informing them of the open enrollment period. In addition, upon the request of a
representative of any of the above referenced bargaining unit, the City of Lockport shall
arrange for a representative(s) of Blue Cross/Blue Shield to make themselves available

to all employees on City of Lockport property, during employee work hours for the
purposes of explaining benefits to aid in selection of the employee's medical plan.

HRA 1 05 ACCOUNT
Pro-Flex, at the expense of the City of Lockport, shall administer the HRA 105 account
and the existing Flexible Spending Account 125.

lf an active employee or retiree dies and said employee/retiree has funds remaining in

their HRA 105 account or their Flexible Spending Account 125, those funds shall be
transferred over to the employee's surviving spouse and remain with the surviving
spouse until and only until the surviving spouse exhausts the remaining funds in his/her
HRA/FSA account. The City of Lockport has no right to any monies in the surviving

spouse's HRA/FSA account. However, the City of Lockport will not be required to make
any future contributions to the HRA after the employee's or retiree's death.

When the retiree becomes Medicare eligible and enrolls in the BC/BS of WNY PPO 799
Plans and the retiree's spouse is not Medicare eligible and is enrolled in a single POS
healthcare plan, the spouse will not be eligible for the HRA. When the spouse is
Medicare eligible and the retiree is not Medicare eligible the retiree shall be eligible for
HRA under the guidelines of this agreement.
15

For those employees opting for the POS 298/298 plus, the City shall contribute $400 for

single coverage and $800 for family coverage. The HRA 105 contributions shall be
made in a lump sum by the City to coincide with the initial start date of the agreed upon
health plan and annually thereafter on the anniversary of the initial start date.

The City shall not contribute to the HRA of employees hired after the day of ratification
of this agreement.

SEPARATION FROM SERVICE

Should an employee separate from service, for any reason other than retirement, said
employee shall be allowed to access any balance in his/her HRA account. The
separated employee may be required, due to IRS rules and regulations, to lose use of
the flex-card and be required to make an expenditure that then may be submitted for
reimbursement.

CHANGE IN COVERAGE STATUS
Should an employee/retiree's coverage status change from a PPO to POS or POS to
PPO plan, said employee/retiree shall have full access to any and all monies in their
HRA at the time of such coverage status change.

PART B PREMIUMS

Part B Premiums - Employees pay all Medicare Part B premiums and expenses upon

their retirement effective for employees hired on or after January 1,2015.
As stated and referenced in this Agreement and for clarification and so there is no
misunderstanding, the City of Lockport agrees to fully reimburse the retiree who was
hired prior to 11112015 and his/her spouse, whether in area or out of area, the full
amount of their Part B premiums including any annual increases once the retiree and/or

spouse is Medicare eligible.
T6

This reimbursement shall be paid to the retiree and/or spouse, through an HRA account
set up by Pro-Flex and the City of Lockport. They shall be reimbursed the full cost of
Part B premiums by check or direct deposit after submitting a statement to Pro-Flex
showing proof of Part B premium deduction from their Social Security checks.

Retiree and/or spouse may submit their Social Security stub or any proof, on a monthly
basis to Pro-Flex or once at the beginning of each calendar year at which time Pro-Flex
shall send a check or direct deposit funds on a reoccurring basis at the beginning of
each month.

This benefit shall continue until and only until the retiree and/or his/her spouse dies

Anyone hired after 11112015 will pay their Part B premiums and their spouses Part B
premiums once they become Medicare eligible.

PRESCRIPTION DRUG REIMBURSEMENT

lf a particular prescription drug is on the active employee's formulary (POS/PPO plans,
in arealout of area plans) and the particular prescription drug is not on the Medicare

formulary, the City of Lockport shall reimburse the Retiree the amount of the drug
prescription minus his/her co-pay, after the employee or family member exhausts all
administrative and procedural remedies available.

MISCELLANEOUS

The City of Lockport and CSEA understand that if the Medicare plans listed in this
Agreement are no longer funded or supplemented by the United States Government in
any way, shape or form the City of Lockport and CSEA will negotiate plans that are

equal to or better than the currently listed plans set forth in this Agreement and the

t7

plans shall continue to be paid in full by the City of Lockport and there shall be no cost
or contribution to the retiree including Part B benefits or any other benefits that may be
required.

The City of Lockport and CSEA understand that if at any time the Medicare Plans listed
in this Agreement cost more than the current plans that are listed and set forth herein,

the City and CSEA will negotiate a plan that is equal to or better than the benefits listed
in this Agreement. The City understands that they cannot unilaterally change plans

without the consent of CSEA. The plans shall continue to be paid fully by the City of
Lockport and there shall be no cost or contribution to the retiree. Part B benefits or any
other benefits that may be required shall continue to be paid fully by the City of Lockport
for employees hired before 11112015.

The City will permit any employee who is a member of the Hospital and Medical Plan

provided herein at the time of their retirement to retain their membership in said medical
plans, as follows, with the City paying the full cost thereof, subject to the criteria

established in the adopting resolution of the Common Council of the City of Lockport,
dated December 16, 1964.

No changes shall be made to this Medical Benefits Agreement by either party by any
method, including but not limited to, Common Council Resolution or collective
bargaining agreement language that has not been agreed to and ratified by CSEA. ln

addition, any change to the insurance provider or the level of benefits provided in the
above designated plans and outlined on the attached benefit summaries shall require
written agreement by representatives of CSEA and then only after ratification of the

membership of CSEA. This Agreement is the full understanding of all parties
concerning Medical Benefits and shall supersede all others.

A. Employees hired prior to October 27, 2010 who do not avail himself/herself of the
coverage provided herein shall receive a lump sum payment: 92000.00;
employees hired after January 1,2011 receive a lump sum payment: $1000.00

l8

Said sum shall be paid to such employee on the first payday in December, and will be
pro-rated if necessary.

ARTICLE XI . JOB POSTINGS

A.

The City shall transmit a copy of any job opening within the bargaining unit to all

departments for posting. The posting shall be for a period of ten days prior to the filling

of such opening. A copy of the posting will be provided to the Unit President, Vice
President, Secretary and Treasurer at the time of the posting.

The posting shall contain

Job title
Department
Rate of pay
Copy of qualifications

During the posting period, any unit employee who wishes to apply for the position may

obtain an application at the Civil Service Office and return the completed application to
the Civil Service Office.

B. Promotion/Reclassification

l. An employee reclassified or promoted one grade from one job to another job within
the promotional ladder as determined by the Civil Service Commission, shall
receive the rate of pay in the beginning step of the higher salary grade and
progress through the steps on their anniversary dates thereafter for the term of this

Agreement. lf the beginning step in the higher salary grade does not provide an
increase, the employee shall move to the step that does provide an increase. This
section shalt also apply to employees promoted into the CSEA bargaining unit.

Z. An employee(s) reclassified or promoted two or more grades from one job to
another job within the promotional ladder as determined by the Civil Service
Commission, shall receive the rate of pay that is not less than the equivalent of two

steps. Such employee(s) shall progress through the steps on their anniversary
dates thereafter for the term of this Agreement. An employee who is promoted or

reclassified and the Entrance Step of the new pay grade is greater than the

t9

equivalent of two steps, such employee shall receive Entrance Step pay and
progress through the steps on anniversary dates thereafter for this Agreement.

3. Each new employee shall serve a probationary period in conformance with Civil
Service Law, not less than eight (8) weeks nor more than twenty-six (26) weeks
unless a training period, in which case the probationary period should be one year.

4. An employee shall be allowed to transfer to a vacant position in another
department before the vacancy is othenruise filled with the approval of the affected
Department Heads, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Such
employee shall serve a probationary period of not less than eight (8) weeks nor
more than 26 weeks in the new employment, which probationary period may be
shortened at the option of the City. Within the probationary period such employee

may retreat to his former position.

ARTICLE XII- RETIREMENT PLAN

A. Each employee covered under this contract who is considered a Tier I or Tier ll
participant in the New York State Retirement System shall be afforded the benefits
of the lmproved Twenty (20) Year Career Retirement Plan (Section 75i) of the New

York State Retirement and Social Security Law. All employees who are
considered Tier lll and Tier lV participants in the New York State Retirement
System shall be provided the benefit of the Co-Escalator Retirement Plan.

B. Sick Leave Conversion
Upon retirement from active service, unused sick leave time will be paid in a lump sum

commensurate with the employee's regular nominal rate of pay at the rate of 50
percent of a maximum of 300 days upon ratification of the contract. Any employee
hired after contract ratification will be paid at the rate of 40 percent of a maximum of
165 days. The employee shall have the option of taking his/her entire entitlement in
equal installments over three (3) years. Such entitlement shall be vested to the retiree

and in the event of death of such employee, any remaining entitlement shall be paid

20

over, as provided herein to the estate of such employee. The City agrees to provide
benefits under Section 41j of the New York Social Security and Retirement Law.

ARTICLE XIII . WORK DAY AND WORK WEEK

A. All employees shall be scheduled to work on a regular shift as determined by the
Department Head. Such shift shall have a regularly scheduled starting and quitting

time. Except for an emergency situation, no change in such schedule shall be
made except upon two (2) weeks' notice to the Union, who shall be allowed input
into the change. lt is clearly understood that the City may change a work shift.

Where such change by the City changes the shift as it existed on January 1,1985,

there shall be paid a shift differential as follows:

l.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Starting after 1 1 a.m. to 4 p.m. - 2o/o of hourly wage
Starting after 4 p.m. to 1 1 p.m. - 4o/o of hourly wage
Starting after 1 1 p.m. to 7 a.m. '60/o of hourly wage

work
For Sunday work

- 4o/o of hourly wage

For Saturday

- 8% of hourly wage

Subject to the above, the normalwork week shall consist of five (5) consecutive

days, Monday through Friday, inclusive. The normal workday for City Hall
employees shall consist of not more than eight (8) hours, from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m., with one hour lunch Period.

B.

Rest Periods

All employees work schedules provide for a 15-minute rest period during each half shift.

ARTICLE XIV . CALL BACK COMPENSATION
Any employee called back to work after the completion of his regularly scheduled shift,
shall be paid for at least four (4) hours at time-and-one-half whether the entire four (4)
hours are worked or not.

2l

Any time worked beyond four (4) hours shall be paid at time-and-one-half for the time
actually worked. The Call Back provision shall not apply to overtime which immediately
follows the employee's regularly scheduled work shift.

ARTICLE XV . OVERTIME COMPENSATION
At the option of the employee, he/she may be compensated for overtime by either time
off or money.

Compensatory time may be accumulated up to 100 hours and up to 50 hours of time may
be carried over into the succeeding year. Hours accumulated hereunder which are not
eligible to be carried over shall be paid in wages. All compensatory time shall be taken

with the approval of the Department Head, whose approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld.

1

Overtime rates shall be paid after eight (8) hours in one day, or forty (a0)
hours in one week. Thirty-five (35) hour employees shall receive straight

time pay for the eighth hour of pay any day, or for the 36th through 40th
hours in any week.
2

Adjustments for improper rotation of overtime shall be limited to
assignment of the next available overtime until said employee is made
whole.

a

J

For purposes of trying to equalize assignment of overtime, the overtime
declined shall be considered as hours worked. The employee with the
least amount of overtime worked or offered shall be assigned the next
available overtime, provided he is qualified for the work.

4.

Rotation of overtime shall be among those qualified employees who
normally perform such work within their department.

5

Employees shall not unreasonably decline overtime in emergency
situations.

22

ARTICLE XVI - HOLIDAYS

A

Designated holidays for members of the bargaining unit shall be as follows:

New Year's Day; Martin Luther King Day; Presidents Day; Good Friday;
Memorial Day; lndependence Day; Labor Day; Columbus Day; Election Day;
Veteran's Day; Thanksgiving Day; Friday immediately following Thanksgiving
Day; Christmas Eve; Christmas Day.

B

Those holidays recognized in this Agreement that have federally designated
celebration dates will be observed on those dates. Such other holidays as
provided for in this Agreement shall be observed on the traditionally observed

day except that a holiday falling on a Saturday shall be observed on the
preceding Friday, while a holiday falling on a Sunday shall be observed on the
following Monday.

C

Employees in continuous operations who are scheduled to work on such
holidays, or other employees as may be required to work on such holidays,
shall receive time-and-one-half for all hours actually worked.

D.

For the purpose of computing overtime, all holiday hours, whether worked or
un-worked, for which such employee is compensated shall be considered as
hours worked.

ARTICLE XVII . VACATIONS
A. The City agrees that full-time employees shall be eligible for vacation as
follows:

o 1 year continuous service, but less than
5 years continuous service

10 daYs

5 years continuous service but less than
10 years continuous service

15 days

a

a

10 years continuous service, but less than
23

a

a

o

15 years continuous service

17 days

15 years continuous service, but less than
20 years continuous service

20 days

20 years continuous service, but less than
24 years continuous service

22 days

25 + years continuous service

30 days

B. Vacation entitlement is based on the anniversary date of the employment of
an employee. After the employee has completed their first vacation cycle,

they shall receive their vacation entitlement on January 1.

C. Once the employee completes their first year of employment, they shall be
eligible to utilize their prorated vacation time from their date of hire through
December 31 of said year.

D. For the purpose of computing overtime, all vacation days utilized by an
employee shall be considered as hours worked.

E. Vacation time shall be accumulated at a prorated basis for parttime
employees.

F, Vacation shall not be accumulated from one calendar year to the next.
Holidays occurring during an employee's scheduled vacation period shall not
be charged against vacation time. lt is understood by the parties that vacation

is earned in one year based on anniversary date, and taken in the following
year.

The Department Head shall schedule vacation in units of not less than five (5)
workdays. Upon the request of the employee, the Department Head, in his sole
and absolute discretion may, when circumstances permit, allow an employee

to use vacation time in units of less than five (5) working days. ln the event of
24

a conflict between employees over requested vacation time, departmental
seniority shall prevail.

G. Upondeath, retirementorothertypeof separationfromserviceof anemployee,
all the employee's accrued vacation and holiday time shall be computed on a

pro-rata basis and paid to him/her in accordance with the normal rate of pay
the employee was receiving at the time.

H, When an employee earns a minimum of fifteen (15) vacation days in a year,
the employee shall have the option of electing to receive the cash equivalent

for a maximum of ten (10) vacation days in lieu of taking off such earned
vacation time, provided the employee gives notice of such election, in writing,
no later than September 1 of the preceding year. Such notice is necessary for

the City to budget the allocation. The employee shall, with 30 days written
notice, make known to the City during which pay period they wish to receive
their vacation buy-back. lt is further understood by the City and the employee
that the employee can, at any time, elect to void the buy-back option due to any

change in circumstances.

ARTICLE XVIII . PERSONAL DAYS
Each full-time employee shall be entitled to three (3) personal days per calendar year,

which days shall not accumulate from year to year, the use of which shall be subject to
the Department Head's approval, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any
employee hired to work less than full-time (35 hours) per week shall be entitled to accrue

this benefit in fractional proportion to fulltime employees. Personal days may be utilized

in%day increments.

25

ARTICLE XIX - BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
A.

For all Full-Time and Part-Time employees: A maximum leave of four (4)
working days, following the day of death, without loss of pay, accumulated sick

leave, vacation or other benefits, on account of death in the employee's
immediate family. Such leave may require satisfactory evidence of such death
and shall be subject to the discretion of the Department Head, which discretion
shall not be unreasonably withheld. The immediate family shall include spouse,
child, parent, sibling, grandparent or grandchild, step parents, step children and

domestic partners.

B

Other Relatives
Each employee of the bargaining unit shall be granted a maximum leave of

three (3) working days, subject to the requirement of paragraph A herein on
account of death of a mother' or father-in-law, brother- or sister-in-law and sonor daughter-in-law.

C

Memorial Service
ln the event the Memorial Service is not held within the above time parameters,

an employee shall be entitled to one (1) day to attend same.

ARTICLE XX . JURY DUTY LEAVE
The only paid time off will be given to all Full-Time and Part-Time employees who are
called for jury duty or subpoenaed in an action NOT brought by the employee. Fees
received for juror day shall be remanded to the City (except for mileage reimbursement).

Proof of subpoena must be submitted to the department head.

26

No employee will be given time off for matters due to their own initiation of a private suit

unless the employee has sufficient personal and/or vacation accruals to cover the period
in question.

ARTICLE XXI . LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Leave of Absence will be granted as follows:

A.

Leaves of Absence with Pay:
Employees of the bargaining unit shall be granted Leaves of Absence with pay

where required by law.

B

Leave of Absence without Pay:

1. Child rearinq leave - Unpaid leave-of absence shall be granted upon
application of an employee of the bargaining unit, and shall be granted such
unpaid leave subsequent to the birth or adoption of a child for up to ten (10)

months. ln addition, an employee having given birth shall be allowed to
utilize up to six (6) weeks of accumulated sick time. Such employee who
has been medically certified as being sick shall not be limited to six weeks,

but shall fall under the conditions as outlined under "Sick Leave". The
Mayor, at his sole discretion, may extend such unpaid leave up to an
additional six (6) months.

2. Employees may apply to the Mayor for unpaid leave of absence not to
exceed one (1) year; such leaves shall be at the sole and absolute
discretion of the Mayor.

3. Employees on unpaid leave-of-absence shall not be afforded any employee
benefits with the exception of medical insurance coverage for twelve weeks

per the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA). After which, such
employees may opt to continue medical insurance coverage at his or her

own expense, as may opt to continue on non-FMLA unpaid leaves of
absence. ln addition, all accrued benefits and seniority shall be "frozen"
and on an employee's return to work, or termination from employment with
27

the City, such accruals shall be pro-rated and rounded up to the nearest
half day.

C.

Leave for Oivil Servicg Exams

An employee shall be given time off with pay where the employer requires the
employee to take a Civil Service Exam as a requirement to keep his job,

ARTICLE XXII . TRAVEL POLICY
An employee required by his Department Head to use his own vehicle for City business,
shall be reimbursed at the IRS approved rate.

28

ARTICLE XXIII . PERSONNEL FILE

A

For the purpose of this Article, there shall be one official personal history folder

maintained for an employee.

B

The personal history folder shall contain copies of all personnel transactions
and official correspondence with the employee.

C

A copy of the document related to the employee's work performance placed in

an employee's personnel history folder shall be sent to the employee at the

time of such placement. ln addition, effective ninety (90) days from the
execution of this Agreement, an employee may be given the opportunity to
acknowledge receipt of a counseling memorandum by signing it prior to its
placement in his or her personal history folder. Where an employee's signature

is not obtained, such memorandum shall be sent to the employee at the
employee's address of record by Certified Mail.

D

Upon a grievance determination that the content of a formalwritten counseling
memorandum issued after the effective date of this Agreement, is substantially

inaccurate, such memorandum shall either be modified or withdrawn.
Grievances alleging that the contents of a counseling memorandum are
substantially inaccurate, shall be processed up to Step 3 of the Grievance
Procedure, but shall not be subject to arbitration.

E.

An employee shall have the opportunity to review his or her personal history

folder in the presence of an appropriate official of the department or agency,
and, at his or her option, his or her union representative upon three (3) working

days' notice; provided however, where the employee's personal history is kept

at a location other than the employee's place of work, five (5) working days'
notice shall be required, and to place in such file a response of reasonable
29

length to anything contained therein which such employee deems to be
adverse, provided, however, and employee may not review letters of reference
obtained in connection with his initial and subsequent employment.

ARTICLE XXIV . GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
A

lntent

The primary intent of this procedure is the orderly resolution of any disagreement
or conflict between an employee or Union and the City of Lockport. The employee

shall be entitled to representation by the Union at any and all stages of this
procedure.

By mutual agreement in writing, any time limit as expressed herein may be waived

for good reason.

The Public Employment Relations Board shall be the Administrative Agency for

arbitration, lf arbitration is required, only one arbitrator shall be selected to hear
and determine the case and such decision shall be final and binding on both

parties. The arbitrator's fee and expense shall be borne equally by the parties,
and no transcript of the proceeding shall be required. In the event either party
requires a transcript, the cost of same shall be borne by such party and a copy of

the transcript provided at no cost to the other party.

CSEA local representatives, limited to no more than two stewards or officials and

the grievant, shall be granted reasonable and necessary leave with pay for the
investigation of claimed grievances and processing of grievances pursuant to this
Article.

B. Grievance Defined
30

A grievance shall be defined as any claimed violation, misapplication or
misinterpretation of any term of this contract, and/or condition of employment.

C. Grievant Defined
The grievant is any employee within the bargaining unit on behalf of himself and/or
others similar! situated, or the Union, shall have the right to file a grievance.

D. Grievance Procedure
Step

1:

Within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date on which the act of

omission actually occurred or when the employee or Union became aware of the

act or omission, a written grievance shall be submitted by the grievant to the
Department Head, or in his absence, to the chairman of the Personnel Committee.

The Department Head, or his agent, shall be allowed up to fifteen (15) calendar
days to respond in writing; failure to respond by the City shall be deemed a denial
of the grievance,

Step

2:

ln the event a grievance remains unresolved after Step 1, the

grievant, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the denial of his grievance, or fifteen
(15) days after the grievance is deemed denied, shall have the right to submit the

grievance for a determination by the Personnel Committee. The Personnel
Committee shall render a determination within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of
the grievance.

Step

3:

Final and Binding Arbitration

Within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the Step 2 determination, the grievant
shall have the right to file a written notice of intent to arbitrate. The decision of the
arbitrator shall be final and binding subject only to limited court review as may be
available for such determination.

31

ARTICLE XXV - DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE
A.

Applicability
The following disciplinary procedure will be applicable to all employees in the
bargaining unit and is specifically intended to replace Section 75 and 76 of the
Civil Service Law and shall be used exclusively in lieu thereof.

B.

Cause

An employee shall not be subject to any disciplinary action except for just
cause.

c

Management Rights

It is agreed that nothing herein shall in any way prohibit the City from
discharging or otherwise disciplining any employee covered by the terms and
conditions of this Agreement.
D

Procedure

l

(1) Disciplinary action or measures shall include, but are not limited to, the
following actions and shall follow the order listed, unless circumstances
warrant departure from the order listed:

(a) Oral reprimand (with written confirmation)
(b) Written reprimand
(c) Suspension
(d) Termination
E. Discipline or notification of pending discipline shall be imposed within ten
(10) working days of the alleged violation, or within ten (10) working days of

the City first becoming aware of the alleged violation.

The disciplined employee, upon request, will be allowed to discuss his
discharge or discipline with his steward or other authorized representative of the
union, and except in a dangerous situation, the employer will make available an
area where the employee may do so before he is required to leave the premises.

32

G. When any action or measure is imposed or is pending against an employee,
the employer shall notify the employee in writing, in duplicate, of the specific
reasons for such disciplinary action. The written notification shall contain a
description of the charges which shall include dates, time, and places. Such notice

shall be made by personal service, if possible, and if such service cannot be
affected by personal service, it shall be made by Registered or Certified Mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of the employee. The time
limits for presenting a grievance defined in the previous article governing
"Grievances" shall commence upon the receipt of a Notice of Discipline by the
employee.

H. lmmediate Hearinq upon Suspension
An employee may be suspended prior to the resolution of the Notice of
Discipline if the employer determines that there is probable cause to believe that
the employee's continued presence on the job represents a potential danger to
persons or property or will severely interfere with operations.
In the event an employee is suspended priorto a full hearing, the City shallconduct

a preliminary hearing before the Personnel Committee within three (3) days of the

effective date of suspension. The scope of such hearing shall be limited to the
issue of whether a pre-hearing suspension shall be continued on the basis of

potential danger or interference with operations, until a full hearing and
determination is made.

I

Pre-Hearinq Conference

Within seven (7) working days of the service of the disciplinary notice and in

advance of a full disciplinary hearing, the employee and his Union
representative and/or attorney shall be entitled to a meeting with the Mayor's

designees to discuss on an informal basis the employee and employer's
position on the charges. lf a resolution is reached by both parties, such
resolution shall immediately be reduced to writing and signed by both parties.
Any settlement of proposal bY.either party may be withdrawn prior to
JJ

acceptance, and such settlement or proposal shall not be used in any related
subsequent hearing or arbitration proceeding arising from the same incident.
J

lf no resolution is reached at the pre-hearing conference, a hearing shall
be held before the Personnel Committee within ten (10) working days after the

pre-hearing. The Personnel Committee shall submit its findings and
recommendations to the Mayor and the Mayor shall, within five (5) days of
receipt of the Personnel Committee findings give his decision in writing to the
employee, in duplicate.

K

Arbitration Procedure

In the event the employee is dissatisfied with the Mayor's decision, such
decision may be appealed to Arbitration within ten (10) working days by serving

notice of appeal to the City Clerk's Office. The Arbitration proceedings shall

be conducted by an arbitrator selected by the Public Employment Relations
Board as per the procedures of the Board.

The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding, subject only to limited
court review as may be available for such determinations. The arbitrator shall

be jointly required to issue his decision within thirty (30) days after the
conclusion of testimony and argument.

No arbitrator functioning under the provisions of this procedure shall have any
power to amend, modify or delete any provisions of this Agreement. The cost

of arbitration shall be split eventy by the parties. ln the event a party requires
a transcript, such parties shall pay the cost of same and shall present a copy

without cost to the other party.

It is agreed by the parties that formal disciplinary proceeding under this Article

may be instituted only by the Department Head, Supervisory Personnel, the
Mayor or the Mayor's designee.
34

ARTICLE XXVI . REDUCTION IN FORCE
Any reduction in force (layoff and recall) shall be in accordance with Civil Service Law of
the State of New York for all employees covered under this contract. An employee who
is laid off shall be allowed to continue in the Health lnsurance Plan, provided that such
employee pays the total cost thereof. The employee will have the right to continue in the
Health Plan at his cost, for a period equal to his layoff, but not longer than four (4) years,
or his recall period. An employee must be given a 14-calendar day notice of layoff.

ARTICLE XXVII . SAFETY

The City shall provide such protective or occupational clothing and equipment as is
deemed necessary by Management.

ARTICLE XXVIII - EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
The City and CSEA realize a responsibility to promote and provide equal opportunities

for employment. lt shall be the positive and continuing policy of the employer and the
CSEA to assure an equal opportunity in employment regardless of race, color, religion,
sex, age or national origin.

ARTICLE XXIX . WAGES

A.

Step Plan
35

A 7-Step Plan has been adopted for the duration of the Agreement as set forth
in Appendix A of this Agreement. A new class of positions shall be established

pursuant to Appendix B.

Any CSEA employee who has been upgraded by virtue of this adopted

wage Plan, or any employee hired prior to January 1, 1985, shall
progress through the steps using the anniversary date of January 1't.
2

Any CSEA employee who has not been upgraded and was hired after

January 1, 1985, shall progress through the steps using their
anniversary date of hire.

3

The following will be reflected in the base salary starting January first of
each year:
2015 through 2020:0% increase
2021:4o/o

2022:2%
2023:2%
2024:2o/o

2025:2%
2026:2%
One-time stipend for members employed with the City on January 1,2021
$3,000 within 90 days of ratification and approval of the Collective
Bargaining Agreement.
a. Any employee within the Building lnspections Department that is
required to receive the certification of a Master Plumber license, shall be
required to perform plumbing inspections within the City. That the
compensation for completing these plumbing inspections shall be
$4,000.00 stipend per year for so long as he or she performs the duties of
Master Plumber for the City. Only one member shall be entitled to receive
this stipend at any given time.

b. ln the event that the Master Plumber is directed by the City to complete
annual backflow prevention inspections or repairs within the City, he or
she shall be entitled to an annual stipend of $6,000.00 for so long as he or
she performs said inspections. Only one member shall be entitled to
receive this stipend at any given time.
36

c. That the Senior Building lnspector, in conducting Master Plumber duties
and inspections, or completing annual backflow prevention inspections or
repairs, shall not be entitled to overtime or compensatory time for handling
such duties.

4. Any employee required to obtain and maintain a Class 3A license shall receive a
$1,500 annual stipend. Any employee required to obtain and maintain a Class 4A
license receive a $2,000 annual stipend. Any employees receiving stipends
pursuant to this section shall be required to utilize operate the appropriate
equipment as directed by their supervisor.

5. Real Property Appraisal position shall be a grade 6 Senior Account Clerk
16. Senior Account Clerk (relative to the Accounts Payable Department)

position shall be a grade 7 PrincipalAccounts Clerk.

B

Reclassification/Promotion (See Page 20 "Article Xll "Job Posting"

paragraphs 1 and 2)

37

ARTICLE XXX - LONGEVITY
Effective January 1,2009, an annual longevity payment will be paid to all full-

A.

time employees covered by this Agreement at the following rates:

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
B

5-

I years

years
15 - 19 years
20 -24 years
25 years and over
10-14

$500.00 per year
$650.00 per year
$800.00 per year
$950.00 per year
$1 ,100.00 per year

Those employees that are eligible for a longevity payment shall receive their
longevity payment in a lump sum to be paid in the first pay period of the year.

C

No employee will be eligible to receive more than one (1) longevity payment
in any one calendar year. The parties agree that there is no incremental pay
system that will apply to any employee of the bargaining unit with respect to

longevity. ln the event that it is an employee's anniversary year, longevity
shall be paid the first pay period following their anniversary date.

ARTICLE XXXI . DENTAL/MEDICAL VISITS
At the discretion of the Department Head, employees will be allowed six annual medical
or dental visits without loss of pay, sick leave, vacation or other leave benefits except that

each such absence in excess of two (2) hours shall be charged to earned sick leave in
one-half (112) day units. Half day units of sick leave for medical visits shall not apply

against the sick leave incentive program. Employees shall, upon request, provide
documentation to verify such medical/dental visits.

38

ARTICLE XXXII . OUT.OF.GRADE WORK
A.

Higher Grade
Each employee covered under this who is assigned to work in a title which is

in a higher grade than the grade of the title which the employee permanently
encumbers, shall be moved to a step in the higher grade which affords the
employee an increase in pay, The employee shall be paid the higher rate of

pay when the employee works more than two (2) hours in the higher
classification. ln such case the employee shall receive the higher rate of pay
commencing with the first hour of work.

B

Lower Grade
Each employee covered under this contract who is assigned to a lower grade

shall continue to receive the salary he/she is paid in the title which he/she
permanently encumbers.

C.

Acting Department Head
The Mayor has the discretion to designate employees as "Acting Department
Heads" in the absence of a Department Head. Employees designated as such

will be paid the difference between his/her salary and the Department Head's

salary for the duration of the designation. Any overtime worked by the
employee during this designation must be approved by the Mayor, and shall be
at one and one-half times the Department Head's salary. Employees have the
right to decline this designation.

ARTICLE XXXIII . SENORITY TRANSFER

39

Any employee who transfers by virtue of a title change from one bargaining unit to the
CSEA bargaining unit, shall be credited with the years of service served in his/her former
title(s) for the purpose of determining vacation, sick leave, personal leave, and longevity
pay,

ARTICLE XXXIV . CLOTHING ALLOWANCE
Employees in the following titles will receive an annual clothing allowance of $350.00:

Chief Process Operator \ A/VTP
lndustrial Pre Treatment Coordinator
\ A//TP Maintenance Supervisor
Chief Public Works Mechanic
Public Works Supervisor
Water Distribution Maintenance Supervisor
Water Treatment Plant Maintenance Supervisor
Chief Water Treatment Plant Operator
Assistant Director of Engineering
Senior Engineering Technician
Eng ineering Technician
Senior Building lnspector
Building lnspector
Rehabilitation Specialist
Parking Lot and Meter Maintainer
Director of Wastewater and Water Operations
Chief Compost Plant Operator
Electrician
Senior Building Maintenance Mechanic
Building lnspector Trainee
Housing lnspector
Part-Time Employees
Right of Way Maintenance Worker

40

ARTICLE XXXV . SICK BANK

A. Purpose and lntent.
The purpose of this Article is to enable members to donate paid leave time to
other members who are confronted with a personal or family emergency.

B. Donations.

A member may donate accrued vacation, compensatory, floating holiday,
personal or sick leave hours to the "Sick Bank" by completing and signing a "
Donation to the Sick Bank Pool" form available in the Personnel/Civil Service
Office.

C. Administration.

The Personnel/Civil Service Office shall keep track of the total hours available in
the pool.

D. Oversight Committee.

The Union shall appoint a Committee to administer the Union's "Sick Bank" as
approved by membership.

E

Use of Pool.
ln conformance with the rules, the Personnel Officer is authorized to permit the
use of hours in the pool by any current member of the Union whose request to

the Oversight Committee shall be final and binding and will not be grievable or
arbitrable.

F

lnter-Union Use.
The Oversight Committee may choose to utilize a portion of the Union's "Sick
Bank" for the benefit of another City bargaining unit. The benefitting bargaining
unit must repay the utilized paid time off to the lending "Sick Bank" within 1 year

4t

ARTICLE XXXVI . RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT
All employees hired after October 27 , 2010, are required to maintain a residency within
the City of Lockport.

ARTICLE XXXVII . COMPLETE AGREEMENT

This document constitutes the sole and complete agreement between the parties and
embodies all the terms and conditions governing the employment of employees in the

Unit. The parties acknowledge that they have had the opportunity to present and discuss
proposals on any subject which is (or may be) subject to collective negotiations. Any prior

commitment or agreement between the Employer and the Union, or any individual
employee covered by this Agreement, is hereby superseded.

lntentionally blank

42

ARTICLE XXXVIII . TERM OF AGREEMENT
This agreement shall be effect as of the first day of January 2015, and shall remain in full
force and effect through the thirty-first day of December,2026.
CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES ASSOC. INC. THE CITY OF LOCKPORT
LOCAL 1OOO, AFSCME, AFL-CIO
CITY OF LOCKPORT EMPLOYEE

uNrr 832-7651

M

Michelle Roman, Mayor

Brewer, President

oate \[

Date tt I tt I >r

a-l

)
Esq.

Dominic Luna,

Jason J. C

Labor Relations Specialist

Deputy Corporation Counsel

o^te/z-t-/l-4

Date \z_/ I

43

tZ\

APPENDIX A. CSEA APPLICABLE POSITIONS

GRADE

t

GRADE

2

GRADE
3

Clerk

Senior Typist

Typist

Account Clerk

Account Clerk
Typist

Cashier

Cashier Typist

Youth Bureau Aide

Senior Typist

Secretary to the
Chief of Police

Engineering Aide

Real Property
Appraisal Associate

Policing Aid

Building
lnspector

Recreation
Program

Trainee

Coordinator

Dog Control

Officer

Code Compliance
Technician

Engineering
Technician

Meter Maintainer

Real Property
Tax Service

Assistant
Computer
Technician/
Payroll Aide

GRADE

Senior

4

Stenographer

GRADE
5

GRADE

Community

Senior Account
Clerk

Youth Program
Coordinator

Principal Account
Clerk

Principal Account
Clerk Typist

6

Parking Lot &

GRADE
7

Tax Enforcement
Clerk

Community
Development
Specialist

44

GRADE

Rehabilitation

8

Specialist

APPENDIX A. CSEA APPTICABTE POSITIONS CONTINUED

Assistant Youth

& Recreation
GRADE

Director

Rehabilitation
Coordinator

Senior Engineering
Technician

Real Property

Water and Billing
Coordinator

9

Administrative
Assistant - Com.
GRADE

Dev.

Appraiser

Administrative
Assistant

10

Clerk / Matron

Rehabilitation
Coordinator

Chief Public

Deputy City Clerk
Registrar - Vital

Works Mechanic
GRADE
TN

Public Works

Supervisor

GRADE

Wastewater
Treatment Plant

t2

- Maint.

Building lnspector

Water Treatment

/

Deputy City
Treasu rer

Statistics

Coordinator/

Payroll and
Benefits

Zoning Officer

Coordinator

lnspection Data

Plant -

Maintenance
Supervisor

Chemist

Supervisor

lndustrial PreGRADE

Treatment
Coordinator

Assistant Director
of Engineering

Chief Compost
Plant Operator

13

Staff Accountant

45

Water Distribution
Maintenance
Supervisor

Director of
Wastewater and

Public Works

Water

Supervisor

Electrician

Senior Building
lnspector

Operations

Assistant City

Wastewater
Treatment Plant

Engineer

Chief Process

Operator

Chief Water
Treatment Plant
Operator

Assistant Chief

Treatment Plant
Operator

46

Chief Accountant

Auditor

/

APPENDIX B - SALARY SCHEDULE

APPENDIX B, CSEA WAGE PLAN I35 HOUR)

2021.

Entr. 1

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Step 6

Gr. 1

13.8985
L5.O773
1.6.2562
17.4345

14.4889

t5.o773
L6.2562

\5.667L

t6,2562

16.8466

77.4345

t5.6671.

L7.4345
18.5120

17.4345
18.6720

].8.6720

19.2025

19.7922

20.97Lr

79.7922

20.3814
21.5596

20.97IL
22.7506

20.3814
21.5596

18,0236
79.2025
20.3814
21.5596

18.6120

76.8466
18.0236

16.8466
18.0236
L9.2025

22.7392

23.3289

23.3289

23.9186
25;0982

24.5055

22.7392

22,1506
23.3289
24.5055

23;3289
24.5065
25.5860
26.8655

23.9186

24.5065
25.5860
26.8656

26.2758
27.4546

25.8556
28.045X

28,6336

29.2240

29.4124

28.0451

28.6336

30.9914

30.4016
31,5818

Gr.2
Gr.3

Gr.4
Gr.5
Gr,5
Gr.7
Gr.8
Gr.9
Gr. 10
Gr. 11
Gr. 12
Gr. 13

20.977L
22.L506

25.0982

26.2758
27.4546

22.7392
23.9185
,25.0982

L9.7922

28.045L

28.6336

2s.6860
25.8656
28.0451,
29.2240

29.8L24

30.4016

26.2758
27,4546

t9.7922
20.97L7
22.L506

2515860

29.2240

29.8124

29.2240
30.4016

30.9914

31.5818

32.1709

32.7594

30.4015

30.9920

31.5818

32.1709

32.7594

33,3479

33.9370

Entr. 1

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Step 5

Gr. 1

74.r764

L4.7786

15.5814

t7.L836

L7.7831

15,3788
15.5814

!7;L836

17.783I

Gr.4
Gr.5

17.783L

15.9804
17.1836
18.3841

15.3788
16.5814
L7.7831.

1S.9804

Gr.2
Gr.3

x8.3841
19.5865

18.9843
20.1881

18.3841
19.5865
20.7890

18.984:
20.1881
21.3905

20.7890
21.9908

21.390s
22.5937

21.9908

22.5937

23.t940

23.7954

23.L940
24.3970

23.7954
24.9966

24.3970
25.6002

24.9966

25.6002

26.\997

26.1997
27.4029

26.8013
28.0037

27.4029

28.0037
29.2063

28.6060

29.2063

29.8085

30.4087

30.4087

31.0096

37.6Lt2

31.0096
32.2134

3L,6r!2
32.8t44

32.2!34

32.8r44

33,4146

33.4t46

34.0749

34.5157

Gr. 14
Gr. 15

2.N%
2022

Gr..6

Gr.7
Gr.8
Gr.9

18;9843
20.1881
21.3905
22.5937

18.984:
20.1881
21.3905

19.5855

22.5937

23.7940
24.3970

23.7954

23.7954

20.7890
21.9908

24.9966

Gr. 10
Gr. 11

24-9966
26.1997

25.5002
26.8013

Gr.12

27.4029

28.OO37

Gr. 13

29.2063

Gr. 14

28.5060
29.8085

26.1997
27.4029
28.6060
29.8085

30.4087

31;0096

Gr. 15

3L.0096

31.5118

32.2L34

26.8013'

47

28.6050
29.8085

APPENDIX B, CSEA WAGE PLAN I35 HOUR) (CONTINUED)

I

2023

Entr.

I

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Gr. 1

14.4600

L5.O742

16,9130

17.5273

18.1388

15,6864

16.3000

15.6864
16.9130

16.3000

Gr,2
Gr.3

17.5273

L7.5273
18,7518

18.1388
19.3640

18.7518

18.7518
19.9'182

19.3640

16.9130
18.1388

18.1388
19.3640

19.9782
21.2048
22.4306
23.6578

20.5918
21.8183

20.5918
21.8183

27.204A

19.3640

L9.9782
21.2048
22.4306
23,6578
24.8850

25.4965

26.1122

Gr.4
Gr.5
Gr,6

Gt.7
Gr.8
Gr.9

20.5918
21.8183
23.0455

Step

23.0455

Step 5

22,4306

20.5918
21.8183
23.0455

23.0455

23.6578

24.2714

24.271.4

25.4965
26.7237

26.7237

24.88s0
26,7122
27.1374

27.gSLO

28.5638

27.9370
29.L78L

24.8850

Gr. 10
Gr. 11

24.27L4
25.4965

24.2714
25.4e65

26.rt22

26.7237

26.7237

27.3374

27s570

27.3374
28.5638

29.r78r

29.7904

30.4046

Gt.L2

27.95LO

29.L78r

29.7904

30.4046

31-O16S

Gr. 13
Gr. tr4

29.t78t

28.5638
29.7904
31.0169

30.4046

31.0169

3L.6298

32.2434

31.6298
32.8577

31.6298

32.2434

32.8577

33.47Q7

32.244L

32,8577

33.4707

34.0829

34.6952

34.0829
35.3080

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Step 6

L7.2513

L7.8778

18.5016

t9.1268

18.5016
19.7513

Gr. 15

30.4046
31.6294

2024

Entr. 1

Step 1

Gr. 1

14.7492

15.3757

16.0001

Gr.2
Gr.3

15.0001

16.6260

t7.25t3

L6.6260
17.8778

L7.25t3

L7.8778

18.5016

t9.1268

19.75t3

20.3778

27.0037

Gr.4

18.s016

!9:L268

20.3778

2t.0637

21-5249

22.2547

19.7513

20.3778
2L.6289
22.4792
24.L370

19.7513
2L.0037
22.2547

2L.6289

22.2547
23.5064

22.8792

23.5054

23,5054

24.1310
25.3827

24.1310
25.3827

26.6344

24.7568
26.0064
27.2582

27.8;841

28.5100

29.7676

Gr.5
Gr.6

Gt,7
Gr.8
Gr.9
Gr. X0
Gr, 11
Gt. L2
Gr. 13

21.0037
22.2547
23.5064

24.7568

22.8792

24.7564
26.0064
27.2582

24.7568
26.0064
27.2582

25.3827

26.0064

26:6344
27.8841

27.2582

26.6344
27-884L

28.5100

29:1351

29.7616

29.1351
30.3862

28.5100

29.1351

29.7616

30.3852

3L.Ot27

37:6372

32.2624

29.7676

30.3862

3L.0L27

3L.6372

32.2624

32.8883

33.5148

34,1401
35.3891

34.7645
36.Or42

28.5100

Gr. 14

3L.OL27

3t.6372

32.2624

32.8883

33.5148

Gr, 15

32.2624

32.8890

33.5148

34.1407

34.7645

48

3t.ot27

APPENDIX B. CSEA WAGE PI4N I35 HOURI (CONTINUEDI

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

15.6832

16.2202

18;2354

LA.87i:6

17.5963
18,8715

21.423A

22.0615

22.6998
23.9766
25.25L9
26.5266
27.8034

23.3368

20.t463
2L.4238
22.6998
23.9766

19.5093
20.7A54
22.O6L5
23.3368

20.t463

18.23s4
19.5093
20.7854

18.8716
20.1463

78.8716
20.7463

15.9585
18.2354
19.5093
'20.7854

17.5953

16.9586

24.6t36

25.2519

25.8903

25,8903

26.5266

27.7671
28.4478
29.7L78

27.8034

27.1671
28.44!8
29.7L78

2025

Entr. 1

Step 1

Gr. 1

15.0441

Gr,2
Gr.3
Gr.4
Gr.5
Gr.6

16.3202
17.5963

Gt.7
Gr.8

22.0615
23.3368

24.6736

2L.4238
22.6998
23,9't66
25.2579
25.5266

24.6136
25,8903

27.767!
28.44t8

Step 5

21.4238
22.6998
23.9766
25.2519
26.5266
27.8034
29.0802

30.9939

32.2699

?2.9077

32.2699

32.9077

33.5461

34.18s1

32.2699

30.3569
31.6330
32.9077

27.8034
29.0802
30.3569
31.6330

33.5461

34.1851

34.8229

35.4598

32-9077

33.5467

34.1851

34.4279

35.4598

35.0969

36.7345

2026

[ntr. 1

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Step 6

Gr. 1

15.3450

17.2977

L7.9482

17.9482

19.2490

19.2490

18.6001
19,8995

18.6001
19.8995

!9.2490

16.6466
17.9482

15.9969
L7.2977

1-6.6466

Gr.2
Gr.3
Gr.4
Gr.5
Gr.5
Gr.7
Gr.8
Gr.9
Gr.10
Gr.11

20.5492

2l.20tl

20.5492
21.8522

Gr^ 9

Gr. 10

Gr.11
Gr-L2

29.0802

Gr. 13
Gr. 14

30.3559
31:6330

30.9939

Gr. 15

29.0802

29.7178
30.9939

30.3559
31.5330

19.2490

18.6001
19.8995

2\.8522

22.5027

23.1538

27.20tt

20.5492
2L.8522

2L.20tt

20.5492

225027

23.1538

2r.8522

22.5027

23.1538

24.4561

24.4561
25.7570

23.1538

23.8036
2s.1059

24:4561
25.7570
27.0571

23r8036
25.1059

23.8036
25.1059

25.7570

26.408r

27.O57L

26AO81-

27.O57r

27.7105

27.7105

28.3594

28.3594
29.6618
30.9640
32-2657

24.4561
25.7570
27.0577

26.408r

Gr. 1.2

29.6678

27.7LO5
29:0106
30.3121

Gr. 13
Gr. trA

30.9640
32.2657

31.5138
32.9153

Gr.15

33,5658

34.2L77

28.3594

28.3594

29.0106

29.6674

29.6678

30.3121
31.6138

30.9640

29.0106
30.3121
31.6138

32.2657

32.9153

33.5558

32.9153

34.2L70

34.8688
36.1690

30.9540
32,2657
33.5658

34.2170

33.5658
34.8588

34.8688

35.5193'

36.1690

49

35.5193
35.8188

37.4692

APPENDIX B. CSEA WAGE PLAN (40 HOURI

202L

Entr. 1

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Gr. 1

t2.l6Lt

12.6777

Gr.2

13.1926

13.7087
L4.7408
L5.7707
16.8021

L3.L926
L4.2242

Gr..3

L4.2242

Gr.4

15.2551
16.2856

Gr.5
Gr.5
Gr.7
Gr.8
Gr.9

Step 4

Step 5

L3.7087

14.2242

3,4.740A

15.2551

14.7408

15.255!.

t5.7707

16.2856

15.25s1

75-7707

16.2856

16.8021

n3\42

16.2856

!6,8021

t7.3t82

L7.3t82

t7.8337

18.3498

t7,8337
t8,8647

18:349i
19.3819

19.8968
20.9289

20:4L28
21.4432
22.4753

17.3782

17.8337

x9:3819

t8.8647

18.3498
19.3819

18,8547

18.3498

19.8968

20,4728

20,9289
21.9670
22.9973
24.0229
25.0544

2L4432

19.3819

19.8968

20.4124

20.4L28
2L.4432
22,4753

20,9289
21.9610

2\.4432

22.99t3

23.5073

Gt. L2
Gr. 13

23.5073

24.0221

24.5394

24.5394

25.0544

25.s7t0

26.0859

25.57t0
26.60t4

26.0859

Gr. 14
Gr. 15

26.6014

27.7180

2022

Entr. 1

Gr- 1

L2.4044
13,4s65

Gr. X0
Gr, 11

Step 6

24.5394

21,9670
22.99\3
24.0229
25.0544

25.5710

26.0859

26.6014
27.6340

27.tt75

27.tL75

27.6340

2A.1496

24.6645

29.1794

26.6014
27:6340
28.6645
29.6949

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Step 6

13.4565

13.9828
15.0355
16.0851
77-L3A2

14.5087
15.5602
16.5113

15.0356
16.0851

15;5601

14.5087
15.5602
16:5113

L7.t382

L7.6645

t7.6645

18.1904

18.7168

19.7695
20.8217

22.4753

22.4753
23:5073

28.t486

23.5073

24.5394
25.5710

Gr.4

15.5502

L2.9313
13.9828
1s.0355
16.0861

Gr.5
Gr.6

16;6113

L7.1382

L7.6645

18.1904

t8.7t68

19.2420

t7.6;645

18.1904

Gr.8
Gr.9

L9.7695

L9.2420
20.2947

L9.7695
2O;8217

20.2947

L8.7768

18.7X68
19,7595

19.2420

Gt.7

zo.82tt

2r.8721
22.9248

27.3474
22.4002
23.4511

Gr. 10
Gr. 11
Gr. 12

2l.a72L

23.9775
25:0302
26.0824

24.5033

25.0302

25.55s5
26.6076

26.0824
27.1335

27-7355

27.659A

2A.7867

28.L867

28.7116
29.7630

30.2888

Gr.2
Gr.3

Gr. 13
Gr. 14
Gr. 15

14.5087

20.2947

21.3474
22.4002

2r,872r

2L.3474
22.4002

>7.924A

23.45rr

22.924A
23.9775

23.45Lt

23.9775

24.5033

25.0302

24.5033
25.5555

25.0302
26.082

25.5555

26.0824

26.5076
27.6604

27.1335

20.8271"

27.L335

28.L867

26.6076
27.6598
28.7L26

50

29.2378

16;6113

2I.A72r
22.9248
23.9775

29.2378

APPENDIX B. CSEA WAGE PITN I4O HOURI ICONTINUED)

2.M%
2023

Cntr. 1

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Step 6

Gr. 1
15f.2

L2.6524

13.1899
14.2625
1S.3363

13.7256
74.7988

14.2625
15.3353

L.4.7988

15.3363

L5.87t4

L3.7256
L4.7988

15.87t4

t6.4074

16.9435

15.8714

76.4074

r7.4AO9

L5.87t4

L6.4078

L7.4809

18.0178
19.0911

16.9435

L7.4809
18.5542

16.9435
18.0178

76.9435
18.0178
19.0911

19.0911

19.6268
20.7006
2L.7744

24.7649

20-70a6

20.L649
21.2275

2r.2375

21.7744

22.3095

22.309s

22.8482

23.3833

Gr.3
Gr.4
Gr.5
Gr.6
Gr.7
Gr.8

18.0178
19.0911

18.5542

18.5542

19.6264

79.6268
20.7006

20.1649

2O.76:49

Gr.

21,2375

21..7744

22.8482

23.3833

23.9201

24.4570

Gr. 10
Gr. 11

22.3095
23.3833

22:8482

22.3095
23.3833

23.9201"

24.4570

24,9934

25.5308

23.920I

24.4SlO

25.5308

Gt. t2
Gr. 13

24.4570

24.993:4

25_5308

24.9934
26.O666

26.604L
27.676L

25.5308

25.0566

26.604t

27.1998

27.6761

26.0666
27.1?94
28.2L30

Gr. 14

26;604I

27.7398

27.6761

28.2130

28.7505

29.2858

29.4225

Gr. 15

27.6'76r

28.2136

28.750S

29.2868

29.8225

30.3582

30.8946

2024

Entr. 1

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Step 6

Gr. L

12.90ss

13.4537

14.0001

14.5477
15.6430

15.0948
16.1889

Gr.4

16.1889

16.7360

Gr.5
br. b
Gr,7
Gr.8
Gr.9

t7.2824

17.8306

t7.2824
t8.3782

15.6430
16.7360
17.8306
18.9253
20.0193

16.1889

14.0001
15.0948

14.s477
15;6430

15.0948

Gr.2
Gr.3

r83742

2t.6622

19.4729

18.9253
20.0193

20.5582

21".2375

26.604\

28.7505

77.2824
18.3782
19.4729

1"6.7360

15,1889
77.2824

173306

\8.3782

L9.4729

18:9253
20.0193

19.4729
2A.5682

20.5682

2L.T146

2L.6622

2L.7146
22.2099

27.1-L46

2t.6622

22.7557

23.3051

23.8510

2!.6622

22.2099

23.8510

24.3985

Gr. 10
Gr. 11

22.7557
23.8510

23.3051
24.3985

22.7557
23.8510

22.2099
23.3051
24.2985.

24.9462

25.4932

24.5462
26.0414

24.9462

25.4912

26.0414

25.5880

2V.r36t

Gr.L2

24.9462

25.4932

26.0414

26.5880

27.t361

27.6826

Gr. 13
Gr. 14

26.O4r4

26.5880

27.1361

27.6A26

28.7773

28.2297
2S.3255

27.L361.

28.7773

29.87L6

30,4L90

28.2297

27.6826
28.7778

24.2297

Gr. 15

29.325s

29.8726

28.2297
29.3255
30.4190

30;9654

31.5125

51

20.5582
22.7557

APPENDIX B. CSEA WAGE PI.AN I4O HOURI (CONTINUED)

2025

Entr. 1

Gr. 1

Gt.2

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Step 5

13.1536

13.7228

x.4.280r

L4.A3A7

15.9559
77.0707

L6.5126
77.6280

Gr.3

15.3957

15.9559

75.3967
15.5125

14.8387
15.9559
77.0707

15.3967

L4.280'J.

17.6280

78.1872

18.7458

Gr.4

16.5L26
77.6280

r7.0707

L7.6280

L8.L872

7A.1872

18.7458

19.3038

t9.8624

19.3038
20.4197
21,5369

L9.8624
20.9795

t8.7458
L9.8624
20.9795

20.4L97
21.5369

20.9795

19.3038
20.4L97
21.5369

L8.7458
L9.8624

72.6541

23.2709

22.0955

22.654I

22.0955
23.2109

23.7712

243240

22.0955

22.6541

23.2L09

23.7712

2432AO

24.3280
25.4451

24.8865

23.2109
24.3280
25.445L
26.5623
27.6789
28.7942

23,7712
24.8855

24.8855
26.0031
27.1157

2s.445I

26.0031

26,5623

27.7197

25.445L
26.5623
27.6789

26.5623
27.6749
28.7942
29.9120

27.L!97
28.2362

27.6789
28.7942

28.2362

28.7942

29.3528

29.9120

29.3528
30.4690

29.9L20
31.0274

30.4700

31.o274

3L.5847

32.1427

Step 4

Step 5

Step 6

Gr.5
Gr.5
Gr,7
Gr.8
Gr.9
Gr. 10
Gr. 11

Gr. 12
Gr^ 13

Gr. 14
Gr. 15

28.2362
29.3534

16.5126

20.9795

26.0031

22.0955

2.OO%

2026

Entr.1

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Gr. 1

13.4269

73.9972

14.5657

15.1355

75.7046

Gr.2
Gr.3

L4.5657

15.1355

75.7046

76.27sO

75.8429

16.2750
L7.4127

16.8429

L5.7046
L6.8429

t6.2750

16.8429
17.9806

t7.4t2l

18.5509
19.6899

L9.1207

18.5509

17.9806
L9.L207

Gr.5
Gr.5
Gr.7
Gr.8

t7.9806

18.5509

19.6899

20.2596

20.828t

2r.399t

19.LZO7

19.6899

L9.t207
20.2596

20.8281

21.3991

2L.9676

20.2596
27.3991

20.8281

21.3991

225374

23.L07\

Gr. 10
Gr, 1.1

23.6751
24.8L46

24.2467

22.5374
23.6751
24.8146

22.5374
23.6751
24.8746

Gr..9

22.5374
23.6757
24.8746

23.t07t

2t.9676

2L.9676
23.1077

Gr., 12

25.9540

25.9540
27.0935
2A.2325

Gr.4

17.4t2t

24.2467

24.2467

17.9805

20.2596

2s.9540

25.3842
26.5232

25.9540

25.1842
26.5232

27.0935

27.662I

27;662!

28.2325
29.3701

28.8009
29.9399

28.2325
29.370L

3r.o784
32.2t64

Gr. 13

27.0935

25.3842
26.5232
27.6621

Gr. 14

2A.2325

28.8009

29.3707

28.8009
29.93S9

30.5102

Gr. 15

29.3701

29.9405

30.5102

31".0794

31.6479

52

27.0935

30.5102

3t.6479
32.7856

53

HEALTH SUMMARY. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD

Benefit Summary for Group:
City of Lockport

Effective D ale: L I L | 2O2L
PPO 898 ASO

.Out-of-Network

ln-Network

Additional lnformation

Genoral lnformotion
Provider Network
Deductlble

Deductible Administration Type

PPO Network

N/A

5250 single / 5500 famlly

Embedded - On family plans,
one person cannot exceed the

Embedded - On family plans,
one person cannot exceed the

ndivldual deductible and/or out ndlvidual dedugtlble and/or out
of pocket maxlmum amount.
of pocket maxlmum amount,
Coinsurance
Out of Pocket Maximum
Out of Pocket Ad minlstratlon
Type

20% coinsurance after

N/A

deductlble

S6,350 sinBle/S 12,7 oo f amily

S2,000 sinele / 54,000 family

Embedded - On famlly plans,
Embedded - On famlly plans,
one person cannot exceed the one person cannot exceed the
lndlvldual deductible and/or out individual deductlble and/or out
of pocket maxlmum amount.
of pocket maxlmum amount.

Llt

Benefi t Administration Date

Dependent Coverage
Dependent Age

26/26

Dependent Cwerage Ends

End of blrth month

Domestlc Partner and Children

Not covered

Prescription Drug Coverage
Prescrlptlon Drugs

Mail Order

s7ls1s/s3s

Not Covered

3'copays per 90 day supply

Not Covered

Pags 1 of 4

54

PPO 898 ASO

Out-of-Nletwork

ln-Netv,,/ork

Additiona I lnformation

Physician and Othor Services
Prlmary office Visit
Specla I ist Offl,ce Vlslt

deductible
20% coinsurance after

S10 copayment

0utpatlent Surgicajl Procedures
(ln physlcian's,office)

deductible

SX0 copayrnent/Sl0 copayrnent

for

Eeperidentg up,to ege 19
Specialist Copay/Coinsura nce
19

Not covered
20% coinsurance after

$10 copayment

Allergy Testing

after

deductible

S10 copayment/$10.copayment

Telemedlcine

for

deductlble
2OYo coinsurance

S10 copayment

Allergy lnjectionp

PCP Copay/€oinsurance

20Y! coinsuranc€ after

S10 copayment

20% coinsurance after

dedualble
20%.colnsurance after

510 copayment

deductible
207o colnsurance

$10 copayment

after

Emergcncy and Urgent Caro Sorvices
Emergency Room
Covered as fn.network

$50 copayment

Covered as ln-network

550 copayment

Ambulance

Prudent layperson language
applies. Emergency Room costshare walved if admltted;
lnpatient benefits noar applY,

Covered as ln-network

Center
Preventive Servicos
Bone min6raldenslty
measurement or teSt
Cholesterol Test (llpld panel)
C.

lmmunizatlgns
Mammogram
Pap Smear

deductible
20%coinsurance after

overed ln full

deductible
20Ye coinsqra ncerafter

Covered in full

deductlble
20% coinsurance after

Covered in full

deduclble
20% coinsurance

Covered in full

Prostate Test (Prostate Speciflc
Antigen "PSA")

Covered in full

Routlne Physlcal Exam

Covered in full

Well Chlld Vislts

20% colnsur:ance after

Covered in full

after

deductibie
20% coinsurance

after

deduaible
Not covered
20% coinsuiance after

Covered In full

deductible

Hospital Servicos

lnpatlent Hospital

20% colnsurance after

Covered in full

deductible

Group lD: 11443777, cla$ lD: 0T08

55

Page 2 of4

Outpatient Surglca I Procedure
(Facility)

20% coinsurance after

$10 copaym'ent

deductlble

Skilled Nurslng Facility

20Zo coinsurance

Covered in full

Laboratory Tests
Radlology

dedualble

20Yo colnsurance

$trO copayment

Postnatal Care (initial vislt)

lnpatient Maternlty

lnpatlent Mental Health

0utpatient Mental Health
lnpatient Substance Abuse Rehab

lnpatient Substance Abuse Detox

Outpatlent Substance Abuse

Dlabetic Equipment

2070 colnsursnce

S10 copaymenVSlo,copayment

@

Chiropractic

Gre

after

20% colnsurance after

deductible
20Yo colnsurance

Cov€ied ln full

after

deductlble

20% colnsurance after

Covered In full

deductlble
20Y! coinsurance

$X0 copayment

after

deductlble
20% coinsurance after

Covered in full

deductlble
20% coinsurance

Covered in full

after

deductlble
20% coinsurance

$10 copayment

after

20% coinsurance after

$10 copayment

deduaible
20% colnsurance

$10 copayment
Dlabetlc Medical Supplies (Test

after

deductible

lnsulin and Other Oral Agents

strips, Syringes, etc)

X20 days per plan year llmlt is
aggregate of servlces rendered
in-net & OON

deductible

$10 copayment

Physlcia n Services:.Prenatal and

after

Preauth required for certaln
procedures, Follow Corporate
guldellnes.

after

deductible

lf adminlstered by pharmacy
vendor copay is lesser of Rx or
offlce visit copay

20% colnsurance after

$10 copayment

deductible

S10 copayment/$10 copayment

20% coinsurance

Physical - Occupational - Speech
$10 copayment/$10 copayment
Therapies

20% coinsurance

Pulmonary Reha billtatlon

20% coinsurance

S10 copayment/S10 copayrnent

after

ded uctible

ded uctlble

Group lD: U443777, Class lD: 0TO8

56

after

deductlble
60 vl6lts, aggretate lN & OON

with PTIOTIST, per plan year

after

24 vlslts per plan yr ln 12 week

perlod;,agg lN+OON

P.ge 3 of 4

PPO 898 ASO

Out"of -f!etwork

ln-l'letvuo rk

Add itional llrf onnatiorr

Additiorral Scrvices
Chemotherapy - Outpatlent
Faclllty
Durable Medlcal Eq.ulpment
Home Health Care
Hosplce

20Yo coinsurance after

S10 copayment

deductibte
50Yo coinsurance after

Covered in fuil

dedudtible

S10 copaymenty'$10 copayment

$10 copaymenV$l0 :copayment

Prosthetics & orthotlbs
Dialysis

207o colnsurance after

200 Vlslts lN & OON

ded u.ctible
20%:col nsura nce: afier

Uhlirhited days'per plan yr lN &

ded.ualble

oor'|

Nbt covered

20Yocolnsurance

20% coinsurance,after

S10 copayment

deductible
Not cavei'ed

Card

Pediatric Vision Sorvices
1 ev.ery ?yearsj 1 per yeAr'for

R'outine Exarn

'Not covered

Covered.ln full
Msdlcgl,Eye -Exam

under 14 wlth dlagnosed
refractlve .error,

20Y!,ci5lns u ra nce a f te r
:

$10 copayrnen/$lo.copaymertt

deductlble

Adult Vision Services
Routlne Exam
Covered in full
Medlcal Eye Exam

*Cost share may vary based on

Not covered

510 copavmenV$l0 copayment

l.every 2 years; 1 per year for
under 14 with diagnosed
refractlve error.

20%colnsurance after

dedualble

Blace of servlce for services llsted above.

$For a.ll$t of Medlcare Part D cr"edltable.coremge.presirlptlon drug plans, please refer t6 our webslte.
**tThis is a sumniary of coJered beneflts and exclusions end ls not lntended as an actual contractor troup
plan. ltdoes notdetail:all beneflE, llmltatlonsand excluslonsthatmayapply,.

Group lD: 111143?7. Cla$ lD: 0T08

57

Page 4 of4

Benefit Summary for Groupt
City of Lockport
Effective Dalez t I L | 2O2L
Pos 298 ASO
Core

Plus

ooN

Additional lnformation

Generallnformation
Provlder Netrrvork

200 Network

Deductible
Deductible

Adminlstration Type

N/A

Coinsurance
Out of Pocket Maximum
Out of Pocket

Administration Type

N/A

S25o single / S5oo famlly

Embedded . On family
Embedded - On famlly
Embedded - On family
plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannot
exceed the lndlvldual
exceed the indlvldual
exceed the lndivldual
deductlble and/or out of deductlble and/or out of deductlble and/or out of
pocket maximum
pocket maximum
pocket maximum
amount.
amount,
amount.
2070 coinsurance

after

N/A

N/A

56,3s0 sintle/S12,700
family

S6,350 single/S12,700

S1,500 sintle ,/ 53,000

famlly

family

ded uctible

Embedded - On famlly
Embedded -On family
Embedded - On famlly
plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannot
exceed the indlvldual
exceed the lndividual
exceed the lndivldual

deductible and/or out of deductible and/or out of deductlble and/or out of
pocket maximum
pocket maximum
pocket maXimum
amount.
amount.
amount.
Beneflt Administration

LlL

Date

Dependent Coverage
Dependent Age

26/26

Dependent Coverage

End of b'lrth month

Ends

Domestic Partner and
Chlldren

Not covered

Prescription Drug €overage
Prescription Drugs
Mall Order

$5 copaym

55 copayment/Ss

copayment

copayment

3 copays per 90 day

3 copays per 90 day

supply

supply

Not Covered

Pa8€ L of4

58

POS 298 ASO

C6re

Plus

55 copayment

S0 or 55 copayment

$10 copayment

$15 or $10 copayment

Ss

S0 or 55

ss/s10

S0/S15 or Ss/S10

Ss/S1o

So/S1s or Ss/S10

ss/s1o

So/Sls or Ss/$xo

55 copayment

S0 or $5 copayment

S10'copayment

S15 or'S10 copayrnent

Additional lrrtormation

ooN

Physician and Otlror Serviccs
Primary Office Visit
Speclallst Officq Vislt
Telemediclne
Allergy lnjections
Allergy Testing

Outpatient Surglcal
Procedures (in
physician's.office)
PCP Copay/Coinsura nce

for Dependents up to ate
19

Speclirllst
Copay/Coinsurance for
19

20% coinsurance aftet
ded uctible

20%.colnsurance after

deductible
Not.covered
20Yo colnsurance

after

deductible
20% coinsurance after
ded uctible
20Yo coinsurdnce after

ded uctible
20% coinsurance after

deductible
20%coinsurance after

deductlble

Emergoncv and Urgent Caro Sorvices

Prudent layperson

Emergency Room

$50 copayment

S50 copayment

Correred as in-network

language applies.
Emergency Room cqstshare waived if admitted;

lnpatlent benefits now
apply.
Ambulance
Urgent Care Center

$50 copayment

S50 copayment

ss

So or 55

Covered ln full

Covered in full

Corered as in*network
20% coinsurance after

deduetible

Preventive Services
Bone mineral denslty
measurement or test
Cholesterol Test (llpld
'panel)

lmmunizations
Mammogram
Prostat€ Test (Prostate

Covered in full

Covered lh full

Covered ln full

Covered in full

Covered ln full

Covered ln full

Cover:ed ln full

CoiEred in full

Routlne Physical Exam

Covered ln full

Ctrvered ln full

Well Chlld Vlslts

'Covered ln full

Covered in full

Speclflc Antigen "PSA")

20% coinsurance after
ded uctible

20%coinsurance after
deductible
20Yo coinsurance

after

deductible
20% cginsurdnce after
ded uctible
20% colnsurance after

deductible
Not covered
20% colnsurance after

deductlble

Page 2 of 4

59

lnpatient Hospital
Outpatlent Surgical
Procedure (Facility)

Covered in full

Covered ln full

s10

S1s or S10

Covered in full

Covered in full

Skilled Nursing Facility

Laboratory Tests
Radlology

Physician Services:
Prenatal and Postnatal
care (initial visit)

lnpatient Maternlty

lnpatient Mental Health
Outpatient Mental
Health

lnpatient Substance
Abuse - Rehab
lnpatlent Substance
Abuse - Detox

deductible
2070 colnsurance

after

deductible
20% coinsurance after

deductible

20% ooinsurance after

Covered in full

Ss/Slo core So/Sls or
Ss/510 Plus

Ss/Sro core So/Srs or

20Yocoinsurance after

S5/S10 Plus

ded uctlble

5s

S0 or 55

Covered in full

Covered in full

Covered in full

Covered in full

Ss

So or Ss

Covered in full

Covered in full

Covered in full

Covered in full

Ss

S0 or 5s

ss

So or 55

Ss

So or Ss

lnsulln and Other Oral
Agents

Unlimited days per plan
year atgregate INN &

ooN

Covered in full

Outpatient Substance

Dlabetlc Equlpment

20% coinsurance after

deductlble

20% coinsurance after

deductible
20Yd coinsurance

after

deductlble

20% coinsurance after

Unlimited visits: Subject

ded uctlble

to medlcal necessity

20% coinsurance

after

deductlble
20%coinsurance after
deductible
209o colnsurance

after

deductible
20lo coinsura nce after

uctible

20Yo colnsurance

after

deductible
20% colnsura nce after

lf adminlstered by
pharmacy vendor copay

ded uctible

ls lesser of Rx or office

visit copay
Diabetic Medical Supplles
(Test strips, Syringes, etc)

ss

S0 or 55

20% colnsurance

Group l0:11443777, Class lD:0001

60

after

deductible

PaSs 3 of 4

Chlropractic Ca re
Physlcal - Occupational

Pulmonary Rehabilitation

Chemotherapy Outpatlent Facility
Durable Medibal

Equlpment
Home Health Gre
Flospice

Prosthetics and orthotias

Wellness Card

55 copayment

Sro

Sls or S1o

910

S15 or $10

Sro

St5 or 510

-

Speech Therapiqs

Dlalysls

$5 copayment

20%coinsurance

20% coinsurance

5ro

Srs or $10

Covered ln full

Ccvered ln full

20% coinsurance

20% coinsurance

Covered ln full

Govered ln full

Not co/ered

Not cover',ed

20% coinsurance after

deductible
20Yo coinsurance

20Y! cqinsura nce after

24 visits per year within a

deductible

12 week perlod

20% coinsurance after

deductlble
50Yo coinsurance

after

ded uctible
20% cblnsurance after

deduatible
20% colnsurance after

,210 days per cal y1'lN &

deductible

OON aggregate

Not covered
20% colnsurance after

deductlble

I

Not covered

1 every 2 years; I per,
year for under 14 wlth

Routlne Exam
Covered ln full

30 vlsits, ag6iregate lN &
OON with PTIOT/ST, per
plan year

after

deductible

CorerEd ln full

Not covered

dlagnosed reftactive

error,
Medicdi Eye Exam

S10

$ts or Sro

Covered ln full

Corered ln full

20% coinsurance after

uctlble
1 every 2 years; I per
year for under 14 wlth
dlagnosed refractiver

Routine Exam

Not covered

errorl
Medlcal Eye Exam

.s10

Srs or: Sro

20% colnsurance

after

deductlble

rcost share may vary based on place of servlce for servlces llsted above,
i+For a llst of Medicare Part D credltable cwerage prescrlptlon drug plans, please refer to our webslte.

***This ls a summar:y of cover:ed benefits and exclusions and is not intended as an actual contract or group
plan. lt does not,detall all benefits, llmltatlons and exclusions that may apply.

Groqp lD: 11443777, Class lD: 0001

6l

Page 4 of4

Benefit Summary for Group:
City of lockport

Effective Datez 1 | t t 2O2L
POS 298

Core

Plus

ooN

Additional lnformation

Goneral lnformation

Prorlder Network

20O Network

Deductlble

Admlnlstration Type

N/A

ded uctible and/or out of

pocket maximum
a mount.

Colnsurance
Out of Pocket Maximum
Out of Po6ket

Admlnistration Type

N/A

S250 slngle / 5500 family

Embedded - On family
Embedded - On family
Embedded - On famlly
plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannot
exceed the indlvidual
exceed the indivldual
exceed the lndlvldual

deductible and/or out of deductible and/or out of
pocket maximum
pocket maximum
amount.
amount,
20% coinsura nce after

N/A

N/A

56,350 sintle,/S12,700

$6,350 single/S12,700

S1,5oo sintle / S3,ooo

family

family

family

deductible

Embedded - On family
Embedded - On family
Embedded - On family
plans, one person cannot plans; one person cannot plans, one person cannot
exceed the indlvldual
exceed the lndivldual
exceed the individual

deductible and/or out of deductible and/or out of deductible and/or out of
pocket maximum
pocket maxlmum
pocket maximum
amount,
ai'nount.
amount.
Benefit Admlnistration

L/t

Date

Dopendent Coverage
Dependent Age

26/2a

Dependent Coverage

End of bhth month

Ends

Domestic Partner and
Chlldren

Not covered

Prescription Drug Coverage
Prescription Drugs
Mail Order

szsls/s3s
3 copays per 90 day

supply

3 copays per 90 day
supply

Not Covered

Page 1 of4

62

POS 298

Core

Pl us

55 cgpayment

S0 or 55 copayment

$1 0 copayment

S15 or S10 copayment

Ss

S0 or $5

S5/S10

50/$1s or Ss/S10

oot]

Additional lnformation

Physician and othcr Scrvices
Pr:lmar.y Offlce Vislt

Speclallst OfflceVlslt
Te'lemedicine
Allergy lnjectlons
Allergy Testlng

s5/s10

s0/51s or 5s/S10

ss/s10

So/Sls or Ss/Slo

Covered,ln Full

Cbvered in Full

$10 copayment

$15 or $10 copayment

Outpatlent Su!'gical
Procedures (in
physician's.offlce)
PCP Copay/bo!nsurance

for Dependents uprto age

20Yo coinsurancg

20% colnsurance aftet

deductible
Not covered
20% coinsura nce after

deductlble
2070 colnsurance

Copay/Colnsurance. f or
Dependents up to.age 19

after

deductible
20Yo colnsurdnce efter

deductible
20Yo coinsurance

after

deductible

19

Speclallst

after

deductlble

2096 colnsura nce after

deductlble

Emcrgoncy and Urgent CaIc Sorvices

Prudent lavperson

Emergency Room
S50 copayment

S50 copayment

Covered as:in-network

S50 copayment

550 copayment

Corered as in.network

ss

So or 55

Covered ln full

Covered ln full

language applles.
Emergency R@m costshare waived if admitted;
lnpatlent beneflts nolv
applv.

Ambulbnce

UrgentCare Center

20lo coinsuraRce after

deductlble

Preventivo Serviccs
Bone mineral denslty
measurement or t€st
Cholesterol Test (llpld
panel)

lmmunizations
Mammogram
ProsFte Test (Prostate
Speclfl c,Antfgen''PSA")

Routlne Physlcal Exam
Well Child Vlslis

$0 per stay

g6vEpgd ihrfull

Cover:ed in full

Covered ln full

Cbriered:ln full

Cortered ln fUll

Covered.in full

Corered ln fiill

Coveled ln full

Covered in full

Covered in full

Correred ih full

2oYo,coi nsu ra nce af ter

deductlble
20%cofnsurEnce after
'ded uctlble
ZoYo coinsurance

20% cginsurence,gfter

deductible
20% coinsqfahce;gft€r

deductlble
Not covered
20% colnsurance,after

Groqp lD: U443777, Clas3l0r 0002

63

after

deductible

deductible

PaSe 2 of4

lnpatient Holpital

Covered in full

Outpatient Sur€lcal
Procedure (Facility)
Skilled Nursin6 Facility

Laboratory Tests
Radiology

Physician Services:
Prenatal and Postnatal

Cwered in full

S10

S1s or S1o

Covered in full

Covered in full

Covered in full

Covered in full

Ss/$ro core So/Srs or
Ss/Sro Ptus

Ss/Sro core So/$rs or
Ss/Sro Ptus

ss

S0 or Ss

Covered in full

Covered ln full

Covered ln full

Cwered ln full

20% colnsurance after

deductible
20% colnsurance

2070 coinsurance

lnpatient Mental Health
Outpatient Mental
Health

lnpatlent Substance
Abuse - Rehab

lnpatlent Substance
Abuse - Detox

ss
Covered in full

Covered in full

Covered ln full

Corered ln full

Outpatlent Substance
Abuse

Diabetic Equipment

$o or 55

Ss

So or Ss

$s

S0 or 55

See Comments

See Comments

after

deductible

deductible
20% coinsurance after
ded uctlble

20% coinsurance after
ded uctible
20Yo coinsurance

after

deductible

20Yo coinsurance

after

Unllmited vlslts: Subject

to medical necessity

deductible
20% coinsura nce after
ded uctible
20% coinsurance

after

deductible
20% coinsura nce after

deductlble
20% coinsurance after

deductible

20% coinsurance after

deductible

lnsulin and Other Oral

Atents

Unllmited Days

20% colnsurance after

Care (lnltial vislt)

lnpatlent Maternity

after

ded uctible

lf administered by
2070 coinsura nce after

pharmacy vendor copay

deductible

is lesser ofRx or offlce

vislt copay
Diabetic Medical Supplies
(Test strlpt Syringes. etc)

Ss

$o or 55

20% coinsurance after

Group lD: U443777, Class lD: 0002

64

deductible

Page 3 of 4

Chiropractlc Care
Phvslcal - Occupational

Pulmonary Rehabilitation

Chemotherapy -

Outpatlent,Faclllty
Durable Medlcbl

Equipment
Home Health care
I'losplce
Prosthetlcs and orthotics

Wellness Card

55 copaymen!

9ro

S15 or.S1o

.

Speech Therapies

Dialysls

55 copayment

510

S1s or $10

S10

S15 or S10

20/o colnsurance

20% coinsurance

$ro

51.5 or,Sro

Covered ln full

Covered in full

20% coinsurance

20% coinsurance

Covered ln full

Corered ln full

Not covered

Not corered

20% coinsurance after
ded uctlble
20% coinsurance after

30vlsits; aBg!'-egate lN &
OON with PTIOT/ST, per

deductible

plan year

20% coinsurance after

24 vlsits per yeqr with.in a

deductible

12 u/€ek perlod

20lo coinsurance after

deductlble
50/o coinsurance after

deductible
20% colnsurance

after

-

deductible
20% colnsurance after

210,days per cal yr lN'&

ded uctible

OON attregate

Not covered
20% coinsurance after

deductible
Not cavered

1 every.2 years; 1 per
year for under 14 wlth

Routine Exam
Covered in full

Not covered

Cwered ln full

diagnosed refractive

error.
Medical Eye Exam

s10

Srs or $ro

20% coinsurance

after

deductible
l" every'2 yFars; I per

Routihe Exam
Covered ln full

Covered ln full

.year for under 14 wlth

Not covered

dlagnosed refractlve

errorl
Medlcal Eye Exam

S10

S15 or S10

20% colnsurance

after

deductlble

tCost share may vary based on place of servlce for services llsted above.
*+For a llst of Medieare Part D credltable corerage prescrlptlon drug plans, please refer to our.website,

*+rThls is a summary of covered beneflts and excluslons and is not intended as an actual contract or $oup
plan, lt does not detall all benefits, llmltations and excluslons that may apply'

Group lD: 11443777, Class lD: 0002

65

Page 4 of 4

Benefit Summary for Group:
City of Lockport

Effective D atez L I t t 2O2L
POS 298

Core

Plus

ooN

Additional lnformation

Generallnformation
Provider Networ.k

200 Networ"k

Deductible
Deductible

Admlnlstration Type

N/A

N/A

Ssoo shgle / 51,ooo

family

Embedded - On family
Embedded - On family
Embedded - On family
plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannot
exceed the lndlvidual
exceed the lndivldual
exceed the indivldual

deductible and/or out of deductible and/or out of deductible and/orout of
pocket maximum
pocket maximum
pocket maximum
t mount.
amount.
amount.
Coinsurance
Out of Pockef Maximum Out of Pocket

Adminlstration Type

25% coinsura nce after

N/A

N/A

56,350 slngle/S12,700

56,3s0 slnBlels12,700

S2,500 slnele / 55,000

family

family

family

deductible

Embedded - On family
Embedded - On family
Embedded - On family
plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannot
exceed the individual
exceed the indivldual
exceed the lndivldual

deductible and/or out of deductible and/or out of deductible and/or out of
pocket maxlmum
pocket maxlmum
Pocket maximum
amount.
amount.
amount.
Benefit Administratlon

LlL

Date

Depondent Coverage
Dependent Age

26/26

Dependent Coverage

End of birth month

Ends

Domestlc Partner and
Chlldren

Not covered

Prescription Drug Coverage
Prescrlption Drugs
Mail Order

s7ls1s/s3s

s7ls1s/s35

3 copays per 90 day

3 copays per 90 day

supply

supply

Not Covered

Page 1. of 4

66

POs 298
Co re

Plus

S10 copayment

$0 or 55 copayment

S'xo copayment

S20 or S15 copayment

s10

S0 or Ss

ooN

Additional lrrformation

Physician and Other Services
Primary OfficeVlsit
s-peclallst offlce vislt

Ielemediclne
Allergy lnjections

slolslo

Allergy Testlng

$o/S2o or Ss/S15

PCP Copayi/Coinsura

25Yd colnsurance

after

deductible
Not covered
25% coinsurance after

deductlbie
25%colnsurance after

So/S20 or SslSls

slo/s1o

So/S2o or Ss/S1s

Covered.in Full

Covered ln Full

25%colnsurance after
:deductible

S1o copayment

S20 or $rs copayment

25%celniurance after
deductlble

nc€

for Dependents up to ate

after

deductlble

910/S10

outpatlent Surglcil
Frocedures (ln
physlcianls:offlce)

25Yo coinsurance

deductible
2570 c. gl nsu rance afte r

deductlble

19

Speclallst
Copay/€olnsurance fbr
'19
to
Depende

Emorgoncv and Urgent Caro Scrviccs

Prudent iayperson

Emergency Room

Ambulance
Urgent Care Center

S50 cqpayment

550 copayment

$50 copayment

S50 oopayment

Sro,.

So or 55

Bone mineral denslty
measurement ort€st

Covered ln full

Corered ln full

Cholesterol Test (llpld
panel)

Covered ln full

Covered ln full

Covered in full

Corered in,full

Covered in full

Qotered in full

Covered,ln full

Colered in full

Covered,ln'fuli

Covered ln full

Covered in fr.rll

Corer,ed ih full

Covered as in-network

language applies.
Emerggncy Room costshare waived if admitted;
lhpatient benEflts now
apply.

Covered as in+network
25% coinsurance after

deductible

Preventivc Sorvices

lmmunizations
Marnmogram
Prostate Test (Prostate
SpeclflC,Antlgen 'PSA)
Routlne Physlcal Exam
Well Chlld Vlslts

25locoinsurance after
deductlble
25% colnsurance

25% coinsurance

after

deductibl.e
257o cginsurahce

after

deductible
25Yo coinsurance

after

deductible
'Not covered.
2570 colnsura nce,after

Groqp lDi 11443777, cla$ lD: 0003

67

after

deductlble

ded r.rctlble

Pag6 2 of4

lnpatient Hospital
Outpatlent Su€lcal
Procedure (Facility)

Covered in full

25% coinsurance after

Corered in full

Sro

S2o or Sls

Covered in full

Corered in full

deductlble
25Yo colnsurance

Skilled Nursing Facillty

Laboratory Tests
Radlology

Physiclan Services:
Prenatal and Po6tnatal
Care (irtitial visit)

lnpatient Materniqt

lnpatlent Mental Health
Outpatlent Mental
Health

lnpatient Substance
Abuse - Rehab

lnpatlent Substance
Abuse - Detox

outpatient substance
Abuse

Diabetlc Equlpment
lnsulin and Other Oral
Agents

Dlabetic Medlcal Supplles
(Test strips, Syringes, etc)

Covered in full

50/520 or Ss/51s

Sro

S0 or 55

Covered ln full

Covered in full

Covered In full

Covered in full

Sro
Covered in full
Covered in full

25Yo coinsurance

So or Ss

Sro

So or Ss

25% coinsurance after
ded uctible
25% coinsurance

5o or Ss

25Yo coinsurance after

ded uctible
25% coinsurance after

deductible
25Yo coinsura nce after

ded uctible
25% colnsurance after

deductible
25% coinsurance

after

deductible

257o coinsurance

after

deductible
25% coinsurance after

lf administered by
.pharmacy vendor copay

ded uctible

is lesser of Rx or office

visit copay

25% coinsurance after

Gtoup lDt LL44r77 7, Class lD: 0003

68

after

deductlble

Sro

after

deductible

Covered in full

S10

ooN

deductible
257o colnsurance

Corered in full

S0 or Ss

Unlimited days per plan
year aggregate INN &

25% ooinsurance after

S0 or 9s

s10

after

ded uctible

Corered in,full

s1o/s10

after

deductible

ded uctible

Page 3 of 4

Chlropractic Gre

$10 copayment

S10 copayment

$10

S2o or S1s

Sro

Szo or $ls

s10

520 or S15

Physlcal -Occupatlonal Speech Therapies

Pulmondry Rehabilltation

Chemotharapy -

Outpatlent,Faclllty
Durable Mediial

Equipment

50% coinsurance

50% colnsurance

Slo

S20 or"5X5

Covered in full

Corered ln,full

Not corered

Not covered

Home Health Care

Hosplce
Prosthetlca and orthotics
Dlalysls

Wellness Card

Covered in full

Covered ln full

Not covered

Not ewered

25Uo colhsurancE 6fter

deductlble
30vlsits, aggregate lN &
OON with PT|OTIST, per
plan year

25% coinsurance'after
ded uctible
25% coinsurance after

24 visits per year within a

deductlble

12 week perlod

25/o colnsura nce' after

deductible
50% coinsurance after

deductible
25%coinsu.rance after

deductlble
25% colnsurance after

deductible

210 days per cal Vr !N &.
OON aggregate

Not covered
25%colnsurance after

deductible
Not covered,

1 every 2 years; i per
year for under 14 with

Routlne Exam
Covered in full

Resplratory Therapy:
OON= full patient
responslbil lty.

Covered in full

Not covered

dlagnosed refractfue

erroi.
Medicai Eye Exdm

s10

$20 or. Sts

Covered ln full

Corered ln fUll

25yo,coi nsura nce afte r

deductible

i

1 everyr2 years; per
year for r.rnder,14 with

Routlno Exam.
Not covered

dlaBnosed refiactive

error.
Medical Eye Exam

s10

S20 or S15

25% coinsurance

after

deductible

*Cost share may vary based on plare of servlce foi' servlces listed a bove,

**For a list of Medicare Part D creditable coverage prescription drut plang, plgase refer to our website,
*++Thls ls a summary of covered benefits and excluslons and is not intended as an actual contract or Sroup
plan. lt does not detail all beneflts, lirnltations and excluslons that may apply.

Group lD: U443777, clase lq: 0003

69

Page 4 of4

Benefit Summary for Group:
City of lockport

Effective Datez L I t l 2O2L
POS 298 ASO

Core

Plus

ooN

Additional lnformation

Genorallnformation
Provider Network

200 Network

Deductible
Deductible

Administratlon Type

N/A

N/A

55o0 single / S1,000

family

Embedded . On family
Embedded - On family
Embedded - On family
plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannpt
exceed the lndividual
exceed the lndlvldual
exceed the lndivldual

deductible and/or out of deductible and/or out of deductible and/or out of
pocket maximum
pocket maximum
pocket maximum
amount,
amount.
amount.
Coinsurance
Out of Pocket Maximum
Out of Pocket

Administratlon Type

25% coinsurance

after

N/A

N/A

56,350 slnsle/S12,700

56,350 slnglelsl2,Too

S2,500 single / 55,000

family

family

family

deductible

Embedded - On family
Embedded - On family
Embedded - On family
plans, one person c€nnot plans, one person cannot plans, one person cannot
exceed the lndividual
exceed the individual
exceed the individual

deductible and/or oug of deductlble and/or out of deductible and/or out of
pocket maximum
pocket maxlmum
pocket maxlmum
amount.
amount,
amount.
Benefit Adminlstration
Date

vt

Depondent Coverage
Dependent Age

26/26

Dependent Coverage

End of birth month

Ends

Domestlc Partner and
Children

Not covered

Prescription Drug Covorage
Prescrlption Drugs

Mall Order

S7lS15/S3s

SZSIs/S3s

3 copays per 90 day

3 copays per 90 day

supply

supply

Not Covered

Fage 1 of 4

70

POS 298 ASO

Core

Plus

S15 copayment

StO or StS copayment

ooN

Additional lrrformation

Physician and Othcr Sorviccs
Primary Office Visit
Speclallst Office Visit

S15 copayment

S20 or S15 copayment

S15

$10 or Sts

$1sls1s

S1o/S2o or S1s/S1s

Telemedlcine
Allergy lnjections
Allergy Testlng

s15/s1s

510/$20 or S1s/S1s

slslsxs

S1o/S20 or 5rs/91s

Covered in Full

Covered ln Full

$15 copayment

S20 or 515 qopayment

Outpatlent Surgical.
Procedures (ln
physicianis office)
PCP Copay/Colnsurance

for Dependents up to age
19
Special ist

Copay/Colnsurance for
Dependents up toage tr9,

25% coinsura nce efter

deductible
25% colnsura nce after

deductible
Not covered
25% coinsurance after

deductlble
25% colnsurance after

deductible
257o colnsurance

after

deductible
25%coinsurance after
deductible
25% coinsurance after
ded uctlble

Emergency and Urgont care Servaces

Prudent layperson
language applies

Emergency Room

550 copayment

550 copayment

Covered as ln-network

Emergency Room cost;hare waived lf admitted;

lnpatient benefits now
apply.
Ambulance

UlgentCare Center

550 copayment

$50 copayment

Covered as in-network

s1s

S10 or S1s

25%coinsurance after
ded uctlble

Covered ln full

Ccrvered ln full

Provcntivo Scrvices
Bone mlneral density
measurement or test
Cholesterol Test (llpld
panel)

lmmunizations
Mammogram

Covered ln full

Covered in full

Covered in full

Covered in full

Covered ln full

Cwered in full

Prostate Test (Prostate
Speclflc Antlgen "PSA")

Covered in full

Co,rer€d in fiill

Routlne Physlcal Exam

Colered ln full

Ccvered in full

Well Child Vislts

Covered in full

Coriered in full

25lo coinsurance after

deductible
25% colnsurance

25lo coinsurance after

deductlble
25Zocolnsurance after

deductible
25% colnsurance

after

deductlble
Not covered
257o coinsura nce after

Gtoup lO: L7443777, Cla99 lD: 0004

7T

after

ded uctible

deductible

Pat€ 2 of 4

lnpatient Hospital

S250. per admission, not

to exceed S250 sintley'
S5oo famlly
Outpatient Surgical
Procedure (Facility)
Skilled Nurslng Facility

Laboratory Tests
Radiology

Physlclan Servlces:
Prenatal and Postnatal

5250 per admission, not
to exceed S250 slngle/

25% colnsurance after

deductible

5500 family

S1s

S20 or S15

S250 per admission, not
to exceed S250 single/

S250 per admlsslon, not
to exceed 5250 single/

5500 family

Ssoo

Covered in full

Corered ln full

sls/s1s

S1o/S20 or $1slsls

Sls

S1o or, Sts

Covered ln full

Cwered in full

$250 per admlsslon, not
to exceed S250 sintle/
5500 family

$250 per admisslon, not
to exceed Szso slngteT

s15

S10 or S15

S250 per admlssion, not
to exceed 5250 sinSle/

5250 per admission, not
to exceed 5250 single/

S5oo family

550o family

$25O per admlssion, no1

$250 per admission, not
to exceed 5250 slngle/

25% coinsurance after
ded uctible
2570 colnsurance

257a coinsurance

lnpatient Mental Health

Outpatient Mental
Health

lnpatlent Substance
Abuse - Rehab
lnpatlent Substance
Abuse - Detox
Outpatlent Substance
Abuse

Dlabetic Equipment
lnsulin and Other Oral
Agents

to exceed $250 single/
S5oo family

25/o coinsurance after

deductible

2570 coinsurance

Srs

5r0 or Srs

$rs

S10 or Sts

Srs

S10 or S15

after

deductlble
25% colnsurance after

dedustible

25% coinsurance

after

deductible

Ss00 family

55oo famlly

after

deductible

Care (lnitlal vislt)

lnpatlent MaternltrT

after

deductible

25Yo coinsurance

Unlimited visits: Subject
to medical necessity

after

ded uctible
25% coinsurance after
ded uctible

25% coinsurance after
ded uctible
25% colnsura nce after

deductlble

25% colnsurance after

deductible
lf administered by
25Y! coinsurance

after

deductible

pharmacy vendor copay
is lesser of Rx or office

visit copay
Diabetic Medical Supplies
(Test stript Syringes, etc)

s15

510 or S15

25lo coinsurance after
ded uctibl'e

Group lD:11443777, Class lD:0004

72

PBg€ 3 of4

POS 298 ASO

Core

Plus

515 copayment

S1g coPayment

Srs

gzo or, $ts

oot!

Additional lniormation

Rehabilitation Sorvicos
Chiropractlc Care
Physlcal - Occupatlonal
Speech The16pies

Pulmonary Rehabilitation

$rs

$Zo or $r5

S1s

Szo or'9rs

Additional Servicos
Chernotherapy -

Outpatlent,Facillty
Durable Medical
Equipment
Home Health Care
Flosplce

Prosthetlcs and orthotics
Dlalysls

Wellness Card

5oyo coinsurance

$rs

50% colnsurance

5zo or Srs

Covered ln full

Covered ln fr.rll

Not covered

Notcorered

Covered ln full

Cqrered ln full

Not CoVered

Not cwered

2570 coinsurance

after

deductlble
25/o coinsurance after

deductlble

plan year

25Yo colnsurance after

I

30 vlsltE aggregate lN &

QoN with PTIoT/ST, per

deductlble

25lo coinsurance after

24 vlsits B9r year withln a

I

12 week perlod

deductlble
50% coinsurance after

deductible
25Zo c'olnsura nce after

dedustible
25Yo colnsurance after

deductible

210 days per cal yr lN &
OON aggregate

Not covered
25Yo colnsurance

after

ded uctlble

Not:covered

Pediatric Vision Servicos
Routine Exam
Covered ln full

Coirered ln full

Not covered

1 every 2 years; 1 per
y€ar for under 14 wlth
diagnosed refractlve

error.
Medlcal Eye Exam

Srs

S2o or S15

Covered ln full

Corered ln full

25% coinsurance after

deductible

Adult Vision Services
Routlhe Exam
Not covered

l every 2 years; l per
year for under 14wlth
diagnosed refractive

error.
Medlcal Eye Exam

S1s

S2o or 915

25% colnsura nce after

deductible

*Cost share may vary based on place of service for services llsted above.

**For a list of Medlcare Part D credltable co,rerage prescriptlon drug plans, please refer to our website.

t**This is a summaryof covered benefitsand exclusions and is not lntended asan actual contractor group
plan. lt dbes not detall all beneflts, limltatlons and excluslons that may apply.

Groqp lD: 11443777, Class loj 0004

73

Pat€ 4 of4

MEDICARE PLANS

@w

BlueGoss BlueShield
of Western NewYork

Medicare Sales: 1-855-2L5-9237 (TW 711)
Monday-Friday: I a.m. - 5 p.m

GROUP NAME: City of Lockport Retirees
GROUP NUMBER:00407399
PLAN NAME: Forever Blue 799 (PPO) Plan Lt (2021.\
Physician and other health professional services

ln-Network

Out-of-Network

Primary doctor

$5

$20

Speciallst

$15

$20

Radiation therapy

$15

$20

Emergency room (waived if admitted)

$50

$50

Urgent care (waived if admitted)

$50

$50

Ambulance

$25

$25

Covered in

Covered in full

Telemedicine - Doctor on Demand@
More than 20 preventive services

ln-Network

Outof-Network

Flu shots - Part B

Covered in full

Covered in full

lmmunizations - Part B hepatitis/pneumonia)
All other preventive screenings and tests

Covered in full

$20

Covered in full

$20

Hospital, home health care, and skilled services

ln-Network

Out-of-NetworK

$100 I 1 copay max per

20o/o

vear
$50

$50

Outpatient surgery

$3s

$50

Home health care

$35
Covered in full

$10

$100 / 1 copay max per

2Oo/o

Hospital (inpatient)
Observation

- hospital
Outpatient surgery - ambulatory center
Skilled nursing facility (100 days per benefit period)

$50

year
Dialysis

Covered in full

lnside service area: 2Oo/o tor
non-participating providers.
Orltside service area: $0 for
non-participating providers.

Mental health / chemical dependence services

ln-Network

Outof-Network

Mental health (inpatient, 190-day lifetime limit)

$1 00 / 1 copay max per

200/o

year
M ental health (outpatient)

$40

30%

Mental health (with psychiatrist)

$20

30o/o

$'100 / 1 copay max per

2Oo/o

Alcohol substance abuse (inpatient)

year
Alcohol substanoe abuse (outpatient)

Laboratory and X-ray services
Laboratory testing
X-rays

2Oo/o

30o/o

ln-Network

Out-of-Network

Covered in full

$20

$15

$20

A divlsion of HealthNow New York lnc.. dn independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue shield Association.
Page 1 of 3

Y0086_EG237_M

74

Advanced radiology

- MRl, MRA, PET, and CT

Rehabilitation services

$15

$20

ln'Network

Out-of-Network

Phvsical. occupational, and speech therapV

$15

$20

Chiropraetor

$15

$20

Cardiac rehab

$15

$20

lrFNetwork

Out-of-Network

Routine vision exam

$15

aoo/^

Medical vision exam

$15

Vision

Hearing
Routine hearlng exam

-

$20
$200 annualallowance

Allowance (lenses and frames)

TruHearingrM

Diagnostic hearing exam

ln-Network

Orit of-Network

$45

$45

$15

$20

$699/$99e

Hearing aid benefit -TruHearingru

Out-of-Network

ln-Network

Dental

$200 annual allowance

Dental

ln-Network

Out-of.Network

Durable medical equipment

$0 compression
stockings; 20% all other
items

3Oo/o

Prosthetics

$0 diabetic shoes/inserts;

3Ao/o

Supplies, equiptnent, and devices

20% all other items

30%

Covered in full

Diabetic supplies - Part B

Out-of-Network

Fitness plogram

Covered in full Covered in full

SilverSneakers ("Steps" program included)@

Prescription drugs - Part B

ln-NetwoIk

Out-of-Network

mmunosuppres$ive drugs

Covered in full

Covered in full

Oral chemotheraDV druos

Covered in full

Covered in full

Physician admi nistered injectables

Covered in full

2Ao/o

Nebulizer inhalation solution

200

20o/o

Part B drugs (other)

200k

3Oo/o

ln-Network

Out-of-Network

I

Prescription drugs - Part D

$0/$'r 0/$20l$40/$40

Prescription drug (Rx)

Tier 1 - Tier 5: 2 copays for a 90 day supply

Mail order

Shingles vaccine

Covered in full

Coverage gap/donut hole

No coverage gap

General product itrformation
I

Out-of-Network

ln-Network

NiA

$s,000

n-network out-of-pocket maxi mum

$3,000

Combi ned out-of-pocket maxi mum

N/A

Prescription deductible

Page 2 of 3

75

BlueCr.p.$s Blueshleld.ol'Westefn NewVoili{BCBSWNY) lsa Medlcare Advant€ge p.le]I,llilth a Medkafe eoriii:aoJ dnd ahrollrfleht
depends:on:contr:act renewal.. BCBSWNY'isa,dlvlslon,of'HaalthNow. New York lnc.,.sn lndep€ndent llc€nssE:of 'th6 Blr,lo er.oss €nd
BltreShleld Assoclbtlonr,:SllvershedkerE6'ls.a,reglstered'trademark"of
Tlvlty. Heelth, lnc Tfvlty Health ls,an Independerrr eonp€n9:that
odnftnlstgtt the $tJYpEneakg.isrgym beneflt. Doctoi On Dqrnando ls a separEte cpmpeny thatnrcrvld€$j.-ldEmedlglnej,$S.r-vlqqslo
BgqSWNYlmHmbirB; TrqHedr'ingti'ha i€€litetEd tiedeft6rlk'of TfuHbErln& lhc!'TrsHEri}lngrE'an::lndepdndeniagiirh'i,riy.that
adrn'lnlstersthe hearlng-ald beneflt Other pharmacles;fthyslchns/€rovlders are.avall'dble lh"our network,. Outiof:networ.fty'.pep.
contracted.,priol/lders are under no obllggtlon to treat Bluecross Blueshleld of Westsrn New York members, except,ln emergency
sltuFlionsi'illeasec€ll ouroustemerseryjce'number:or qee your Eyldence of Coverage for mqre lnfgrmaglBn, lngiudlng 1lr9 cqltBCBSWNY complies wlth appllcable Federal civii rights laws and'does.not
sherlng:that applles to out{f:network

-servlces.

dllirimlnateqnihebislaof r.ace^rolor,natloh€l orj8lri;,sge;dlsabtllty,orbex.

ATENCI6N:61 habtd:ofuanFil,tlenea:iuiill5i63Eldn
sewielos.trgtuitoe',de aslstencia llngulstlca; Llame:al 1€33-?35!45.15 (.IIV 71d) E:ffi | tr*6.ffiF.FilS,j(. ' .trElf;tfiHffiffiF

H#ffHE# n ffi#€ t,Slr-2t5.4s15 (rrY711)

PbCd,3 ofl3

76

Medicare Sales: 1-855-2L5-9237 (TW 711)

@W "?tffss"ii:f''*f

Monday-Friday: 8 a.m. - 5 p.m

GROUP NAME: City of Lockport Retirees

GROUP NUMBER:00407399
PLAN NAME: Forever Blue 799 (PPO) Plan 13 (OOA) (2121-l
Physician and other lrealth professional services

ln-Network

Out-of-Network

Primarv doctor

$10

$10

Specialist

$20

$20

Radiation therapy

$20

$20

Emergency room (waived if admitted)
Urgent care (waived if admitted)

$50

$50

$50

$50

Ambulance

$50

$50

Covered in full

Covered in full

Telemedicine - Doctor on Demand@
More than 20 preventive services

ln-Network

Out-of-Network

Flu shots - Part B

Covered in full

Covered in full

lmmunizations - Part B (hepatitis/pneumonia)
All other preventive screenings and tests

Covered in full

Covered in full

Hospital, home health care, and skilled services
Hospital (inpatient)
Observation
Outpatient surgery
Outpatient surgery

- ambulatorv center
hospital

Home health care

Skilled nursing facility (100 days per benefit period)
Dialysis

Covered in full

Covered in full

ln-Network

Out-of-Network

$25O I 1 copay max per

year combined

$250 / 1 copay max peryear
combined

$50

$50

$50

$50

$35

$3s

Covered in full

Covered in full

$250 I 1 copay max per
Vear combined

$250 / 1 copay max peryear

Covered in full

lnside service area:20o/o lor
non-participating providers.
Outside servrce area: $O for
non-pa rticipating providers.

combined

Mental health / chemical dependence services

ln-Network

Out-of-Network

Mental health (inpatient, '190-day lifetime limit)

$250 / 1 copay max per

$250 / 1 copay max peryear
combined

year combined
Mental health (outpatient)

$40

s40

Mental health (with psychiatrist)

$20

$20
$250 / I copay max per year
combined

$250/ 1 copay max per

Alcohol substance abuse (inpatient)

year combined
Alcohol 6ubstance abuse (outpatient)

Laboratory and X-ray services
Laboratory testing

X-rays

20o/o

20o/o

ln-Network
Covered in full

Out-of-Network
Covered in full

$20

$20

A divilion of HealthNow New York lnc., an independent licensee of the Blue cross and Blue Shield Association.

Page 1 of 3

Y0086_EG237_M

77

Advanced

Rehabilitation services

Vision
Routine vision exam

2O9/o

exam
Allowance (lenses and frames)

$200 annual allowance

Hearing
Routine
Hearing aid benefit - TruHearingril
Dental
$200 annual allowanoe

Dental

Supplies, equiprnent, and devices
20%

Durable medical equipment
,a ll other

diabetic shoes/inserts;
20% all other items

ProSthetics

2Ao/o

in full

in full

Fitrress prograrn
Silve€neakers ("Stepsl' program included)@

in fuil

fr.i

Prescription drugs - Part B

ffi.##ltrlfftriH',,ffigg

lmmunosuppressive druqs

Covered in full
Govered in full

Covered in full

Oral chemotheraw druos
Physioian admi nistered injeatables

Covered in full

2oo/o

Nebi.rlizer inhalation solution

21o/o

20%

Part

20.o/o

2oo/o

Covered in full

Prescription drugs - Part D
Prescription drug (Rx)

$0/$1

Mail:order

Tier 1 - Tler 5: 2 oopays for a 90 d6y,erJpply

Shingles vaocine

Covered'in full

Coverage gap/donut hole

No coverage gap

General product inforrnation
I

n-neb,tiork ouFof-pocket maximum

N/A

$3

Oornbined out'of-pocket maximum

$3,400

Prescription deductible

N/A

Page 2 of 3

78

BlueCross BlueShield of Western New York (BCBSWNY) isa Medlcare AdVantage plan wlth a Medicare contract and enrollment
depends on contraci renewal. BCBSWNY is a divislon of HealthNow New York lnc., an lndependent llcensee of the Blue Cross and
Blue Shield.Association. SilverSneakerso ls a registered trademark of Tivlty Health, lnc. Tivity Health ls an lndependent company that
admlnlsters the SllverSneakerS gym benefit. Doctor On Demando is a separate company that.provides telemedlclne services to
BCBSWNY members. TruHearingo is a reglstered trademark of TtuHearin6, lnc, TrUHeaiint ii an,independent companythat
admlnisters the hear.ing.aid benefit. Other. pharmacies/physicians/providers are available in.our network. Out-of-network/non.
contracted prorlders are under no obllgatlon to treat BlueCross BlueShleld of Western New York members, except ln emergency
'situations.
Please call our customer service number or see your Evidence of Coverege for more lnformatlon, including the costsharlnB that applies to out-of:network services, BCBSWNY complies wlth appllcable Federal civil rights laws and does not
dlscrimlnateonthebasisofrace,color,natlonal orlgln,age,dlsablllty,orsex. ATENCIdN:si hablaespaffol,tieneasudlsposlcl6n
:
servlcios gratuitos de asistencia linsuisfica, Llame al 1-833-735-4515 (TTY 711)
' tfi4r}f,F&?+i.E
1-833-735-45 15 Fry 711)
"

ttH fi StrffiXffi+t

a&wwr* iH#€

Pags 3 of 3

79
