TOWN OF REHOBOTH
TOWN WARRANT
Special Town Meeting
and
Annual Rehoboth Water District
Monday, September 30, 2024
7:00 PM
Francis Farm
Francis Hall Building
27 Francis Farm Road
Rehoboth, MA 02769

Page 2 of 24

THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
Town of Rehoboth
Bristol, ss
To any of the Constables of the Town of Rehoboth
Greetings:
In the name of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts you are required to notify and warn the
inhabitants of the Town aforesaid who are qualified to vote in Elections and Town Affairs, therein,
to meet at Francis Farm-Francis Hall Building, on Monday, September 30, 2024 at 7:00 p.m. to act
on the following Special Town Meeting articles:

ARTICLE 1: FUNDING COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT-DISPATCHERS
SUBMITTED BY: BOARD OF SELECTMEN
To see if the Town will vote to appropriate a sum of $40,246.69 to fund the first two years of (FY24
and FY25) of a 3-year Collective Bargaining Agreement by and between the Town of Rehoboth and
AFSCMA, Local 1701-Dispatchers
Vendor/Dept Name

Purpose

Amount

Dispatchers’ Wages

FY24 Retro Payment

$10,722.23

Dispatchers’ Wages

FY25

$27,024.46

Dispatchers’ Expenses

FY25 Uniform Expense

$2,500.00

___Approved

___Disapproved

Finance Committee Recommends: Approval
Source of Funds: Free Cash $40,246.69

Comment: The Dispatchers have negotiated a 3-year contract for FY24 thru FY26. This has
resulted in a retro payment of $10,722.23 for the Dispatchers’ wages for FY24. The Dispatchers’
wages and expenses increased the FY25 budget by $27,024.46 and $2,500 respectively. The town
voted on Section 26, Exhibit A at the Spring Town Meeting on June 4, 2024.

ARTICLE 2: FUNDING COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT-POLICE
DEPARTMENT PATROLMEN’S ASSOCIATION LOCAL #209 AND SUPERIOR
OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION LOCAL #208
SUBMITTED BY: BOARD OF SELECTMEN
To see if the Town will vote to appropriate a sum of $155,284.56 to fund the first year FY25 of a 3year Collective Bargaining Agreement by and between the Town of Rehoboth and the Patrolmen’s
Association, Local #209 and Superior Officers’ Association Local #208.

Page 3 of 24

Dept Name
Police CompensationPatrolmen’s Associate and
Superior Officers
Association
Police Chief Salary

___Approved

Purpose

Amount

FY25 Budget Increase

$141,159.20

FY25 Budget Increase

$14,125.36

___Disapproved

Finance Committee Recommends: At Town Meeting
Source of Funds: Free Cash

Comment: The Patrolmen’s and Superior Officers’ Unions have both negotiated a 3-year contract
for the period of FY25-FY27. This represents an increase to Section 25, Police Compensation, as
voted at the Annual Town Meeting on June 4, 2024. The Police Chief’s salary line represents the
Acting Chief’s adjusted salary and stipend based on the 3-year contract of the Superior Officers’
Union Contract. This represents an increase to Section 25, Police Chief Salary, as voted at the
Annual Town Meeting on June 4, 2024.

ARTICLE 3: FUNDING FY25 BUDGET WAGE LINE
SUBMITTED BY: BOARD OF SELECTMEN
To see if the Town will vote to appropriate $714.40 from Free Cash to fund the FY25 Budget wage
line for the Office Administrator Position in the Planning Board and Conservation Commission; or
take any other action relative thereto.

Dept Name

Account Number

Amount

Conservation Commission

011712-51140

$357.20

Planning Board

011752-51140

$357.20

____Approved

___Disapproved

Finance Committee Recommends: Approval
Source of Funds: Free Cash $714.40

Comments: Base wages were incorrectly supplied for the FY25 Budget for the Planning Board and
Conservation Commission.

ARTICLE 4: AUTHORIZATION TO PAY BILLS OF A PRIOR YEAR
SUBMITTED BY: BOARD OF SELECTMEN
To see if the Town will vote to appropriate $12,383.06 from Free Cash to pay bills from the previous
year as printed below; or take any other action relative thereto.

Page 4 of 24

Vendor/Dept Name

Purpose

Amount

Columbus Energies Repairs/Service - Facility
Maintenance Dept

Late Billing

$11,065.00

C.N. Wood – Equipment/PartsHighway Dept

Late Billing

$1,318.06

____Approved

___Disapproved

Finance Committee Recommends: Approval
Source of Funds: Free Cash $12,393.06

Comments: Invoices were received from the vendors after the close of FY24. This requires a 9/10th
Vote.
ARTICLE 5: BOARD OF HEALTH-TRANSFER STATION OFFSET RECEIPTS
SUBMITTED BY: BOARD OF HEALTH
To see if the Town will vote to amend Article 3 from the 2024 Annual Town Meeting to reauthorize
an “offset receipts” account for the Solid Waste Handling Facility and Recycling Area and its
operation pursuant to MGL C. 44 S. 53E. Fees collected for the use of the Solid Waste Handling
Facility and Recycling Area will be deposited in this fund. The account shall be for the expenses and
improvements incurred for the operation, maintenance, monitoring and / or compliance requirements
of the Solid Waste Handling Facility and Recycling Area. The Fiscal Year 2025 expenditures shall
be decreased from the estimated amount of $152,400.00 to a new amount of $147,801.00. All
expenditures are to be authorized by the Board of Health, or take any other action relative thereto.
___Approved

___Disapproved

Finance Committee Recommends: Approval

Comments: The operation of the Transfer Station is estimated to cost $147,801.00 in FY25 and will
be funded by pay-as-you-throw fees. This is an amendment from the 2024 Annual Town Meeting in
June.

ARTICLE 6: AMENDMENT TO SOURCE OF FUNDING FOR CPC APPROVED
PURCHASE FOR AN ALL-AGE PLAYGROUND FROM JUNE 4, 2024 ANNUAL TOWN
MEETING-ARTICLE 21
SUSBMITTED BY: COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
To see if the Town will vote to amend Article 21 from the 2024 Annual Town Meeting to correct
the source of funds from the recreational funds to undesignated reserve funds.
___Approved

___Disapproved

Finance Committee Recommends: Approval

Comments: June 2024 Annual Town Meeting-Article 21 stated source of funds to be “Open Space
and Recreational.” Source of funds should have read “Open Space and Undesignated” funding
sources. The funding amounts will remain the same as voted on at the Annual Town Meeting in June.

Page 5 of 24

ARTICLE 7: STREET ACCEPTANCES: HYBRID DRIVE AND CLUBHOUSE WAY
SUBMITTED BY: BOARD OF SELECTMEN
To see if the Town will vote to accept as Town public ways the following roadways:
Hybrid Drive: as laid out by the vote of the Board of Selectmen on August 26, 2024, and as shown
on Assessor’s Map 45 and 51, a copy of which was filed with the Town Clerk not later than seven
days prior to Town Meeting, and to authorize the Board of Selectmen to accept or take by eminent
domain deeds or easements to use such public way for all purposes for which public ways are used
in the Town of Rehoboth and further to authorize the Selectmen to acquire related drainage, utility
and other related easements, as may be necessary.
Clubhouse Way: as laid out by the vote of the Board of Selectmen on August 26, 2024, and as
shown on Assessor’s Map 51, a copy of which was filed with the Town Clerk not later than seven
days prior to Town Meeting, and to authorize the Board of Selectmen to accept or take by eminent
domain deeds or easements to use such public way for all purposes for which public ways are used
in the Town of Rehoboth and further authorize the Selectmen to acquire related drainage, utility and
other related easements, as may be necessary.
Further to authorize the appropriation of $1500 to pay for title and other expenses that may arise, or
take any other action relative thereto.
___Approved ___Disapproved

Board of Selectmen Recommends: Approval
Finance Committee Recommends: Approval
Source of Funds: Free Cash $1500

ARTICLE 8: GENERAL BYLAWS-ADOPT REVISIONS TO THE GENERAL BYLAWS
SUBMITTED BY: TOWN CLERK
To see if the Town will vote to adopt the following changes to the General Bylaws as set forth in the Final
Draft of the Code of the Town of Rehoboth, dated April 2024, on file with the Town Clerk, or what it will do
in relation thereto.
General Revisions:

References to the Massachusetts General Laws are standardized to the following format: MGL c.
__, § ___.
The following titles are amended to read "Treasurer-Collector" when referring to the Town Treasurer
and Town Collector: Treasurer, Collector, Treasurer/Collector, Tax Collector, and Collector of
Taxes.
References to the "Zoning Board" and "Board of Appeals" are amended to read "Zoning Board of
Appeals."
References to the "Building Inspector" and "Inspector of Buildings" are amended to read "Building
Commissioner."
Page 6 of 24

References to the "Superintendent of Streets" are amended to read "Highway Superintendent."
The term "by-law" is amended to read "bylaw."
The term "Chairman" is amended to read "Chair."
Throughout Chapter 210, Stormwater Management, references to "Superintendent" are amended to
read "Highway Superintendent."

Specific Revisions:
Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Article I, General Penalty.
Section 1-2 is amended as indicated:
Any citizen may, and it shall be the duty of the Selectmen, Constables, and Police Officers[,] to, prosecute
every violation of any of the foregoing aforementioned bylaws, by complaint before any court of
competent jurisdiction in the County of Bristol.
Article II, Approval and Severability of Code Provisions.
Section 1-4 is amended as indicated:
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance bylaw shall be
judged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance bylaw
as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or
unconstitutional.
Chapter 7, Boards and Officials.
Part 1, Boards.
Section 7-3 is amended as indicated: "Refer to General Laws, Chapter 71, Sections 15 through 17 MGL c.
71, §§ 15 through 16I, and amendments."
Part 2, Officials.
Article II, Elected Officials.
Original Ch. A, Art. III, Sec. 1, the third and fourth subparagraphs, regarding the Collector of Taxes and
Town Treasurer, respectively, as amended effective 6-19-1972, of the Bylaws are deleted.
Section 7-9B(7) is amended as indicated: "The Selectmen shall act as the licensing authority of the Town,
except where otherwise provided, and shall grant licenses and fix fees within the limits provided by the law."
Section 7-9B(13) is amended as indicated:
The Selectmen shall establish the hours, days and weeks of work and the hours, days and weeks of
leave without loss of pay, including without limiting the generality of the foregoing, holiday leave,
vacation leave and sick leave, for any and all employees other than those appointed by the School
Committee; provided that the number of working hours, days or weeks so established shall not
Page 7 of 24

exceed, and the number of hours, days or weeks of leave without loss of pay shall not be less than,
the number prescribed by any general or special law applicable to the Town; and further provided
that the Annual Town Meeting shall approve by majority vote said action of the Board of Selectmen
and further provided that the Annual Town Meeting shall approve by majority vote said action of the
Board of Selectmen and further provided that the necessary funds shall be available in a departmental
budget.
Section 7-9C(2) and (5) is amended to change "these By-laws" to "this bylaw."
Section 7-9C(6) is amended as indicated:
In addition, the Town Clerk shall ensure, as far as possible, that the entire proceedings of every Town
Meeting be videotaped electronically recorded and that the original or a complete copy of said
videotape recording be filed with the Town Clerk at the conclusion of each session of said Town
Meeting. The videotape recording of each session of each Town Meeting shall become the property
of the Town Clerk's office and shall be kept by the Town Clerk's office for a minimum of three years
following the adjournment of the subject Town Meeting. Any expenses involved with the videotaping
electronic recording of Town Meetings shall be borne by the Town of Rehoboth.
Article III, Appointed Officials, Commissions and Committees.
Original Ch. A, Art. III, Sec. 2D, Duties of the Town Treasurer, as amended June 20, 1988, and June 26,
2007, of the Bylaws ised.
Original Ch. A, Art. III, Sec. 2E, Duties of the Tax Collector, of the Bylaws is deleted.
Original Ch. A, Art. III, Sec. 1, last paragraph, regarding the Stormwater Officer, added 3-10-2011, of the
Bylaws is deleted.
Section 7-10.
Original Ch. A, Art. IV, Sec. 7A, regarding the appointment date and term of the Town Administrator,
added eff. 8-19-1978, as amended 5-19-1989, of the Bylaws is deleted, which originally read: "The
Board of Selectmen shall annually in May, and whenever a vacancy shall exist, appoint a Town
Administrator for a term of one year beginning on July 1."
The lead-in paragraph is amended as indicated:
Unless otherwise provided by statute, vote of the Town, or these bylaws, all officials, boards,
committees and bodies not elected on the official ballot shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen, effective July 1, each for a term of one year for up to three-year terms or as
otherwise specified in state law.
The following positions are added: Board of Health, Electrical Inspector, Fish Warden,
Harbormaster, Stormwater Officer, Treasurer-Collector.
The following positions are deleted: Agent to care for cemeteries, Forest Fire Warden, Inspector of
Manufactured and Natural Gas Appliances and Installations, Inspector of Plumbing, Inspector of
Range Boilers, Inspector of Wiring.
Page 8 of 24

The following positions are revised:
"Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances in Buildings" is amended to read "Plumbing
Inspector/Gas Inspector."
"Two Measurers of Wood and Lumber" is amended to read "Measurer of Wood and
Lumber."
"Six Public Weighers" is amended to read "Public Weigher of Livestock."
"Public Nurse" is amended to read "Public Health Nurse."
Section 7-10A(9) is amended to add the following four subsections:
(a) The Treasurer-Collector shall have all the powers, perform the duties and be subject to
the liabilities and penalties now or hereafter conferred and imposed by Massachusetts
General Laws on town treasurers and town collectors of taxes. The Treasurer-Collector
shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a term not to exceed three years and
may be removed by the Board of Selectmen of the Town.
(b) The Treasurer-Collector shall be properly bonded. The Treasurer-Collector shall have
stated hours for the transaction of business and shall give public notice thereof.
(c) The Treasurer-Collector shall have the custody of all funds belonging to the Town except
funds for which other provisions are made by law or by these bylaws. No payment of
Town funds may be made except by the Town Treasurer-Collector, and then only on a
warrant prepared and signed by the Town Accountant and approved by a majority of the
Board of Selectmen. Such warrant shall be sufficient authority to the Town TreasurerCollector to pay money, and the payment thereof under such warrant shall discharge
from him all liability of money so paid. The Town Treasurer-Collector shall make a
detailed report of all receipts and expenditures and of all trust funds in his charge,
together with a statement of the Town debt, which shall be printed in the Annual Town
Report. The Treasurer-Collector shall negotiate all borrowing of money authorized by
vote of the Town and shall have custody of the standard weights and measures of the
Town.
(d) The Treasurer-Collector shall bill and collect all tax accounts due the Town, including
real and personal property taxes and such other amounts authorized by law or by vote of
the Town. All tax bills shall be sent out by the Treasurer-Collector and shall be delivered
as soon as practicable after receipt of the tax lists and warrants from the Assessors.
Section 7-10C(5) is amended as indicated:
A Computer Committee shall be appointed annually, effective on July 1, by the Board of
Selectmen to include a member of the Board of Assessors, the Town Treasurer-Collector, the
Town Clerk, the Town Accountant, the Executive Secretary Town Administrator, the Police
Chief and the Fire Chief or their designees.
Section 7-10C(12) is amended as indicated: "A Zoning Board of Appeals under the Sub-Division
Control Law Chapter 350, Subdivision of Land Regulations."
Section 7-10C(13) is amended as indicated:
Page 9 of 24

A Zoning Board of Appeals, consisting of five (5) members and three (3) associate members
shall be appointed by the Selectmen under provision of MGL c. 40A, and any and all
amendments and additions thereto, consisting of five members for a term of five years, one
to be appointed each year and up to three associate members appointed annually.
Section 7-10C(14) is added to read: "Committees, councils, commissions, and agencies in §§ 7-11
through 7-19."
Section 7-15C is amended as indicated: "Requirements for membership on the Communications Commission
Committee shall include either formal schooling in electronics or on-the-job experience in two-way radio or
signaling systems."
Original Ch. A, Art. IV, Sec. 8A, last paragraph, regarding appointment authority, and Sec. 10, last paragraph
under "Establishment," regarding appointment authority, of the Bylaws are deleted.
Section 7-16B(1) is amended as indicated:
The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs, possibilities and resources of the
Town regarding community preservation, including the consideration of regional projects for
community preservation.
Section 7-16B(2) is amended as indicated:
The Community Preservation Committee shall make recommendations to the Town Meeting for the
acquisition, creation and preservation of open space; for the acquisition and preservation of historic
resources; for the acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational use; for the
acquisition, creation, preservation and support of community housing; and for rehabilitation or
restoration of such open space, historic resources, land for recreational use and community housing
that is acquired or created as provided in this section; provided, however, that funds expended
pursuant to MGL c. 44B shall not be used for general maintenance. With respect to community
housing, the Community Preservation Committee shall recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of
existing buildings or construction of new buildings on previously developed sites.
Section 7-16B(4) is added to read as follows:
The Community Preservation Committee may recommend and the legislative body of the Town may
approve appropriations from the fund to acquire land, or real property interests therein, held for
railroad purposes to be used by the Town for recreational use as a rail trail as defined in MGL c. 82,
§ 35A. Notwithstanding MGL c. 44B, § 12(a), land, or real property interests therein, acquired
pursuant to this subsection shall remain subject to any property interest, including restrictions or
reversionary interests, required to be held by the grantor or the United States pursuant to the federal
National Trails System Act of 1968, as amended. Notwithstanding the definition of real property
interest in MGL c. 44B, § 2, land, or real property interests therein, acquired pursuant to this
subsection shall be considered a real property interest for purposes of this chapter, and a conservation
restriction that meets the requirements of MGL c. 184, § 31 to 33, inclusive, shall be required.
Section 7-17.

Page 10 of 24

Subsection A is amended as indicated: "There is hereby established an Agricultural Commission.
authorizing tThe Board of Selectmen is authorized to appoint an Agricultural Commission to
represent the Rehoboth farming community."
Subsection B is added to read as follows:
The Board of Health shall provide copies of and the Agricultural Commission shall have 45
days to review proposed regulations on the following: "farmers' markets" as defined in
department regulations; "farms" as defined in MGL c. 128, § 1A; the noncommercial keeping
of poultry, livestock or bees; or the noncommercial production of fruit, vegetables or
horticultural plants.
Section 7-18C(3) is amended as indicated:
If no action is taken by the Board of Selectmen after 30 days, the Council may act upon its
recommendation after holding a public hearing, including notice to all parties concerned, and in
conformity with MGL Chapter 39 Section 23B MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25.
Section 7-22 is added to read as follows:
Should any of the commissions, boards, or committees who have appointment authority under this
bylaw be no longer in existence for whatever reason, the appointment authority for that commission,
board, or committee shall become the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen.
Chapter 22, Funds, Fees and Contracts.
Article II, Charles D. Richardson Memorial Camp Scholarship Fund.
Section 22-5 is amended as indicated:
That tThe Charles D. Richardson Memorial Camp Scholarship Fund is hereby established; that the
members of the Conservation Commission shall be ex officio trustees of said fund, with authority to
invest and reinvest the principal or income. The income shall be used for the purpose of paying the
expenses of the worthy youth or youths of the Town in connection with their attendance at a 4-H or
other camp which includes within its purposes the promotion of an interest in conservation of natural
resources[;], and that the Town Treasurer-Collector shall be treasurer-custodian of the fund; that he
shall be authorized to accept original and subsequent gifts which will become part of the
unexpendable principal of said funds; disbursements shall be made from income when income
amounts are sufficient to permit such expenditures as authorized by the trustees.
Chapter 60, Personnel Bylaw.
Section 60-1A(3) is amended as indicated:
Fair treatment of all applicants and employees shall be guaranteed in all aspects of the personnel
system, which shall be administered without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
political affiliation, age, handicap, any characteristics protected by law or other nonmerit factors and
with proper regard for privacy and constitutional rights.
Section 60-3A(1)(e) is amended as indicated:
Page 11 of 24

Ensure that the Town acts affirmatively in providing maximum opportunities to all persons regardless
of sex, color, creed, race or national origin without regard to any characteristics protected by law or
other nonmerit factors for both entry-level positions and promotional positions and provides equal
treatment in all aspects of personnel management.
Chapter 76, Town Meetings.
Article I, Calling of Town Meetings.
Section 76-1B is amended as indicated: "The number of copies to shall be at the discretion of the Board of
Selectmen."
Article II, Procedure at Town Meetings.
Section 76-9 is amended as indicated:
The conduct of all Town Meetings not prescribed by law or by these By-Laws this bylaw shall be
determined by the rules and practices contained in Town Meeting Time: A Handbook of
Parliamentary Law Practice, second edition by Johnson, Trustman, and Wadsworth, revised and
amended in 1984 by Copeland, Harrington, Howard, Kirkpatrick and Nichols, current edition, as far
as applicable and not inconsistent with the bylaws of the Town.
Chapter 113, Buildings and Building Construction.
Article I, Stretch Energy Code.
Section 113-4 is amended as indicated:
The Stretch Energy Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780
CMR Appendix 115.AA, including any future editions, amendments or modifications, is herein
incorporated by reference into the Town of Rehoboth General Bylaws, Chapter 113, Article I. The
Stretch Energy Code is enforceable by the Inspector of Buildings or Building Commissioner and
effective as of January 1, 2020.
Chapter 118, Burial Grounds, Care of.
Section 118-4 is amended as indicated:
Within such buffer zone, excavating a ground depth of more than 24 inches and construction of any
kind within the designated buffer zone is prohibited without prior authorization of the Cemetery
Commission.
Chapter 125, Dog Control.
Section 125-2C is amended as indicated:
Penalties may be imposed as prescribed in MGL c. 140, § 157, up to and including euthanasia and/or
issuing a fine to the owner of the dog or dog(s) in the amount of $100 for the first offense, $200 for
the second offense, and $300 for subsequent offenses the third offense; for a fourth or subsequent
offense, the fine shall be $500 and the Town may order the animal spayed or neutered. Each day of
said failure shall constitute a separate offense. No banishment orders may issue be issued.
Page 12 of 24

Section 125-4A is amended as indicated:
Whoever is the owner or keeper of a dog or cat six months of age or older shall cause such dog or cat
to be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian using a vaccine approved by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Such owner or keeper shall procure a veterinarian's
certification that such dog or cat Section 21A. Whoever is the owner or keeper of a dog, or cat or
ferret six months of age or older shall cause such dog, or cat or ferret to be vaccinated against rabies
by a licensed veterinarian using a vaccine approved by the Massachusetts Department of Public
Health. Such owner or keeper shall procure a veterinarian's certification that such dog, or cat or ferret
has been vaccinated and setting forth the date of such vaccination and the duration of immunity, or a
notarized letter from a veterinarian that a certification was issued, or a metal rabies tag bearing an
expiration date indicating that such certification is still in effect.
Chapter 131, Excavations.
Article II, Utility Installations.
Section 131-5 is amended to change "division of professional licensure" to "Division of Occupational
Licensure," so that the second sentence of this section reads as follows:
The granting of such permit shall require all such activities to conform to MGL c. 82A, MGL c. 82,
§§ 40 through 40D, inclusive, and regulations promulgated by the Office of Public Safety and
Inspections of the Division of Occupational Licensure relative to MGL c. 146.
Chapter 137, Farming (Right to Farm Bylaw).
Section 137-2, definition of "farming or agriculture (or their derivatives)," Subsection A, is amended as
indicated: "Includes, but shall not be limited to, the following:"
Chapter 149, Gravel Operations.
Section 149-10B is amended as indicated:
Gravel operations, as defined in Article III hereof, to fulfill requirements of the Subdivision Control
Law Subdivision of Land Regulations of Rehoboth in an approved subdivision in accordance with
standards approved by the subdivision approving authority of the Town.
Section 149-10D is amended as indicated:
Gravel operations, as defined in Article III hereof, for the purposes of equestrian, landscaping,
horticulture or agriculture purposes[,]; provided, however, that no such operation shall involve more
than 1,000 cubic yards of soil, loam, peat, sand, or gravel per 60,000 square feet of area.
Section 149-11A(4) is amended as indicated: "Each day in which a violation takes place or exists shall
constitute a separate offense under this bylaw; and."
Chapter 156, Health and Sanitation.
Section 156-4 is amended as indicated in the second sentence thereof: "Violations of this By-Law section
shall be deemed a misdemeanor and punishable as such."
Page 13 of 24

Section 156-7 is amended as indicated:
The requirements/regulations for septic tank capacities, as outlined in the State Environmental Code,
Title 5: Minimum requirements for the subsurface disposal of sanitary sewage Standard
Requirements for the Siting, Construction, Inspection, Upgrade and Expansion of On-Site Sewage
Treatment and Disposal Systems and for the Transport and Disposal of Septage, 15.006: Septic Tanks
(1) Capacities Facilities with a Design Flow of 10,000 gpd or Greater but Less than 15,000 gpd,
Subsection (1), be changed for the Town to "but in no case less than 1,500 gallons."
Chapter 175, Marijuana.
Article II, Licensing.
Section 175-3 is amended as indicated: "No person shall carry on the business, cultivate, process, package,
deliver, obtain, manufacture, brand, sell or otherwise transfer, or test marijuana or marijuana products …"
Section 175-10A is amended as indicated:
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals and
transfers, of any party or agent thereof whose name appears on said the list furnished to the licensing
authority from the Town Treasurer-Collector of individuals delinquent on their taxes and/or other
municipal charges.
Section 175-11 is amended as indicated: "This bylaw is adopted under the authority granted by the Home
Rule Amendment (Art. 89 of the Amendments to the Massachusetts Constitution); MGL c. 94G, § 3; 935
CMR 500.000."
Chapter 188, Permits and Licenses.
Article I, Denial or Revocation for Failure to Pay Taxes or Fees.
Section 188-1 is amended as indicated:
The Treasurer-Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal taxes,
assessments, betterments, and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as the "TreasurerCollector," shall annually, and may periodically, furnish to each department, board, commission,
department, official, or division, hereinafter referred to as the "licensing authority," that issues, grants
or provides, licenses, permits, approvals or endorsements, including, but not limited to, renewals and
transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the
"party," that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments, or other
municipal charges, including amounts assessed under MGL c. 40, § 21D, for not less than a twelve
(12) month period, and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending application of abatement
of such tax or a pending petition before the Appellate Tax Board.
Chapter 200, Scenic Roads.
Section 200-2B is amended as indicated:
The Board shall also send copies of that notice to the Selectmen, Conservation Commission,
Historical Commission, Town Engineer, Highway Surveyor Superintendent, Tree Warden,
Department of Public Works, and owners as of the preceding January 1 of property located in whole
or in part within 500 feet of the proposed action.
Page 14 of 24

Section 200-4F is amended as indicated:
Relationship of road design to the standards of the Planning Board's subdivision regulations Chapter
350, Subdivision of Land Regulations, and of the Massachusetts Department of Public Works
Highway Division;
Section 200-5A is amended as indicated: "A report of denial shall include an indication and of what
modifications, if any, would lead to consent."
Original Ch. B, Art. I, Sec. 36, Subsection (4), definitions of "road," "cutting or removal of trees," and "tearing
down or destruction of stone walls," of the Bylaws, are deleted.
Chapter 210, Stormwater Management.
Section 210-4, definition of "estimated habitat of rare wildlife and certified vernal pools," is amended to
change 304 CMR 11.00 to 302 CMR 16.00, so that this definition reads as follows:
Habitats delineated for state-protected rare wildlife and certified vernal pools for use with the
Wetlands Protection Act Regulations (310 CMR 10.00) and the Forest Cutting Practices Act
Regulations (302 CMR 16.00).
Section 210-4, definition of "pollutant," Subsection L, is amended as indicated: "And nNoxious or offensive
matter of any kind."
Section 210-6 is amended as indicated: "The Rehoboth Highway Superintendent (Superintendent) or
Stormwater Officer shall administer and implement Article II of this bylaw."
Section 210-9B(6) is amended as indicated: "Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(b)(20), or uncontaminated pumped groundwater;"
Section 210-13 is amended to add a lead-in paragraph to read "The following activities shall be exempt from
the permit requirements of this article:"
Chapter 215, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Ways.
Section 215-4 is amended as indicated:
No person shall establish or maintain any shade or awning over any part of a sidewalk unless the
same be securely and safely supported and unless the lowest part thereof be not less than seven nine
feet above said sidewalk.
Section 215-7 is amended, in part, as indicated: "… or any noxious material or refuse or other liquid or solid
matter or substances."
Chapter 235, Vehicles and Traffic.
Article II, Handicapped Parking.
Section 235-3A is amended, in part, as indicated: "… or for any other place where the public has a right of
access as invitees or licensees, to shall reserve parking spaces in said off-street parking area …"
Page 15 of 24

Chapter 240, Vendors.
Article II, Junk Dealers.
Section 240-13 is amended as indicated:
Whoever, not being licensed as herein provided, keeps such a shop or storage place, or is such a
dealer and, being licensed, violates any of the provisions of this article or any regulations or
restrictions contained in his license shall forfeit not more than twenty dollars $20 for each offense.
Article III, Ice Cream Trucks.
Section 240-16 is amended as indicated: "Permits issued hereunder shall conform to regulations, rules, forms
and policies of the Massachusetts Department of Public Safety Office of Public Safety and Inspections."
Chapter 253, Wetlands Protection.
In § 253-2B, the Filing Fee Schedule is amended as indicated in the double-asterisk note that follows the
schedule: "Please note that the filing fee for a notice of intent which has been filed as a result of enforcement
action is double the fee shown in this table."

___Approved ___Disapproved

Board of Selectmen Recommends: At Town Meeting

Comment: As mentioned in the previous article comments, the Board of Selectmen approved
the Codification of Rehoboth’s Town Bylaws project. Part of the project included a thorough
legal review of Rehoboth’s bylaws to assure all references to laws and other standards are
updated to current information. Such updating is needed because some Commonwealth statutes
and regulations have been revised, dropped, or added. A range of corrections involve typos,
wording duplications, grammatical inconsistencies, and other inevitable errors occurring over
the years. Additionally, over the years, various town offices have changed their names and some
officials have new titles. A few changes are presented for action. Finally, all changes have been
researched and checked by Rehoboth town officials. Representatives of each affected town
committee, commission, and board have given their detailed review and indicated
approval. Important to Note: None of the meanings or requirements of the bylaws are
changed. At the instruction of the Board of Selectmen, the project specifically does not
encompass substantive content changes. If and when content changes are desired, they will be
presented in a future Town Meeting. A red-lined version of the current changes appears on the
Town website for your review in detail @ www.RehobothMA.gov under “News &
Announcements”. A printed version is available for review in the Town Clerks office.

ARTICLE 9: REHOBOTH ZONING BYLAW AMENDMENT TO ADOPT REVISIONS
TO THE ZONING BYLAWS
SUBMITTED BY: TOWN CLERK
To see if the Town will vote to adopt the following changes to the Zoning Bylaw as set forth in the Final
Draft of the Code of the Town of Rehoboth dated April 2024, on file with the Town Clerk, or what it will do
in relation thereto.
General Revisions:

Page 16 of 24

References to the Massachusetts General Laws are standardized to the following format: MGL c. __,
§ ___.
References to the "Zoning Board" and "Board of Appeals" are amended to read "Zoning Board of Appeals."
References to the "Building Inspector," "Inspector of Buildings," and "building official" are amended to read
"Building Commissioner."
References to "licensed" engineers are amended to read "registered."
The term "by-law" is amended to read "bylaw."
The term "ordinance" is amended to read "bylaw," and the term "this ordinance" is amended to read "this
bylaw."
References to the "Zoning Bylaws" are amended to read "Zoning Bylaw."
References to the "Residential/Agricultural" District are amended to read "Residence/Agricultural."
The following terms are amended to read "large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation":
"ground-mounted large scale solar photovoltaic installation," "large scale solar power generation
installation," "solar photovoltaic installation," "large-scale ground-mounted photovoltaic installation," and
"large-scale solar photovoltaic installation."

Specific Revisions:
Section 270-2.0.
The definition of "camper" is amended as indicated: "A portable dwelling, eligible to be registered
and insured for highway use, designed to be used for travel, recreational and vacation uses but not
for permanent residence."
The defined term "child care facility" is updated to "child-care center," and the definition is amended
as indicated:
A Day Care Center, a Family Day Care Home or a School Age Child Care Program. A facility
operated on a regular basis, whether known as a "child nursery," "nursery school,"
"kindergarten," "child play school," "progressive school," "child development center," or
"preschool," or known under any other name, which receives children not of common
parentage under seven years of age, or under 16 years of age if those children have special
needs, for nonresidential custody and care during part or all of the day separate from their
parents. Child-care center shall not include any part of a public school system; any part of a
private, organized educational system, unless the services of that system are primarily limited
to kindergarten, nursery or related preschool services; a Sunday school conducted by a
religious institution; a facility operated by a religious organization in which children are
cared for during short periods of time while persons responsible for the children are attending
religious services; a family child-care home; an informal cooperative arrangement among
neighbors or relatives; or the occasional care of children with or without compensation.
Page 17 of 24

The definition of "day care center," added 4-18-1995, is deleted.
The defined term "district" is amended to read "Flood Plain District," and the definition is amended
as indicated: "Floodplain district The overlay district as provided in § 270-4.4 of this bylaw."
The defined term "family day care home" is updated to "family child care home," and the definition
is amended as indicated:
"Family day care home" as such term is defined M.G.L. Chapter 28A, section 9, as the same
may be amended from time to time A private residence which, on a regular basis, receives
for temporary custody and care during part or all of the day children under seven years of
age, or children under 16 years of age if those children have special needs, and receives for
temporary custody and care for a limited number of hours children of school age under
regulations adopted by the Board. The total number of children under 16 in a family childcare home shall not exceed six, including participating children living in the residence.
Family child-care home shall not mean a private residence used for an informal cooperative
arrangement among neighbors or relatives, or the occasional care of children with or without
compensation.
The definition of "flood hazard, area of special" is amended as indicated:
Is tThe land in the floodplain within the municipal boundaries of the Town of Rehoboth
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area is designated as
Zone A, A1, A2, A3, A4, A6, or A7 on the FIRM dated September 1, 1977 July 7, 2009.
The defined term "kennel: kennel" is amended to read "kennel."
The definition of "medical marijuana facilities" is amended as indicated:
A not-for profit entity, as defined by Massachusetts law only, duly registered and/or licensed
by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, that acquires, cultivates, possesses,
processes (including development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils
or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana,
products containing marijuana, related supplies or educational materials to qualifying
patients or their personal caregivers The premises approved under a medical use marijuana
license.
The definitions of "microbrewery" and "microdistillery" are amended to change "Alcoholic Beverage
Commission" to read "Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission."
The defined term "school age child care program" is updated to "school-aged child care program,"
and the definition is amended as indicated:
A "school-aged child care program" as defined in M.G.L., Chapter 28A, section 9 MGL c.
15D, § 1a, as the same may be amended from time to time.
The definition of "sign" is amended as indicated:

Page 18 of 24

The area of a sign shall be considered to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying
designs and symbols, together with the background on which they are displayed, any frame
around the sign and any "cutouts" or extensions, except as otherwise provided in § 270-6.5
of this bylaw, but shall not include any supporting structure or bracing.
The defined term "special hazard area" is amended to read "special flood hazard area."
Section 270-4.1A(16) is amended as indicated: "Large Wind Electrical Generation Facility Large wind energy
facility with special permit approval as described in § 270-4.9."
Section 270-4.1A(17) is amended as indicated: "Utility Scale Wind Electrical Generation Facility Utilityscale wind energy facility with special permit approval as described in § 270-4.9."
Section 270-4.4C(1)(a) is amended, in part, as indicated:
… the Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage Standard
Requirements for the Siting, Construction, Inspection, Upgrade and Expansion of On-Site Sewage
Treatment and Disposal Systems and for the Transport and Disposal of Septage, DEP (currently 310
CMR 15.00, Title 5)
Section 270-4.5A(1) is amended as indicated: "The purpose of the Groundwater Protection District is to:"
Section 270-4.5B, definition of "nonconforming use," is amended as indicated: "Any use that does not
conform to the intent of this bylaw whether specified of inferred herein See § 270-2.0."
Section 270-4.5E(3)(b)[1] is amended to change "310 Code of Massachusetts Regulations CMR 19.00" to
"310 CMR 19.00," so that this subsection reads as follows:
Solid waste disposal facilities, including, without limitation, landfill, junkyards, and salvage yards,
that require a site assignment from the Board of Health under MGL c. 111, § 150A, (the Landfill
Assignment Law), and regulations adopted by the Department of Environmental Quality
Engineering, 310 CMR 19.00;
Section 270-4.5E(3)(b)[8] is amended as indicated:
Disposal of liquid or leachable wastes, except by individual on-site domestic sewage disposal systems
serving one- or two-family residences or serving business, industrial, or institutional uses discharging
not more than 1,000 gallons per day per 60,000 square feet of lot area in compliance with Title V 5
of the State Environmental Code, 310 CMR 15.00;
Section 270-4.5F(1) is amended as indicated: "Such special permit shall only be granted if the Planning Board
determines that the intent of this bylaw as and each of its specific criteria are fully met."
Section 270-4.5F(8)(a) is amended to change "314 CMR 6.00" to "314 CMR 5.11."
Section 270-4.5G(1) is amended as indicated: "Laboratory analysis at the applicant's shall be at the expense
of the applicant."

Page 19 of 24

Section 270-4.10C, definition of "protected structure," is amended, in part, as indicated: "Any occupied
residence, commercial, business, school, religious institution or any other public building located within one
mile of the surface location of a compressor station …"
Section 270-4.11H(2) is amended as indicated:
Prior to construction of the facility, the operator shall provide to the Town's first responders, including
the Fire Department, Police Department, ambulance service and Zoning Enforcement Officer, a copy
of its Preparedness, Prevention Contingency Plan, which shall address methods to handle the
following:

Section 270-6.1B is amended, in part, as indicated: "… first notice of the public hearing on this bylaw or any
amendment thereto to provide for its use for a substantially different purpose …"
Section 270-6.5C(2) is amended as indicated: "The Town Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the right to
order the repair or removal of any sign which is defective, damaged or substantially deteriorated."
Section 270-6.5G, definition of "animated sign," is amended as indicated:
A sign which has any visible moving part, flashing or oscillating lights, visible mechanical movement
of any description, or other apparent visible movement achieved by any means that move, change,
flash, or oscillate; provided, however, that electronic message centers signs which are otherwise
regulated under this sign section shall not be considered to be animated signs.
Section 270-6.6J is amended as indicated: "Such permit shall be for a period of six months and may be
renewed only for two consecutive one six-month intervals interval, the total time period not to exceed 18 12
consecutive months."
Section 270-6.7D(1) is amended as indicated: "All site plans shall be prepared by a registered architect,
landscape architect, or professional engineer unless this requirement is waived by the Planning Board because
of unusually simple circumstances."
Section 270-6.7E(1) is amended as indicated:
The Planning Board shall refer copies of the application within five days to the Conservation
Commission, Board of Health, Building Commissioner, Highway Superintendent, Police Chief, and
Fire Chief and Board of Selectmen, who shall review the application and submit their
recommendations and comments to the Planning Board.
Section 270-6.8B is amended as indicated:
The same formula shall apply to issuance of occupancy permits certificates of occupancy for mobile
homes if, and only if, mobile homes are specifically permitted by another section of the Zoning
Bylaw.
Section 270-6.9 is amended as indicated:
Additionally, that said the applicant for a building permit for such installation shall be required to
furnish all documentation as the Building Commissioner may require to determine that such
Page 20 of 24

installation will not create a health hazard, nuisance or discomfort to the occupancy of neighboring
properties, and that the use of such boiler used in compliance shall be allowed to burn all year long
with no special permit allowed.
In § 270-7.1C, the reference to Article 1, Section 113.1, of the Massachusetts State Building Code is amended
to "780 CMR 105," so that this subsection reads as follows:
Any person who undertakes or authorizes or causes work to be done without first applying for and
obtaining the appropriate building permit as set forth in the Massachusetts State Building Code, 780
CMR 105, shall be subject to a fine in the amount of three times the then-current fee charged for said
permit as established by the Board of Selectmen, not to exceed $300 per offense; each day of violation
shall be a separate offense.
Section 270-7.3 is amended to add a lead-in paragraph to read "The powers of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be as follows:"
Section 270-8.1 is amended as indicated: "The special permit granting authority shall be the ZBA for the uses
described in this article."
Section 270-11.2, definition of "Building Commissioner," is amended as indicated: "The inspector of
buildings or the zoning enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of the zoning ordinance this Zoning
Bylaw."
Section 270-11.2, definition of "building permit," Subsection A, definition of "special use permit," is
amended as indicated:
A permit provided by the special permit granting authority for installation of wind energy facilities
or MET towers by business and industrial entities and for large wind/ or utility-scale wind energy
facilities.
Sections 270-11.2, definition of "building permit," Subsection A, defined term "special use permit," and 27012.4A are amended to change "special use permit" to "special permit."
Section 270-11.3A, the table listing technology types and the permit needed for each, is amended to change
"Large Wind-Utility scale or on-site wind" to "Large, utility-scale or on-site wind energy facility" and to
change "Building Integrated Wind Energy System" to "Building integrated wind energy facility."
Section 270-11.4A is amended as indicated:
The construction of a micro wind or small wind energy facility shall be allowed in any zoning district
subject to the issuance of a special permit and provided that the use complies with all requirements
set forth in §§ 270-11.3 and 270-11.4."
Section 270-12.2.
In the definitions of "as-of-right siting" and "site plan review," the term "local zoning ordinances or
bylaws" is amended to read "this Zoning Bylaw."

Page 21 of 24

The definition of "Building Commissioner" is amended as indicated: "The inspector of buildings or
the zoning enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of the zoning ordinance this Zoning
Bylaw."

____Approved ___Disapproved

Board of Selectmen Recommend: At Town Meeting
Planning Board Recommend: At Town Meeting

Comment: As mentioned in the previous article comments, the Board of Selectmen approved
the Codification of Rehoboth’s Town Bylaws project. Part of the project included a thorough
legal review of Rehoboth’s bylaws to assure all references to laws and other standards are
updated to current information. Such updating is needed because some Commonwealth statutes
and regulations have been revised, dropped, or added. A range of corrections involve typos,
wording duplications, grammatical inconsistencies, and other inevitable errors occurring over
the years. Additionally, over the years, various town offices have changed their names and some
officials have new titles. A few changes are presented for action. Finally, all changes have been
researched and checked by Rehoboth town officials. Representatives of each affected town
committee, commission, and board have given their detailed review and indicated
approval. Important to Note: None of the meanings or requirements of the bylaws are
changed. At the instruction of the Board of Selectmen, the project specifically does not
encompass substantive content changes. If and when content changes are desired, they will be
presented in a future Town Meeting. A red-lined version of the current changes appears on the
Town website for your review in detail @ www.RehobothMA.gov under “News &
Announcements”. A printed version is available for review in the Town Clerks office.

ARTICLE 10: TRANSACT OTHER BUSINESS AS MAY LEGALLY COME BEFORE
SAID MEETING

Page 22 of 24

Page 23 of 24

Town of Rehoboth
Rehoboth, Massachusetts 02769

PRESORTED STANDARD
U.S. Postage Paid
Attleboro, MA
Permit No. PI210

Important
Official Notice of:
September 30, 2024 Special Town Meeting

BOX HOLDER
Rehoboth, Massachusetts 02769

Please bring this Warrant with you to the
Special Town Meeting
Francis Farm
Francis Hall Building
27 Francis Farm Road
Rehoboth, MA 02769

Monday, September 30, 2024 at 7 PM
