CITY OF GLADSTONE, MISSOURI
AND
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE WEST CENTRAL MISSOURI REGIONAL
LODGE # 50

2023-2026
LABOR AGREEMENT
NON-SUPERVISORY BARGAINING UNIT

Article I. Preamble
Section 1.01 Parties
This agreement has been developed by the Fraternal Order of Police, West Central Missouri
Regional Lodge #50, herein called the “Lodge,” and the City of Gladstone, Missouri, herein called
the “City.”
Section 1.02 Conflicts
In the event that any provision of this Agreement conflicts with the City's Employee Handbook,
the General Orders of the City's Police Department (hereinafter, the "Department,"), or with any
policies, procedures, or other written directives issued by management, the provisions of this
Agreement shall be controlling. The parties recognize that the City's Employee Handbook, and
the Department's General Orders and other written directives will address topics not covered in
this Agreement, and will provide further details about matters that are addressed in this
Agreement. To the extent these written materials do not conflict with the provisions of this
Agreement, they shall be enforceable.
Article II. Recognition
Section 2.01 Bargaining Unit
The City recognizes the Lodge as the exclusive bargaining representative for all sworn, full-time
personnel employed in the Gladstone Police Department with the rank of Police Officer or
Corporal.
Section 2.02 Added Classification
In the event any new full-time sworn job classification is added to the Department the City will
bargain with the Lodge regarding the potential inclusion of the classification in either of the
existing bargaining units. The City will further bargain with the Lodge regarding the duties and
wage scale for the classification.
Section 2.03 Non-Discrimination
The Parties acknowledge and agree that there shall be no discrimination against or harassment
of any employee by either party due to the employee's race, gender, color, national origin,
religion, age, disability, sexual orientation, military service status, Lodge membership status or
lawful Lodge activities, genetic information, marital status, or political affiliation, consistent with
federal, state, and local law, or membership in any other category or classification that is
protected by law.

2

Article III. Management Rights
Section 3.01 Management Rights
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement, the City retains the right to manage
the Department, including but not limited to the right to:
(a) Determine the mission of the City and the Department;
(b) Direct the working forces;
(c) Hire, classify, assign, promote, and transfer employees;
(d) Suspend, discipline, and discharge employees for just cause;
(e) Relieve employees from duty because of lack of work or other legitimate reasons;
(f) Change existing methods, operations, facilities, equipment, and type or number of

personnel;
(g) Promulgate, make, change, and/or revoke reasonable personnel rules, regulations,

policies, and work and safety rules, consistent with this Agreement and applicable
law;
(h) Assign work to bargaining unit and/or civilian support personnel;
(i) Maintain and/or take steps to enhance the efficiency of the operation of the City and

the Department; and
(j) Take whatever actions may be reasonably necessary to carry out the mission of the

City and the Department.
Section 3.02 Rights & Responsibilities
The foregoing powers, rights, authority, and responsibilities, and the adoption of policies, rules,
regulations and practices in furtherance thereof shall be exercised in conformity with this
Agreement by the City's selected management personnel. Failure of the City and/or Department
to exercise any of the Management Rights enumerated above does not diminish the future ability
to exercise such Management Rights.
Section 3.03 Operation of Law
Nothing in this Agreement shall be interpreted or construed in a way that would prevent the City
and/or the Department from complying with any duty or obligation placed upon the City and/or
Department by operation of law.

3

Article IV. Lodge Rights
Section 4.01 Lodge Representatives
On January 1st of each year, the Lodge shall provide the Department with a list of employees,
not to exceed two (2) individuals, who shall serve as official Lodge representatives for that
calendar year.
Section 4.02 Orientation
The City agrees that all new full-time personnel hired to fill represented positions shall, while on
duty and during their FTO process, be given a presentation from the Lodge. During the
presentation, the representative(s) of the Lodge will provide copies of this Agreement, explain
the Lodge's function as the exclusive bargaining representative of the employees in the
bargaining unit, will provide other information regarding the Lodge and membership therein, and
will offer membership in the Lodge to each new full-time employee. The Lodge shall be allowed
reasonable time to make its presentation, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes. The Lodge
representative must either be a member of the same bargaining unit as the employee being
oriented, or a non-employee representative of the Lodge.
Section 4.03 Bulletin Boards
The City agrees to allow the Lodge to maintain a bulletin board in the patrol area. The bulletin
board will be for the exclusive use of the Lodge. All items placed on the bulletin board shall be
initialed and dated by an officer of the Lodge. Items without a date and initials, or that are
incendiary, inappropriate, or disruptive may be removed by Management and returned to the
Lodge.
Section 4.04 Use of Internal Mail
The Lodge shall be permitted to use the City's email and hard copy internal mail distribution
systems for Lodge business, so long as the Lodge's use does not create a burden on the City's
electronic and/or physical systems, and so long as such mail use does not hinder on-duty
personnel in the performance of their duties. The Lodge shall use the City's email system only for
the purpose of communicating with its membership and with Police Department and City
management. The Lodge and its members acknowledge that all City mail, whether electronic or
physical, is subject to potential monitoring, and may also be subject to public disclosure under
the State's sunshine law.
Section 4.05 Dues Deduction
The City will continue to follow direct deposit authorizations received from bargaining unit
members, including authorizations calling for withheld amounts to be transferred to the Lodge
or Lodge-affiliated accounts. The Lodge will notify the City of any change in amount to be
transferred to Lodge-affiliated accounts without the need for the submission of new forms from
individual members. The Lodge will provide the City 30 days’ notice of any changes.
4

Section 4.06 Lodge Business
The City will pay full-time City employees who are on duty and who serve as Lodge
representatives for time spent in labor management meetings, grievance meetings, and
representing employees during investigatory interviews. All other Lodge business shall be
performed on non-working time.
Section 4.07 Confidentiality
Bargaining unit personnel shall have the right to consult with a Lodge representative from their
same bargaining unit on a confidential basis regarding performance and disciplinary matters. Any
Lodge representative, who has any supervisory responsibility over the person or issue involved,
shall be excluded from serving as a Lodge representative in any way with regard to that particular
issue. Further, the right of confidentiality under this paragraph shall be limited in that all
employees of the Police Department shall be obligated to immediately report to senior
management and to answer questions about any statement indicating that an employee clearly
has committed, or has a current intention to commit, any crime.
Section 4.08 Release of Information
The City shall, upon written request, provide to the Lodge information and records reasonably
relevant to the Lodge's performance of its functions in serving as the exclusive bargaining
representative of the employees in the bargaining unit. Where such information involves medical
data, the City will require the Lodge to present a signed release from each employee covered by
the request.
Section 4.09 Request for Information Fee
In the event the City estimates that responding to a single information request will require the
production of more than 100 pages of information that is not available in electronic format,
and/or will require more than two hours of staff time to research or prepare, the City shall notify
the Lodge of this fact, and the estimated charge for compliance with the request. Research and
duplication time will be estimated and charged at the lowest hourly pay and benefit rate of
available qualified personnel, and copies shall be estimated and charged at 15 cents per page.
Section 4.10 Indemnification
The Lodge shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City in the event that a City employee
should file a claim against the City for unauthorized dues deduction or release of information,
and such deduction or release was pursuant to information, or a request for information,
provided by the Lodge to the City.
Article V. Past Practices
Section 5.01 Establishment of Past Practices
5

A past practice is an agreement to handle a particular factual situation in a given manner. In order
for a past practice to exist it must be: (1) unequivocal; (2) clearly enunciated and acted upon; and
(3) readily ascertainable over a reasonable period of time. The parties mutually acknowledge that
there do not exist any binding past practices between them as of the date of execution of this
Agreement. In order for any binding past practice to be established in the future, the practice
must be reduced to writing and signed by the parties at the time it is established.
Article VI. Job Descriptions
Section 6.01 Job Descriptions
The Department shall maintain job descriptions for all positions within the bargaining units.
Article VII. Specialized Duty Assignments
Section 7.01 Specialized Assignments
Full Time specialized assignments may include, but shall not be limited to K-9 Officer, School
Resource Officer, Criminal Investigator/Detective, Traffic Officers, Law Enforcement Training
Coordinator, Crime Prevention Specialist, and Specialized Unit Officers.
Part-time assignments may include but shall not be limited to Type II Breath Analyzer, Bicycle
Officer, Tactical Unit Officer, Drone Operator, Hostage Negotiators, Instructors, Field Training
Officers and Honor Guard.
Section 7.02 Vacancy Posting
When there is a vacancy in any specialized duty assignment, the Department shall notify the
Lodge and all members of the vacancy via interdepartmental e-mail. The posting shall:
a) Identify the vacant or new position by name and the rank of the position;
b) Identify the date on which the applications for the position must be received and to

whom the applications should be delivered; and
c) Provide the entry qualifications for the position.

Section 7.03 Bid for Special Assignment Vacancy
Bargaining unit employees shall submit their bid for vacant positions to the Chief or his or her
designee within the time prescribed in the bid posting. Once the deadline has passed, the Chief
or his or her designee shall review the bids and determine if any or all applicants meet the entry
qualifications.
All vacant positions shall be subject to an oral board selected by the Chief. The Chief may
additionally elect to administer an appropriate test or tests for certain assignments. Each bidder
6

shall receive a copy of their testing scores and/or oral board scores. Employees shall be paid for
all time in interviews and tests.
Section 7.04 Input and Selection for Specialized Assignments
The Chief, or his or her designee, shall select the most qualified bidder to fill each assignment.
Where overall qualifications are substantially equal, seniority shall be used as the tiebreaker to
determine which bidder will be selected. When a candidate is passed over for a position as
provided herein, the Chief or his or her designee, upon request of the individual candidate, shall
meet with the passed over candidate to provide the reasons why the candidate was passed over,
to aid the candidate in future special assignment opportunities.
Section 7.05 Multiple Positions
Personnel who hold specialized assignments may bid for and hold multiple specialized
assignments, so long as no conflict exists among the positions held.
Article VIII. Hours of Work
Section 8.01 Hours
Officers working in patrol shall work twelve (12) hour shifts. The Impact Squad shall work ten
(10) hour shifts. Detectives and SROs shall work eight (8) hour shifts. The Department may
change the duration of the shifts and the schedule of bargaining unit employees at its discretion
provided that it sends written notice to the FOP for input regarding such change at least 30
calendar days in advance of the implementation of such change. The Department shall not be
required to comply with the 30-day written notice provision in cases of a temporary change (30
days or less) to the shift duration or schedule to address an emergency situation.
Section 8.02 Shift Bidding Procedure
Members assigned to Patrol will complete a bidding process each October, wherein:
(a) Officers shall bid for shifts based upon their seniority.
(b) Officers will bid in order of their seniority. Officers will be given a reasonable opportunity

to submit their bid of no more than twenty-four hours.
(c) Members who fail to bid will be placed in open shift positions after the bid process is

completed.
(c) New bid assignments will become effective the first full pay period in January following

the October bid.
(d) The Police Chief shall have the authority to assign new officers to shifts at his or her

discretion when those officers complete Field Training.

7

(e) The Department may conduct an additional bid as necessary in the event it adopts a

permanent schedule change during the course of the year.
Section 8.03 Shift Transfers and Reassignments
Employees may submit written requests to be transferred to any open Patrol position through
their chain of command. Transfers shall be subject to the approval of the Commander(s) of the
affected Division(s).
The Chief shall have the authority to re-assign any employee or employees to another shift for
legitimate operational reasons. Any potential involuntary reassignment and the specific reasons
therefore shall be provided to the Lodge and the employee(s) involved.
Section 8.04 Meal Breaks
The Department shall make a reasonable attempt to allow all members to receive a thirty (30)
minute paid meal break, plus two (2) fifteen (15) minute paid breaks for each full shift worked.
Section 8.05 Duty Trade
Employees assigned to the same position shall be eligible to trade shifts between themselves, for
their own convenience, subject to approval of their immediate supervisors. Trades must occur
within the same pay period. All such trades shall be purely voluntary between the employees
involved, and both employees shall be paid for the hours they actually work.
Article IX. Promotions
Section 9.01 Promotion Eligibility
Officers are eligible to participate in the promotion process for Corporals after three (3) years of
full-time service as a commissioned Police Officer with at least one year of service at the City of
Gladstone, provided they have not received suspension (or any Level 3 discipline) in the last two
(2) years. Officers are eligible to participate in the promotion process for Sergeants after five
years of full-time service as a commissioned Police Officer with at least one year of service at the
rank of Corporal within the City of Gladstone.
Section 9.02 Promotional Process When the Chief determines there is a need to fill one or more
Corporal or Sergeant positions, he or she shall distribute a notice of the opening(s), via email, at
least fourteen (14) days before the position is to be filled. The email shall specify the number of
positions to be filled, and the commencement date for the promotional process.
(a) The promotional process shall be administered by a promotional board. For promotions

to sergeant, the board shall consist of the two division commanders, the HR
administrator, and one command-level officer from an outside agency. For promotions
to corporal, the board shall consist of two sergeants, the HR administrator, and one
sergeant from an outside agency. Outside agency participants shall be selected by the
Chief or his or her designee.
8

(b) The promotional process shall consist of a written examination, a written and oral

exercise, and an oral board interview. The promotional board shall identify the top three
candidates who will then participate in interviews with the Police Chief.
(c) The Police Chief shall interview the three top candidates for each open position, and shall

select the best candidate for promotion after considering each candidate’s job
performance and relevant knowledge, experience, and ability. In the event the Police
Chief determines none of the internal candidates are ready for promotion, he or she may
seek and consider external candidates.
(d) Employees shall be paid at straight time rates for time spent in testing or in interviews

during the promotional process. The City shall have the option to adjust working
schedules during the weeks affected by the promotional process, so that any employee's
total scheduled hours during the work period(s) in question do not exceed the regularly
scheduled hours for that period. Regardless of whether the City elects to make such
adjustments, the parties jointly recognize that participation in the promotional process
is not "work" for the benefit of the City, but rather is a purely voluntary activity for the
benefit of each individual officer. Therefore, hours spent in a promotional process will
not count toward overtime eligibility.
Section 9.03 Raises Upon Promotion
Upon receiving a promotion, the employee shall receive a pay increase to the lowest step of the
new classification that results in a pay increase of at least 4%.
Article X. Transitional Duty Assignments
Section 10.01 Duty Related Injury
When an employee is injured in the line of duty, the City shall attempt in good faith to provide
transitional duty assignments to him or her, consistent with any restrictions the workers'
compensation doctor has identified. The City will first attempt to place an injured officer in a
position within the police department. If no work is available within the Department, the officer
may be placed in a position within the City. While employees covered under this agreement are
on Workers’ Compensation leave, the City will maintain their regular base pay and the employees
will sign over their Workers’ Compensation checks to the City.
Section 10.02 Non-Duty Related Medical Condition
When an employee is unable to perform his or her regular work assignment due to a non-workrelated injury or non-communicable illness, the City may at its discretion offer a transitional duty
assignment, to the extent productive work is available and there is an operational need for the
injured employee to perform the transitional work. The City shall have the option of discontinuing
the transitional duty at any time. Employees with on-the-job injuries shall have preference over
employees with non-work-related injuries for any such assignments.
Section 10.03 Acceptance of Transitional Duty
9

Employees with work-related illnesses or injuries must accept and perform transitional
assignments that are offered to them, in accordance with Departmental policy, so long as the
assignment is fully consistent with all medical restrictions. Any employee who declines a
transitional duty assignment will be subject to reduction in workers' compensation pay, to the
extent allowed under State law.
Article XI. Wages
Section 11.01 Wages
The parties agree that the City will maintain the current pay step system attached hereto as
Appendix A.
All bargaining unit members whose job performance meets or exceeds expectations will receive
a one-step pay increase on November 1 of each calendar year during the life of this Agreement,
except the initial pay raise under this Agreement shall become effective upon ratification of the
Agreement by the bargaining unit.
Employees hired into the bargaining unit between November 1 and April 30 of any calendar year
shall be eligible for their first step increase on the next occurring November 1. Employees hired
into the bargaining unit between May 1 and October 31 shall be eligible for their first step
increase on the second occurring November 1 after their date of hire.
Section 11.02 Lateral Hires
The Police Chief shall have discretion to place new hires at steps A through E in the pay step
system, based on their relevant experience. Credit need not be given on a year-for-year basis,
but shall be based on the quality and nature of the work experience in question.
Section 11.03 Acting Sergeant/Corporal
Members acting as the officer in charge for more than four consecutive weeks shall be paid an
additional five percent (5%) above their base hourly rate, for all times spent in the acting position
as a premium for all time spent working out of grade.
Section 11.04 FTO Pay
For each day that they are training a new recruit, officers assigned as FTOs shall receive one (1)
hour of straight time pay at their regular hourly rate. This pay shall not count toward overtime
eligibility.
Section 11.05 Detective Clothing Expense Reimbursement
Detectives shall be reimbursed up to eight hundred eighty dollars ($880) per year for actual outof-pocket clothing expenses. Detectives seeking reimbursements shall present receipts
confirming their purchases.
Section 11.06 Court Time
10

Members who are required to attend court, as a result of the performance of their assigned
duties, during non-work hours shall be compensated for a minimum of two (2) hours or actual
time worked, whichever is greater.
Section 11.07 Call Back or Call Out
Members who are called to work during their off-duty hours will receive two (2) hours' pay or
pay for actual time worked, whichever is greater. Members who are called in less than two (2)
hours immediately prior to the beginning of the shift shall be paid for all hours actually worked
and shall not be subject to the two (2) hour minimum, provided that the member's shift is not
adjusted to avoid paying overtime.
Article XII. Overtime
Section 12.01 Overtime
Employees shall be paid at time and a half of their regular rate of pay for all hours actually worked
in excess of eighty (80) hours in a fourteen-day work period. Employees working Department of
Transportation (DOT) grant hours shall be paid at the rate specified by the grant regardless of
whether the employee’s hours exceed the overtime hour threshold for the pay period.
Section 12.02 Regular Rate Calculation
Pay incentives will be included in determining each employee's regular hourly rate for overtime
calculation purposes, consistent with the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Section 12.03 No Duplicative Payment
There shall be no duplicative payment or pyramiding of overtime for the same hours worked.
"Overtime" as used herein does not include pay incentives.
Section 12.04 Extra-Work Assignment
Voluntary extra work shall be offered on a first-come, first-serve basis department-wide.
Involuntary extra work shall be assigned to the least senior employee from another shift. Any
employee who has been forced in within the prior seven days shall be passed over, unless all
other employees on their shift have been forced in as well.
The above shall not apply to special events or emergencies, wherein all employees will be subject
to mandatory call-out. Nothing herein shall prevent any employee from accepting available
overtime on a voluntary basis.
12.05 Compensatory Time
Bargaining unit members may have the option of accepting compensatory time in lieu of
overtime pay at the rate of one and a half (1.5) hours per overtime hour worked. Bargaining unit
members may accumulate up to forty (40) hours of compensatory time and any overtime worked
that exceeds that maximum accumulation shall be paid at the overtime rate.
11

Section 12.06 Duty-Related Phone Calls and Email
Employees who receive one or more phone calls from any Department supervisor (Corporal,
Sergeant, Captain, or Chief), or their designee, while off-duty on any given day, which call(s) last
longer than seven (7) minutes, and which concern job-related issues, shall be compensated for
the actual time spent on the call.
Employees shall not access work email while off duty, unless specifically instructed to do so by a
Department supervisor. Employees who spend more than seven (7) minutes on work-related
email on any given day while off duty shall report their time and shall be compensated for actual
time spent.
Section 12.07 Special Events
Employees assigned or volunteering to work Gladfest, Blues Fest, Whiskey Fest, and/or July 4 th
outside of their regularly scheduled shifts shall be paid premium pay at time-and-one-half their
regular rate.
Article XIII. Health and Welfare
Section 13.01 Health, Dental, Life Insurance Coverage
(a) The City shall provide Health, Dental, Vision, and Life Insurance plans. Employees covered

under this Agreement shall be eligible for coverage under these plans on the same terms
as apply for all other City employees.
(b) The City will also maintain a Section 125 flexible benefits spending plan, and allow

employee participation in such plan so long as the maintenance and participation of
such plan is legally compatible with the City's health insurance plan(s).
Article XIV. Retirement Benefits
Section 14.01 LAGERS
The City will continue the current LAGERS L6 non-contributory retirement program.
Section 14.02 Deferred Compensation Plans
The City will maintain enrollment in the 457 Deferred Compensation Plan.
Article XV. Holidays
Section 15.01 Holidays
(a) Employees covered under this Agreement shall receive the following paid holidays:
New Years Day

January 1st
12

Martin Luther King, Jr.
Birthday

3rd Monday in January

President’s Day

3rd Monday in February

Memorial Day

Last Monday in May

Juneteenth Day

June 19th

Independence Day

July 4th

Labor Day

First Monday in
September

Thanksgiving Day

4th Thursday in
November

Day After Thanksgiving Day

Friday Following the 4th
Thursday in November

Christmas Day

December 25

Employees shall accrue and be paid holiday time in accordance with City policies.
ARTICLE XVI. Leaves of Absence
Section 16.01 Vacation Leave
Sworn officers shall accrue and use vacation in accordance with City policies.
Section 16.02 Sick Leave
Employees shall accrue and use sick leave in accordance with City policies.
Section 16.03 Bereavement Leave
Employees covered under this Agreement shall be eligible for Bereavement Leave as provided
in City policy.
Section 16.05 Paid Military Leave.
Employees on military leave shall receive paid and/or unpaid leave in accordance with state and
federal law.

13

Article XVII. Seniority
Section 17.01 Seniority Definition
A current seniority list is attached at Appendix B. Newly hired police officers shall be added to
the seniority list beginning with the date the employee completes the field training program.
If two or more officers have the same seniority date, the following criteria will be used to
determine the higher seniority:
(a) The person with the earlier hire date with the City.
(b) If section (a) does not resolve the tie, the date of the most recent application for
employment will establish who has the highest seniority, with the entrant having the
earlier application being considered more senior.
Section 17.02 Rank Seniority
Rank seniority is based on time served within a member’s current rank. If two or more members
are promoted to the same rank, on the same day, then the senior employee shall be the
employee with the greatest length of service in the prior rank.
Section 17.03 Roster to Be Provided
The Department shall maintain and provide to the Lodge a current roster showing names of all
current bargaining unit personnel, job assignment, date of initial hire within the Department, and
date of assignment to current position.
Section 17.04 Loss of Seniority
Seniority shall be lost and the employment relationship terminated upon the occurrence of any
of the following events:
(a) Voluntary separation;
(b) Discharge for just cause;
(c) Failure to return from an authorized leave of absence on the next working day after the

authorized leave expiries;
(d) Failure to return from layoff within fourteen (14) days after the City issues a recall

notice;
(e) No-call/no-show for any shift unless circumstances make it impossible for the

employee to call in, through no fault of the employee; or,
(f) Failure to perform work for the City for twelve (12) consecutive months for any reason,

other than military leave, or work-related illness or injury.
14

Section 17.05 Rehire
Former bargaining unit employees who are rehired will begin to accrue seniority from the date
of re-employment, without any credit for prior service with the City. The City shall not be under
any obligation to rehire former bargaining unit employees but shall be entitled to exercise its
best judgment regarding whether to rehire such individuals.
The City shall have discretion to offer employment to rehired employees at the rate of pay they
would have been earning had they remained with the City, or at the rate they were earning when
they left the City, or at the rate that would be offered to any comparable lateral hire. Reinstated
or rehired employees who return after an absence of more than one month will become eligible
for employee benefits on the same schedule as applies for new hires.
Article XVIII. Right to Return
Section 18.01 Return to the Bargaining Unit Following Promotion
Employees returned to the unit shall be placed at the rate of pay they held prior to their
promotion out of the unit, without any loss of seniority. The Chief may assign employees
returning to the unit under this Section to any open position.
Article XIX. Reductions in Force
Section 19.01 Lay Off
In the event the City determines it is necessary to reduce the size of the workforce, employees
shall be laid off in the order of inverse seniority, provided the remaining employees are capable
of performing the available work.
Section 19.02 Recall List
Employees who are laid off shall be placed on a recall list for up to eighteen (18) months.
Employees shall be recalled in seniority order. Employees shall be required to notify the City
whether they will accept recall within seventy-two (72) hours after receiving a recall notice, and
shall have a maximum of fourteen (14) days to report for duty. Any employee who declines recall,
or who does not report for duty within the specified time period shall be removed from the recall
list.
Article XX. Discipline
Section 20.01 Discipline
Discipline or discharge of bargaining unit represented employees will be for just cause.
Section 20.02 Types of Discipline
The following types of disciplinary actions are officially recognized. The type of disciplinary action
issued in any given situation will depend on the overall circumstances being addressed, and it
15

shall not be necessary for discipline to start at any particular level. Factors to be considered in
determining the level of discipline issued include but are not limited to consideration of the
employee's overall performance history and disciplinary record, and the nature and/or severity
of the misconduct, negligence or unsatisfactory performance.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Documented Verbal Warning
Written Reprimand
Suspension
Termination

Section 20.03 Non-Disciplinary Actions
Informal discussions or verbal counseling between an employee and supervisor or higher-level
member of management, usually concerning expected employee behavior, conformity to City
policies, or job performance shall be considered non-disciplinary counseling. No record of
informal counseling discussions shall be referred to in any disciplinary matter, except to establish
that management informed an employee of performance expectations or work directives.
Employees shall not be entitled to Lodge representation during informal counseling sessions.
Section 20.04 Copies of Personnel Records
The City will provide the employee with a copy of any formal disciplinary record that is to be
placed in the City's personnel files.
Each employee shall have the right to examine the City's personnel files on that employee, upon
scheduling an appointment with the Human Resources Administrator. Employees shall not
remove or alter any document contained in their file, but may submit comments to be attached
to any record, and may obtain copies of any record contained in the file upon request. Pre-hire
psychological profiles and polygraph or CVSA examination results shall be excluded from
coverage under this Section.
Section 20.05 Lodge Representation
Members under investigation are entitled to have an attorney or any duly authorized
representative present during any questioning that the member reasonably believes may result
in disciplinary action. The attorney or representative shall be permitted to confer with the
member but shall not unduly disrupt or interfere with the interview. The questioning shall be
suspended for a period of up to twenty-four (24) hours if the officer requests representation.
Section 20.06 Review of Internal Affairs or Disciplinary Files
After the completion of any administrative investigation, upon written request of the member or
the member’s representative, a copy of the entire record of the administrative investigation,
including, but not limited to, audio, video, and transcribed statements, shall be provided within
five (5) business days of the written request. The Department may request a protective order to
redact all personal identifying witness information. Any individual who reviews an internal affairs
investigatory file shall maintain the confidentiality of all information contained in the file.
16

Section 20.07 Written Reprimands
Written reprimands shall remain active in employees' personnel files for one (1) year from the
date they are issued, and during that period of time, written reprimands may be used for
subsequent progressive discipline. After one (1) year, written reprimands will no longer be used
for subsequent progressive discipline, but may be referred to for the purpose of demonstrating
knowledge of the applicable rules or expectations, and/or to establish a pattern of behavior.
Section 20.08 Suspensions
Suspensions shall remain active in the employee's personnel file indefinitely, and may be used
for subsequent progressive discipline, provided that the weight to be given to prior suspensions
shall be subject to the just cause analysis.
Article XXI. Internal Investigations
Section 21.01 Administrative Investigations
All internal investigations in disciplinary matters will be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Mo. Rev. Stat. § 590.502.2.
Section 21.02 Criminal Investigations
If, during the course of any investigation, it becomes apparent that the employee's alleged
conduct may amount to criminal activity, the Department shall determine whether to refer the
matter for criminal investigation. During the pendency of any criminal investigation,
management may suspend the administrative investigation and may elect either to place the
employee on administrative leave, with pay, or it may elect to take appropriate disciplinary action
based on the information gathered independently from the criminal investigation.
Section 21.03 Bargaining Unit Member Involved Shooting Investigation
•

No bargaining unit member who has discharged his or her weapon shall be treated as a
suspect unless there is reasonable suspicion or probable cause to believe a crime has
been committed.

•

The scenes from shooting situations are to be considered and handled as any other major
crime scene, per the appropriate policy. The on-scene supervisor will be in charge until
properly relieved by the Lead Supervisor of the investigating agency. The crime scene will
be held until the Chief or his/her designee authorizes the release. The involved officer
shall not leave the scene until released by the Lead Supervisor or Gladstone PD
Commander or their designee, unless transported for medical evaluation or treatment.

•

Immediately following the shooting, bargaining unit members may be ordered to
participate in a walk-through with an assigned investigator and provide answers to the
following public safety questions to provide information necessary to complete the
investigation:
17

1)

Are you injured?

2)

If you know of anyone who was injured, what is his or her location?

3)

In what direction did you fire your weapon(s)?

4)

Are there any suspects at large, what are their descriptions?

5)

What was the suspects' direction of travel?

6)

How long ago did the suspects flee?

7)

For what crimes are suspects wanted?

8)

With what weapons is the suspect armed?

9)

Does any evidence need to be preserved?

10) Where is the evidence located?
11) Did you observe any witnesses?
12) Where are they?
•

Besides the answers to these questions, no other questioning shall be performed at the
scene.

•

A bargaining unit member who is involved in a shooting incident shall have the right to
have legal counsel present during any criminal interview. No criminal interview of the
bargaining unit member involved in a shooting incident shall be conducted until the
officer is well rested, generally two full sleep cycles.

•

Bargaining unit member(s) involved in shooting incidents resulting in any personal injury
or fatality may be relieved of duty and placed on Administrative Leave by the Chief or
his/her designee. They will retain their badge and identification card, but not their
weapon. This shall be removed and retained pending the investigation. A replacement
weapon will be made available to any member placed on Administrative Leave and
whose weapon has been removed. Bargaining unit member(s) will receive formal
notification of their Administrative Leave or Administrative Assignment through a Notice
of Administrative Assignment.

•

If criminal charges are filed, the leave will become unpaid from the time of filing. If the
charges are subsequently dropped, or if the bargaining unit member is acquitted on the
charges, he or she will be returned to full duty status with all back pay, unless the
Employer determines to pursue disciplinary action against the bargaining unit member,
independent of the disposition of the criminal charges. In that event, all other procedural
safeguards of this Memorandum and the Employer's personnel rules shall apply to that
18

disciplinary action. The bargaining unit member(s) will receive formal notification
through a personnel action form of their return to active status.
•

Bargaining unit member(s) involved in shooting incidents resulting in any personal injury
or fatality shall be required to be evaluated by a mental health professional to determine
if the bargaining unit member is emotionally fit before they may return to active duty.
This shall be at the expense of the City.

The City will pay the costs and expenses for counseling with a City-selected mental health
provider for any bargaining unit member who is involved in a critical incident.
Article XXII. Grievance Procedure
Section 22.01 Filing Grievances
A "grievance," for the purposes of this Article shall mean any dispute over the application and/or
interpretation of this Agreement and/or any City or Departmental personnel policy/work rule
(excluding operational directives that do not address terms or conditions of employment). The
Lodge, the City, or the Department shall be the only parties permitted to file grievances. The City
or Department shall not accept or process grievances filed by individual bargaining unit members.
Individual bargaining unit members shall submit their potential grievances to the Lodge for
evaluation. The Lodge shall evaluate potential grievances and file grievances as required by the
standards of its duty of fair representation.
Section 22.02 Resolution at Earliest Possible Step
Informal discussions with the Chief of Police or Human Resources Administrator are encouraged
prior to filing grievances. The parties desire to resolve grievances at the earliest possible step
and shall endeavor in good faith to do so. Grievances may be settled at any of the steps of the
grievance procedure. If the settlement is reduced to writing and signed by representatives of the
Lodge and the Chief of Police or City Administration, such resolution shall be final as to that
grievance.
Section 22.03 Waiver of Additional Process
In the event that the Lodge files a grievance on behalf of an individual employee or group of
employees, the election to use the grievance process set out herein shall constitute a waiver of
any other dispute resolution mechanism that would otherwise be available to address the same
matter.
Section 22.04 Filed Within 15 Days
All grievances must be submitted in writing to management within fifteen (15) calendar days
after the Lodge and/or grieving employee first knew or reasonably should have known of the
issue being raised. The Lodge may file a grievance on its own behalf or on behalf of any bargaining
unit employee.
19

Section 22.05 Step One
Grievances at the first step shall be filed with the appropriate Captain. Every grievance shall be
reduced to writing, signed, and dated by the person submitting the grievance. Each first step
grievance shall state in summary fashion the nature of the issue being grieved and the resolution
desired. The Captain shall countersign and date the grievance when it is submitted. Within ten
(10) calendar days after receiving a grievance, the Captain shall issue a written decision stating
that the grievance is upheld, or if the grievance is denied, stating the reasons for the denial.
Section 22.06 Step Two
If the matter is not satisfactorily resolved at Step One, the Lodge may appeal the grievance to the
Chief. Any appeal to Step Two must be submitted to the Police Chief within ten (10) calendar
days after the Captain issues his or her decision at Step One, or within fourteen (14) calendar
days after the grievance was filed at Step One if the Captain fails to issue a timely decision. The
written Step Two appeal to the Chief must contain a concise statement of the facts giving rise to
the grievance, the applicable section of this Agreement or City or Departmental policy that has
allegedly been violated, and the resolution desired.
The Chief shall either issue a written decision within ten (10) calendar days, or at his or her option,
may schedule a grievance meeting to discuss the matter with the grievant and a Lodge
representative, at a mutually convenient time. In the event the Chief schedules such a meeting,
the written decision shall be due no more than ten (10) calendar days after the grievance meeting
takes place.
Section 22.07 Step Three
If the matter is not satisfactorily resolved at Step Two, the Lodge may appeal the grievance to
the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. Any appeal to Step Three must be submitted
within ten (10) calendar days after the Police Chief issues his or her decision at Step Two, or
within fourteen (14) calendar days after the grievance was appealed to Step Two or the grievance
meeting was held, whichever is later, if the Police Chief fails to issue a timely decision. The written
Step Three appeal must contain a concise statement of the facts giving rise to the grievance, the
applicable section of this Agreement or City or Departmental policy that has allegedly been
violated, and the resolution desired. The City Manager or his or her designee shall review the
grievance and issue a decision on it within ten (10) calendar days of its receipt.
Section 22.08 Suspension and Discharge Grievances Filed At Step Three
In any grievance challenging any disciplinary suspension that involves loss of pay, or any discharge
from employment, the Lodge shall have the right to file the initial grievance at Step Three.
Section 22.09 Lodge Representation
The Lodge shall represent the interests of the bargaining unit members at all steps of the
grievance process. Legal counsel shall not be present during the grievance process.
20

Section 22.10 Time Limits
The time limits set out above shall be strictly enforced, unless one party submits a written request
for an extension of time and the other party agrees to the requested extension in writing
(including e-mail). All extensions of time shall be for a specific number of calendar days. Any
grievance filed or appealed after time limits have expired shall be considered null and void, and
no further action shall be taken with respect to that grievance.
Section 22.11 No Interruptions in Service
Neither the Lodge, its officers, employees, agents, members or representatives, nor any
employee covered by this Agreement, will authorize, instigate, aid, condone, participate in or
engage in any strike, work stoppage, sickout, slowdown, boycott, picket line, or any other
interruption or interference with the work of the Gladstone Police Department, including any
sympathy strike.
In the event of the unauthorized activity proscribed above, the Lodge shall immediately take
affirmative action to cause each and every employee covered by this Agreement to return to
work and shall, among any and all other necessary or appropriate steps intended to cause each
such employee to return to work, immediately:
A.

Notify the employees in person, by telephone, and/or by mail that such strike or
other interruption of continuous service is unauthorized; and

B.

Promptly order its members to return to work.

The City shall have the right to proceed directly to court for a temporary restraining order,
injunction, and any and all other legal and/or equitable relief for any alleged breach of this Article.
The City shall not be required to first exhaust the grievance and arbitration provisions of this
Agreement before proceeding directly to court when seeking to enforce the provisions of this
Section 22.11.
The parties recognize the right of the City to take disciplinary action, including discharge, against
any employee covered under this Agreement who participates in any activity in violation of this
Section, whether such action is taken against all participants or only against selected participants.
The parties recognize that the Union's designated representatives have an affirmative duty to
prevent and cause the cessation of any activity which violates this Section.
Article XXIII. Arbitration
Section 23.01 Appeal to Arbitration
If a grievance regarding the application or interpretation of this Labor Agreement is not
satisfactorily resolved at Step Three, the Lodge may appeal the grievance to binding arbitration
by delivering a Notice of Intent to Arbitrate to the Human Resources Administrator within ten
(10) calendar days after receiving the Step Three decision, or within fourteen (14) calendar days
if the City Manager or his or her designee fails to issue a Step Three decision.
21

Matters appealed to arbitration shall not be addressed in any other forum. The grievance and
arbitration provisions established herein shall be the sole avenue available for addressing any
alleged violation of the terms of this Labor Agreement, including but not limited to determining
whether the City had just cause for any discharge or discipline.
Section 23.02 Selection of the Arbitrator
Within fourteen (14) calendar days after the Notice of Intent to Arbitrate is delivered, the party
seeking arbitration shall submit a request for a sub-regional panel of seven (7) arbitrators to the
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service. Each party may reject a maximum of one list received
from FMCS per grievance, and the party rejecting any list shall be responsible for obtaining a
replacement list from FMCS. The parties shall alternately strike one name from the list, with the
party seeking arbitration striking first. The last name remaining on the FMCS list shall be
appointed to serve as the Arbitrator empowered to resolve the matter. The party requesting
arbitration shall notify the selected arbitrator of his or her selection within seven (7) days after
the date of selection, requesting dates within the next three months on which the arbitrator
could be available to hold a hearing on the matter. Within seven days after receiving available
hearing dates from the Arbitrator, the parties shall jointly select an agreeable hearing date.
Section 23.03 Decision of the Arbitrator
The decision of the Arbitrator shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a)

The Arbitrator shall determine the procedural rules of arbitration, and make
such orders during the pendency of the proceeding as are necessary to enable
the Arbitrator to act effectively.

(b)

In the resolution of the dispute, the Arbitrator shall give no weight or
consideration to any matter except the language of the Agreement and policies
at issue, applicable law, and the evidence presented by the parties.

(c)

The Arbitrator shall have no power to add to, subtract from, or modify any of
the terms of this Agreement. The Arbitrator shall have no power to establish or
change any wage rates.

(d)

The Arbitrator's authority shall be limited to resolving the particular grievance
pending before him or her.

Section 23.05 Costs Shared Equally
The costs of the Arbitrator shall be shared equally by the City and the Lodge. Each party shall
otherwise bear its own costs.
Article XXIV. Labor Management Committee
Section 24.01 Labor/Management Meetings
22

There shall be a Labor/Management Committee consisting of two (2) representatives from
Department management and two (2) representatives from the bargaining unit.
The Labor/Management Committee will strive to improve relationships between Labor and
Management in all areas, and to ensure that this Agreement is properly administered at all times.
The City and the Lodge shall appoint their respective representatives to this Committee within
one month after this Agreement is signed by both parties. Those representatives shall meet
promptly thereafter and shall set up a schedule of meetings.
Section 24.02 Labor/Management Committee Purpose
The parties mutually acknowledge that the purpose of the Labor/Management Committee is to
discuss topics of mutual interest on a cooperative basis. The Labor/Management Committee is
not a forum for formal collective bargaining. The purpose of regular meetings shall include but
is not limited to:
(a)

Dissemination of information.

(b)

Discussion of potential methods for improving any aspect of the Department's
service, including efficiency of operations and overall working conditions. Any
representative to the Committee may present topics for discussion during
Committee meetings.

(c)

Review and discussion of any revisions or potential revisions to City or
Departmental policies, work rules, or practices.

(d)

Clarifications as to the application or interpretation of this Agreement, policies,
work rules, or practices, not the subject of an active grievance at the time.

(e)

Resolution of any dispute or problem involving any represented full-time
employee or group of employees, on an informal, voluntary basis.

Section 24.03 Request for Meeting
A request for a meeting of the Labor/Management Committee may be made by either party at
any time. The Committee shall be convened within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of a
written request by either party.
Article XXV. General Provisions
Section 25.01 Uniforms and Equipment
The City will provide all necessary uniforms and equipment to the appropriate members.
(a) Employees shall not be required to respond to any hazardous situation without the proper
clothing and equipment, all properly maintained and in good working order.

23

(b) The City shall replace all Department-issued items, when no longer serviceable and as
provided herein. All protective clothing, including but not limited to bullet resistant vests,
helmets, and firearms shall meet the standards in effect at the time of purchase by the
City, and shall be worn to all emergency incidents as required by Department policies.
(c) Officers may choose to wear long or short sleeve shirts at their discretion.
(d) Officers with twenty-five (25) or more years of service who are in good standing at the
time of retirement from the police department shall be gifted their firearm by the
department at the time of departure.
Section 25.02 Off-Duty Actions
The City and the Lodge recognize that all commissioned personnel are presumed to be subject
to call to duty twenty-four (24) hours per day. Any appropriate, lawful action, consistent with
City and Departmental policy, taken by a commissioned officer on his or her time off, which
could have been taken by an officer on duty, if present or available, shall be considered police
action, and bargaining unit members shall have all the rights, obligations, and benefits
concerning such action as if they were on active duty, to the maximum extent allowed under
the City's workers' compensation policy.
Section 25.03 Policies to Be Available
The City will make all policies that are applicable to employees covered under this agreement
available to each employee in print or electronic format. Employees will be responsible for
reading and complying with all such policies, and for asking questions about any area that is
unclear to the individual employee.
Section 25.04 Outside Employment
The City employs a full-time police force. Every employee covered under this agreement should
consider City employment his or her "primary" job. Employees may hold other employment so
long as the other employment does not create a conflict of interest with the employee's
employment by the City, and does not interfere with the employee's ability to work as scheduled,
or otherwise limit the employee's ability to perform his or her job. Employees desiring to hold
other employment shall submit a written request to the Police Chief, identifying the other
employment for consideration and approval.
Section 25.05 Release of Personal Information
The City shall not release an employee's personal information, including name, date of birth,
address, phone number, or other identifiable information to a third party (not including the
Lodge) for any reason except with the employee's written consent, or when required for the
performance of the employee's duties (e.g. to arrange for training), or as required by law.
Section 25.06 Uncompensated Work Prohibited
24

Bargaining unit members shall not be required as a condition of employment to participate in
any uncompensated work for any charity or any special interest group.
Article XXVI. Training
Section 26.01 Pay for Training
Training required by the Department shall be considered to be on-duty time, for which the
employee will be compensated in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Agreement. All
costs associated with required training shall be paid by the Department. Meal reimbursement
and travel pay shall be provided in accordance with City policy.
Section 26.02 Return from Training
Employees covered under this Agreement, who are attending external training, shall not be
required to return to work, if there are fewer than four hours remaining in the shift, except in
case of staffing shortage. Employees who elect not to return to work shall be paid for time spent
in training, and may elect to use accrued comp time or vacation time to cover the remainder of
their regularly scheduled hours, if they so desire.
Article XXVII. Complete Agreement
Section 27.01 Zipper Clause
The parties acknowledge that during negotiations which resulted in this Agreement, each had
the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with respect to any subject
or matter not removed by law from the area of collective bargaining, and that the understandings
and agreements arrived at by the parties after the exercise of that right and opportunity are set
out in this Agreement. Therefore, the City and the Lodge, for the life of this Agreement, each
voluntarily and unqualifiedly waives the right and each agrees that the other shall not be
obligated to bargain collectively with respect to any subject or matter referred to or covered in
this Agreement, except as expressly provided for herein. Further, each party voluntarily and
unqualifiedly waives the right and agrees that the other shall not be obligated to bargain
collectively over any other subject during the life of this Agreement, even though such subjects
or matters are not addressed herein, and may not have been within the knowledge or
contemplation of either or both of the parties at the time they negotiated or signed this
Agreement. Should matters arise during the term of this Agreement that are appropriate subjects
of collective bargaining, they shall be addressed under the Labor/Management process set out
in Article XXIV.
Section 27.02 Complete Agreement
This Agreement constitutes the entire Agreement between the parties hereto, and supersedes
and replaces any and all obligations and/or agreements, whether written or oral, express or
implied, between or concerning the parties. No amendment, modification, or addition to this
Agreement shall be effective unless it is reduced to writing and signed by both parties. Individual
agreements concerning training costs or signing incentives shall remain in effect.
25

Appendix A

PD PAY SCALE
City of Gladstone
Law Enforcement
Entrant Officer

Police Officer
Detective

Corporal

Pay Grade
A
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

Hourly
$23.5577
$25.9615
$26.7404
$27.5426
$28.3689
$29.2199
$30.0965
$30.9994
$31.9294
$32.8873
$33.8739
$34.8901
$35.9368
$37.0149
$28.8462
$29.7115
$30.6029
$31.5210
$32.4666
$33.4406
$34.4438
$35.4771
$36.5414
$37.6377

4870-4050-0862, v. 2

27

Annual Equivalent
$49,000
$54,000
$55,620
$57,289
$59,007
$60,777
$62,601
$64,479
$66,413
$68,406
$70,458
$72,571
$74,749
$76,991
$60,000
$61,800
$63,654
$65,564
$67,531
$69,556
$71,643
$73,792
$76,006
$78,286

Request for Council Action
RES ☐ # City Clerk Only

BILL ☒ # 24-03

Date: 12/29/2023

ORD ☒ # 4.659
Department: General Administration

Meeting Date Requested: 1/8/2024
Public Hearing: Yes ☐ Date: Click here to enter a date.
Subject: Collective Bargaining Agreement for non-supervisory, commissioned Police Department
personnel between the City of Gladstone and the Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge 50.
Background: The Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge 50 represents non-supervisory, commissioned Police
Department personnel, to include the rank of Corporal. Over the last several months, the City has been
bargaining in good faith with the Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge 50. Those negotiations have resulted in
the attached Collective Bargaining Agreement. This Agreement was ratified by the Fraternal Order of Police,
Lodge 50 on December 09, 2023. Staff recommends approval of this Agreement.
Budget Discussion: N/A
Public/Board/Staff Input: Staff recommends approval of the proposed Ordinance.
Provide Original Contracts, Leases, Agreements, etc. to: City Clerk and Vendor.

Bob Baer
City Manager

JM
City Attorney
