In re Interest Arbitration Between

Teamsters local 346, Union
and
City of Brainerd, Employer
BMS Case 25-PN-0773
Arbitrator’s Award
Phillip Finkelstein, Arbitrator

Union Representative

Employer Representatives

Tim Andrew, Atty

Tim Sullivan, Andrea Jamison, Attys

Andrew and Poole, P.A.

Ratwick, Roszak& Maloney, P.A.

Duluth, Minnesota

St. Paul, Minnesota

1

Introduction:
Brainerd is a pleasant city located on the Mississippi River in Northern Minnesota. It is a
tourism center and the City’s population of 14,400 can almost triple in size during the
tourist seasons of summer, fall and winter. The addition of tourists and their needs can
place a signiﬁcant burden on City services especially the Police Department which
includes the Sergeants and Lieutenant who are represented by the Teamsters.
The City of Brainerd hereafter Employe and Teamsters Local 346 hereafter Union have long
been parties to a Collective Bargaining Agreement.
The last Agreement expired 12/31/2024 and the Parties were unable to settle all the terms
of the successor 1/1/2025 to 12/31/2027 Labor Agreement.
Pursuant to Minnesota Statute 179A.16 the Bureau certiﬁed the remaining issues and the
Parties ﬁled Final Positions. See Appendix
Phillip Finkelstein was selected as the neutral Arbitrator and the Hearing was held July 31,
2025 in Brainerd. Both Parties were given a full opportunity to present Witnesses and
Exhibits.
Certiﬁed Issues by the Bureau of Mediation Services:
1. Holidays
2. Floating Holidays
3. Severance Pay
4. Wages 2025
5. Wages 2026
6. Wages 2027
At the Hearing the Parties agreed that there were 3 basic areas of dispute and presented
their cases as follows:
1. Holidays (Certiﬁed Issues 1 and 2)
2. Severance Pay (Certiﬁed Issue 3)
3. Wages (Certiﬁed Issues 4,5,6)
Post Hearing Briefs were due and received August 29, 2025. The Hearing was then closed.
2

Following the Hearing the Parties also agreed that:
1. Implementation methodologies shall process as set forth in parties’ position
but shall not be included as language in the CBA.
2. That the wages issues to be determined by the Arbitrator shall be retroactive
to Jan 1, 2025 for all bargaining unit members in active payroll status at the
time of the Arbitration award. (See Tim Sullivan email of August 4, 2025).

Issues:
Issue 1 (Holidays: certiﬁed issue 1 and 2)

Employer Position:
11.1 All employees will receive an additional eight (8) hours of straight time
pay for each of the following eleven (11) holidays:
New Year’s Day Martin Luther King Jr. Day
President’s Day Memorial Day
Independence Day Juneteenth
Veteran’s Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
Indigenous Peoples Day
Labor Day
11.3 In addition to the above holidays, employees will receive one (1)
“Floating Holiday” which will consist of either eight (8) or ten (10) hour shifts.
Floating Holidays must be approved by the Police Chief or designee.
Employees will be accredited their ﬂoating holidays on January 1st of each
year or upon date of hire and it may be used at any time during the calendar
year.

In essence, the Employer adds Juneteenth as a paid 8 hr straight time holiday
increasing the total of paid holidays to 11 by reducing the number of ﬂoating
holidays from 2 to 1:
3

Union Position:
Article 11.1 Holidays:
New Year’s Day Martin Luther King Jr Day
Presidents Day Memorial Day
Independence Day Juneteenth
Labor Day
Indigenous Peoples Day
Veteran’s Day Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
In addition to the above holidays, employees will receive two (2) “Floating
Holidays” which will consist of either eight (8) on January 1st or ten (10) hour
shifts. Floating Holidays must be approved by the Police Chief or designee.
Employees will be accredited with their ﬂoating holidays on January 1st of
each year or upon date of hire and it may be used at any time during the
calendar year.
In essence, the Union accepts the addition of Juneteenth as a paid holiday in
Article 11.1 but wants no reduction in the paid 2 personal days.

Award by Arbitrator:
The Employer’s Position is accepted with the modiﬁcation that employees
will have the option of converting the paid Juneteenth into a 2nd paid ﬂoating
holiday by declaring their preference in writing by January 1st of each year.
Employees who select the above option will not receive an additional 8 hours
of holiday pay for Juneteenth.

Rationale:
Both the Employer and Union are in a difficult position as result of the State
of Minnesota declaring Juneteenth, a mandatory Holiday but not considering
what effect it would have in upcoming collective bargaining. While the
purpose behind celebrating Juneteenth is laudable, parties still have to
negotiate how they will pay and account for the additional holiday.
4

In the present case, The Employer is requesting that the employees pick up
the cost of the additional holiday by giving up one of their two personal
ﬂoating holidays. The Parties had resolved the issue on a non-precedent
setting basis in the past. However, the Parties were unable to resolve this
issue for the new Labor Contract. The State mandate does not require
Juneteenth be a paid holiday. Nor did the Teamster Bargaining Unit even
request the holiday if it meant the loss of their Personal Floating Holiday. See
testimony of Sgt Paul Dooley. It is interesting to note that the IBEW also felt
the same way in not desiring the additional Holiday, if it meant the loss of one
their personal days. See page 12 of BMS Case 24-PN-0860 IBEW and City of
Brainerd by Arbitrator Patrick Kelly. Union ex 7.
Police want to retain the same opportunities to attend graduations and
weddings that other employees take for granted. Unlike other employees,
Police are often scheduled to work the evenings and weekends when these
special occasions take place. Police cannot pause their work because a
holiday comes up. This Award leaves it up to the individual employee to
determine if they wish to continue the second paid personal day and not
receive payment for the new holiday.
Issue 2 Severance Pay (certiﬁed issue 3)

Employer Position:
All regular full-time employees shall be entitled to one hundred percent
(100%) of unused sick leave as severance pay, with a maximum of nine
hundred sixty (960) hours, upon retirement or if they become disabled and
must terminate their employment with written proof by a physician. In the
event of death, severance pay shall be paid to the beneﬁciary. Employees
who leave their employment in good standing with the City of Brainerd after
twenty (20) years of service shall be entitled to ﬁfty (50%) of all accumulated
sick leave up to the maximum of the nine hundred sixty {(960) hours. The
terms retirement and in good standing are deﬁned in the in City’s Employee
Policy Manual.
The Employer is proposing a language change from current 75% payout to
50% for those with 20 years service.
5

Union Position
All regular full-time employees shall be credited with eight (8) hours of sick
leave for each month worked. Sick leave may be used for the purpose
provided in MN Statute 181.9447, as amended. Sick leave accumulation
shall be a maximum of nine hundred sixty (960) hours. A physician’s
certiﬁcate may be required, consistent with MN Statute 181.9447, subd. 3, if
in the opinion of the Police Chief, it is deemed necessary. Eligibility for sick
leave shall be credited for the original date of hire without a break in service.
Bargaining unit members may not use sick leave due to the closure of the
employee’s workplace due to weather or a public emergency or an
employee’s need to care for a family member whose school or place of care
has been closed due to weather or other public emergency (Section
181.9447, subd. 1, clause (4)).
The Union opposes the change.
Award by Arbitrator:
The Union position is awarded, no change to the current language and 75%
payout after 20 years continues.

Rationale:
While the Employer is correct that a 75% payout of sick leave is uncommon
in the State of Minnesota, the consideration of the issue does not end there.
While the LELS bargaining unit may have accepted the lower 50% pay out,
this change was agreed to as part of a voluntary, negotiated settlement of
their Labor Contract. It is unclear what horse trading occurred to obtain this
result and besides, the LELS Bargaining Unit is not bargaining for the
Teamster Unit. The Teamster Bargaining Unit members have worked long and
hard to receive this beneﬁt and the City proposal would cut it by one third,
6

immediately, for all current employees. A majority of the Bargaining Units in
the City still receive the 75 % payout after 20 years. Currently, 5 out of the 6
other City Bargaining Units receive the 75% pay out. It is a well-accepted
Arbitration Maxim that in Interest Arbitrations, beneﬁts are typically
compared internally absent special circumstances. The special
circumstances have not been demonstrated to exist in the present case to
support cutting this beneﬁt. Therefore, at this time, the City’s argument
cannot carry the day.
Issue 3 Wages (Certiﬁed Issues 4,5,6)
Employer Position:
Place Patrol Sergeants and Lieutenants on the 2023 Flaherty &
Hood (F&H) Wage Grid, as with all Other City employees, with wage
Adjustments of :
3.75% on 1/1/2025
2.75% on 7/1/2025
3% on 1/1/2026
3% on 1/1/2027
For transitional employees, apply lump sum “transitional pay” during
the transition to the grid. All employees placed at the step closest to (but not
below) their 12/31/24 wage, not including merit steps unless previously
earned.

Union Position
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 5 Step 6 Step 7 Step 8
Effective 1/1/25 7.70%

6.48% 5.38% 4.37% 3.44% 2.56% 6.51% 6.37%

Effective 7/1/25 2.75% Across The Board
Effective 1/1/26 3% Across The Board
Effective 1/1/27 3% Across The Board

7

Award by Arbitrator:

Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 5 Step 6
Effective 1/1/25

5.75%

5%

4.5%

4%

3%

2.25%

Step 7

Step 8

4.5%

4.5%

Effective 7/1/25 2.75% wage increase for all Steps.
Effective 1/1/26 3% wage increase for all Steps.
Effective 1/1/27 3% wage increase for all Steps.
Please note that the Parties were in agreement for wage increases for all years except
1/1/25. Also note the Parties have also agreed where to place the Lieutenant :
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 5 Step 6 Step 7 Step 8
Effective 1/1/25

42.41

44.02

45.64 47.25

48.88 50.48

54.53 56.54

Effective 7/1/25

43.58 45.23

46.90 48.55

50.22 51.87

56.03 58.09

Effective 1/1/26

44.89 46.59

48.31 50.01

51.73 53.43

57.71 59.83

Effective 1/1/27

46.24 47.99

49.76 51.51

53.28 55.03

59.44 61.62

Finally please note Steps 7 and 8 for both Classiﬁcations are merit based as before and not
automatic.

Rationale:

It is wages as of 1/1/25 and the transition to the new grid that are heart of the present
dispute. It has been complex, difficult and challenging. At times, it seems both Parties have
been skillfully dancing on top of a pin. At base, the Parties are in agreement as to the %
increases for as7/1/25 2.75 %, 1/1/26 3%, and 1/1/27 3%. The Parties have also agreed on
where to place the Lieutenant on the grid and his wage increases during the term of the
Labor Contract. It is only the wage increase due the Sergeants on 1/1/25 that is the
disagreement. Both Parties have strong arguments in support of their position but the
Arbitrator ﬁnd the Union Argument more compelling. The reason that this Arbitrator is
8

making this ﬁnding is because of the signiﬁcant compression of wages between the Patrol
Officers and the Sergeants if the Employer Position was adopted, which would leave only
7.14 % wage differential between the ﬁrst level Supervisors and the Patrol. The City
Proposal is in sharp contrast to the past history of wage differential between the Sgt and
patrol. See for example, the last Interest Arbitration between the Parties, Teamsters Local
746 v, City of Brainerd, BMS Case 11-PN-6035 by Arbitrator James Reynold who noted why
the differential is needed:
“As to the internal comparisons the record shows that the parties have maintained a pay
relationship between Police Officers and Police Sergeants. Such a pay gap is necessary to
recognize the added responsibilities of supervisory police officers.” See Union ex 19 at
page 7.
See also Arbitrator Susan Bauman in MAC v LELS ,BMS Case 22-PN-0949 at Page 7 where
she notes the delicate balance in compensation between Police Sgts and the Patrol below:
“ For Police Sergeants, there must be a balance so that compensation is not too low to
dissuade officers from seeking to promote and take on the added duties of the sergeant
position.”
.
Keeping in mind the additional pay differentials that Patrol Officers may receive and
Insurance payback under the LELS Contract, some Patrol Officers would have to take a pay
cut to become a Sgt if the City’s position were upheld. As a department that prefers to
promote from within, that can’t be a desired outcome for the City or its employees. This
proposed wage differential is less than half of what Sgts have received in the recent past
above the Patrol Officers that they supervise. See Union Ex 16. While not dispositive, the
Arbitrator also does take note that the LELS patrol Officers received 6.82% increase for
1/1/25 at Step 6 while the Sgts at Step 6 were offered .88 % on 1/1/25 by the City Final
Position.

While the Employer argues there isn’t that much difference between the work Sergeants
and Patrol Officers do, This Arbitrator ﬁnds that there is a number of signiﬁcant differences.
This current City proposed 7% differential is not enough to account for the additional
responsibilities the Sgt undertake, which include managing work, approving overtime and
other duties as detailed in Employer Ex 29 which lists the Sergeant duties in their current
job description:

9

Essential Functions include the following supervisory activities:
Supervises work of patrol personnel to ensure conformance with established
standards of performance, accuracy of written reports and general
operational effectiveness; recommends disciplinary action, and evaluates
personnel advising, counselling and providing guidance and/or oral
reprimand to officers.
Directs activities at crime and accident scenes; gathers evidence; takes
victim and witness statements.
Prepares detailed reports on activities and assignments; reviews officers’
reports for thoroughness and accuracy.
Assists in and attends ongoing training in procedures, tactics, weapons,
computer systems, and related subjects.
Responds to citizen inquiries and complaints.
Oversees and supervises service calls; ensures appropriate actions are
taken.
Assists Police Chief and/or Deputy Chief with administrative functions
including grant writing and grant administration.
Receive and/or responds to complaints regarding police officer’s conduct
and follow department procedures.
Assumes duties of Police Chief and/or Deputy Police Chief in his/her
absence.
Clearly, these responsibilities are supervisory. Contrast it with the job duties of the patrol
officers. Again, see Employer ex 29. Also see testimony of Sgt Dooley. In his comparable
worth analysis, Sgt Dooley estimated that he spent 40% of his time in supervision. See also
Employer ex 16 at p7. Even with the addition of the position of Lieutenant whom the Parties
have reached agreement on his salary for the term of this new Contract, see Employer ex
10

22, the Sergeants are still supervisory, and are recognized as such in the Teamster Labor
Contract. See also179A6. (2.). Under Minnesota Law, Essential Supervisors are prohibited
from being in the same Bargaining Unit with the employees they are supervising. Even with
the Arbitrator’s Award, the wage differential between the Patrol and their supervising Sgts
will be narrowed further versus what it was in the past. The Employer’s argument, while
energetic, did not establish why the Sgt job duties had truly changed, why the current job
description was not valid, and why the wage differential should be even more signiﬁcantly
narrowed.

Comparables too, support an increase beyond the City Proposal.
See for example Cities in the Union Comparable Grouping that follows the previous
2011arbitration award and the average wage for other cities in 2025 is signiﬁcantly
higher$5.46 than what the Sgts will receive under City proposal. See Union ex 22 and 23.
This Arbitrator did not see adequate reasons to use a different comparable grouping but
even if he had used the City Grouping based on the F and H comparables, the Sgt would be
$2.11 behind.
While this Arbitrator is mindful of the requirements of Minnesota Statute 471.992 et seq,
the Minnesota Pay Equity Act, the fact remains that even the Teamster wage proposal
would not leave the City in non-compliance with the Act, which was admitted by City
Human Resources Director Kris Schubert. Nor would the Arbitrator’s Award which is even
less. While it is always challenging to deal with the interplay of a Pay Equity Study and Final
Positions of both Parties, This Arbitrators Award is less than .5% over the average over the
Employer’s 1/1/25 Final Position in the ﬁrst year (3.75%) and it restores some but not most
of the new wage differential between the Sgt and Patrol. While the Arbitrator is loath to
revise the Sergeants salary grid, he believes for the reasons herein that there has to be
enough wage differential so that Patrol will not be economically dissuaded from becoming
Sgts. Even the Union’s higher wage proposal allows the differential to increase.

The Arbitrator understands that the City has worked very hard in the implementation of the
F and H Pay Equity Study and to maintain equitable relationships between jobs as required
by Law. But without evidence of the “secret sauce which was proprietary to the
11

consultants” as noted by the Human Resources Director, i.e. what factors were measured
and how, important information was left unknown at the Hearing. For example why the long
established Comparable Grouping, was no longer appropriate. Both parties were left
debating – The Union pointing which jobs got to use market forces vs those classiﬁcations
that were forced to follow the study where more points meant more pay while the
Employer stated that the study was “Robust, Comprehensive and Fair”.

While it might have been more relevant had the Union appealed their points and explained
why their positions were not properly evaluated, it was concerning to the Arbitrator that out
of 8 other job evaluations whose authors that did appeal, not a single score was changed.
Compare and contrast that with the previous pay equity study done for the City of Brainerd
where appeals did lead to points being adjusted for 10 classiﬁcations. See Union ex 28.

In any case, the role of this Interest Arbitrator is to arrive at what the parties would have
likely negotiated at the table. Even with Pay Equity, external and internal comparables still
play an important role. See Arbitrator Richard John Miller City of Mounds View and LELS,
BMS Case 10-PN-0957. The role of bargaining is not lost because of pay equity. Even under
the Pay Equity Law. Minn Statute, 471.992 et seq, other factors such as comparables and
internal consistency may be considered.
In the present case the Union has relied on the same comparable grouping used in the
2011 Reynolds Interest Arbitration Sura. The City, on the other hand, has relied on a
different grouping that includes Sgts that are not statutory supervisors and are in the same
bargaining unit as the patrol. Clearly, those classiﬁcations do not have the same
supervisory authority under Law and Contract. Nor has the City of Brainerd made an
inability to pay argument while the Employer does make a fair argument that the fact a City
can pay, doesn’t mean it should pay. Still this Arbitrator believes historical precedent of the
wage differential between the Sgt and Patrol without demonstrated change, the actual
supervisory authority of Sargeants, and comparables, both internal and external, would
have dictated a higher amount than the City’s Final Position had the Parties been able to
bargain to conclusion.

This Arbitrator therefore believes the above Award is appropriate.

12

Conclusion

This Award was made in accordance with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes 471.922
et seq. and 179A.16(7). This Arbitrator has considered the statutory rights and obligations
of public employers to efficiently manage and conduct their operations within the legal
limitations surrounding the ﬁnancing of these operations.
Dated: September 3, 2025

Phillip Finkelstein, Arbitrator

13
