Agreement
Between

The City of
New Port Richey
And

I.A.F.F.
Local 1158
(District Chief Unit)
For Fiscal Years
2024-2025
2025-2026
2026-2027

PREAMBLE
This Agreement is entered into by the City of New Port Richey hereinafter referred to as
the “Employer” and Clearwater Firefighters Inc., Local 1158 of the International Association of
Firefighters, AFL-CIO, hereinafter referred to as the “Union,” for the purpose of promoting
harmonious relations between the Employer and the Union, to establish an orderly and peaceful
procedure to settle differences which might arise, and to set forth the basic and full agreement
between the parties concerning wages, rates of pay, and other terms and conditions of employment.

ii

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
Section 1. The Employer recognizes the Union as the exclusive bargaining representative in
accordance with Chapter 447.307, Florida Statues.
INCLUDED: All regular full-time employees of the City of New Port Richey in the
classification of District Chief.
EXCLUDED: All others employee of the City of New Port Richey.
Section 2. The IAFF hereby recognizes the City Manager or their representative as the Public
Employer’s representative for the purpose of collective bargaining.

3

ARTICLE 2
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Section 1. Management Rights
Florida Statute 447.209 shall govern this Agreement.
Section 2. Emergency Conditions
If it is determined that civil emergency conditions exist, and are declared, including, but not
limited to, riots, civil disorders, strikes, hurricane conditions, or similar catastrophes or
disorders, the provisions of this Agreement may be suspended by the City Manager during
the term of the declared emergency, provided that wage rates and other direct monetary
payments shall not be suspended.
Section 3. Arbitration
Nothing in this Article shall be subject to Arbitration.

4

ARTICLE 3
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Section 1. A “grievance” shall be defined as any dispute involving the interpretation, application
or alleged violation of a specific clause or provision of this Agreement. No other matter
shall be considered a grievance or shall be the subject of arbitration.
All time limits in this article are binding and considered of the essence. If a grievance is
not advanced to the next step by the grieving party in a timely manner as required by this
article, it shall be considered waived at that step. If the responding party fails to respond in
the required time limit, the grievance shall be automatically advanced to the next step. Time
limits may be extended by mutual written consent between the appropriate parties at each
step.
Section 2. An employee covered by this Agreement shall present their grievance within ten (10)
business days of the day on which the grievance arose in the following manner:
Step 1:
An employee shall present their grievance in writing to the Assistant Fire Chief. The
written grievance should set forth the following:
1.
2.
3.
4.

A statement of the grievance and the facts upon which it is based.
The alleged violations of this Agreement. (citing specific article(s) and/or
section(s))
The remedy or adjustment requested.
The signature of the grievant.

The Assistant Fire Chief will discuss the grievance with the employee with or without a
Union Steward present and give their answer, in writing, within ten (10) business days of
receiving the written grievance from the submitting employee.
Step 2:
If the matter is not resolved, the employee may advance the grievance in writing to the Fire
Chief or their designee within ten (10) business days after receiving the Assistant Fire
Chief’s step 1 answer. A meeting between the Fire Chief or their designee and the grieved
employee with or without a Union Steward shall be held within ten (10) business days after
the grievance is received by the Fire Chief or their designee. The Fire Chief or their
designee shall give their written answer within ten (10) business days after meeting with
the aggrieved employee.
Step 3:
If the matter is not resolved, the aggrieved employee may advance the grievance in writing
to the City Manager within ten (10) business days after having received a written answer

5

from the Fire Chief. The City Manager or their designee shall give their answer within ten
(10) business days after receiving the grievance.
Step 4:
If the matter is not resolved as provided in step 3, the Union shall within fifteen (15)
business days of the City Manager’s or designee’s answer provide the City Manager written
notice of the intent to arbitrate and request a Florida sub-regional list of seven (7) arbitrators
to be provided by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Services. After the receipt of the
list, representatives of the parties shall select an arbitrator through alternate striking of the
names on the list. A flip of the coin shall determine who shall strike the first name, and
then the other party shall strike a name. The process shall then be repeated until one name
remains and the remaining name shall be the arbitrator selected and the Federal Mediation
and Conciliation Services shall be notified of their selection as arbitrator.
The Arbitrator’s decision shall be final and binding as provided by law. The arbitrator’s
decision shall be given within thirty (30) calendar days after having received the arbitration
briefs from Employer and the Union. The Arbitrator may not substitute their judgment for
that of the Department, nor add to, delete from, modify or alter this contract.
Section 3. The costs of the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the parties, except that each party
shall bear the costs of its attorneys and the cost of any transcripts desired by that party.
Section 4. An employee covered by this Agreement shall have the right to be represented, or refrain
from exercising the right to be represented in the determination of a grievance arising under
the terms and conditions of employment covered by this Agreement. Nothing in this Article
shall be construed so as to prevent any employee from presenting, at any time, their own
grievances, and having such grievances adjusted without the intervention of the bargaining
agent. However, if an employee chooses to process their own grievance, the Union must
be invited to attend any meeting where the resolution of the grievance may occur. (FS
447.301(4)).
Section 5. Newly hired probationary employees, and the Union on their behalf, shall not have
access to this Grievance Procedure for any matter except for matters directly relating to the
wages and benefits addressed in this Agreement.
Section 6. The Arbitrator shall be limited to considering only those issues and articles allegedly
violated that are presented at the Step 3 level.
Section 7. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the employee from utilizing the process
included in the Personnel Rules and Regulations – Human Resources Policy Manual except
that once an employee proceeds according to the steps in this Agreement they shall not
have access to that procedure for the resolution of the grievance. The employee shall make
their selection in writing at Step 1.
Section 8. Grievances arising out of discharge, demotion or suspension shall not be subject to the

6

grievance and arbitration process of this Agreement and can only be processed through the
City’s Personnel Rules and Regulations – Human Resources Policy Manual.
Section 9. For purpose of computing time limits herein, a business day shall be considered to
include until 4:30 p.m. on any day during which the Administration office is open. The
time limits for all Steps of this article shall include only days in which the administrative
office is open. Grievances may be processed during working hours by the aggrieved
employee and union steward with prior approval of the Fire Chief or their designee.

7

ARTICLE 4
NO STRIKE
Section 1. Florida Statute 447.505, 447.507 and 447.509 shall govern this Agreement.
Section 2. Should the Union or employees covered by this Agreement breach this Article, the City
may then proceed against the Union as covered in State and Federal Law. The City would
also be entitled to injunctive relief for the breach of this Article.
Section 3. Should any member of the bargaining unit be found guilty of conduct prohibited under
Florida Statute 447.505 and/or 447.509, they shall be subject to dismissal, and it is
expressly agreed that such violation constitutes just cause for dismissal.
Section 4. Nothing in this Article shall be subject to Arbitration.

8

ARTICLE 5
STEWARDS
Section 1. The Employer agrees to recognize one Union representative designated by the Union.
The Union shall notify the Employer in writing of the name of the official bargaining unit
representative.
Section 2. City work hours may be used by employees or Union Representative for the conduct of
Union organized meetings or other types of Union Business if requested and approved by
the Fire Chief or their designee.

9

ARTICLE 6
CHECK OFF
Section 1. Employees covered by this agreement may authorize payroll deductions for the purpose
of paying Union dues. No authorization shall be allowed for the payment of initiation fees,
assessments or fines.
Section 2. The Union will initially notify the Employer as to the amount of dues. Such notification
will be certified to the Employer in writing signed by an authorized Officer of the Union.
Changes in Union membership dues will be similarly certified to the Employer and shall
be done at least one month in advance of the effective date of such change.
Section 3. Dues shall be deducted bi-weekly, and the funds deducted, minus service fee, shall be
remitted to the Treasurer of the Union within thirty (30) days. The Union will indemnify,
defend and hold the Employer harmless against any claim made and against any suits
instituted against the Employer on account of payroll deduction of Union dues.
Section 4. In the event an employee’s salary earnings within any pay period, after deductions for
withholding, pension or social security, health and/or other standard deductions, are not
sufficient to cover dues it will be the responsibility of the Union to collect its dues for that
pay period from the employee.
Section 5. The Union agrees to pay the Employer a reasonable fee for the services of dues
deduction and collection. The fee for dues deductions shall be twelve ($0.12) cents per
member per pay period for those who have authorized such deductions.
Section 6. The Union agrees to pay the Employer a reasonable fee for any changes in bargaining
unit membership dues structure, at the rate of twelve ($0.12) cents times the number of
members having such deductions at the time of such change. In addition, a flat fee of twelve
($12.00) dollars shall apply to any such change. A check to cover these fees shall
accompany the letter of authorization requesting such change.

10

ARTICLE 7
HOLIDAYS
Section 1. The following legal holidays shall be observed on stipulated days recognized by the
City:
New Year’s Day
Good Friday
Juneteenth
Labor Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day

Martin Luther King Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Veterans Day
Day after Thanksgiving

Four (4) Floating Holidays (8 Hours each) eligible after twelve (12) months of employment
One (1) Personal Leave Day (8 Hours) eligible after twelve (12) months of employment
One Additional Personal Leave Day (8 Hours) after five (5) year’s seniority.
Section 2. Eligibility for Holiday Pay
A.

The above listed holidays shall be paid in the following manner: 24-hour shift
employees working the holiday will be compensated with twelve (12) hours of
straight time pay, those employees off duty shall receive eight (8) hours of straight
time pay. 24-hour shift employees on scheduled leave on a designated holiday shall
receive 8 hours of holiday pay and be charged their designated leave time. The 24hour shift employee on leave will not receive the additional four (4) hour holiday
pay for working that day

B.

24-hour shift employees will receive holiday pay based on the actual holiday dates.
8- hour shift employees will receive holiday time (the day off) based on the
observed holiday. The observed holiday, unless stipulated differently by the City
for a specific holiday when a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall
be observed as the official holiday for that year. When a holiday falls on a Sunday,
the following Monday shall be observed as the official holiday. The City agrees to
publish a list of dates of designated holidays at the start of each calendar year.

C.

The City Manager shall determine when any department, operation or section or
any portion thereof will be closed in observance of the holiday.

D.

An employee must be on active pay status for their entire scheduled hours of duty
or work their normal scheduled hours, on their regularly scheduled working day
immediately prior to a holiday and their regularly scheduled working day
immediately following a holiday in order to qualify for holiday pay. The intent of
this section is to minimize the amount of unscheduled absences immediately before
and/or immediately following a holiday identified in Section 1 of this Article.

E.

Employees, who are scheduled and required by their supervisor to work on the day

11

observed as a holiday, must work that day to be eligible to earn holiday pay. An
employee who is scheduled to work on the day observed as a holiday and reports
sick on that day will be charged sick leave for the day and be ineligible for holiday
pay for that day. An employee who takes a partial day off as sick leave shall have
their holiday pay reduced on an hour for hour basis for any hours used as sick leave
up to the full amount of holiday pay.
F.

Fire Department employees who are on military leave, jury duty, funeral leave or
any other scheduled leave with pay shall receive holiday pay in lieu of any time off
credit should the holiday occur during such leave.

G.

Employees working overtime on the observed holiday shall be eligible for up to
four (4) additional holiday pay hours providing they meet the requirements of letter
D and E in this section. If an employee does not meet the requirements of letter D
and E and works the holiday they would not receive any holiday pay even though
they worked overtime on the holiday. If an employee works a twelve (12) hour
overtime shift (outside of their normally scheduled shift) on the holiday they shall
receive two (2) additional hours of holiday pay. If an employee works the entire
twenty-four (24) hour overtime shift (outside of their normally scheduled shift) they
shall receive the additional four (4) hours of holiday pay. No other incremental
hours shall be considered for additional holiday pay hours.

Section 3. Floating Holidays
A.

The employee will give seventy-two (72) hours’ notice for the scheduling of
Floating Holiday Time.

B.

Floating Holiday time must be scheduled in at least four (4) hour increments.

C.

Fire Chief or their designee(s) are responsible for the approval of floating holiday
requests.

Section 4. Personal Leave
Personal Leave hours will be subtracted from annual sick leave. In the event an employee
does not have credited sick leave hours, they shall not be eligible for personal leave until
sufficient hours are accrued.
A.

Personal Leave shall not be accrued. Personal Leave must be used in the
anniversary year in which it is earned or the hours will remain credited as sick leave
hours.

B.

Use of Personal Leave will not affect the Medical Incentive Leave award.

C.

Personal Leave will be scheduled at least 72 hours in advance of the leave.
Requests of emergency leave with less than 72 hours’ notice may be granted by the
Fire Chief or Assistant Chief.

12

D.

Personal Leave is allowed to be taken in four (4) hour increments.

E.

Fire Chief or their designee(s) are responsible for the approval of personal leave.

Section 5. Payment for Unused Leave
Employees who voluntarily leave employment (retirement, resignation) shall be
reimbursed for unused accrued vacation time at the rates and manner as described in the
City Rules and Regulations manual in effect at the time of ratification of this contract.

13

ARTICLE 8
VACATIONS
Section 1. Annual Vacation Leave Accrual Rate
A.

Annual vacation leave will be accrued on a monthly basis and computed as of the
anniversary date of the original hire of the employees covered by this contract who
have been continuously employed from the date of employment or reemployment.

B.

The vacation year shall be measured from October 1st to September 30th of the
following year.

C.

Continuous Employment

Annual Accrual:

Monthly Accrual:

Up to 5 years

6 shifts per year

12 hours per month

5-6 years

7 shifts per year

14 hours per month

6-10 years

8 shifts per year

16 hours per month

Over 10 years

9 shifts per year

18 hours per month

Paid annual vacation leave may not be taken during the first six (6) months of
employment or re-employment, although it shall be accrued.

Section 2. Carry Over
A.

It is the City’s policy that employees be absent from the job for vacation (rest and
relaxation) purposes at least once a year for a minimum of two (2) weeks. The Chief
or their designees are responsible for the approval of employees for annual
vacation leave purposes.

B.

There shall be no carry-over of any annual vacation leave hours in excess of the
employee’s yearly accrual amount in accordance with the stated policy above in
Section 1. If the employee needs to carryover vacation time that is above their
accrual rate, a written request must be submitted to the Fire Chief no later than
August 1 of the current fiscal year. Request must include the dates and reason for
carryover. The City Manager may, at their sole discretion, consider approving
any additional carry-over due to operational requirements and based on the
individual employee’s written request stating the reason why the additional carryover of any hours should be considered.

Section 3. Usage
A.

After completion of six (6) months of continuous service, employees shall be
eligible to use annual vacation leave as accrued.

14

B.
C.

Annual vacation leave shall normally be granted for periods of not less than four
(4) hours.
With the consent of the Department, vacation will be selected in accordance with
Special Order 95-300-3.

D.

The request for annual (vacation) leave shall be submitted in writing to the Chief
or their designee not less than 72 hours prior to the beginning of the leave. Annual
vacation leave may be taken only after the necessary approval is obtained.

E.

If an emergency should arise requiring an employee to take annual vacation leave
time for an emergency that does not allow for the 72-hour pre-approval time, said
employee shall call the Assistant Chief or Fire Chief no later than 0630 hrs. and
request unscheduled leave. The employee will justify the request to the Assistant
Chief or Fire Chief who has the authority to grant or deny the request.

F.

The City oversees the scheduling and approval of annual vacation leave and
reserves the right to restrict the selection of certain days based on special activities.
The City will make every effort to honor pre-approved leaves.

Section 4. Payment for Unused Leave
A.

Employees who voluntarily leave City employment (retirement, resignation) shall
receive all annual vacation leave earned and “on the books” as of the date of
leaving, provided that a minimum of two (2) weeks’ notice of resignation is
received by the Fire Department.

B.

Employees who are terminated for just cause shall be eligible to receive payment
for unused annual vacation leave.

C.

Payment for accrued annual (vacation) leave shall not apply to employees having
less than one (1) year of continuous employment. For annual vacation leave
purposes, re-employment or re-instated employees shall be considered new
employees.

D.

Employees placed on lay-off status will receive pay for all accrued annual vacation
leave up to the time of the layoff at their straight time hourly rate.

E.

Employees who die while in the employ of the City shall have all of their accrued
annual (vacation) leave paid to the spouse or estate as the case may be.

F.

Employees shall not be paid for accrued annual vacation leave in lieu of taking such
leave.

G.

No annual vacation leave/vacation pay will be made during a work stoppage or
strike.

15

H.

For the purposes of this Article, payment for all annual vacation leave vacation time
is based on the employee’s regular straight time hour’s rate. The straight time
hourly rate is exclusive of any premiums, bonus or other type of incentive.

16

ARTICLE 9
WAGES and COMPENSATION
Section 1. Wages
A.

Career Ladder Step Plan
Level
Probationary District Chief

Salary
$98,820

District Chief I

$100,796

District Chief II
District Chief III

$103,820
$106,934

District Chief IV

$110,143

District Chief V

$113,447

Effective the beginning of the first pay period after ratification of this Agreement by all
parties, employees’ salaries will be increased prospectively to the above salaries based on
their levels as determined in Article 10 of this Agreement.
B.

Level Increases
1.

For Fiscal Year 2025-26, increases to each level, if any, will be established
through reopener negotiations.

2.

For Fiscal Year 2026-27, increases to each level, if any, will be established
through reopener negotiations.

3.

Should an employee receive less than a satisfactory annual evaluation on their
annual review, then that employee shall be re-evaluated in 90 calendar days from
the date of the annual review and then if found satisfactory shall be eligible for any
wage increase at that time. If still found to be less than satisfactory, the employee
shall not be eligible for a wage increase until their next annual evaluation.

Section 2.

Additional Pay

A.

Any employee who successfully completes and becomes a State Certified Fire Inspector
and are so designated by the Fire Chief, shall continue to be eligible to receive an additional
$1200 annually distributed as additional pay biweekly.

B.

Those employees who complete and maintain USAR (Urban Search and Rescue)
certification shall continue to receive an additional $25.00 per month while they maintain
their certification and continue participation in the required training. Should they miss
required training for a period of in excess of one month the pay shall cease until such
training is made-up.

17

a.

Should an employee need to schedule make-up training other than that provided by
the department, the employee may be responsible for that training and may not be
eligible for compensation.

C.

The Department shall continue to pay to employees who are State Certified as a Paramedic
$1800.00 annually, such payment to be paid incrementally on a bi-weekly basis and shall
be pension eligible earnings. Paramedic’s eligibility to receive “Paramedic Compensation”
shall be determined by the Fire Chief and shall be based on the paramedic’s ability to
function as a paramedic as determined by the EMS Coordinator.

D.

The City shall pay Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per month for an employee designated as
Breathing Apparatus Repair Coordinator.
a.

Section 3.

Coordinator positions shall be re-evaluated annually and may be re-assigned, retitled or eliminated by the Fire Chief if it is determined that the Department’s need
for the position has changed. Should the Fire Chief decide that it is necessary to
change, eliminate, or remove the employee from the position, employee will be
given 30 days’ notice if possible.
Clothing Allowance

The Employer shall provide an annual allowance of $650.00 for repair, replacement and
servicing clothing articles. The City agrees to pay this as per current practice.
Section 4.

Christmas or Holiday Bonus

Members of the bargaining unit are eligible for any discretionary Christmas or holiday
bonus that may be given to other employees.

18

ARTICLE 10
PERSONNEL PRACTICES
Section 1. Career Ladder Program
A.

District Chief Career Ladder

Level

Time Requirements

Probationary
District Chief

Same as Probationary
Captain

Educational
Requirements
Same as Probationary
Captain

District Chief I

Completion of
Probation
3 Years as a DC I
3 Years as a DC II
3 Years as a DC III
3 Years as a DC IV

Blue Card & Incident
Safety Officer Cert.
Health & Safety Officer
Safety Officer Cert.
Fire Officer III Cert.
Fire Officer IV Cert.

District Chief II
District Chief III
District Chief IV
District Chief V

Testing
Information
Successful
Completion of
Probation
Task Book
Task Book
State Exam
State Exam
State Exam

B.

Career Ladder levels be attained upon completion of the requisite time and
educational requirements. Each required class shall be pre-approved by the Fire
Chief for a ladder advancement.

C.

The responsibility for scheduling career ladder exams rests with the employee.

D.

Employees must schedule Career Ladder Program Examinations to be taken prior
to their anniversary date.

E.

Effective the beginning of the first pay period after ratification of this Agreement,
the current District Chiefs as of that date shall be placed in the District Chief I level.
Such District Chiefs who do not meet the educational and/or testing requirements
for District Chief I shall be required to complete those requirements, along with the
District Chief II requirements, to move to District Chief II. Additionally, the
current District Chiefs will only be required to serve as a District Chief for one (1)
year before being eligible to move to District Chief II.

F.

Evaluations by the Fire Chief or Assistant Chief will be required for all career
ladder advancement.

19

ARTICLE 11
POSTING OF AGREEMENT
The City will provide a digital copy of this Agreement, placed on a shared drive. One (1) printed
copy will be posted at each Station. The city will provide one (1) digital copy of this Agreement
to be emailed to each employee in the bargaining unit.

20

ARTICLE 12
BULLETIN BOARDS
Section 1. District Chiefs may use the Union Bulleting Board provided under the non-supervisory
collective bargaining agreement.

21

ARTICLE 13
WORK SCHEDULE
Section 1. Shifts for District Chief shall start at 0730 hours, and end at 0730 hours, the following
morning. Shifts shall consist of three (3): “A”, “B”, “C.”
A.

Each of which will work in a rotation of 24 hours on duty and 48 hours off duty.

B.

This is recognized as a 56-hour workweek.

Section 2. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, the employer retains the right to adjust
work schedules; provided however, that no work schedule shall be adjusted arbitrarily or
capriciously; and provided further, prior to making such change, the Employer shall
provide the Union with not less than fourteen (14) calendar days’ notice, unless the giving
of such notice is not possible given the circumstances of the situation.
Section 3. FLSA Status
District Chiefs shall continue to be overtime-exempt.
Section 4.

District Chiefs may exchange duty time under the following conditions:

A.

The person filling in is acceptable to the Assistant Chief prior to the change.

B.

All exchanges shall be in accordance with FLSA.

C.

The person desiring the change shall notify the Assistant Chief of the anticipated
change not less than 72 hours prior to the start of the anticipated change unless such
exchange arises under emergency situations. Notification shall be a completed
exchange request submitted to the Assistant Chief no less than 72 hours in advance.
An incomplete request or a late request will not be approved. Any exception to this
rule shall only be granted by the Fire Chief.

D.

No person may be allowed to exchange more than 24 consecutive hours.

E.

The employee working the exchange time will be covered by all applicable benefits
in case of injury while filling in, but will not receive pay for this period.

F.

If the person agreeing to loan or fill in time is sick or fails to appear for the
exchange, their annual (vacation) leave account will be charged for the actual
expense incurred by the employer in filling in for the employee who is sick or fails
to appear at the current accepted pay increments.

G.

The person agreeing to fill in for another employee is obligated to remain on duty
in the absence of the person with whom the exchange is made.

22

H.

Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary above, the Employer shall not be
required to allow any exchange if doing so would impose upon the Employer
liability for any additional overtime compensation in excess of what the persons
may otherwise be entitled.

I.

Time exchange may not be less than four (4) hours.

J.

Employees may not exchange more than a total of one hundred and eighty (180)
hours, (initial request) in a fiscal year unless approved by the Fire Chief.
Exception:
District Chiefs may exceed this amount (initial request) if the shift trade request is
for school (refer to paragraph “Q” this section). Simple submission of request shall
not be considered approval of the Fire Chief. Fire Department approved classes and
seminars, or other shift exchanges that are deemed to be in the best interest of the
department shall not be counted against this time.

K.

It shall be the Assistant Chief’s responsibility to track the number of hours
exchanged each year.

L.

Employees will use the following guidelines when using trade time:
District Chief with District Chief

M.

At no time shall time exchange create a reduction in service. This shall include but
not be limited to placing an ALS vehicle out of service.

N.

The Fire Chief or their designee may allow “out of grade” exchanges if they feel it
will not create a reduction in service or it is felt to be in the best interest of the
Department to allow said exchanges.

O.

Compensating a fellow bargaining unit member who accepts a trade with anything
other than fulfilling the trade by working for that bargaining unit member is strictly
prohibited. Such action will be grounds for discipline up to and including
termination.

P.

All shift trade paybacks are to be completed within the same fiscal year as the
original request.

Q.

If the shift trade is for job-related training, the District Chief requesting shift trade
must provide the Assistant Chief with evidence of enrollment for the school,
seminar, etc. Acceptable forms of enrollment include, but are not limited to,
registration payment receipt and/or tuition payment receipt. Upon completion of
training, the District Chief is required to submit certificate and/or transcript to
Assistant Chief.

23

R.

Any exception to these rules in this section shall only be granted by the Fire Chief
or Assistant Chief.

24

ARTICLE 14
WORK RULES AND PREVAILING RIGHTS
Section 1. It is understood and agreed by both parties that the duties performed by members of
the bargaining unit cannot always be covered by job descriptions and, therefore, members
of the bargaining unit may be required to perform duties in addition to those listed in the
current job description. Those additional duties performed by members of the bargaining
unit in the past and at present time are presumed to be reasonable and proper.
Section 2. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement, any written rule, regulation,
policy or procedure affecting those employees of the bargaining unit in effect prior to,
as well as those issued after the effective date of this Agreement, shall remain and be in
full force and effect unless changed, modified or deleted by the City. The Fire Chief or
their designee shall notify the Union Representative of the change as early as practicable
prior to implementation. Final authority to change, modify or delete any rule or regulation
rests with the City, so long as it does not violate the agreed terms of this Agreement and
in conjunction with Florida State Statutes.

25

ARTICLE 15
SENIORITY, LAY-OFFS AND RECALL
Section 1. Seniority.
A.

City seniority is an employee’s length of city service in continuous permanent
status employment or reemployment from the first day of continuous permanent
employment, including prescribed probationary periods. City seniority shall be
used for vacation and sick leave accruals, service awards and other matters based
on length of City service. This date changes if the employee is in a non-pay status
for one pay period or more; the anniversary date is then deferred by an equivalent
amount.

B.

Classification seniority is the length of continuous service in classification. After
successful completion of the probationary period, the length of time in
classification reverts to the date of entry, transfer or promotion to the present
classification. The classification seniority date shall be used in connection with
merit reviews, layoff consideration and promotional eligibility opportunities. This
date will be adjusted an equivalent amount for a leave of absence with pay or
disciplinary suspension for one pay period or more.

C.

Employees shall lose all seniority as a result of any one of the following:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.

Resignation
Retirement
Termination
Absent without permission or authorized leave for three (3) consecutive
working days.
Layoff exceeding two (2) years.
Failure to report to the Human Resources Department intentions of
returning to work within five (5) days after receipt of certified notice of
Recall.
Failure to return from military leave within the time limits provided by
law.

Section 2. Probationary Periods
A.

The probationary period shall be for a period of one (1) year from the first day of
work for all new hires.

B.

When an employee successfully completes the probationary period, they will be
placed on permanent status.

C.

If a newly hired probationary employee is found to be unqualified to perform, or
will not properly perform the duties of the position, the employee may be dismissed.
The City may, at its sole discretion, terminate any employee during their initial

26

probationary period. This does not apply to promotional probationary periods.
D.

The probationary period for an employee accepting a position as a result of a
promotion shall be one hundred-eighty (180) days. The Fire Chief may extend a
promotional probationary period an additional sixty (60) days providing they give
written notice to the employee and the Human Resources Department specifying
the reasons for the extension of the probationary period beyond one hundred-eighty
(180) days.

E.

If an employee serving a probationary trial period as a result of a promotion is found
to be unqualified to perform the duties of the higher position, they shall be returned
to the position and status held immediately prior to promotion unless there is just
cause for discipline or discharge.

Section 3. Layoff
A.

Whenever it becomes necessary to separate employees from City’s service, the City
Manager shall determine the organizational units and classifications to be affected.
The order of layoff is as follows:
1.
2.
3.

Employees serving initial probationary period.
Probationary employees promoted from a lower classification shall be
returned to such lower class.
Non-probationary employees based on seniority.

B.

Employees shall be laid off on the basis of the following factors: classification,
seniority, performance ratings and the recommendation of the Fire Chief. In these
circumstances the needs of the City and the District Chief’s respective skills and
qualifications will also be considered.

C.

When the Fire Chief believes that a certain permanent employee is essential to the
efficient operation of the Fire Department because of special skills or abilities,
and wishes to retain this individual, the Fire Chief must submit a written request to
the City Manager for permission to do so. Only if the City Manager approves the
request, may the individual be retained under this exception.

D.

Any employee who is to be laid off will be given ten (10) business days’ notice
or as much advance notice as possible depending upon the circumstances at the
time.

E.

Duties performed by an employee laid off may be reassigned to other employees
already working.

27

Section 4. Recall
A.

Probationary employees laid off shall have their names placed on the eligible
register from which they came in order of the respective ranking for no more than
one year.

B.

Permanent Non-probationary employees who are laid off shall have their names
placed on the layoff section of the eligible list for no more than one (1) year. They
shall be given first opportunity for re-employment in the class from which they
were laid off in the reverse order of ranking from which the layoffs occurred. The
City Manager may, at their sole discretion, extend the eligible list for one (1)
additional year.

C.

Laid off employees who are re-employed within six (6) months from the date of
layoff shall be credited with the medical leave balance accrued at the time of layoff,
shall not have their eligibility for earning annual leave interrupted and shall be
placed in the same pay grade and pay rate they were in at the time of layoff. If
changes of grade have occurred during the time of layoff, appropriate adjustments
shall be made for the individual upon return to work.

D.

The City will offer recall to laid off employees by certified mail to the last
known address. Within ten (10) business days of the certified receipt date, laid off
employees must signify their intention of returning to work to the Human
Resources Office.

E.

Recall will be offered to laid off employees provided they can demonstrate they are
physically and otherwise qualified to perform the duties of the job.

28

ARTICLE 16
MEDICAL LEAVE
Section 1. General
Paid sick leave is not considered an earned benefit or employee’s right and is subject to
documentation. Illness is considered a legitimate reason for a supervisor to grant an
employee permission to be absent with pay from official duties. Permission to use paid
sick leave shall be granted for bona fide illness or injury and only for the time actually
required. Any payment made to the employee pursuant to this procedure will be subject
to normal deductions. For the purposes of tracking sick leave usage, sick leave use will
be reviewed on a fiscal year basis (Oct 1st thru Sept. 30th).
Section 2. Eligibility
A.

Each permanent full-time employee will be allowed medical leave with pay.

B.

Medical leave up to the amount earned may be taken during an employee’s
probationary period. However, in the event the probationary employee resigns or
is otherwise terminated before the end of the probationary period, any medical
leave taken will be reimbursed to the City by deduction from the employee’s final
pay.

C.

Frequent claiming of benefits under this rule will constitute grounds for the
assumption by the department head that the physical condition of the employee
is below the standard necessary for the proper performance of duties. Evidence
of abuse of this benefit will constitute grounds for disciplinary action. Abuse of
medical leave shall be defined as illness exceeding four (4) work day equivalents,
in excess of 96 hours, without a medical certificate (i.e. Doctor’s Certificate), also
known as “sick unexcused” (SU), within a one fiscal year period which falls outside
the Family Medical Leave Act, the Americans With Disabilities Act, or other
applicable law.

D.

Employees shall receive progressive disciplinary action for abuse of medical
leave. Progressive discipline will include, but not be limited to, being placed on
“Doctor’s Certificate Requirement” (Section 5).

E.

The Doctor's Certificate is to include the following: the necessity of the absence,
the required time off and the date for return to work.

F.

Doctor’s Certificates must be submitted no later than the beginning of the next shift
worked by the employee. If the certificate is not received by Fire Administration
by that time, the employee will not be paid for the absence even though the
employee may have sick time accrued. Employees requesting sick time (family
or self) will be required to submit a Doctor’s Certificate no later than the
beginning of the next shift worked by the employee in order for the absence to be

29

excused (sickness self (SF) or sickness family (SF)). If Fire Administration does
not receive the Doctor’s certificate by that time, the employee’s leave will be
charged as sickness, unauthorized (SU). The Fire Chief, at their discretion, may
extend the time for submitting a Doctor’s Certificate for extenuating
circumstances.
Section 3. Rate of Earning
Employees working a 56-hour weekly schedule shall earn 144 hours of medical leave
annually. Employees working a 40-hour weekly schedule shall earn 96 hours of medical
leave annually.
Section 4. Use
Medical Leave may be granted for the following purposes:
A.
Incapacitation by reason of illness or injury, except for injuries incurred while on
duty where worker’s compensation benefits apply.
B.

Medical, dental, or optical examination or treatment. However, employees on a
56- hour work schedule shall make every effort to schedule appointments on off
duty time.

C.

Jeopardizing the health of co-workers due to exposure to a contagious disease.

D.

Care of a member of family - Medical leave may be granted an employee for care
and attendance to a member of the employee’s immediate family who has a bona
fide illness or injury provided that no other person is available to care for said
person(s). (A family member, for the purposes of this policy only, shall be defined
as an individual living in your household such as a spouse, child, mother, father,
significant other or person for whom the employee is guardian.)

E.

Nothing herein shall limit the provisions and application of the Family Medical
Leave Act.

F.

Any employee who uses medical leave for any purpose other than those permitted
in Section 4 shall be subject to a Group 3 offence of the City’s Disciplinary
Guidelines, which may result in dismissal.

Section 5. Doctor’s Certificate Requirement
The “Doctor’s Certificate” requirement will be placed on any employee whose absences
for personal or family illness exceed four (4) work day equivalents within a one-year
period, 96 hours for those employees working 56 hours per week. Absences exempt from
this accumulation are as follows:
A.

Absences attributable to “On the Job Injuries.”

30

B.

Absences of two (2) consecutive workdays or more since Doctor Certificates are
mandated in these instances.

C.

Absences that are approved based on medical certificates.

D.

Absences due to a death in the family.

E.

Family sick leave when documented by school or physician. A note from the school
shall indicate that a child was sent home from school with a medical issue or
condition. The note shall be from the school nurse/clinic, teacher or administrative
staff member stating the medical necessity for the child being released from school
to be considered an excused absence whether an employee is on Doctor’s
Certificate Requirement or regular medical leave (sick family). An absence from
school or a phone call from a parent or guardian stating the child will not attend
school due to illness does not constitute an excused absence under the Doctor’s
Certificate Requirement or excused medical leave (sick family).

Section 6. Doctor’s Certificate Defined
A valid medical certificate should be a written, typed or printed statement from the doctor
specifying:
A.

The date(s) of visits/consultation with the doctor

B.

The date the employee is authorized to return to work

C.

If there are any conditions/limitations imposed by the doctor that would prohibit
the employee from performing their job (i.e.: medications or physical limitations
that could prohibit job performance). Doctor’s certificate must state the specifics
of employee limitations upon returning to full duty.

D.

Doctor certificates must be signed by the doctor or their designee.

A bill from the doctor is not a medical certificate. If the medical certificate does not meet
these requirements, the Department may deem it unacceptable. In such an instance, sick
leave pay is not provided and the absence may be considered unauthorized. Employees
shall remain in the “Doctor’s Certificate Requirement” status for one calendar year from
the date their sick leave use exceeds the criteria established.
Section 7. Accrual
There is no limit on the amount of medical leave an employee may accrue.
Section 8. Request for Leave
A.

An employee in a unit operating on a twenty-four (24) hour basis must notify the

31

department within the time limit established by the department.
B.

Failure of the employee to secure this authorization shall be cause for denial of sick
leave pay for the period of absence.

C.

The department head may waive this provision if the employee submits evidence
that it was impossible to give such notification.

D.

An employee unable to return to work after a period of three consecutive shifts shall
make known to the supervisor the nature of the situation, as well as the name of
the attending physician, if applicable.

E.

The department head may request a physician’s certificate to verify the reason for
medical leave.

F.

An employee upon returning to work from absence due to illness or injury, for a
period of three (3) consecutive shifts or more, will be required to report to a
physician of the City’s choice and at the City’s Expense for return to work medical
clearance.

G.

The City physician may require the employee to sign a medical release. Such
release will permit the City physician to contact the employee’s private physician
for information. Failure of the employee to sign this statement when requested is
grounds for disciplinary action up to and including dismissal.

H.

If, and whenever, medical leave may appear to be abused as defined in Section 5
of this Article (Doctor’s Certificate Requirement), the employee
claiming/requesting such leave may be required to furnish a physician’s report to
support the necessity for such absence. The City reserves the right in all cases of
illness or injury, or reported illness or injury, to require the employee to furnish a
physician’s report. Abuse of medical leave privileges shall constitute grounds for
disciplinary action.

Section 9. Medical Leave Incentive Program
All members of the bargaining unit will be eligible to participate in the adopted City-wide
medical leave incentive program, if any program exists at the City’s discretion. The Citywide medical leave program, if any, will have a specific section reflecting the medical
leave incentive program specific to firefighters.
Section 10. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require any action inconsistent
with the Family and Medical Leave Act.

32

ARTICLE 17
LINE OF DUTY INJURY AND DEATH PAY
Section 1: The Employer hereby agrees to pay the following compensation to any employee
injured in the line of duty in accordance with the following terms, conditions, and
definitions.
A.

Compensation shall be payable under this section only with respect to disability
as the result of injury to an employee where such injury is incurred in the line of
duty.

B.

An injury shall be deemed to have incurred in the line of duty only if such injury
is compensable under the Florida Worker’s Compensation Law.

C.

No compensation under this section shall be allowed for the first seven (7) calendar
days of disability, provided, however, that where the disability continues for
fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days from the first day of disability then
compensation shall be payable from the first day of disability. In return, the
employee agrees to sign over to the City any wage payments received from
the worker’s compensation insurance carrier.

D.

The City will pay the eligible employee the difference between the amount the
employee receives through Worker’s Compensation payments and the
employee’s net salary at the time of injury. This payment, if required, shall be for
a period of ninety (90) days. If the employee requires an extension beyond ninety
(90) days, they may submit a request to the City Manager together with an
updated physician’s report supporting the extension for prompt consideration;
such extension may be granted at the discretion of the City Manager.

E.

The term “disability” as used in this section means incapacity because of line of
duty injury that prevents the employee to continue in the occupation of District
Chief.

Section 2: It is the intention of the parties that nothing in this Agreement shall interfere with the
normal procedures under Worker’s Compensation Law or the requirements of the
Employer’s Worker’s Compensation insurance carrier. Subject to such limitations:
A.

An employee who is injured in the line of duty shall be transported or referred to
a designated medical facility as defined by the New Port Richey Fire
Department’s Worker’s Compensation carrier whenever possible. Should the
injury require specialized care, the employee will be transported directly to the
appropriate facility, i.e. trauma or burn center.

B.

Depending on the nature of the injury, the City’s managed care physician will
determine whether or not the employee needs specialized treatment and will arrange
for referrals. In cases where the employee is referred to a specialist, the City’s

33

managed care physician will be considered the injured employee’s primary care
physician and will monitor all medical treatment and progress. The City’s
managed care physician will be responsible for certifying that the injured
employee is fit to return to work or light duty.
C.

In other cases involving injuries in the line of duty which do not require
hospitalization, the injured employee shall follow the guidelines defined by New
Port Richey Fire Department and/or their Worker’s Compensation carrier.

Section 3: If an employee is killed in the line of duty, the Employer shall pay to the spouse, or
if there is no surviving spouse, the estate, of such deceased employee their accumulated
severance pay within 15 working days. Such payment shall include all accumulated annual
(vacation) leave, floating holidays or earned sick leave incentive account.
Section 4: An employee injured in the line of duty shall report the occurrence of such injury
immediately or as soon as possible thereafter, verbally, in person, or by phone, to the
employee’s immediate supervisor or the Fire Chief.
Section 5: Upon returning from a hazardous situation, the employee may request a physical
examination by a physician to ensure the employee is stable and capable of returning
to work. This right may be rescinded by the Employer, on an individual basis, if
considered abused. Such examination must be approved and scheduled by the Fire Chief
or Assistant Chief.

34

ARTICLE 18
LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Section 1: Sick Leave for Family Illness
An employee may utilize their accumulated sick time due to an illness in their immediate
family under the guidelines of the Family Medical Leave Act.
Section 2: Funeral Leave
An employee shall be allowed up to two (2) shifts off with pay in the event of a death in
the immediate family to attend services and to assist in the personal affairs of the deceased
if necessary, which shall be limited to spouse, father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister,
father-in-law, mother-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, stepfather, stepmother,
stepbrother, stepsister, grandparents, grandson and granddaughter The definition of
immediate family shall not be more restrictive than the definition in the City Personnel
Policy Manual. The mere fact of a listed relative dying does not automatically grant an
employee paid funeral leave. The concept of funeral leave is for the purposes of attendance
at the funeral service, mourning and/or putting the affairs of the deceased relative in order.
This is not chargeable to sick leave. Any employee availing himself/herself of this section
shall notify the Fire Chief or their designee of such intent as soon as possible. The employee
shall provide proof of death in their immediate family as defined in this section before the
compensation is approved.
Section 3: Military Leave
The Employer shall grant military leave as required by applicable federal and state law.

35

ARTICLE 19
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
All bargaining unit employees are eligible to participate in the City’s Employee Assistance
Program.

36

ARTICLE 20
SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Section 1. The City, the Union, and the employees covered hereunder mutually agree that
employee substance and alcohol abuse may constitute a danger to the employee, fellow
employees, and the general public. It is further agreed that the safety of public property
and equipment and the image of the City and its employees are placed in jeopardy if an
employee is involved in drug or alcohol abuse. Accordingly, the Union and the employees
covered hereunder agree that the City shall have the right and authority to require
employees to submit to appropriate drug and alcohol testing to detect the presence of any
controlled substance, narcotic, drug, or alcohol in accordance with the provisions below
and the Drug-Free Workplace provisions of Chapter 440, Florida Statutes and the
corresponding rules adopted by the Agency for Health Care Administration.
Section 2. Bargaining unit employees shall not:
A.

Use, possess, manufacture, cultivate, sell or attempt to sell or distribute any drug
or other substance that is illegal under Florida or federal law at any time whether
on or off duty, and whether on or off City property.

B.

Use, possess, sell or attempt to sell or distribute any drug or medication not
prescribed to them for use by a licensed healthcare provider and shall use said drug
or medication only as prescribed.

C.

Use, possess, or be under the influence of any drug or alcohol while on duty; while
on City premises; while driving a City vehicle, while operating a piece of City
equipment, or while being transported in City vehicles at any time; or

D.

For employees hired after January 1, 1995, use Tobacco or nicotine products on
or off duty.

As used herein, the term “drug” shall be defined in accordance with Section 440.102
(1), Florida Statutes.
Section 3. When an employee uses a drug or other medication that has been prescribed or
administered by a licensed healthcare provider, or uses an over-the-counter medication,
which may affect their performance of job duties, the employee shall inform their
immediate supervisor prior to reporting to work. If contact with the immediate supervisor
cannot be made, the employee shall contact the Fire Chief or Assistant Chief.
Furthermore, the employee will be required in the case of prescribed or administered
medication to have a note from the healthcare provider stating that they can perform
firefighting duties while taking such drug or medication. If there are concerns about the
drug or medication, the City reserves the right to send the employee for a medical evaluation
at the City’s expense.
Section 4 Should there be reasonable suspicion that an employee is using Tobacco or nicotine

37

Tobacco products, they are subject to being tested for nicotine/cotinine. Employees hired
prior to January 1, 1995 will be exempt from nicotine/cotinine testing. The testing
parameters for Nicotine/Cotinine testing will be as follows:
Nicotine and Metabolite testing (ng/ml = nanograms per milliliter)
Nicotine levels greater than 2.0 ng/ml are indicative of active tobacco product use
Cotinine levels greater than 20.0 ng/ml are indicative of active tobacco product use
Section 5. Any employee in this bargaining unit will be subject to a urinalysis and/or blood testing
when there is reasonable suspicion that the employee is under the influence of alcohol,
drugs or controlled substances while on duty.
Section 6. Reasonable suspicion for purposes of this Article may include, among other things:
A.

Observable phenomena while at work, such as direct observation of drug use or
of the physical symptoms or manifestations of being under the influence of a drug.

B.

Abnormal conduct or erratic behavior while at work or a significant deterioration
in work performance.

C.

A report of drug use, provided by a reliable and credible source.

D.

Evidence that an individual has tampered with a drug test during their
employment with the current employer.

E.

Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold, solicited, or transferred
drugs while working or while on the employer’s premises or while operating the
employer’s vehicle, machinery, or equipment.

The Fire Chief or Assistant Chief or other City/Department officials (two Officers or
officials when practicable) shall make the determination if the employee appears
impaired.
Section 7. Employees shall submit to testing after being involved in a vehicle accident, sustaining
an on the job injury, and/or during annual physical examinations. The City may, through
the use of an unbiased selection procedure, conduct random drug tests of bargaining unit
employees if the testing is performed in accordance with drug-testing rules adopted by the
Agency for Health Care Administration.
Section 8. Any employee subjected to urinalysis or blood tests under this Article may be removed
from duty or reassigned pending the results of such tests if there is reasonable suspicion
that the employee may not be fit for duty. Such employee shall continue to receive their
regular pay and benefits until the results are obtained and verified pursuant to Section 8.
Section 9. Pursuant to Section 440.102 (9), Florida Statutes only licensed laboratories shall
conduct drug tests. The drugs to be tested, drug and alcohol cut-offs, and testing procedures

38

shall be in accordance with the drug-free workplace rules adopted by the Agency for Health
Care Administration. All positive initial tests shall be confirmed using gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) or an equivalent or more accurate
scientifically accepted method approved by the Agency for Health Care Administration as
such technology becomes available in a cost-effective form.
Section 10. Refusal to submit to testing or submitting an adulterated, tampered, or diluted sample
shall result in discharge. Submission to a test shall not act as a waiver of the employee’s
right to challenge the grounds for the test or the accuracy of the results.
Section 11. A test result indicating the employee is in violation of the provisions of this Article
will result in discharge from employment unless the City Manager determines, in her sole
discretion, to allow the employee to attend and complete an appropriate detoxification,
alcohol or drug abuse program, and satisfy any other terms and conditions determined by
the City Manager, in lieu of discharge. Failure to successfully complete such program shall
subject the employee to discharge. The employee shall be allowed to utilize accrued time
off (vacation, sick leave) for absence from duties to attend any such appropriate program.
Section 12. After completion of any rehabilitation the employee shall be subject to up to six (6)
random urinalysis and/or blood tests per year anytime during a twenty-four month period.
A positive test on any one of the six (6) tests will subject the employee to discharge.
Section 13. In the event that the employee voluntarily informs the employer they will seek assistance
for drug/alcohol abuse or tobacco products/nicotine use prior to being asked to or required
to take a drug test or without testing, no disciplinary action shall be taken against the
employee, provided that the employer is informed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to
the employee being under reasonable suspicion by the Fire Chief or Assistant Chief or
other co- worker, or being asked to or required by the City to take a drug test whichever is
earlier. However, the employee may be relieved of duty pending the successful completion
of an approved rehabilitation program. Successful completion of an approved rehabilitation
program for an employee who voluntarily informs the employer prior to an incident or
request to take a drug test shall result in no disciplinary action against the employee.
Section 14. Each bargaining unit employee has an absolute obligation to report to their supervisor
any employee who is suspected to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs or controlled
substances while on duty, and must thereafter cooperate in the investigation program, and
any related disciplinary proceedings. Such suspicion must be based upon some factual
evidence such as breath odor, behavioral observations, or actual knowledge or equivalent.
Any employee who fails to do so shall be subject to disciplinary action. An anonymous
“tip” shall not discharge a bargaining unit member’s obligation hereunder nor shall it be
the sole basis for the imposition of testing under this article. A bargaining unit employee
who maliciously files a false report that another bargaining unit member is under the
influence of alcohol, drugs or controlled substances while on duty shall be subject to
disciplinary action.
Section 15. Employees shall report to their supervisor any arrest, charge, indictment or conviction

39

for a drug or alcohol related violation or alleged violation of law not later than the next
workday after they become aware of it. Failure to so report will result in immediate
discharge. Upon conviction of a crime involving illegal drugs, the employee will be
immediately discharged. Without regard to prosecution or conviction by appropriate
governmental entities, the City may, at its sole discretion, conduct an investigation to
determine whether or not there has been a violation of this Article. If the City determines
that a violation has occurred, it will take whatever disciplinary action it deems appropriate
regardless of the ultimate outcome of any criminal case that may be brought against the
employee. Alternatively, the City, at its at its sole discretion, may transfer the employee to
a non-safety sensitive position or place the employee on leave without pay.

40

ARTICLE 21
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Section 1. Employees covered by this labor agreement shall be required to undergo a physical
examination as scheduled by the Fire Department in accordance with the applicable NFPA
code 1582 and any other tests the City Physician deems necessary.
Section 2. The employer shall determine the extent of the examination and bear the cost of each
examination. The results of these physicals shall be made available to the City and to each
employee upon completion of the physical.
Section 3. The City agrees to provide inoculations to employees based on applicable NFPA codes
and State EMS requirements, if any, and the recommendations of the City Physician.
Section 4. The parties agree that the physical condition of the employee is of great concern to the
employee and to the City. All employees whose physical fitness or medical status is deemed
deficient in some manner as a result of the physical examination shall be advised by the
Department and shall be required to undertake a fitness rehabilitation program in an effort to
improve their physical fitness and health.
Section 5. The City agrees to provide physical examinations in accordance with NFPA 1582.
Section 6. The City agrees to provide inoculations and medical screenings to employees based on
the recommendations of the Fire Chief and or the Department Physician.
Section 7. To facilitate a more complete annual medical examination lab work for the annual physical
shall be completed at least one week prior to the scheduled exam.
Section 8. If the employee calls in sick on the scheduled day for their physical, it shall be the
responsibility of the employee to reschedule the physical exam (not on-duty). Employee will
be required to complete the physical within 15 days of the original on-duty exam date.
Section 9. All blood draws for the physical are to be done by the lab testing agency employees only
and at the facility designated by the City.
Section 10. Scheduled time off will not be allowed when Department physical exams are scheduled
(this includes shift trades unless both parties complete the trade during the exam period so that
there is no interruption with the exam schedule). This blackout of “no scheduled time off”
should not be more than 3 calendar days.

41

ARTICLE 22
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 1. Safety Committee
The Union will select a total of one representative from either the rank-and-file or District
Chief bargaining unit to be on the Fire Department’s Safety Committee. The committee
shall meet pursuant to Florida State Statute 633.810.
Section 2. Pension Plan
The City of New Port Richey and the employee organization IAFF Local 1158 recognize
that the New Port Richey Firefighter Retirement System is administered under the current
plan document adopted by the City, Article III, Chapter 17, Code of Ordinances. This
document may be amended from time to time by amendment adopted by the City Council.
The City and Union understand that pension is a mandatory subject of bargaining and can
choose to bargain the pension benefit or changes to the plan or in place of bargaining both
parties can agree to work through the pension board and make specific recommendations
concerning the plan to the City Council. This section may be re-opened at any time during
the life of this agreement upon the request of either party.
The City of New Port Richey Firefighter Retirement System provides as follows:
A.

Compensation
Salary means total cash remuneration paid by the City for services rendered, but
overtime payments up to three hundred hours (300). Salary does not include
payments for accrued sick leave. Salary includes all tax deferred, tax sheltered or
tax-exempt items of income derived from elective employee payroll deductions or
salary reductions. Compensation in excess of limitations set forth in section
401(a)(17) of the code shall be disregarded.

B.

Employee contribution
Each member of the System shall contribute six and one-half (6.5) percent of their
Salary to the fund. In any year in which the City’s net actuarially required
contribution is less than six and one-half (6.5) percent of covered payroll, the City’s
and members’ contributions will be adjusted so that both the City and the member’s
share equally in the reduction (e.g., if the City’s net required contribution is
scheduled to be $20,000 less than 6.5%, then the City’s contribution with be
$10,000 less than 6.5% and the members’ contribution will be $10,000 less than
6.5%.

C.

Normal retirement
A member’s normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident

42

with, or the next following the date they attain age 52 and completes ten (10) years
or more of credited service or the date they complete 23 years of creditable service.
An employee who has a grandfathered normal retirement date of 20 years and age
50 shall retain their normal retirement date.
D.

Normal Retirement Benefit
The monthly retirement benefit shall equal three and one-half (3 1/2) percent of
average final compensation, for each year of credited service accrued through
September 30, 2013 The monthly retirement benefit shall equal three (3) percent of
Average Final Compensation for each year or part thereof of credited service
accrued after September 30, 2013 through the effective date upon the adoption by
the City of an ordinance implementing these amendments. The monthly retirement
benefit shall equal three and one-quarter (3.25) percent of Average Final
Compensation for each year or part thereof of credited service accrued after the
effective date upon the adoption by the City of an ordinance implementing these
amendments. The monthly retirement benefit for any member shall not exceed
seventy-five (75) percent of average final compensation.

E.

Early Retirement
A member shall be eligible for early retirement upon attainment of age fifty (50)
and the completion of ten (10) years of credited service. Credited service and
average final compensation shall be determined as of the early retirement date, but
actuarially reduced to take into account the member’s younger age and the earlier
commencement of retirement income payments not to exceed three (3) percent for
each year by which the member’s age at retirement preceded the member’s normal
retirement age.

F.

Accumulated excess Chapter 175 premium tax monies
The parties mutually consent and agree that the total amount of accumulated excess
Chapter 175 premium tax monies held in reserve as of the effective date of this
Agreement shall be applied to reduce the City’s annual required contribution to the
Firefighter Retirement System

G.

Future excess Chapter 175 premium tax revenues
The parties mutually consent and agree that the total amount of future excess
Chapter 175 premium tax monies shall be applied to reduce the City’s annual
required contribution to the Firefighter Retirement System.

H.

Share Plan
A Defined Contribution (“Share Plan”) will be created by the City in consultation
with the Union to implement the provisions of Section 175.351(6), Florida Statutes,

43

subject to the provisions of paragraphs F and G of this Section.
I.

DROP
Going forward from the effective the date of the Ordinance’s amendment, members
shall be eligible to enter the DROP under the terms of Section 17-50.17 of the
Firefighters’ Retirement System, except that members shall be limited to a onetime irrevocable option of being credited with either interest at an effective rate
of 1.5% per annum or the Retirement System’s net investment

Section 3: Insurance Plan
The City shall provide bargaining unit employees health insurance under the same plan and
terms as the City’s other non-management employees. Should the employee premiums be
increased by 10% or more, the Union shall have the right to reopen this Section for
negotiations.
Section 4. Inspection of Personnel Records
Each employee shall have the right to inspect their own personnel records maintained by
the Department and those records maintained by the Human Resources Department, during
normal business hours. Employees shall also have the right to insert a written response to
any negative item (disciplinary action, letter of complaint, etc.) which has been placed in
their file. This response must be accomplished within 15 days of the entry of such negative
item. For those items, which are placed in file without the employee’s knowledge the
fifteen (15) day period shall commence upon the inspection of the records when said item
was found.
Section 5. City Reimbursement for new hire expenses:
Any employee that leaves the employ of the City prior to completion of their probation
shall reimburse the City for all costs incurred as a result of preparing the employee for
employment with the City. This includes, but is not limited to New Employment Physicals
and Hepatitis Series Injections. However, this shall not apply if the employee is laid-off or
terminated by the department.
Section 6. Employment Agreements:
The Union recognizes all employment agreements as binding for newly hired personnel
currently in effect, as well as newly issued agreements to new employees (of the same
nature as current agreements) as necessary due to hiring of new personnel.

44

ARTICLE 23
UNIFORM ISSUE
Section 1: I.A.F.F. Pins
All members of the bargaining unit may wear one (1) I.A.F.F. pin, approved by the Fire
Chief, on their Class A uniform.
Section 2: Uniforms
A.

Initial Issue

The following items will be issued to employees upon hire or as soon as possible
thereafter. Employees will sign an inventory list for their initial issue.

Item
City ID Badge
Key Fob
Collar Brass
Name Tag
Badge
Dress Shirt (Class A)
Pants
T Shirts
Firefighting Boots
Suspenders
Bunker Pants
Bunker Coat
Firefighting Gloves
Helmet
Nomex Hood
Air Mask
Polo shirt
Dress Uniform
B.

Quantity
1
1
1 set
1
1
2
3
3
1 pair
1 set
1 pair
1
1 pair
1
1
1
2
1

Replacement of Initial Issue

The Fire Chief may issue replacements to worn out uniforms on an annual basis. The Fire
Chief shall determine what uniforms are issued on an annual basis. The Fire Chief shall
determine when uniforms are issued. Only items on the initial issue list that become
unserviceable through normal wear and use may be replaced on an annual basis. Any items
not scheduled for annual replacement shall be the responsibility of the employee to replace.
The employee shall be responsible for the cost of replacement of uniforms in excess of
annual replacement. (Example: The City is seeking to purchase 3 T-shirts, but the employee
desires to receive 6 T-shirts. The cost of the additional 3 T-shirts shall be the employee’s

45

responsibility.)
C.

Misuse or Neglect of Initial Issue

Employees will not be held personally responsible for initial issue items that become worn
or unserviceable through no fault of their own. However, if in the opinion of the Fire Chief,
a piece of initial issue is damaged due to abuse, carelessness or the negligent care of the
employee, the employee will be personally liable for either the replacement cost or the fair
market value of the item, whichever is less.
D.
Turn-in of Initial Issue
Employees who retire, are terminated, or leave the employment of the Department, will
return their initial issue items prior to obtaining their final paycheck. The City reserves the
right to withhold an amount from the final paycheck that is sufficient to reimburse it for
the cost of all initial issue items not returned. The Fire Chief shall have the right to allow a
member who achieves normal retirement to keep their City-issued helmet upon their date
of retirement.

Section 3 Subsequent Issue
From time to time, the City may, in its sole discretion, issue subsequent items to employees.
Subsequent issue items will be categorized as “City Permanent Issue” or “Employee
Permanent Issue” at the time of issue.
A.

“City Permanent Issue Items” are those that must be returned to the City upon
termination, separation or retirement. These items will be added to the employee’s
initial issue inventory. Sections 2 B, C, and D of this Article will apply to these
items.

B.

The following items are defined as ‘Subsequent Issue Items” and are to be added
to the employee’ inventory list, when issued, and shall be designated as “City
Permanent Issue.”
Item
Sweatshirt
Long Sleeve Dress Shirt
Light Jacket
Dress Pants
Dress Shoes
Polo Shirt

Tee Shirts Long Sleeve
and/or Short Sleeve

Quantity
1
1
1
1
1
up to 3 for officers
up to 3 for FF
up to 2 for part-time
2 for career
1 for part-time

Tactical Pants

up to 3 pairs for career

46

1 pair for part-time
C.

“Employee Permanent Issue Items” are items that need not be returned to the City
upon termination, separation or retirement. These items do become part of the
employee’s uniform; however, turn in of these items will not be required.

Section 4.
A.

Station Footwear

The Fire Chief will approve footwear and provide this information to the employees, based
on recognized standards. Employees shall have the option of (1) purchasing the footwear
designated on this approved list without Fire Chief’s approval or (2) prior to purchasing
footwear not on the list, obtaining the approval of the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief or their
designee shall approve footwear (black in color) that meets ANSI Z41-1991 & ANSI Z411999 Footwear Standards and appearance. The employee is required to wear an approved
shoe during all work-related on-shift duties.
B.

Fire Helmets

The Fire Chief may authorize employees to utilize a non-issue Fire Helmet if in the opinion
of the Fire Chief, the helmet meets or exceeds the helmet issued by the Department with
regards to safety and appearance. The Fire Chief reserves the right to require employees to
revert back to the initial issue helmet at any time, for any reason. The City shall not be
responsible for the initial cost or any replacement cost of said helmet. Only Department
issued decals shall be placed on the helmet. Any changes shall require Fire Chief’s
approval.
Section 5. Procedures
A.

Additional equipment issues, not defined above will no longer occur unless
authorized by the Fire Chief.

B.

Initial Issue items or Subsequent Issue items will not be changed in any manner
that will cause them to vary from standards.

C.

Uniforms will be worn only when on duty and/or when representing the Department
or the City with permission of the Fire Chief’s office. At no time will any uniform
or parts of uniform clothing be worn off duty without the express permission of the
Fire Chief’s office.

D.

All uniform clothing items will be laundered at the station except as specifically
noted elsewhere. The City assumes the responsibility for cleaning Bunker Gear. If
a uniform becomes dirty or damaged due to the carelessness, neglect or fault of the
employee, the employee will assume the responsibility and cost for professionally
cleaning or replacing the item.

47

E.

Any item or clothing worn on duty or as part of any class of uniform that is not
issued must be approved by the Fire Chief’s office.

F.

Any non-issued approved uniform items or clothing worn on duty must meet all
infectious requirements and guidelines before they can be removed from the station.

G.

Employees are subject to periodic checks of their initial issue and subsequent issue
items to ensure that they are serviceable, presentable and are in their possession.

H.

The following items will not be issued to individuals, but will be maintained as
community property within the Department.
Rain Coats
Safety Goggles
Window Punch
Heavy Jackets
Pocket Spanner

48

ARTICLE 24
INDEMNIFICATION
The City agrees to defend any employee when the employee is sued on a particular claim
arising out of their employment with the City, provided the employee was acting within the scope
of their employment.
The City agrees to indemnify employees against judgments levied against them as a result
of their negligent, non-intentional torts committed while acting within the scope of their employment,
up to the recovery limits specified in 768.28(5), Florida Statutes, as amended, subject to the terms
and conditions of 111.07 Florida Statutes.

49

ARTICLE 25
TUITION PROGRAM
Section 1. Tuition Reimbursement Program
A.

The City seeks to encourage every employee to improve their on-the-job skills. A
reimbursement program is designed to assist those employees who wish to
broaden their professional performance provided that such educational level is
related to their current or next logical level of responsibilities. Members of the
bargaining unit will participate in the City’s Tuition Reimbursement program.

B.

Tuition refunds will be granted for courses offered by accredited colleges and
universities as certified by the regional accreditation agency Southern
Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS)

C.

College courses including related courses and electives will be approved only for
the following 2 and 4-year degrees: EMS, Fire Science, Emergency Management
or Public Safety.

D.

There must be a probability that the course will contribute to the employee’s
development as a City employee.

E.

When possible, course attendance should be on the employee’s own time and
should not interfere with their job duties.
Grade Requirements

F.

Successful completion of the course must be accomplished through a grade of “C”
or better for reimbursement to be made.

G.

In courses which are offered on a “pass” or “fail” basis, a “pass” grade must be
accomplished for reimbursement to be made.

H.

A form will be secured from the Human Resources Department requesting
reimbursement. This form shall be submitted to the Human Resources
Department and the Fire Chief for approval of the course no later than fifteen (15)
days prior to enrollment. If the course is approved, a copy of the employee’s grade
report and a receipt of payment from the school or institution must be submitted
to the Human Resources Department for reimbursement.

I.

Reimbursement is contingent upon City budget and funding.

Section 2. Related Non-Credit Classes
A.

This Section refers to formal institution courses, seminars, and short courses,
which are job related and taken at the employee’s option with approval of the Fire
50

Chief.
B.

All requests for educational assistance must be submitted to the City Manager’s
office as early as practicable at the start of the training. A copy of the approved
form will then be returned to the employee and the original forwarded to the
Personnel office.

C.

The Fire Chief may approve additional Classes, Seminars, and Certifications on
a case by case basis.

Section 3. Certifications and Specialized Training
A.

The City agrees to pay for the re-certification for EMT, Paramedics, and Fire
Inspector, provided the Fire Inspector is required by the Department to use their
certification. The City agrees to continue to provide this re-certification training
as an in-house service. The City will not reimburse employees for the recertification training for EMT and Paramedic when the training is conducted
outside the department, unless approved by the Fire Chief.

B.

The Fire Chief has the discretion to approve additional re-certification
reimbursement.

C.

The Fire Chief may approve additional Fire Inspection Certification Classes and
related expenses for District Chiefs. These classes will be approved on a case by
case basis.

D.

The Fire Chief may approve the EMS Coordinator and others involved in EMS
operations to attend State EMS meetings and related EMS Conferences. These
classes will be approved on a case by case basis.

Section 4. Repayment Requirement
In the Event of Discharge, or Resignation before the completion of one (1) year of
employment from the date of course(s) completion for which tuition costs were paid by
the City, the employee shall financially reimburse the City of New Port Richey for all
monies paid for tuition reimbursement for those courses. The City will have the authority
to garnish up to 100% of the employee’s final check. If the City is not reimbursed of all
monies within 90 days of said employees last work day, the City shall report the failure to
compensate the City to a credit agency.

51

ARTICLE 26
CALL BACK PROCEDURES
Section 1:
The Employer and the Employees agree that certain emergency situations may arise, from
time to time, and that the employees may be required to report to duty to assist their fellow
employees in these emergencies and to protect the community. To facilitate this process,
the employer has established the following communication system to address call back
procedures.
A.

All Uniformed Fire Personnel who are issued departmental phones and are
responsible to maintain these phones in good working order.

B.

Personnel may have the option to use their own personal cell phones in lieu of being
issued a department phone, for notification purpose, with no compensation from
the City.

C.

All Uniformed Fire Personnel will carry department issued phones or their
personal cell phones with them at all times. The phone will be carried in such a
manner as to alert the employee that a notification is being sent. The exception to
this policy is annual, sick, funeral leave, or other occasions when the employee
has informed the Fire Chief or their designated representative, that the employee
will not be available to respond to a notification when the employee is off duty.

D.

Fire Personnel will respond to all notifications sent to them originating from
Dispatch, Fire Administration or other City of New Port Richey notification
locations. Fire Personnel need not respond to notifications when they are off duty
and have previously coordinated with the Fire Chief, or their designated
representative, that they will not be available to respond.

E.

The Fire Chief or their representative will maintain a record of non-available
employees to ensure that adequate personnel are available to respond to
emergency call backs.

F.

Secondary employment is not a valid excuse for not responding to a notification.

G.

The departmental issued phones are City property. Damage to or loss of a issued
phone may result in an Internal Notice of Investigation (INOI).

H.

Paging systems will not be used in a manner in which non-essential notifications
will or might possibly interfere with notifications sent to them from Dispatch, Fire
Administration or other City of New Port Richey notification locations.

I.

Paging systems will be tested each Saturday between 0800 and 1200 hours. If a
52

notification is not received, the employee shall contact Station 1 and report the
malfunction. A second test will be administered to see if a problem is an isolated
situation.
J.

If a situation arises where an off-duty employee becomes “not available” for call
back for a specific period, the employee will notify the Fire Chief or Assistant
Chief prior to becoming unavailable or as soon after as practicable.

K.

If an employee is unable to respond to a call back, they shall call dispatch.

Section 2:
Employees shall not abuse the privilege of notifying the Fire Chief or Assistant Chief
that they will not be available for call back. It is agreed that no employee will engage in
any action, which may affect the operation of the Department in providing services
pursuant to Article 4 of this Agreement.

53

ARTICLE 27
PERSONAL PROPERTY DAMAGE
An employee shall be reimbursed for loss or damage to property in the performance of
their duty subject to the following restrictions:
A.

The maximum reimbursement for all personal property shall be one hundred
($100.00) dollars.

B.

Requests for reimbursement for the loss of or repair to personal property must be
made within the shift in which the loss or damage occurs.

C.

Reimbursement for loss or damage of personal property must be approved by the
Fire Chief.

D.

Requests for reimbursement for the loss of or damage to personal property that
exceed one hundred ($100.00) dollars may be approved by the City Manager.
The City Manager may, at the request of the Fire Chief and at their discretion,
authorize additional payment not to exceed two hundred ($200.00) dollars.

54

ARTICLE 28
AMENDMENTS
This Agreement may be amended at any time by the mutual written agreement of both
parties, but no such attempted amendment shall be of any force or effect until placed in writing
and executed by each party hereto.

55

ARTICLE 29
SEVERABILITY AND WAIVER
Section 1. Each and every article, section, and subsection (clause) shall be deemed separable from
each and every other clause of this Agreement to the extent that in the event that any clause
or clauses shall be finally determined to be in violation of any law, such clause or clauses
only, to the extent only that any may be so in violation, shall be deemed of no force and
effect and unenforceable, without impairing the validity and enforceability of the rest of
the Agreement, including any and all provisions in the remainder of any clause, sentence
or paragraph in which the offending language may appear.
Section 2. The exercise or non-exercise by the Employer or the Union of the rights covered by this
Agreement shall not be deemed to waive any such right or the right to exercise them in
some way in the future.
Section 3. In the event of invalidation of any Article, Section or Subsection, both the Employer
and the Union agree to meet within thirty (30) calendar days of such determination for the
purpose of arriving at a mutually satisfactory replacement for such Article, Section, or
Subsection.

56

ARTICLE 30
CONTRACT CONSTITUTES ENTIRE AGREEMENT OF THE PARTIES
The parties acknowledge and agree that, during the negotiations which resulted in this
Agreement, each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with
respect to any subject or matter included by law within the area of collective bargaining and that
all the understandings and agreements arrived at by the parties after the exercise of that right and
opportunity are set forth in this Agreement. Therefore, the Employer and the Union, for the life of
this agreement, each voluntarily and unqualifiedly waive the right to require further collective
bargaining, and each agrees that the other shall not be obligated to bargain collectively with respect
to any matter or subject not specifically referred to or covered by this Agreement, whether or not
such matters have been discussed even though such matters or subjects may not have been within
the knowledge or contemplation of either or both parties at the time that they negotiated or signed
this Agreement. All terms and conditions of employment not expressly covered by this agreement
shall continue to be subject to the city’s sole direction and control. This Agreement contains the
entire contract, understanding, undertaking, and agreement of the parties hereto, and finally
determines and settles all matters of collective bargaining for and during its term except as may
otherwise specifically provided herein.

57

ARTICLE 31
DURATION, MODIFICATION, AND TERMINATION
Section 1. This Agreement shall be effective upon ratification by both parties and shall continue
in full force and effect until the 30th day of September 2027, subject to any reopeners
listed in this Contract. At least one hundred and twenty (120) days prior to the expiration
of this Agreement, either party hereto shall notify the other in writing, of its intentions to
modify, amend, or terminate this Agreement.

58

ATTESTATION
Executed this ___ day of _________, 2025 in Pasco County, Florida.
For the City of New Port Richey

For Clearwater Firefighters Association,
Florida Local 1158, IAFF

Debbie L. Manns, ICMA-CM, City Manager

David Sowers, President Local 1158

Judy Meyers, CMC, City Clerk

Corbin Mitchell, Vice Pres. Local 1158

Alfred C. Davis, Mayor

59
