AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
TOWN OF ARLINGTON SCHOOL COMMITTEE
AND
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL
EMPLOYEES, AFL-CIO, STATE COUNCIL 93, LOCAL 680
SCHOOL BUS OPERATORS

Effective
July 1, 2018 — June 30, 2021

INDEX

PAGE

ARTICLE
Preamble

4

I

Recognition

5

II

Union Dues and Initiation Fees

5

III

Management Rights

6

IV

No Strike Clause

7

V

Discrimination and Coercion

7

VI

Grievance and Arbitration Procedure

8

VII

Civil Service and Seniority

9

VIII

Job Bidding and Posting

9

IX

Overtime and Callback

10

X

Union Representatives

11

XI

Meal Periods

11

XII

Holidays

11

XIII

Vacations

12

XIV

Sick Leave

15

XV

Funeral Leave

16

XVI

Jury Duty

17

XVII

Longevity

17

XVIII

Personal Leave

18

XIX

Health and Welfare

19

2

XX

Uniform Allowance

19

XXI

Classification Plan and Pay Rates

19

XXII

Miscellaneous Provisions

20

XXIII

Effective Date

22

XXIV

Termination

22

XXV

Renewal

22
24

Appendix A

3

AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
TOWN OF ARLINGTON SCHOOL COMMITTEE
AND
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL
EMPLOYEES, AFL-CIO, STATE COUNCIL 93, LOCAL 680
SCHOOL BUS OPERATORS

PREAMBLE
This agreement entered into by the Town of Arlington School Committee and Local 680,
State Council 93, American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, AFLCIO, hereinafter referred to as the Union, has as its purpose the promotion of harmonious
relations between the School Committee and the Union, the establishment of an equitable
and peaceful procedure for the resolution of differences; and the establishment of rates of
pay, hours of work and other conditions of employment.

4

ARTICLE I
RECOGNITION
The School Committee recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent
for the purposes of establishing salaries, wages, hours, and other conditions of
employment for all School Bus Operators of the School Department of the Town of
Arlington.

The School Committee will not engage in any activity prohibited by the Collective
Bargaining Act.

ARTICLE II
UNION DUES AND INITIATION FEES
Employees may tender the initiation fee (if any) and monthly membership dues by
signing the authorization of Dues Form. During the life of this agreement and in
accordance with the terms of the form of authorization of Check-Off of Dues hereinafter
set forth, the School Committee agrees to deduct Union membership dues levied in
accordance with the constitution of the Union from the pay of each employee who
executes or has executed such form and remit the aggregate amount to the Treasurer of
the Union along with a list of employees who have had said dues deducted. If possible,
such deductions shall be remitted to the Treasurer of the Union prior to the tenth (10th)
day of the month following deductions. An employee wishing to withdraw from the
union must notify the treasurer of the Union sixty (60) days in advance. This notification
must be in writing.

5

ARTICLE III
RIGHTS OF MANAGEMENT

The listing of the following specific rights of management in this article is not intended to
be considered restrictive of or as a waiver of any of the rights of the employer not listed
herein.
1. Among such management responsibilities as are vested exclusively in the
employer are the following: the right to hire, promote, transfer, assign and
retain employees in positions with the department and to suspend, demote,
discharge or take other disciplinary action against employees for just cause, to
relieve employees from duty because of lack of work or other legitimate
reasons, to determine the method, means and personnel by which such
operation are to be conducted and to take whatever action may be necessary to
carry out the work of the town in situations of emergency.
2. The employer shall have the freedom of action to discharge its responsibility
for the successful operation of the Arlington Public Schools, including the
scheduling of operations, the methods and materials used in carrying out the
functions of the Arlington Public School and the extent to which its own or
other facilities and/or personnel shall be used. Nothing in this article shall be
construed to conflict with Chapter 31 of the General Laws of Massachusetts.
3. Such inherent management responsibilities are not subject to arbitration and
shall remain exclusively with the employer except as they may be shared with
the union by the provisions of this agreement.
4. The School Committee reserves and retains the right to contract out work, or
sub-contract out work. Pursuant to the exercise of such rights, no employee
shall be laid off if there is available work in the same position or in a similar
position, which he/she is qualified to fill and is eligible to fill under civil
service law and rules.
5.

6

ARTICLE IV
NO STRIKE CLAUSE

1. No employee covered by this agreement shall engage in, induce or encourage any
strike, work stoppage, slow down, or withholding of services, such as refusal to
work emergency overtime as may be required during the life of this agreement.
The union agrees that neither it nor any of its officers or agents will call, institute,
authorize, participate in, sanction or ratify any such strike, work stoppage, slow
down, or withholding of services.
2. Should any employee or group of employees covered by this agreement engage in
any strike, work stoppage, slow down or withholding of services the union shall
forthwith disavow any such strike, work stoppage, slow down or withholding of
services, and shall refuse to recognize any picket line established in connection
therewith. Furthermore, at the request of the municipal employer, the union shall
take all reasonable means to induce such employee or groups of employees to
terminate the strike, work stoppage, slow down or withholding of services and
return to work forthwith.
3. In consideration of the performance by the union of its obligations under sections
1 and 2 of this article, there shall be no liability on the part of the union, nor its
officers or agents for any damages resulting from the unauthorized breach of the
agreement contained in this article by individual members of the union.

ARTICLE V
DISCRIMINATION AND COERCION
There shall be no discrimination by Director, Superintendents, Business Agents, or other
agents of the School Committee against any employee because of her activity or
membership in the Union. The School Committee further agrees that there will be no
discrimination against any member for her adherence to any provision of this agreement
or her refusal to comply with any order, which would violate this agreement.

7

ARTICLE VI
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
Any grievance or dispute which may arise between the parties involving the application,
meaning or interpretation of this agreement shall be settled in the following manner:

Step I

The Union Steward and or representative, with or without the aggrieved
employee shall take up the grievance of dispute in writing with the
Director of Transportation within three (3) working days of the date of the
grievance or his/her knowledge of its occurrence. The Director shall
attempt to adjust the matter and shall respond to the Steward within three
(3) working days. If the grievance has not been settled, it shall be
presented in writing to the Superintendent or his representative within
three (3) working days after the Director's response is due. The
Superintendent shall respond to the Steward in writing within five (5)
working days.

Step II

If the grievance still remains unadjusted, it shall be presented to the
School Committee in writing within three (3) working days after the
response of the Superintendent is due. The School Committee shall
respond in writing within thirty (30) days.

Step III

If the grievance is still unsettled, either party may, within fifteen (15)
working days after the reply of the School Committee is due, by written
notice to the other, request arbitration.

The arbitration proceeding shall be conducted by an Arbitrator selected by
the School Committee and the Union within seven (7) days after notice
has been given. If the parties fail to select an Arbitrator, either party may
submit the dispute to the American Arbitration Association in accordance
with its rules.

8

The decision of the Arbitrator shall be final and binding upon the parties
provided that the decision of the Arbitrator does not usurp the functions of
the School Committee or the proper exercise of its judgment and
discretion under law and this agreement. The Arbitrator shall be requested
to issue his decision within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of
testimony and argument.

The expense for the Arbitrator's services and the proceedings shall be
borne equally by the School Committee and the Union. Only the Union
and/or its designated agent and the School Committee and/or its
designated agent may submit a matter to arbitration.

ARTICLE VII
CIVIL SERVICE AND SENIORITY
Seniority rights will be determined in accordance with Section 15D of Chapter 31 of the
General Laws.
The School Committee and the Union shall recognize and adhere to all civil service and
State labor laws, rules and regulations relative to promotions, transfers, discharges,
removals and suspensions.

The Union reserves the right to represent employees under any such established
procedure.
ARTICLE VIII
JOB BIDDING AND POSTING
If the School Committee determines that a bus position is vacant and it desires to fill such
vacancy, within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, such vacancy
shall be posted in a conspicuous place for five (5) working days (listing pay, duties and

9

qualifications). Employees interested shall apply in writing within the five (5) working
day period. The School Committee will award the position to the most qualified senior
applicant in accordance with civil service regulations.

The Director of Transportation shall notify the Union Steward when a vacancy is
filled. The Director of Transportation shall notify the Union Steward of any vacancy
that arises during the summer.
ARTICLE IX
OVERTIME AND CALL BACK
Employees covered by this agreement shall be paid overtime at the rate of one and onehalf (11/2) times their regular rate of pay for work in excess of eight (8) hours in one (1)
day and forty (40) hours in one (1) week. Employees shall be paid at the rate of two (2)
times their regular rate of pay for all hours of work performed on Sunday.

Overtime shall be equally and impartially distributed among personnel who ordinarily
perform such work in the normal course of their workweek.

Any employee called back to work on the same day after having completed his assigned
work and left his place of employment and before his next regular scheduled starting
time, shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half (1 1/2) for all hours worked on recall.
He will be guaranteed a minimum of two (2) hours call back for mail or package
deliveries and a minimum of four (4) hours call back for cancellations, for trips. This
guarantee shall also apply to work on Sunday.
The employer shall keep records of the overtime work. In the case of a grievance
involving such records, they shall be subject to examination by the Union Representative
or the Shop Steward with the Director.

There shall be no discrimination against any employee who declines to work overtime if
he/she has a legitimate reason.

10

ARTICLE X
UNION REPRESENTATIVES
A written list of Union stewards and other representatives shall be furnished to the School
Committee immediately after their designation and the Union shall notify the School
Committee of any changes.

Elected delegates may attend meetings of State and National bodies without loss of pay
provided two weeks' notice is given in writing to the Director.

Union representatives may be granted time off, with the approval of the Director of
Transportation, to settle disputes or grievances, without loss of pay.
ARTICLE XI
MEAL PERIODS
All full-time employees working eight (8) hours per day shall be granted an unpaid meal
period of one (1) hour's duration if the schedule allows. For example, an employee
working a regular schedule from 6:30 am to 3:30 pm shall have an unpaid meal period of
one (1) hour. If a full-time employee is required to work through the one (1) hour unpaid
meal period, the employee may either finish his/her shift at 2:30 p.m. or be compensated
at the rate of time and one half (11/2) for all time worked over eight (8) hours.

Part-time employees who work less than six (6) hours per day shall not be entitled to an
unpaid meal period.
ARTICLE XII
HOLIDAYS
In order to qualify for holiday pay, a regular employee shall have worked on the last
regularly scheduled work day prior to, and the next regularly scheduled work day
following such holiday, unless it is an absence for which compensation is payable under

11

Article 7C of the bylaws of the Town. The following days in each year shall be
considered as holidays:
New Year's Day
Patriot's Day
Presidents' Day
Labor Day
Good Friday

Veterans' Day
Columbus Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day

Martin Luther King Day
Thanksgiving Day
Friday after Thanksgiving
Christmas Day

Christmas Eve shall be considered a full-day holiday when it falls on any day from
Monday through Friday inclusive.

Whenever a legal holiday falls on Saturday, another working day off with pay shall be
arranged at the discretion of the department head.

If the holiday falls on Sunday, the following day will be the working day off Holiday
pay shall be a day's pay at straight time rate.

If a holiday occurs within an employee's vacation period the employee will not be
charged a vacation day on that day. Any employee required to work on a
holiday shall receive
in addition to the regular holiday pay an amount equal to one and one-half (1 1/2) times
his/her regular rate of pay for all hours worked, but in no case shall this be less than an
amount equal to two (2) hours work at the above rate. If an employee is required to work
in excess of eight (8) hours on a holiday, double time his/her regular rate of pay will be
paid for all hours scheduled beyond their regular shift, regular shift being 6:30 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.

ARTICLE XIII
VACATIONS

Vacation leave with pay shall be granted to all regularly employed personnel. These
employees are provided opportunity to accrue vacation leave in order that he/she may

12

have periods of rest and relaxation from his/her job for health and well-being, consistent
with work load and staffing requirements of their department. Employees are encouraged
to request vacation leave in blocks of time to ensure rest and relaxation.
A. Accrual Rates
1.

Vacation leave credits are not accumulated and cannot be used during
the first six (6) months.

2.

All regularly employed personnel shall be credited with six (6) days of
vacation leave upon completion of his/her first six (6) months of
service as long as these employees do not receive more vacation leave
in their first year of employment than granted in number three below.

3.

All regularly employed personnel with more than six (6) months but
fewer than five (5) years of service shall receive twelve (12) days of
vacation leave.

4.

All regularly employed personnel with more than five (5) years but
fewer than ten (10) years of service shall receive eighteen (18) days of
vacation leave.

5.

All regularly employed personnel with more than ten (10) years but
fewer than twenty-five (25) years of service shall receive twenty-four
(24) days of vacation leave.

6.

All regularly employed personnel with more than twenty-five (25)
years of service shall receive thirty (30) days of vacation leave.

B. Vacation leave will be granted to all eligible employees, according to their accrual
rates, on January 1 of each year.
C. The scheduling of vacation periods with pay shall be arranged and approved prior
to use by the Director of Transportation for such time or times as best serve the
public interest and department efficiency. In case of conflict in scheduling
vacation time, preference will be given based on seniority or other provisions
established by the Director of Transportation.

13

D. Vacation leave may not be accumulated from one vacation year to another, except
when in the opinion of the Director of Transportation, it is impossible or
impractical to use because of work schedules or other emergencies. Requests for
such carry-over must be submitted to the appropriate appointing authority before
the end of the calendar year in which the vacation leave was granted.

E. Absences on account of sickness in excess of those authorized or for personal
reasons not provided for under leave regulations may, at the discretion of the
Director of Transportation, be charged to vacation leave.

F. Whenever employment is terminated by dismissal through no fault of the
employee, or by resignation, retirement, or death, without his/her having been
granted a vacation to which he/she is entitled, he/she or in the case of his/her
death, his/her estate shall be paid vacation pay at the regular rate of compensation
at which it was earned payable to him/her at termination of employment.

G. If a holiday falls within the vacation period, it shall not count as part of the
vacation allowance.
H. Regular part-time employees accrue and earn vacation leave on a pro-rated basis
according to the differences between their regular scheduled workweek and the
normal workweek.
I. Vacation leave credits shall not be advanced for use prior to their being earned.

A member of the bargaining unit may be allowed to take up to one week of
vacation during the school year when school is in session in addition to school
vacation weeks, with the following limitations:
1.

No vacation may be granted in the month of September or in the months
of May or June (on or prior to the last day of school).

14

2.

Only one member of the bargaining unit at any specific time may use
vacation during the school year when school is in session. Two or more
members of the bargaining unit may not be on vacation at the same time
during the school year while school is in session.

3.

The bargaining unit member must request vacation as far in advance as
possible, but in no event less than two weeks prior to the start of the
intended vacation. This notice is to provide the Director with sufficient
time to secure substitute coverage.

4.

If the Director of Transportation is not able to secure substitute coverage,
the vacation will not be authorized.

J. Employees who have accumulated at least 18 days of vacation leave may sell
back one week (5 days) of vacation per year provided notice is provided by
November 15 and approved by the Director of Transportation, Human Resources
Director and Superintendent.
ARTICLE XIV
SICK LEAVE
Employees must complete six (6) months of service before qualifying for sick leave, at
the end of which time seven and one-half (71/2) days credit will be allowed.
Earned sick leave with pay will be limited to one and one quarter (11/4) days per month,
not to exceed fifteen (15) days per year, and will be credited on the first day of each
month. Sick leave credit will begin on the first day of the month following employment
except as otherwise provided in above paragraph. Employees having an aggregate of
more than two (2) days of authorized leave without pay in any calendar month shall not
receive sick leave credit for that month. Employees having unauthorized absence without
pay in any calendar month shall not receive sick leave credit for that month.

Sick leave with pay shall be granted to employees only when they are incapacitated from
the performance of their duties by sickness, injury or quarantine by health authorities.
Sick leave will commence on the day notification of the illness is given by the employee,
his family, or her physician. Such notification shall be given a minimum of one hour
prior to the starting time for employees scheduled to begin work before 8:00 a.m.
15

For absence on account of sickness, the Director or School Committee may require
evidence in the form of a physician's certificate for the necessity for absence, such
certificate to give the nature of illness and the expected duration. If such certificate is not
filed after request therefore, such absence may be applied, at the discretion of the
Director, to vacation leave or leave without pay. The Director shall require such
certificate at the end of two (2) weeks of illness and subsequent certificates may be
required at the discretion of the Director or the School Committee.

Part-time employees whose hours of work follow a regular schedule will be allowed such
proportion of sick leave credit as their actual part-time service bears to full-time service.
Employees injured on the job and receiving Workers' Compensation may, upon request,
be granted such sick leave allowance payment as will when added to the amount of
Workers' Compensation, result in the payment to them of their full salary, provided they
have such sick leave credit. Permanent employees suffering an injury on the job related
to their work shall continue to earn ordinary sick leave credit and vacation allowance
during their absence from work due to such injury.

In the case of death or retirement of an employee, the employee or her estate shall be paid
twenty-five percent (25%) of the employee's unused and accumulated sick leave at the
rate in effect at such time, any employee hired after July 1, 1997, will have sick leave
buyback limited to one hundred and fifty (150) days.

ARTICLE XV
FUNERAL LEAVE
An absence with pay, to the extent necessary but not to exceed five (5) days shall be
granted in case of the death of immediate family, meaning spouse, child, father, mother,
sister, brother, grandparent, grandchild, father and mother-in-law. An absence of one (1)
day shall be granted in case of death of an employee's other in-laws, aunt or uncle, or
grandparents of spouse.

16

ARTICLE XVI
JURY DUTY
Employees who present jury summons and proof of jury service will be entitled to leave
with pay for such jury duty.
ARTICLE XVII
LONGEVITY
An employee who has completed continuous full time years of service with the
Town/School Department shall receive annual longevity pay in accordance with the
following schedule:
a.

Five years or more but less than ten - $300.

b.

Ten years or more but less than fifteen - $500.

c.

Fifteen years or more but less than twenty - $700.

d.

Twenty years or more but less than twenty-five - $900.

e.

Twenty-five years or more but less than thirty - $1,100.

f.

Thirty or more years - $1,300.

Beginning July 1, 2019, the above schedule will be amended as follows:
a.

Five years or more but less than ten - $400.

b.

Ten years or more but less than fifteen - $600.

c.

Fifteen years or more but less than twenty - $800.

d.

Twenty years or more but less than twenty-five - $1,000.

e.

Twenty-five years or more but less than thirty - $1,200.

f.

Thirty or more years - $1,400.

An employee who has or will reach the fifth, tenth, fifteenth, twentieth, twenty-fifth, or
thirtieth anniversary date of continuous full time service in the calendar year shall be paid
in a lump sum his respective longevity payment on the regular pay date nearest December
first (1st), an employee who resigns, retires or, in the case of his death, his designated
beneficiary or estate shall be paid prorated longevity pay for such year with his final

17

paycheck. If an employee is discharged for cause, said employee shall not be eligible to
receive any portion of the longevity benefit. Longevity benefit is prorated for part-time
employees with minimum of twenty hours per week.
ARTICLE XVIII
PERSONAL LEAVE
A personal leave of absence of one day per year with pay shall be granted to all full time
employees who have completed one year of full time service. Employees who do not use
sick leave shall be granted personal leave without loss of pay up to five (5) days per
calendar year in accordance with the following:

1.

Employees who do not report out sick from January 1 to March 31 shall
receive one (1) additional day.

2.

Employees who do not report out sick from April 1 to June 30 shall receive
one (1) additional personal day.

3.

Employees who do not report out sick from July 1 to September 30 shall
receive one (1) personal day.

4.

Employees who do not report out sick from October 1 to December 30 shall
receive one (1) additional personal day.

5.

In addition to the foregoing, those employees who do not report out sick more
than four (4) days during the calendar year shall receive one (1) additional
personal day.

6.

Personal days earned for good sick leave record may not be accumulated
beyond one year from the date of its being credited.

7.

Employees receiving Workers' Compensation shall not be eligible for
Personal days under this program.

Application for personal leave and the reason for such request must be made orally or in
writing to the Director whenever possible at least twenty-four (24) hours before taking
such leave.

18

ARTICLE XIX
HEALTH AND WELFARE
If group insurance for town employees represented by AFSCME Local 680 is modified,
said modifications shall apply to the school bus operators.
ARTICLE XX
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
All bus operators shall receive a credit of up to $400 each contract year for the purchase
of authorized uniforms approved by the Director of Transportation. Beginning on July 1,
2019 (FY20), all bus operators shall receive a credit of up to $450 each contract year for
the purchase of authorized uniforms approved by the Director of Transportation.
ARTICLE XXI
CLASSIFICATION PLAN AND PAY RATES
School Bus Operators shall be paid in accordance with the rates of pay as set forth in
Appendix A. Employees hired between January 1 and June 30 will advance to the next
step on January 1st, and employees hired between July 1 and December 31 will advance
to the next step on July 1st.

There shall be:
A.

Full time academic bus operators,

B.

Full time twelve (12) month a year bus operators,

C.

Part time twelve (12) month bus operators,

D.

Part time academic bus operators.
Wage Increase

Effective July 1, 2018 — 2% increase to all steps. Add a new Step 8 at 3% above FY 18
Step 7
Effective July 1, 2019 — 2% increase to Steps 1-7; 2.5% increase to Step 8
Effective July 1, 2020 - 1% increase to all steps

19

In order to be placed on Step 7, an employee must have been employed as a Bus Operator
for the District for at least 10 years prior. The maximum step placement for a new
employee who has previous experience as a Bus Operator is Step 6.

ARTICLE XXII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
A.

Bulletin Board — Announcements shall be posted in a conspicuous place
where employees enter or leave the premises. Parties to this agreement, both
of whom may use the bulletin boards for notices of a routine nature, agree that
it would be improper to post denunciatory or inflammatory written material on
bulletin boards.

B.

Should any provisions of this agreement be found to be in violation of any
federal or state law, Town By-Laws, civil service rule or School Committee
rules and regulations, all other provisions of this agreement shall remain in
full force and effect for the duration of this agreement.

C.

No Discrimination — The parties to this agreement agree that they shall not
discriminate against any employee because of race, creed, color, sex or age in
accordance with the law and that such persons shall receive the full protection
of this agreement.

D.

Access to Premises — The School Committee agrees to permit representatives
of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, AFLCIO State Council #93, and/or Local 680 to enter the premises at any time
during the working day for individual discussion of working conditions with
employees, provided care is exercised by such representative that they do not
interfere with the performance of duties assigned to the employees.

E.

The School Department agrees to furnish and/or allow the Union to have
access to any and all records dealing with individual wages and sick time.

20

F.

The School Committee agrees that it will have one (1) member of Local 680
to act with and in conjunction with the Town's compensation agent. This
name is to be submitted by the Union.

G.

If a training program is instituted, the School Committee agrees to pay the
employees in this program at the regular rate while being trained.

H.

Any employee of the Union has the right to have a Steward or any official of
the Union appear with them during an investigation that could result in
discipline or at a disciplinary hearing before any official or designee of the
School Department.

Leaves of absence without pay may be granted by the School Committee in its
discretion.

J.

The hours of operation shall be made known prior to the school year.

K.

Commercial Driver's License (C.D.L.) — The school bus operators must
possess a valid C.D.L. license with proper endorsement required by the State
of Massachusetts. In addition, drivers must also possess a valid school bus
license endorsed by the Department of Telecommunications & Energy

L.

The School Department will reimburse employees for all school bus licenses
and renewals.

M.

The Committee shall retain discretion to implement a certification program
during the term of the contract and offer such program to employees on a
voluntary basis subject to negotiations with the union as to terms and
conditions.

21

N.

Biweekly Pay
With sixty days' notice to the Union, the School Committee has the right to
implement bi-weekly payroll. Upon implementation, bargaining unit members
shall receive a payment of two hundred dollars ($200).

ARTICLE XXIII
EFFECTIVE DATE
The signing of this agreement by the authorized representatives of the Union and the
School Committee shall constitute the effective date of this agreement.

ARTICLE XXIV
TERMINATION
This agreement will remain in effect until June 30, 2021. Either party may terminate this
agreement provided such termination is transmitted through the registered United States
Mail to the responsible signatories to the agreement no less than thirty (30) days prior to
June 30, 2021.
ARTICLE XXV
RENEWAL
Should neither party to this agreement send a notice of termination as described in Article
XXII, this agreement will be considered to have been automatically renewed for another
two years.

22

This agreement entered into this

if

day of

FOR THE ARLINGTON SCHOOL
COMMITTEE:

FOR THE UNION:

Chair,
Arlington School Committee

Representative,
AFSCME Council 93
0

President, AFSC

cal 680

Chapter Chair, AFSCME Local 680

23

APPENDIX A
2018.2019 Effective July 1, 2018
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 8

21.01
21.88
22.74
23.65
24.57
25.56
26.60
26.86

2019-2020 Effective July 1, 2019
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 8

21.43
22.32
23.19
24.13
25.06
26.07
27.13
27.53

2020-2021 Effective July 1, 2020
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 8

21.65
22.54
23.42
24.37
25.31
26.33
27.40
27.81

24
