COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
BY AND BETWEEN
ANACONDA PUBLIC SCHOOLS
ANACONDA DEER LODGE COUNTY SCHOOL DISTRICT#10
AND

CLASSIFIED UNIT OF
THE ANACONDA TEACHERS' UNION
MONTANA FEDERATION OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES LOCAL
#502, AFT, AFL-CIO

August 1, 2021 through July 31, 2023

1

Table of Contents

ARTICLE I —RECOGNITION

3

ARTICLE II -SAVINGS CLAUSE

3

ARTICLE III -MEMBERSHIP/PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS
ARTICLE IV -WORKING RULES AND CONDITIONS
ARTICLE V -VACATIONS

3
4
6

ARTICLE VI -HOLIDAYS

7

ARTICLE VII-SICK LEAVE

7

ARTICLE VIII -PERSONAL LEAVE

8

ARTICLE IX -SENIORITY AND JOB SECURITY

8

ARTICLE X -HEALTH AND WELFARE

9

ARTICLE XI- GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

9

ARTICLE XII-LEAVES OF ABSENCE

12

ARTICLE XIII -MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

12

ARTICLE XIV-TERMS OF AGREEMENT

13

AGREEMENT
August 1, 2021 to July 31, 2023
SECRETARIES/PARAPROFESSIONALS
THIS AGREEMENT made and entered into on this
day of August 2021, by and
between Anaconda School District No. 10, of Anaconda-Deer Lodge County, Montana, Board of
Trustees, hereinafter referred to singularly and collectively as "Employer" and the Classified
Unit of the Anaconda Teachers' Union, Local 502, MFPE, AFT, AFL-CIO, hereinafter referred to
as the "Union".
It is hereby agreed that the general purpose of this Agreement, is to promote the
mutual interests of the undersigned parties, and to continue the present amicable relations
between EMPLOYER and EMPLOYEES.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the terms and conditions herein contained, it is
hereby mutually agreed by and between the parties hereto as follows:

ARTICLE I -RECOGNITION
The Employer recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive representative of all
secretaries and all paraprofessional employees who work as classroom teaching assistants in
Special Services, within the bargaining unit as defined and certified by the Board of Personnel
Appeals. This bargaining unit shall be known as the classified unit of the Anaconda Teachers'
Union.

ARTICLE II -SAVINGS CLAUSE
In the event any of these provisions is declared illegal, the parties shall immediately
meet and negotiate a substitute provision.

ARTICLE III -MEMBERSHIP/PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS
A. Employees covered by this Agreement may become and remain members of the
Union or refrain from doing so at their choosing. No employee in the bargaining unit
shall be required to become a member of the Union as a condition of employment.

3

B. Upon voluntary written authorization of any employee within this bargaining unit, the
Employer shall deduct from the pay of the employee the monthly amount of dues as
certified by the authorized officer of the Union. Such forms shall be collected by the
Union and delivered to the Employer no later than the first (1st) workday of such
month in which the change becomes effective. Such change shall be limited to one
change per contract year other than any change made at the time of the renewal of
the contract.
C. The Union shall indemnify and hold the Employer harmless against any claim made
and against any suit instituted against the Employer, on account of its compliance
with the provisions of this Article.

ARTICLE IV -WORKING RULES AND CONDITIONS
A.

Wages:

Secretaries K-6

2018-

2019-

2020-

2021-

2022-

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

16.65

17.01

17.46

17.81

17.99

17.06

17.44

18.05

18.41

18.59

15.40

15.74

16.05

16.37

16.53

Hourly Wage

Secretary 7-12

Hourly Wage

Paraprofessionals *

Hourly Wage

Paraprofessionals who hold an Associates or a Bachelor's Degree shall receive an additional stipend of
$.20 / hour.

Paraprofessionals with
AA/BA
Hourly Wage
15.60

15.94

16.25

16.57

16.73

4

B.

The Employer shall have 180 school calendar days to evaluate new employees to
determine the individual's competency and permanent employment.

c.

No permanent employee shall be terminated except for just cause.

D. At the Principals' discretion, Secretaries may work the same number of days as their
building Administrator/Principal. Secretaries can be assigned no less than 1477.5
hours and no more than 1552.5 hours in a school year, except at Anaconda High
School, where the secretary can be assigned up to 222 days to meet the needs of the
building principal. Employees shall normally be scheduled to work 8 hours in any
given workday. On occasion with mutual agreement between the Supervisor and the
employees, the workday may be altered. For example, if a Secretary is normally
scheduled to work 8 hours per day a Principal may use a Secretary for more than 8
hours per day in order that they may leave earlier on a Friday (or any other mutually
agreed upon day) as long as the hours worked do not exceed forty hours for the
week. Occasional overtime may be worked with mutual agreement between the
Supervisor and the employee. Under extenuating circumstances an employee may be
directed without mutual consent to work overtime.
E. The work year for paraprofessionals will at a minimum be 182 days. Hours may vary
depending on IEP requirements.
F. The Employer will provide all bargaining unit members with a minimum of one (1) day
per school year for training and instruction on issues relevant to the position.
G. Whenever the Employer determines that a vacancy is to be filled, the Employer shall
post notice of such vacancy within the bargaining unit. Any employee may apply for
either reassignment or transfer. The Employer may post the position externally at the
same time, but internal applicants will be given first consideration.
H. Employees whose position requires them to work in more than one location shall be
reimbursed per IRS rates for travel between buildings.
i.

All employees covered by this Agreement shall be given free passes into all school
sponsored activities.

J. School Closure: For those days that are not made up by the whole district, the
employee shall have the option of taking vacation, or they may request to be assigned
for other duties for that time.
K. Longevity Clause
Five (5) years or more with the School District - $125 annually
Ten (10) years or more with the School District - $200 annually
Fifteen (15) years or more with the School District - $300 annually

5

Longevity shall be paid in a lump sum with the January pay period. A partial year
will not count in the total for longevity.
L. Retirement: TRS Bargaining Unit Employees planning to retire can cash-out accrued
sick leave at a rate of 25% of the cash value, with the option of rolling it into their TRS
Account.
M. Supervisor: The Building Principals will be direct supervisor for paraprofessionals in
each school building. Principals will evaluate Paras using the Danielson model. SPED
Director will oversee placement of Paraprofessionals.
N. PIR Days— The District will provide Paraprofessionals local training during MFPE
conferences. Attendees will be paid for their time at their normal rate of pay.

ARTICLE V -VACATIONS
A. Annual vacation leave is provided by law. Each permanent, full-time employee shall
earn annual vacation leave credits from the first day of employment. For calculating
vacation credits, 2080 hours (52 weeks x 40 hours) shall equal one (1) year. However,
employees are not entitled to any vacation leave with pay until they have been
continuously employed for a period of six (6) calendar months, as required by statute.
B. Permanent, part-time employees are entitled to pro-rated annual vacation benefits, if
they have worked the qualifying period.
c. An employee may not accrue annual vacation leave credits while in a leave-without
pay status.
D. Vacation leave credits are earned at a yearly rate calculated in accordance with the
following schedule:
(.058xhrs worked) for a maximum of 120 hours
1 day through 10 years
(.069xhrs worked) for a maximum of 144 hours
10 years through 15 years
(.081xhrs worked) for a maximum of 168 hours
15 years through 20 years
(.092xhrs worked) for a maximum of 192 hours
20 years on
E. Annual vacation leave may be accumulated to a total not to exceed two (2) times the
maximum number of days earned annually as of the end of the first pay period of the
next calendar year. Excess vacation time is not forfeited if taken within ninety (90)
calendar days from the last day of the calendar year in which the excess was accrued.
F. At the end of each school year the Employer agrees to reimburse the employee for
unused vacation leave at his/her current rate of pay.
G. The dates of employee's annual vacation shall be determined by agreement between
each employee and his/her supervisor with regard to the best interest of the
Employer as well as the best interest of each employee.
6

H.

The Superintendent's Office and Clerk's Office will be informed in writing what dates
have been awarded.

ARTICLE VI -HOLIDAYS
A.

All employees covered by this Agreement shall be granted the following holidays off
with pay which occur during the employee's work period where applicable and listed
below:
* New Year's Eve — December 31
* New Year's Day - January 1
* Good Friday - Friday before Easter
* Memorial Day - Last Monday in May
* Labor Day - First Monday in September
*Thanksgiving Day - Fourth Thursday in November
* Day after Thanksgiving - Fourth Friday in November
* Christmas Eve Day - December 24
* Christmas Day - December 25

B.

School holidays when worked will be paid at the rate of time and a half.

ARTICLE VII-SICK LEAVE
A. Sick leave will be in compliance with MCA, 2-18-618, 1985
B. Family sick leave is the necessary absence due to an illness or death in your
immediate family and is charged against accrued sick leave rather than vacation or
leave without pay. In taking emergency sick leave, you are limited to five workdays
per calendar year for illness in the immediate family and five workdays for each
death in the immediate family. Your immediate family is defined as your spouse,
parents and grandparents of either spouse, grandchildren, brothers and sisters of
either spouse, son-in-law and daughter-in-law, children, and the household
dependents of either spouse.
c. Any employee returning to duty after an illness which exceeds five (5) days, may be
required to present a statement from his/her physician and/or submit to an
examination by a physician designated by the Superintendent. If such an
examination is requested, it shall be at the expense of the Employer.
D.

A recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of
pregnancy, and recovery therefrom and any temporary disability resulting there
from as any other temporary disability for all job-related purposes.

7

E.

Additional Sick Leave Requests: Upon the exhaustion of an employee's sick leave,
the affected employee may submit a request for additional leave donations from the
bargaining unit. The leave request shall be submitted on the Employer's provided
form and it is up to each individual employee to decide if! how much to donate.

ARTICLE VIII-PERSONAL LEAVE
Each employee may elect to take up to four (4) personal days per year for personal
reasons. Personal leave requests will be submitted to the building administrator and approved
by the Superintendent.
Note: Personal leave does not accrue and has no cash value.

ARTICLE IX -SENIORITY AND JOB SECURITY
The principles of seniority will be recognized and applied in all cases during the life of this
contract, under the following conditions:
A. Right to selection of position and building when an opening occurs, provided the
applicant has the qualifications and ability to perform the work involved. The
applicant must be approved by the Board of Trustees.
B. Seniority in case of reduction of staff. Employees whose seniority dates are the same
shall have their respective seniority rank determined by the order in which the
employee's name appears in the original Board minutes at the time of hiring.
c. Seniority will be computed from the date the employee began regular uninterrupted
service with the Employer.
D. Seniority shall be forfeited by discharge for cause, voluntary termination, or as the
result of continuous absence from work because of illness for twelve (12) continuous
calendar months.
E. Recall from layoff shall be in reverse order. In recalling employees, the Employer shall
send a certified, return receipt letter to the last known address of the employee with
a copy to the Union. The employee shall have fourteen (14) days to report to work
from the date of receiving such notification. Recall rights shall terminate twelve
months from date of layoff.
F. Any employee re-elected from the recall list shall not be required to serve an
additional probationary period. Any recalled employee, who is laid off because of
staff reduction, shall return to the recall list.
G. Two seniority lists - one for secretaries and one for paraprofessionals shall be
maintained by the Employer. The seniority list shall be revised to reflect the
employee's seniority status as of October 1 st of each year and shall be posted within
thirty (30) days thereafter. Employees shall have fifteen (15) calendar days after the
8

posting of the seniority list to raise objections to their seniority rights. Any employee
failing to protest his/her seniority date as shown on such list shall be considered to
have confirmed his/her seniority as listed.

ARTICLE X -HEALTH AND WELFARE
A. Union members, along with representatives of other employee groups covered by
the same group health insurance plan, shall consider insurance options and make
recommendations to the Board of Trustees regarding insurance
carriers/administrators and policies at least once per year. The Employer's only
obligation is to pay the required contribution to the carrier/administrator finally
selected by the Board. No warranties are expressed or implied as to the coverage,
benefits, or performance of any insurance carrier/administrator.

For the 2021-2023 school years the Employer will contribute up to $752.43 per month
to the Employer's group health insurance plan carrier/administrator towards the
insurance premiums for each participating permanent secretary or paraprofessional
beginning on the first day of the month following that permanent secretary's or
paraprofessional's first day of work as a participating permanent secretary or
paraprofessional. Should the $752.43 exceed the actual amount of the premium for
the $1000 deductible plan, the Employer will only pay the full premium amount.
Additional premiums shall be paid by payroll deduction. Such contributions shall
cease upon an employee's termination.
B. The Employer shall contribute the sum of fifteen ($15.00) per month per permanent
employee to the group life insurance program for the twelve (12) month period.

ARTICLE XI-GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
A. A grievance shall mean a complaint that there has been an alleged violation of a
specific provision of this Agreement.
B. As used in this Article, the term "employee" shall mean:
1. A member of the bargaining unit.
2. A group of bargaining unit members having the same grievance; or
3. The Union.
c. Procedure:

9

Step 1: An employee and the Union Grievance Committee chairman shall first
discuss the problem with the building administrator.
Step 2: If the matter is not satisfactorily adjusted within two (2) school days after
the last discussion, the employee, with the assistance of the grievance
committee chairman shall submit the grievance in writing within five (5) school
days to the Superintendent of Schools. The Superintendent may request a
meeting with the employee and the grievance committee chairman prior to
making his decision, but in any event, must render his decision in writing with
copies to the employee and the Union within ten (10) days of written submission
to him by the employee.
Step 3: The Union shall have five (5) days to submit the unresolved grievance to
the Board of Trustees. The Board may request a meeting with the employee and
the grievance committee chairman prior to making its decision, but in any event,
must render its decision in writing with copies to the employee and the Union
within twenty (20) days of written submission to it by the employee.
Step 4: Arbitration
(a) Procedure: In the event that the parties are unable to resolve a grievance
involving an unresolved and disputed interpretation of this Agreement, it
may be submitted, only at the option of the Union to arbitration as
defined herein, provided a notice of appeal to arbitration is filed in the
office of the Superintendent within ten (10) days of the receipt of the
decision of the School District in step 3.
(b) Selection of Arbitrator: Upon submission of a grievance to arbitration
under the terms of the procedure, the parties shall, within five (5) days
after receipt of the notice provided in (a), above, attempt to agree upon
the selection of an arbitrator. If no agreement on an arbitrator is reached
after five (5) days, either party may, within ten (10) days, request the
Board of Personnel Appeals to submit to both parties a list of five (5)
names. Within five (5) days of receipt of the list, the parties shall select an
arbitrator by striking names in alternate order. The name remaining shall
be the arbitrator. Failure by the Union to request an arbitration list within
the time periods provided herein shall constitute a waiver of the
grievance.
(c) Hearing: The grievance shall be heard by a single arbitrator and the
parties shall have the right to a hearing at which time both parties will
have the opportunity to submit evidence, offer testimony, present
witnesses, and make oral or written arguments relating to the issues
before the arbitrator.
(d) Decision: The decision by the arbitrator shall be rendered within thirty
(30) days after the close of the hearing, or within twenty (20) days after
the deadline for mailing of post hearing briefs, if the arbitrator so
instructs. The arbitrator's decision will be in writing and will set forth
10

his/her findings of fact, reasoning, and conclusions on the issues
submitted. Decisions by the arbitrator, in cases properly before him/her
shall be final and binding upon the parties, subject however to the
limitations of arbitration decisions as provided by Montana Law. The
arbitrator may issue compensatory awards to make the grievant(s) whole
for lost salary/benefits.
(e) Expenses: Each party shall bear its own expenses in connection with
arbitration, including expenses relating to the party's representatives,
witnesses, and any other expenses which the party incurs in connection
with presenting its case. The parties shall share equally fees and expenses
of the arbitrator, including the cost of the list of potential arbitrators, and
any other expenses which the parties mutually agree are necessary for
the conduct of the arbitration. In the event one party orders a transcript
of the arbitration, that party shall pay all costs thereof. When both parties
desire a copy, the costs shall be equally shared.
(f) Jurisdiction: The arbitrator shall have jurisdiction over grievances properly
before the arbitrator pursuant to the terms of this procedure. The
arbitrator will be without power or authority to make any decision which
requires the commission of an act prohibited by law or which violates the
terms of this Agreement. The arbitrator shall not have jurisdiction over
any grievance which has not been submitted to arbitration in compliance
with the terms of the grievance and arbitration procedure as outlined
herein. In considering any grievance, the arbitrator shall give due
consideration to the statutory rights and obligations of the School District
to efficiently manage and conduct the operations of the District.
D. Miscellaneous Provisions

1. Reprisals shall not be taken against any party of interest in the grievance procedure
by reason of such participation.
2. Any agreement between the District representative at any level and the grievant
shall constitute a waiver of any future appeal through the grievance procedure
concerning the particular grievance.
3. Once the grievant(s) or the Union has filed any complaint, appeal or other action
with any county, state or federal agency, court, tribunal or other forum involving
the same facts or circumstances all rights to file or pursue a grievance under this
Agreement shall be forever waived unless the grievance is remanded by the court
to the grievance procedure contained within this Agreement.
4. When it is mutually agreed that it is necessary to hold a grievance meeting during
school hours, individuals required to attend shall be excused with pay for that
meeting.
5. No employee at any stage of the grievance procedure shall be required to meet
with any administrator without Union Representation.
11

6. If a grievance arises from the action of authority higher than that of principal of a
school, the Union may present such grievance at the appropriate step of the
grievance procedure.
7. Only grievances involving unresolved and disputed interpretations of this
Agreement may be submitted to binding grievance arbitration as provided
herein.
8. For the period between May 15 and August 15 any reference to days or school
days herein shall mean normal business days, Monday through Friday, exclusive
of recognized holidays for which the school district business office is closed.

ARTICLE XII -LEAVES OF ABSENCE
A. Employees may be entitled to take a leave without pay not to exceed one (1) year for
good and sufficient reasons with prior approval of the Board of Trustees.
B. An employee who is under proper summons as a juror or subpoenaed to serve as a
witness shall collect all fees and allowances payable as a result of the service and
forward the fees to the appropriate accounting office. Juror fees or witness fees shall
be applied against the amount due the employee from the Employer. However, if an
employee elects to charge his/her juror time off or witness time off against his/her
annual leave, he/she shall not be required to remit his/her juror fees or witness fees
to his/her Employer. In no instance is an employee required to remit to his/her
Employer any expenses or mileage allowance paid him/her by the Court. The
Employer may prefer that the employee retain the jury/witness pay and that the
employee's wage payment be reduced accordingly.

ARTICLE XIII-MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

In compliance with 39-31-303, MCA, the Union shall recognize the prerogatives of the
Employer to manage, direct, and control its business all particulars, in such areas as, but not
limited to:
1. direct employees;
2. hire, promote, transfer, assign, and retain employees;
3. relieve employees from duties because of lack of work or funds or under conditions
where continuation of such work would be inefficient and non- productive;
4.

maintain the efficiency of government operations;

5. determine the methods, means, job classifications, and personnel by which the
agency operations are to be conducted;
6. take whatever actions may be necessary to carry out the mission of the agency in
situations of emergency; and
12

7. establish the methods and processes by which work is performed.

ARTICLE XIV-TERMS OF AGREEMENT
A. Term. This Agreement shall be effective August 1, 2021 and shall be binding until July

31, 2023. Either party may seek to renegotiate any portion of this Agreement by
giving written notice to the other prior to the termination date of the Agreement. If
such notice is given, this Agreement shall remain in force and effect pending all
negotiations concerning modification of any of the provisions thereof.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto set their hands on this

day of August 2021

By:

By:

Kevin Morley, Board Chairperson

Gayle Holm, Business Manager/Clerk

BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Anaconda School District No. 10 Anaconda, MT

By:

By:

Brian Tesson, President ATU

Kate Mattern, Negotiations Chair

CLASSIFIED UNIT
Anaconda Teachers' Union Local No. 502, MFPE, AFT, AFL-CIO

13
