STATE OF WISCONSIN
BEFCRE TRE 4RBITRATOR

*

In the Matter

of the Petition

of the

EDGERTON EDUCATION SUPPORT STAFF
To Initiate Arbitration
Between Said Petitioner

and

EDGERTON SCBOOL DISTRICT

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Case 30
No. 40835
INT/ARB - 4975
Decision No. 2593&A

APPEAR 4NCES:
Shannon E. Bradburv, Staff Counsel, Misconsin 4ssociation of School Boards, Inc.,
on behalf of the District
Mallory

K. Keener, Executive Director,
the .4ssociation

Capital

Area UniServ-South, on behalf of

ISTRODUCTION
On ADI’I~ 6, 1989, the Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission (WERC) appointed
the undersigned to act as Mediator-Arbitrator
pursuant to Section 111.70 (4) (cm) 6 of the
Municipal Emplovment Relations Act (MER4) in the dispute existing between the Edgerton
Education Support Staff (hereinafter the “Association” or the “Union” or “EESS”) and the
Edgerton School District (hereinafter the “Employer”, “District”, or “Board”).
On June 8,
1989, an arbitration hearing was held between the parties pursuant to statutory requirements
and the parties agreed to submit briefs. Briefing was completed on August 15, 1989. This
arbitration award is based upon a review of the evidence, exhibits and arguments, utilizing
the criteria set forth in Section 111.77 (4) (cm), Wm. Stats. (1985).
ISSUE
Shall the final offer of the School District
the Arbitrator?
CONTRACT

or that of the Association be acceoted by

TERM

There appears to be no dispute between the parties
shall run from Julv 1, 1988 through June 30, 1999.

in this regard.

The Contract

LIFE INSURANCE
4lthough this issue was addressed in briefs, there appears to be no substantive
disagreement between the partles. Both agree that the contract language shall be amended
only in so far that the District’s contribution to the life insurance oremlum shall be Increased
from 41%, as set forth in the previous contract, to 100% for all employees who work four
(4) hours or more per day.
DENTAL INSURANCE
Although this language is in dispute between the parties, the dollar difference between
Therefore, this issue shall not be controlling, but shall
the two is relatively insignificant.
be decided as part of the total award and shall not be dmcussed further here.
FAIR SH4RE
The Association’s

Position:

Many of
This is a small Union, representing approximately t,wenty-five employees.
For
the
most
part,
this
group
consmts
of
newer
those employees are not Union members.
employees who, it is argued, have not yet perceived the benefits of Union representation
or servxes available through It.
Therefore, the burden of representation has fallen upon a relatively small group of
senior emoloyees who have accepted and support organizational representation through the
Union.
The Unton afftrms that Fair Share is lust and deserved and would not Impose a burden
upon the District, which already recognizes the Fair Share concept with other bargaining
units with which It deals.
The District’s

Position:

The Board takes the position that the burden IS upon the Union to show the arbttrator
that Fair Share should be imposed through the arbitration orocess. Therefore, It has not
felt compelled to offer lengthy testimony or support in briefs in obposltion to the Union’s
demand.
The arbitrator is urged to reject a proposal for language which has not been adopted
In bargaining over a period of years of Union representation.
It points out that it would be
a burden to administer the program. Absent a showing of real need, the Union’s Fair Share
language should not be adopted.
Discussion:
It is well established that arbitrators are reluctant to impose contract language upon
parties in binding, final offer arbitrations.
Such changes should be resolved by the parties
at the table, where a give and take 1s oossible that does not exist when the process has
reached this stage.
As a result, I have subscribed to a three-prong
evaluating proposed contract language in arbitration.
-2-

test adopted by other arbitrators
This test is:

in

1.

Does the present contract

language give rise to conditions

?I.

Does the oroposed language remedy the condition?

that require change?

3. Does the proposed language imoose an unreasonable burden upon the other party?
In many awards, this last test is defined as a “quid pro quo”, and that may in fact be
a guide as to reasonableness. However, it is also possible that no direct quid pro quo is
involved in the analysis.
The burden of supporting the language change is upon the party proposing it, and the
District is correct here in its ascertion it is under no obltgation to concentrate upon the
issue, if it chooses not to do so.
Assuming foe the moment that the Union has sustained the first test, let us turn now
to the second and third. Fair Share, and its implementation, are not unusual in Wisconsin or
The language proposed here is stmilar to that in effect in the
in this school district.
Thus, it is reasonable to find that the proposed
Edgerton School District and elsewhere.
language would remedy the condition and that, notwithstanding some representations made
by the Board here, its implementation would not impose an unreasonable burden upon the
District.
The root question, then, is whet!ier the absence of Fair Share gives rtse to a condition
that requires change.
The Assoctatton’s position that equitv alone requtres support of its proposal has merit.
Fatr Share has become more usual than not in this State for public sector employers and
employees. The arguments enlisted here have been made many times elsewhere and many
This is particularly true when one considers
of the statements made cannot be disouted.
the large number of employees in this unit who take advantage of Union representation
without assuming the burden of paying its cost. New-hires are typically difficult to recrutt
into Union membership until experience convinces them of its benefits.
The question to be answered remains, however. That is whether the present condition
requires change. I think not. Surely Fair Share is desireable to the Union members and it
may well be that other workers are benefiting from Union representation and supoort in an
unfair manner. But, the District has other non-organized employee groups, as well as those
who are in unions. The same conditton occurs in other public sector employee groups in
Edgerton and adjoinIng areas. In the absence of a showing that this employee group has
been damaged by absence of Fair Share language, the Unions ftnal offer on this issue must fail.
WAGES AND HEALTH INSUR4NCE
These two remaintrig issues are constdered together here because of the
relationship between them as presented by the parttes at the hearing and in briefs.

close

Comparables:
There is some dispute between the oarties on comparables. Bowever, within the basic
comparable group there ts agreement that all conference schools should be included, a group
of SIX other school districts.
4 review of the exhibits presented by the parties would
indicate that additions proposed by either side would work to that side’s advantage but
would not so alter the information to be learned bv examining the conference schools alone
- 3 -

as to render that information meaningless. Therefore, the comparable group selected here
shall be the conference schools of Brodhead, Clinton. Evansville, Parkview, Beloit Turner
Reference here may be made to other comparable groups outside the basic
and Walworth.
list, but only in the context of the discussion.
The Union’s Position:
The Association makes two basic arguments. The first is based upon a defense of the
present contract language, which provides for full payment of health insurance premiums in
each contract year, as set forth in the present labor agreement.
The second argument is based upon the Union’s belief that the District’s wage offer
represents a quid pro quo that is insufficient compensation for giving up the present language.
It views the Board’s final offer as an attempt to “divide and conquer” in two respects.
Only nine of the Support Staff members avail themselves of health insurance benefits.
By
giving a larger wage increase than the Union is requesting, the employer is attempting to
divide the employees between those interested in wages only and those to whom health and
other benefits are of primary importance.
The Union also believes that the District’s tactic here is designed to drive a wedge
between the EESS and other represented District emplovees who presently enjoy a health
insurance benefit similar to the support staff. It argues that imposition of this language will
be used to lustify a similar position in bargaining wtth larger employee u&s whose members
take more advantage of this benefit than do the support staff workers.
The District’s

Position:

The Board’s primary motive in makin,0 its offer is to attempt to limit the cost of
health care premiums. It believes the recent up-surge in health costs requires it to take
a stand in an effort to limit cost exposure in its area.
It is acknowledged that employees who choose to continue in the WEAIT health care
plan will be required to contribute a portion of their wages to premiums, should the expected
oremium increases occur. And yet, the District’s final offer would cover all the projected
costs for the other health care oackage presently available to unit members, the Dean Care
R.M.O. Thus, workers who choose the higher-cost plan would be required to pay more than
they would were they to change to the lower-cost health olan.
The District urges the arbitrator
to consider the fact that adoption of the Union’s
final offer here would result in a disproportionately
high effective wage increase for those
support staff members who continue to choose WEAIT as their health care carrier.
It should be remembered, the District argues, that its final offer on wages alone is
higher than that requested by the Union. This increase represents a larger percentage
Thus, its offer
increase than that enjoyed by comparable workers in comparable districts.
represents a more than adequate quid pro quo for contract language changes and should be
recognized as such in this arbitration matter.
Finally, the District believes that by increasing the number of health insurance plans
offered to its employees it will be allowing them to choose that health plan which most
closely fits their personal and family needs for coverage, as well as cost. It has suggested
making available a health care program through the Wisconsin Public Employers Group Health

Insurance program to effectuate this goal. Among the plans offered through this program
is the Dean Care H.M.O., a plan presently available to support staff members.
Discussion’
Before embarking upon an analysis of the offers, I believe it would be helpful t0
Section 15 of that agreement relates to Insurance
review the present labor agreement.
Benefits.
Under that section are contauted provisions relating to health care insurance
(15.03), life insurance (15.04), tax sheltered annuities (15.05), dental insurance (15.06) and
long-term disability (15.08). Section 15.07 relates to claims for compensation and insurance
benefits.
Section 15.01 gives all the employees who qualify the right to be covered by the
various insurance plans described in the contract.
Of particular importance here is Section 15.02. This section applies to all insurance
coverages and gives the Dmtrict the right to choose carriers provided the coverage is equal
to or better than those In effect during the term of the agreement. Thus the District has
the right to change carriers for any or all insurance benefits, once a contract has been put
in place. The language in SectIon 15.02 is prospective in nature. Once the plan or plans
go into effect, the Board 1s not able to offer lesser benefits. Thts language is a device used
III many contracts to prevent an employer from reducing benefits during the term of the
contract.
It does not prevent a change from one carrier to another.
Therefore, the language proposed by the District for Section 15.03 does not require a
“new language” analysis stmilar to that used when considering the Union’s Fair Share proposal.
It represents an offer, made in terms of dollars, that will impact upon the emoloyee group,
just as any other offer would Impact. Whether or not the impact is reasonable LS another
Issue to be addressed later in this award.
The last contract describes the employer’s contribution to health insurance premiums
in terms of dollars.
Thm reflects the premium costs in place at the time that contract
went Into effect.
This cost is agreed to have been 100% of the WFAIT plan at the time
that contract was bargained.
.4t first hlilsh, The Urnon’s offer of 100% of premium costs ut this contract’s second
year would appear to constttute a change in language. Such is not the case. The Union
1s attempttng
to exoress by a percentage the language historically used in setting the
District’s
contribution,
Gtven the length of this contract
and the obvious uncertainty
regardtng those costs In thm contract’s last half-year, the Union’s language is found to be
in keeping with the intent of the last contract and the first three-quarters
of this contract,
and will not be found to be an alteration in contract language requiring “new language”
analysis.
With the “new language” issue behind us, it is now possible to review the final offers
for health insurance and wages in the light of the statutory standards alone. This review
will deal wtth both issues together, as that is the manner in which they are presented by
the parties.
A review of the statutory criteria reveals that some are not applicable here. There is
no disoute over the lawful authority of the employer, nor is there a dispute over matters
St&Mated between
the parties.
?lo argument IS made over the District’s financial ability
to meet the costs of the settlement, nor have there been changes in circumstances during
the pendencv of these proceedtngs. Yeither party has made an argument under factor “j”.

-5-

The cost of ltvinq question was presented by the parties, but cannot control here since
it appears that both offers exceed the index relied uoon by the Board. Its offer, having a
lower package cost, is closer to the CPI than that of the Union, hut the difference is not
substantial enough to cause a finding for the District on that criterton alone.
Factors “e” and “f” have been dealt with at some length here by both oarties in
It is not my intention to dismiss these factors in a cavalier manner.
exhtbits and briefs.
However, the range of health tnsurance benefit plans and the wage structures cited in this
matter are so diffuse and varied as to make meaningful comparisons difficult, if not impossible.
A review of the evidence and the arguments presented by the parties appears to reveal
that the District has made a wage offer which is generous by comparison, in the main. The
employer’s contribution to health premiums range from far below to more than that proposed
by the Board, whether the comparison is made between oublic or private sector employers,
represented or non-union.
Both sides do ask the arbitrator to give attention to other employees of the Distract.
The Board points out that non-represented employees have accepted a health insurance
benefit package similar to the one it proposes here. It applauds this group for helping the
District deal with the tremendous increase in premtum costs experienced in the recent Dast.
The Union counters that ascertion by remutding the arbitrator that these employees
had the benefit of Union representattton and thus are put into a “take-tt-or-leaveit” bind because thev do not have the rtght to barqatn collecttvely or to take advantage of
the statutory protection encompassed In the Statutes.

have

not

This argument is strengthened by the fact that the other untonized employment group
tn the District, the teachers, have and will continue to enjoy a health insurance premium
contribution by the District exactly like the beneftt now in force for the EESS which the
District wishes to alter here.
Insofar as factor “e” is concerned, the position of the Union has merit. A change in
benefit here would place the membership In a position clearly less favorable than that of
other unionized District employees and, were this the controlling factor, the Union’s ftnal
offer would be preferred.
We turn now to factor “d”. As stated above, it IS my behef that the SIX conference
schools offer a sufficient comparable group for purposes of this award.
A revtew of the
exhibits indicates that for the years 1988/89 the entry wage for atdes tn these schools us
$5.28 per hour. This wage is 38.9% htgher than that proposed by the Union and 37.1%
higher than the Board’s final offer.
Both would be below the entry wage for all other
schools, which range from $4.02 ut Evansville to $7.54 in Walworth.
A slightly different picture is presented when the maxtmum rate is considered.
Here
both proposals would rank third among the schools. The average wage is $6.62 and would
be exceeded by 5.7% under the Union offer and 6.5% under the District’s.
The Union has
characterized the Board’s offer as constituting a badly needed catch-up offer in the entry
level. At the maximum rate this District compares favorably with other units, but the Union
points out that only three of its members would be patd in the maximum range and that it
1s only fair to grant a proportionately
higher increase (this being a cents-per-cell increase)
to those workers most in need of it.
4t the time the Associatton orepared its exhibit 21, it apoeared that four conference
schools had settled the health tnsurance Issue for 1988/89.
Of those, three, Cltnton,
Orfordville and Turner, had agreed to pay 100% of the cost of tnsurance under the WE\IT
- 6 -

.

plan. The fourth, Evansville,
than the WE-VT plan.

was paying 100% of the BC-BS plan, a program

less costly

For 1988/89, the Brodhead District will pay 94% of the cost of a W.P.S. single person
and 91% of a family plan. Walworth, though the matter was still in negotiations at
that time, Indicates a 100% contribution to a W.P.S. plan.

plan

The information cited above is flawed bp the fact that no 1989/90 data is included.
However, based upon the Information available, it would appear that the Union’s final offer
on wages is not so far below that estabhshed in other districts as to cause it to fail and
that the District’s offer on health insurance constitutes a change in status so significant as
to cause its final offer to be relected, based upon a comparison with other employees
performing similar services.
The last criterion, factor “h”, is the most important of the factors. It is this factor
has been emphasized bv the parties, and I believe it should control the discussion of
the waee/health Insurance Issue.

that

In effect, both parties seek to ]ustlfy their final offers as a “buy-out” or a ‘Quid pro
quo”. The Union belleves It has made an offer sufficiently modest to justify a continuation
of the present benefit levels. The District believes it has made a wage offer sufficiently
generous to justify a reduction in benefits.
Health insurance costs have been recently increasing at an unprecedented rate and
both sides agree that something must be done to curb them. One problem has been that
employers have had no way in which to deal with the rise in costs other than to seek out
less expensive plans, wtuch may Impact upon the level of services or to ask that employees
begin to assume an Increased portlon of the costs, which may Impact upon compensation.
The Union agrees with the analysis, but argues that the problem of increased costs
extends far beyond the Edgerton School District and it is unreasonable to ask this group of
lower-paid em?logees, many of whom work for the benefit package as much as wages, to
bear the brunt of the solution.
The District points out that the majority of non-union members do not subscribe to
health insurance. It is these workers, who are primarily interested In wages alone, whom
the Board feels would benefit from its higher wage proposal and it maintains the Union is
preferrin:
one group of employees to another.
The Association thanks the Board for its concern for its people but feels it and it alone
is capable of representirq the will of the EESS without the employer’s assistance.
The
Union’s fIna offer was not arrived at capriciously but represents the agreed upon positIon
of its membership. As such, it should be evaluated without consideration of the District’s
ascertion as to what is best for its workers. It is of no significance that a majority of the
EESS does not subscribe to health insurance benefits.
The situation can be compared to
the salary schedules in place in many school districts, where separate pay schedules are
established for teachers holding a Bachelor’s degree and those with a Master’s degree. If
a teacher does not wish to earn a higher degree he/she may continue in the lower schedule
to retirement.
The choice is voluntary, and so 1s the choice here. The benefit exists for
those who wish it. It is of no moment whether one or all of the union members subscribe.
In its brief, the Union touched upon what I belleve 1s the controlling issue here. That
is the nature of the benefit itself.
This 1s a relatively low-paid employee group.
Using
the “Employee .A” and “Employee 9” tables in the briefs, the health insurance benefit
-7-

constituted 26.96% of the wages for the higher-paid Employee 4’s annual compensation and
13.69% of Employee B’s compensation for 1987/88. Thus it is possible to accept the Union’s
position that many of its members work for the benefit almost as much as for the wage.
Furthermore,
the District
would disturb a doctor-patient
relationsip presently in
existence by requiring the workers, in most cases, to choose between leaving a present
provider or incurring a substantial financial burden to retain the provider. If weight is to
be given to the freedom of choice now within the ability of the employee to obtain, the
mere financial aspects of the offers must ,$ive way. I think this is true here and I must
find that the District’s higher wage offer IS not sufficient reason to impose an increased
cost and the lost non-monetary benefit upon the EESS.
DECISION
It is obvious at this point that the decision on Fair Share and on wages and health
insurance oppose each other. The conflict must now be resolved.
To do so, the impact of each issue must be weighed. The Fair Share offer would have
a minor financial impact upon those workers who would be required to pay Union dues. It
has already been established that it would have a minor impact upon the District.
On the other hand, the unfavorable impact uoon the EESS of the employer’s final offer
Benefits, both monetary and emotional, would be reduced with only
would be considerable.
a minor wage net recovery to be attained through wages. Taken together, it IS obvious
that adoption of the Union’s final offer would hav e a lesser impact upon the losing party
than would occur were the District’s final offer to be accepted.
AWARD
The final offer of the Edgerton Education Support Staff shall be incorporated
1988/1990 labor agreement between the parties.
Dated this 8th day of November, 1989 , at Madison, Wisconsin.

-8-

into the
