UNIFIED FIRE AUTHORITY
ORGANIZATIONAL POLICY MANUAL
Affiliation: Administration Policies
Title: UFA Employee Organization Policy
Number: 100 – 060
Approved: 11/8/2022

By: Fire Chief Dominic Burchett

Last Reviewed:

By:

DEFINITIONS:
Employee – A person in the paid employment of the Unified Fire Authority (UFA)
Employee Organization – A group of UFA employees who have formally joined together
through written agreement to promote employee issues and concerns.
LEADERS INTENT:
To provide a consistent, uniform, and equitable procedure which supports, promotes, and
maintains a positive labor relations climate between employee organizations, UFA employees
and UFA Administration.
PURPOSE:
To provide guidelines for the officers of employee organizations, certification, and
decertification of employee organizations, and for interaction by UFA with employee
organizations. The policy provides for the recognition of employee organizations. It is not the
intent of this policy to limit in any way the ability of any organization or citizen to interact with
the UFA as outlined in state statute or local ordinance.
POLICY:
1.0
Recruitment Practices
1.1

Employee organizations wishing to recruit UFA employees must identify their
target group(s) before such recruiting may occur. The identification of target
groups must be in writing and submitted to the Fire Chief.

1.2

The UFA may allow any employee organization that has a membership of 50 or
more UFA employees or has a membership of 30% or more of the target UFA
employee group in its organization (whichever is less), and a membership of at
least 15 employees, certain opportunities within the UFA. Employee
organizations meeting the above criteria may be afforded the following:
1.2.1 Copies of agendas for the UFA Board meetings
1.2.2 List of UFA employees by name and work assignment. The data shall
not include confidential information such as home addresses or phone
numbers.

Page 1 of 3
Policy distributed: December 7, 2022

1.2.3 Ability to contact UFA employees on UFA premises during their break
and lunch periods to recruit employees and discuss organization
activities.
2.0

Time Allocations
2.1

Employee organizations may be allowed time each month during UFA working
hours for employees who are officers of the employee organization to attend to
organization business. This privilege is limited to:
•
•
•

President and/or Vice President – 10 hours
Executive Board (limit 2 members) – 6 hours
Trustees (limit 5 members) – 3 hours

2.1.1 Additional leave may be granted for events, meetings, and processes
that are approved by the Fire Chief or designee.
2.1.1.1 The Fire Chief or designee may limit the approvals of the special
leave to no more than two employees per shift.
2.1.1.2 Requests for additional leave should be made to the Fire Chief
or designee, in writing, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the
requested leave.
2.2

Such monthly time allotment is a maximum that cannot, if unused, be carried
over.

2.3

Each employee member must give timely notification to his/her supervisor prior
to attending any such meetings.
2.3.1 Employees are required to find their own backfill coverage, notify the
Staffing Office with the name(s) of their replacement(s), and if working in
Operations may not leave their assignment until properly relieved.

3.0

2.4

If an employee holds more than one position in one or more organizations,
he/she will receive the greater of the monthly hourly allotment but not the
aggregate total.

2.5

There is no limit on employee involvement outside of UFA working hours.

2.6

By January 15th of each year, employee organizations will provide a list of
officers to the UFA for approval of time to work on employee issues.

Payroll Deductions
3.1

4.0

Employee organizations must have at least 15 members to be eligible for
payroll deduction of dues.

Employee Representation – Employee organizations will have the right to represent
employees in resolving personnel – related issues including grievances.
Page 2 of 3

Policy distributed: December 7, 2022

5.0

Advisory Status
5.1

Employee organizations are advisory in nature. Recommendations and
decisions made by employee organizations shall not bind the UFA in any
manner.

5.2

Employee organization representatives shall not serve as voting members on
UFA boards and councils dealing with employee polices. This does not
preclude UFA employees who are members of an employee organization from
serving on the UFA Policy Advisory Committee.

5.3

Any relationship with an employee organization shall exclude collective
bargaining agreements.

5.4

Right to Strike
5.4.1 Employees belonging to employee organizations shall not have the right
to strike under any circumstances.

6.0

Relation with the UFA
6.1

Employee organizations are encouraged to communicate with the UFA
regarding major employee issues affecting all employees through the Fire Chief
who will in turn direct the information to the appropriate division representative.

Replaces policy dated July 1, 2004, and former policy Employee Association Time
Allotment

Page 3 of 3
Policy distributed: December 7, 2022
