COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board
FALLS TOWNSHIP POLICE ASSOCIATION
v.
FALLS TOWNSHIP (BUCKS)

:
:
:
:
:
:

Case No. PF-C-23-68-E

PROPOSED DECISION AND ORDER
On July 28, 2023, the Falls Township Police Association (Association or
Union) filed a charge of unfair labor practices with the Pennsylvania Labor
Relations Board (Board) against Falls Township (Township or Employer),
alleging that the Township violated Section 6(1)(a) and (e) of the
Pennsylvania Labor Relations Act (PLRA), as read with Act 111, by refusing to
comply with a January 5, 2022 arbitration award regarding Police Officer
Stephanie Metterle.
On August 21, 2023, the Secretary of the Board issued a Complaint and
Notice of Hearing, directing a hearing on September 28, 2023, if necessary.
The hearing was initially continued to December 1, 2023, at the Township’s
request and without objection by the Union. On November 30, 2023, the
hearing was continued indefinitely based on the representation that the
parties had reached a tentative resolution of the dispute underlying the
charge. However, on August 26, 2024, the Union requested that the matter be
relisted for hearing, which was subsequently scheduled for October 1, 2024.
The hearing ensued on October 1, 2024, at which time the parties were
afforded a full opportunity to present testimony, cross-examine witnesses and
introduce documentary evidence. The Union filed a post-hearing brief in
support of its position on January 21, 2025. The Township filed a posthearing brief in support of its position on January 22, 2025.
The Hearing Examiner, on the basis of the testimony presented at the
hearing and from all other matters and documents of record, makes the
following:
FINDINGS OF FACT
1.
The Township is a public employer and political subdivision under
Act 111 as read in pari materia with the PLRA. (N.T. 5)
2.
The Association is a labor organization under Act 111 as read in
pari materia with the PLRA. (N.T. 5)
3.
The Association is the exclusive bargaining representative for a
unit of police employes at the Township. (Union Exhibit 2)
4.
The Association and the Township were parties to a collective
bargaining agreement (CBA) effective January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2022.
(Union Exhibit 2)
5.
Stephanie Metterle began working at Falls Township as a police
officer in October 2009. She was terminated from her position in October
2020, which the Association challenged through the contractual grievance
procedure. (N.T. 13; Union Exhibit 1)

6.
The parties litigated the grievance before Arbitrator Thomas
McGonnell, who ultimately issued an award on January 5, 2022, which provided
in relevant part as follows:
The discharge was not supported by just cause. The discharge is
reduced to a thirty (30) day suspension. The Township is ordered
to reinstate the Grievant to her former position; restore her
seniority; and make her whole for any loss of wages (minus the
30-day suspension), benefits, and other emoluments of employment
flowing from the discharge. The Township is ordered to adjust
the Grievant’s disciplinary records to reflect the altered
discipline. I will retain jurisdiction for ninety (90) days for
the purpose of addressing any issues relating to remedy. Should
either or both parties raise an issue or issues during that
ninety (90) day period, I will then retain ongoing jurisdiction
on that issue or issues until the issue(s) is resolved or a
supplemental award is issued...
(N.T. 13-15; Union Exhibit 1)
7.
On February 4, 2022, the Township filed a Petition to Vacate the
Arbitration Award in the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas. (N.T. 15, 70)
8.
On April 21, 2023, the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas issued
an Order, denying the Petition to Vacate the Arbitration Award. (N.T. 70)
9.
On May 18, 2023, the Township filed a Notice of Appeal to the
Commonwealth Court. (N.T. 70)
10.
On December 20, 2023, the Township reinstated Officer Metterle to
her position as a police officer. (N.T. 15)
11.
On May 10, 2024, the Commonwealth Court circulated an opinion and
order, denying the Township’s appeal. (N.T. 70)
12.
The parties stipulated and agreed that the attorneys were
engaging in settlement discussions about this case until September 6, 2024.
(N.T. 71)
13.
On September 18, 2024, the Township issued a check to Officer
Metterle, purporting to cover the backpay amount due pursuant to the
arbitration award. Officer Metterle did not cash the check because she did
not believe it to be the correct amount due. (N.T. 16; Township Exhibit 2)
14.
Officer Metterle testified that she earned overtime pay prior to
her termination by the Township. She identified as Union Exhibits 3(a),
3(b), 3(c), 3(d), and 3(e) a series of printouts detailing the overtime wages
she earned in 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively. (N.T. 18-21;
Union Exhibits 3(a), 3(b), 3(c), 3(d), 3(e))
15.
Officer Metterle earned 377 hours of overtime in 2016, 617 hours
of overtime in 2017, 415.5 hours of overtime in 2018, 54.25 hours of overtime
in 2019, and 146.25 hours of overtime in 2020. (N.T. 22-23; Union Exhibits
3(a), 3(b), 3(c), 3(d), 3(e))
16.
Officer Metterle testified that she had a reduction in her
overtime hours in 2019 because she became pregnant and eventually had a
2

child. She explained that she reached a point in her pregnancy in October
2018 where she was put on light duty because of the risk, during which she
was not able to earn overtime. She then eventually went into preterm labor
and had her first daughter on April 26, 2019, at which point she took a leave
of absence to care for her daughter. She returned to work in September 2019
without restrictions. However, she described how her overtime hours were
again reduced in 2020 due to the Covid-19 pandemic and the corresponding
closures. She went off work again due to a Covid protocol in July 2020 and
never returned to work. She was placed on administrative leave until her
termination in October 2020 and was unable to earn overtime hours. (N.T. 2325)
17.
Officer Metterle had a second child on September 10, 2021, which
was after her termination. She was not planning on having a second child
prior to her discharge. She created her plan to have her second child after
she was terminated. She testified that she was heavily influenced to do so
by her termination. She described how she was not working at that point, and
her family knew the grievance process would take some time. She explained
how she decided with her family to have a second child then. She testified
that she would not have had a second child in 2021 had she not been
discharged. (N.T. 25-26)
18.
Officer Metterle testified that the father of her children is
Officer Raymond Fanelli, who also works at the Township. She described how
she was able to take off work on FMLA leave right after the birth of her
first child. She was out for four months and returned to work on September
1, 2019. Officer Fanelli did not take FMLA leave at that time because she
did, and she was able to care for the baby. (N.T. 26-27)
19.
Officer Metterle testified that she and Officer Fanelli had an au
pair living with them prior to her termination. She explained how the au
pair lived in their house and served as their full-time babysitter. She
indicated that they had to let their au pair go after the termination because
they did not need childcare anymore since she was no longer employed. She
testified that they would have remained in the au pair program had she not
been terminated. (N.T. 27-28) 1
20.
Officer Metterle testified that she receives paid time off as a
Township police officer, which includes vacation, personal, holiday, and
Kelly time. She has not had any of those forms of leave restored to her bank
for the time she spent off work due to the termination. (N.T. 28-29)
21.
Officer Metterle had $85,294 in her pension when she was
terminated. She withdrew those funds from her pension in 2021, but did not
pay taxes on them. She rolled those funds into another plan initially. She
eventually cashed in her pension in 2022 and paid $21,323 in federal taxes
and penalties as a result. (N.T. 29-34, 42; Union Exhibit 4, 5, 6)
22.
Officer Metterle testified that she cashed in her pension in 2022
because she did not have any income and needed to pay her mortgage. She
would not have withdrawn her pension if she had not been terminated. She had
never withdrawn money from her pension account prior to her termination.
(N.T. 34-35)
Officer Metterle’s specific au pair was from Austria and would have had only
so much time remaining on her visa. (N.T. 27-28).

1

3

23.
Officer Metterle testified that she made monthly payments to the
Township to maintain her health insurance after she was terminated. She
eventually found a job at Access Healthcare in February 2023. She resigned
from that position after she got notice the Township was returning her to
work there in December 2023. She received health insurance through Access
Healthcare, which had substantially higher copays and out-of-pocket expenses.
She also had to contribute $330 per month at Access Healthcare. She did not
have to make contributions for health insurance at the Township. (N.T. 3537)
24.
Officer Metterle testified that she has paid out-of-pocket
medical expenses since she was terminated by the Township. She paid $125.00
out of pocket for treatment at a dermatologist, which she would not have had
to pay if she was still covered under the Township’s medical insurance. She
also received a bill for $984.70 from Capital Health Medical Center, which
she had not paid at the time of the hearing. She explained that this bill
has been submitted to collections. She described how she would not have had
to pay for this bill if she was still covered under the Township’s medical
insurance because she had been treating there for 11 years and had never
received a bill for such high out-of-pocket costs, even though both of her
children were delivered there. (N.T. 37-40; Union Exhibit 7, 8)
25.
On cross-examination, Officer Metterle testified that, when she
was reinstated, none of her credentials were still active. She had to work
in the office, while not in uniform, doing four years of legal updates,
retraining in CPR and first aid, firearms, and MPOETC certifications. As a
result, she was not out on the road for three or four months, and was unable
to work overtime. (N.T. 52-53)
26.
The Township submitted wage calculations purporting to be the
make-whole remedy due to Officer Metterle. The Township took an offset for
$102,078.57, which includes the $85,294 in pension contributions she withdrew
following her termination, in addition to the interest portion to pay those
pension contributions back. 2 The Township calculated the overtime due by
using an average of Metterle’s overtime hours per year from October 2018
through October 2020. (N.T. 67-69; Township Exhibit 2, 3)
DISCUSSION
In its charge, the Union alleged that the Township violated Section
6(1)(a) and (e) of the PLRA 3 by failing to comply with the January 5, 2022
arbitration award. Specifically, the Union maintains that the Township
undercompensated Officer Metterle with regard to her overtime earnings
because the Township only took into account two years of those earnings when
it calculated the backpay award. In addition, the Union argues that the
Township violated the PLRA and Act 111 by failing to make Officer Metterle
whole for the federal taxes and penalties she was forced to incur when she
withdrew her pension funds in 2022. The Union further contends that the
The parties agree that the Township properly offset the $85,294 in pension
contributions, but disagree regarding the interest portion on that amount.
(N.T. 67-69).
3 Section 6(1) of the PLRA provides that “[i]t shall be an unfair labor
practice for an employer (a) To interfere with, restrain or coerce employes
in the exercise of the rights guaranteed in this act...(e) To refuse to
bargain collectively with the representatives of his employes, subject to the
provisions of section seven (a) of this act.” 43 P.S. § 211.6.
2

4

Township failed to make Officer Metterle whole for out-of-pocket medical
expenses and accrued leave, which she would have earned but-for the discharge
in 2020. The Township, for its part, submits that the charge should be
dismissed because it was prematurely filed, or in the alternative, untimely
filed within the PLRA’s six-week limitations period. The Township also
asserts that the charge should be dismissed because the Township complied
with the January 5, 2022 award and has made Officer Metterle whole for all
the compensation she was due pursuant thereto.
In cases where refusal to comply with an arbitration award is alleged,
the Board’s inquiry is limited to first determining if an award exists,
second if the appeal procedure available to the aggrieved party has been
exhausted, and third if the party has failed to comply with the provisions of
the arbitrator’s decision. PSSU v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 17 PPER ¶
17154 (Final Order, 1986). Eventual compliance, determined to be untimely,
violates the PLRA. Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 5 v. City of
Philadelphia, 41 PPER 123 (Proposed Decision and Order, 2010) citing
Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge 5 v. City of Philadelphia, 38 PPER 72
(Proposed Decision and Order, 2007). The burden of proof is on the charging
party to show by substantial and legally credible evidence that the
respondent has not complied with the arbitration award. Id. citing St.
Joseph’s Hospital v. PLRB, 323 A.2d 106 (Pa. 1977). The Board may not review
the merits of the award or substitute its judgment for that of the
arbitrator. Id. citing City of Duquesne, 5 PPER 117 (Final Order, 1974).
If, upon review of the award as a whole, the Board is unable to discern the
intent of the arbitrator and the award is therefore ambiguous, the Board will
dismiss an unfair practice charge alleging noncompliance with the award.
AFSCME Local 197 v. City of Philadelphia, Office of Housing & Community
Development, 24 PPER ¶ 24052 (Final Order, 1993).
Section 9(e) of the PLRA provides that “[n]o petition or charge shall
be entertained which relates to acts which occurred or statements which were
made more than six weeks prior to the filing of the petition or charge.” 43
P.S. § 211.9(e). As a general matter, the nature of the unfair practice
claim alleged frames the limitations period for that cause of action. Upper
Gwynedd Township Police Dept. v. Upper Gwynedd Township, 32 PPER § 32101
(Final Order, 2001). For a refusal to bargain a change in terms and
conditions of employment, notice to the union of the implementation of the
challenged policy or directive triggers the statute of limitations. Harmar
Township Police Wage and Policy Committee v. Harmar Township, 33 PPER § 33025
(Final Order, 2001). Implementation is the date when the directive becomes
operational and serves to guide the conduct of employes, even though no
employes may have been disciplined or corrected for failure to abide by the
directive. Id. Mere statement of future intent to engage in activity, which
arguably would constitute an unfair labor practice, does not constitute an
unfair labor practice for engaging in that activity. Upper Gwynedd Township,
at 264. The Board will dismiss a charge as prematurely filed where the
complainant files the charge prior to actual implementation. City of
Allentown, 19 PPER § 19120 (Final Order, 1988).
As detailed above, the Township argues that the Union’s charge of
unfair labor practices should be dismissed because it was prematurely filed
on July 29, 2023, which was allegedly prior to the exhaustion of appeals.
The Township reasons that, since it appealed the arbitration award to the
Commonwealth Court, the appeals did not exhaust until 30 days after May 10,
2024, when the Commonwealth Court eventually denied the Township’s Petition
to Vacate and no further appeals were taken. The Township cites PLRB v.
5

Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 387 A.2d 475 (Pa. 1978) as support for its
position. However, the Township’s argument ignores a long line of Board
precedent indicating that the arbitration award became enforceable once it
was affirmed by the Common Pleas Court on April 21, 2023.
In FOP Lodge 5 v. City of Philadelphia, 39 PPER 9 (Final Order, 2008),
the Board addressed the same argument, which was advanced by the city
employer in that case. In rejecting the city employer’s argument, the Board
opined as follows:
The City’s reliance on PLRB v. Commonwealth is misplaced given
that the state of the law has changed since the Supreme Court
issued that decision. PLRB v. Commonwealth involved repealed
provisions of the Rules of Judicial Administration governing
appeals of arbitration awards, under which arbitration awards
were stayed pending each level of appellate review. As the Board
held in Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge No. 5 v. City of
Philadelphia, 32 PPER ¶ 32102 (Final Order, 2001):
The Supreme Court’s 1978 decision in PLRB v. Commonwealth, supra,
was fully consistent with then existing Rules of Appellate
Procedure, which provided for an automatic supersedeas for
political subdivisions appealing arbitration awards...to the
Commonwealth Court. It was therefore logical for the Court to
instruct the Board to wait until the aggrieved employer’s appeal
procedures were exhausted in the arbitration arena. To opine
otherwise and permit the order of compliance at an earlier stage,
would thereby violate the automatic supersedeas.
However, in 1987 the Rules of Appellate Procedure were amended
and the amendment to Rule 1736 fundamentally altered the
protections provided to employers by the Supreme Court in PLRB v.
Commonwealth, supra. Pa.R.A.P. 1736 provides as follows:
(a)

General Rule.

No security shall be required of...

(1)

Any political subdivision...except in any case in which a
common pleas court has affirmed an arbitration award in a
grievance or similar personnel matter...

(b)

Supersedeas Automatic. Unless otherwise ordered pursuant
to this chapter the taking of an appeal by any party specified
in Subdivision (a) of this rule shall operate as a supersedeas
in favor of such party.

The note following the rule more fully explains the amendment:
The 1987 amendment eliminates the automatic supersedeas for
political subdivisions on appeals from the common pleas court
where that court has affirmed an arbitration award in a grievance
or similar personnel matter.
Thus, once an arbitration award has been affirmed by a common
pleas court, the award becomes enforceable. The aggrieved
employer has been stripped of its ability to delay compliance
with the award by seeking further redress in subsequent appeals.
The Commonwealth Court explained that Pa.R.A.P. 1736(a)(2)
6

“expressly negates an automatic supersedeas for a political
subdivision in an appeal from an arbitration award.”
Commonwealth Dept. of the Auditor General v. AFSCME, Council 13,
573 A.2d 233, 234 (Pa. Cmwlth. 1990). See also...Cheltenham Twp.
Police Ass’n v. Cheltenham Twp., 21 PPER ¶ 21026 (Final Order,
1989); City of Philadelphia, Office of Housing and Community
Development v. AFSCME, Local 1971, 37 Pa.D.&C. 4th 116 (Phila.
County Common Pleas, 1996); Crawford County v. AFSCME, Council
85, 27 PPER ¶ 27117 (Crawford County Common Pleas, 1996)(where
arbitration award affirmed by common pleas, application for a
stay denied; while appellate court could ultimately reverse
arbitrator, no irreparable harm in requiring employer to comply
with award).
...
As regards appeals by political subdivisions from arbitration
awards, the Board’s research has disclosed no Board decisions
where the Board has stayed enforcement of an award following a
common pleas affirmance of the award, pending further appeal in
Commonwealth Court. To the extent that there may be any post1987 Board final orders that withhold enforcement of affirmed
arbitration awards pending a second level of appellate review in
reliance on PLRB v. Commonwealth, supra, the Board will no longer
adhere to them as precedent. To find otherwise would defeat the
purpose of the changes to Pa.R.A.P. 1736 and would occasion
unwarranted delay in the timely enforcement of arbitration awards
which remain on appeal under the narrow scope of judicial review
of arbitration awards.
City of Philadelphia, 32 PPER at 266-267. Since City of
Philadelphia, the Board has consistently entertained unfair labor
practice charges to enforce arbitration awards pending appellate
review in Commonwealth Court. E.g., Somerset Area Education
Ass’n v. Somerset Area School District, 37 PPER 1 (Final Order,
2005)...
The Board’s policy of enforcing arbitration awards on appeal is
consistent with the current rules of appellate procedure, and the
policies and purposes of Act 111 and the PLRA. Indeed, prompt
enforcement of arbitration awards, both grievance and interest
awards, furthers the purposes and policies of Act 111 and the
PLRA. As was recognized by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court in its
landmark decision concerning Act 111 interest arbitration:
An arbitration panel is a temporary “one shot” institution,
convened to respond to a specific conflict. Once it reaches a
decision it is disbanded and its members disperse. Its
resolution of the dispute must be sure and swift, and much of its
effectiveness would be lost if the mandate of its decision could
be delayed indefinitely through protracted litigation.
(Citations omitted).
City of Philadelphia, 39 PPER at 30-31.
In this case, the record shows that the January 5, 2022 arbitration
award was affirmed by the Common Pleas Court on April 21, 2023. As a result,
7

the award became enforceable by the Union as of April 21, 2023, pursuant to
Board law. The Township did not have an automatic supersedeas after April
21, 2023, and there is no evidence that the Township either sought or
obtained a stay at any point thereafter.
Therefore, the Union’s attempt to
enforce the award by filing the instant charge on July 28, 2023 was ripe and
not premature, as alleged by the Township. Accordingly, the Township’s
argument in this regard must be rejected.
The Township’s argument that the charge was untimely filed is similarly
unavailing. While the Union waited for more than six weeks following the
expiration of the 30-day appeal period after Common Pleas affirmed on April
21, 2023, the Township stipulated and agreed that the attorneys were engaging
in settlement discussions about this case until September 6, 2024. In fact,
the Township’s attorney admitted in his opening statement during the October
1, 2024 hearing that “[t]he parties had [] good faith negotiations about the
amount of back pay and other issues due to her [sic]. It was, about a few
weeks ago, the parties, I guess, agreed to disagree. And at that point,
there’s a dispute over the amount.” (N.T. 8). This evidence of ongoing
negotiations shows that the Union reasonably believed the Township would
comply with the award, all the way up until September 2024. There is no
evidence that the Township refused to comply with, or made its intent known,
that it would not implement the award, more than six weeks prior to the
filing date of July 28, 2023. To the contrary, the record shows only that
the parties were engaging in settlement discussions and had good faith
negotiations regarding how the Township could comply until September 2024. 4
As such, the record supports a finding that the Township essentially
acknowledged its responsibility to implement the award through September
2024, thereby tolling the limitations period through that date. Accordingly,
it must be concluded that the Union’s July 28, 2023 charge was timely filed.
See Susquehanna Regional Police Ass’n v. Susquehanna Regional Police Dept.,
31 PPER ¶ 31064 (Final Order, 2000)(citing Crawford Central School District,
618 A.2d 1202 (Pa. Cmwlth. 1992))(charge filed seven months after arbitration
award was timely filed within PERA’s four-month limitations period where the
parties communicated about implementation and calculations, requested a
remedial award, and the employer acknowledged its responsibility to implement
the award for five months following issuance of the award); Wyoming Borough
Police Dept. v. Wyoming Borough, 43 PPER 22 (Final Order, 2011)(statute of
limitations does not necessarily accrue immediately upon issuance of an
arbitration award; but is tolled during a period of negotiations where
employer gives assurances of its attempt to comply); IBEW Local 81 v.
Scranton Housing Authority, 33 PPER ¶ 33134 (Final Order, 2002)(limitations
period begins to run when union knows, or should know, that employer will not
be complying with award, such as where the employer takes a “firm and
unyielding stance” regarding its obligation to comply with the award).
Turning to the merits of the charge, the Union contends that the
Township refused to comply with the January 5, 2022 award because the
Township has failed to make Officer Metterle whole. Specifically, the Union
maintains that the Township’s make-whole remedy failed to include the proper
overtime wages, federal taxes and penalties on her pension withdrawal, out of
pocket medical expenses, and accrued leave. Of course, the Township submits
that it has properly calculated the make-whole remedy and provided Officer
Metterle with everything she was due pursuant to the make-whole award.
While an attorney’s statements during the hearing typically cannot be used
as evidence or testimony, the instant statements represent a party admission,
which is binding on the Township.
4

8

The parties do not contest that an award exists. Nor does the record
show that the award has not yet become enforceable. As previously set forth
above, the award became enforceable once the Common Pleas Court affirmed on
April 21, 2023. Thus, the only question then, is whether the Township has
failed to comply with the provisions of the arbitrator’s decision. The
arbitrator’s award provides, in relevant part as follows:
The discharge was not supported by just cause. The discharge is
reduced to a thirty (30) day suspension. The Township is ordered
to reinstate the Grievant to her former position; restore her
seniority; and make her whole for any loss of wages (minus the
30-day suspension), benefits, and other emoluments of employment
flowing from the discharge. The Township is ordered to adjust
the Grievant’s disciplinary records to reflect the altered
discipline...
(Union Exhibit 1). The dispute here essentially boils down to what the
proper make-whole remedy would be.
First of all, however, it must be noted that the Township did not issue
a check purporting to constitute the make-whole remedy until September 18,
2024, which was approximately 17 months after the Common Pleas Court affirmed
the award on April 21, 2023. What is more, the Township did not even
reinstate Officer Metterle to her position until December 2023, some eight
months following the Common Pleas affirmance. Thus, even if the Township had
issued the proper make-whole remedy on September 18, 2024, the Township still
committed an unfair labor practice because it did not comply with the award
in a reasonable period of time. Indeed, it cannot be seriously contended
that 17 months was a reasonable period for compliance by issuing the backpay.
Nor does the Township even make such an argument. In the same vein, it
cannot be seriously disputed that eight months was an unreasonable period of
time for the Township to reinstate Officer Metterle. The Township should
have reinstated her within 30 days of April 21, 2023. As a result, the
Township must be found in violation of Act 111 and the PLRA based on the
timeliness of its payment and reinstatement of Officer Metterle, regardless
of whether the payment properly made her whole.
In addition, the Union has also sustained its burden of proving that
the Township refused to comply with the award by failing to include all the
money and benefits due pursuant thereto. In AFSCME DC 47, Local 2186 v. City
of Philadelphia, 54 PPER 10 (Proposed Decision and Order, 2022), the Board’s
hearing examiner rejected the city’s argument that an arbitrator’s award,
which provided for make-whole relief, permitted the city to exclude overtime
earnings where the record showed that the grievant regularly worked overtime
prior to her separation from the city. The examiner recognized that the
Board has long held that an arbitrator’s make-whole remedy includes the
payment of overtime in such cases, even if the award does not expressly
direct such a payment, citing FOP Lodge 5 v. City of Philadelphia, 30 PPER ¶
30105 (Proposed Decision and Order, 1999), 30 PPER ¶ 30204 (Final Order,
1999), and specifically directed the city to pay her average overtime amount
across the five years of wages submitted during the hearing. Yet, for some
reason, in this case, the Township claims that it was only required to
include the average of Officer Metterle’s overtime wages for two years
instead of the five years of available records. The Township offers no
justification for this, aside from generally citing to Teamsters Local 776 v.
Borough of Gettysburg, 54 PPER 17 (Proposed Decision and Order, 2022) and FOP
9

Lodge 5 v. City of Philadelphia, 30 PPER 30204 (Final Order, 1999). But
these cases do not provide for a limit of two years in calculating an
employe’s overtime earnings for purposes of a make-whole award. Rather, the
evidence of record was simply based on two years of calculations. As Hearing
Examiner Marino observed in Borough of Gettysburg “the Board has recognized
that make-whole arbitration awards clearly seek and intend to place the
employe in the same economic position [she] would have been in had the
employe not been unlawfully terminated.” 54 PPER at 82. Likewise, Hearing
Examiner Marino further cited City of Philadelphia, supra, and noted that,
“[i]n its make-whole awards, the NLRB will compute back pay on the basis of a
forty-hour week plus the adjusted average overtime hours worked by each
employe.” (emphasis in original).
Here, the record shows that Officer Metterle had significant overtime
earnings for the years of 2016, 2017, and 2018, which was then reduced for
the years of 2019 and 2020. The Township’s decision to only include the
average overtime earnings for the last two years, which were coincidentally
her lowest, of course, in calculating the backpay due, only served to
artificially deflate her earnings and provide the Township with a windfall.
The record shows that Officer Metterle had reduced overtime hours in 2019
because of pregnancy and childbirth. The record also shows that she had
reduced overtime hours in 2020 because of Covid-19 closures and her eventual
administrative suspension and termination. Inclusion of only those two years
in calculating her overtime earnings due pursuant to the make-whole award
does not place Officer Metterle in the same economic position she would have
been in had she not been unlawfully terminated. Therefore, the Township will
be directed to pay Officer Metterle her average overtime hours across the
five years of wages submitted during the hearing, which represents a much
more accurate depiction of her earnings, and which is consistent with the
Board’s process of remedial relief. AFSCME DC 47, Local 2186 v. City of
Philadelphia, 54 PPER 10 (Proposed Decision and Order, 2022); See also
Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 5 v. City of Philadelphia, 41 PPER 181
(Proposed Decision and Order, 2010) wherein the hearing examiner held that
the City should look at the overtime paid to the affected bargaining unit
employe for working special events in the preceding years, and average that
amount in computing his overtime. (citing City of Philadelphia, 30 PPER ¶
30204 (Final Order, 1999)(the Board adopted the Federal standard for the
computation of back pay, including overtime, as set forth in Ellis & Watts
Products, 143 NLRB 1269 (1963), enf’d 344 F.2d 67 (6th Cir. 1965)).
Next, the record shows that the Township also failed to comply with the
January 5, 2022 award by taking an offset for $102,078.57, representing the
$85,293.73 pension withdrawal, as well as $16,784.84 in interest that would
have accrued on those funds. The Union does not dispute that the Township
was entitled to offset the $85,293.73 for the pension withdrawal. However,
the Union asserts that the Township was responsible for the interest on that
amount, along with the $21,323 in taxes and penalties that Officer Metterle
was forced to incur when she withdrew those funds in 2022. The Township
counters that Officer Metterle did not have to roll over her pension
contributions to an IRA, and that the Township has no authority over how much
money she owes to the IRS from when she ultimately withdrew those funds. The
Township further claims that Officer Metterle is responsible for repaying the
contributions that she withdrew, as well as the interest that would have
accrued, in order to get back on the Township’s pension. Unfortunately for
the Township, however, the record shows that Officer Metterle was forced to
withdraw her pension funds in 2022 to pay her mortgage. She would not have
been forced to withdraw those funds and to pay taxes and penalties on them if
10

not for the Township’s unlawful termination. The Board and its hearing
examiners routinely direct employers to include pension contributions as part
of a make-whole remedy. AFSCME DC 47, Local 2186 v. City of Philadelphia, 54
PPER 10 (Proposed Decision and Order, 2022); FOP Lodge 5 v. City of
Philadelphia, 54 PPER 37 (Proposed Decision and Order, 2022); Teamsters Local
776 v. Borough of Gettysburg, 54 PPER 17 (Proposed Decision and Order, 2022);
Corry Area Education Ass’n v. Corry Area School District, 38 PPER 155 (Final
Order, 2007). There is no meaningful difference between employer
contributions to an employe’s pension and the interest that would have
accrued on the employe’s contributions to the pension during the period of
her unlawful discharge.
In Corry Area School District, the Board opined that “a cash payment
equal to a lost pension contribution does not come close to compensating the
loss of contributions into a statutorily-regulated pension, which impact on a
retirement date or ultimate pension benefit.” Not only has the Township here
failed to make a cash payment to Officer Metterle for the interest that would
have accrued on her pension during the time of her unlawful discharge, but
also, the Township has actually taken an offset against that accrued interest
from the make-whole remedy it owes her, which clearly impacts on her eventual
retirement date or ultimate pension benefit. The Board certainly would not
permit the Township to simply pay Officer Metterle directly for the cash
value of the interest that would have accrued on her pension. Why then the
Township thinks it could permissibly take an offset for that amount is a
mystery. Furthermore, the Board noted in Corry that its “method of
calculating backpay offsets interim earnings from the employer’s backpay
liability in calendar quarter increments, and is designed to make employes
whole for lost wages, as well as taking into consideration matters such as
tax implications and periodic wages adjustments.” Thus, the interest that
would have accrued on Officer Metterle’s pension contributions and the taxes
and penalties she incurred from withdrawing those funds were part of the
Township’s liability for the January 5, 2022 make-whole award.
In Wyoming Borough Police Dept. v. Wyoming Borough, 43 PPER 22 (Final
Order, 2011), the Board recognized that longevity increases, out-of-pocket
medical expenses, holiday pay, accrued leave, and interest are typical
components of make-whole relief. Indeed, out-of-pocket medical expenses that
would have otherwise been covered by the employer’s health insurance policy
must be reimbursed to make the employe whole. Id. The record here shows
that Officer Metterle incurred out-of-pocket medical expenses for treatment
that would have been covered under the Township’s medical insurance had she
not been unlawfully discharged. In fact, one of her bills had unfortunately
been submitted to collections at the time of the hearing. The Township
offers no reason or justification for why it has not made her whole with
regard to these expenses. The Township’s post-hearing brief is devoid of any
arguments contradicting its liability on this point. The January 5, 2022
make-whole award clearly encompasses such relief. Therefore, the Township
will be directed to pay these expenses to remedy this clear violation of the
PLRA.
Finally, in Wyoming Borough, the Board held that reimbursement for
holiday pay and accrued leave is in accordance with the applicable collective
bargaining agreement. Thus, an employe who would not otherwise be paid for
unused leave under the applicable CBA upon resignation, would not be entitled
to such a payout for leave under the Board’s remedial make-whole relief. Id.
The Township contends that Officer Metterle was not entitled payment for her
accrued leave because the award does not mention leave time. However, the
11

National Labor Relations Board Compliance Manual provides in Section 10536.1
that “[b]ackpay awards are intended to make whole the person who has suffered
from a violation for earnings and other compensation lost as a result of that
violation.” Further, the National Board’s Compliance Manual provides in
Section 10540.1 that “[g]ross backpay must take into account all benefits and
forms of compensation that [an employe] would have earned from employment,
had there not been an unlawful action. All forms of wages, including
overtime, premiums, tips, bonus payments, and commissions, are to be
considered in determining backpay.” (Emphasis added) 5. This Board
specifically adopted and approved the use of the National Board’s Compliance
Manual in Corry Area Education Ass’n v. Corry Area School District, 38 PPER
155 (Final Order, 2007). Accrued leave is a benefit and form of compensation
that Officer Metterle would have earned from her employment had there not
been an unlawful termination. Therefore, it is of no consequence whether the
award specifically mentions accrued leave or not. What is more, the
Township’s argument that leave time is accrued under the contract only by
those who are working is without merit. While the CBA generally provides in
Articles 23 and 24 for the accrual of leave by those employes who are
working, the Township conveniently ignores the fact that Officer Metterle
would have been working had the Township not unlawfully discharged her. The
Union also persuasively notes how those provisions are devoid of any “use it
or lose it” clause, such that employes are prevented from preserving the
value of their accrued leave from year-to-year. Instead, Article 23, Section
2 provides for employes to be paid the cash value of holidays that they are
unable to use due to illness, injury, or duty requirements, while Article 24
permits employes to be paid for any unused vacation days at the end of the
year if the employe was unable to take those vacation days for unusual
circumstances. (Union Exhibit 2). Thus, it is irrelevant whether Officer
Metterle receives pay for her accrued leave on top of weeks for which she
receives her regular working pay because she was entitled to be paid for that
unused leave time pursuant to the CBA. 6 Accordingly, the Township will be
further directed to include her accrued leave as part of the make-whole
relief.
CONCLUSIONS
The hearing examiner, therefore, after due consideration of the
foregoing and the record as a whole, concludes and finds as follows:
1.
The Township is a public employer and political subdivision under
Act 111 as read in pari materia with the PLRA.
2.
The Association is a labor organization under Act 111 as read in
pari materia with the PLRA.
3.

The Board has jurisdiction over the parties hereto.

5 The National Board uses the term gross back pay to describe the amount owed
to an employe prior to an offset for interim earnings or unemployment
compensation. Likewise, the National Board uses net back pay to describe the
amount owed to an employe following such an offset. This distinction is not
relevant to the outcome here, as this Board clearly allows public employers
to take an offset for interim earnings and unemployment compensation that an
employe may have received during the back pay period, which the Township has
already done.
6 Significantly, Officer Metterle did not resign from her position either like
the employe at issue in Wyoming Borough.

12

4.
The Township has committed unfair labor practices in violation of
Section 6(1)(a) and (e) of the PLRA.
ORDER
In view of the foregoing and in order to effectuate the policies of the
PLRA and Act 111, the examiner
HEREBY ORDERS AND DIRECTS
that the Township shall
1.
Cease and desist from interfering with, restraining or coercing
employes in the exercise of the rights guaranteed in the PLRA and Act 111;
2.
Cease and desist from refusing to bargain with the
representatives of its employes;
3.
Take the following affirmative action which the examiner finds
necessary to effectuate the policies of the PLRA and Act 111:
(a)
Immediately comply with the January 5, 2022 arbitration award by
tendering full backpay to Officer Metterle for her lost overtime wages from
her discharge in October 2020 to her reinstatement in December 2023, minus 30
days, by using an average of all five years of her overtime earnings
submitted at the hearing in this matter, along with all other benefits or
emoluments of employment she was entitled to pursuant to the award, including
but not limited to her out-of-pocket medical expenses, pension contributions
and interest accrued thereon, taxes and penalties she incurred, and all of
the leave she would have accrued under the CBA had it not been for her
unlawful discharge, together with six (6%) percent per annum interest;
(b)
Post a copy of this Decision and Order within five (5) days from
the effective date hereof in a conspicuous place readily accessible to the
bargaining unit employes and have the same remain so posted for a period of
ten (10) consecutive days;
(c)
Furnish to the Board within twenty (20) days of the date hereof
satisfactory evidence of compliance with this Decision and Order by
completion and filing of the attached Affidavit of Compliance; and
Union.

(d)

Serve a copy of the attached Affidavit of Compliance upon the
IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ORDERED AND DIRECTED

that in the absence of any exceptions filed with the Board pursuant to 34 Pa.
Code § 95.98(a) within twenty days of the date hereof, this decision and
order shall be final.

13

SIGNED, DATED AND MAILED at Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, this 4th day of
March, 2025.
PENNSYLVANIA LABOR RELATIONS BOARD

/s/ John Pozniak______________
John Pozniak, Hearing Examiner

14

COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board
FALLS TOWNSHIP POLICE ASSOCIATION
v.
FALLS TOWNSHIP (BUCKS)

:
:
:
:
:
:

Case No. PF-C-23-68-E

AFFIDAVIT OF COMPLIANCE
The Township hereby certifies that it has ceased and desisted from its
violations of Section 6(1)(a) and (e) of the Pennsylvania Labor Relations
Act; that it has immediately complied with the January 5, 2022 arbitration
award by tendering full backpay to Officer Metterle for her lost overtime
wages from her discharge in October 2020 to her reinstatement in December
2023, minus 30 days, by using an average of all five years of her overtime
earnings submitted at the hearing in this matter, along with all other
benefits or emoluments of employment she was entitled to pursuant to the
award, including but not limited to her out-of-pocket medical expenses,
pension contributions and interest accrued thereon, taxes and penalties she
incurred, and all of the leave she would have accrued under the CBA had it
not been for her unlawful discharge, together with six (6%) percent per annum
interest; that it has posted a copy of the Proposed Decision and Order as
directed therein; and that it has served an executed copy of this affidavit
on the Union at its principal place of business.
_______________________________
Signature/Date
_______________________________
Title
SWORN AND SUBSCRIBED TO before me
the day and year first aforesaid.
_________________________________
Signature of Notary Public

15
