12/04/2023
2995-02
22-MED-05-0605
41715

AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE RIVERSIDE LOCAL SCHOOL DISTRICT
BOARD OF EDUCATION
AND
THE OHIO ASSOCIATION OF PUBLIC SCHOOL EMPLOYEES
AFSCME Local #4 AFL-CIO
Local #374

2022-2025
Amended by Board of Education
on July 28, 2022

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I: RECOGNITION............................................................................................................ 1
Article II: NON-DISCRIMINATION .......................................................................................... 2
Article III: DEDUCTIONS........................................................................................................... 2
Article IV: SCOPE OF NEGOTIATIONS ................................................................................... 3
Article V: NEGOTIATION PROCEDURE ................................................................................. 3
Article VI: IMPASSE ................................................................................................................... 5
Article VII: SEVERABILITY ...................................................................................................... 5
Article VIII: NO STRIKE CLAUSE ............................................................................................ 6
Article IX: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE .................................................................................... 6
Article X: JOB DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................... 9
Article XI: LEAVES..................................................................................................................... 9
Article XII: SEVERANCE PAY ............................................................................................... 17
Article XIII: CALAMITY DAYS .............................................................................................. 18
Article XIV: HOLIDAYS.......................................................................................................... 19
Article XV: VACATIONS ........................................................................................................ 19
Article XVI: OVERTIME, BREAKS AND PAY DAYS ......................................................... 20
Article XVII: WRITTEN CONTRACTS ................................................................................... 22
Article XVIII: INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS ..................................................................................... 23
Article XIX: VACANCIES AND TRANSFERS ...................................................................... 25
Article XX: FRINGE BENEFITS ............................................................................................. 27
Article XXI: REDUCTION IN FORCE .................................................................................... 30
Article XXII: DISCIPLINE ....................................................................................................... 34
Article XXIII: SICK LEAVE REWARD ................................................................................... 34
Article XXIV: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS ................................................................................ 35
Article XXV: UNION RIGHTS ................................................................................................. 35
Article XXVI: UNIFORM ALLOWANCE................................................................................ 37
Article XXVII: SERS PICK-UP................................................................................................. 38
Article XXVIII: GENERAL ....................................................................................................... 38
Article XXIX: TRANSPORTATION......................................................................................... 40
Article XXX: WORKING CONDITIONS................................................................................. 48
Article XXXI: WAGES ............................................................................................................... 51
Article XXXII: DURATION ...................................................................................................... 52
Attachment “A” ...........................................................................................................................54

i

Article I:
A.

RECOGNITION
The Riverside Local School District Board of Education hereby recognizes the
Ohio Association of Public School Employees Local #4 AFSCME/AFL-CIO on
behalf of its Local #374, as the exclusive bargaining representative of full-time
and regular short-hour bargaining unit members in the following positions:
Assistant Department
Library
Recess/Playground
Study Hall Monitor
Special Needs Assistants
Multi-Handicapped
Special Needs Assistant
Teacher/Pre-kindergarten
Transportation Department
Transportation Assistants
Transportation Operators
Non-CDL Operators
Bus Coordinator
Cafeteria Department
Assistant Cook
Cashier
Kitchen Manager
Lunch Assistant
Courier Department
Crossing Guard Department
Custodial Department
Custodial
Maintenance I
Maintenance II
Skilled Crafts
Fleet Maintenance Department
Head Technician
Fleet Technician I
Fleet Technician II
Secretarial Department
Secretaries
1

The following positions are excluded from the bargaining unit:
School Nutrition Services Cafeteria Director, Custodial Director, Garage
Director, Maintenance Director, Transportation Director, Operations Director,
Latchkey Employees, Seasonal Employees, Substitutes, Superintendent’s
Secretary (1), Assistant Superintendent/Personnel’s Secretary (1), Treasurer’s
Assistant, Treasurer’s Secretaries (2), Payroll and Benefits Specialists (2),
District Registrar (1), Administrative Assistant to the Executive Director of
Curriculum and Instruction (1), and Administrative Assistant to the Executive
Director of Student Services (1).
B.

Article II:

Recognition shall continue for the duration of the contract and for the negotiation
of a successor contract, unless a successor representative is elected or recognition
withdrawn in compliance with the terms of 4117 O.R.C.
NON-DISCRIMINATION

The parties agree in the administration of this Agreement that they will not unlawfully
discriminate on the basis of race, religion, creed, color, sex (including sexual orientation and
transgender identity), age, ancestry, genetic information, national origin, disability, veteran status,
or membership in the Association.
Article III:
A.

DEDUCTIONS
Union Dues
1.

The Board agrees to deduct OAPSE State union dues and Local union
dues (current or as increased) from employee’s salary or wages and remit
the same to the OAPSE State Treasurer upon receipt of the employee’s
voluntary authorization. Such voluntary authorization of dues deduction
shall be irrevocable, regardless of whether the employee remains a
member of the Union, for a period of one (1) year from the date of
execution and shall automatically renew from year to year thereafter
unless the employee submits a written revocation to the OAPSE State
Treasurer during the ten (10) day period before the end of the initial one
(1) year term or any renewal term thereafter. A member’s revocation of
dues deduction authorization shall be delivered to the OAPSE State
Treasurer.

2.

The OAPSE State Treasurer shall provide up-to-date written notice to the
Board Treasurer of the bargaining unit members who have authorized
annual dues deduction.

3.

Such deductions shall be made in eighteen (18) equal installments
beginning with the first payroll in October. Dues shall be forwarded to the
OAPSE state treasurer within fifteen (15) days of deduction.

2

4.

B.

The Association agrees to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the Board
from any claim by bargaining unit members relating to or arising out of this
Article.

Other Deductions
In addition to payroll deductions required by law and dues for the Union, the
Treasurer will make payroll deductions properly authorized by the bargaining unit
member for any of the following purposes:
Credit Union
Tax Sheltered Annuities
Hospitalization and Dental
Cancer Aid
United Fund
OAPSE Local 374 Scholarship Fund (monthly)
AFSCME People
125 Plan
Other legal deductions approved by the Board Treasurer.
Written authorization for “Other Deductions” under this Section B. must be
executed by the bargaining unit member and may be revoked by the
bargaining unit member at any time by giving written notice to both the
Board and the Union. Once a bargaining unit member revokes authorization
for “Other Deductions” under this Section B., the bargaining unit member
may not commence the deduction again until the next school year.
All deductions shall be divided equally between two pay periods monthly.

Article IV:

SCOPE OF NEGOTIATIONS
The subjects of negotiations shall be wages, hours, fringe benefits, terms and
other conditions of employment.

Article V:
A.

NEGOTIATION PROCEDURE
Negotiating Teams
The Board and the Union shall be represented at all negotiation meetings
by a team of negotiators not to exceed six (6) members and one (1) observer in
each.

B.

Exchange of Information
Upon reasonable written request either negotiating team shall make available to the
other such information as is pertinent to the issues in negotiations, except that
which is confidential or expressly compiled for use by the negotiating teams.

3

C.

D.

Submission
1.

A written request to open negotiations shall be served on either party not
earlier than March 15 in the year that this contract expires. Negotiations
shall begin no later than April 15th of that year unless otherwise agreed
upon by the Board and the Union.

2.

All proposals for negotiations shall be submitted, in writing, at the first
meeting by both parties. No additional proposals shall be submitted by
either party following the first meeting unless mutually agreed upon by
the Board and the Union.

Negotiation Meetings
The parties shall meet at a place and time agreed upon prior to the first meeting.
Subsequent meetings shall be set by the negotiating teams.

E.

Caucus
Upon request of either party, the negotiation meeting shall be recessed to permit
the requesting party a period of time in which to caucus in private.

F.

Progress Reports
During negotiations, interim reports may be made to the Union by its
representatives and to the Board by its representatives. Each party will be
responsible for requesting that the information from such reports be regarded as
only proposals and shall be considered confidential information with the
organization concerned. If impasse is reached, each party is free to communicate
to the public without consent of the other party.

G.

Item Agreement
As negotiated items are agreed upon, they shall be reduced to writing, initialed
and dated by the chief negotiator of each party. Such initialing shall be construed
as tentative agreement by both parties on that item or issue until all issues are
resolved.

H.

Agreement
When a tentative agreement is reached through negotiations, the outcome shall be
reduced to writing. Within five (5) days thereof, the representatives of the parties
shall meet and agree on the final form and content of the contract transcript.
Once the contract is in final form and not later than twelve (12) days after a
tentative agreement is reached, it shall be submitted to the Union for ratification
4

and adoption. Within ten (10) days of the ratification by the Union, it shall be
submitted to the Board for approval, and if approved, shall become a part of the
official Board minutes. Upon approval by the Board, each negotiating team
member shall immediately sign the agreement, and it shall become binding on
the parties.
Within thirty (30) days of adoption of the contract, the Board shall print the
contract and provide sufficient copies for each bargaining unit member to the
Union President for distribution. The cost will be shared equally by the Union
and the Board.
Article VI:

IMPASSE

A.

The purpose of the bargaining procedure is to provide a means of obtaining an
agreement. In the event a contract is not reached by negotiations, either party shall
have the option of declaring impasse. Impasse may be declared 45 days prior to the
expiration of the contract.

B.

If impasse is declared by either party, it is with the understanding that impasse is
declared on all issues where tentative agreement has not been reached by both
parties. In such cases, the parties shall jointly prepare a request for a mediator
and direct such requests to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service within
five (5) working days of the date impasse was declared.
The purpose of the mediator is to bring the two parties together and aid in
reaching agreement. Both parties will share equally the cost of the mediator and
other incidental costs incurred.

C.

Article VII:

The foregoing mediation procedure is exclusive. It shall constitute the parties’
“mutually agreed upon alternative dispute resolution procedure’ under Chapter
4117.
SEVERABILITY
This contract supersedes and prevails over all statutes of the state of Ohio, except
as specifically set forth in Ohio Revised Code 4117.10(A) and except where the
Union and the Board have intentionally negotiated a provision different than law.
If any court of competent jurisdiction or the State Employment Relations Board
determines, after all appeals or appeal periods have been exhausted, that any
provision herein is unlawful, such provision will be automatically terminated, but
all other provisions of this contract shall remain in full force and effect. If any
provision is found to be unlawful and all appeals or appeal periods have been
exhausted, the parties will meet within 30 days to determine its impact and to
bring the contract into compliance through the negotiations process.

5

Article VIII: NO STRIKE CLAUSE
There shall be no strike, slowdown, or work stoppage sanctioned by any
officer or member of the Union for the duration of this Agreement. The
Board shall not lock out bargaining unit members for the duration of this
Agreement.
Article IX:
A.

B.

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
DEFINITIONS
1.

A grievance shall be defined as an alleged violation,
misinterpretation and/or misapplication of a specific Article(s) and/or
subsection(s) of this Agreement.

2.

A “grievant” is a bargaining unit member(s) or the Union who files a
grievance.

3.

For the purposes of this Article, “days” shall be calendar
days excluding weekends and holidays.

BASIC PRINCIPLES
1.

The purpose of this procedure is to secure, at the lowest possible
administrative level, the equitable resolution of grievances.
Nothing contained in the procedure will be construed as limiting
the rights of any bargaining unit member having a grievance to
discuss the matter with any appropriate member of the
Administration and/or Union. Grievances shall be processed as
expeditiously as possible.

2.

Both parties agree to keep the proceedings as informal and
confidential as possible.

3.

Reprisals against any bargaining unit member because of his
participation in the grievance procedure will not be tolerated.

4.

The Board and the Administration shall cooperate with the
bargaining unit member and/or the Union in the investigation of
any grievance, and further, will furnish the bargaining unit
member and/or the Union with such available information for the
processing of any grievance unless this information is
confidential under applicable law.

5.

The grievant at his/her option may be represented at all steps of
the grievance procedure by an OAPSE representative, who may
be either a bargaining unit member or the Field Representative.
6

When a grievant chooses not to be represented by the Union at a formal
step of the grievance procedure, the Union President and/or Field
Representative shall be notified in writing by the grievant and must be
present at the resolution of any formal grievance.
The Union shall provide to the Superintendent a list of official Union
Representatives for any grievance or meeting with management from
August 1st through July 31st of each year. The Union shall notify the
Superintendent of any changes.
6.

C.

Hearings and conferences under this procedure shall be conducted at a
time and place which shall afford a fair and reasonable opportunity for
all persons to attend and will be held, as far as possible, during nonduty hours. If such hearings must be held during duty hours, the
bargaining unit member(s) required to attend shall be excused with
pay, for that purpose.

PROCEDURES
1. STEP ONE
Within twenty (20) days from the time the grievant knew or should have
reasonably known of the event or condition on which the grievance is based,
the grievant shall discuss the grievance informally with his/her immediate
director, principal or appropriate administrator who shall attempt to resolve it or
advise the grievant of his/her position promptly. The bargaining unit member
shall inform the director, principal or appropriate administrator that this is the
informal discussion of a possible grievance.
If, however, an administrator (other than the grievant’s immediate director,
principal, or appropriate administrator) caused the event or condition on which a
grievance is based, the grievant will informally discuss the grievance with that
administrator. The grievant’s immediate director, principal or appropriate
administrator will advise the grievant in dated, written form of the appropriate
administrator immediately or as soon as possible. The bargaining unit member
shall inform the administrator that this is the informal discussion of a possible
grievance.
2. STEP TWO
If the grievance is not resolved at Step One, the grievant and/or the Union shall
present the grievance in writing to his/her immediate director, principal or
appropriate administrator identified during Step One above within ten (10) days
of the discussion. A copy shall be provided to the Superintendent. Within ten
(10) days after the presentation of the grievance, the director, principal or the
7

appropriate administrator shall give his/her answer in writing to the bargaining
unit member and Union representative.
3. STEP THREE
If the grievance is not resolved in Step Two, the grievant and/or the Union,
within ten (10) days of receipt of the answer from the director, principal or the
appropriate administrator identified during Step One, shall submit to the
Superintendent or designee the answer in Step Two with the original grievance
statement. The Superintendent or his designee shall meet with the grievant and/or
his/her Union Representative within ten (10) days after the receipt of the written
grievance. A written answer shall be sent to the grievant and Union
Representative within ten (10) days of the meeting.
4. STEP FOUR
If, within ten (10) days of the Superintendent’s or his designee’s decision, the
aggrieved person is not satisfied, the Union shall serve notice on the Board
Treasurer of its intent to arbitrate the grievance. Within twenty (20) days after
the notice of intent to arbitrate is given to the Board Treasurer, the Union shall
contact the American Arbitration Association (AAA) for a list of arbitrators.
The arbitrator shall then be selected in accordance with the AAA rules within
ten (10) days of receipt by the parties of the list, through the alternate strike
method. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding. The arbitrator
shall have no power to add to, subtract from, disregard, alter, or modify any of
the terms of this agreement. The arbitrator will be requested to submit his/her
decision in writing within thirty (30) days of the hearing.
If the grievance is denied, the fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be
borne by the Union. If the grievance is granted, the fees and expenses of the
arbitrator shall be borne by the District. If the grievance is denied in part
and granted in part, the fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be shared
equally by the Board and the Union. Any other expenses shall be borne by the
party incurring them except that any bargaining unit members who are
witnesses, building representatives or the grievant shall not lose any pay
when the hearing is conducted during that bargaining unit member’s regular
hours of work.
D.

GENERAL
1.

Any grievance not advanced to the next step by the grievant and/or
the Union within the time limit in that step shall be deemed resolved
by the Administrator’s last answer.

2.

Any grievance not answered by the immediate director, principal,

8

appropriate administrator or the Administration, within the agreed
time limits, shall automatically move to the next Step.

Article X:

3.

Time limits may be extended by mutual agreement of the
Administration and the grievant and/or the Union in writing. The
new date shall prevail.

4.

No Step shall be omitted except by written mutual consent of both
parties.

5.

Grievance Form (see Appendix) to be reviewed in Labor/Management meetings.

6.

A grievance regarding disciplinary action in accordance with
subsections B. 3. and B. 4. of Article XXII (Discipline) may be
initiated at Step 3 of the grievance procedure.

JOB DESCRIPTION

A.

The Board shall have written job descriptions for all classified positions outlining
the general duties and responsibilities of each classification. All job descriptions
for Bargaining Unit Members will be reviewed by the District periodically.

B.

The Union shall be notified prior to any change/revision to a job description and
prior to the creation of a job description for a new position covered by this
Agreement. If requested by the Union, a meeting shall be held, at which time the
Union may provide input regarding the anticipated change/revision or the job
description for the new position.

C.

Bargaining unit members shall not regularly be assigned work which is not
within or related to work in their job description. It is nonetheless agreed that
bargaining unit members are obligated to perform the work to which they are
assigned and may not refuse assignments on account of an assigned task not
being within the written job classification, except for health or safety reasons as
provided by law. An alleged improper assignment may be grieved.

D.

Each bargaining unit member in the classified service shall be given a copy of
his/her job description, and the Union shall be given copies of the job
descriptions of bargaining unit members annually, prior to the first day of school.

Article XI:
A.

LEAVES
Personal Leave
Subject to the following requirements, a bargaining unit member may be absent
without loss of pay for three (3) days (proportional for part-time) in any school

9

year to transact necessary or urgent personal business which cannot be
conducted outside the regular assigned work hours, to attend to affairs of a
personal nature which cannot be conducted outside the regular assigned work
hours, and for other reasons that fall within this provision. Except for Operators
and Transportation Assistants in the Transportation Department, personal leave
will be taken in two (2) hour increments. Operators and Transportation
Assistants in the Transportation Department may utilize personal leave in
increments equal to his/her AM route package, Mid-Day route package, and/or
PM route package and will be charged the use of personal leave proportional to
his/her regular work day.
1.

An application on the Board’s form for such leave must be received in the
Director’s/Principal’s office at least five (5) days in advance thereof,
emergencies excepted. If the District does not receive the personal leave
application at least five (5) days in advance of the requested personal
leave, the District may require that the bargaining unit member provide,
in writing, the reason for the requested personal leave. In reviewing all
requests, the Superintendent or his designee will render the final approval
or disapproval where required. Requests for personal leave that fall within
the guidelines of this provision shall be approved.

2.

No more than two (2) of the bargaining unit members may be granted
personal leave in each classification in each building on any one (1) day.
No more than two (2) bus drivers and no more than three (3) custodians,
district wide, may be absent on personal leave on the same day.

3.

Personal leave cannot be taken the day before or the day after a holiday
or vacation period or on the first two (2) days or last two (2) days of the
student school year, except for emergencies beyond the bargaining unit
member’s control. This restriction shall not apply when school is not in
session (for example, summer vacation, winter break, etc.).

4.

The application for leave must recite one or more of the following
reasons:
a. To transact personal business that cannot be transacted outside
regular assigned work hours, for example, religious observance and
matters of a legal nature (court appearance, attorney, real estate,
etc.).
b. Affairs of a personal nature that cannot be conducted outside the
regular assigned work hours, for example, death of a relative, close
friend, associate, etc. Personal leave may be granted when absence
for bereavement is not covered by the sick leave policy.
(Graduation, marriage, or a similar major event within the
immediate family.) For the purposes of this subsection, “family”
shall be as defined in Section G of this Article.
10

c. Emergency beyond the bargaining unit member’s control-Such
circumstances are defined as certain broad events which cannot be
anticipated or avoided.
d. Other good and just causes which must be specified and which
leave shall be subject to prior approval. Personal leave shall not be
used to extend holidays, recesses or vacations; for recreation; to
engage in or seek other employment; or to attend business trips
with spouse.
e. Any examples cited in subsections a. through d. above are
illustrative rather than all inclusive.

B.

5.

It shall be sufficient compliance if the application identifies by the
appropriate number one or more of these reasons. The Board shall return a
copy of the form to the bargaining unit member in a timely manner. For
days before or after holidays and/or vacation specificity of reasons may be
required. The Superintendent may grant additional days at his discretion.
The filing of a false statement shall be considered a serious breach of
ethics and shall be grounds for severe disciplinary action in such form and
manner as the Board may deem advisable.

6.

Unused personal leave shall be added to the bargaining unit member’s
sick leave accumulation as of July 31st of each year.

Union Leave
The Superintendent or his designee will grant up to 14 days of Union leave as
needed provided an application is made on the proper form and approved by
the OAPSE President.

C.

Assault Leave
1.

Any bargaining unit member who is absent due to physical or mental
disability resulting directly from a physical assault which occurs in the
course of Board employment will be maintained on frill pay status
(including regular and supplemental contracts) during the period of such
absence not to exceed twenty (20) days.

2.

The bargaining unit member shall sign a statement stating that such leave
was due to physical or mental disability resulting from an assault which
occurred during the course of employment with the Board of Education.

3.

A statement from a licensed physician stating the nature of the disability
and its duration is required.

11

D.

4.

Falsification of either the bargaining unit member’s signed statement or
the physician’s statement may be grounds for suspension or termination
of employment under Section 3319.16 of the Ohio Revised Code.

5.

The bargaining unit member who has been assaulted shall file an assault
complaint with the law enforcement officials in the appropriate
jurisdiction.

6.

Assault leave granted under the above agreement shall not be charged
against sick leave earned or earnable under Section 3319.141 of the Ohio
Revised Code. Fringe benefits shall be maintained for bargaining unit
members on assault leave to the same extent and on the same terms as
they are maintained for bargaining unit members on other paid leaves.

7.

Bargaining unit members who are still disabled after exhausting assault
leave may use their accumulated sick leave. If a bargaining unit member
is still disabled after exhausting sick leave, the Board shall approve an
additional twenty (20) days of assault leave.

8.

In the case of an assault on a bargaining unit member for which Worker’s
Compensation or disability compensation under the School Employees
Retirement System is paid, the Board will pay the difference between the
Worker’s Compensation and/or disability payment and the bargaining
unit member’s per diem rate for the period of assault leave granted under
this provision.

Unpaid Professional Leave
1.

Any bargaining unit member who has completed two or more years of
regular service in the district may be granted a leave of absence without
pay for training, educational, professional development, or other
purposes provided that he does not exceed a total unpaid leave of two (2)
years.

2.

The application for leave must be submitted to the Assistant
Superintendent/Personnel at least thirty (30) days prior to the requested
leave. Application for such leave shall outline the program to be pursued
and shall clearly state how such activity will contribute directly to
improved service to the school system and any other reasons for the
requested leave. No leave of absence will be granted for employment in
another occupation or business.

3.

Application for reinstatement must be made at least thirty (30) days
prior to the expiration of the approved leave of absence.

12

E.

Military Leave
In accordance with Section 5923.05 of the Ohio Revised Code, all officers
and bargaining unit members of the Ohio National Guard or the United
States Reserves are entitled to leaves of absence from their respective duties
and positions, without loss of pay, for such time as they are in the military
service, on field training or active duty for periods not to exceed thirty-one
(31) days in any one calendar year. Beyond the thirty-one (31) day point,
military pay, benefits, and insurance will then apply. However, if a
bargaining unit member wishes to continue the school- provided benefits,
he/she shall have the option of doing so at the bargaining unit member’s
expense and be given a military leave of absence for the duration
of his/her service.
Bargaining unit members returning from active duty will be offered a job with the
same pay and seniority as he/she would have expected if his/her work had not
been interrupted by military duty. The bargaining unit member on military leave
shall be entitled to these considerations for up to four years or as long as the
emergency necessitating the call for duty lasts, whichever is the shorter. Those
returning from active duty shall be allowed ninety (90) days of unpaid general
leave of absence if requested in writing upon their return.

F.

Jury Duty
A bargaining unit member shall be granted time off for jury duty and shall not
suffer any loss of pay. Jury duty payment shall not be deducted from the
bargaining unit member’s salary. Bargaining unit members shall not suffer any
loss of pay for appearances in court on matters arising from their employment,
including testifying in student discipline matters or in accident cases witnessed
by a driver while performing duties for the Board, and similar matters. Contract
grievance disputes are subject to Article IX, not this provision.

G.

Sick Leave
1.

Accumulation of Sick Leave. As provided by statute, each bargaining unit
member shall accrue paid sick leave at the rate of one and one fourth (11/4) days (proportional for part-time) per month. The maximum number
of sick leave days bargaining unit members may accumulate shall be two
hundred sixty nine (269) days.

2.

Procedure. All bargaining unit members may use sick leave for absence
made necessary by illness, injury, exposure to contagious disease, and
illness or death in the bargaining unit member’s immediate family. Sick
leave may not be used to extend holidays, recesses or vacations; for
recreation; to engage in or seek other employment; to enable a
bargaining unit member to work at other day-time or night-time
employment or to take trips with spouses.
13

3.

Immediate Family is defined as: parent, sister, brother, spouse,
children, step-children, step-parents, wards, mother-in-law, father-inlaw, grandparents, grandchildren, or a person living in the same
household.

4.

All bargaining unit members except Operators and Transportation
Assistants in the Transportation Department shall be permitted to use
sick leave in Appropriate segments based on hours worked and used,
provided that sick leave shall be charged in increments of one (1)
hour. Operators and Transportation Assistants in the Transportation
Department may utilize sick leave in increments equal to his/her AM
route package, Mid-Day route package, and/or PM route package and
will be charged the use of sick leave proportional to his/her regular
work day.

5.

Bargaining unit members may transfer unused sick leave
accumulated in other Ohio public employment as authorized by
statute, only to the extent that such sick leave could be
accumulated as a bargaining unit member of the school district.

6.

Each newly hired bargaining unit member and each bargaining unit
member who has exhausted his/her accumulated sick leave shall be
entitled to an advancement of five (5) days of sick leave each year to be
charged against sick leave he subsequently earns.

7.

A bargaining unit member who is unable to work for medical reasons
during pregnancy and/or immediately after childbirth may use
accumulated sick leave. Use of sick leave after childbirth should be
limited to six (6) calendar weeks, unless documented medical
conditions require longer use of available sick leave.

8.

Upon return to work, the bargaining unit member shall complete a
Sick Leave Form and submit it to his/her director prior to the end
of his/her work shift. If medical attention is required, the
bargaining unit member’s statement shall list the name and address
of the attending physician and the dates consulted. If a bargaining
unit member uses five (5) consecutive sick leave days for absence,
the bargaining unit member may be required to present to the
District, upon returning to work, a signed and dated physician’s
statement indicating the medical reasons for the extended sick
leave. A bargaining unit member who exhibits, over an extensive
period of time, an ongoing pattern of use of sick leave may be
required to provide a physician’s statement attesting to his/her
illness or incapacity. If hospitalized for a period in excess of three
(3) days, the Board may request from a bargaining unit member a
physician’s statement indicating that the bargaining unit member
14

may return to work. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
waive the physician-patient privilege provided by O.R.C. 2317.02.

H.

9.

Misuse or abuse of sick leave may result in disciplinary action as per
Article XXII of this agreement.

10.

Application for sick leave to be used for anticipated medical
treatment or anticipated medical disabilities shall be applied for as
far in advance as is possible and shall state the anticipated
beginning date of the leave, the estimated duration of the leave,
and the expected return date.

11.

Bargaining unit members who work less than 2 1/2 hours per day
may not take sick leave for routine medical/dental appointments
during their contracted hours except with the permission of the
Director/Principal. Sick Leave Form (see Appendix)

Workers’ Compensation
All bargaining unit members covered under this contract are protected
under the Workers’ Compensation Act of Ohio, in cases of injury or
death incurred in the course of and arising out of their employment. The
Board shall provide the bargaining unit member with all fringe benefits
to which he/she is entitled under the contract.

I.

Parental Leave
1.

Parental Leave. Bargaining unit members who become pregnant,
who are adopting or rearing a child of pre-school age, and who
desire to return to work at a future date shall be granted a parental
leave. A parental leave shall be a leave without pay and shall be in
accordance with this provision. Parental leave may commence at
any time during the period between commencement of pregnancy
and the end of pregnancy disability associated with the birth of the
child or at the time of an adoption of the child. Such leave shall be
for a period up to one (1) year and may be extended for one (1)
year with prior approval from the Superintendent.

2.

Application for Leave. Applications for parental leave shall be in
writing, directed to the Assistant Superintendent/Personnel and
shall contain the date on which the leave of absence is to
commence and the date on which
the bargaining unit member expects to return. Application for
parental leave shall be made at the earliest possible time but shall
not be later than the thirtieth (30th) day before the beginning of the
parental leave except in cases of emergency or those owing to

15

circumstances which could not reasonably be anticipated thirty (30)
days in advance. Missing the thirty (30) day deadline will not be
reason to deny the leave, but may be reason to delay it.
3.

J.

K.

Reinstatement Application. A bargaining unit member on an
extended parental leave who desires to return to work should
confirm his/her intention to return at least thirty (30) days preceding
the scheduled return date. A bargaining unit member who decides
not to return shall so notify the Board not less than thirty (30) days
prior to the expiration of the leave of absence.

Unpaid Medical Leave
1.

Upon written notice of a bargaining unit member, the Board shall
grant an unpaid medical leave of absence for a period of not more
than two (2) years where illness, dependent care or other disability is
the reason for the request. Such leave shall be granted by the Board
in up to one (1) year increments.

2.

Application for such leave shall be made at least thirty (30) days in
advance, when possible.

3.

Application for reinstatement must be made at least thirty (30) days
prior to the expiration of the leave of absence.

Fringe Benefits For Unpaid Professional, Unpaid Medical, Parental and Family
Medical Leave
1.

For a period not to exceed twelve (12) weeks, a bargaining unit
member on approved parental or unpaid medical leave who qualifies
for up to twelve (12) weeks of unpaid leave under the Family and
Medical Leave Act shall be entitled to a continuation of
hospitalization/health care insurance at the same level of Board
contribution as exists during a paid leave. Thereafter, said bargaining
unit member will be given the opportunity of continuing in the
hospitalization/health care insurance and group term life insurance
programs by forwarding a check or checks for both the Board’s portion
and the bargaining unit member’s portion to cover the full cost of said
insurance programs.

2.

A Bargaining unit member on approved parental/unpaid medical
leave who does not qualify for up to twelve (12) weeks of unpaid
leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act or a bargaining unit
member on approved unpaid professional leave will be given the
opportunity of continuing in the hospitalization/health care insurance
and group term life insurance programs by forwarding a check or

16

checks for both the Board’s portion and the bargaining unit
member’s portion to cover the full cost of said insurance programs.
3.

L.

M.

The Treasurer’s Office will process all requests for said insurance
coverage. Checks must be in the Treasurer’s Office not later than the
twentieth (20th) day of the prior month in order to continue the insurance
in force. The checks for fringe benefits are to be made payable to the
Riverside Local Schools. The Treasurer’s Office will forward these
monies to the specified company.

Return From Leave
1.

Upon return from approved leave under this Article, the bargaining unit
member will retain the same contract status he/she held when the leave
commenced and will be assigned to the same position if available or to a
substantially equivalent position to the one he/she held prior to the leave
with equivalent benefits, pay, hours, shift and other terms and conditions
of employment held prior to taking the leave. Any credit awarded to any
bargaining unit member mentioned above shall be in compliance with
3319.13 of the Ohio Revised Code.

2.

Upon the return of the bargaining unit member from approved leave
under this Article, the Board may terminate the employment of a person
hired exclusively for the purpose of replacing the returning bargaining
unit member while he/she was on said leave of absence.

3.

If, after the return of the bargaining unit member from an approved leave
under this Article, the person employed exclusively for the purpose of
replacing any bargaining unit member while he/she was on said leave of
absence is continued in employment as a regular bargaining unit member,
or if he/she is hired by the Board as a regular bargaining unit member
within a year after his/her employment as a replacement is terminated,
he/she shall receive credit for his length of service with the Board during
such replacement period.

4.

An employee may return to work prior to the end of an approved leave
upon the approval of the Superintendent and the Board provided he/she
has submitted such request at least 30 days prior to returning.

Five (5) Day Unpaid Leave
The Superintendent or his designee may grant or deny up to five (5) days of
unpaid leave per year to a bargaining unit member upon written request.

Article XII:

SEVERANCE PAY

17

A.

B.

Any bargaining unit member, at the time of retirement from active service,
shall be paid in cash for one-fourth (1/4) of the value of his/her accrued but
unused sick leave credit up to two hundred sixty nine (269) days or a
maximum of sixty seven and twenty five hundredths (67.25) days. Such
payment shall be based on the bargaining unit member’s rate for sick leave
credit accrued by the bargaining unit member at the time of retirement. For
the purpose of this section, any bargaining unit member shall be deemed to
“retire” if
1.

The bargaining unit member becomes eligible for receipt of retirement
benefits from the School Employees Retirement System, and the District
receives notification of same from SERS; or

2.

The bargaining unit member voluntarily terminates his/her employment
with the Riverside Local Schools, and he has ten (10) years of service and
is fifty-five (55) years of age or older.

This severance payment shall eliminate all sick leave credit accrued by the
bargaining unit member. Should a bargaining unit member die while in the
service of the Board, the estate of the deceased bargaining unit members shall be
paid the severance benefit calculated under this Article.

Article XIII: CALAMITY DAYS
A.

All bargaining unit members shall be paid their appropriate rate of pay for all
days or parts of a day when the school in which they are employed is closed due
to an epidemic or other public calamity.
1.

All bargaining unit members who are requested by the Director,
Superintendent, or his designee, to report to work on a calamity day
shall be paid their regular hourly rate of pay in addition to calamity day
compensation or shall have the option to take compensatory time for all
hours actually worked. All compensatory time must be utilized during
the contract year in which it was earned.

B.

The Superintendent or his designee shall determine which bargaining unit
members normally will be required to report to work on calamity days. Notice
will be sent to those bargaining unit members at the beginning of the school year,
and they shall report to work on calamity days unless notified not to do so. Other
bargaining unit members will not report for work on calamity days unless called
and told to do so.

C.

When a bargaining unit member is called in to work on a calamity day, he/she
shall be paid time and one-half his regular rate of pay for those hours worked
outside his normal work hours.

18

D.

Bargaining unit members who report to work because they did not receive
notice of the calamity day through no fault of their own shall be paid or
receive compensatory time for
work performed until they are sent
home. Bargaining unit members
shall be given a reasonable amount
of paid work time to clean up, put
away, and secure equipment after
being told to leave. Paid time shall
be a minimum of two (2) hours at
the member’s regular rate of pay.

E.

Calamity days shall not be counted as hours worked for the purpose of
determining eligibility for overtime payment.

Article XIV:

HOLIDAYS

A.

Twelve Month bargaining unit members:
Labor Day
New Year’s Day
Thanksgiving Day
Martin Luther King Day
Day after Thanksgiving
President’s Day
Christmas Eve
Good Friday
Christmas Day
Memorial Day
New Year’s Eve
Juneteenth
Fourth of July

B.

All other bargaining unit members:
Labor Day
Martin Luther King Day
Thanksgiving Day
President’s Day
Christmas Day
Good Friday
New Year’s Day
Memorial Day
Juneteenth (if the member’s regular work year includes the workdays
immediately before and after June 19th)

C.

If a holiday falls on Saturday, the work day next preceding it will be designated
the holiday. If the holiday falls on Sunday, the work day next following it will be
designated the holiday, subject to the adopted school calendar and in accordance
with O.R.C. 33119.087.

Article XV:

VACATIONS

All classified full-time and regular part-time bargaining unit members who are employed on a
twelve (12) month contract (excluding summer workers under section E of Article XXVIII) earn
vacation as follows:
A.

Less than one year service one (1) day for each month worked after the first two
(2) full months for a maximum often (10) vacation days to be taken during the
-

19

next contract year, provided that no bargaining unit member shall be entitled to
any actual vacation leave until he/she has completed twelve (12) full months
employment with the Board.
B.

One year through six years of service - two weeks.

C.

Seven years through twelve years of service - three weeks.

D.

Thirteen years through eighteen years of service - four weeks.

E.

Nineteen years of service and up - five weeks.

Years of service shall mean continuous service in the district regardless of position held,
including any positions held that were not on a twelve (12) month contract. However, where the
bargaining unit member had more than one (1) year of service with the District at the time of the
beginning of the twelve (12) month contract, he/she will earn vacation during their first year in
the twelve (12) month contract at the rate commensurate with their total years of service with the
district.
Vacation earned during a specific contract year will be available to be taken during the next
contract year.
The vacation year for all bargaining unit members for vacation purposes shall be August
1 through July 31.
Vacations may be taken at any time of the year subject to the approval of the Director,
Principal, Superintendent or his designee. Vacation preferences will be submitted before
October 1, and conflicts within a building/classification shall be resolved on the basis of
seniority. Requests submitted after October 1 shall be considered on a first-come firstserved basis.
Bargaining unit members may carry over, not to exceed two (2) weeks of vacation into the
following year with the written approval of the Principal, Director, or Administrator. The carryover must be used in the following year.
Article XVI:
A.

OVERTIME, BREAKS AND PAY DAYS
Workweek
1.

The standard work week shall be forty (40) hours per week and shall not
include more than ten (10) hours per day and shall not include more than
five (5) consecutive days per week with said days being Monday through
Friday. Management reserves the right to schedule bargaining unit
members on a Tuesday through Saturday work week on a limited or
seasonal basis. Any regular Tuesday through Saturday schedule would
have to be agreed to by the Union.

20

B.

2.

The regular work week for short hour bargaining unit members shall be
Monday through Friday and the hours shall be for the number of hours
established or required for the position.

3.

Bargaining unit members may work four (4) ten (10) hour days when
school is not in session for students with the approval of the Director.

4.

Each such work day shall include a duty free uninterrupted unpaid lunch
period of not less than thirty (30) minutes.

5.

When a Principal/Director requires any bargaining unit member to
work during lunch, the bargaining unit member shall receive a paid lunch
period.

Breaks
All regular full time bargaining unit members are entitled to fifteen (15) minute
breaks in the A.M. and P.M. Short hour bargaining unit members working less
than full time, but at least four (4) hours will be entitled to one (1) such break.
(Bus drivers are not eligible for breaks).

C.

Pay Days
All bargaining unit members shall have their choice to receive their salary on a
semi-monthly, twenty-four (24) pay basis or twenty (20) pay basis except where
otherwise stated in the member’s individual contract or salary notice. The
twenty-pay basis will only be done by classification and not by an individual
bargaining unit member’s choice. Any classifications that receive their salary in
20 pays will be required to pay in full by June 30th any benefits that are
extended for 12 months. “Spread pay” at the beginning of a new contract year
shall not include any payment for hours not yet worked for that contract year.

D.

Overtime Eligibility Computation
Paid leave, holidays, and vacation days shall all count toward meeting the above
forty (40) hour work week provisions.

E.

Sundays and Holidays
Except as otherwise provided, no bargaining unit member will be required
to work on Sundays or Holidays. For all bargaining unit members who are
scheduled to work 40 hours per week, any work performed on Sundays or
holidays and all work performed over and above the forty (40) hour work
week shall be compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times
21

his/her normal rate of pay. For all bargaining unit members who are
scheduled to work less than 40 hours per week, any work performed on
holidays shall be compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times
their normal rate of pay. Payment at time and one-half for Sundays would
not occur unless their total hours of work for that week exceed 40. The
Board and Administration may grant compensatory time off, at the
bargaining unit member’s option, in place of overtime pay, at the rate of
time and one-half (1-1/2).
F.

Assignment of Overtime
The Board will offer overtime opportunities during the work year first to
bargaining unit members in the affected job classification and/or the
classification having the same or similar duties who are assigned to the building
where the overtime is to be worked. If there are no such bargaining unit
members available, overtime will next be offered to other bargaining unit
members in the affected job classification and/or the classification having the
same or similar duties.
If the Director has difficulty assigning overtime, the Director shall call the next
three (3) bargaining unit members, in order of seniority, in an attempt to assign
the overtime. The Director shall note the date and time of such attempts on the
rotation roster. The Director shall make an attempt not to assign consecutive
overtime to the same bargaining unit member.
The Director shall post, on a bulletin board in his/her office and the Board
office, a seniority list of bargaining unit members, indicate the overtime they
have received and upcoming overtime assigned. This shall be posted in an area
readily accessible to any bargaining unit member who wishes to review the list.
The Board will distribute overtime on a seniority rotation basis to those
bargaining unit members who have expressed an interest in working overtime.

G.

Any bargaining unit member called out to work either before or after his/her
work shift or on a bargaining unit member’s not regularly scheduled work day,
shall be paid a minimum of two (2) hours or for all time worked. At the
discretion of the bargaining unit member he/she shall also have the option of
working his/her normal hours.

Article XVII: WRITTEN CONTRACTS
A.

Newly hired bargaining unit members shall enter into written contracts for their
employment with the District. The term of the initial contract shall be for a period
of not more than one (1) year, and the initial contract shall have an expiration date
of July 31st. If that bargaining unit member is rehired, his/her three (3) subsequent
contracts shall be for a period of two (2) years each. After the termination of the
third two-year contract, if the contract of that bargaining unit member is renewed,
the bargaining unit member shall be continued in employment, and the salary
22

provided in that continuing contract may be increased but not reduced unless such
reduction is a part of a uniform plan affecting the nonteaching employees of the
entire District. The District has total discretion to decide not to re-employ a
bargaining unit member prior to his/her attaining continuing contract status for
any reason it deems necessary.
B.

The contracts as provided for in this section may be terminated by a majority
vote of the Board of Education. Such contracts may be terminated only for
violation of written rules and regulations as set forth by the Board of Education,
for incompetency, inefficiency, dishonesty, drunkenness, immoral conduct,
insubordination, discourteous treatment of the public, neglect of duty, or any
other acts of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance. In addition to the right of
the Board of Education to terminate the contract of a bargaining unit member, the
Board may suspend a bargaining unit member for a definite period of time or
demote the bargaining unit member for the reasons set forth in this division. The
bargaining unit member will promptly be sent written notice by certified mail of
the Board of Education’s action terminating, demoting, or suspending him/her.
The bargaining unit member may contest the Board of Education’s action under
this paragraph by filing a grievance pursuant to Article IX. The
grievance/arbitration procedure shall be the exclusive means of contesting a
demotion, suspension, or termination during the term of the contract, and shall
supersede and be in lieu of all other remedies, including court appeals provided
by Revised Code Section 3319.081 (C).

C.

Any bargaining unit member may terminate his/her contract of employment
thirty (30) days subsequent to the filing of written notice of such termination
with the Treasurer.

D.

A person hired exclusively for the purpose of replacing a bargaining unit member
while such bargaining unit member is on a leave of absence granted under
Section 3319.13 of Ohio Revised Code is not a regular bargaining unit member
under this section.

Article XVIII: INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS
A.

Evaluation
1.

Any annual evaluation by the appropriate Director, Principal or
Administrator on any bargaining unit member’s work record shall be
examined by the bargaining unit member and initialed by him/her prior to
being placed in his/her files. The bargaining unit member shall be provided
with a copy of said evaluation. Initialing of evaluation forms merely
indicates review by the bargaining unit member and not necessarily
agreement or disagreement with the contents. In the event the bargaining
unit member refuses to initial the evaluation form, the evaluation report
shall be filed without the bargaining unit member’s signature. The
23

Transportation Director shall notify operators, by phone, the morning of the
evaluation if at home site.
2.

Should the appropriate Director, Principal or Administrator feel that a
bargaining unit member needs to be observed/assessed more than once per
year, the Director shall meet with the bargaining unit member, and
establish goals and objectives for improvements. The appropriate Director,
Principal or Administrator shall meet with the bargaining unit member at
least three (3) times prior to the official evaluation(s) to note all
improvements. The observation assessment shall be done on the
appropriate form.
Evaluations, if they are performed, shall be completed by May 15th of each
year.

B.

3.

Any bargaining unit member may write and attach his/her comments to any
evaluation form examined by him/her.

4.

The presence of this bargaining unit member evaluation section in the
agreement does not make mandatory any bargaining unit member
evaluations. If and when evaluations are conducted, the above procedures
shall be followed.

Personnel Records
1.

The official personnel file shall be kept in the Central Administration
Office. All disciplinary records, evaluations, letters of commendation,
and awards shall be sent to the office file. Complaint forms may be sent
to the file. If such items are sent to the official file, the bargaining unit
member will be informed, given a copy and will have an opportunity to
respond. The bargaining unit member’s response shall be placed in
his/her personnel file.
Any bargaining unit member may request to examine his/her personnel
file and shall be permitted to do so at a reasonable time of request, not
to exceed one eight (8) hour day.
At the bargaining unit member’s request, he/she may have a Union
representative accompany him/her in the review of the file, and a
representative of the District will also be present. Any bargaining unit
member may submit letters of work-related commendation or awards to
his/her file.

2.

A copy of a written disciplinary report, signed and dated by the
appropriate Director, Principal or Administrator, which is to be
included in the bargaining unit member's personnel file, shall be sent to
24

the bargaining unit member and the Union.
3.

C.

Bargaining unit member personnel records shall be expunged of
disciplinary actions or reprimands, after a three year period of time if
there is not a reoccurrence of the same issue and upon mutual
agreement of the Board and Union.

Inspection
Bargaining unit members will not be required to participate in the search of any
buildings which have been evacuated due to a bomb threat. Further, bargaining
unit members shall not be required to search students for illegal substances
and/or weapons.

D.

No Reprisals
No reprisals shall be taken against any bargaining unit member by reason of his
utilization of any procedure or activity herein provided for, or on account of his
membership or position in an organization and its lawfully related activities.

Article XIX:
A.

VACANCIES AND TRANSFERS
Vacancies (except for vacancies among transportation operators; see Article
XXIX, Section 9)
1.

A position shall be considered vacant when a bargaining unit member
has resigned, retired, is discharged, has transferred to another position
or when a new position is established.
Should the District determine that it will not fill a vacant position,
notification of that decision will be posted in place of a vacancy
notice, and such notice shall be sent to the Union president.

2.

Vacancies shall be posted at the Board Office and in all other school
buildings in the system in an area readily accessible to bargaining unit
members for a period of five (5) working days. Each posting shall
include the position, its location/shift, and the job description. Each
posting shall be initialed and dated by the Director, Principal or the
appropriate Administrator as to the date of posting. Reminders of
summer postings will appear on paycheck stubs.

3.

A bargaining unit member must make a request for the vacancy, in
writing, to the appropriate Administrator with copies to the Central Office
and the Union President. All such requests for consideration shall be
received by the District no later than 4:00 p.m. of the fifth day of posting.

25

4.

The awarding and filling of all posted vacancies shall be accomplished
as follows:
a.

Bargaining unit members within the classification of the vacancy
with the most seniority shall be given first consideration so long
as they have demonstrated the necessary qualifications, as
outlined in the current job description, and skills for the vacancy;

b.

Other bargaining unit members shall be considered next so long
as they have demonstrated the necessary qualifications and skills;

c.

Should the above procedure not provide a qualified (as outlined in
the current job description) and skilled bargaining unit member,
the Board may hire a person deemed so qualified to fill the
vacancy or may transfer a bargaining unit member as outlined in
Section B.

5.

An individual awarded a vacancy must resign his/her previously held
position if the combined hours for the position would regularly exceed
forty (40) hours per week unless the Board in its sole discretion chooses to
waive this requirement. This individual would serve a thirty (30) working
day probationary period. If a bargaining unit member is awarded a vacancy
in which he/she has previous experience, the Board may waive the
probationary period.

6.

If at any time during this probationary period the employee determines that
the new position is not satisfactory, the employee may return to his/her
previously held position.
If at any time during this probationary period the Board determines that the
newly assigned employee is not performing satisfactorily, or decides to
return the employee to the previously held position, the employee shall be
return to the position he/she held immediately before the assignment within
5 working days.

7.

Any bargaining unit position which becomes vacant or is newly created
may be filled by a substitute but no such position may be filled by
substitute personnel for more than sixty (60) consecutive working days.

8.

When a bargaining unit member changes positions by filling a vacancy,
he/she shall be placed on the same step as was held in the previous job,
however, the employee will be placed on the bottom of that departments
seniority list. District seniority will not be affected.

9.

Vacancies due to sick leave, extended vacation or leave of absence in
excess of sixty (60) working days shall be posted for temporary

26

assignment. If no qualified bargaining unit member, per 4.a. or 4.b. of this
Section, requests consideration for said temporary assignment, the District
may fill the temporary vacancy as it deems, in accordance with Section B.
of this Article.
B.

Article XX:
A.

Transfers
1.

In accordance with Section A.9. of this Article, the Board shall have the
right to transfer a bargaining unit member in order to fill a vacancy created
by vacation, sick leave, leave of absence or if no other bargaining unit
member bids for the posted vacancy. If a bargaining unit member feels that
such a transfer would result in undue hardship, said bargaining unit
member may request reconsideration of the transfer to his/her Director,
Principal or appropriate administrator.

2.

Should the Board transfer a bargaining unit member, the Union and the
bargaining unit member must be consulted as to the necessity of such
transfer. If such transfer is necessary, the transfer shall be made, to a similar
position, without a reduction in compensation, benefits or seniority.

3.

When a bargaining unit member transfers from one position to another,
continuous service will not be disrupted if the new job does not start
immediately upon completion of the previous job (i.e. cafeteria employee
transfers to transportation).

FRINGE BENEFITS
Healthcare Insurance
The Lake County Schools Council Standard Plan Nos. 1 and 2, and
Consumer Driven Health Plan shall be the only healthcare insurance offered
by the Board to the members and shall be subject to the following conditions
and limitations:
1.

Eligibility. Members who work less than twenty (20) hours per week are
ineligible to participate in the Board’s healthcare insurance (medical,
prescription drug, dental, and vision).

2.

Employee contributions for LCSC Standard Plan No. 1 (medical and
prescription drug) are as follows:
a.

For 12-month full-time employees, the employee contribution will be
10%.

b.

For school year full-time employees working at least 35 hours per
week, the employee contribution will be 12.5%.
27

3.

c.

For other school year employees working at least 27 hours per week
but less than 35 hours per week, the employee contribution will be
20%.

d.

For other school year employees working at least 20 hours per week
but less than 27 hours per week, the employee contribution will be
50%.

Employee contributions for LCSC Standard Plan No. 2 (medical and
prescription drug) are as follows:
a.

For 12-month full-time employees, the employee contribution will be
18%.

b.

For school year full-time employees working at least 35 hours per
week, the employee contribution will be 20.25%.

c.

For other school year employees working at least 27 hours per week
but less than 35 hours per week, the employee contribution will be
25%.

d.

For other school year employees working at least 20 hours per week
but less than 27 hours per week, the employee contribution will be
50%.

4.

Throughout the duration of this agreement, there shall be no employee
contribution for the Consumer Driven Health Plan (medical and
prescription drug).

5.

Dental and Vision Insurance. The Board shall offer dental and vision
insurance (single or family) to eligible employees at an employee
contribution rate of $10 per month. The Dental Plan will be consistent
with the Plans offered to other District bargaining unit members. The
Vision insurance shall include coverage for one (1) eye examination
every twelve months, one (1) pair of lenses every twelve (12) months,
and one (1) pair of frames every twenty-four (24) months. The Vision
plan will have co-pays as follows: $10 for examinations, $15 for lenses
and $15 for frames.

6.

The Board shall provide hospitalization, major medical, dental and vision
insurance policies for bargaining unit members and their spouses and
dependent children, provided that the bargaining unit member complies
with the terms of the policy and the insurance company’s procedures
concerning matters such as eligibility and enrollment. The Board shall
have no obligation to provide insurance for a dependent if the bargaining

28

unit member desiring dependent coverage fails to make written
application to the Treasurer or to provide information reasonably
requested by the Treasurer to establish the eligibility of dependents.
7.

The Board will provide a Section 125 Tax Plan for members of the
bargaining unit for the duration of this contract. This Plan will include
medical premiums, dependent care, and unreimbursed medical.
When two members of the same family are employed by the Board, only
one is eligible for family coverage, provided that no dependent shall be
deprived of coverage by nature of this provision. This section shall not
preclude the spouse from receiving the medical insurance rebate. The
rebate to a spouse shall be paid at the single rate. The District retains the
right to convert a family health insurance plan covering two married
bargaining unit members to two single health insurance plans as long as
the bargaining unit members suffer no economic loss. The bargaining
unit member will be informed prior to the conversion.

B.

Life Insurance
The Board shall provide at no cost to the bargaining unit member, a group term
life insurance policy in the following amounts:

C.

1.

12 month full-time bargaining unit members....$50,000

2.

school year full-time bargaining unit members.$45,000

3.

school year bargaining unit members:
a.

at least 30 hours per week up to 35 hours per
week…………………………………..$40,000

b.

at least 20 but not more than 30 hours...$30,000

c.

less than 20 hours per week……………$ -0-

Medical Insurance Rebate
Once yearly, members of the bargaining unit shall have the option to participate in
any or all insurance benefits. If a bargaining unit member elects not to receive a
specific insurance benefit for a full year of the contract, he/she shall receive a
rebate according to the following, and changes in the amount of employee
contributions will be calculated and made effective each July 1st (prorated for the
initial “short” year):
Benefit

Single/Family

29

Single/Family Single/Family

100%

85%

75%

Hospitalization/Major Medical/Rx $675/$1,350

$574/$1,148

$506/$1,013

Dental Care

$75/$150

$64/$l28

$56/$113

Vision

$50/$100

$43/$85

$38/$75

It is the bargaining unit members who must inform the District Treasurer in
writing by the end of the enrollment period of each contract year as to the
insurance option(s) they are selecting for rebate. The rebate shall be paid as part
of the regular paycheck on the second pay period in September of the ensuing
school year. Members have the right to request to enter any of the insurance
options during the contract year, but shall forfeit a prorated portion of the rebate
for the months enrolled.
D.

Enrollment
Open enrollment is October 15th through November 15th annually. A member of
the bargaining unit may change the coverage (single or family) effective the
first day of any month. Any changes must remain in effect for at least six (6)
months unless one of the following events occurs:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Marriage
Birth or adoption of child
Death of spouse or child
Divorce or legal separation
Dependents eligibility status change
Return from Board approved leaves
Loss of insurance coverage by spouse
-

New members of the bargaining unit must apply for coverage within thirty (30)
days of the 1st day of employment.
Article XXI:

REDUCTION IN FORCE

A.

Under Section 3319.172 of the Ohio Revised Code, the Board of Education may
adopt a resolution ordering reasonable reductions in the number of non-teaching
employees for any of the reasons for which a board of education may make
reductions in accordance with the terms of Section 3319.17 of the Ohio Revised
Code. To the extent this provision conflicts with Section 3319.172 of the Ohio
Revised Code, Section 3319.172 shall govern.

B.

The number of bargaining unit members affected by reductions shall be kept to a
minimum by not employing replacements, insofar as is practical, for bargaining
unit members who resign, retire or otherwise vacate a position.
30

C.

Temporary, casual and seasonal bargaining unit members in an affected
classification shall be laid off first.

D.

Seniority.
1.

System Wide - shall be defined as the uninterrupted length of
continuous service with the Board, computed from the latest effective
date of hire.

2.

Classification - shall be defined as the length of uninterrupted
continuous service within the classification.

3.

Leaves - authorized leaves of absence do not constitute an
interruption in continuous service nor does the bargaining unit
member receive seniority service credit while on or as a result of the
leave.

4.

Identical Seniority - In the ease where affected employees have
identical seniority, seniority shall be determined in the following
order:
a. The earlier date of the Board meeting at which the affected
employee was hired.
b. If there is still a tie among two or more affected employees, the
earlier date that the affected employee submitted his/her signed
employment contract to the Board per the applied time stamp.
c. Then, a coin toss per current contract language unless there are
more than two affected employees, then drawn numbers.

If after the forgoing the employees still have equal seniority, bargaining unit
members shall, in the presence of the Union President and the
Superintendent, flip a coin to determine their respective order of seniority.
E.

The Superintendent will meet with the Union prior to instituting any
reductions and prior to the Board making a decision regarding
layoff.

F.

Displacement Rights.
Any bargaining unit member affected by such a reduction shall be granted
displacement opportunity. Displacement shall be exercised on the basis of
total system seniority. Any bargaining unit member affected by such a
reduction may displace a less senior bargaining unit member within the
same classification or classification series in the following order:

31

1.

Within the same classification.

2.

Within the same classification series.

3.

Within the classification the bargaining unit member held immediately
prior to holding the classification from which the bargaining unit member
was laid off.

For purposes of this paragraph, the classifications and classification series shall be:
Series 1

Assistant Department
Library
Study Hall Monitor
Recess/Playground

Series 2

Special Needs Assistants
Multi-Handicapped
Special Needs Assistant
Teacher/Pre-kindergarten

Series 3

Bus Coordinator

Series 4

Transportation Department
Transportation Operators
Non-CDL Operators
Transportation Assistants

Series 5

Cafeteria Department
Kitchen Manager
Assistant Cook
Cashier
Lunch Assistant

Series 6

Courier Department

Series 7

Crossing Guard Department

Series 8

Custodial Department
Skilled Crafts
Maintenance II
Maintenance I
Custodial

Series 9

Fleet Maintenance Department
Head Technician
Fleet Technician II
32

Fleet Technician I
Series 10

Secretarial Department
Secretaries

All bargaining unit members affected by displacement or “bumping’ shall be entitled to a
written notice of a “bumping” meeting. Such notice shall be provided to the bargaining unit
members five (5) days prior to the meeting date. All affected bargaining unit members shall
be present at such meeting or designate a Union official to act in their stead, in case of
emergency.
G.

Thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of layoff, the Board shall prepare
and post for inspection, in a conspicuous place, a list containing the names,
seniority date, and classifications and indicate which bargaining unit members
are to be laid off. Each bargaining unit member to be laid off shall be given
thirty (30) days advance written notice of the layoff. Each notice of layoff shall
state the following:
1.
2.
3.

Reason for layoff
The effective date of layoff
A statement advising the bargaining unit member of his/her rights
of reinstatement from layoff
-

H.

The names of all bargaining unit members laid off shall be placed on a
separate reinstatement list in reverse order of layoff Reinstatement shall be
made from this list before any individuals are hired in that classification.

I.

The bargaining unit member’s name shall remain on the appropriate
reinstatement list for a period of three (3) years from the effective date of
layoff. If reinstated from layoff, during this period, such bargaining unit
members shall retain all previously accumulated seniority and a notice of
reinstatement shall be made by certified mail. The recall notice shall be sent
to the last known address. The bargaining unit member must respond, in
writing, within five (5) working days of receipt of recall notice as determined
by the date on the return receipt. The bargaining unit member is responsible
for keeping the Board advised of his/her current address, and the Board
notification of recall to last known address meets the Board’s responsibility.
If the bargaining unit member accepts reinstatement, he/she will resume the
contract status held at the time of layoff, and layoff time will not count as time
actually served for purposes of attaining either continuing contract status or
eligibility for continuing contract status.

J.

Vacancies that occur during a Reduction in Force shall be subject to Article
XIX Vacancies and Transfers. If not filled within five (5) days of notice of
vacancy, it shall be offered to the bargaining unit member highest on the layoff
list within the classification. Any bargaining unit member who declines

33

reinstatement shall be removed from the reinstatement list. However, any
bargaining unit member who refuses recall to a lower classification shall not be
removed from the reinstatement list for that reason. However, any bargaining
unit member who refuses recall to a lower classification or to a position with
fewer hours than s/he held at the time of layoff shall not be removed from the
reinstatement list.
Article XXII: DISCIPLINE
A.

A bargaining unit member shall be subject to discipline for cause.

B.

Except for serious offenses, principles of progressive corrective action shall be
followed. Serious offenses include safety related matters, unauthorized absence
from work; assault/fighting; insubordination; knowingly falsifying a work related
document; theft; dishonesty; negligence; obscene or profane conduct, and those
for which a bargaining unit member is subject to termination, demotion or
suspension under O.R.C. 3319.081. In matters of serious offense, the offense may
be dealt with at the appropriate step below. Generally, progressive discipline shall
include:
1.

First Offense Oral warning and conference with Director.

2.

Second Offense Written warning.

3.

Third Offense Written reprimand and conference with Director.

4.

Subsequent Offenses Demotion, suspension or termination as is deemed
appropriate under the circumstances.

-

-

-

-

Prior to any disciplinary action, a meeting will be held with the bargaining unit
member, his/her representative, and the Director who initiated the action.
C.

The School District may suspend a bargaining unit member with pay pending
disciplinary action under paragraph (B).

D.

Copies of written reprimands or other disciplinary actions shall be promptly
sent to the Union representative.

E.

The Union representative will be notified, and the bargaining unit member
will be permitted to have a Union representative present at disciplinary
conferences and meetings.

F.

Directors will not give oral and written reprimands in front of other staff or
public.

G.

A grievance regarding disciplinary action in accordance with subsection B. 3.

34

or B. 4 of this Article may be initiated at Step 3 of the grievance procedure.
Article XXIII: SICK LEAVE REWARD
For each sick leave day earned but not used, in excess of 230 days, a bargaining unit member
who works at least five (5) hours per day shall receive annually, not later than September 15 of
the ensuing contract year, a reward of sixty-five ($65.00) dollars per day of the current year
accrued but not used days. This provision applies to bargaining unit members who have 230
days accumulated as of August 1. Max payout will be fifteen (15) days. Days used for sick
leave reward shall not be deducted from employees’ sick leave accumulation.
Article XXIV: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Except as expressly limited by the terms of this agreement, the Board hereby retains and reserves
for itself, without limitations, all the powers, rights, authority and responsibilities conferred upon
it by the Laws and Constitution of the State of Ohio and the United States. The Union
recognizes that it is the exclusive function of the Board to maintain order, efficiency, and general
operational responsibility for the District; to hire, direct, classify, assign, schedule, evaluate,
promote and demote employees; to discipline or discharge employees; to make and alter
reasonable rules and regulations to be observed by employees; to determine reasonable levels of
quality and quantity of work; to determine work methods; and to carry out all other ordinary and
customary functions of a board of education.
The Union undertakes for itself, its agents, representatives, and members to cooperate fully with
the Board in the exercise of these management rights.
Further, the Board and the Union are not required to bargain on any subject during the term of
this agreement unless mutually agreed upon.
Article XXV: UNION RIGHTS
A.

Facilities: The Union shall have the right to use the Board’s facilities for
meetings with permission of the Superintendent or his designee, provided that the
Union shall reimburse the Board for any custodial services required. The Union
also may use inter-office mail, bargaining unit member mailboxes, and
designated areas on bulletin boards.

B.

Board Meeting Notices: Board meeting notices will be posted in accordance with
Sunshine Law guidelines.

C.

Board Agenda and Minutes: The Board shall provide the Union President with
copies of the Board agenda prior to the meeting and official Board minutes
following each Board meeting.

D.

Policy Books: Board policies will be made available for the Union on the District
website.
35

E.

Workshops:
1.

If the Board requires bargaining unit members to attend professional
meetings or workshops, the bargaining unit member(s) shall be granted
time off and shall be reimbursed for their actual, necessary expenses
relative to mileage, meals, tuition, registration fees and necessary
lodging.

2.

Bargaining unit members may be permitted to attend professional
workshops and/or classes, relative to their classification, with the
approval of the Director, Principal and Treasurer and shall be
reimbursed as in number 1 above.

F.

Labor-Management Committee: The Union and the Superintendent or his
designee shall meet to discuss work-related items. The purpose of the meetings
shall be to solve problems before they become formal grievances; to keep both
parties to this contract informed of changes and developments caused by
conditions other than those covered by this agreement, and to confer over
potential problems in an effort to explore solutions. Labor-Management
Committee meetings may be a forum for discussion of such matters as training,
in-service, equipment, safety and staffing concerns. Representing OAPSE shall
be the Local President, Secretary, Field Representative, and up to four (4) other
bargaining unit members the Union deems necessary, if possible from different
classifications. Such meetings will be held at least four (4) times per year and
minutes shall be taken and distributed to the participants. Labor-Management
Committee discussions may include matters that may be subject to bargaining.
However, discussing such issues at Labor-Management Committee meetings
shall not be deemed to be bargaining, only discussion of that issue.

G.

Financial Reports
The Treasurer shall provide to the President of the Union access to adopted
financial reports via the District website.

H.

Health and Safety:
1.

The Board and the Union agree to work cooperatively to provide
bargaining unit members with a safe and healthy work place.
Bargaining unit member complaints about unsafe equipment shall be
given priority by the administration, and bargaining unit members are
encouraged to bring concerns directly to the attention of the principal
or superintendent, as may be appropriate, if they are not satisfied with
the action taken by their immediate Director.

36

2.

Bargaining unit members who are questioned about a work related
accident or are subject to discipline shall have the right to be
accompanied by a union representative of their choice. When
possible, the Board shall give the Union advance notice of such
meeting.

I.

OAPSE Workshop: The Board agrees to permit up to four (4) local officers and up
to five (5) bargaining unit members, who desire to attend OAPSE workshops, if
held on OAPSE/NEOTA Day, and to be paid for such hours of attendance at the
workshop. In order to be paid, bargaining unit members must sign in at the
beginning of the meeting and remain during the entire scheduled meeting. OAPSE
shall keep a record of those attending and turn said record in to the payroll
department on the next scheduled work day before any payments are made.

J.

Mandatory Meetings: Any bargaining unit member required to attend
meetings called by administrators, directors, and/or principals outside their
work day, work hours, or work year shall be paid for all time spent in such
meeting(s) at the appropriate rate of pay.

K.

Worksite Visitations: Designated Union Representatives and Field
Representatives shall be permitted at worksites to see union members during
breaks, lunches or non-working hours when possible. Such representatives
shall inform the Principal/Director of their presence and shall not unduly
disrupt the bargaining unit member’s work schedule.

Article XXVI: UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
A.

Uniforms will be supplied by the Board for fleet technicians; shirts/smocks
will be supplied for Custodial and maintenance bargaining unit members.
Foul weather gear, which will include boots, rainwear and winter wear for
maintenance and fleet technician personnel, shall be supplied by the Board
following consultation with the affected bargaining unit members and the
Director. Following the initial purchase, the above items will be replaced on
an as needed basis and upon presentation of the original item. During the
school year, bargaining unit members must wear the uniforms, shirts,
smocks, and/or boots supplied by the District and must wear the Districtsupplied foul weather gear as required by weather conditions.

B.

Fleet technicians shall be reimbursed for replacement of tools, of equal and
brand name value, up to the amount of $100.00 per tool upon presentation
of sufficient documentation of need and determined by the Director. Tools
valued at or over $100.00 shall be approved for replacement by the
Director.
The Board shall be provided with a tool inventory annually from each fleet
technician.
37

C.

All Kitchen Managers and Assistant Cooks will receive a uniform
allowance of $50.00 upon presentation of sufficient documentation.
Cashiers will not receive a uniform allowance except at RHS, JRW and
LMS. Lunchroom Assistants will not receive a uniform allowance. Aprons
will be provided for bargaining unit members who are not required to wear
uniforms and do not receive a uniform allowance.

D.

All bargaining unit members shall be supplied with gloves necessary to perform
their duties.

E.

Custodial employees shall be reimbursed up to $50 per year for the cost of
shoes/boots upon presentation of receipt.

Article XXVII: SERS PICK-UP
Consistent with current practice, there will be Board pick-up of SERS via uniform salary
reduction per SERS guidelines.
Article XXVIII: GENERAL
A.

Federal/State Programs and Student Employees: The Board shall not employ
any students under any secondary school or college work-study program or
any federally funded work experience program in any position that would
replace any bargaining unit member.

B.

Asbestos Tests: When required by state or federal: law, the Board shall
provide testing during the school year to determine whether a bargaining
unit member’s health has been affected as a result of working or having
worked in a Board-owned building or buildings that contained asbestos.

C.

Supplemental Contracts - Classified Staff: In the event there is no certified
staff hired for a supplemental salary position, or if there is no interest shown
for said position by the certified staff, qualified members of the recognized
classified bargaining unit who express interest shall be considered for such
work before the position is offered outside the bargaining unit.
Bargaining unit members who have held these positions in the past shall be
given first consideration.

D.

Extracurricular Events (Junior & Senior High Schools): In accordance with
the above Section C, regarding supplemental contracts, members of the
recognized classified bargaining unit will have a fair and equal opportunity
to work ticket/gate, timekeeper, and similar positions at Junior and Senior
High School events.

E.

Summer Work: Bargaining unit members who do not work during the
38

summer months shall be permitted to bid on available summer work that
does not require certification and for which they otherwise qualify.
Bargaining unit members hired for such work shall do so on condition that
they expressly agree to accept the Board-established summer rate rather than
their regular rate; that the summer work time shall not increase holiday or
vacation rights or otherwise affect their status as less than twelve (12) month
bargaining unit members; and that their insurance and fringe benefit status
shall not change as a result of the summer work. The summer jobs
themselves shall remain separate and distinct from the bargaining unit, and
OAPSE acknowledges it has no right to bargain over terms and conditions of
summer employment. This provision shall not apply to situations when a
bargaining unit member is called in as a substitute in the summer; such
bargaining unit members shall continue to be paid in accordance with the
current practice.
F.

All bargaining unit members shall be ultimately responsible to the Assistant
Superintendent in charge of Personnel. However, the Superintendent of
Schools, as the executive head, shall retain final authority over bargaining
unit members.

G.

Directors shall not perform bargaining unit work, except in an emergency.
Bargaining unit members shall not be required to dispense medication nor
perform nursing duties, except in emergencies where there is an absence of the
nurse, health aide, principal, assistant principal, or director, to handle such
duties. Such bargaining unit members shall be under the direction of and be
annually trained by the school nurse in the correct dispensation of and record
keeping for medications.

I.

Bargaining unit members who are required by the Board to receive
additional training for the performance of their job shall have such training
paid for by the Board. Should the bargaining unit member be required to
attend during the bargaining unit member’s work shift, it shall be without
loss of pay.

J.

School Events: Bargaining unit members may be permitted to attend school
events, except where prohibited by law, or where attendance conflicts with their
assigned work schedule, and will be given staff passes allowing admittance.

K.

Sub-Contracting: The Board shall not subcontract if the result is to lay off
bargaining unit members or to deprive an available, qualified bargaining unit
member of a regular work opportunity. If the Board does subcontract, it shall be
limited to work not customarily performed by bargaining unit members during
their normal workday or for the lack of a qualified bargaining unit member
available to perform it. The Board and the Union shall meet to discuss
subcontracting before any action is taken except in emergency situations where
notification to the Union will be as soon as possible. Bargaining unit members

39

may be given the opportunity to bid on work (not being performed by other
bargaining unit members) and district projects within the scope of their abilities.
Such opportunities shall be shared with the Union.
The Board agrees to advise building administration of this provision to insure
their awareness of responsibilities prior to sub-contracting.
L.

Volunteers: The Board may utilize volunteers providing their contributions
will enhance but not replace the work normally done by bargaining unit
members. Volunteers will be under the direction of appropriate Directors
who shall designate the work to be done which shall not be bargaining unit
work. Any functions and/or the purpose of volunteers not described in this
paragraph will follow Ohio Revised Code 4117.103.

Article XXIX: TRANSPORTATION
A.

Bidding of Routes
1.

Prior to July 1st, all anticipated route packages for the bid date will
be available in the Transportation Director's office for review.
Bidding shall take place no sooner than seven (7) days after
posting but prior to July 15th . Route packages will be established
by the Transportation Director.

2.

The Transportation Director is responsible for the development,
maintenance, and modification of all transportation routes in compliance
with current laws, regulations, Sections of this Article and parameters of
this entire Agreement. All route packages may be modified during the
school year as the needs of the District change. Such changes will not
result in a reduction in an operator’s approved route time as outlined below
except as listed in this item. In instances where an operator’s time is found
to materially decrease thirty (30) minutes or more after September 30th,
management reserves the right to assign additional duties, within the
operator’s or assistant’s job description, for the approved time the operator
is paid. If there is no other work available for that operator they will be
given the option of reducing their approved time and pay or requesting a
bumping meeting, within the classification, in compliance with Article
XXI, (such a “bump” would be exempt from the thirty (30) day
notification procedure of the RIF provision). In instances where an
operator's time (excluding mid-day routes) is found to increase by thirty
(30) minutes or more after September 30th, the route shall be posted for
bid. The bidding will be posted for three (3) working days in the
Transportation Department and be exempt from the five (5) working day
period in Article XIX.

3.

On the bid date established under Section A. 1. of this Article, operators
40

and transportation assistants shall be called into the Transportation
Director’s office for bidding of all anticipated route packages. All
operators and transportation assistants’ positions shall be a part of this
bidding. Each contracted operator shall choose, by seniority, a route
package assignment from the list of all anticipated route assignments
prepared by the Transportation Director.
4.

So long as the operator’s total hours of compensation will not exceed forty
(40) hours per week, from a route package in item 3 above, they may also
elect to choose, by seniority, additional assignments from a separate list of
routes prepared by the Transportation Director. This bidding shall take
place in accordance with the bidding timeliness established herein. Any
route vacancy during the school year, beyond the bid date, will not be
awarded to any operator if the total route assignment exceeds forty (40)
hours per week. Mid-day routes shall be paid a minimum of one (1) hour.
The addition of stops along any route driven by the operator does not
constitute an additional route.

5.

Any regular operator that is not available to bid during his/her appointed
time due to illness or approved leave will give notice to the Transportation
Director and arrangements will be made for choosing a route assignment
by way of phone or a bargaining unit member to bid in his/her place. An
operator shall inform the Transportation Director of the identity of his/her
designee.

6.

At the time of bidding, the Transportation Director shall provide the
operator with the first stop location, estimated length of route, roads
traveled, school building and number of assigned bus for the route.
Management reserves the right under Article XXIV of this Agreement to
reassign equipment as the needs of the District dictate. Once the operator
has chosen his/her desired route, the Transportation Director will calculate
the total hours which shall include the route package, travel time and nondriving time. This total will be forwarded to the Board Treasurer. The
calculated hours will be used for a basis in calculating the operator’s
annual compensation.

7.

The Transportation Director will give the operators any information, to
the best of the Director’s knowledge, that may benefit the operators in the
selection of their routes.

8.

If requested, operators may assist the Transportation Director with bus
routes in an effort to solve routing problems, and be paid their hourly rate
for such time.

9.

Vacancies. In the event a new route is established which necessitates the
use of additional bus(es), or an existing route becomes vacant due to

41

resignation, retirement, termination or leave of absence, said route(s) shall
be posted and bid as follows:

10.

a.

The Director and Union President or designee shall meet to decide
whether to conduct a bid meeting and, if so, to select a date to hold
a one-day bidding meeting.

b.

The notice shall be posted for at least five (5) working days and
must contain all information about the vacant route including
schools, bus #, hours, and roads traveled. A copy of the route
should be made available for all interested operators to view prior to
the meeting.

c.

Any operator who is interested in bidding on the new posting or any
routes that become vacant during the bidding procedure shall attend
the bidding meeting. If an operator cannot be present for the
scheduled meeting, s/he may have a representative attend for them.

d.

The most senior driver shall have first choice. If that operator
accepts the vacant position, his/her route now becomes vacant and
will be offered for bid.

e.

The Director will make a copy of the next vacant route and present
it to the remaining employees for viewing. The vacant route will be
awarded to the next most senior operator who accepts it.

f.

The process will continue until all routes have been offered. The
final route will be filled by a substitute selected by the
Transportation Director.

g.

Once an operator accepts the vacant position offered, the operator
will be removed from the bidding process. The operator may not
bid on any other routes that become vacant during this process.

h.

The Director shall let the operator(s) know the date that they will
start their new route.

i.

This procedure applies to transportation operators only. All other
vacancies are subject to Article XIX.

j.

This procedure does not apply to Mid-day routes.

Route packages shall be paid at a minimum of four and one-half hours
(4½), which shall include thirty (30) minutes of non-driving time each
day to perform duties, as follows:
Pre-trip and warm up
42

Fuel
Sweep the bus
Route maintenance.
For operators contracted after August 15, 2007, route packages shall be
paid at a minimum of two and one-half (2½) hours which shall include
thirty (30) minutes of non-driving time each day to perform the duties
listed above.
When the complete route package is not driven due to conflicting
school calendars, the employee will be compensated for the contracted
partial drive time of that day's routes. Any additional time shall be
submitted on a timesheet.
Annually, daily route time sheets will be kept by all Operators until
September 30th. The Transportation Director will then calculate the
length of each route by verifying the time sheets to be correct as
submitted, make any adjustments and forward to the Treasurer’s office
the revised route time.
Starting with the first pay in October, the Operator’s compensation
should reflect the revised amount. The Treasurer will include a copy of
the calculations with this pay.
Any additional time performed after September 30 will be submitted on
a time sheet and submitted to the Treasurer’s office for payment.
Fringe benefits will be adjusted and effective when other than a
temporary increase over the approved route time occurs and warrants
said adjustment.

B.

11.

The District may decide at any time to store its buses in either a new or
existing facility.

12.

Transportation operators will notify, in writing, the Transportation
Director of a request for a different bus prior to bidding. The
determination of bus assignments will be made by the Transportation
Director. In unusual situations, the administration shall meet with the
union to resolve concerns related to reasonable accommodation of
employee health concerns.

Field/Athletic Trips
1.

Such trips shall be offered on the basis of seniority rotation to all
available operators desiring such trips. An operator is not available if the
trip conflicts with the operator’s scheduled route package, or if the

43

operator is on an approved leave.
2.

During April, operators will be surveyed in writing by the Transportation
Director to identify their interest in day, evening, weekend, summer,
science or emergency trips; athletic or field trips, and summer trips.
Those who sign up for athletic/field trips shall have their names placed
on the appropriate Seniority Rotation Roster. The roster shall be posted
in the Transportation Office by the first day of school.

3.

Seniority rotation shall start with the most senior operators being
assigned the first trips of the year and then each trip shall be assigned to
the next senior operator, etc. An operator who refuses a trip shall not be
offered another trip until his/her name comes up on the rotation list
again. If all available operators on the rotation list have been offered a
trip, the trip may then be offered to other operators.

4.

When a field/athletic trip request is received in the Transportation
Office, it will be stamped with the current date. Trips will be assigned at
least one month in advance of the trips, time permitting. Confirmation
slips shall be printed/filled in and placed in the Operators mailbox. The
group sponsoring the trip shall be responsible for those costs to the
operator incidental to the trip such as parking fees, entrance fees, etc.

5.

If an operator wishes to be added to the field trip list during the school
year, they shall put the request in writing to the Transportation Director.
Transportation operators will be added at their seniority place on the
rotation list. No operator added to the list will be awarded a trip until one
full rotation has been achieved. Likewise, operators who refuse a trip
will not be awarded a trip until one full rotation has been achieved. An
operator who cancels awarded trips three (3) consecutive or five (5) total
times in a school year will be removed from the list, for that year.

6.

Operators may trade trips only upon approval of the Director.

7.

Operators, from the time of notification, shall have three (3) working
days to accept, or refuse the posted trip. Notification is by placing the
confirmation slip in the operator’s mailbox in the Transportation
department. Operators who do not respond by marking the appropriate
box on the confirmation slip, signing, and turning it in, within the three
(3) day period will result in a warning. If an operator fails a second time
to meet the time line, it will lead to removal from the list for the rest of
that year.

8.

Those trips received less than three working days are considered
emergency trips. Emergency trips will be offered to the next available
operator on the emergency roster. After offering the trip to the next

44

three (3) available operators, the trip will be offered to any available
operator on the emergency roster. An available operator who refuses an
emergency trip shall not be charged for it. An available operator who
accepts an emergency trip will not be credited for a trip but shall
maintain his/her same position on the field trip list.
9.

A phone/radio call shall be made to inform the assigned operator of all
trips assigned within five (5) working days.

10.

The following codes will be used to note the action taken.
A……..
R……..
S/L…..
P/L…..
U/U…
T/C….
B…….
R/C…..
O/C…..
3D……

Accepted
Refused
Sick leave
Personal leave
Union leave
Time conflict
Emergency, with explanation noted
Refused with a phone call
Operator canceled
Posted 3 days, no response

Upon completion of each rotation, the roster shall be posted.

C.

11.

In the event of a cancellation of such a trip, after the operator has arrived
at the school, said operator shall receive two hours compensation.

12.

All operators shall remain with the event for the entire duration of the
trip. If the operator is driving a field trip as an emergency field trip as
defined by paragraph 8 under this subsection, he/she may leave the field
trip destination once for the purposes of a meal provided that the driver
returns to the field trip destination within thirty (30) minutes.

13.

Chaperons or Field Trip Supervisors shall be available at boarding time.
There shall be at least one chaperon per bus. Chaperons or field trip
supervisors shall be responsible for student conduct and making certain
that all litter is cleaned up off of-seats and floors upon arrival back to
school.

14.

Extracurricular field/athletic trips shall be paid at the operator's regular
rate of pay. One half (1/2) hour minimum shall be paid from storage to
storage for buses housed outside the central site. All operators shall be
at school fifteen (15) minutes prior to departure and shall receive
fifteen (15) minutes of clean-up time after each trip.

General
45

D.

1.

Annual compensation for regular operators who drive non-public school
routes only or a combination of public/non-public school routes will
include all time to be driven based upon the appropriate school
calendars.

2.

Operators shall submit inspection sheets daily as required by applicable
law and regulation.

3.

Operators shall submit service request forms as service and repairs are
needed to the Head Technician. Operators shall be given a copy of the
repair form after completion of repairs.

4.

At the beginning of the school year, the Transportation Director shall
provide each operator with a list of all students who will be assigned to
the particular route. The list shall indicate for each student: vocational
education, special education, A.T. (gifted) student, grade, address and
phone number as required by law.

5.

Medical cards will be kept in the Transportation office. A list of
medical information will be provided to each operator and maintained
by the operator on the bus. Operators may be required to assist in
obtaining medical information in compliance with applicable law and
regulation.

6.

Operators may be used as substitutes when requested by the
Transportation Director. Operators shall be paid their regular hourly rate
for such substitutions.

7.

Transportation Assistants who hold valid CDL may be used as substitute
operators when requested by the Transportation Director and shall be
paid at their salary step on the operators schedule.

Bus-Availability
1.

If, due to mechanical failure or malfunction of vehicles, a bus is
unavailable, the operator shall not lose wages but shall be
compensated for his/her regular scheduled run provided the failure or
malfunction is not the fault of the operator.

2.

Breakdown time and unavoidable delays shall be paid at the
operator’s regular hourly rate. Should a breakdown occur while an
operator is on an extracurricular/field trip, the operator shall be paid.

3.

Riverside Local School District students shall be transported by
District buses in compliance with applicable law and regulation .

46

E.

F.

Workshops and Safety Meetings
1.

All operators and fleet technicians shall attend annual safety
meetings required by law. The Board shall provide a certificate to
each operator and fleet technician indicating that he attended the
safety meeting providing the operator/fleet technician remains at the
meeting to the end.

2.

The Transportation Director shall inform operators and fleet
technicians of educational workshops available to improve
knowledge and changes in rules and regulations.

Severe Weather
Operators shall be notified at the earliest possible time that they are not to
drive because of severe weather conditions.

G.

Emergency Phone Number
The Transportation Director shall provide to all operators a list of numbers
of those who can be called in the event that an operator has an emergency.

H.

I.

Physicals/Testing
1.

Operators must be certified by a District-approved physician annually.
The Board shall pay up to $40.00 for annual operator physicals upon
presentation of proper documentation provided the physical is performed
by a District-approved physician. The Board shall pay the cost of the
CDL license and renewals of all CDL holders in the bargaining unit. The
Board also will pay the cost of annual abstracts and biennial BCI reports.
A bargaining unit member who fails the test the first time shall be given
an unpaid sixty (60) day leave of absence during which the bargaining
unit member may retake the test. During this leave, insurance benefits
will be retained at bargaining unit member’s expense.

2.

The Board shall pay for all drug/alcohol testing required by state law. A
bargaining unit member selected for random testing will not lose wages
for all time lost. Bargaining unit members tested outside their regular
work hours shall be paid a minimum of one (1) hour at their regular rate
of pay. If transportation is needed, the Board will accommodate or
arrange for such transportation.

Clean-Up
All operators shall receive up to an additional two (2) hours at their regular rate

47

of pay for clean-up at the beginning of the school year and up to two (2) hours
at their regular rate of pay at the end of the school year in preparation for State
Highway Patrol inspections. Clean up at the beginning and end of the year is
mandatory and will be considered completed only upon approval by the
Transportation Director.
J.

Removal From Route
Any operator removed from a route can only be removed under the Articles of
this Agreement regarding disciplining, except in emergencies. An operator may
request consideration for removal from a run to the Transportation Director who
will meet with the operator to consider and render a final decision on the
request.

K.

Safe is Smart
The Board agrees to continue to reimburse bargaining unit members who plan
and present the required safety instruction to district elementary students, ‘Safe is
Smart Program”, annually. Such reimbursement shall be at the regular rate of
pay.

L.

Operator Training
Bargaining unit members who train other operators for C.D.L. certification or
recertification shall be paid at their regular hourly rate for such training.

Article XXX: WORKING CONDITIONS
All bargaining unit members shall be in-serviced in their respective classifications a
minimum of two (2) times annually. In-service meetings shall be relative to the classification
for which it is being given. Bargaining unit members may be asked to assist in the planning
of such meetings. In-service planning meetings and actual in- service meetings shall be paid
by the Board for all time spent in such meetings at the bargaining unit members regular rate
of pay. Bargaining unit members may attend training sessions outside their classification,
while not on duty, upon notification and approval of the appropriate Director and at their own
expense.
All twelve (12) month bargaining unit members’ contract year shall be based upon two
hundred sixty (260) days of work annually, including vacation and holidays. Actual days
worked for all bargaining unit members shall be established by a position calendar listing
days to be worked, holidays and non-contracted (recess) days. Such calendar may be
modified only through:
1.

The mutual agreement of the bargaining unit members, Union and their
immediate director, or;

48

2.
A.

B.

C.

Board action.

Assistants
1.

Includes all bargaining unit members who are employed as Multihandicapped Assistants, Special Needs Assistants, Library Assistants,
Teaching Assistants, Pre-Kindergarten Assistants, Study Hall Monitors
and Recess/Playground Personnel.

2.

Assistant Personnel, Study Hall Monitors and Library Aides required to
supervise additional students or classes that total twenty-five (25)
students or more shall be paid their hourly rate for any class period when
such an excess occurs. Such hourly rate is in addition to their per diem
rate. Additionally, Study Hall Monitors and Library Aides who are asked
to supervise students in more than one room at the same time shall be
paid their hourly rate for any class period when such an excess occurs in
addition to their daily rate. Study Hall Monitors and Library Aides shall
not qualify for such excess if additional aides or teachers are assigned to
assist with these periods.

Cafeteria Personnel
1.

Includes all bargaining unit members who are employed as Kitchen
Managers, Assistant Cooks, Cashiers and Lunchrooms Assistants.

2.

When a cafeteria bargaining unit member is absent, the most senior
bargaining unit member in the next lower classification at that site
shall be permitted to move up to the higher position for the
duration of the absence and be paid the rate of the higher position
at the replacement bargaining unit member’s step of the salary
schedule.

3.

Cafeteria personnel shall be provided a uniform allowance as
outlined in Article XXVI.

4.

When a kitchen is being used by a group or individual outside of
the School Nutrition Services, a School Nutrition bargaining unit
member must be present if any kitchen power equipment or steam
tables are being used. If equipment is not being used, but the
serving line is being used, it is up to the discretion of the School
Nutrition Services Director whether a bargaining unit member
needs to be present.

Courier

49

D.

E.

F.

1.

When doing courier duties, the courier shall receive assistance from
the building custodian as available when loading and unloading
articles.

2.

Upon request, the Board shall provide one (1) raincoat and one (1)
vest so that the bargaining unit member shall be readily visible.
They shall qualify for a clothing allowance, similar to maintenance
personnel.

3.

The courier will be responsible to the Director of
Maintenance/Custodial.

Crossing Guard
1.

Shall be provided with inclement weather clothing which shall
consist of a raincoat and vest and necessary safety equipment.
These items will be replaced by the Board as needed.

2.

Crossing Guards will be responsible to the appropriate building
principal.

Buildings and Grounds Personnel
1.

Includes all bargaining unit members who are employed as Skilled Crafts,
Maintenance I, Maintenance II, and Custodial Personnel.

2.

Each custodian shall receive a job description and an area description/map
of their particular work area. Bargaining unit member(s) may be required
to assist the Director if necessary in developing area description and be
paid their regular rate of pay while assisting.

3.

The Board shall provide necessary tools for custodial bargaining unit
members to do minor repairs.

4.

The Board shall pay the state licensing fee required annually for all
bargaining unit members who are required to hold a boiler license.

5.

Appropriate bargaining unit members may be scheduled for non- standard
hours during grass mowing season when school is in session. This would
be at the discretion of the Director.

Fleet Maintenance Personnel
1. Although separate from transportation operators, fleet technicians will
be under the direct supervision of the Transportation Director.

50

2. Fleet technicians with the most seniority shall be given preference as
to their work shift. Overtime shall be granted on a seniority rotation
basis to all fleet technicians.
3. Any training program which a fleet technician is required to attend
shall be paid for by the Board according to Article XXV.
4. The Board shall pay the cost of the CDL License and any renewal
thereof. The Board shall also pay for the cost of the abstract annually.
5. The Board shall pay for the cost of the BCI Report.
G.

Secretarial Personnel
1. Secretarial Personnel will include all ten (10) and twelve (12) month
secretaries, substitute coordinator and clerical staff not specifically
excluded in Article 1(A), Recognition.
2. Bargaining unit members’ work area will be ergonomically arranged at
the discretion of the Principal/Director.
3. Bargaining unit members who use computers such as Secretarial
Personnel will be required to participate in training programs that are
related to their jobs in order to facilitate changing job responsibilities.
Training will be at the discretion of the building Principal/Director.
4. All ten (10) month secretaries shall work two hundred eleven (211)
days, eight and one-half (8.5) hours per day with a half hour (.5) unpaid
lunch. All twelve (12) month secretaries shall work two hundred sixty
(260) days less a specific number of non-contract days established
annually by the adoption of the District calendar, that occur during the
Winter and Spring Holidays. Their work day shall be eight and one-half
(8.5) hours with a half hour (.5) unpaid lunch.

H.

Transportation Supplemental
The District shall award one (1) additional duty supplemental contract in the total
amount of $1,200 provided shared transportation services are continuing. This
additional duty supplemental contract may be awarded to one bargaining unit
member or split (evenly or otherwise) between two bargaining unit members in
the Transportation Director’s discretion.

Article XXXI: WAGES
A.

2022-2023 Contract Year

51

1. Each bargaining unit member will receive a two percent (2%) increase in
his/her base wage rate for the 2022-2023 contract year. See Attachment “A”
for the applicable hourly rates and other wages for the 2022-2023 contract
year.
2. Effective at the beginning of the 2022-2023 contract year, each eligible
bargaining unit member shall receive one (1) year of service credit on his/her
wage scale for service rendered in the Riverside Local School District in
accordance with this Agreement. If this additional service credit results in a
step increase for the bargaining unit member on his/her wage scale, then the
bargaining unit member shall receive the resulting step increase effective at
the beginning of the 2022-2023 contract year.
B.

2023-2024 Contract Year
1. Each bargaining unit member will receive a two percent (2%) increase in
his/her base wage rate for the 2023-2024 contract year. See Attachment “A”
for the applicable hourly rates and other wages for the 2023-2024 contract
year.
2. Effective at the beginning of the 2023-2024 contract year, each eligible
bargaining unit member shall receive one (1) year of service credit on his/her
wage scale for service rendered in the Riverside Local School District in
accordance with this Agreement. If this additional service credit results in a
step increase for the bargaining unit member on his/her wage scale, then the
bargaining unit member shall receive the resulting step increase effective at the
beginning of the 2023-2024 contract year.

C.

2024-2025 Contract Year
1. Each bargaining unit member will receive the same adjustment in his/her base
wage rate for the 2024-2025 contract year that the bargaining unit members of
the Riverside Local Education Association receive in their base wage rate for
the 2024-2025 contract year. This provision does not apply to any wage
increase due to step movement. The applicable hourly rates and other wages
for the 2024-2025 contract year will be added to Attachment “A” when
available.
2. Effective at the beginning of the 2024-2025 contract year, each eligible
bargaining unit member shall receive one (1) year of service credit on his/her
wage scale for service rendered in the Riverside Local School District in
accordance with this Agreement. If this additional service credit results in a
step increase for the bargaining unit member on his/her wage scale, then the
bargaining unit member shall receive the resulting step increase effective at the
beginning of the 2024-2025 contract year.

52

Article XXXII: DURATION
This Contract shall be in full force and effect from August 1, 2022 through July 31, 2025, and
this Contract supersedes the former Contract in its entirety.

For the Board of Education of the
Riverside Local School District,

For the Union OAPSE Local #374,

Chuck Schlick, Asst. Superintendent
&�y, Board President
Karen Palmer

_

\ ,/? olnar, OAPSE Field Representative

53

Attachment “A”
* Each bargaining unit member will receive the same adjustment in his/her base wage rate for the
2024-2025 contract year that the bargaining unit members of the Riverside Local Education
Association receive in their base wage rate for the 2024-2025 contract year. This provision does
not apply to any wage increase due to step movement. The applicable hourly rates and other wages
for the 2024-2025 contract year will be added to this attachment when available.

ASSISTANT DEPARTMENT
LIBRARY ASST.
Step
0
1
2
4
6
9

2022-2023
12.31
12.81
13.06
13.34
13.65
14.01

2023-2024
12.56
13.07
13.32
13.61
13.92
14.29

2024-2025*
12.56
13.07
13.32
13.61
13.92
14.29

RECESS / PLAYGROUND ASST.
Step
0
1
2
4
6

2022-2023
12.05
12.54
12.76
13.06
13.34

2023-2024
12.29
12.79
13.02
13.32
13.61

2024-2025*
12.29
12.79
13.02
13.32
13.61

STUDY HALL MONITOR
Step
0
1
2
4
6
9
12

2022-2023
12.31
12.81
13.06
13.34
13.65
14.01
14.38

2023-2024
12.56
13.07
13.32
13.61
13.92
14.29
14.67

2024-2025*
12.56
13.07
13.32
13.61
13.92
14.29
14.67

SPECIAL NEEDS ASSISTANT DEPARTMENT
MH ASST./SPECIAL NEEDS ASST./PRE-K ASST.
Step
0
1
2
4
6
9
12

2022-2023
15.48
15.79
16.23
16.52
16.81
17.25
17.71

2023-2024
15.79
16.11
16.55
16.85
17.15
17.60
18.06

54

2024-2025*
15.79
16.11
16.55
16.85
17.15
17.60
18.06

TEACHER ASSISTANT
Step
0
1
2
4
6

2022-2023
11.99
12.47
12.71
13.02
13.29

2023-2024
12.23
12.72
12.96
13.28
13.56

2024-2025*
12.23
12.72
12.96
13.28
13.56

TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT
TRANSPORTATION ASSISTANT
Step
0
1
2
4
6
9
12

2022-2023
13.44
13.75
14.19
14.48
14.77
15.21
15.67

2023-2024
13.71
14.03
14.47
14.77
15.07
15.51
15.98

2024-2025*
13.71
14.03
14.47
14.77
15.07
15.51
15.98

TRANSPORTATION OPERATOR
Step
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
17
20
23
26

2022-2023
20.17
20.59
21.00
21.45
21.90
22.33
22.72
23.18
23.58
24.03
24.47
24.89
25.26
25.63
26.06
26.49

2023-2024
20.57
21.00
21.42
21.88
22.34
22.78
23.17
23.64
24.05
24.51
24.96
25.39
25.77
26.14
26.58
27.02

55

2024-2025*
20.57
21.00
21.42
21.88
22.34
22.78
23.17
23.64
24.05
24.51
24.96
25.39
25.77
26.14
26.58
27.02

NON-CDL OPERATOR
Step
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
17
20
23
26

2022-2023
17.14
17.52
17.96
18.17
18.49
18.84
19.19
19.53
19.82
20.18
20.56
20.91
21.48
22.01
22.66
23.33

Step
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
17
20
23
26

2022-2023
20.94
21.42
21.84
22.28
22.74
23.19
23.61
24.08
24.51
24.97
25.42
25.86
26.41
26.97
27.41
27.89

2023-2024
17.48
17.87
18.32
18.53
18.86
19.22
19.57
19.92
20.22
20.58
20.97
21.33
21.91
22.45
23.11
23.80

2024-2025*
17.48
17.87
18.32
18.53
18.86
19.22
19.57
19.92
20.22
20.58
20.97
21.33
21.91
22.45
23.11
23.80

BUS COORDINATOR
2023-2024
21.36
21.85
22.28
22.73
23.19
23.65
24.08
24.56
25.00
25.47
25.93
26.38
26.94
27.51
27.96
28.45

2024-2025*
21.36
21.85
22.28
22.73
23.19
23.65
24.08
24.56
25.00
25.47
25.93
26.38
26.94
27.51
27.96
28.45

TRANSPORTATION OPERATORS
Recertification
2022-2023
$133.17

2023-2024
$135.83

56

2024-2025*
$135.83

CAFETERIA DEPARTMENT
CAFETERIA
Step
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
17
20
23
26

2022-2023
15.47
15.66
15.83
16.05
16.21
16.36
16.52
16.68
16.91
17.05
17.27
17.42
17.64
17.81
17.94
18.08

2023-2024
15.78
15.97
16.15
16.37
16.53
16.69
16.85
17.01
17.25
17.39
17.62
17.77
17.99
18.17
18.30
18.44

2024-2025*
15.78
15.97
16.15
16.37
16.53
16.69
16.85
17.01
17.25
17.39
17.62
17.77
17.99
18.17
18.30
18.44

ELEMENTARY CASHIER
Step
0
1
2

2022-2023
14.30
14.94
15.60

2023-2024
14.59
15.24
15.91

2024-2025*
14.59
15.24
15.91

KITCHEN MANAGER (PER DAY)
20222023
$18.95
$9.69

RHS/JRW/LMS
Elementary

20232024
$19.33
$9.88

20242025*
$19.33
$9.88

BANQUET WAGE
Head
Cook
Helper

2022-2023
Base+$4.05

2023-2024
Base+$4.13

2024-2025*
Base+$4.13

Base+$2.20

Base+$2.24

Base+$2.24

SECONDARY CASHIER (PER DAY)
2022-2023
$2.00

2023-2024
$2.04

2024-2025*
$2.04

LUNCHROOM ASST.
Step
0
1
2

2022-2023
11.69
12.30
12.92

2023-2024
11.92
12.55
13.18

57

2024-2025*
11.92
12.55
13.18

COURIER DEPARTMENT
COURIER
Step
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
17
20
23
26

2022-2023
17.14
17.52
17.96
18.17
18.49
18.84
19.19
19.53
19.82
20.18
20.56
20.91
21.22
21.52
21.99
22.50

2023-2024
17.48
17.87
18.32
18.53
18.86
19.22
19.57
19.92
20.22
20.58
20.97
21.33
21.64
21.95
22.43
22.95

2024-2025*
17.48
17.87
18.32
18.53
18.86
19.22
19.57
19.92
20.22
20.58
20.97
21.33
21.64
21.95
22.43
22.95

CROSSING GUARD DEPARTMENT
CROSSING GUARD
Step
0
1
2
4
6

2022-2023
11.32
11.50
11.70
12.01
12.25

2023-2024
11.55
11.73
11.93
12.25
12.50

58

2024-2025*
11.55
11.73
11.93
12.25
12.50

CUSTODIAL DEPARTMENT
CUSTODIAL
Step
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
17
20
23
26

2022-2023
17.14
17.52
17.96
18.17
18.49
18.84
19.19
19.53
19.82
20.18
20.56
20.91
21.22
21.52
21.99
22.50

2023-2024
17.48
17.87
18.32
18.53
18.86
19.22
19.57
19.92
20.22
20.58
20.97
21.33
21.64
21.95
22.43
22.95

2024-2025*
17.48
17.87
18.32
18.53
18.86
19.22
19.57
19.92
20.22
20.58
20.97
21.33
21.64
21.95
22.43
22.95

HEAD CUSTODIAN
RHS &
JRW
LMS

2022-2023
$701.54

2023-2024
$715.57

2024-2025*
$715.57

$542.83

$553.69

$553.69

CUSTODIAL/COURIER
Wage premium for the day custodian (no
more than 1 per building)
Melridge
Buckeye
Parkside
Riverview
LMS
RHS/JRW

2022-2023

2023-2024

$0.44/hour

$0.45/hour

20242025*
$0.45/hour

$0.58/hour
$0.82/hour

$0.59/hour
$0.84/hour

$0.59/hour
$0.84/hour

59

MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT
MAINTENANCE I
Step
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
17
20
23
26

2022-2023
17.83
18.26
18.75
19.18
19.53
20.04
20.57
20.99
21.45
22.06
22.66
23.52
24.05
24.61
25.44
26.31

Step
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
17
20
23
26

2022-2023
20.48
21.01
21.58
22.01
22.51
23.16
23.79
24.66
25.31
25.95
26.85
27.76

2023-2024
18.19
18.63
19.13
19.56
19.92
20.44
20.98
21.41
21.88
22.50
23.11
23.99
24.53
25.10
25.95
26.84

2024-2025*
18.19
18.63
19.13
19.56
19.92
20.44
20.98
21.41
21.88
22.50
23.11
23.99
24.53
25.10
25.95
26.84

MAINTENANCE II
2023-2024
20.89
21.43
22.01
22.45
22.96
23.62
24.27
25.15
25.82
26.47
27.39
28.32

2024-2025*
20.89
21.43
22.01
22.45
22.96
23.62
24.27
25.15
25.82
26.47
27.39
28.32

SKILLED CRAFTS
Step
6
7
8
9
12
15
17
20
23
26

2022-2023
21.95
22.41
22.91
23.58
24.18
25.09
25.84
26.58
27.46
28.39

2023-2024
22.39
22.86
23.37
24.05
24.66
25.59
26.36
27.11
28.01
28.96

60

2024-2025*
22.39
22.86
23.37
24.05
24.66
25.59
26.36
27.11
28.01
28.96

BOILER LICENSE
2022-2023
$466.02

2023-2024
$475.34

2024-2025*
$475.34

FLEET MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT
HEAD TECHNICIAN
2022-2023, 2023-2024 & 2024-2025
15% Stipend of actual wage

FLEET TECHNICIAN I
Step
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
17
20
23
26

2022-2023
18.93
19.36
19.85
20.28
20.64
21.14
21.68
22.10
22.55
23.16
23.77
24.62
25.15
25.71
26.56
27.41

2023-2024
19.31
19.75
20.25
20.69
21.05
21.56
22.11
22.54
23.00
23.62
24.25
25.11
25.65
26.22
27.09
27.96

2024-2025*
19.31
19.75
20.25
20.69
21.05
21.56
22.11
22.54
23.00
23.62
24.25
25.11
25.65
26.22
27.09
27.96

FLEET TECHNICIAN II
Step
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
17
20
23
26

2022-2023
21.58
22.12
22.68
23.11
23.61
24.28
24.89
25.77
26.41
27.07
27.95
28.87

2023-2024
22.01
22.56
23.13
23.57
24.08
24.77
25.39
26.29
26.94
27.61
28.51
29.45

61

2024-2025*
22.01
22.56
23.13
23.57
24.08
24.77
25.39
26.29
26.94
27.61
28.51
29.45

SECRETARIAL DEPARTMENT
10 AND 12 MONTH SECRETARIES
Step
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
17
20
23
26

2022-2023
16.78
17.22
17.69
18.15
18.66
19.08
19.53
20.02
20.52
20.93
21.45
21.90
22.29
22.67
23.13
23.63

2023-2024
17.12
17.56
18.04
18.51
19.03
19.46
19.92
20.42
20.93
21.35
21.88
22.34
22.74
23.12
23.59
24.10

62

2024-2025*
17.12
17.56
18.04
18.51
19.03
19.46
19.92
20.42
20.93
21.35
21.88
22.34
22.74
23.12
23.59
24.10
