COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board
FOP WHITE ROSE LODGE 15
v.
CITY OF YORK

:
:
:
:
:

Case No. PF-C-17-63-E

FINAL ORDER
The City of York (City) filed timely exceptions and a supporting
brief with the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board (Board) on July 20,
2018, from a Proposed Decision and Order (PDO) issued on July 2, 2018,
in which the Hearing Examiner found that the City violated Section
6(1)(a) and (e) of the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Act (PLRA), as read
in pari materia with Act 111 of 1968, by unilaterally implementing a
policy restricting employes’ use of sick leave while on leave under the
Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA). The Fraternal Order of Police, White
Rose Lodge 15 (FOP) filed a brief in response to the exceptions on
August 22, 2018. Upon review of the exceptions, the response thereto,
and all evidence of record, the Board makes the following:
ADDITIONAL FINDING OF FACT
11.
Article IV of the CBA governs “Management Rights” and provides,
in relevant part, as follows:
All rights and responsibilities of management not
specifically modified by this Agreement shall remain a
function of management. Management agrees to meet and
discuss policy matters which affect wages, hours and terms
and conditions of employment and also to discuss the impact
these policy matters may have upon members of the
bargaining unit, upon the request of duly authorized
bargaining unit representatives. Meet and discuss does not
mean that the Contract is being opened up for renewed
negotiations. It is merely a means whereby labor and
management can discuss the ramifications such new policy
matters may have, for the mutual understanding of both
parties.
(Union Exhibit 1).
DISCUSSION
On August 25, 2017, the FOP filed a charge alleging that the City
committed unfair labor practices by unilaterally changing the use of
accrued leave for FMLA contradicting the parties’ collective bargaining
agreement. On September 11, 2017, the Secretary of the Board issued a
Complaint and Notice of Hearing on the Charge of Unfair Labor Practices.
An evidentiary hearing was held on April 4, 2018, at which time the
parties were afforded a full opportunity to present testimony, crossexamine witnesses and introduce documentary evidence. Based on the
evidence presented by the parties, the Findings of Fact relevant to the
exceptions, are summarized as follows.

The FOP and the City are parties to a collective bargaining
agreement (CBA), which is effective from January 1, 2015 through December
31, 2018. Article IV of the CBA governs “Management Rights” and provides,
in relevant part, as follows:
All rights and responsibilities of management not
specifically modified by this Agreement shall remain a
function of management. Management agrees to meet and
discuss policy matters which affect wages, hours and terms
and conditions of employment and also to discuss the impact
these policy matters may have upon members of the
bargaining unit, upon the request of duly authorized
bargaining unit representatives. Meet and discuss does not
mean that the Contract is being opened up for renewed
negotiations. It is merely a means whereby labor and
management can discuss the ramifications such new policy
matters may have, for the mutual understanding of both
parties.
Article XV of the CBA governs “Sick Leave” and provides, in relevant
part, as follows:
Sick leave is to be used for the illness of the police
officer. Should illness in the immediate household require
a police officer’s presence, sick leave for this purpose may
be granted at the discretion of the Police Commissioner or
the Chief of Police in accordance with the Family Medical
Leave Act (sic).
Prior to June 2017, the police officers were permitted to utilize
twelve weeks of sick leave to cover FMLA absences to care for a family
member. There was no requirement that the police officers use vacation
or personal time to cover this FMLA leave.
By Executive Order dated July 15, 2017, Mayor C. Kim Bracey
implemented changes to the FMLA policy, which provides, in relevant part
as follows:
Paid Time off Benefits
If an employee requests leave under the FMLA because of
his/her own serious health condition, the employee shall use
his/her accrued sick leave, any accrued personal time, or any
accrued vacation leave; or to care for an immediate family
member, the employee shall first use 120 hours of sick leave
and then personal time or any accrued vacation leave for a
FMLA qualifying illness in the immediate family member (sic)
if needed. Accumulated Compensatory Time is not eligible for
FMLA.
The City did not bargain the July 15, 2017, change in the FMLA policy
with the FOP.
Following the submission of post-hearing briefs by the parties,
the Hearing Examiner issued a PDO on July 2, 2018. In the PDO the
Hearing Examiner found and concluded, in relevant part, as follows:

2

The contractual language at issue cannot be read as giving
management the authority to issue a bargaining unit wide
policy capping the use of sick leave for this purpose at
120 hours or approximately three weeks for every single
officer, especially where the longstanding past practice
was to allow the use of 12 weeks of sick leave in such
instances…. By doing so, the City was not merely applying
contractual language to permit, deny, or limit a request
for sick leave to care for a family member in an FMLA
qualifying event. Rather, the City has unilaterally
prescribed a certain meaning to the contractual language
that is applicable to all bargaining unit members, in
violation of its bargaining obligations…. Indeed, the City
has implemented a policy, which effectively eliminates
discretion for sick leave to cover FMLA absences to care
for a family member. As such, the City’s contractual
privilege defense is rejected, and the City will be found
in violation of Section 6(1)(a) and (e) of the PLRA.
(PDO at 5-6).
On exceptions, it is undisputed that sick leave entitlement and
use are mandatory subjects of bargaining. See Chester Upland School
District v. PLRB, 150 A.3d 143 (Pa. Cmwlth. 2016). The City argues,
however, that the Hearing Examiner erred in failing to find that the
City had a sound arguable basis, or contractual privilege defense, for
its unilateral change to the use of sick leave for FMLA leave found in
Article XV of the CBA.
Generally, an employer may defend a charge of unfair labor
practices of a refusal to bargain by establishing a contractual
privilege that its actions have a sound arguable basis in conformity
with agreed upon language in a collective bargaining agreement. E.g.
Wilkes-Barre Township v. PLRB, 878 A.2d 977 (Pa. Cmwlth. 2005). The
Board recognizes that there is a fundamental distinction between an
employer’s application of the terms in a collective bargaining
agreement in response to a specific contractual claim, which must have
a sound basis in the contract, and an action that attempts to
unilaterally alter contractual terms through managerial policies that
have prospective unit-wide application. Id. Where the employer asserts
a contractual right to change a mandatory subject of bargaining or
contractual terms, the defense is not a sound arguable basis in the
application of the agreement, but one of a waiver of the right to
bargain, and the employer must point to specific, agreed-upon contract
language which indicates that the union expressly and intentionally
authorized the employer to take the precise unilateral action at issue.
Commonwealth v. PLRB, 459 A.2d 452 (Pa. Cmwlth. 1983 (Venango County
Board of Assistance); Wilkes-Barre Township, supra.; Pennsylvania State
System of Higher Education (California University) v. PLRB, 2012 WL
3860033, 2159 C.D. 2011 (Pa. Cmwlth., unreported, August 15, 2012);
Chester Upland School District, supra.; Port Authority Transit Police
Association v. Port Authority of Allegheny County, 39 PPER 147 (Final
Order, 2008); Temple University Hospital Nurses Association v. Temple
University Health System, 41 PPER 3 (Final Order, 2010). In the
absence of a clear, express and unequivocal waiver of the statutory
right to bargain over previously negotiated contract terms or mandatory
subjects of bargaining, an employer’s unilateral repudiation or
3

alteration of the terms of the collective bargaining agreement is
irrefutably an unfair labor practice. Id.
On exceptions, the City argues that it has a sound arguable basis
to unilaterally alter contract terms based on the “Management Rights”
clause in Article IV of the CBA. The City relies on language that
“[m]anagement agrees to meet and discuss policy matters which affect
wages, hours and terms and conditions of employment …” as evidencing a
sound arguable basis for the City’s unilateral changes to contractual
provisions concerning mandatory subjects of bargaining, including the
use of sick leave for FMLA leave. The City’s argument is that mandatory
subjects of bargaining expressly negotiated in the CBA need not be
maintained during the life of the contact or re-negotiated, but the
City’s unilateral changes thereto are only subject to meet and discuss
with the FOP upon demand. The City’s argument in this regard was
definitively rejected over thirty-five years ago by the Board and
Commonwealth Court in Venango County Board of Assistance.
[A] union's waiver of the right to bargain on mandatory
subjects during the term of an agreement will not be found
in a boiler plate waiver clause alone. Instead, … such
clauses may only be employed as a shield by either party to
prevent incessant demands during the contract term made by
the other party seeking to alter the status quo. Use of the
clause as a sword by one seeking to impose unilateral
changes without first bargaining is not favored.
Venango County Board of Assistance, 459 A.2d at 457. Thus, to establish
the union’s waiver of the statutory right to bargain over a mandatory
subject of bargaining, there must be specific, agreed-upon contract
language negotiated in the collective bargaining agreement in which the
union expressly and intentionally authorized the employer to take the
precise unilateral action with regard to the specific subject at issue.
E.g. Id.; Port Authority of Allegheny County, supra. Nothing in Article
IV of the parties’ CBA governing Management Rights refers specifically
to the City being authorized by the FOP to take unilateral action to
change the mandatory bargaining subject of sick leave use for FMLA
leave set forth in Article XV of the CBA. Accordingly, the City has
failed to establish that in Article IV of the CBA the FOP waived its
statutory right to negotiate over changes to mandatory subjects of
bargaining, including the use of sick leave for FMLA set forth in
Article XV of the CBA.
Moreover, even if the sound arguable basis defense were
applicable to the City’s arguments regarding the Management Rights
clause, the City’s arguments are belied by the express terms of Article
IV of the CBA. Indeed, the clause of Article IV upon which the City
relies is prefaced by language stating that “[a]ll rights and
responsibilities of management not specifically modified by this
Agreement shall remain a function of management.” There is no dispute
that the employes’ use of sick leave during family FMLA leave is not a
“right and responsibility of management”, but is a mandatory subject of
bargaining. Moreover, use of sick leave during FMLA is set forth in
Article XV of the CBA, and thus is “specifically modified by this
Agreement” and therefore did not “remain a function of management”
under Article IV. By the express terms, Article IV does not provide a
contractual privilege to make unilateral changes to terms negotiated in
4

the CBA, including the employes’ use of sick leave during FMLA as
governed by Article XV of the CBA.
The City also argues on exceptions that it has a sound arguable
basis under Article XV of the CBA to unilaterally implement a policy
limiting the use of sick leave to 120 hours for FMLA leave to care for
a family member because Article XV provides that “sick leave for this
purpose may be granted at the discretion of the Police Commissioner or
the Chief of Police.” The City further argues that the Hearing Examiner
erred in noting the past practice of the Police Chief to grant employes
use of sick leave for the full duration of FMLA leave to care for
family members.
First, the City misses the point of the Hearing Examiner’s
finding regarding a past practice of the Chief of Police granting
officers permission to use sick leave for up to the full twelve weeks
under the FMLA for care of a family member. The point of this finding
is that both the FOP and the City understood that Article XV of the CBA
expressly and unequivocally vested the Police Commissioner or the Chief
of Police with discretion to grant (or deny) the use of sick leave for
up to the full duration of FMLA when used for the care of a family
member.
Second, as astutely found by the Hearing Examiner, the City was
not merely applying the contractual language in Article XV to have the
Police Commissioner or Chief of Police exercise their discretion to
permit, deny, or limit a request for sick leave to care for a family
member in an FMLA qualifying event. Rather, the City, through the
Mayor’s uniform policy, unilaterally prohibited the exercise of
discretion set forth in Article XV, by capping the use of sick leave
for care of a family member under the FMLA at 120 hours for every
single officer regardless of circumstances. Indeed, by doing so, the
City has unilaterally implemented a policy that eliminates Article XV’s
contractually agreed upon discretion, that was mutually vested in the
Police Commissioner and Chief of Police to grant employes the ability
to use sick leave to cover FMLA absences to care for a family member in
individualized cases. By unilaterally implementing a bargaining unit
wide policy that precluded the contractual exercise of discretion of
the Police Commissioner or Chief of Police to grant the use of sick
leave for FMLA, the City repudiated the contractual terms in violation
of its statutory bargaining obligation under Section 6(1)(a) and (e) of
the PLRA. See Wilkes-Barre Township, supra (holding that an action that
attempts to expand contractual terms through unilateral adoption of
managerial policies that are not in response to a specific contractual
claim and have unit-wide application is not a sound arguable
application of the contract terms, but an unfair labor practice for
unilaterally altering the agreed upon contractual provisions); Chester
Upland School District, supra. (same); Millcreek Education Association
v. Millcreek Township School District, 22 PPER ¶22185 (Final Order,
1991), affirmed sub nom. Millcreek Township School District v. PLRB,
631 A.2d 734 (Pa. Cmwlth. 1993), appeal denied, 537 Pa. 626, 641 A.2d
590 (1994) (a sound arguable basis defense does not extend to a flat
repudiation of the terms of a collective bargaining agreement.
Repudiation of the provisions of a collective bargaining agreement is
an unfair practice).

5

After a thorough review of the exceptions and all matters of
record, the Hearing Examiner did not err in finding that the City did
not establish a sound arguable basis in the CBA to unilaterally
implement a bargaining unit wide policy prohibiting the use of more
than 120 hours of sick leave for the care of a family member under the
FMLA, which effectively eliminated the terms of Article XV that “sick
leave for this purpose may be granted at the discretion of the Police
Commissioner or the Chief of Police.” As such, the Hearing Examiner
did not err in concluding that the FOP established that the City
violated its collective bargaining obligation under Section 6(1)(a) and
(e) of the PLRA, as read in pari materia with Act 111, by unilaterally
implementing a restriction on sick leave for FMLA for care of family
members that contradicted the express terms of Article XV of the
parties’ CBA. Accordingly, the exceptions filed by the City shall be
dismissed, and the PDO made absolute and final.
ORDER
In view of the foregoing and in order to effectuate the policies
of the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Act and Act 111, the Board
HEREBY ORDERS AND DIRECTS
that the exceptions filed by the City of York are hereby dismissed, and
the July 2, 2018 Proposed Decision and Order, be and hereby is made
absolute and final.
SEALED, DATED and MAILED at Harrisburg, Pennsylvania pursuant to
conference call meeting of the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board,
James M. Darby, Chairman, and Albert Mezzaroba, Member this eighteenth
day of September, 2018. The Board hereby authorizes the Secretary of
the Board, pursuant to 34 Pa. Code 95.81(a), to issue and serve upon
the parties hereto the within order.
MEMBER ROBERT H. SHOOP, JR., DID NOT PARTICIPATE IN THE CONSIDERATION
OR DECISION OF THIS CASE.

6

COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board
FOP WHITE ROSE LODGE 15

:
:
:
:
:
:

v.
CITY OF YORK

Case No. PF-C-17-63-E

AFFIDAVIT OF COMPLIANCE
The City of York hereby certifies that it has ceased and desisted
from its violations of Section 6(1)(a) and (e) of the Pennsylvania
Labor Relations Act; that it has complied with the Proposed Decision
and Order and Final Order as directed therein by immediately rescinding
the July 15, 2017 FMLA policy as it relates to the bargaining unit of
police officers, restoring the status quo ante, and making whole any
bargaining unit employes who have been adversely affected due to the
City’s unfair labor practices; that it has posted a copy of the
Proposed Decision and Order and Final Order as directed; and that it
has served an executed copy of this affidavit on the Union at its
principal place of business.

_______________________________
Signature/Date
_______________________________
Title
SWORN AND SUBSCRIBED TO before me
the day and year first aforesaid.

_________________________________
Signature of Notary Public
