MINUTES OF A MEETING
OF THE BOARD OF COUNCIL OF THE
CITY OF FORT THOMAS,
CAMPBELL COUNTY, KENTUCKY, ON
MONDAY, MAY 20, 2024
2024 Budget Hearing: Mayor Haas opened the public hearing for the 24/25 FY Budget at 6:45
p.m. With no comments received, the hearing was closed at 6:55 p.m.
Mayor Haas called the meeting of Council to order at 7:00 p.m.
Pledge to the Flag
Roll Call: Matt Kremer called the roll and the following Council members were present: Lauren
McIntosh, Ben Pendery, Andy Ellison, Adam Blau, and Eric Strange. Absent: Jeff Bezold. Staff
members in attendance included: City Administrative Officer Matt Kremer, Assistant City
Administrator/Finance Director Joe Ewald, Fire Chief Chris Amon, Police Chief Casey Kilgore,
and City Attorney Tim Schneider.
Minutes: The minutes from the April council meeting and the Finance Committee meeting will
be deferred to the next meeting of council.
Visitors and Communications:
Jessica Hurley, Vice Chair of the Fort Thomas Business Council updated on their recent business
meeting, the next meeting is on June 27th at Fort Thomas Coffee. There was a recent ribbon cutting
for Jackie Adams, a massage therapist at 18 N. Fort Thomas Ave. Mrs. Hurley also introduced
Erica Laker with NKY Medical Massage who just moved her business to 2221 Memorial Parkway
and congratulated her for the business winning best of NKY. Erica Laker introduced herself and
told a little about the background of her business.
Recognition of Past Board Members: Mayor Haas recognized Tom Duckworth (could not be
present) who served on the Board of Adjustment, and Susan Wingard who also served on the Board
of Adjustment. Mayor Haas thanked Susan for her time and effort that she put forth on the Board.
Building Safety Month Proclamation:
Proclamation.

Mayor Haas read the Building Safety Month

Public Works Week: Mayor Haas read a thank you to our Public Works Department.
William Twehues from 127 S. Grand Avenue was present asking that the city look into changing
the ordinance that bans ducks as pets in the City. Matt Kremer noted that he has spoken to his
mother and will speak to him regarding this issue.
Tiffany Huber from 26 Hawthorne Avenue addressed council regarding the zoning code update
and the sizing of homes and buildings.
Dr. Johnson, the executive director of the Cincinnati Preservation Association addressed council
regarding extending the preservation overlay into the Tower Park area.

Joan Ferris of 66 Burney Lane was present to discuss the area at the top of Bivouac Ave. that the
city is looking into adding to the neighborhood commercial district. She feels that this area should
not be listed as commercial, it should be kept residential.
Peggy Maggio from 37 S. Shaw Lane addressed council regarding the zoning code update and the
Design Review guidelines.
Steve Megerle from 7 Greene Street addressed council regarding the proposed historic overlay
district. He asked several questions that he wanted clarified for the record.
Reports of Officers
Fire Department Monthly Report: Chief Chris Amon presented the monthly report for the Fire
Department. A motion was made by Mr. Strange and seconded by Mr. Pendery to receive and file
the monthly report for the Fire Department. The motion passed by a unanimous vote.
Police Department Monthly Report: Chief Casey Kilgore presented the monthly report for the
Police Department. A motion was made by Mr. Pendery and seconded by Mrs. McIntosh to
receive and file the monthly report for the Police Department. The motion passed by a unanimous
vote.
City Administrator’s Report: Matt Kremer: Matt Kremer reported on the following:












The Finance Committee met on April 23rd at 9:30 am. The committee approved all budget
line items the staff did a great job at documenting expenses this year. A first reading will
be held later in the meeting.
Tower Park is finishing up with the installation of equipment and a ribbon cutting is set for
July 4th at 4 p.m.
Last month one of the large oaks in the Tower Park construction area had to be removed
and the two existing oaks will also have to be removed due to disease and rot. The total
removal of trees are 8-10 but the city will be replacing these with 38 trees in the park.
Highland Park Pickleball bids came in just under $500k. They will begin work on these
two weeks after Memorial Day, the paving should be complete in late July, and the courts
should be open approximately late September.
The state awarded the schools grant funds of 2.5 million that will be passed through the
city.
The Axon Taser 5 year agreement will be discussed under new business. This will upgrade
the body worn cameras for the police department dramatically.
Old Route 8 is coming along and is currently being milled. Once the guardrails are
installed, overlay work should be done the end of June.
Matt met with KYTC this week to determine if the city could add a bit of shoulder to allow
more room for bikes. The city has had several instances on state routes, ex. removing trees
and deer removal that our crews had to take on when the state wasn’t available. The State
has agreed to allow us to submit quarterly invoices to be reimbursed for work the city has
to undertake ourselves.



Legislation: 23/24 Budget Amendment, 24/25 Budget, Pay Classification Ordinance, and
a resolution adopting the NKY Regional Mitigation Plan for the State of Kentucky

Reports of Committees
Finance Committee Report: Ben Pendery reported regarding the Finance Committee meeting
that was held on the budget for 24/25. The projected general fund is a 6% increase over last year.
There will not be a property tax increase in 2024. Some of the major budget expenses for 24/25
are: Police Department $60K for the Axon Taser lease, updating the glock duty pistols, and three
new patrol vehicles. For the Fire Department, there is 1.5 million for an aerial truck that will be
delivered this year and 300K for an ambulance that will be ordered this year. Recreation
Department will have 45K in game room improvements, 500K for the Pickleball courts in
Highland Park, 130K for the General Thomas Statue, 36K for Mess Hall windows and new chairs
and tables, 300K for the Carlisle Park Stormwater, 50K for the Mayfield Avenue turnaround, 150K
for the Tennis Court upgrades, and 260K toward the Tower Park Soccer Complex, the General
Services Department will have 270k on two new Public Works vehicles and 40K for holiday
lighting.
New Business
AXON Body Worn Camera Contract: A motion was made by Mr. Blau and seconded by Mr.
Ellison to approve assigning the five year lease with AXON for new body worn cameras for the
Police Department. Upon call of the roll, the following members voted “aye”: Mrs. McIntosh, Mr.
Pendery, Mr. Ellison, Mr. Blau and Mr. Strange. Voting “no” none. The motion passed by a
unanimous vote.
Mr. Ellison spoke with Moyer 3rd grade through Steve Arey who runs the Junior Achievement
program. Mr. Ellison spoke to a young man whose name is Conrad who asked him about the Gaga
Court in Highland Park. Conrad asked if there was a way to build a fence to keep the balls from
rolling down the hill into the woods. The city will build a temporary fence to see how it works out.
Mr. Ellison is going to go back to Moyer on Friday and congratulate Conrad on getting involved
in the community and presenting a problem and helping to find a resolution.
Finance Committee Report of Disbursements: The Finance Committee presented its Report of
Disbursements and recommended the payment of warrants numbered 25314-25457 for the period
of April 16 to May 16, 2024. A motion was made by Mrs. McIntosh and seconded by Mr. Pendery
to concur in the recommendation of the Finance Committee. Upon call of the roll, the following
members voted “aye”: Mrs. McIntosh, Mr. Pendery, Mr. Ellison, Mr. Blau and Mr. Strange.
Voting “no” none. The motion passed by a unanimous vote.
Ordinances, Resolutions and Orders
Ordinance O-01-2024: The 23/24 FY Budget Amendment was presented to Council for a first
reading. This ordinance will be laid over to the next regular meeting of council for consideration.
Ordinance O-02-2024: The 24/25 FY Budget was presented to Council for a first reading. This
ordinance will be laid over to the next regular meeting of council for consideration.

Ordinance O-03-2024: The 24/25 Pay Classification Plan was presented to council for a first
reading. This ordinance will be laid over to the next regular meeting of council for consideration.
Resolution R-01-2024: A resolution adopting the NKY Regional Hazard Mitigation Plan was
presented to council for consideration. A motion was made by Mr. Ellison and seconded by Mr.
Blau to approve resolution R-01-2024. Upon call of the roll, the following members voted “aye”:
Mrs. McIntosh, Mr. Pendery, Mr. Ellison, Mr. Blau and Mr. Strange. Voting “no” none. The
motion passed by a unanimous vote.
Adam Blau presented council with a potential issue pertaining to Mayor Haas and the One
Highland Agreement. A copy of the information can be obtained through the City Clerk’s Office
via Open Records Request. Mr. Blau is asking council to have a hearing regarding the information
provided to the council members.
Adjournment: With no further business to come before council, a motion was made by Mr.
Pendery and seconded by Mrs. McIntosh to adjourn the meeting at 8:28 p.m.

APPROVED:
____________________________
Eric Haas, Mayor
ATTEST:
____________________________
Melissa K. Beckett, City Clerk
