It is expected that a Quorum of the Personnel Committee, Board of Public Works, Plan Commission, Redevelopment Authority and Administration
Committee will be attending this meeting: (although it is not expected that any official action of any of those bodies will be taken)

CITY OF MENASHA
COMMON COUNCIL
First Floor Conference Room
100 Main Street
Monday, March 18, 2019
Meeting 6:00 PM
AGENDA
A. CALL TO ORDER
B. PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
C. ROLL CALL
D. PUBLIC HEARING
1. Garages, Accessory Buildings, and Uses within the R-1 Single Family Residence District
and R-2 Two-Family Residence District (Chicken Coops)
E. PUBLIC COMMENTS ON ANY MATTER OF CONCERN TO THE CITY
(five (5) minute time limit for each person)
F. REPORT OF DEPARTMENT HEADS/STAFF/CONSULTANTS
1. Introduction & swearing in of new firefighter, Josh Boelk
2. Clerk Galeazzi—the following minutes and communications have been received and placed
on file:
Minutes to receive:
a. Administration Committee, 3/4/2019
b. Board of Health, 2/15/2019& 3/8/2019
c. Board of Public Works, 3/4/2019
d. Committee on Aging, 1/11/2019
e. Housing Authority, 3/11/2019
f. Library Board, 2/27/2019
g. Plan Commission, 3/5/2019
h. Personnel Committee, 3/4/2019
i. Redevelopment Authority, 3/5/2019
j. Sustainability Committee, 2/21/2019
Communications:
k. Elected Officials Seminar Memorandum, 3/14/2019, Clerk Galeazzi
G. CONSENT AGENDA
(Prior to voting on the Consent Agenda, items on the Consent Agenda may be removed at the request of any
Alderman and placed immediately following action on the Consent Agenda. The procedures to follow for the
Consent Agenda are: (a) removal of items from Consent Agenda; and (b) motion to approve the items from
Consent Agenda.)

Minutes to approve:
1. Common Council, 3/4/2019
Administration Committee, 3/4/2019, Recommends the Approval of:
2. Strong Neighborhoods Menasha—A Housing Renovation Initiative Program

City of Menasha Common Council Agenda
March 18, 2019
Page 2

Board of Public Works, 3/4/2019, Recommends the Approval of:
3. Recommendation to Award—Contract Unit No. 2019-01; New Street Construction;
Province Terrace, Jennie Street, Province Link, and Midway Crossing (Various Locations);
Sommers Construction Co., Inc.; $697,062.40
4. Recommendation to Award—Contract Unit No. 2019-03; Street Reconstruction; Various
locations—Broad Street, Melissa Street, Grove Street, Lawndale Drive/Court, Greenwood
Drive, Frederick Street, and Library Parking Lot; Northeast Asphalt, Inc.; $393,347.33
5. Rear Yard Drainage Program
Personnel Committee, 3/4/2019, Recommends the Approval of:
6. Tentative Agreement between City of Menasha and Menasha Professional Police Union,
January 1, 2019-December 31, 2020.
H. ITEMS REMOVED FROM THE CONSENT AGENDA
I. ACTION ITEMS
1. Accounts payable and payroll for the term of 3/4/2019—3/14/2019 in the amount of
$692,820.00
2. Beverage Operators License Applications for the 2017-2019 licensing period.
J. HELD OVER BUSINESS
1. Recommendation for denial of Beverage Operators License for Michelle Long
K. ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
1. R-7-19—A Resolution to Approve the Cancellation of Outstanding Checks; and the Write
Off of General Uncollectible Accounts Receivables and Delinquent Personal Property Tax
Receivables; Introduced by Mayor Merkes
2. R-8-19—A Resolution Approving the Project Plan and Establishing the Boundaries for and
the Creation of Tax Incremental District No. 14, City of Menasha, Wisconsin; Introduced by
Mayor Merkes
3. R-9-19—Support for Letter of Intent to Apply for University of Wisconsin Partnership
Program Community Impact Grant Program: Lead Safe Menasha; Introduced by Mayor
Merkes
L. APPOINTMENTS
1. Reappointment of Arnie Collier to Landmarks Commission for the term of 3/18/2019—
3/1/2022
M. CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
N. PUBLIC COMMENTS ON ANY MATTER LISTED ON THE AGENDA
(five (5) minute time limit for each person)
O. ADJOURNMENT
MEETING NOTICE
Monday, April 1, 2019
Common Council Meeting – 6:00 p.m.
Committee Meetings to Follow
"Menasha is committed to its diverse population. Our Non-English speaking population and those with disabilities are
invited to contact the Menasha City Clerk at 967-3603 24-hours in advance of the meeting for the City to arrange special
accommodations."

City of Menasha
Public Hearings
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that public hearings will be held by the Menasha Plan Commission
and Common Council on the proposed amendments to Title 13 of the Menasha Code of
Ordinances pertaining to Garages, Accessory Buildings and Uses within the R-1 Single Family
Residence District and R-2 Two-Family Residence District. The Plan Commission will be
considering the amendments at an informal public hearing on Tuesday, March 5, 2019 at 3:30
p.m. or shortly thereafter in the first floor conference room of the Menasha City Center, 100
Main Street, Menasha, WI. Persons interested in this matter will be given an opportunity to
comment and ask questions about the proposed amendment. A second public hearing before
the Common Council will be held Monday, March 18, 2019 at 6:00 p.m. or shortly thereafter in
the first floor conference room of the Menasha City Center located at 100 Main Street,
Menasha, WI.
Deborah A. Galeazzi, WCMC
City Clerk
Run: March 1 and 11, 2019.

REDLINE ORDINANCE O-XX-19
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 13, CHAPTER 1 OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
(R-1 Single Family Residence District and R-2 Two-Family Residence District Accessory Uses)
INTRODUCED BY __________________.
The Common Council of the City of Menasha does hereby ordain as follows:
SECTION 1: Amend Title 13, Chapter 1, Article C of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Menasha, Wisconsin as follows:
SEC. 13-1-25 R-1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
…
(e)

GARAGES, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
(1)
One (1) detached garage. Such garage may be constructed in addition to the garage
space within the principal structure.
(2)
One (1) accessory building.
(3)
Any of the following accessory uses:
a.
One (1) private swimming pool.
b.
One (1) private tennis court.
c.
One (1) satellite antenna/dish.
d.
One (1) detached solar structure.
e.
One (1) chicken coop.
…

SEC. 13-1-26 R-2 TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
…
(e)

GARAGES, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
(1)
One (1) detached garage. Such garage may be constructed in addition to the garage
space within the principal structure.
(2)
One (1) accessory building.
(3)
Any of the following accessory uses:
a.
One (1) private swimming pool.
b.
One (1) private tennis court.
c.
One (1) satellite antenna/dish.
d.
One (1) detached solar structure.
e.
One (1) chicken coop.
…

SECTION 2: This amending Ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided
by law.
Passed and approved this ____ day of __________, 2019.

Recommended by:
________________________
Motion/Second:
________________________
Vote: ___________________
Pass/Fail: ________________
Requires:
__Majority Vote
__ 2/3 Vote

______________________________
Donald Merkes, Mayor
ATTEST:

______________________________
Deborah A. Galeazzi, City Clerk

CITY OF MENASHA
ADMINISTRATION COMMITTEE
First Floor Conference Room
100 Main Street, Menasha
March 4, 2019
MINUTES

DRAFT

A. CALL TO ORDER
Meeting called to order by Chairman Nichols at 6:50 p.m.
B. ROLL CALL
PRESENT: Aldermen Mark Langdon, Steve Krueger, Tom Grade, Ted Grade,
Randy Ropella, Rebecca Nichols, James Taylor, Stan Sevenich.
ALSO PRESENT: Mayor Merkes, CA Captain, PC Styka, FC Kloehn, ASD Jacobs,
CDD Schroeder, DPW Radomski, PHD McKenney PRD Tungate, Clerk Galeazzi.
C. MINUTES TO APPROVE
1. Administration Committee, 2/18/19
Move by Ald. Ropella seconded by Ald. Tom Grade to approve minutes.
Motion carried on voice vote.
D. DISCUSSION/ACTION ITEMS
1. Due Process – Margaritaville Lounge, LLC, d/b/a Hammerheads, 6 Tayco Street,
Menasha (postponed 2/18/19).
Jennifer Almeida-Sandoval, representing Margaritaville Lounge, LLC, explained the business
has been closed since March 2018 and the difficulty she is having finding someone to run the
business. She has a potential partner and is asking for a few months extension.
CA Captain explained the purpose of the due process hearing. Based on City ordinance a
business must be operating for the purpose the “Class B” license is issued for 150 days during
the licensing year. It is up to the Administration Committee to determine if the license should
be revoked or allow the business owner to maintain the license.
CA Captain swore in Jennifer Almeida-Sandoval.
Ms. Almeida-Sandoval answered questions from CA Captain and Committee members.
Ms. Almeida-Sandoval stated the business has not been operating for the current licensing
year, which began on July 1, 2019. They did some remodeling to the premise. She feels she
will have the business open by May 1, 2019. Ms. Almeida-Sandoval said if she does not have
the business operating by May 1 she will voluntarily surrender the liquor license.
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Ted Grade to extend the license to May 1, 2019.
Motion carried on voice vote.
2. Due Process – 5 O’clock Somewhere RD, LLC, d/b/a 5 O’clock Somewhere,
600 Broad Street, Menasha
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Tom Grade to revoke license for 5 O’clock
Somewhere RD, LLC, d/b/a 5 O’clock Somewhere, 600 Broad Street, Menasha.
CA Captain explained the license holder lost access to the premise in August and has not
been able to find another premise to transfer the license.
Motion carried on voice vote.

Administration Committee Minutes
March 4, 2019
Page 2

DRAFT

3. Strong Neighborhoods Menasha-A Housing Renovation Initiative Program.
CDD Schroeder explained some amendments to the housing program based on previous
discussions. The program will be effective 1/1/2020. Funding for the program will come from
the City’s portion of increment after closing TIF #5. The closing of TIF #5 does have some
deadlines that need to be completed in 2019.
General discussion ensued on encouraging City employees to live in the City but restricting the
eligible property to a single family dwelling.
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Taylor to amend First Time Homebuyer, Loan
Guidelines, item g, to restrict to single family dwellings only.
Motion carried on voice vote.
Moved by Ald. Ropella seconded by Ald. Taylor to amend First Time Homebuyers, Eligible
Properties, item d, remove two-family.
General discussion ensued on encouraging less rentals, intent of program is to help fix up
properties, encouraging owner-occupied duplexes, and legal non-conforming properties being
included in the program.
Motion fails on roll call 3-5.
Ald. Taylor, Langdon, Ropella voted yes.
Ald. Nichols, Sevenich, Krueger, Tom Grade, Ted Grade voted no.
CDD Schroeder explained the procedure for following up on the First Time Homebuyer
requirement of living in the home for five consecutive years, the budget for the program, and
clarified under the Major Renovation section historically single family homes that had been
converted to multi-family dwellings can use funds to return home back to a single dwelling.
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Taylor to recommend to Common Council Strong
Neighborhoods Menasha-A Housing Renovation Initiative Program as amended.
Motion carried on voice vote.
E. ADJOURNMENT
Moved by Ald. Taylor seconded by Ald. Krueger to adjourn at 7:53 p.m.
Motion carried on voice vote.
Deborah A. Galeazzi, WCMC
City Clerk

CITY OF MENASHA BOARD OF HEALTH
Minutes
February 15th, 2019
A. Meeting called to order at 8:03 AM by Nancy McKenney.
B. Roll Call: Present: Nancy McKenney, Lori Asmus, Kristene Stacker Excused: Teresa Rudolph, Candyce Rusin
Staff: Kortney Dahm, Mary Fritz, Linda Palmbach, Todd Drew, Claire Opsteen, Meghan Pauly
Guest: Steven Mui
C. Guest Presentation: Steven Mui, CAc, Acupuncturist, Aurora Health System described his educational background and
licensure process with the State of Wisconsin. Under the Aurora Health System, he offered to provide a lunch and learn
at the Senior Center and with consent, provide limited services. He discussed the risks and benefits of acupuncture
including alternative pain control, relaxation, and stress reduction.
D. MINUTES TO APPROVE
Kristene Stacker moved to approve the January 11, 2019 minutes, seconded by Lori Asmus, motion passed
E. REPORT OF DEPT HEADS/STAFF/CONSULTANTS
Administrative: Budgets and Contracts: Nancy McKenney updated the Board of Health on the status of 2019 contracts
and Grant application updates.
Enhancing Public health Preparedness – The Opioid Epidemic Grant Award Wisconsin Department of Health Services,
Division of Public Health- Amount: $20,000.00 (new award) Time period: November 1, 2018 - August 31, 2019 -This
grant allows the City to enhance safety and prevention measures posed by the Opioid crisis.
Enhancing Local Public Health Agency Preparedness – Promoting Inclusive Risk Planning for the Whole Community
Wisconsin Department of Health Services, Division of Public Health -Amount: $3,600.00 (new award)
Time Period: July 1, 2018-June 30, 2019-Funds will be used to integrate special needs considerations into the City of
Menasha Excessive Heat Event Emergency Preparedness Plan; disseminate Be Prepared, Have a Plan: Emergency
Preparedness Toolkit for Persons with Disabilities; and to acquire, disseminate and review shelter kits with emergency
managers at four designated shelter locations in the City of Menasha
Retail Program Standards Grant Award- United States Food and Drug Administration through Association of Food and
Drug Officials- Amount: $3,000.00 (new award) Time period: November 1, 2018 – October 31, 2019
The program provides funds for the completion of projects to enhance conformance with the Voluntary National Retail
Food Regulatory Program Standards (Retail Program Standards).
Public Health Emergency Preparedness Training Award Wisconsin Department of Health Services, Division of Public
Health - Amount: $10,550 ($6,300.00 higher than projected) Time Period: July 1, 2018-June 30, 2019 - Funds will be
used for emergency preparedness and response training.
Correspondence: Nancy McKenney gave Board of Health an update on Fox Cities Community Health Survey 2018 report.
Academic Affiliation Update: Kristine Jacobson is working with Katherine De Wane, RN, UWO DNP student and
Partnership Community Health Center on the Lead Free by Delivery grant.
Employee Safety: Todd Drew conducted normal Safety Committee Meetings. Scheduled employee hearing screening is
set for March 28, 2019.
Sealer of Weights and Measures: Scale inspections are being completed. There is a press release on the impact of
Weights & Measures programs. It will be posted to Web page for Weights & Measures week March 4-8 regarding
financial impact of Weights & Measure programs for Wisconsin Consumers.
Environmental Health Programs: Todd Drew reported routine restaurant inspections are being done. Jimmy Johns
opened early January 2019. Todd Drew reported numerous housing complaints were made. Brin Building Demolition
mainly finished. A 120 foot well was discovered within the building. Todd Drew has arranged to have well abandoned as
required by WDNR Administrative Code. Todd Drew is working with Code Group and Menasha Police Department on the
process to raze a small commercial residential property where a fire had occurred in 2018. DNR Inspections, 4
inspections and 1 significant enforcement action. Todd Drew reported De Pere has a new Sanitarian – formally worked
with Outagamie County. Todd Drew followed up on an elevated blood lead case – during the course of the assessment
leaded mini blinds were found and a likely source for child’s lead exposure (9000 ug/cubic cm). Code group will begin to
work on Nuisance/ Human Health Hazard Ordinance Revisions.

Communicable Disease Reports: Linda Palmbach RN, Public Health Nurses reviewed the January 2019 Communicable
Disease report. Menasha Health Department will be raising the cost of TB skin test to $25.00 due to increase cost of
Tubersol.
School Health: Increase in School Absences late January. February School Absences remain low.
Health Screening 60+ Program: Steven Mui acupuncturist, discussed his method of pain control with the Board of
Health and Menasha Health Department Staff. Vascular Screening was held in February at Menasha Health Department.
Dental Program: Claire Opsteen reported she is in process of doing fluoride varnishes in the elementary schools.
Dental Sealant Program: Claire Opsteen reported Sealants started in January 2019.
Lead Prevention Program: Todd Drew reported he is working on 1 lead case.
Prevention: No Report
Maternal and Child Health: No Report.
Immunization: No Report
Emergency Preparedness: No Report
Twenty Four/Seven: No Report
Senior Center: No Report
F. ACTION ITEMS Policy and Procedure Review: No Report
G. HELD OVER BUSINESS: None
H. ADJOURNMENT: Lori Asmus moved to adjourn the meeting at 9:23, seconded by Kristene Stacker. Motion passed.
The next meeting will be on Friday March 8th, 2019 at 8:00 a.m.

CITY OF MENASHA BOARD OF HEALTH
DRAFT Minutes
March 8th, 2019
A. Meeting called to order at 8:05 AM by Nancy McKenney.
B. Roll Call: Present: Nancy McKenney, Kristene Stacker, Teresa Rudolph, Excused: Lori Asmus, Candyce Rusin
Staff: Mary Fritz, Linda Palmbach, Claire Opsteen, Meghan Pauly
Guest: Dick & Carol Sturm
C. MINUTES TO APPROVE
Kristene Stacker moved to approve the February 15th, 2019 minutes, seconded by Dr. Teresa Rudolph, motion passed
D. REPORT OF DEPT HEADS/STAFF/CONSULTANTS
Administrative: Budgets and Contracts: Nancy McKenney updated the Board of Health on the status of 2019 contracts
and grant application updates.
Proposed Ordinance-Backyard Chickens- Nancy McKenney explained that the Menasha Health Department was asked to
participate in the development of a proposed backyard chicken ordinance in cooperation with elected officials,
Community Development and members of the Sustainability Committee. The Sustainability Committee requested the
Board of Health consider the proposed ordinance. Todd Drew joined the meeting by phone. Nancy McKenney read the
ordinance. Concerns expressed included: 1) Increased risk of diseases including Campylobacter, Salmonella and other
diseases. It was noted that CDC tracked 76 outbreaks since 2000 linked Salmonella and backyard chicken keeping.
Poultry may have Salmonella in their droppings and on their bodies (feathers, feet, and beaks), even when they appear
healthy and clean. 2) There is potential for vermin and predators and it was suggested vermin be defined in the
ordinance. 3) Concern was expressed about adequate personnel time and expenditures to manage complaints. Nancy
McKenney noted that Todd Drew, Registered Sanitarian would have primary responsible for investigating health-related
complaints and would also enforce of the ordinance. She was concerned that this will add to an already full work load
and could be time consuming. Required financial resources may not be sufficiently covered by permit fees.
Kristine Stacker moved that the Board of Health approve sending the proposed ordinance to the Administration
Committee for consideration. The Board of Health does not take a position on backyard chicken keeping. However,
should the Administration Committee and Common Council decide to allow backyard chicken keeping, this is an
enforceable proposed ordinance that promotes safety. Seconded by Dr. Theresa Rudolph, motion carried.
Correspondence: Nancy McKenney gave Board of Health an update on Fox Cities Community Health Survey 2018 report.
Nancy McKenney & Kurt Eggebrecht were featured on a radio segment with WHBY (Dave Edwards) on March 3rd, 2019.
Academic Affiliation Update: Kristine Jacobson is working with Katherine De Wane, RN, UWO DNP student and
Partnership Community Health Center on the Lead Free by Delivery grant.
Employee Safety: Todd Drew conducted normal Safety Committee Meetings. Scheduled employee hearing screening is
set for March 28, 2019.
Sealer of Weights and Measures: Gas pump inspections are in process.
Environmental Health Programs: No Report
Communicable Disease Reports: Linda Palmbach RN, Public Health Nurses reviewed the February 2019 Communicable
Disease report.
School Health: February School Absences remain low.
Health Screening 60+ Program: Meghan Pauly reported Steven Mui acupuncturist will be at the Menasha Senior Center
starting in May.
Dental Program: Claire Opsteen RDH reported to date 952 Fluorides have been done. United Way Off Year Reporting
was completed and has been submitted.
Dental Sealant Program: Claire Opsteen RDH reported she is in the process of applying sealants, 99 students have had
sealants placed to date. Goal was 135, she will exceed this goal this year.

Lead Prevention Program: Nancy McKenney reported Liz Rosin is working on an elevated blood lead case and providing
technical assistance with Todd Drew.
Prevention: Corny Community Walk will be held on Wednesday August 7th, 2019 at Jefferson Park in Menasha.
Maternal and Child Health: Kristine Jacobsen is working with City of Menasha Administration staff on becoming a
Breastfeeding Friendly work place.
Immunization: No Report
Emergency Preparedness: Nancy McKenney & Kristine Jacobson are attending a Fox Valley Community Health
Improvement Coalition meeting – including an emergency preparedness table top exercise and report on the recent
weather-related accident in the Fox Cities.
Twenty Four/Seven: No Report
Senior Center: Meghan Pauly reported Valley VNA will no longer be doing influenza vaccines at the Senior Center.
Meghan Pauly is in process of finding a replacement.
E. ACTION ITEMS Policy and Procedure Review: Communicable Disease Guidelines were approved by Kristine Stacker,
seconds by Teresa Rudolph.
F. HELD OVER BUSINESS: None
G. ADJOURNMENT: Kristine Stacker moved to adjourn the meeting at 9:38, seconded by Teresa Rudolph. Motion
passed. The next meeting will be on Friday April 12, 2019 at 8:00 a.m.

CITY OF MENASHA
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS
First Floor Conference Room
100 Main Street, Menasha
March 4, 2019
MINUTES

DRAFT

A. CALL TO ORDER
Meeting called to order by Chairman Krueger at 8:53 p.m.
B. ROLL CALL
PRESENT: Aldermen Mark Langdon, Steve Krueger, Tom Grade, Ted Grade,
Randy Ropella, Rebecca Nichols, James Taylor, Stan Sevenich.
ALSO PRESENT: Mayor Merkes, CA Captain, PC Styka, ASD Jacobs, DPW Radomski,
Clerk Galeazzi.
C. MINUTES TO APPROVE
1. February 4, 2019
Moved by Ald. Langdon seconded by Ald. Ted Grade to approve minutes.
Motion carried on voice vote.
D. DISCUSSION / ACTION ITEMS
1. Recommendation to Award – Contract Unit No. 2019-01; New Street Construction;
Province Terrace, Jennie Street, Province Link and Midway Crossing (Various
Locations); Sommers Construction Co., Inc.; $697,062.40
DPW Radomski explained Sommers Construction Co was the lowest of the two bids
received and under budget.
Moved by Ald. Langdon seconded by Ald. Ropella to recommend to Common Council
Recommendation to Award Contract Unit No. 2019-01 for new street construction of
Province Terrace, Jennie Street, Province Link and Midway Crossings (various locations)
to Sommers Construction Co., Inc in the amount of $697,062.40.
Motion carried on roll call 8-0.
2. Recommendation to Award – Contract Unit No. 2019-03; Street Reconstruction;
Various Locations – Broad Street, Melissa Street, Grove Street, Lawndale
Drive/Court, Greenwood Drive, Frederick Street and Library Parking Lot; Northeast
Asphalt, Inc.; $393,347.33
DPW Radomski explained Northeast Asphalt, Inc was the lowest bid received and under
budget. He explained contractors are restricted to 15 days for a street to be under
construction unless there is additional utility work to be done. Replacement of the Library
parking lot was part of the 2019 budget.
Moved by Ald. Langdon seconded by Ald. Ted Grade to recommend to Common Council
Recommendation to Award Contract Unit No. 2019-03 for street reconstruction, various
locations of Broad Street, Melissa Street, Grove Street, Lawndale Drive/Court,
Greenwood Drive, Frederick Street and Library Parking Lot to Northeast Asphalt, Inc in
the amount of $393,347.33.
Motion carried on roll call 8-0.

Board of Public Works Minutes
March 4, 2018
Page 2

DRAFT

3. Rear Yard Drainage Program Update
DPW Radomski explained how the Rear Yard Drainge Program works and benefits the
property owner. He stated the program as currently written has become combersum and
time consuming for staff to process. Staff is recommending requiring a $100 reimburable
fee towards the completion of the project when the application is submitted to cover staff
time. They are also recommending setting deadlines for when applications need to be
submitted. This will help to more accurately budget funds for the program and will help to
bid multiple properties instead of one at a time.
General discussion ensued on the maximum amount paid by the City for each property
drainage issue, number who apply each year, other changes to the program, areas
most affected, and who qualifies for the program.
Moved by Ald. Langdon seconded by Ald. Tom Grade to recommend to Common Council
the Rear Yard Drainage Program.
Motion carried on roll call 8-0.
E. ADJOURNMENT
Moved by Ald. Langdon seconded by Ald. Ted Grade to adjourn at 9:25 p.m.
Motion carried on voice vote.
Deborah A. Galeazzi, WCMC
City Clerk

CITY OF MENASHA
COMMITTEE ON AGING
January 11, 2019
Minutes
A. Meeting called to order at 1:05 PM.
B. ROLL CALL: Present: Joyce Klundt, Tom Stoffel and Nancy McKenney, Cheryl Richard, Pat Irwin. Beatrice Kohanski,
Brenda Marks Guests: Kristine Jacobsen
C. MINUTES TO BE APPROVED: Tom Stoffel moved to approve the December 7h, 2018 minutes, seconded by
Joyce Klundt. Motion passed.
E CORRESPONDENCE: None
F. REPORT OF DEPT HEADS/STAFF/CONSULTANTS:
Senior Center: Cheryl reported that there were 683 people made 1,170 visits to the Senior Center in January. She noted
that the Neenah COA discussed and is open to collaboration with the Menasha Committee on Aging. Their next meeting
is on April 11th 2019. Beth Howell, Cheryl Richards, Kortney Dahm and Meghan Pauly are teaching Tai Chi classes at the
Menasha City Center. The Senior Center will be using the City BOSS system to request facilities services for the Senior
Center.
Public Health and Health Screening 60+ Grant: On behalf of Meghan Pauly, Nancy McKenney noted that 73 people had
110 services provided in January. Kristine Jacobsen described progress on planning the State Health Plan Community
Dialogue listening sessions. The dates for the mini-grant are February 22nd, 2019, March 8th, 2019, March 22nd, 2019 and
a wrap up date of April 12th, 2019. Each session will include an introduction, facilitated group discussion, and lunch.
Results will be sent to the State Division of Public Health to help shape the next Wisconsin State Health Plan. COA
members signed up to participate in a session. Nancy McKenney noted that recent reports show opioid-related
addiction and overdose is occurring in the 55 and older age group. On behalf of Meghan Pauly, she requested the
opinion of the COA about hosting an Aurora Health System acupuncturist for alternative pain relief. It was agreed that
offering alternative methods of pain control was important. It was suggested that the acupuncturist be a featured lunch
and learn speaker.
Policies and Procedures Discussion: No report
G. NEW BUSINESS: Nancy McKenney reported Community Health Assessment Reports were being completed and the
community dialogue sessions will help with local plans as well as the State Health Plan.
H. HELD OVER BUSINESS: Mission Vision and Goals: Meghan Pauly, Cheryl Richard, Pat Irwin and Nancy McKenney will
meet to discuss SMART objectives for the Senior Center. They will put time frames on goals and objectives.
Signage: Cheryl Richard has requested assistance getting recommendations and estimates for signs in front of the
Senior Center.
No report. Safety Manual: No report.
Cost Study: No report.
I. ADJOURNMENT: Tom Stoffel moved to adjourn the meeting. Joyce Klundt seconded the motion. Motion passed.
The next meeting will be held on Friday, February 8th at 1:00pm at the Menasha Health Department on 100 Main Street
Menasha, WI.

CITY OF MENASHA
Housing Authority
Room 207, City Hall – 100 Main Street
March 11, 2019
DRAFT MINUTES

A.

CALL TO ORDER
The meeting was called to order at 4:31 p.m. by Chairperson Larry Haase.

B.

ROLL CALL/EXCUSED ABSENCES
MEMBERS PRESENT: Commissioners Larry Haase, Mike Keehan, and Christine Kaup.
MEMBERS EXCUSED/ABSENT: Arnie Collier
OTHERS PRESENT: BI/HS Humski and CDC Heim

C.

MINUTES TO APPROVE
1.

D.

Minutes of the October 22, 2018 Housing Authority Meeting
Motion by Comm. Keehan, seconded by Comm. Kaup to approve the October 22, 2018 Housing
Authority meeting minutes. The motion carried.

PUBLIC COMMENT ON ANY ITEM OF CONCERN ON THIS AGENDA
Five (5) minute time limit for each person.

1.
E.

REPORT OF DEPARTMENT HEADS/STAFF/CONSULTANTS
1.

F.

No comments were made.

CDC Heim provided a brief overview of the Strong Neighborhoods Menasha program. On March
4, 2019 the Common Council approved two resolutions which allocated funds for a Strong
Neighborhoods Menasha housing program. The funding is being allocated from the closing of
Tax Increment District #5 and will be available in fiscal year 2020 and will correspond with the
program being available in 2020 as well. Members were excited to hear of the program and were
happy to see reinvestment back into the city housing stock.

ACTION/DISCUSSION ITEMS
1.

Review of Applicants
BI/HS Humski stated that Application #001-18 was initially approved for $16,000 for roof repair.
After an extended process of finding a contractor, it was brought to light that the roof planks are
spaced too far apart to meet the manufacturer specifications. The bid from the contractor
received for the project is $22,200. BI/HS Humski is seeking the additional $6,200 in funds for
the project to be completed. Members discussed the request and need for the roof repairs to be
completed to manufacturer specifications.
Motion by Comm. Keehan to approve the additional $6,200 for Applicant #001-18, seconded by
Comm. Kaup. The motion carried.

2.

Set Next Meeting
The next meeting date is scheduled for April 22, 2019.

G.

ADJOURNMENT
Motion by Comm. Keehan, seconded by Comm. Kaup to adjourn at 4:47 p.m. The motion
carried.

Minutes respectfully submitted by CDC Heim.

ELISHA D. SMITH PUBLIC LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Elisha D. Smith Public Library
Gegan Board Room
February 27, 2018
Called to order at 4:02pm by Chairman Englebert
Present:
Chairman Englebert, Vice Chairman Golz, Secretary Halverson, Ad Hoc Trustee Hermans,
Trustee Lane, Trustee Schwerbel, Trustee Witt, Trustee Turner (arrived at 4:03pm),
Superintendent of Schools VanderHeyden, Trustee Franzoi (arrived at 4:04pm), and Teen
Representative Genz (arrived at 4:05pm)
Absent:
None
Also Present: Director Lenz, Children Services Supervisor Beson, Support Services Brandt and Business
Manager Dreyer
Public Comment/Communication
None
Consent Business
Motion made by VanderHeyden, seconded by Golz to approve the Library Board meeting minutes from
February 6, 2019, and accept the Ad Hoc Strategic Planning minutes from February 6, 13, and 18, 2019.
Motion carried unanimously.
Authorization of Bills
Motion made by Golz, seconded by Franzoi to authorize payment of the December 2018(3) bills from the
2018 budget, the February 2019 from the 2019 budget, endowment, and WALS fund. Motion carried
unanimously.
New Business
1. January Statistics.
The circulation statistics comparison (1998-2018) and January 2019 statistics were reviewed. Digital
circulation for January was 4.8% higher than last year but physical circulation was down. The weather
has not been good.
2. 2018 and 2019 Budget Status.
Trustees reviewed the 2018 and 2019 budget status. A check has been issued but not sent to Kone
(elevator) for invoices from 2018. The city attorney is now talking with Kone’s attorney. Motion made by
Franzoi, seconded by Halverson to hold the check until the matter with Kone has been satisfactorily
handled. Motion carried unanimously.
PW Deputy Director Alix is in the process of getting a second opinion on the compressor.
3. Staff/Trustee Reports.
 The library was closed on January 28 and February 12 due to snowstorms. It was open when the
wind chills dropped to dangerous levels and acting as a warming shelter at the request of the
Menasha Health Department.
 We have begun re-upholstering chairs, refurbishing/getting new wooden chairs and looking into new
office chairs.
 Adult Services Supervisor Joe Bongers requested approval to travel to this year’s American Library
Association Conference in Washington, DC from June 20 – 25. Motion made by Schwerbel,
seconded by Witt to approve up to $3,000 for Joe Bongers to attend the American Library
Association Conference as per his request. Motion carried unanimously.
 Director Lenz and the supervisors are recommending McKenzie Brandt as 2019 Library Volunteer of
the Year. McKenzie has been volunteering in circulation every Friday beginning in 2012. Motion
made by Franzoi, seconded by Schwerbel to approve McKenzie as our Volunteer of the Year.
Motion carried unanimously.
 The WAPL Conference is being held at the Holiday Inn & Suites in Rothschild May 2 & 3. Lenz will
email the agenda when it becomes available.

2


The 2018 Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction Public Library Annual Report was reviewed.
Motion made by VanderHeyden, seconded by Franzoi to approve the 2018 Annual Report with a
“yes” to the question regarding system effectiveness. Motion carried unanimously.

Beson left the meeting at 4:30pm.
Unfinished Business
2019-2023 Strategic Plan
Planning Committee Chairman Halverson led trustees in a refinement of goals, mission, vision, and values.
The draft will be presented to library staff members for their input during two lunch meetings in March, and a
plan will be presented at the next board meeting for approval.
Adjournment
Motion to adjourn made at 5:45pm by Golz, seconded by Englebert. Motion carried unanimously.
Respectfully submitted,
Kathy Dreyer, Recording Secretary

CITY OF MENASHA
Plan Commission
Menasha City Center, Room 133 – 100 Main Street
March 5, 2019
DRAFT MINUTES

A.

CALL TO ORDER
The meeting was called to order at 3:32 PM by Mayor Merkes.

B.

ROLL CALL/EXCUSED ABSENCES
PLAN COMMISION MEMBERS PRESENT: Mayor Merkes, Alderperson Rebecca Nichols, DPW
Radomski, and Commissioner Sturm.
PLAN COMMISION MEMBERS EXCUSED: Commissioners Benner, Homan and Cruickshank.
OTHERS PRESENT: CDD Schroeder, AP Stephenson, Alderperson Tom Grade, Alderperson
James Taylor, Joanne Roush (409 Cleveland Street), Carol Sturm (1203 Greenwood Ct), Mark
Keating (Gries Architecture), Joel Berg (Baisch Engineering), and Andrew Fitzwilliam (Essity).

C.

PUBLIC HEARING
1.

Text Amendment to Title 13, Article C, Section 13-1-25(e)(3) and Section 13-1-26(e)(3)
AP Stephenson gave a background on the proposed Text Amendment. Staff, in conjunction with
Sustainability Board, has created an ordinance that would allow for the keeping of chickens
within the City of Menasha. The keeping of chickens ordinance would be placed in Chapter 7
and allow individuals to place a chicken coop on their property and keep up to six (6) chickens
on residential lots. If the chicken keeping ordinance was passed, the proposed text amendment
to Title 13 would allow chicken coops within R-1 and R-2 zoning districts to be a permitted
accessory use.
Carol Sturm (1203 Greenwood Ct): Chickens within the city of Menasha should be allowed and
many of the surrounding communities already have similar ordinances to the one proposed.
Keeping of chickens will help foster a quality community and the ordinance will provide a clean
and safe environment for chickens.

D.

MINUTES TO APPROVE
1.

E.

Minutes of the February 5, 2019 Plan Commission Meeting
DPW Radomski made a motion to approve the minutes of the February 5, 2019 Plan
Commission Meeting. Alderperson Nichols seconded the motion. The motion carried.

PUBLIC COMMENT ON ANY ITEM OF CONCERN ON THIS AGENDA
Public comments were taken throughout the meeting.

F.

DISCUSSION / ACTION ITEMS
1.

Site Plan Review – 190 Third Street – Essity Professional Hygiene
AP Stephenson gave a brief background on the site plan for 190 Third Street. Baisch
Engineering, on behalf of Essity Professional Hygiene, has submitted an application for a site
plan review to allow for the construction of an addition on the south end of Essity Professional
Hygiene, 190 Third Street. The addition would be used to house a new pulping facility for Essity.
The Plan Commission had a brief discussion with the following items being discussed:
1. Lighting of the new addition.
2. Light trespass.
3. The relocation of the sewer easement south of the existing building.

PDW Radomski made a motion approve the site plan as presented for 190 Third Street (#200436-00) with the following conditions:
1. Prior to the issuance of building permits, a storm water and site improvement agreement
must be recorded for the proposed development.
2. All light levels must meet the code outlined in Section 13-1-12 (h) “Outdoor Lighting” and
will be at or less than 5 foot-candles.
3. The Department of Public Works must approve the relocation of the existing storm sewer
system and the applicant must provide all required easement documents to the City. The
easement must be recorded before work can begin.
The motion was seconded by Commissioner Sturm. The motion carried.
2.

Site Plan Review – 455 Baldwin Street – Public Works Facility
AP Stephenson gave a brief background on the site plan for the Public Works Facility. The
proposal is to demolish the existing public works facility in phases and replace it with a new
public works facility. The use and dimensions of this building is in conformance with the City’s
Government Use (GU) zoning district.
The Plan Commission entered into a discussion with the following topics being discussed:
1. Fencing around the Public Works Facility.
2. Screening the roof top equipment.
3. Emergency efficiency.
4. Gravel patio space vs grass patio space.
5. Gate locations.
6. Recycling area location and screening the recycling area.
DP Radomski made a motion to approve the site plan as presented for 455 Baldwin Street, 435
Baldwin Street, and 981 Plank Road (#5-00497-00, #5-00498-00, and #5-00500-00) with the
following conditions:
1. Prior to the issuance of building permits, a storm water and site improvement agreement
must be recorded for the proposed development.
2. All HVAC roof top equipment must be screened as per Title 13, Article B, and Section
13-1-12(f)(5).
The motion was seconded by Commissioner Sturm.
Alderperson Nichols made a motion to amend the motion made by DPW Radomski and added
the following condition:
1. A vegetative screen shall be placed to screen the recycling area from public view.
The amended motion was seconded by Mayor Merkes. The motion carried.
The motion to approve the site plan for the public works facility with three conditions carried.

3.

Text Amendment to Title 13, Article C, Section 13-1-25 (e)(3) and Section 13-1-26(e)(3)
Commissioner Sturm made a motion to recommend that the Plan Commission recommend
approval of the text amendment to Title 13, Article C, Section 13-1-25(e)(3) and Title 13, Article
C, Section 13-1-26(e)(3) – Accessory Uses within the R-1 and R-2 districts with the condition
that an ordinance amending Title 7, Chapter 1 of The Code of Ordinances (Licensing of Dog,
Cat, or Ferret and Regulation of Animals) Article C, Section 7-1-13(D) Keeping of Chickens in
the City is also approved. The motion was seconded by Mayor Merkes.
DPW Radomski informed the Commission that he disapproved of the Text Amendment and the
proposed chicken ordinance. He would like to see a larger set back and additional requirements
to screen chicken coops.
Alderperson James Taylor informed the Commission that he disapproved of the Text
Amendment and the proposed chicken ordinance. He felt that chickens should not be allowed in
the City because they are a nuisance and smell bad.

The Plan Commission entered into a conversation with the following items being discussed:
1. The merits of allowing chickens in the city.
2. The potential for increased nuisance complaints.
3. How the chickens will be permitted.
4. Which communities currently allow chickens.
The motion passed 3-1 with DPW Radomski voting no.
4.

Electronic Message Center Draft Ordinance Revisions
AP Stephenson gave a brief background on the Electronic Message Center Ordinance Revision.
Joanne Roush (409 Cleveland Street) informed the Commission that she was not in favor of
revising the EMC ordinance. She wants residential districts to be protected from adjacent church
and school EMC signs.
The Plan Commission entered into a conversation with the following items being discussed:
1. The effect of EMC’s on neighboring residents.
2. What other communities allow EMC signs.
3. Transition slides for EMC’s and animation.
No action was taken.

H.

COMMUNICATION
1.

I.

Set Next Meeting Date
The next Plan Commission meeting was set for March 19, 2019 at 3:30 PM.

ADJOURNMENT
Ald. Nichols made a motion to adjourn the meeting at 4:52 PM. Comm. Sturm seconded the
motion. The motion carried.

Minutes respectfully submitted by AP Stephenson.

CITY OF MENASHA
PERSONNEL COMMITTEE
First Floor Conference Room
100 Main Street, Menasha
March 4, 2019
MINUTES

DRAFT

A. CALL TO ORDER
Meeting called to order by Chairman Ted Grade at 9:30 p.m.
B. ROLL CALL
PRESENT: Aldermen Mark Langdon, Steve Krueger, Tom Grade, Ted Grade,
Randy Ropella, Rebecca Nichols, James Taylor, Stan Sevenich, Mayor Merkes.
ALSO PRESENT: CA Captain, PC Styka, ASD Jacobs, Clerk Galeazzi
C. MINUTES TO APPROVE
1. Personnel Committee, 1/21/19
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Krueger to approve minutes.
Motion carried on voice vote.
D. DISCUSSION/ACTION ITEMS
1. Tentative Agreement between City of Menasha and Menasha Professional Police
Union, January 1, 2019 – December 31, 2020.
PC Styka gave a brief summary of the Police Union contract and the financial impact.
Moved by Ald. Taylor seconded by Ald. Langdon to recommend to Common Council
Tentative Agreement between City of Menasha and Menasha Professional Police Union,
January 1, 2019-December 31, 2020.
General discussion ensued on the Police Department achieving accreditation status and
the physical fitness incentive program in place of the vest incentive program.
Motion carried on roll call 9-0.
E. ADJOURNMENT
Moved by Ald. Taylor seconded by Ald. Tom Grade to adjourn at 9:48 p.m.
Motion carried on voice vote.
Deborah A. Galeazzi, WCMC
City Clerk

CITY OF MENASHA
Redevelopment Authority
100 Main Street – Room 133
March 5, 2019
DRAFT MINUTES

A.

CALL TO ORDER
The meeting was called to order by Chairperson Kim Vanderhyden at 5:16 PM.

B.

ROLL CALL/EXCUSED ABSENCES
REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY MEMBERS PRESENT: Chairperson Kim Vanderhyden,
Alderperson Rebecca Nichols, Matt Vanderlinden, Gail Popp, Shane Correll, Kip Golden, and Bob
Stevens.
REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY MEMBERS EXCUSED: None.
OTHERS PRESENT: CDD Sam Schroeder, AP Joe Stephenson, Attorney Pam Captain,
Alderperson Tom Grade, and Alderperson Mark Langdon.

C.

MINTUES TO APPROVE
1.

D.

Minutes of the February 5, 2019 Redevelopment Authority Meeting
Matt Vanderlinden made a motion to approve the meeting minutes from February 5, 2019
Redevelopment Authority Meeting. The motion was seconded by Shane Correll. The motion
carried.

PUBLIC COMMENT ON ANY ITEM OF CONCERN ON THIS AGENDA
(five (5) minute time limit for each person)
Public comments were taken throughout the meeting.

E.

DISCUSSION ITEMS
1.

Promissory Note and Loan Agreement – 835 Kelsey Brook Court – Cypress Homes
CDD Schroeder gave an update on the Promissory Note and Loan for 835 Kelsey Brook Court. On
February 25 of 2016, the RDA executed the sale of 836 Kelsey Brook Court, Lot 118 of Lake Park
Villas, to Cypress Homes. As part of this closure the RDA granted Cypress Homes a zero percent
interest loan in the amount of the lot cost, $35,000. This loan was to mature after three years or
upon the transfer of a lot from Cypress Homes to a third party whichever came first. While Cypress
Homes does have a buyer lined up, the lot currently remains vacant and is in the process of pricing
and building design in order to close later this spring. With the closure of the lot in site, Cypress
Homes has requested a 2 month extension to the promissory note and loan agreement in order to
allow the closure to be completed.
The Redevelopment Authority directed staff to draft a proposal and bring it back to the
Redevelopment Authority next month. In addition, The Redevelopment Authority directed staff to
not cash the check for promissory note at this time.

2.

Lake Park Villas Listing Agreement
CDD Schroeder gave a brief update on the Lake Park Villas Listing Agreement. For the past
several years the City of Menasha Redevelopment Authority has had a listing contract with
Coldwell Banker the Real Estate Group (Coldwell) including Richard DeKleyn as the listing agent.
Most recently a one year extension was approved by the RDA and executed on June 1, 2018. On
February 27, 2019, staff was contacted by Coldwell who informed us that the listing agent Richard
DeKleyn is no longer with the company leaving our listing agreement in a state of unknown. We

can stay with Coldwell Bankers, look for a new agency, or stop listing the property.
The Redevelopment Authority felt that staying with Coldwell Banker would be beneficial. Coldwell
Banker gave the RDA adequate services at a reasonable price. There was no change made to the
current agreement.
No action was taken.
3.

Authority to Grant Use and Access of the Banta Property - 460 Ahnaip Street
CDD Schroeder gave a brief background on authority to grant use and access of the Banta
Property. Since the acquisition of the Banta property by the Redevelopment Authority there have
been multiple requests for temporary use and or access to the building. These requests include,
but are not limited to:
 Site Visits by potential Developers
 Consultants including environmental, construction, marketing, etc.
 WisDOT
 Police and/or Fire Training
It would be beneficial to have one or two main points of contact for situations like these. Those
points of contact could then provide access to the building without needing to bring the request to
the Redevelopment Authority.
The Redevelopment Authority had a brief discussion and agreed they needed to grant the
Chairperson and Executive Director authority to grant access or use to the Banta facility.
Kip Golden made a motion granting the Chairperson or the Executive Director the authority to grant
professional use and or access to the Banta Facility at 460 Ahnaip Street on a case by case basis.
The motion was seconded by Kim Vanderhyden.
The motion carried.

4.

Banta/RR Donnelley Property – 460 Ahnaip Street
CDD Schroeder updated the Redevelopment Authority on the Banta Site. Staff has been having
conversations with the Wisconsin DOT. They are having the building appraised. If we do not like
the appraisal we have the ability to find our own appraiser and have the building appraised. The
state will pick up any cost associated with the appraisal.
There was no action taken.

F.

5.

Lawson Canal Discussion
CDD Schroeder informed the Redevelopment Authority that staff has been having conversations
with Neenah Menasha Power and Sonoco. Staff is working with both entities to come to an
agreement on the canal. In addition, staff presented the canal plan to the Common Council and
they were pleased with the plan.

6.

Set Next Meeting
Next meeting was set for April 2, 2019 at 5:00 PM.

ADJOURNMENT
Alderperson Nichols made a motion to adjourn the meeting at 6:12 PM. The motion was seconded
by Bob Stevens. The motion carried.

Minutes respectfully submitted by AP Stephenson.

CITY OF MENASHA
SUSTAINABILITY BOARD
100 Main Street, Room 132, Menasha
February 21, 2019
Minutes
A. CALL TO ORDER
Meeting called to order by Kathy Thunes at 1:15 p.m.

B. ROLL CALL/EXCUSED ABSENCES
Present: Roger Kanitz, Linda Stoll, Donald Merkes, Joe Stevenson, Carol Sturm, Dick Sturm, Nancy
McKenney

C. PUBLIC COMMENTS ON ANY MATTER OF CONCERN TO THE SUSTAINABILITY BOARD
(five (5) minute time limit for each person) -- No one spoke

D. MINUTES TO APPROVE
Motion by Roger Kanitz second by Linda Stoll to approve the minutes of January 17, 2019. Motion
carries

E. COMMUNICATIONS
Evergreen CU has an invasive species workshop scheduled for the Menasha Public Library on May
28th presented by a UWEX master gardener

F. REPORTS
G. DISCUSSION ITEMS
1. City of Menasha Energy Usage
WPPI grant approved for potential solar for PWF and Focus on Energy grant submitted

2. Waste Management
No report
3.. Spring Electronics Recycling Event
Date Set for May 11 with Recycle that Stuff
4. Fall Electronics Recycling Event
Discussed options for other vendors, waiting for references.

3. Livable Communities
a. Urban Chickens. Board discussed the draft ordinance including recommended fee
of $42 annually, 8’ maximum coop height, and inspections allowed at reasonable
times. Motion by Roger Kanitz second by Linda Stoll to recommend to the Board of
Health, Plan Commission, and Administration Committee for approval and
consideration by the Common Council. Motion carries
b. Large Rock the Block event planned for central Menasha in the summer/fall of 2019
c. Strong Neighborhoods. Members discussed if there were opportunities for
communal spaces (not at the present time), would like to show any energy
efficiency programs, noted that programs like this reap benefits far above the
original cost.
d. CORP the parks department is still seeking input on the survey

4. Menasha Farm Fresh Market Menasha Farm Fresh Market
No report

5. Transportation
Received $100,000 grant towards the Province Terrace Trail extension from Fox Cities
Convention and Visitors bureau.

6. Website
No report

7. Member Recruitment
No report

H. ADJOURNMENT
Motion made by Roger Kanitz and seconded Linda Stoll by to adjourn at 2:45p.m. Motion carried.
Minutes submitted by DJM

City of Menasha ● Office of the City Clerk

MEMORANDUM
DATE:

March 14, 2019

TO:

Common Council

FROM:

Debbie Galeazzi, Clerk

SUBJECT:

Elected Officials Seminars

Attached is information on the Davis/Kuelthau Annual Public Officials Seminar.
Please let me or Deputy Clerk Stephanie Cheslock know if you are interested in
attending and we will register you. The seminar is April 29 and we would need to
register you by April 22.
Please feel free to contact me should you have questions.

140 Main Street ● Menasha, Wisconsin 54952-3151 ● Phone (920) 967-3603 ● Fax (920) 967-5273
www.cityofmenasha-wi.gov

CITY OF MENASHA
COMMON COUNCIL
First Floor Conference Room
100 Main Street
Monday, March 4, 2019
MINUTES

DRAFT

A. CALL TO ORDER
Meeting called to order by Mayor Merkes at 6:00 p.m.
B. PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The Pledge of Allegiance was recited.
C. ROLL CALL
PRESENT: Aldermen Mark Langdon, Steve Krueger, Tom Grade, Ted Grade,
Randy Ropella (arrived at 6:01pm), Rebecca Nichols, James Taylor, Stan Sevenich.
ALSO PRESENT: Mayor Merkes, CA Captain, PC Styka, FC Kloehn, ASD Jacobs,
CDD Schroeder, DPW Radomski, PHD McKenney, PRD Tungate, Clerk Galeazzi
D. PUBLIC HEARING
None
E. PUBLIC COMMENTS ON ANY MATTER OF CONCERN TO THE CITY
(five (5) minute time limit for each person)
Sandra Dabill Taylor, 545 Broad Street, Menasha. Commented on closure of TIF #5 and using
funds for housing program. Housing program will have no impact until there is code enforcement
with other violations. City staff seems to have hands off approach on code violations at commercial
property. People are getting frustrated and moving out of City.
F. REPORT OF DEPARTMENT HEADS/STAFF/CONSULTANTS
1. PHD McKenney—Community Health Survey Executive Summary and Press Release
PHD McKenney gave a presentation on the Fox Cities Community Health Survey that the
Menasha Health Department participated in. The purpose of the project is to provide information
from an assessment conducted on the health status of residents. PHD McKenney explained the
uniqueness of the City of Menasha Health Department and what they offer their residents.
2. Clerk Galeazzi - the following minutes and communications have been received and placed on
file:
Minutes to receive:
a. Administration Committee, 2/18/2019
b. Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission, 1/22/2019
c. Parks and Recreation Board, 1/8/2019
d. Police Commission, 12/20/2018
e. Water & Light Commission, 1/23/2019
Communications:
f. Proposed legislation relating to vacancies in elective offices in cities and villages
g. Notice of Pending Vacancy, Fox Valley Technical College District Board, 2/8/2019
h. Neenah-Menasha Memorial Day Parade Committee Notice, 2019 Memorial Day Parade,
Monday, May 27, 2019
i. Order Granting Extension, Office of the Commissioner of Railroads of the State of
Wisconsin
j. Ribbon Cutting—Jimmy Johns—87 Racine St, Menasha Memorandum, 3/4/2019, CDD
Sam Schroeder
k. Menasha Residents Invited to Water Street Open House Press Release, 2/26/2019

Common Council Minutes
March 4, 2019
Page 2

DRAFT

l. Update on Creation of Tax Increment Financing District #14 Memorandum, 3/4/2019,
CDD Sam Schroeder
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Krueger to receive Minutes and Communications a-l.
Motion carried on voice vote.

G. CONSENT AGENDA
(Prior to voting on the Consent Agenda, items on the Consent Agenda may be removed at the
request of any Alderman and placed immediately following action on the Consent Agenda. The
procedures to follow for the Consent Agenda are: (a) removal of items from Consent Agenda; and
(b) motion to approve the items from Consent Agenda.)
Minutes to approve:
1. Common Council, 2/18/2019
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Tom Grade to approve Consent Agenda item 1,
Common Council minutes, 2/18/2019.
Motion carried on voice vote.
H. ITEMS REMOVED FROM THE CONSENT AGENDA
None
I.

ACTION ITEMS
1. Accounts payable and payroll for the term of 2/21/2019—2/28/2019 in the amount of
$1,194,716.45
Moved by Ald. Nichols seconded by Ald. Krueger to approve accounts payable and payroll.
Motion carried on roll call 8-0.
2. Beverage Operators License Applications for the 2017-2019 licensing period.
Moved by Ald. Nichols seconded by Ald. Krueger to approve beverage operator’s license
application for the 2017-2019 licensing period as listed in memo dated 2/27/19.
Motion carried on roll call 8-0.
Mayor Merkes stated the Police Department is recommending denial of beverage operator’s
license application of Michelle Long since according to her probation rules she is not allowed to sell
any alcoholic substance or enter into any establishment that sells alcohol.
Michelle Long explained to the Council there is miscommunication with the Courts and her
probation office. She asked to hold off on taking any action until she can clear up the
miscommunication.
PC Styka stated the circumstances of Ms. Long’s case do not fall into the regular policy guideline.
It is reasonable to wait to hear from the Courts.
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Langdon to postpone action to March 18, 2019 meeting.
Motion carried on voice vote.

J. HELD OVER BUSINESS
K. ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
1. O-2-19 An Ordinance Amending Title 7, Chapter 2, Article B of the Code of Ordinances
(Operator’s License) (Introduced by Alderman Nichols; Recommended by Administration
Committee)
Moved by Ald. Nichols seconded by Ald. Krueger to approve O-2-19 An Ordinance Amending Title
7, Chapter 2, Article B of the Code of Ordinances (Operator’s License) (Introduced by Alderman
Nichols; Recommended by Administration Committee).
Motion carried on roll call 8-0.

Common Council Minutes
March 4, 2019
Page 3

DRAFT

2. R-4-19 A Resolution Approving an Affordable Housing Extension through Tax Increment
District No. 5 to Benefit Affordable Housing and improve Housing Stock within the City of
Menasha (Introduced by Mayor Merkes; Recommended by Administration Committee)
Moved by Ald. Nichols seconded by Ald. Krueger to approve R-4-19 A Resolution Approving an
Affordable Housing Extension through Tax increment District No. 5 to Benefit Affordable Housing
and improve Housing Stock within the City of Menasha (Introduced by Mayor Merkes;
Recommended by Administration Committee).

CDD Schroeder explained this Resolution directs the City’s portion of excess increment of TIF #5
to fund the Strong Neighborhoods Menasha Housing Program. The housing program will be
discussed at the Administration Committee.
Council members had concerns of funding the housing program before they had the opportunity to
act on the program.
Mayor Merkes stated the Council can vote to recess to the Administration Committee.
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Taylor to recess to Administration Committee.
Motion carried on voice vote.
Council recessed at 6:45 p.m.
Council reconvened at 7:55 p.m.
The motion on the floor: Moved by Ald. Nichols seconded by Ald. Krueger to approve R-4-19 A
Resolution Approving an Affordable Housing Extension through Tax increment District No. 5 to
Benefit Affordable Housing and improve Housing Stock within the City of Menasha (Introduced by
Mayor Merkes; Recommended by Administration Committee).
Motion carried on roll call 8-0.
3. R-5-19 A Resolution Terminating City of Menasha Tax Increment District (TID) No. 5,
Authorizing City Treasurer to Distribute Excess Increment to Overlying Taxing Districts, and
Approving the Distribution of Remainder Funds from TID No. 5 Closure to Strong
Neighborhoods Menasha Housing Program (Introduced by Mayor Merkes; Recommended by
Administration Committee)
Moved by Ald. Nichols seconded by Ald. Krueger to approve R-5-19 A Resolution Terminating City
of Menasha Tax Increment District (TID) No. 5, Authorizing City Treasurer to Distribute Excess
Increment to Overlying Taxing Districts, and Approving the Distribution of Remainder Funds from
TID No. 5 Closure to Strong Neighborhoods Menasha Housing Program (Introduced by Mayor
Merkes; Recommended by Administration Committee)
General discussion ensued on the amount that is expected to be applied to the housing program,
putting more funding toward debt relief, benefits of TIF #5 valuation, amount applied to tax relief,
amount needed to make housing program a success, how housing stock affects taxes, when next
TIF is scheduled to end, using funds in housing program to remediate lead from homes, what other
communities offer, promoting the housing program, use of code enforcement to clean up
properties, housing program helping improve properties on the main corridors of the City.
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Langdon to direct $200,000 of excess increment to the
general fund and the remainder to the Strong Neighborhoods Menasha Program.
Motion fails on roll call 4-5.
Ald. Sevenich, Langdon, Ted Grade, Ropella voted yes.
Ald. Nichols, Taylor, Krueger, Tom Grade, Mayor Merkes voted no.
Moved by Ald. Sevenich seconded by Ald. Ted Grade to direct $175,000 of excess increment to
the debt service fund and the remainder to the Strong Neighborhoods Menasha Program.
Motion carried on roll call 5-4.
Ald. Sevenich, Langdon, Ted Grade, Ropella, Mayor Merkes voted yes.
Ald. Nichols, Taylor, Krueger, Tom Grade voted no.

Common Council Minutes
March 4, 2019
Page 4

DRAFT

General discussion ensued on details of the program, the importance of a housing program,
and paying down the City’s debt.
Original motion as amended carried on roll call 8-0.
L. APPOINTMENTS
None
M. CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
None
N. PUBLIC COMMENTS ON ANY MATTER LISTED ON THE AGENDA
(five (5) minute time limit for each person)
No one spoke.
O. ADJOURNMENT
Moved by Ald. Taylor seconded by Ald. Tom Grade to adjourn at 8:45 p.m.
Motion carried on voice vote.
Deborah A. Galeazzi, WCMC
City Clerk

2019
Strong Neighborhoods Menasha
A Housing Renovation Initiative

Joe Stephenson
Associate Planner
City of Menasha
100 Main Street
Menasha, WI 54952

CONTENTS
HOUSING RENOVATION INITIATIVE ....................................................................................................2
Overview .......................................................................................................................................2
Goals and Objectives ......................................................................................................................2
Administration ...............................................................................................................................2
Program Summary .........................................................................................................................3
PROGRAM DETAILS ............................................................................................................................4
Paint and Restore Program .............................................................................................................4
Curb Appeal Program .....................................................................................................................5
Major Renovation Program ............................................................................................................6
First Time Homebuyer ....................................................................................................................7
Property Acquisition.......................................................................................................................8
ADDITIONAL PROGRAM DETAILS ...................................................................................................... 10
Income Requirements……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………10
Housing Requirements…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..10
Ineligible Properties ..................................................................................................................... 10
Eligible Projects ............................................................................................................................ 10
Labor ........................................................................................................................................... 11
Application Process ...................................................................................................................... 11
Housing Authority Approval………………………………………………………………………………………………………….11
Program Amendments ……..………………………………………………………………………………………………………….12
Marketing Funds…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..12
APPENDIX A ..................................................................................................................................... 13
APPENDIX B ..................................................................................................................................... 15

1|Page
INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION
Overview
Strong Neighborhoods Menasha is an initiative developed by the City of Menasha to help increase the
attractiveness and affordability of Menasha’s housing stock. Strong Neighborhoods aims to work with
citizens to invest in both them and their homes. Currently the City runs a Community Development
Block Grant (CDBG) program and a Paint and Restore Program. The Strong Neighborhoods Initiative will
combine these programs along with four new programs, Curb Appeal, Major Renovation, First Time
Homebuyer, and Property Acquisition. The new programs will be financed through a TIF financing law
known as the “Affordable Housing Extension” that allows the extension of a TIF to benefit a
municipalities housing stock. Funds for these programs will be available in the form of grants and loans.
Investing in the city’s housing stock will result in a ripple effect that will benefit everyone within the City.
Goals and Objectives
Strong Neighborhoods Menasha is aimed at updated the City’s residential homes. Two main goals have
been proposed; with a number of objectives to help us define what success looks like. These goals are
based upon the findings in Appendix (A).
Goal One: Increase the quality of Menasha’s housing stock.
1. Increase median property values within the city from $118,400 to $120,000 by 2025
2. See a downward trend in property survey violations.
Goal Two: Increase home ownership stability.
1. Return an average of two historically single family homes, that were converted to multi-family
homes, back to single family homes per year by 2025.
2. Decrease the number of home changes per year.
3. Increase the percentage of students who start in Menasha School District and graduate from
Menasha School District by 5% by 2025.
Administration
The Community Development Department will administer the Strong Neighborhoods Initiative.
Administration includes, but is not limited to, promoting and advertising the program, accepting and
reviewing completed applications, interpreting program guidelines, approving or disapproving property
acquisitions, and reviewing reimbursement requests.
Any grant funds that were allocated but not used in full by an approved applicant and/or any unused
funds within the calendar year will either be reprogramed to another grant application with an eligible
project(s) or will be carried over to the next calendar year's budget.
Approving or disapproving applicants, loans, and grants for Curb Appeal and Major Renovation will be
done on a quarterly basis. Qualified projects will be approved on a first come first serve basis. The
2|Page
INTRODUCTION

Menasha Housing Authority will have final determination on amount and who receives funds from the
Curb Appeal and Major Renovation programs.
The budget for the program will be set on an annual basis and be included in the City of Menasha’s
Operating Budget.
Program Summary
The Housing Initiative’s wide range of programs intend to rebuild the City’s aging housing stock and
increase home ownership and stability. The following is a list of programs administered through this
initiative:
1. Paint and Restore: Minor program to assist in the repair and replacement of various exterior
housing improvements. Administered by Community Development Department.
a. Up to $1,000 Grant.
b. 100% match for owner occupied – 200% match for non-owner occupied.
2. Curb Appeal: Major program to assist in the repair and replacement of various exterior housing
improvements. Administered by Community Development Department and Housing Authority
a. Up to $5,000 Grant – minimum $5,000 project.
b. 100% match for owner occupied – 200% match for non-owner occupied.
3. Major Renovation: Program designating funds for large exterior and interior home
improvement projects. Administered by the Community Development Department and the
Housing Authority.
a. Up to $15,000 Forgivable Loan – minimum $15,000 project.
b. 50% match for owner occupied homes.
c. Optional additional $15,000 for conversions from historically single family homes back
to a single unit.
4. First Time Homebuyer: A down payment assistance program for first time home buyers.
Administered by the Community Development Department.
a. Up to $5,000 forgivable loan.
5. Property Acquisition: Program designated to assist the City in the acquisition, demolition, or
rehabilitation of blighted properties. Administered by the Community Development Department
and the Common Council.
Other programs offered by the City of Menasha include the following:
1. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG): Low to Moderate Income (LMI) restricted
program to assist in the Repair and replacement of roofs, doors, windows, plumbing, electrical,
HVAC, siding, accessibility. Administered by Housing Specialist.
a. Deferred loan due at the time of sale
2. Lead Lateral Replacement: Program designed to assist property owners in replacement of lead
laterals servicing the home. Administered by Menasha Utilities.
a. Up to $2,000 Grant
b. 33% match from property owner
3|Page
INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION

PROGRAM DETAILS
Paint and Restore Program
The paint and restore program is a grant program to help eligible single and two-family homes increase
the curb appeal of their home. The program is a matching grant program and will provide funds of up to
$1,000 for eligible expenses.
Home Type
Owner Occupied
Non-owner Occupied
Owner Occupied
Non-owner Occupied

Total Project Amount
$2,000
$3,000
$1,500
$1,500

City Grant
$1,000
$1,000
$750
$500

Private Match
$1,000
$2,000
$750
$1,000

A. Eligible Properties: Properties that meet the following criteria may apply for up to $1,000, 100%
matching for owner occupied and 200% for non-owner-occupied units:
a. Single Family or Two-Family Residence use properties.
b. Property owner or tenant cannot spend more than 30% of their gross monthly
household income on housing related expenses.
B. Ineligible Properties: See Additional Program Details
C. Eligible Projects: See Additional Program Details
D. Grant Guidelines:
a. The applicant must submit a completed application packet, including before photos,
prior to any work being completed in order to be considered for a Grant Program.
b. A project timeline must be submitted to the Community Development Department.
c. This program is a reimbursement grant. The applicant is required to pay all expenses
related to their approved project and then submit for reimbursement from the City.
d. Must provide 100% matching funds if owner occupied and 200% is non-owner occupied.
e. The homeowner must agree to obtain all necessary permits (e.g. building, plumbing,
electrical, roofing, permits, etc.).
f. All work must meet local, state and national standards including but not limited to lead
and asbestos.
g. For painting or staining projects applicants are required to scrape and prime all surfaces
prior to painting or staining. Photo documentation of the finished prep work is required.
h. Up to 10% of the total project grant reimbursement can be for trees and shrubs planted
in the front yard.
i. Projects must be substantially completed within six (6) months of loan approval.
E. Ineligible Grant Expenditures: Items/projects that are not eligible for reimbursement under the
Grant Program include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. The repair or replacement of dog houses or any other structure for animals.
b. Any interior projects to the primary building, detached garage, or accessory building.
c. Rental companies or other organizations may not use this program to reimburse their
own staff’s labor expenses to complete their project.

PROGRAM

4|Page
PROGRAM DETAILS

d. Materials that have been purchased or projects that are completed or underway prior
to issuance of a signed Contract for Services and Grant Award Letter by Community
Development Staff.
e. The purchasing of permanent equipment or tools (ladder, paint sprayers, etc.) is not an
eligible expense.
F. Reimbursement Procedures:
a. A completed Final Reimbursement Form/Worksheet. This form must include a
description of the proposed project(s) and the final cost for each project. Any items for
projects not listed on the Pre-Documentation Form are not considered for
reimbursement.
b. Copies of receipts/paid invoices showing proof of purchase of the approved/ completed
items/materials for each project. The applicant is required to mark on their receipt
which item(s) is/are being requested for reimbursement and what project they were for.
c. Final photo documentation of the complete project. (“After” Photos). Photos shall be
taken in a similar manner to the “Before” photos.
d. After the applicants submit all of the required information for reimbursement, the
Community Development Department shall review all information submitted to ensure
it is eligible for reimbursement and will determine the amount awarded, if any, to the
applicant.
e. Once the request is complete, copies are made of the reimbursement form and all
receipts and/or paid invoices are forwarded to the City of Menasha’s Finance
Department and the dollar amount to be reimbursed back to the applicant.
Curb Appeal Program
The curb appeal program is a grant program to help eligible single and two-family homes increase the
curb appeal of their home. The program is a matching grant program and will provide funds of up to
$5,000 for eligible expenses.

Home Type
Owner Occupied
Non-owner
Owner
Non-owner

Total Project
Amount
$5,000
$5,000
$15,000
$15,000

City Grant

Private Match

$2,500
$1,667
$5,000
$5,000

$2,500
$3,333
$10,000
$10,000

Eligible Landscape
Expenses
$250
$167.70
$500
$500

A. Eligible Properties: Properties that meet the following criteria may apply for up to $5,000 grant,
100% matching for owner occupied and 200% for non-owner-occupied units:
a. Single Family or Two-Family Residence use properties.
b. Property owner or tenant cannot spend more than 30% of their gross monthly
household income on housing related expenses.
c. Minimum project value of $5,000.
5|Page
PROGRAM

PROGRAM DETAILS

B.
C.
D.
E.
F.

Ineligible Properties: See Additional Program Details
Eligible Projects: See Additional Program Details
Grant Guidelines: See Grant Guidelines under Paint and Restore
Ineligible Grant Expenditures: See Ineligible Grant Expenditures under Paint and Restore
Reimbursement Procedures: See Reimbursement Procedures under Paint and Restore

Major Renovation Program
The Major Renovation Program will help eligible homes increase their value and assist with needed
upgrades. The program provides 200% matching funds in the form of a forgivable loan of up to $15,000.
Any project that reduces the number of units to one (1) is eligible for an additional $15,000 of funding.
The forgivable loans will act as a deferred second mortgage with no principal or payments due until the
sale of the house. If the applicant lives in the home for five (5) consecutive years the entire loan is
forgiven.
Total Project Amount
$15,000
$45,000
$30,000
$22,500

Conversion of Single Family
NO
YES
YES
NO

City Loan
$10,000
$30,000
$20,000
$15,000

Private Match
$5,000
$15,000
$10,000
$7,500

A. Eligible Properties: Properties that meet the following criteria may apply for the Major
Renovation Program:
a. Single Family or Two-Family Residence use properties
b. Homes that are or will be owner occupied within one (1) year of loan distribution.
c. Property owner cannot spend more than 30% of their gross monthly household income
on housing related expenses.
d. Minimum project value of $15,000.
B. Ineligible Properties: See Additional Program Details
C. Eligible Projects: See Additional Program Details
D. Loan Guidelines:
a. The applicant must submit a completed application packet, including before photos,
prior to any work being completed in order to be considered for a Major Renovation
Program loan.
b. A project timeline must be submitted to the Community Development Department.
c. Loans will consist of a 0% interest over the life of the loan, and act as a deferred second
mortgage. After five consecutive years of living in the home that received the loan
funds, the loan will be 100% forgiven.
d. If the property owner sells before the five year time period or is no longer the primary
place of residence, the loan is required to be paid back in full.

6|Page
PROGRAM DETAILS

e. Properties may receive a loan, not to exceed $15,000 for home improvements and
$30,000 for home improvements that reduce the number of livable units to one (1) on
an existing multi-unit property.
f. The homeowner must agree to obtain all necessary permits (e.g. building, plumbing,
electrical, roofing, permits, etc.).
g. All work must meet local, state and national standards including but not limited to lead
and asbestos.
h. The loan can be transferred to a new owner one (1) time over the life of the loan and
must be transferred within one (1) year of loan distribution. If an individual does not use
the home as their primary residence after the one (1) year period the loan is required to
be paid back in full.
i. Projects must be substantially completed within six (6) months of loan approval.
G. Ineligible Loan Expenditures: Items/projects that are not eligible for reimbursement under the
Program include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. The repair or replacement of dog houses or any other structure for animals.
b. Any interior projects to the detached garage or accessory building.
c. Rental companies or other organizations may not use this program to reimburse their
own staff’s labor expenses to complete their project.
d. Materials that have been purchased or projects that are completed or underway prior
to issuance of a signed Contract for Services and Award Letter by Community
Development Staff.
e. The purchasing of permanent equipment or tools (ladder, paint sprayers, etc.) is not an
eligible expense.
f. Proposed projects that are solely demolition.
g. Project costs that demolish a structure or part of a structure and do not replace the
structure in kind to protect the character of the home and neighborhood.

First Time Homebuyer
First Time Homebuyer program is an incentive that provides first time homebuyers with down payment
assistance. The incentive will be provided in the form of a forgivable loan of up to $5,000. The loan will
accrue no interest and after five (5) consecutive years of living in the home the loan will be 100%
forgiven.
A. Eligible Properties:
a. Owner occupied homes.
b. Individuals purchasing their first home.
c. Property owner cannot spend more than 30% of their gross monthly household income
on housing related expenses.
d. Single Family properties.
B. Ineligible Properties: See Additional Program Details
C. Loan Guidelines:
7|Page
PROGRAM DETAILS

a. The applicant must submit a completed application packet.
b. Loans will consist of a 0% interest over the life of the loan, and act as a deferred second
mortgage. After five consecutive years of living in the home that received the loan
funds, the loan will be 100% forgiven.
c. The individual who received the loan must use the property as their primary place of
residency.
d. If the property owner sells before the five year time period or is no longer the primary
place of residence, the loan is required to be paid back in full.
e. The loan can be paid in full or in part at any time before the sale of the home.
f. Properties may receive a loan, not to exceed $5,000.
g. Individuals employed by the City of Menasha that choose to relocate within the City’s
Municipal boundaries qualify for the first time homebuyer program regardless of if the
home they are purchasing is their first home or not. Any home purchased in this manner
must be an existing single family home.
Property Acquisition
The Property Acquisition Program is a tool the City of Menasha can use to help remove blighted
properties within the city. The intent of the property acquisition program is to acquire strategically
located or blighted properties. The acquired properties would then be demolished or sold to a qualified
contractor that would work with the City of Menasha to rehabilitate the property. All costs associated
with acquiring the property and rehabilitating the site is eligible under this program.
A. Eligible Properties: Properties deemed eligible by the Community Development Director shall
be presented to the Menasha Common Council. It is the discretion of the Menasha Common
Council on which properties to acquire. Properties that meet the following criteria may be
considered by the Menasha Common Council for acquisition through the Property Acquisition
Policy:
a. Any properties that is blighted or in disrepair.
b. Properties that present an economic benefit to acquire.
c. Properties, that when acquired, will further the goals of the City of Menasha
Comprehensive Plan.
d. Properties, that when acquired, will further the goals of the City of Menasha Downtown
Vision Plan.
e. Properties that have an active raze order.
f. Any property that will benefit the City of Menasha’s housing stock.
B. Eligible Expenditures:
a. Property acquisition.
b. Demolishing/razing costs.
c. Costs associated with the sale of a property.
d. Costs associated with the maintenance of a property.
e. Utility costs.

8|Page
PROGRAM DETAILS

f.

Any costs associated with ensuring the house are not a health or sanitation risk,
including but not limited to: asbestos removal, well abatement, removal of hazardous
material, and lead removal.
g. Safety costs.
h. Bringing non-compliant features up to code.

9|Page
PROGRAM DETAILS

ADDITIONAL PROGRAM DETAILS
Income Requirements
No loan or grant shall be given to an individual who does not meet the state requirement of affordable
housing as defined in section 66.1105(2) (ab). No more than 30% of the household’s gross monthly
income can be spent on housing related expenses. Housing related expenses include: mortgages,
property taxes and home insurance. ($5,000 Gross Monthly Household Income = $1,500 maximum
amount spent on housing costs)
Housing Standards
In order to maintain the historic character and quality of Menasha’s older homes, all houses that use
program funds must abide by the guidelines set forth in Appendix (B).
Ineligible Properties
A property which has any one or more of the following conditions is ineligible for the rehabilitation
program:
A. A property is not located within the corporate limits of the City of Menasha.
B. Any property where the owner of that property is delinquent on any debt it owes to the City of
Menasha.
C. Properties owned in part or in whole by a tax exempt entity.
D. A property that has an open or issued Correction Notice. Applications that are submitted for
projects will close a Correction Notice may be considered on a case by case basis.
E. Property that has received past housing funds, excluding the Community Development Block
Grant Program, in the previous 5 years or has a Major Housing Renovation Loan open with the
City of Menasha.
Eligible Projects
Eligible items for include, but are not limited to, the following:
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.

Bringing non-compliance features up to code.
Replacing the roof.
Repair/Replacing windows.
Exterior masonry repair/replace.
Front porch repair.
Replace/ repair existing siding.
Install guards and handrails.
Paving of driveway.
Replace, repair, or install garage.
Demolition and removal of structures deemed dilapidated by the City Building Inspector as part
of a larger project.
10 | P a g e
ADDITIONAL PROGRAM DETAILS

K. Repair, replacement, or installation of fences.
L. Repair or replacement of gutters or trim.
M. Repair or replacement of soffit and fascia.
N. Lead and asbestos remediation.
O. Shrubs and Trees within the front yard (not to exceed 10% of total project reimbursement).
P. Other projects may be eligible for reimbursement upon approval of the Community
Development Director.
Q. Additions or added architectural features that will enhance the character of the home.
R. Additional Projects Permitted for Major Renovation:
a. Foundation repair.
b. Interior Remodel
c. Upgrading electrical.
d. Upgrading plumbing.
e. Upgrading mechanical systems.
Labor
Only professional labor can be claimed for reimbursement. Professional labor is considered work done
by an individual who is trained and engaged in such work for a career. All work must meet the housing
standards set forth in Appendix (B).
Application Process
The Community Development Department shall ensure a complete application is submitted and then
will process them.
A. Administration and Approval:
a. Paint and Restore – Community Development Department review and approval
b. Curb Appeal – Community Development Department review and Housing Authority
Approval on a quarterly basis
c. Major Renovation – Community Development Department review and Housing
Authority Approval on a quarterly basis
d. First Time Homebuyer – Community Development Department review and approval
B. A complete Pre-Documentation project Form. For renovation projects, this Form must include
an itemized description of the proposed project and an estimated cost for each item. Any item
not listed on the worksheet will not be considered for reimbursement or a loan. If the project is
being completed by a contractor, a copy of their estimate to complete the work must be
attached.
C. Submit a timeline outlining when the project will be completed.
D. A completed W-9 Form. A completed W-9 form must be completed and submitted in order to
be eligible for the program.
E. The Community Development Department determines whether the applicant owes money to
the City and if there are any Correction Notices on the property.
11 | P a g e
ADDITIONAL PROGRAM DETAILS

F. It is anticipated that an applicant will receive a response whether they are eligible or ineligible
for the Program within 30 days from the date received.
G. Before photos of the proposed project. Items will not be considered if before photos are not
submitted.
H. A signed Contract for Services Form. Submit a signed Contract for Services Form. If approved, a
signed copy of the Contract from the City will be sent back to the applicant.
I. Additional Requirements for Loan Programs:
a. Three (3) recent consecutive months of paycheck stubs.
b. Last one (1) year full tax return (federal) and W2s and 1099s.
c. Recent 6 months checking/savings statements and recent retirement/financial asset
statements.
d. Most recent mortgage loan statement (if any) and homeowner’s insurance policy
coverage page. Along with a statement of all current debt.
Housing Authority Approval
The Housing Authority on a quarterly basis shall review and approve all applications for the Curb Appeal
and Major Renovation Programs. The Community Development Department will make a
recommendation to the Housing Authority on all projects. The recommendation will be considered by
the Housing Authority for approval or denial of the project. The following criteria will be taken into
consideration by the Community Development Department and the Housing Authority:






The applicant’s financial history.
History of the applicant and/or listed contractors including past ordinance violations and/or
citations.
The quality of work performed by the applicant in any other applicable home renovation.
The Project quality.
The neighborhood impact of the project.

Program Amendments
Any update clarifying the intent of the document and/or process that does not drastically change the
program details or the programs intent may be made by the Community Development Department.
Those changes that would alter the programs intent, drastically change the review and approval process,
or alter a funding amount shall require consent of the Common Council.
Marketing Funds
It is the expressed intent of this initiative that up to $1,500 shall be budgeted per calendar year to
market and advertise the initiative. The Community Development Department will determine how best
to use the budgeted marketing funds to promote the initiative.

12 | P a g e
ADDITIONAL PROGRAM DETAILS

APPENDIX A
A person’s home is their largest asset and thus the City’s housing stock is its largest asset. Menasha’s
housing stock varies widely in style, age, and value. Much of the City’s housing was built before 1950.
The median age of a home in Menasha is 1966. In fact, compared to our neighbors Menasha has the
second oldest housing stock. The City of Oshkosh had the oldest housing stock in the comparable City’s.
When comparing median housing value the City of Menasha also trends lower. Menasha’s median home
value is $118,400, the second lowest in the study group. Oshkosh has the lowest median, $116,900,
home value and De Pere has the highest, $167,400, in the study group.

Median Home Value
180000
160000
140000
120000
100000
80000
60000
40000
20000
0

Median Year Home Built
1990
1985
1980
1975
1970
1965
1960
1955
1950

The final metric gathered was rental percentage. Menasha’s rental percentage has remained fairly
steady since 2000 and the non-owner occupied ratio is not out of line with similar communities.
Menasha’s current rental rate is 38.5%. De Pere, Menasha, Ashwaubenon, and Oshkosh all have a rental
rate right around 40%. Appleton, Neenah, and Kaukauna have a rental rate around 33%. The State of
Wisconsin’s rental rate as a whole is 33%. A mix of homeowner and tenant occupied units is considered
healthy for a city. A rental rate of 35% is considered to be a healthy ratio for a city. While Menasha does
not have an inordinate number of tenant occupied units, it does have a significant concentration of
rental units in certain areas. Both the downtown and the north central part of the city have higher than
average rates.
Percent Housing Stock Rental Occupied
50.0
45.0
40.0
35.0
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0

The north central block group has an elevated rental
rate because a number of apartment complexes are
in this area. These apartment complexes artificially
elevate the regions rental rate. The second area with
an elevated rental rate is the downtown. This region
is split between three different block groups. The
rental rate in the downtown is the highest in the City
at 78%. While the city overall has only a slightly
elevated rental rate, these key areas of majority
tenant occupied units need to be addressed.

13 | P a g e
APPENDIX A

These issues must be addressed. Home quality
must be increased and rental rates in the center
city must be reduced. Menasha may have older
homes with lower home values but with proper
investment by the City, these homes can be fixed
up and become a healthy vibrant part of our
community and Menasha will become a place
every wants to live.

City of Menasha Rental Percent Since
2000
50.0
40.0
30.0
20.0
10.0

Menasha
Wisconsin

0.0

14 | P a g e
APPENDIX A

APPENDIX B
The City’s housing programs are primarily aimed at renovated existing homes. These homes have a
character that is unique and should be preserved and enhanced when at all possible. When a structure
is renovated, with the use of City of Menasha funds, the purpose of the renovation is not to make an old
house new but to improve or repair the existing features. The original home’s design, structure, and
style should be maintained when at all possible. The following is a design guideline to ensure that the
aesthetics of existing homes are not lost with renovation projects.
A. Siding:
 When existing wood siding exists it is preferred that the existing siding is maintained
opposed to replacing it with new siding.
 New siding shall be applied in a manner that preserves all existing distinguishing
architectural features and ornamentation.
 Width of new siding is consistent with the type, age and style of the house.
B. Brick and other Exterior Masonry:
 When at all possible, all existing exterior masonry will be preserved and repaired. Only
in cases of irreparable damage can the exterior masonry be removed.
 New masonry shall be applied in a manner that preserves all existing distinguishing
architectural features and ornamentation.
C. Porches:
 Existing porches will be maintained and repaired. In no case should a salvageable porch
be removed.
 Existing front porches will be maintained and repaired to original appearance and
condition. Salvageable front porches will not be removed.
D. Windows and Doors:
 The style and design of any new window or door should match the original.
 The removal of a window or door shall not be permitted unless the removal of the
window or door is vital to the completion of the project.
 The replacement of windows shall not destroy any distinguishing features or
architectural ornamentation.
 A new window or door may not be smaller than the existing window or door.
E. Outbuildings:
 Any outbuilding, shed, garage or other structure will conform in style and color to the
principal structure on the lot.

15 | P a g e
APPENDIX B

SUMMARY OF TENTATIVE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CITY OF MENASHA AND
WPPA/LEER LOCAL 602
February 25, 2019

1. Article IV (A) Wages:
2019: 2% wage increase effective 4/7/2019, 1% wage increase effective
10/6/2019
2020: 3% wage increase effective 12/29/2019
(Wage schedule listed in Exhibit 1)
2. Article IV (B)(4) Assignments: Removing the $200 paid annually to
officers engaged in the duties of CRT and Evidence Technician and
adding language to pay certified Wisconsin Tactical Instructors $200
annually.
3. Article IV (E) Vest Incentive: The current language which pays 1% to
officers who certify they have worn their body armor will be removed. In its
place, a voluntary physical fitness incentive will be created. Officers who
choose to participate in this incentive will be paid $1,400 upon successful
completion of the testing. Officers who have achieved full employment
status prior to 1/1/2019 will have the option to elect not to participate in the
program and if they certify they have worn their body armor during the
year will be paid $500. (Full language attached in Exhibit 2)
4. Article IV (F) Health Insurance:
2019: 8% of the health insurance premium
2020: 10% of the health insurance premium
5. Article V (A)(2) Compensatory Time: The maximum amount of time
which can be booked increases from 50 to 150 hours, with an annual carry
over cap of 50 hours.
6. Article VI (A) Fair Share: This section has been removed in its entirety
and a new section “Dues Deduction” has been created. (Full language in
Exhibit 3)

430 First Street ● Menasha, Wisconsin 54952-3143 ● Phone (920) 967-3500 ● Fax (920) 967-5145
www.menashapolice.org

SUMMARY OF TENTATIVE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CITY OF MENASHA AND
WPPA/LEER LOCAL 602
Page 2
7. Article VII Grievance Procedure: The timeframes throughout the
process have been changed to ten (10) days in each of the steps.
8. Article VII Arbitration: The timeframe has been changed from five (5)
days to ten (10) days.
9. Article XV Term of the Agreement: The agreement shall be in effect
from January 1, 2019 – December 31, 2020.

Accepted this ____ day of February 2019.
City of Menasha

WPPA/LEER Local 602

__________________________
(Name)

__________________________
(Name)

EXHIBIT 1
Pay Schedule

Step
Patrol Officers

1
2
3
4
5
6
OIC

Step
Patrol Officers

Patrol Officers

Monthly Pay
+2% Effective
04/07/2019
$4,313
$4,514
$4,968
$5,461
$5,963
$6,130
$6,283
Monthly Pay
1% Effective
10/06/2019

1
2
3
4
5
6
OIC

$4,356
$4,559
$5,018
$5,516
$6,023
$6,191
$6,346

Step

Monthly Pay
3% Effective
12/29/2019

1
2
3
4
5
6
OIC

$4,487
$4,696
$5,169
$5,681
$6,204
$6,377
$6,536

EXHIBIT 2
Physical Fitness Incentive
a. All Officers have the opportunity to participate in a physical fitness incentive program.
The testing will include the most current State of Wisconsin exit level for the Recruit
Academy in the areas of Pushups; Sit ups; and the one-and-a-half-mile run.
b. Officers who desire to participate in this program must indicated their willingness to
participate to the Chief of Police or designee in writing no later than January 31, of each
year.
c. Testing will take place in September of each year and all officer participating shall be
considered on duty.
d. The run course will be held on an outside track no smaller than 400meters.
e. Officer must meet the minimum requirement for each of the three events; pushups, sit
ups, mile and a half run in order to receive a lump sum payment of one thousand four
hundred dollars ($1,400.00), paid on the first pay check in December. This sum shall not
be added to base wages, nor shall it be included when calculating the hourly rate for
purposes of overtime, or the payout of any benefits at termination of employment.
f.

Should an officer fail to meet the minimum requirement in any area, they shall have the
ability to retest prior to November 30, at a date and time set by the Chief or his designee.
The officer must complete all three events, pushups, sit ups, and mile and a half run,
meeting the minimum requirement in each to qualify for the lump sum payment of
$1,400.00. This sum shall not be added to base wages, nor shall it be included when
calculating the hourly rate for purposes of overtime, or the payout of any benefits at
termination of employment.

g. Should an officer fail to meet the minimum requirement in any/all area(s) there shall be
no discipline to such officer.
h. Any officer on workman’s compensation and unable to perform the physical fitness
testing due to workman’s compensation restrictions shall be allowed to test as soon as
they are physically capable; this same testing shall be allowed to those employees with
non-work-related medical conditions which made them unable to perform the physical
fitness testing.
i.

Officer who have achieved full employment status prior to 1/1/2019 may elect to not
participate in this program, and instead certify by November 1st of each year that they
have worn their approved body armor over the past year. Officers who elect and certify
this option will receive a $500.00 payment on the first pay check in December of that
year. This sum shall not be added to base wages, nor shall it be included when
calculating the hourly rate for purposes of overtime, or the payout of any benefits at
termination of employment.

j.

Those officers assigned to plain clothes duty shall be required to wear the body armor
for all appropriate duties. The Chief of Police or his/her designee may grant exceptions
to this requirement.

EXHIBIT 3
Dues Deduction
1. The Employer agrees to deduct monthly dues in the amount certified by the
WPPA/LEER from the pay of employees who individually sign a dues deduction
authorization form provided by the Employer where the Employee is knowingly and
affirmatively consenting to the deduction of dues from the employee's paycheck,
including any Local Association dues which the employee has authorized to be
deducted in conjunction with the WPPA/LEER dues.
2. It shall be the employee's responsibility to sign the dues deduction authorization form
and provide the signed form to the Employer and Association no less than 30 days
prior to the date in which dues deductions are to commence.
3. The Employer shall deduct the combined dues amount each month for each
employee requesting such deduction, upon receipt of such form and shall remit the
total of such deductions, with a list of employees from whom such sums have been
deducted, to the WPPA/LEER or Local Association if applicable, in one lump sum not
later than the last day of each month.
4. Authorization of dues deduction by a member may be revoked upon notice in writing
to the Employer, WPPA or to the Local Association and with the understanding that
the deduction will cease as reasonably as practical after receipt of written notice of
revocation.
5. No employee shall be required to join the Association, but membership in the
Association shall be made available to all employees in the bargaining unit who
apply consistently with the either the WPPA or local Association Constitution and
Bylaws.
6. The Local agrees to notify the WPPA, Madison Office in writing of the name of any
new hire into the bargaining unit. No employee shall be denied membership because
of race, creed, color, sex or other legally protected class status.
7. It is expressly understood and agreed that WPPA/LEER will refund to the employer
or the employee involved any dues erroneously deducted by the employer and paid
to WPPA/LEER and/or the Local Association. WPPA/LEER shall indemnify and hold
the employer harmless against any and all third party claims, demands, suits, order,
judgments or any other forms of liability against or incurred by the Employer,
including all costs of defense and attorney’s fees, which may arise out of action
taken or not taken by the Employer's compliance with this Article. Provided that the
defense of any such claims, demands, suits or other forms of liability shall be
interpreted to preclude the Employer from participating in any legal proceedings
challenging the application or interpretation of the Article through representatives of
its own choosing and at its own expense

Date: 3/4/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/4/2019
Vendor Name
BAKER & TAYLOR INC

Check Check Date
Number
64109

Invoice Number

Account Number

Amount

Description

3/4/2019

2034245588

100-0601-551.30-14

272.75

Library Materials

3/4/2019

2034246076

100-0601-551.30-14

79.20

Library Materials

3/4/2019

2034270437

100-0601-551.30-14

56.22

Library Materials

3/4/2019

2034270780

100-0601-551.30-14

129.76

Library Materials

3/4/2019

2034279550

100-0601-551.30-14

3.14

Library Materials

3/4/2019

2034292121

100-0601-551.30-14

131.06

Library Materials

3/4/2019

2034293319

100-0601-551.30-14

45.32

Library Materials

3/4/2019

2034294919

100-0601-551.30-14

768.79

Library Materials

3/4/2019

2034300272

100-0601-551.30-14

1,037.55

Library Materials

3/4/2019

H25121450

100-0601-551.30-14

1,344.96

Library Materials

3/4/2019

H25181670

100-0601-551.30-14

75.57

Library Materials

3/4/2019

H25225270

100-0601-551.30-14

33.58

Library Materials

3/4/2019

H25744830

100-0601-551.30-14

405.18

Library Materials

3/4/2019

T98250850

100-0601-551.30-14

108.65

Library Materials

3/4/2019

T98649280

100-0601-551.30-14

17.99

Library Materials

Total for check: 64109
4,509.72
JOE BONGERS

64110

3/4/2019

BONGERS

100-0601-551.33-01

18.70

Reimbursement

100-0601-551.33-04

2.00

Reimbursement

Total for check: 64110
20.70
CENGAGE LEARNING - GALE

64111

3/4/2019

65836854

100-0601-551.30-14

31.19

Library Materials

3/4/2019

65897449

100-0601-551.30-14

47.20

Library Materials

66412106

100-0601-551.30-14

38.92

Library Materials

3/4/2019

Total for check: 64111
117.31
CENTER POINT LARGE PRINT

64112

3/4/2019

1660812

100-0601-551.30-14

231.30

Library Materials

3/4/2019

1664432

100-0601-551.30-14

42.54

Library Materials

Total for check: 64112
273.84

Page 1

Combined Page 1

Date: 3/4/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/4/2019
Vendor Name
DAVID DANIELS

Check Check Date
Number
64113

3/4/2019

Invoice Number
DANIELS

Account Number

Amount

100-0601-551.20-05

461.00

Description
Colossal Fossils

Total for check: 64113
461.00
DEMCO

64114

3/4/2019

6541208

100-0601-551.30-18

209.32

Library Supplies

3/4/2019

6551090

100-0601-551.30-18

241.67

Library Supplies

Total for check: 64114
450.99
EGGERT, JOYANN

64115

3/4/2019

EGGERT

100-0601-551.30-14

45.00

Material Return

Total for check: 64115
45.00
TOM HANNAH

64116

3/4/2019

HANNAH

100-0601-551.20-05

200.00

Irish Music Performance

Total for check: 64116
200.00
STEVE HEINER

64117

3/4/2019

HEINER

100-0601-551.20-05

150.00

Performance

Total for check: 64117
150.00
KITZ & PFEIL INC

64118

3/4/2019

17470

100-0601-551.30-13

41.27

Batteries

Total for check: 64118
41.27
KRUEGER, TANA

64119

3/4/2019

KRUEGER

100-0601-551.30-14

27.00

Materials Return

Total for check: 64119
27.00
VICKI LENZ

64120

3/4/2019

LENZ

100-0601-551.30-16

11.67

Reimbursement

23.94

Reimbursement

Total for check: 64120
35.61

Page 2

Combined Page 2

Date: 3/4/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/4/2019
Vendor Name
LIBRARY SUPPLY SOLUTIONS

Check Check Date
Number
64121

3/4/2019

Invoice Number
21086-9

Account Number

Amount

100-0601-551.30-18

1,032.00

Description
CD/DVD Overlays

Total for check: 64121
1,032.00
RON LINDBERG

64122

3/4/2019

LINDBERG

100-0601-551.20-05

300.00

Performer

Total for check: 64122
300.00
MANDERFIELD'S HOME BAKERY

64123

3/4/2019

516535

100-0601-551.30-16

15.00

Cookies

Total for check: 64123
15.00
MCGUIRE, JENNIFER

64124

3/4/2019

MCGUIRE

100-0601-551.30-14

56.10

Materials Return

Total for check: 64124
56.10
MIDWEST TAPE

64125

3/4/2019

096825594

100-0601-551.30-14

156.19

Library Materials

3/4/2019

096825667

100-0601-551.30-14

59.99

Library Materials

3/4/2019

096856742

100-0601-551.30-14

4.49

Library Materials

3/4/2019

096856744

100-0601-551.30-14

71.20

Library Materials

3/4/2019

096916155

100-0601-551.30-14

63.73

Library Materials

Total for check: 64125
355.60
MINITEX

64126

3/4/2019

97497

100-0601-551.30-18

575.00

Library Materials

Total for check: 64126
575.00
MBM

64127

3/4/2019
3/4/2019

IN362576

100-0601-551.24-04

120.04

Contract

IN364341

100-0601-551.24-04

127.45

Contract

Total for check: 64127
247.49
ROOSTER DREAMS VISUAL ARTS

64128

3/4/2019

ROOSTER DREAMS 100-0601-551.20-05

220.00

Art Display

Total for check: 64128
220.00

Page 3

Combined Page 3

Date: 3/4/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/4/2019
Vendor Name

Check Check Date
Number

SERVICEMASTER BUILDING MAINTENANCE 64129

3/4/2019

Invoice Number
29318

Account Number

Amount

100-0601-551.20-01

1,635.00

Description
Janitorial Contract

Total for check: 64129
1,635.00
STAPLES BUSINESS ADVANTAGE

64130

3/4/2019

80531550536

100-0601-551.30-10

111.01

Office Supplies

Total for check: 64130
111.01
SYNCB/AMAZON

64132

3/4/2019

438738574889

100-0601-551.30-10

45.01

100-0601-551.30-14

9.49

Supplies
Library Materials

3/4/2019

453445485948

100-0601-551.30-14

(1.67)

Library Materials

3/4/2019

458685384666

100-0601-551.30-14

74.08

Library Materials

3/4/2019

465684739897

100-0601-551.30-10

30.89

Supplies

100-0601-551.30-14

23.76

Library Materials

3/4/2019

468757547555

100-0601-551.30-14

47.45

Library Materials

3/4/2019

476954483593

100-0601-551.30-14

468.69

Library Materials

3/4/2019

493698736796

100-0601-551.30-14

159.98

Library Materials

3/4/2019

583893367833

100-0601-551.30-14

(0.37)

Library Materials

3/4/2019

667645356984

100-0601-551.30-14

94.90

Library Materials

3/4/2019

677756667764

100-0601-551.30-14

32.00

Library Materials

3/4/2019

683938779469

100-0601-551.30-14

21.95

Library Materials

3/4/2019

7388863796795

100-0601-551.30-14

(74.00)

Library Materials

3/4/2019

749863943663

100-0601-551.30-14

24.95

Library Materials

3/4/2019

764659457664

100-0601-551.30-14

(0.11)

Library Materials

3/4/2019

764763467847

100-0601-551.30-14

15.00

Library Materials

777389777839

100-0601-551.30-14

116.00

Library Materials

3/4/2019

CREDIT

CREDIT

CREDIT
CREDIT

Total for check: 64132
1,088.00
UNIQUE MANAGEMENT SERVICES INC

64133

3/4/2019

495846

100-0000-441.19-00

259.55

Collection Agency Fees

Total for check: 64133
259.55

Page 4

Combined Page 4

Date: 3/4/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/4/2019
Vendor Name
US BANK EQUIPMENT FINANCE

Check Check Date
Number
64134

3/4/2019

Invoice Number
378081384

Account Number

Amount

100-0601-551.24-04

513.46

Description
Contract

2/10/19-3/10/19

Total for check: 64134
513.46
WINNEFOX AUTOMATED LIBRARY SYSTEM 64135

3/4/2019

WALS1087

100-0601-551.30-11

83.07

Dec 2018 Unique

Total for check: 64135
83.07

12,823.72

Page 5

Combined Page 5

Date: 3/7/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/7/2019
Vendor Name
ACCURATE

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64136

3/7/2019

Amount

Description

1901624

731-1022-541.30-18

49.36

Step Drill

3/7/2019

1901668

731-1022-541.38-04

139.16

Brake Rotor/Pads

3/7/2019

1901822

731-1022-541.30-18

306.80

Supplies

3/7/2019

1901888

100-1016-543.30-18

17.48

Shears

Total for check: 64136
512.80
ALL-LIFT SYSTEMS INC

64137

3/7/2019

0401445-IN

731-1022-541.21-06

371.00

Annual Inspection

Total for check: 64137
371.00
CITY OF APPLETON

64138

3/7/2019

1530

100-0918-531.21-06

500.00

Emergency Planning

January

3/7/2019

1581

100-0918-531.21-06

500.00

Emergency Planning

February

3/7/2019

1611

470-1003-541.82-02

1,243.74

Street Repair-Valley Rd

3/7/2019

1615

100-1012-541.22-03

251.71

Street Lighting Costs

11/22/17-11/7/18

Total for check: 64138
2,495.45
ASSOCIATED APPRAISAL CONSULTANTS

64139

3/7/2019

141131

100-0402-513.21-09
100-0402-513.30-11

5,000.00

March Assess SVCS

61.66

Internet Posting Parcels

8.40

Postage

Total for check: 64139
5,070.06
AYRES ASSOCIATES INC

64140

3/7/2019
3/7/2019

179022

470-0703-553.82-02

5,357.60

Pro. Srvc. thru 1/26/19 Jefferson Park

179392

100-0703-553.21-02

4,793.40

Pro. Srvc. thru 2/23/19 Jefferson Park

Total for check: 64140
10,151.00
BECK ELECTRIC INC

64141

3/7/2019

F2719-COM-ED-1

100-1008-541.24-04

290.63

Traffic Light-3rd St

Total for check: 64141
290.63
BERGSTROM

64142

3/7/2019

54077

731-1022-541.38-03

22.31

Switch Asy

Page 1

Combined Page 6

Date: 3/7/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/7/2019
Vendor Name
BERGSTROM...

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64142...

3/7/2019

54126

731-1022-541.38-04

Amount
177.13

Description
Belt/Tensioner

Total for check: 64142
199.44
BMI

64143

3/7/2019

2392568

100-0702-552.32-01

319.76

License

Total for check: 64143
319.76
CASPERS TRUCK EQUIPMENT INC

64144

3/7/2019

0035359-IN

731-1022-541.38-03

121.44

Clutch

3/7/2019

0035431-IN

731-1022-541.38-04

15.75

Motor Relay Kit

Total for check: 64144
137.19
CNA SURETY DIRECT BILL

64145

3/7/2019

CNA SURETY

100-0801-521.32-01

30.00

Notary Commission

Chuck Sahr

Total for check: 64145
30.00
CORRE INC

64146

3/7/2019

5499

485-0703-553.21-02

3,185.00

Province Trail Services 1/1/19-1/31/19

Total for check: 64146
3,185.00
COX, GERALD

64147

3/7/2019

COX

100-1006-541.30-18

50.00

Mailbox Damage

1419 Stadler Ct

Total for check: 64147
50.00
KORTNEY DAHM

64148

3/7/2019

DAHM

100-0903-531.33-01

26.18

Reimbursement

Total for check: 64148
26.18
ECS MIDWEST LLC

64149

3/7/2019

712720

100-0703-553.21-02

1,135.00

Engineering

Total for check: 64149
1,135.00
JFTCO INC

64150

3/7/2019

C185189

731-1022-541.38-03

731.91

Cover/Strip-Wear/Plate

3/7/2019

C187319

731-1022-541.38-03

225.30

Locknut/Screw/Washer

Page 2

Combined Page 7

Date: 3/7/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/7/2019
Vendor Name
JFTCO INC...

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64150...

3/7/2019

C189311

731-1022-541.38-03

Amount
523.68

Description
Strip Wear

Total for check: 64150
1,480.89
FACTORY MOTOR PARTS CO

64151

3/7/2019

18-1749965

731-1022-541.38-03

(16.00)

Credit

3/7/2019

18-1750002

731-1022-541.38-03

442.31

Filters

3/7/2019

18-1750201

731-1022-541.38-03

15.26

Filters

3/7/2019

18-1750611

731-1022-541.38-03

(469.86)

Credit

3/7/2019

18-Z16421

731-1022-541.38-03

(171.75)

Credit

3/7/2019

48-579533

731-1022-541.38-03

698.68

Parts

3/7/2019

50-2289233

731-1022-541.38-03

10.22

Filter

Total for check: 64151
508.86
FERGUSON ENTERPRISES #1550

64152

3/7/2019

4871551

470-0703-553.82-01

2,637.76

3/7/2019

4894121

100-0801-521.30-18

151.47

Pipe

4920316

470-0703-553.82-02

566.09

Parts

3/7/2019

Parts/Smith Park

Total for check: 64152
3,355.32
FOX CROSSING UTILITIES

64153

3/7/2019

127-65515

100-0703-553.22-06

27.57

Stormwater

10/15/18-1/15/19

Total for check: 64153
27.57
FOX CROSSING, VILLAGE OF

64154

3/7/2019

TAX BILL CHGS

100-0000-201.06-00

25,971.22

Delinquent Charges

Tax Bill

Total for check: 64154
25,971.22
FOX VALLEY TECHNICAL COLLEGE

64155

3/7/2019

TPB0000506043

100-0801-521.34-02

1,106.00

Trainings

Total for check: 64155
1,106.00
GRAINGER INC

64156

3/7/2019

9071102132

100-0801-521.24-03

244.65

Thermostat

Total for check: 64156
244.65

Page 3

Combined Page 8

Date: 3/7/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/7/2019
Vendor Name
GREEN BAY PRESSURE SYSTEMS LLC

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64157

3/7/2019

12372

731-1022-541.30-18

Amount
385.00

Description
Truck Shine

Total for check: 64157
385.00
GUSTMAN CHEVROLET SALES INC

64158

3/7/2019

49166

731-1022-541.38-03

14.84

Resistor

3/7/2019

49186

731-1022-541.38-03

144.53

Thermos/Glow

Total for check: 64158
159.37
HEYRMAN& GREEN BAY BLUE

64159

3/7/2019

949555

100-0801-521.29-01

281.00

Abandoned Vehicle Sticker

Total for check: 64159
281.00
HOME DEPOT CREDIT SERVICES

64160

3/7/2019

2114223

731-1022-541.30-18

37.90

Park Tools

3/7/2019

6082916

100-1008-541.30-18

19.97

Marking Wand

Total for check: 64160
57.87
KRISTINE JACOBSEN

64161

3/7/2019

JACOBSEN

100-0903-531.33-01

123.20

Reimbursement

100-0903-531.33-03

15.98

Reimbursement

Total for check: 64161
139.18
JX ENTERPRISES INC

64162

3/7/2019

2427304P

731-1022-541.38-03

188.29

Pipe

3/7/2019

2427377P

731-1022-541.38-03

(82.99)

Strap

CREDIT

Total for check: 64162
105.30
CHAD KOLASINSKI

64163

3/7/2019

KOLASINSKI

100-1001-514.34-02

80.55

C.E.Training

601-1020-543.34-02

183.60

Plumber License Renewal

731-1022-541.34-02

80.55

C.E.Training

Total for check: 64163
344.70

Page 4

Combined Page 9

Date: 3/7/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/7/2019
Vendor Name
KUNDINGER INC

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64164

3/7/2019

50526987

731-1022-541.38-03

Amount
35.93

Description
Elbow

Total for check: 64164
35.93
LAKE PARK VILLAS HOMEOWNERS ASSN

64165

3/7/2019

LAKE PARK VILLA 501-0304-562.32-01

759.38

Common Area Expenses

Feb

438.17

Common Area Expenses

Jan

Total for check: 64165
1,197.55
LEVENHAGEN OIL CORPORATION

64166

3/7/2019

067431A-IN

100-0000-131.00-00

19,149.79

Fuel

Total for check: 64166
19,149.79
M-B COMPANIES INC

64167

3/7/2019

235166

731-1022-541.38-03

280.23

Cylinder

Total for check: 64167
280.23
MATTHEWS TIRE & SERVICE CENTER

64168

3/7/2019

69154

731-1022-541.38-02

866.80

Tires

3/7/2019

69162

731-1022-541.38-02

133.13

Tires

3/7/2019

69167

731-1022-541.38-02

(133.13)

Credit

3/7/2019

69168

731-1022-541.38-02

64.99

Tires

Total for check: 64168
931.79
MENARDS-APPLETON EAST

64169

3/7/2019

55256

100-1001-514.24-03

11.00

Shelf Material

3/7/2019

55304

100-1008-541.30-18

86.42

Extension/Adapter/Impact

3/7/2019

55557

470-0703-553.82-01

56.46

Studs/Smith Park

Total for check: 64169
153.88
MENASHA NEENAH MUNICIPAL COURT

64170

3/7/2019

MNMC

100-0000-201.03-00

174.00

BOND

Report #19-0022

237.00

BOND

Report #19-0021

174.00

BOND

Report #18-0318

Total for check: 64170
585.00
MENASHA UTILITIES

64171

3/7/2019

MU

100-0000-123.00-00

8.57

Electric

1/7/19-2/8/19

Page 5

Combined Page 10

Date: 3/7/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/7/2019
Vendor Name
MENASHA UTILITIES...

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64171...

3/7/2019...

3/7/2019

MU...

TAXBILLCHGS

Amount

Description

100-0703-553.22-03

194.02

Electric

1/7/19-2/8/19

100-0703-553.22-05

218.74

Water

1/7/19-2/8/19

100-0703-553.22-06

184.81

Storm

1/7/19-2/8/19

100-1008-541.22-03

207.10

Electric

1/7/19-2/8/19

100-1012-541.22-03

13.43

Electric

1/7/19-2/8/19

601-1020-543.22-03

52.36

Electric

1/7/19-2/8/19

731-1022-541.22-03

56.27

Electric

1/7/19-2/8/19

100-0000-201.05-00

57,647.56

Delinquent Charges

Tax Bill

Total for check: 64171
58,582.86
MORTON SAFETY

64172

3/7/2019

191681-00

731-1022-541.30-18

98.64

Eyewear

Total for check: 64172
98.64
N&M AUTO SUPPLY

64173

3/7/2019

666307

731-1022-541.38-03

45.94

Belt

3/7/2019

666451

731-1022-541.38-03

11.42

Switch

3/7/2019

667166

731-1022-541.38-03

61.33

Fuse Holder/Solenoid

3/7/2019

667781

731-1022-541.38-03

12.32

Boxed Capsules

3/7/2019

668239

731-1022-541.38-03

20.97

Motor Treatment Foam

3/7/2019

668484

731-1022-541.38-03

10.61

Weather Cap

Total for check: 64173
162.59
NEENAH-MENASHA SEWERAGE COMMISSION

64174

3/7/2019

2019-034

601-1021-543.25-01

47,586.92

March Wastewater

3/7/2019

2019-040

601-1021-543.25-01

14,583.00

March Interest & Debt

Total for check: 64174
62,169.92
NORTHERN PIPE EQUIPMENT INC

64175

3/7/2019

1138

601-1020-543.21-02

22,829.40

2018 Annual Sewer

Televising Program

Total for check: 64175
22,829.40

Page 6

Combined Page 11

Date: 3/7/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/7/2019
Vendor Name
RAY O'HERRON CO INC

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64176

3/7/2019

1905696

100-0801-521.30-15

Amount
352.95

Description
Supersock Beanbag

Total for check: 64176
352.95
PACKER CITY INTL TRUCKS INC

64177

3/7/2019

X103069627:01

731-1022-541.38-03

152.56

3/7/2019

X103069627:02

731-1022-541.38-03

26.42

Filter

3/7/2019

X103070097:01

731-1022-541.38-03

9.82

Filters

3/7/2019

X103070097:02

731-1022-541.38-03

26.42

Filter

3/7/2019

X103070517:01

731-1022-541.38-03

78.20

Filters

3/7/2019

X103070686:01

731-1022-541.38-03

45.66

Filter

Filters/Fluid

Total for check: 64177
339.08
LINDA PALMBACH

64178

3/7/2019

PALMBACH

100-0903-531.33-01

22.99

Reimbursement

Total for check: 64178
22.99
MEGHAN PAULY

64179

3/7/2019

PAULY

100-0903-531.33-01

27.74

Reimbursement

100-0905-531.33-01

7.70

Reimbursement

Total for check: 64179
35.44
PLYMOUTH LUBRICANTS

64180

3/7/2019

6170492

731-1022-541.38-03

800.41

Pro Performance

Total for check: 64180
800.41
LIZ ROSIN

64181

3/7/2019

ROSIN

100-0903-531.33-01

17.49

Reimbursement

Total for check: 64181
17.49
HENRY SCHEIN INC

64182

3/7/2019

61893706

100-0916-531.30-18

206.39

Backorder Dental Brush

Total for check: 64182
206.39

Page 7

Combined Page 12

Date: 3/7/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/7/2019
Vendor Name
SECURIAN FINANCIAL GROUP INC

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number

Amount

64183

2,916.72

3/7/2019

POLICY 002832L

100-0000-204.07-00

Description
April Life Insurance

Total for check: 64183
2,916.72
SPEEDY METALS LLC

64184

3/7/2019

4774624-AP

100-0801-521.24-03

11.29

Steel Tube

Total for check: 64184
11.29
SPORTS GRAPHICS

64185

3/7/2019

0219-029

824-0807-521.30-15

133.95

PD K-9 Sweatshirts

Total for check: 64185
133.95
SUPERION LLC

64186

3/7/2019

227248

743-0403-513.24-04

2,806.00

Financial Software-March

Total for check: 64186
2,806.00
SWANK MOTION PICTURES INC

64187

3/7/2019

RG 1596743

100-0702-552.20-05

435.00

Movies

826-0702-552.30-18

870.00

Movies

Total for check: 64187
1,305.00
TAPCO

64188

3/7/2019

I627992

100-1008-541.30-18

1,857.00

3/7/2019

I628572

100-1008-541.30-18

840.00

Film/Sheeting
Sheeting

Total for check: 64188
2,697.00
TRUCK EQUIPMENT INC

64189

3/7/2019

834028-00

731-1022-541.38-03

226.32

3/7/2019

834028-01

731-1022-541.38-03

80.37

Screws/Spinners/Motors
Spinner

3/7/2019

836855-00

731-1022-541.38-03

248.47

Spinner Motor

Total for check: 64189
555.16
UNIFIRST CORPORATION

64190

3/7/2019

097 0277512

731-1022-541.20-01

291.65

Cleaning Service

Total for check: 64190
291.65
UNIFORM SHOPPE

64191

3/7/2019

285203

100-0801-521.19-03

177.95

Jacket

Page 8

Combined Page 13

Date: 3/7/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/7/2019
Vendor Name
UNIFORM SHOPPE...

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64191...

3/7/2019

285313

100-0801-521.19-03

Amount
52.95

Description
Emblems on Jacket

Total for check: 64191
230.90
WE ENERGIES

64192

3/7/2019

0000-310-958

100-0000-123.00-00

758.39

100-0601-551.22-04

2,303.01

Memorial Building
Library

1/13/19-2/11/19

100-0703-553.22-04

615.04

Parks

1/13/19-2/11/19

100-0704-552.22-04

65.64

Pool

1/13/19-2/11/19

100-0801-521.22-04

1,047.30

PD

1/13/19-2/11/19

100-0920-531.22-04

450.82

Senior Center

100-1001-514.22-04

934.07

City Hall

1/13/19-2/11/19

1/13/19-2/11/19

1/13/19-2/11/19

207-0707-552.22-04

58.94

Marina

1/13/19-2/11/19

731-1022-541.22-04

3,777.47

Garage

1/13/19-2/11/19

Street Lights

1/21 - 2/20

3/7/2019

3818-650-595

100-1012-541.22-03

1,042.02

3/7/2019

4410-797-129

100-0703-553.22-03

57.72

Electric-HWY 10 & 114

3/7/2019

7097-295-547

100-0703-553.22-03

15.90

Electric- North St

8247-844-693

100-0703-553.22-03

9.57

Gas-2170 Plank Rd

3/7/2019

12/27/18-1/29/19

1/7/19-2/5/19
1/14/19-2/12/19

Total for check: 64192
11,135.89
WIL-KIL PEST CONTROL

64193

3/7/2019

3573309

731-1022-541.20-07

72.25

Commercial Contract

Total for check: 64193
72.25
WINNEBAGO COUNTY CLERK OF COURTS

64194

3/7/2019

WINNCOCLERK

100-0000-201.03-00

435.00

BOND

Report #19-0558

285.00

BOND

Report #19-0516

Total for check: 64194
720.00
WINNEBAGO COUNTY TREASURER

64195

3/7/2019

14033

266-1029-543.25-01

1,671.00

3/7/2019

14079

100-0805-521.25-01

102.92

Freon Appliances

Microwaves

Stay-January

Total for check: 64195
1,773.92

Page 9

Combined Page 14

Date: 3/7/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/7/2019
Vendor Name
WISCONSIN DEPT OF FINANCIAL

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64196

3/7/2019

WPFI

100-0801-521.32-01

Amount
20.00

Description
Notary Commission

Chuck Sahr

Total for check: 64196
20.00
WISCONSIN DEPT OF JUSTICE

64197

3/7/2019

ACCT #G3228

100-0601-551.21-06

14.00

Transactions

2/1/19-2/28/19

Total for check: 64197
14.00
WLECHA

64198

3/7/2019

WLECHA

100-0801-521.32-01

35.00

Canine Handler Membership

Total for check: 64198
35.00
ZANDER PRESS INC

64199

3/7/2019

88794

100-0801-521.29-01

296.00

Envelopes

Total for check: 64199
296.00

251,107.50

Page 10

Combined Page 15

Date: 3/14/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/14/2019
Vendor Name
ACCURATE

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64200

Amount

Description

3/14/2019

1900048

731-1022-541.38-03

121.80

Trim Panel/Turbo Fl

3/14/2019

1901188

731-1022-541.30-15

33.75

Sockets

3/14/2019

1902107

731-1022-541.30-18

72.25

Lock/Heat Shrink

3/14/2019

1902176

731-1022-541.38-03

319.72

Hose/Elbow/Swivel

Total for check: 64200
547.52
APPLETON POLICE DEPARTMENT

64201

3/14/2019

APPLETON PD

100-0000-201.03-00

200.00

BOND

Report # 19-0631

Total for check: 64201
200.00
AUTOMATED COMFORT CONTROLS

64202

3/14/2019

23330

100-0601-551.24-03

3,096.77

3/14/2019

23371

100-0801-521.24-03

449.40

Service

23372

100-0601-551.24-03

649.25

Service on Boiler

3/14/2019

Compressor B Service

Library

Total for check: 64202
4,195.42
BATTERIES PLUS LLC

64203

3/14/2019

P11747774

100-0801-521.24-03

83.70

6V Lead

Total for check: 64203
83.70
COMPLETE OFFICE OF WISCONSIN

64204

3/14/2019

42885

100-0801-521.30-10

29.60

Office Supplies

Total for check: 64204
29.60
DAVEL ENGINEERING & ENVIRONMENT

64205

3/14/2019

3176105

100-0304-562.21-08

30.00

CSM Recording

140 Main

Total for check: 64205
30.00
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE

64206

3/14/2019

692132-000-5

100-0703-553.15-09

1,480.00

Befefit Charges

2/1/19-2/28/19

100-1019-552.15-09

739.72

Befefit Charges

2/1/19-2/28/19

Total for check: 64206
2,219.72

Page 1

Combined Page 16

Date: 3/14/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/14/2019
Vendor Name
DTN LLC

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number

Amount

64207

1,800.00

3/14/2019

5499421

743-0403-513.24-04

Description
Online Weather Service 3/20/19-3/19/20

Total for check: 64207
1,800.00
EARTHLINK BUSINESS

64208

3/14/2019

8026082

100-0101-511.22-01

11.98

Mayor

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

100-0201-512.22-01

7.59

Attorney

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

100-0202-512.22-01

19.19

Personnel

100-0203-512.22-01

15.78

Clerk

100-0301-523.22-01

17.33

Building Inspector

100-0304-562.22-01

28.40

Community Dev

100-0401-513.22-01

38.32

Finance

100-0402-513.22-01

7.81

Assessor

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

100-0502-522.22-01

47.56

EOC

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

100-0601-551.22-01

201.93

Library

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

100-0702-552.22-01

32.12

Recreation

100-0703-553.22-01

53.96

Parks

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19
Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19
Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19
Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19
Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

100-0704-552.22-01

16.77

Pool

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

100-0801-521.22-01

297.75

Police

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

100-0903-531.22-01

58.26

Health

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

100-0920-531.22-01

15.66

Senior

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

100-1001-514.22-01

86.02

City Hall

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

100-1002-541.22-01

50.04

Engineering

100-1008-541.22-01

4.52

Sign

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

207-0000-123.00-00

31.89

Marina

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

731-1022-541.22-01

30.83

Garage

743-0403-513.22-01

18.22

IT

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19
Phone 3/2/19-4/1/19

Total for check: 64208
1,091.93
FASTSIGNS OF APPLETON

64209

3/14/2019

A 115570

100-0801-521.30-10

64.33

Magnetics

Total for check: 64209
64.33

Page 2

Combined Page 17

Date: 3/14/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/14/2019
Vendor Name
FLATER, BRUCE

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64210

3/14/2019

FLATER

100-1006-541.30-18

Amount
50.00

Description
Mailbox Damage

Total for check: 64210
50.00
FORCE AMERICA DISTRIBUTING LLC

64211

3/14/2019

IN001-1316445

731-1022-541.38-03

548.05

Granular Feedback Kit

3/14/2019

IN001-1317488

731-1022-541.38-03

406.30

Sensor

Total for check: 64211
954.35
FOX CROSSING UTILITIES

64212

3/14/2019

ACCT# 127-16734

100-0701-533.22-06

77.58

Standby Water-Geneva Rd 11/15/18-2/15/19

3/14/2019

ACCT# 127-17360

100-0701-533.22-06

9.70

Standby Water

11/15/18-2/15/19

Total for check: 64212
87.28
GRAND CHUTE POLICE DEPARTMENT

64213

3/14/2019

GRANDCHUTEPD

100-0000-201.03-00

237.40

BOND

Report #19-0631

Total for check: 64213
237.40
GUNDERSON CLEANERS

64214

3/14/2019

705061

100-0801-521.30-13

36.39

Cleaning Service

Total for check: 64214
36.39
GUSTMAN CHEVROLET SALES INC

64215

3/14/2019

49236

731-1022-541.38-04

157.20

Harness/Hose

3/14/2019

49248

731-1022-541.38-03

130.51

Bezel

Total for check: 64215
287.71
HARRISON UTILITIES

64216

3/14/2019

001-0220-00

100-0703-553.22-05

101.99

Sewer/Water

Total for check: 64216
101.99
JX ENTERPRISES INC

64217

3/14/2019

2427735P

731-1022-541.38-03

19.77

Clamp

Total for check: 64217
19.77
KITZ & PFEIL INC

64219

3/14/2019

17421

100-1002-541.30-18

12.15

Flashlight

625-1002-541.30-18

4.04

Flashlight

Page 3

Combined Page 18

Date: 3/14/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/14/2019
Vendor Name
KITZ & PFEIL INC...

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64219...

Amount

Description

3/14/2019

17427

731-1022-541.30-18

3.22

Part

3/14/2019

17432

100-0801-521.30-15

17.09

Parts/CSO Equipment

3/14/2019

17433

731-1022-541.30-18

1.61

Misc Hardware

3/14/2019

17441

100-0601-551.24-03

12.85

Misc Hardware/Snowblower

3/14/2019

17468

100-0501-522.24-03

16.18

Misc Hardware

3/14/2019

17481

731-1022-541.38-03

7.51

Misc Hardware

3/14/2019

17542

731-1022-541.38-03

1.48

Nuts & Bolts

3/14/2019

17585

731-1022-541.38-03

0.85

Nuts & Bolts

3/14/2019

17638

100-0601-551.24-03

17.98

Wallboard/Outlets

100-0801-521.24-03

35.42

Wallboard/Misc Parts

100-1008-541.30-18

7.49

Cover/Traffic Lights

207-0707-552.24-03

20.97

Cover/Marina

Weatherstrip

3/14/2019

17678

100-0801-521.24-03

13.97

Misc Hardware

Hallway Project

3/14/2019

17680

100-0501-522.24-03

10.33

Caulk/Silicone

TV Outlet

3/14/2019

17713

100-1008-541.30-18

10.78

Hex Bit

3/14/2019

17729

100-0801-521.24-05

15.09

Rollers

3/14/2019

17747

100-0601-551.30-18

16.17

Tape

3/14/2019

17784

100-0801-521.24-03

12.77

Misc Hardware

601-1020-543.24-04

34.02

Misc Hardware

3/14/2019

17815

100-0801-521.24-05

19.76

Adhesive

3/14/2019

17863

100-0801-521.24-03

32.38

Paintbrushes

3/14/2019

17876

100-0801-521.30-15

17.70

Misc Hardware/Drill Bits

3/14/2019

17922

100-0801-521.24-03

15.91

Hardware/Corner Brace

3/14/2019

17923

100-0801-521.24-03

32.22

Misc Hardware/Drill Bit

3/14/2019

17931

470-0703-553.82-01

27.23

Smith Park Remodel

3/14/2019

17957

100-0703-553.30-18

6.00

Spray Paint

3/14/2019

17967

100-0801-521.24-03

5.93

Anchor/Patrol Rm Board

PD Lockers

Park Buoys

Total for check: 64219
429.10
KWIK TRIP INC

64220

3/14/2019

ACCT# 00244691

100-0801-521.38-01

156.28

Fuel

Total for check: 64220
156.28

Page 4

Combined Page 19

Date: 3/14/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/14/2019
Vendor Name
LB MED WASTE

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64221

3/14/2019

98418

100-0903-531.30-18

Amount
65.99

Description
30 Gal Box/ Bio-Waste

Total for check: 64221
65.99
MARCO TECHNOLOGIES LLC

64222

3/14/2019

CR392502

743-0403-513.24-04

(1,980.20)

CREDIT-Returned Parts

3/14/2019

INV6041003

743-0403-513.24-04

2,989.96

Firewall Maintenance

3/14/2019

INV6120315

743-0403-513.29-01

24.40

1/17/19-1/16/20

Finance Copy/Print Use 2/10/19-3/9/19

Total for check: 64222
1,034.16
MCMAHON

64223

3/14/2019

913348

625-1010-541.21-02

184.80

Stormwater Action Plan 12/30/18-2/2/19

Total for check: 64223
184.80
MCNEILUS TRUCK & MFG COMPANY

64224

3/14/2019

4283201

731-1022-541.38-03

12.60

Joysticks

Total for check: 64224
12.60
MEDICAL EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT ACCT

64225

3/14/2019

20190314

100-0000-202.08-00

17,614.17

PAYROLL SUMMARY

Total for check: 64225
17,614.17
MENARDS-APPLETON EAST

64226

3/14/2019

55857

470-0703-553.82-01

109.24

PVC/ Bracket/Valves

3/14/2019

55910

470-0703-553.82-01

68.40

PVC Pipe

Smith Park

3/14/2019

55922

470-0703-553.82-01

10.94

Durock/ Copper Tee

3/14/2019

56021

470-0703-553.82-01

72.81

Copper Pipe/Couple/Tee's Smith Park

Smith Park
Smith Park

Total for check: 64226
261.39
MENASHA NEENAH MUNICIPAL COURT

64227

3/14/2019

MNMC

100-0000-201.03-00

174.00

BOND

Rerport #19-0027

174.00

BOND

Rerport #19-0621

166.00

BOND

Rerport #19-0026

Total for check: 64227
514.00
MENASHA UTILITIES

64228

3/14/2019

4649

601-0401-513.25-02

19,135.28

Jan Sewer

625-0401-513.25-01

1,397.91

Jan Stormwater

Page 5

Combined Page 20

Date: 3/14/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/14/2019
Vendor Name
MENASHA UTILITIES...

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number

Amount

64228...

10,846.24

3/14/2019

ST LIGHTS

100-1012-541.22-03

Description
Feb Street Lighting

Total for check: 64228
31,379.43
MBM

64229

3/14/2019

IN326812

743-0403-513.29-01

201.76

Copier Contract

3/14/2019

IN337806

743-0403-513.29-01

270.49

Print Copy Use

8/26/18-9/25/18

3/14/2019

IN362870

743-0403-513.29-01

147.56

Copy/Print Use Jan.

1/1/19-1/31/19

3/14/2019

IN367168

743-0403-513.29-01

199.02

PD Copy/Printing

1/7-2/6

Total for check: 64229
818.83
MORTON SALT

64230

3/14/2019

5401791429

100-1006-541.30-18

13,562.92

Salt

3/14/2019

5401793072

100-1006-541.30-18

22,590.18

Salt

Total for check: 64230
36,153.10
CITY OF NEENAH

64231

3/14/2019

37018

743-0403-513.24-04

11,882.50

2018 Tax System Support

Total for check: 64231
11,882.50
NETWORK HEALTH SYSTEM INC

64232

3/14/2019

376699

100-0202-512.21-05

805.56

EAP Standard Service

First Quarter

Total for check: 64232
805.56
CURT PRELLWITZ

64233

3/14/2019

PRELLWITZ

743-0403-513.33-01

10.12

Mileage

Total for check: 64233
10.12
RUEKERT & MIELKE INC

64234

3/14/2019
3/14/2019

126651

601-1020-543.21-02

125.00

Monitoring Program

126652

601-1020-543.21-02

937.50

Sewer User Billing

Total for check: 64234
1,062.50
SERVICEMASTER BUILDING MAINTENANCE

64235

3/14/2019

29583

731-1022-541.20-01

825.00

Janitorial Contract

Total for check: 64235
825.00

Page 6

Combined Page 21

Date: 3/14/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/14/2019
Vendor Name
SHERWIN WILLIAMS CO

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64236

3/14/2019

8057-1

100-0704-552.30-18

Amount
195.00

Description
Paint

Total for check: 64236
195.00
STAPLES BUSINESS ADVANTAGE

64237

3/14/2019
3/14/2019

8053316008
8053316012

100-1002-541.30-18

161.79

625-1002-541.30-18

53.93

Office Supplies
Office Supplies

100-0203-512.30-10

36.86

Office Supplies

100-0204-512.30-10

12.34

Office Supplies

100-0304-562.30-10

19.49

Office Supplies

100-0405-513.30-10

40.16

Office Supplies

100-0702-552.30-10

27.27

Office Supplies

Total for check: 64237
351.84
SUPERIOR VISION INSURANCE PLAN

64238

3/14/2019

0000246638

100-0000-204.10-00

1,079.94

Vision Ins

Total for check: 64238
1,079.94
SYN-TECH SYSTEMS

64239

3/14/2019

184531

743-0403-513.24-04

550.00

Maintenance Agreement

Fuel System

Total for check: 64239
550.00
TAPCO

64240

3/14/2019

I629206

100-1008-541.24-04

708.93

Aluminum Pole

Total for check: 64240
708.93
UNIFIRST CORPORATION

64241

3/14/2019

097 0277945

731-1022-541.20-01

293.05

Cleaning Service

Total for check: 64241
293.05
WAHPC

64242

3/14/2019

WAHPC

100-0304-562.21-10

40.00

Historic Preservation

Membership

Total for check: 64242
40.00

Page 7

Combined Page 22

Date: 3/14/2019

AP Check Register
Check Date: 3/14/2019
Vendor Name
WIL-KIL PEST CONTROL

Check Check Date Invoice Number Account Number
Number
64243

3/14/2019

3573439

100-0703-553.20-07

Amount
49.75

Description
Commercial Contract

Total for check: 64243
49.75
WINNEBAGO COUNTY TREASURER

64244

3/14/2019

LOTTERY CREDIT 100-0000-201.03-00

473.46

Lottery Credit Charges Tax Bills

Total for check: 64244
473.46
WISCNET

64245

3/14/2019

13807

743-0403-513.21-04

750.00

Qtr 4 Internet Access

10/1/18-12/31/18

Total for check: 64245
750.00
WISCONSIN DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION

64246

3/14/2019

395-0000123037

470-1003-541.82-02

2,247.19

Broad St

12/31/18-1/31/19

Total for check: 64246
2,247.19
WISCONSIN SUPPORT COLLECTIONS

64247

3/14/2019

20190314

100-0000-202.03-00

1,008.99

PAYROLL SUMMARY

Total for check: 64247
1,008.99

122,994.79

Page 8

Combined Page 23

City of Menasha ● Office of the City Clerk

To:

Menasha Common Council

From: Stephanie Cheslock, Deputy Clerk
RE:

Beverage Operator License (Bartender) Applicants

Date:

3/4/2019

The below individuals have applied for a bartender license to serve, dispense and/or sell alcohol
at a licensed establishment within the City. They have all met the criteria under the “Guidelines
for Operator Licenses” approved by the Common Council. Therefore, staff is recommending the
following people be APPROVED for an Operator’s License for the 2017-2019 licensing period:
Destiny Wood

100 Main Street Suite 200● Menasha, Wisconsin 54952-3151 ● Phone (920) 967-3603 ● Fax (920) 967-5273
www.cityofmenasha-wi.gov

City of Menasha ● Office of the City Clerk

To:

Menasha Common Council

From: Stephanie Cheslock, Deputy Clerk
RE:

Beverage Operator License (Bartender) Applicants

Date:

3/14/2019

The following individual has applied for a bartender license to serve, dispense and/or sell
alcohol at a licensed establishment in the City. They have not met the criteria under the
“Guidelines for Operator Licenses” approved by the Common Council. Therefore, staff is
recommending the following person be DENIED an Operator’s License:
Michelle Long (postponed from 3/4/2019 meeting)

100 Main Street Suite 200● Menasha, Wisconsin 54952-3151 ● Phone (920) 967-3603 ● Fax (920) 967-5273
www.cityofmenasha-wi.gov

CITY OF MENASHA POLICY GUIDELINES FOR
OPERATOR LICENSES
1. Intent: It is the responsibility of the Menasha Police Chief to screen applications for
operators’ licenses (bartender licenses) for the City of Menasha. The following guidelines are
adopted in order to specify the reasons for denying, non-reviewing or revoking an operator’s
license and outlines the steps and considerations given, for any denials that are appealed to the
Menasha Common Council.
All applications for operators’ license applications are submitted to the Menasha Police
Department for a background check. The Menasha Police Chief makes the decision on licensing
by either accepting or rejecting the application.
Due to the discretionary nature of the alcohol beverage licensing
process, it is not possible to state every circumstance that may
result in approval of a license application and what circumstances
will result in approval of a license application. However, it is possible
to enumerate what will be considered in the decision-making and
what circumstances are more likely to result in the denial of a
license application.
Individuals granted an operator’s license must act in cooperation with law enforcement to
enforce the alcohol beverage laws, drunk driving laws, and assist with minimizing disturbances
of the peace and maintain the safety of the community. Therefore, individuals with a past history
of negative or uncooperative contacts with police agencies will be scrutinized.
It is with these goals in mind that these guidelines are adopted. Furthermore, to the extent that
Wis. Statutes Ch. 125 or Menasha City Ordinances provide additional grounds for denial,
suspension, revocation or non-renewal, the Police Chief may also rely on such provisions.
In the event an individual with an operator’s license is considered for non-renewal, suspension or
revocation, all offenses will be considered, the circumstances of which are substantially related
to the license regardless of whether some of the offenses occurred prior to the adoption of these
guidelines.
Upon request, a copy of these guidelines shall be provided to each person who applies for a
license.

Guidelines: What is meant by substantially related? The law does not specifically define
this term although there are many court decisions on the topic. The Wisconsin Supreme Court
has stated that the purpose of the test is to assess whether the tendencies and inclinations to
behave a certain way in a particular context are likely to reappear later in a related context, based
on the traits revealed. The “substantially related” test looks at the circumstances of an offense,
where it happened, when, what, etc. compared to the circumstances of the licensed activity.

Where does the licensed activity typically occur, when and what is involved in performing the
licensed activity, etc.
Examples of “substantially related” in the context of an operator’s license: There is a substantial
relationship between the illegal purchase, use and sale of controlled substances and engaging in
bartending, which involves the purchase and sale of a closely regulated substance. The same is
true for offenses involving alcohol, e.g. drunk driving, selling to underage, possession and/or
consuming as an underage, committing law violations while under the influence of alcohol or
drugs, etc.


Guideline 1. Provided the offense is substantially related to the circumstances of the
license activity, circumstances of the offense substantially relate to the circumstances of
the job or licensed activity, any person who has been convicted of any FELONY,
unless duly pardoned, does not qualify for an operator’s license. Sec. 125.04(5)(b), Wis.
Stats. (To the extent the other guidelines reference a specific offense; this guideline shall
apply if the offense constitutes a felony.)



Guideline 2. Provided the circumstances of the offense substantially relate to the
circumstances of the job or licensed activity, offense is substantially related to the
circumstances of the licensed activity, any person who has been convicted of or has a
current charge pending, for two (2) or more offenses within the last five (5) years or for
two (2) or more offenses, arising out of separate incidents, within the last five (5) years in
the following subcategories, does not qualify for an operator’s license:
o Violent crimes against the person of another, including but not limited to battery,
criminal disorderly conduct, sexual assault, injury by negligent use of a vehicle,
intimidation of a victim or witness.
o Crimes involving cooperation (or lack thereof) with law enforcement officials,
including but not limited to, resisting or obstructing a police officer, bribery of
public officers/employees, eluding police, bail jumping, hit and run, perjury, or
acts/threats of terrorism.
o Manufacturing, distributing, delivering a controlled substance or a controlled
substance analog; maintaining a drug trafficking place; possessing with intent to
manufacture, distribute, or deliver a controlled substance or a controlled substance
analog. Sec. 111.335(1)(c), Wis. Stats.



Guideline 3. Provided the circumstances of the offense substantially relate to the
circumstances of the job or licensed activity, offense is substantially related to
circumstances of the license activity, any person who has been convicted of or has a
current charge pending, for two (2) or more offenses, arising out of separate incidents,
within the last three (3) years in the following subcategories, does not qualify for an
operator’s license:
o Disorderly conduct, criminal damage to property, solicitation of prostitution or
other prostitutions-related offenses, wherein the offense involves an incident at a
place that is, or should have been licensed under Wis. Stat. Ch. 125.
o Alcohol beverage offenses (under Wis. Stat. Ch. 125 or Menasha City
Ordinances).

o Possessing a controlled substance, controlled substance analog without a valid
prescription, or possessing drug paraphernalia.
o Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicants or drugs.
o Operating a motor vehicle with a prohibited alcohol concentration (PAC) in
excess of .08% by weight.
o Open intoxicants in a public places or in a motor vehicle.
What is a habitual law offender? The term “habitual” refers to multiple convictions or pending
charges and could include an offender with two (2) offenses occurring within a relatively short
period of time. The term “offender” refers to a person with civil violations such as ordinance
convictions and/or misdemeanor convictions (or pending charges), which substantially relate to
the licensing activity. A legal opinion rendered by the League of Wisconsin Municipalities
states that a person with two drunk driving convictions within the last couple years would be
considered a habitual offender under the alcohol beverage licensing laws. Intoxicating Liquors #890
(1991). Some examples include:
o Two (2) or more offenses, each with a separate incident, within the immediately
preceding one (1) year.
o Three (3) or more offenses, each a separate incident, within the immediately
preceding five (5) years.
o Six (6) or more offenses, each a separate incident, within the preceding ten (10)
years.


Guideline 4. Applicants must truthfully and completely fill out applications:
O If an applicant provides false information on an application, that application shall
be denied and the applicant shall not be eligible to reapply for an operator license
for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial of such application.
O If the Police Chief determines that information was intentionally omitted from an
application, the application shall be denied and the applicant shall not be eligible
to reapply for an operator license for a period of one (1) year from the date of the
denial of such application.
O If the Police Chief determines that information was OMITTED from an
application due to inadvertence, mistake or excusable neglect, the Chief may
allow the applicant to submit a corrected application and recommend granting of
the license, if the applicant is otherwise qualified.



Guideline 5. Recommending approval of an operator’s license application for an
applicant who would otherwise be denied under these policy guidelines:
O The Common Council may approve an operator’s license application if the
application would otherwise be denied under this policy if the applicant presents
substantial, credible evidence of rehabilitation. Such evidence includes letters of
recommendation from Alcohol and Other Drug (“AODA”) counselors, probation
agents or other relevant service providers, other professional counselors,
certificates and/or letters confirming satisfactory completion of an AODA or other
relevant counseling program. Any such letters shall be on the letterhead of the
agency offering the recommendation in order for the letter to be considered
credible evidence of rehabilitation. Any evidence must be in the form of

documents submitted to the Common Council and may not be statements of the
applicant at the time of the hearing.
O The reason for any recommendation of approval of an operator’s license
application under this paragraph must be clearly stated in the record.


Guideline 6. If the Police Chief recommends denial of an operator’s license application,
the reasons for the denial must be clearly stated on the record and shall be consistent with
the criteria outlines above.

City of Menasha ● Administrative Services

MEMORANDUM

To:

City of Menasha Common Council

From:

Jennifer Sassman, Finance Manager

Date:

March 13, 2019

RE:

R-7-19 – Resolution to approve the cancellation of outstanding checks; and the
write –off of general uncollectible accounts receivables and delinquent personal
property tax receivables

BACKGROUND
As part of the year-end process, staff reviews outstanding checks, past due accounts
receivables, and delinquent personal property receivables; and requests that Council take action
on the following:
-Cancel outstanding accounts payable and payroll checks that were issued more than
one year ago,
-Adjust our accounting records to reflect the likelihood that we may not collect past due
accounts receivables, and
-Write-off delinquent general and personal property tax receivables.
ANALYSIS
Staff has established an annual process that is completed to maintain current records and
reflect the City’s financial position accurately. The details for each section are as follows:
Cancel Outstanding Checks -Per ATTACHMENT A, this recommendation includes $230.00 of
accounts payable checks. Please note that it is possible that the some of these checks have been
cashed but did not make it back through the federal banking system to be charged against our
accounts. However, staff does review the list and make contact with those payees with
outstanding check amounts greater than $100, as those are the ones that likely would not have
gotten held up in the federal banking system. Also, if at any time in the future, any of the checks
are presented for payment, the City will certainly honor them.

100 Main Street Suite 200● Menasha, Wisconsin 54952 ● Phone (920) 967-3630 ● Fax (920) 967-5271
www.cityofmenasha-wi.gov

General Accounts Receivable from 2012 and delinquent Personal Property Tax Receivables from
2011/2012 - Per ATTACHMENTS B and C, this recommendation includes $2,447.97 of general
accounts receivables from 2012, and $5,766.02 of personal property tax receivables from
2011/2012. Since these accounts receivables are no longer legally collectible, they need to be
removed from the City’s records.
FISCAL IMPACT
The fiscal impacts of this item are as follows: (1) Cancelled outstanding checks-the City will
increase its cash position by $230.00, (2) Write-off general accounts receivables of $2,447.97-no
financial impact as the allowance was made in a previous year, and (3) Write-off personal
property tax receivables of $5,766.02- the City will decrease its financial position in regard to
this write-off, acknowledging that the accounts are no longer collectible. Funds were budgeted
in the 2018 year for this purpose.
RECOMMENDATION
Staff recommends that Council authorize this resolution to execute this transaction as outlined.

Outstanding checks to be cancelled - 2018 Year-End
3/13/2019
Check #
57709
58484
59858

Check date
5/25/2017
8/10/2017
12/29/2017

Payee
Sam's Club
Brandon Rudolph
Becky Bauer

ATTACHMENT A

Purpose
Membership
Parking Ticket Overpayment
Library Material Reimbursement

Amount
$
$
$

180.00
10.00
40.00

Total

$

230.00

**Note: Sam's Club was contacted and they indicated that the City was current on their membership

Delinquent Accounts Receivable - 2018 Year End
3/13/2019

Date
1/9/2012
5/22/2012
10/22/2012
10/22/2012
10/26/2012

Obligor
Saul Hernandez Rodriguez
Carrie Walbrun
Tasha LaFond
Jamison Beth Pierce
Tammy Flatt

ATTACHMENT B

Reason
Accident Damage
Returned Checks
Accident Damage
Accident Damage
Accident Damage

Amount
$
1,486.04
$
95.52
$
204.21
$
298.48
$
363.72

Total

$

Note:
Rodriguez-deemed uncollectable by the collection agency in 2018
Walbrun-deemed uncollectable by the collection agency in 2018
LaFond-will leave account with the TRIP program but have not received any payments
Pierce-deemed uncollectable by the collection agency in 2018
Flatt-deemed uncollectable by the collection agency in 2018

2,447.97

Personal Property Write-Offs - Year-End 2018
3/13/2019
Obligor
4 Kids Childcare
Abraham, Dan
Accent Floral & Gifts
Alltel Wireless
Bauer Ferris & Holloway
Creative Hands & Minds
Fiberglass Technologies
Fink Law Offices, Thomas
Gloede, Robert
Haen, Paul
Sears Driving School (M&E Inc)
Talbot, Douglas
Tesch Chemical
Tri City Ceramics
Creative Hands & Minds
Get Reel Entertainment
London Place LLC
Underground Functional
Vital Beat

ATTACHMENT C

$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$

2011/2012
173.82
376.60
31.60
357.53
97.43
60.59
118.52
766.38
36.87
7.91
7.91
163.28
71.10
63.21
10.54
792.71
3,831.90
263.37
18.43

Grand Total $

7,249.70
Total

$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$

City Portion
63.27
137.07
11.50
130.13
35.46
22.05
43.14
278.95
13.42
2.88
2.88
59.43
25.88
23.01
10.54
792.71
3,831.90
263.37
18.43

$

5,766.02

RESOLUTION R-7-19
RESOLUTION TO APPROVE THE CANCELLATION OF OUTSTANDING CHECKS; AND
THE WRITE OFF OF GENERAL UNCOLLECTIBLE ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLES AND
DELINQUENT PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX RECEIVABLES
Introduced by Mayor Merkes
WHEREAS, it is necessary to cancel the outstanding checks and write off general uncollectable
accounts receivables and delinquent personal property tax receivables,
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Mayor and the Common Council that the
checks on “Attachment A” ($230.00) have been outstanding for more than twelve months, the
proper City Officials are hereby authorized to notify Nicolet National Bank to stop payment on
these checks and to credit the proper amounts to the appropriate accounts,
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED by the Mayor and the Common Council
that the proper City Officials are hereby authorized to write off the general accounts receivable
balances from 2012 on “ATTACHMENT B” ($2,447.97). These write-offs do not change the
City’s financial position as an allowance for uncollectable accounts was previously set up for
these accounts in the period in which the accounts were sent to collections or deemed as unlikely
to be collected. However, since the receivables are no longer legally collectible, they need to be
removed from the City’s records.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED by the Mayor and the Common Council
that the proper City Officials are hereby authorized to write off the personal property tax
receivable balances from 2011/2012 on “ATTACHMENT C” ($5,766.02). These write-offs do
change the City’s financial position, as will be reflected in the 2018 Financial Statements, as they
were not previously removed from the City’s records, but are no longer legally collectible.
Passed and approved this ____ day of __________, 2019.

Recommended by:
________________________
Motion/Second:
________________________
Vote: ___________________
Pass/Fail: ________________
Requires:
__Majority Vote
__ 2/3 Vote

______________________________
Donald Merkes, Mayor
ATTEST:
_____________________________
Deborah A. Galeazzi, City Clerk

RESOLUTION R-8-19
RESOLUTION APPROVING THE PROJECT PLAN AND ESTABLISHING THE BOUNDARIES
FOR AND THE CREATION OF TAX INCREMENTAL DISTRICT NO. 14,
CITY OF MENASHA, WISCONSIN
Introduced by Mayor Don Merkes.
WHEREAS, the City of Menasha (the “City”) has determined that use of Tax Incremental
Financing is required to promote development and redevelopment within the City; and
WHEREAS, Tax Incremental District No. 14 (the “District”) is proposed to be created by the
City as a rehabilitation - conservation district in accordance with the provisions of Wisconsin Statutes
Section 66.1105 (the "Tax Increment Law"); and
WHEREAS, a Project Plan for the District has been prepared that includes:
a. A statement listing of the kind, number and location of all proposed public works or
improvements within the District, or to the extent provided in Wisconsin Statutes
Sections 66.1105(2)(f)1.k. and 66.1105(2)(f)1.n., outside of the District;
b. An economic feasibility study;
c. A detailed list of estimated project costs;
d. A description of the methods of financing all estimated project costs and the time when
the related costs or monetary obligations are to be incurred;
e. A map showing existing uses and conditions of real property in the District;
f. A map showing proposed improvements and uses in the District;
g. Proposed changes of zoning ordinances, master plan, map, building codes and City
ordinances;
h. A list of estimated non-project costs;
i. A statement of the proposed plan for relocation of any persons to be displaced;
j. A statement indicating how the District promotes the orderly development of the City;
k. An opinion of the City Attorney or of an attorney retained by the City advising that the
plan is complete and complies with Wisconsin Statutes Section 66.1105(4)(f).
WHEREAS, prior to its publication, a copy of the notice of public hearing was sent to owners of
all property in the proposed district, to the chief executive officers of Winnebago County, the Menasha
School District, and the Fox Valley Technical College District, and any other entities having the power to
levy taxes on property located within the District, in accordance with the procedures specified in the Tax
Increment Law; and
WHEREAS, in accordance with the procedures specified in the Tax Increment Law, the Plan
Commission, on January 8, 2019 held a public hearing concerning the project plan and boundaries and
proposed creation of the District, providing interested parties a reasonable opportunity to express their
views thereon; and
WHEREAS, after said public hearing, the Plan Commission designated the boundaries of the
District, adopted the Project Plan, and recommended to the Common Council that it create such District
and approve the Project Plan and

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Common Council of the City of Menasha that:
1. The boundaries of the District that shall be named "Tax Incremental District No. 14, City of
Menasha", are hereby established as specified in Exhibit A of this Resolution.
2. The District is created effective as of January 1, 2019.
3. The Common Council finds and declares that:
a. Not less than 50% by area of the real property within the District is in need of rehabilitation
- conservation work within the meaning of Wisconsin Statutes Section 66.1337(2m)(b).
b. Based upon the findings, as stated in 3.a. above, the District is declared to be a rehabilitation
- conservation district based on the identification and classification of the property included
within the District.
c. The improvement of such area is likely to enhance significantly the value of substantially all
of the other real property in the District.
d. The equalized value of the taxable property in the District plus the value increment of all
other existing tax incremental districts within the City, does not exceed 12% of the total
equalized value of taxable property within the City.
e. The City estimates that approximately 100% of the territory within the District will be
devoted to retail business at the end of the District’s maximum expenditure period, pursuant
to Wisconsin Statutes Section 66.1105(5)(b).
f.

The project costs relate directly to promoting the rehabilitation of the area consistent with
the purpose for which the District is created.

4. The Project Plan for "Tax Incremental District No. 14, City of Menasha" (attached as Exhibit B) is
approved, and the City further finds the Plan is feasible and in conformity with the master plan of
the City.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED THAT the City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to apply to
the Wisconsin Department of Revenue, in such form as may be prescribed, for a "Determination of Tax
Incremental Base", as of January 1, 2019, pursuant to the provisions of Wisconsin Statutes Section
66.1105(5)(b).
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED THAT pursuant to Section 66.1105(5)(f) of the Wisconsin Statutes
that the City Assessor is hereby authorized and directed to identify upon the assessment roll returned and
examined under Wisconsin Statutes Section 70.45, those parcels of property which are within the District,
specifying thereon the name of the said District, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to make
similar notations on the tax roll made under Section 70.65 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Passed and approved this

day of

, 2019.
_________________________
Donal d Mer kes, Mayor

Recommended by:
_____________________
ATTEST:
Motion/Second:
_____________________
Vote: ________________
Pass/Fail: _____________
Requires: 2/3 Vote

_________________________
Deborah A. Galeazzi, City Clerk

EXHIBIT A

LEGAL BOUNDARY DESCRIPTION OR MAP OF
TAX INCREMENTAL DISTRICT NO. 14
CITY OF MENASHA

THIS CAN BE FOUND IN THE PROJECT PLAN

EXHIBIT B

PROJECT PLAN

THIS WILL BE HANDED OUT SEPARATELY

March 18, 2019

DRAFT Project Plan for the
Creation of Tax Incremental
District No. 14

Organizational Joint Review Board Meeting Held:

January 8, 2019

Public Hearing Held:

January 8, 2019

Consideration for Approval by Plan Commission:

January 8, 2019

Consideration for Adoption by Common Council:

March 18, 2019

Consideration for Approval by the Joint Review Board:

April 2, 2019

Tax Incremental District No. 14 Creation
Project Plan
City of Menasha Officials
Common Council
Stan Sevenich

Common Council President

Rebecca Nichols

Council Member

James Taylor

Council Member

Mark Langdon

Council Member

Steve Krueger

Council Member

Thomas E Grade

Council Member

Ted Grade

Council Member

Randy Ropella

Council Member

City Staff
Donald Merkes

Mayor

Debbie Galeazzi

City Clerk

John Jacobs

Director of Administrative
Services/Comptroller/Treasurer

Sam Schroeder

Community Development Director

Pamela Captain

City Attorney

Plan Commission
Don Merkes, Mayor

Kara Homan, Citizen

Rebecca Nichols, Alderperson

Catherine Cruickshank, Citizen

Tom Grade, Alternate Alderperson
Josh Radomski, Director of Public Works

Kevin Benner, Citizen

Richard Sturm, Chairperson of the Parks and
Recreation Board

Joint Review Board
Don Merkes

City Representative

Mark Harris

Winnebago County

Amy Van Straten

Fox Valley Technical College District

Brian Adesso

Menasha School District

Scott Francis

Public Member

Table of Contents

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...........................................................................................................................................4
TYPE AND GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT ........................................................................................6
PRELIMINARY MAP OF PROPOSED DISTRICT BOUNDARY ........................................................................7
MAP SHOWING EXISTING USES AND CONDITIONS ......................................................................................8
PRELIMINARY PARCEL LIST AND ANALYSIS ...................................................................................................9
EQUALIZED VALUE TEST .....................................................................................................................................10
STATEMENT OF KIND, NUMBER AND LOCATION OF PROPOSED PUBLIC WORKS AND OTHER
PROJECTS................................................................................................................................................................11
MAP SHOWING PROPOSED IMPROVEMENTS AND USES .........................................................................14
DETAILED LIST OF PROJECT COSTS ..............................................................................................................15
ECONOMIC FEASIBILITY STUDY, FINANCING METHODS, AND THE TIME WHEN COSTS OR
MONETARY OBLIGATIONS RELATED ARE TO BE INCURRED ..................................................................17
ANNEXED PROPERTY...........................................................................................................................................22
ESTIMATE OF PROPERTY TO BE DEVOTED TO RETAIL BUSINESS ......................................................22
PROPOSED ZONING ORDINANCE CHANGES ................................................................................................22
PROPOSED CHANGES IN MASTER PLAN, MAP, BUILDING CODES AND CITY OF MENASHA
ORDINANCES ..........................................................................................................................................................22
RELOCATION ...........................................................................................................................................................23
ORDERLY REDEVELOPMENT OF THE CITY OF MENASHA .......................................................................23
LIST OF ESTIMATED NON-PROJECT COSTS .................................................................................................23
OPINION OF ATTORNEY FOR THE CITY OF MENASHA ADVISING WHETHER THE PLAN IS
COMPLETE AND COMPLIES WITH WISCONSIN STATUTES 66.1105 ......................................................24
CALCULATION OF THE SHARE OF PROJECTED TAX INCREMENTS ESTIMATED TO BE PAID BY
THE OWNERS OF PROPERTY IN THE OVERLYING TAXING JURISDICTIONS......................................25

SECTION 1:

Executive Summary
Description of District
Type of District, Size and Location
Tax Incremental District (“TID”) No. 14 (the “TID” or “District”) is proposed to be created by the City of
Menasha (“City”) as a rehabilitation - conservation district. A map of the proposed District boundaries is
located in Section 3 of this plan.

Estimated Total Project Expenditures.
The City anticipates making total project expenditures of approximately $2,650,000 to undertake the
projects listed in this Project Plan. The Expenditure Period of this District is 22 years from the date of
adoption of the authorizing Resolution of the Common Council (the “Creation Resolution”). The projects
to be undertaken pursuant to this Project Plan are expected to be financed through a development
incentive (Municipal Revenue Obligation) issued to a developer, with cash/fund balance accumulated by
the District, or through the issuance of General Obligation debt of the City. A discussion and listing of
other possible financing mechanisms, as well as a summary of total project financing, is located in
Section 10 of this plan.

Economic Development
As a result of the creation of this District, the City projects that additional land and improvements value
of approximately $4,556,009 will be created as a result of new development, redevelopment, and
appreciation in the value of existing properties. This additional value will be a result of the improvements
made and projects undertaken within the District. A table detailing assumptions as to the timing of new
development and redevelopment and associated values is located in Section 10 of this Plan. In addition,
creation of the District is expected to result in other economic benefits as detailed in the Summary of
Findings hereafter.

Expected Termination of District
Based on the Economic Feasibility Study located in Section 10 of this plan, this District would be
expected to generate sufficient tax increments to recover all project costs by the year 2037; 10 years
earlier than the 27 year maximum life of this District.

Summary of Findings
As required by Wisconsin Statutes Section 66.1105, and as documented in this Project Plan and the
exhibits contained and referenced herein, the following findings are made:
1. That “but for” the creation of this District, the development projected to occur as detailed in
this Project Plan: 1) would not occur; or 2) would not occur in the manner, at the values, or
within the timeframe desired by the City. In making this determination, the City has considered
the following information:
•

The City has conducted an independent review of the intended developer’s sources and uses
proforma for the initial proposed redevelopment project of the Shopko plaza and outlot. This
review has concluded that a public investment of $1,250,000 or a payout over 15 years
(whichever comes first) is required to enable the development to occur in the manner desired by

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 4

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

the City, while providing the developer a fair and reasonable return on their investment. This
assistance will be provided in the form of a Municipal Revenue Obligation (“MRO”). The MRO
is not a debt of the City, nor is it an absolute obligation; if the developer does not produce
sufficient incremental value to support the intended cash flows, the payments under the MRO
reduce accordingly. This PAYGO structure minimizes the risk to the City. The net present value
(“NPV”) of the future cash flow/increment generated by a project approximates the amount a
developer might be able to borrow against the MRO, or “monetize” in order to secure funding at
the front end of a project. It is expected the City will enter into a development agreement
specifying the terms and amount of the MRO.

•

The District will meet the objectives of a rehabilitation or conservation work by carrying out
plans for a program of voluntary repair and rehabilitation of buildings or other improvements
within the District. This includes the existing Shopko Plaza (not including the adjacent Shopko
anchor store), and the outlot most recently operated by the Gardenview Restaurant. Plans include
updating the façade of the Plaza and demolishing the restaurant in order to build a new, 3-tenant
parcel containing national-known tenants. The façade upgrade is intended to attract additional
tenants to the Plaza shops, and other improvements such as parking lot refacing, will be
considered by the developer. It is the judgment of the City that the use of Tax Incremental
Financing (“TIF”) will be required to provide the necessary inducements to encourage
development on the sites consistent with that desired by the City.

2. The economic benefits of the Tax Incremental District, as measured by increased employment,
business and personal income, and property value, are sufficient to compensate for the cost of
the improvements. In making this determination, the City has considered the following information:
•

As demonstrated in the Economic Feasibility Section of this Project Plan, the tax increments
projected to be collected are more than sufficient to pay for the proposed project costs. On this
basis alone, the finding is supported.

•

The development expected to occur will revitalize an existing retail center and replace an
outdated restaurant property with an income producing development. This will prevent a loss of
property tax value within the District and help stabilize the retail components of the area/corridor.

3. The benefits of the proposal outweigh the anticipated tax increments to be paid by the owners
of property in the overlying taxing jurisdictions.
•

If approved, the District’s creation would become effective for valuation purposes as of January
1, 2018. As of this date, the values of all existing development would be frozen and the property
taxes collected on this base value would continue to be distributed amongst the various taxing
entities as they currently are now. Taxes levied on any additional value established within the
District due to new construction, renovation or appreciation of property values occurring after
January 1, 2018 would be collected by the TID and used to repay the costs of TIF-eligible
projects undertaken within the District.

•

Since the development expected to occur is unlikely to take place or in the same manner without
the use of TIF (see Finding #1) and since the District will generate economic benefits that are
more than sufficient to compensate for the cost of the improvements (see Finding #2), the City
reasonably concludes that the overall benefits of the District outweigh the anticipated tax
increments to be paid by the owners of property in the overlying taxing jurisdictions. It is further
concluded that since the “but for” test is satisfied, there would, in fact, be no foregone tax
increments to be paid in the event the District is not created. As required by Section

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 5

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

66.1105(4)(i)4., a calculation of the share of projected tax increments estimated to be paid by the
owners of property in the overlying taxing jurisdictions has been made and can be found in
Appendix A of this plan.
4. Not less than 50% by area of the real property within the District is in need of rehabilitation conservation work within the meaning of Wisconsin Statutes Section 66.1337(2m)(b).
5. Based upon the findings, as stated above, the District is declared to be a rehabilitation - conservation
District based on the identification and classification of the property included within the District.
6. The project costs relate directly to promoting the rehabilitation of the area consistent with the purpose
for which the District is created.
7. The improvement of such area is likely to enhance significantly the value of substantially all of the
other real property in the District.
8. The equalized value of taxable property of the District, plus the value increment of all existing tax
incremental districts within the City, does not exceed 12% of the total equalized value of taxable
property within the City.
9. The City estimates that 100% of the territory within the District will be devoted to retail business at
the end of the District’s maximum expenditure period, pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes Sections
66.1105(5)(b) and 66.1105(6)(am)1.
10. The Project Plan for the District in the City is feasible and is in conformity with the master plan of the
City.

SECTION 2:

Type and General Description of District
The District is being created by the City under the authority provided by Wisconsin Statutes Section
66.1105. The District is created as a “Rehabilitation - conservation District” based upon a finding that at
least 50%, by area, of the real property within the District is in need of rehabilitation - conservation work.
In Section 5 of this Plan, the City has identified those properties within the District that meet the criteria
of “rehabilitation - conservation areas” as defined in Wisconsin Statutes Section 66.1337(2m)(a) and
relies on these characterizations as the basis for making the above finding.
A map depicting the boundaries of the District is found in Section 3 of this Plan. A map depicting the
proposed uses of the District is found in Section 8 of this plan. The City intends that TIF will be used to
assure that private development occurs within the District consistent with the City’s development and
redevelopment objectives. The goal is to increase the tax base and to provide for and preserve retail
employment opportunities within the City. The project costs included in this Plan relate directly to the
rehabilitation - conservation of areas in the District consistent with the purpose for which the District is
created. Based upon the findings, as stated within this Plan, the District is declared to be a rehabilitation conservation District based on the identification and classification of the property included within the
district.
____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 6

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

SECTION 3:

Preliminary Map of Proposed District Boundary

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 7

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

SECTION 4:

Map Showing Existing Uses and Conditions

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 8

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

SECTION 5:

Preliminary Parcel List and Analysis

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 9

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

SECTION 6:

Equalized Value Test

The following calculations demonstrate that the City is in compliance with Wisconsin Statutes
Section.66.1105(4)(gm)4.c., which requires that the equalized value of the taxable property in the
proposed District, plus the value increment of all existing tax incremental districts, does not exceed 12%
of the total equalized value of taxable property within the City.
The equalized value of the increment of existing tax incremental districts within the City, plus the base
value of the proposed District, totals $135,072.028. This value is less than the maximum of $141,307,296
in equalized value that is permitted for the City of Menasha. The City is also closing TID #5 prior to
April 15, 2019. For illustration purposes, compliance with the 12% test factoring in the closure of TID #5
is also provided. The City is in compliance with the statutory equalized valuation test and may proceed
with creation of this District.

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 10

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

SECTION 7:

Statement of Kind, Number and Location of Proposed
Public Works and Other Projects

The following is a list of public works and other TIF-eligible projects that the City expects to implement
in conjunction with this District. Any costs necessary or convenient to the creation of the District or
directly or indirectly related to the public works and other projects are considered "Project Costs" and
eligible to be paid with tax increment revenues of the District.

Property, Right-of-Way and Easement Acquisition
Acquisition of Rights-of-Way
The City may need to acquire property to allow for installation of driveways, sidewalks, utilities,
stormwater management practices and other public infrastructure. Costs incurred by the City to identify,
negotiate and acquire rights-of-way are eligible Project Costs.

Acquisition of Easements
The City may need to acquire temporary or permanent easements to allow for installation and
maintenance of driveways, sidewalks, utilities, stormwater management practices and other public
infrastructure. Costs incurred by the City to identify, negotiate and acquire easement rights are eligible
Project Costs.

Relocation Costs
If relocation expenses are incurred in conjunction with the acquisition of property, those expenses are
eligible Project Costs. These costs may include, but are not limited to: preparation of a relocation plan;
allocations of staff time; legal fees; publication of notices; obtaining appraisals; and payment of relocation
benefits as required by Wisconsin Statutes Sections 32.19 and 32.195.

Utilities
Stormwater Management System Improvements
Redevelopment within the District will cause stormwater runoff and pollution. To manage this
stormwater runoff, the City may need to construct, alter, rebuild or expand stormwater management
infrastructure within the District. Eligible Project Costs include, but are not limited to, construction,
alteration, rebuilding or expansion of: stormwater collection mains; inlets, manholes and valves; service
laterals; ditches; culvert pipes; box culverts; bridges; stabilization of stream and river banks; and
infiltration, filtration and detention Best Management Practices (BMP’s). To the extent stormwater
management system projects undertaken within the District provide direct benefit to land outside of the
District, the City will make an allocation of costs based on such benefit. Those costs corresponding to the
benefit allocated to land within the District, and necessitated by the implementation of the Project Plan,
are eligible Project Costs. Implementation of the Project Plan may also require that the City construct,
alter, rebuild or expand stormwater management infrastructure located outside of the District. That
portion of the costs of stormwater management system projects undertaken outside the District which are
necessitated by the implementation of the Project Plan are eligible Project Costs.

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 11

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

Streetscaping and Landscaping
In order to attract redevelopment consistent with the objectives of this Plan, the City may install
amenities to enhance development sites, rights-of-way and other public spaces. These amenities include,
but are not limited to: landscaping; lighting of streets, sidewalks, parking areas and public areas;
installation of planters, benches, clocks, tree rings, trash receptacles and similar items; and installation of
brick or other decorative walks, terraces and street crossings. These and any other similar amenities
installed by the City are eligible Project Costs.

Miscellaneous
Cash Grants (Development Incentives)
The City may enter into agreements with property owners, lessees, or developers of land located within
the District for the purpose of sharing costs to encourage the desired kind of improvements and assure tax
base is generated sufficient to recover project costs. No cash grants will be provided until the City
executes a developer agreement with the recipient of the cash grant. Any payments of cash grants made
by the City are eligible Project Costs.

Projects Outside the Tax Increment District
Pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes Section 66.1105(2)(f)1.n, the City may undertake projects within territory
located within one-half mile of the boundary of the District provided that: 1) the project area is located
within the City’s corporate boundaries and 2) the projects are approved by the Joint Review Board. The
cost of projects completed outside the District pursuant to this section are eligible project costs, and may
include any project cost that would otherwise be eligible if undertaken within the District. The City
intends to make the following project cost expenditures outside the District:
•

Pedestrian improvements; curb & gutter, and related storm water improvements totaling
$449,750.

Professional Service and Organizational Costs
The costs of professional services rendered, and other costs incurred, in relation to the creation,
administration and termination of the District, and the undertaking of the projects contained within this
Plan, are eligible Project Costs. Professional services include, but are not limited to: architectural;
environmental; planning; engineering; legal, audit; financial; and the costs of informing the public with
respect to the creation of the District and the implementation of the Plan.

Administrative Costs
The City may charge to the District as eligible Project Costs reasonable allocations of administrative
costs, including, but not limited to, employee salaries. Costs allocated will bear a direct connection to the
time spent by City employees in connection with the implementation of the Plan.

Financing Costs
Interest expense, debt issuance expenses, redemption premiums, and any other fees and costs incurred in
conjunction with obtaining financing for projects undertaken under this Plan are eligible Project Costs.
With all projects the costs of engineering, design, survey, inspection, materials, construction, restoring
property to its original condition, apparatus necessary for public works, legal and other consultant fees,
testing, environmental studies, permits, updating City ordinances and plans, judgments or claims for
damages and other expenses are included as Project Costs.
____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 12

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

In the event any of the public works project expenditures are not reimbursable out of the special TIF fund
under Wisconsin Statutes Section 66.1105, in the written opinion of counsel retained by the City for such
purpose or a court of record so rules in a final order, then such project or projects shall be deleted
herefrom and the remainder of the projects hereunder shall be deemed the entirety of the projects for
purposes of this Project Plan.
The City reserves the right to implement only those projects that remain viable as the Plan period
proceeds.
Project Costs are any expenditure made, estimated to be made, or monetary obligations incurred or
estimated to be incurred, by the City and as outlined in this Plan. Project Costs will be diminished by any
income, special assessments or other revenues, including user fees or charges. To the extent the costs
benefit the municipality outside the District, a proportionate share of the cost is not a Project Cost. Costs
identified in this Plan are preliminary estimates made prior to design considerations and are subject to
change after planning is completed. Prorations of costs in the Plan are also estimates and subject to
change based upon implementation, future assessment policies and user fee adjustments.

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 13

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

SECTION 8:

Map Showing Proposed Improvements and Uses

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 14

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

SECTION 9:

Detailed List of Project Costs

All costs are based on 2019 prices and are preliminary estimates. The City reserves the right to increase
these costs to reflect inflationary increases and other uncontrollable circumstances between 2019 and the
time of construction. The City also reserves the right to increase certain project costs to the extent others
are reduced or not implemented without amending the Plan. The tax increment allocation is preliminary
and is subject to adjustment based upon the implementation of the Plan.
This Plan is not meant to be a budget nor an appropriation of funds for specific projects, but a
framework within which to manage projects. All costs included in the Plan are estimates based on
best information available. The City retains the right to delete projects or change the scope and/or
timing of projects implemented as they are individually authorized by the Common Council,
without amending the Plan.

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 15

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

Proposed TIF Project Cost Estimates

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 16

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

SECTION 10:

Economic Feasibility Study, Financing Methods, and the
Time When Costs or Monetary Obligations Related are to
be Incurred
The information and exhibits contained within this Section demonstrate that the proposed District is
economically feasible insofar as:
•

The City has available to it the means to secure the necessary financing required to accomplish
the projects contained within this Plan. A listing of “Available Financing Methods” follows.

•

The City expects to complete the projects in one or multiple phases and can adjust the timing of
implementation as needed to coincide with the pace of private redevelopment. A discussion of
the phasing and projected timeline for project completion is discussed under “Plan
Implementation” within this Section. A table identifying the financing method for each phase
and the time at which that financing is expected to be incurred is included.

•

The development anticipated to occur as a result of the implementation of this Plan will generate
sufficient tax increments to pay for the cost of the projects. Within this Section are tables
identifying: 1) the redevelopment expected to occur, 2) a projection of tax increments to be
collected resulting from that redevelopment and other economic growth within the District, and 3)
a cash flow model demonstrating that the projected tax increment collections and all other
revenues available to the District will be sufficient to pay all Project Costs.

Available Financing Methods
General Obligation (G.O.) Bonds or Notes
The City may issue G.O. Bonds or Notes to finance the cost of projects included within this Plan. The
Wisconsin State Constitution limits the principal amount of G.O. debt that the community may have
outstanding at any point in time to an amount not greater than five percent of its total equalized value
(TID IN). As of the date of this plan, the City has a G.O. debt limit of $58,875,040, of which
approximately $31.0 million is currently unused and could be made available to finance Project Costs.

Bonds Issued to Developers (“Pay as You Go” Financing)
The City may issue a bond or other obligation to one or more developers who provide financing for
projects included in this Plan. Repayment of the amounts due to the developer under the bonds or other
obligations are limited to an agreed percentage of the available annual tax increments collected that result
from the improvements made by the developer. To the extent the tax increments collected are insufficient
to make annual payments, or to repay the entire obligation over the life of the District, the City’s
obligation is limited to not more than the agreed percentage of the actual increments collected. Bonds or
other obligations issued to developers in this fashion are not general obligations of the City and, therefore,
do not count against the City’s statutory borrowing capacity.

Tax Increment Revenue Bonds
The City has the authority to issue revenue bonds secured by the tax increments to be collected. These
bonds may be issued directly by the City, or as a form of lease revenue bond by a Community
____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 17

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

Development Authority (CDA) or by a Redevelopment Authority (RDA). Tax Increment Revenue Bonds
and Lease Revenue Bonds are not general obligations of the City and therefore do not count against the
City’s statutory borrowing capacity. To the extent tax increments collected are insufficient to meet the
annual debt service requirements of the revenue bonds, the City may be subject to either a permissive or
mandatory requirement to appropriate on an annual basis a sum equal to the actual or projected shortfall.

Utility Revenue Bonds
The City can issue revenue bonds to be repaid from revenues of the its various systems, including
revenues paid by the City that represent service of the system to the City. There is neither a statutory nor
constitutional limitation on the amount of revenue bonds that can be issued, however, water rates are
controlled by the Wisconsin Public Service Commission and the City must demonstrate to bond
purchasers its ability to repay revenue debt with the assigned rates. To the extent the City utilizes utility
revenues other than tax increments to repay a portion of the bonds, the City must reduce the total eligible
Project Costs in an equal amount.

Special Assessment “B” Bonds
The City has the ability to levy special assessments against benefited properties to pay part of the costs for
street, curb, gutter, sewer, water, storm sewers and other infrastructure. In the event the City determines
that special assessments are appropriate, the City can issue Special Assessment B bonds pledging
revenues from special assessment installments to the extent assessment payments are outstanding. These
bonds are not counted against the City's statutory borrowing capacity. If special assessments are levied,
the City must reduce the total eligible Project Costs under this Plan in an amount equal to the total
collected.

Plan Implementation
Projects identified will provide the necessary anticipated governmental services to the area. A reasonable
and orderly sequence is outlined on the following page. However, public debt and expenditures should be
made at the pace private development of redevelopment occurs to assure increment is sufficient to cover
expenses.
It is anticipated developer agreements between the City and property owners will be in place prior to
major public expenditures. These agreements can provide for development guarantees or a payment in
lieu of development. To further assure contract enforcement, these agreements might include levying of
special assessments against benefited properties.
The order in which public improvements are made should be adjusted in accordance with development
and execution of developer agreements. The City reserves the right to alter the implementation of this
Plan to accomplish this objective.
Interest rates projected are based on current market conditions. Municipal interest rates are subject to
constantly changing market conditions. In addition, other factors such as the loss of tax-exempt status of
municipal bonds or broadening the purpose of future tax-exempt bonds would affect market conditions.
Actual interest expense will be determined once the methods of financing have been approved and
securities or other obligations are issued.
If financing as outlined in this Plan proves unworkable, the City reserves the right to use alternate
financing solutions for the projects as they are implemented.

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 18

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

Development Assumptions

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 19

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

Increment Revenue Projections

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 20

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

Cash Flow – For Illustration Purposes Only

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 21

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

SECTION 11:

Annexed Property
There are no lands proposed for inclusion within the District that were annexed by the City on or after
January 1, 2004.

SECTION 12:

Estimate of Property to be Devoted to Retail Business
Pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes Sections 66.1105(5)(b) and 66.1105(6)(am)1, the City estimates that
100% of the territory within the District will be devoted to retail business at the end of the District’s
maximum expenditure period.

SECTION 13:

Proposed Zoning Ordinance Changes
The City does not anticipate that the District will require any changes in zoning ordinances.

SECTION 14:

Proposed Changes in Master Plan, Map, Building Codes
and City of Menasha Ordinances
It is expected that this Plan will be complementary to the City's Master Plan. There are no proposed
changes to the Master Plan, map, building codes or other City ordinances for the implementation of this
Plan.

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 22

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

SECTION 15:

Relocation
It is not anticipated there will be a need to relocate persons or businesses in conjunction with this Plan.
In the event relocation or the acquisition of property by eminent domain becomes necessary at some time
during the implementation period, the City will follow applicable Wisconsin Statutes Section chapter 32.

SECTION 16:

Orderly Redevelopment of the City of Menasha
The District contributes to the orderly redevelopment of the City by providing the opportunity for
continued growth in tax base, job opportunities and general economic activity. This includes
improvements to the existing Shopko Plaza (not including the adjacent Shopko anchor store), and the
outlot most recently operated by the Gardenview Restaurant. Plans include updating the façade of the
Plaza and demolishing the restaurant in order to build a new, 3-tenant parcel containing national-known
tenants. The façade upgrade is intended to attract additional tenants to the Plaza shops, and other
improvements such as parking lot refacing, will be considered by the developer.

SECTION 17:

List of Estimated Non-Project Costs
Non-Project costs are public works projects that only partly benefit the District or are not eligible to be
paid with tax increments, or costs not eligible to be paid with TIF funds.
The City does not expect to incur any non-project costs in the implementation of this Project Plan.

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 23

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

SECTION 18:

Opinion of Attorney for the City of Menasha Advising
Whether the Plan is Complete and Complies with
Wisconsin Statutes 66.1105

____________________________________________________________________________________________

Project Plan TID No. 14 Creation
Submitted by Ehlers

Page 24

City of Menasha
March 18, 2019

Exhibit A:

Calculation of the Share of Projected Tax Increments
Estimated to be Paid by the Owners of Property in the
Overlying Taxing Jurisdictions

City of Menasha ● Health Department
Nancy McKenney, RDH, MS ● Public Health Director
nmckenney@ci.menasha.wi.us
City of Menasha ● Health Department
MEMORANDUM
To:

Common Council

From: Nancy McKenney, MS, RDH, Public Health Director
Date:

March 13, 2019

RE:

Resolution R-9-19 Support for Letter of Intent to Apply for a University of Wisconsin Partnership
Program Impact Grant for a Lead Safe Menasha

The Partnership Program was established in 2004 through an endowment gift from Blue Cross and Blue Shield
United of Wisconsin’s conversion to a stock insurance corporation.
Community Impact Grants provide up to $1 million over five years to support large-scale, evidence-based,
community-academic partnerships aimed at achieving sustainable policy, systems and/or environmental
changes that will improve health, health-equity and well-being in Wisconsin.
This resolution authorizes the Menasha Health Department to submit a Letter of Intent to apply for a
Community Impact Grant to advance Lead Safe Menasha, a childhood lead poisoning prevention program.

100 Main Street ● Menasha, Wisconsin 54952-2337 ● Phone (920) 967-3520 ● Fax (920) 967-5247
www.cityofmenasha-wi.gov

RESOLUTION R-9-19
SUPPORT FOR LETTER OF INTENT TO APPLY FOR UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM COMMUNITY IMPACT GRANT PROGRAM
LEAD SAFE MENASHA
Introduced by Mayor Merkes
WHEREAS, The City of Menasha is dedicated to assuring conditions in which people can be healthy.
WHEREAS, The large percentage of older housing units is a concern to Menasha as the potential for lead
laterals and lead-based paint being used during that time is considerable.
WHEREAS, Experts at the Environmental Protection Agency and Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention agree there is no known safe level of lead in a child’s blood, and; 1 2
WHEREAS, even low blood lead levels have been shown to affect IQ, ability to pay attention, and
academic achievement, and;
WHEREAS, effects of lead exposure cannot be corrected, and;
WHEREAS, research shows that for every dollar spent on controlling lead hazards, $17–$221 is returned
in health benefits, increased IQ, higher lifetime earnings, tax revenue, reduced spending on special
education, and reduced criminal activity, and, 3
WHEREAS, the City has established sustainable, partnerships and community leadership dedicated to
childhood lead poisoning prevention,
WHEREAS, Menasha Utilities was a recipient of Wisconsin Safe Drinking Water grants, and replaced
200 out of 644 customer-owned lead or galvanized water service laterals and;
WHEREAS, In 2018, after Wisconsin Safe Drinking Water grants were expended, he City and Menasha
Utilities jointly passed RESOLUTION R-25-18 A Resolution Regarding Lead and Galvanized Water
Services Lateral Replacement Partnership, now awaiting approval of the Public Service Commission to
support replacement of lead and galvanized water service laterals;

1

United States Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, What Do Parents Need
to Know to Protect Their Children? 2017. Retrieved on March 28, 2017 from:
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/acclpp/blood_lead_levels.htm
2
United States Environmental Protection Agency, Learn About Lead. 2017. Retrieved on March 28, 2017 from:
https://www.epa.gov/lead/learn-about-lead#effects
3
Gould, Elise, Childhood Lead Poisoning: Conservative Estimates of the Social and Economic Benefits of Lead Hazard Control
Environ Health Perspective. 2009 Jul; 117(7): 1162–1167. Published online 2009 Mar 31.
Retrieved from Pub Med on March 28, 2017 from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2717145/

WHEREAS, The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates that only 20 percent of human
exposure to lead may come from drinking water, with the majority from paint in homes built before 1978,
contaminated soils and dust.
WHEREAS, the most important step all of us can take is to prevent lead exposure before it occurs, and;

WHEREAS, the Menasha Health Department has established an academic partnership with the
University of Wisconsin Oshkosh, Doctorate of Nursing Practice, placing two interns dedicated
to the primary prevention of childhood lead poisoning (2017-2018 Lead Poisoning Prevention
Through Outreach at the City of Menasha Health Department; 2018-2020 Lead Free by Delivery).
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, that the Common Council recommends the Menasha
Health Department submit a Letter of Intent to apply for Wisconsin Partnership Program
Community Impact Grant to advance Lead Safe Menasha, focused on making Menasha a leader
in preventing childhood lead poisoning.
Passed and approved this ____ day of __________, 2019.

Recommended by:
________________________
Motion/Second:
________________________
Vote: ___________________
Pass/Fail: ________________
Requires:
__Majority Vote
__ 2/3 Vote

______________________________
Donald Merkes, Mayor
ATTEST:
_____________________________
Deborah A. Galeazzi, City Clerk
