Metropolitan Nashville and Davidson
County, TN
Legislation Text
File #: RS2023-2198, Version: 1

A resolution adopting a new pay plan for employees of the Metropolitan Board of Health, effective July 1, 2023.
WHEREAS, the Metropolitan Board of Health, acting in its official capacity as a Civil Service Commission has,
pursuant to Sections 12.09 and 12.10 of the Metropolitan Charter, assigned each employment classification to
a salary grade as of July 1, 2023, with such assignments being equitably related to each other; and,
WHEREAS, the Board of Health’s Civil Service Commission has adopted the salary ranges for each grade;
and,
WHEREAS, the Director of Personnel for the Board of Health has recommended, after the Commission’s
approval, desirable salary ranges for each grade to the Director of Finance; and,
WHEREAS, pursuant to RS2022-1555, a one-year pay plan was approved by the Metropolitan Council to go
into effect on July 1, 2022; and,
WHEREAS, the pay plan that was adopted pursuant to RS2022-1555 included increment pay increases that
are earned at various time intervals; and,
WHEREAS, it is the desire for these increment increases to continue; and,
WHEREAS, it is further the desire that employees who are paid pursuant to open pay ranges be eligible, at the
discretion of the employee’s Appointing Authority, to receive merit pay increases; and,
WHEREAS, the Board of Health’s Civil Service Commission recognizes that the pay scales included in the pay
plan adopted pursuant to RS2022-1555 should be modified by applying a cost of living increase as of July 1,
2023; and,
WHEREAS, the Board of Health’s Civil Service Commission recommends that the pay scales be increased by
4% as of July 1, 2023; and,
WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 12.10 of the Metropolitan Charter, having been advised of its full budgetary
implications, the Mayor has approved the plan and recommends its adoption by the Metropolitan Council.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE METROPOLITAN GOVERNMENT OF
NASHVILLE AND DAVIDSON COUNTY:
Section 1: The pay plan adopted pursuant to RS2022-1555 and which went into effect on July 1, 2022, for
employees of the Metropolitan Board of Health, from and after July 1, 2023 shall be as provided in Exhibit “A”.
Exhibit “A” reflects a salary increase in the amount of 4% and the continuation of step increment adjustments.
Exhibit “A” is incorporated into this Resolution as if fully set out herein.
Section 2: Additional funding shall be provided to the Metropolitan Department of Health in the amount of
3% of that department’s total annual open range salary budget so that employees in Open Range pay
classifications will have the opportunity to receive merit based salary increases, at the discretion of the
Appointing Authority, as reflected in Exhibit “A”. Eligibility for Open Range salary increases for FY23 will
become effective as of July 1, 2023.
Section 3: Upon the adoption of the pay plan attached as Exhibit “A” and upon it becoming effective, the
Metropolitan Nashville and Davidson County, TN

Page 1 of 2

Printed on 7/20/2026
powered by Legistar™

File #: RS2023-2198, Version: 1

pay plan adopted pursuant to RS2022-1555 is hereby repealed.
Section 4: This Resolution shall take effect on July 1, 2023, the welfare of The Metropolitan Government
of Nashville and Davidson County requiring it.
Analysis
This resolution is the pay plan for the employees of the Board of Health to take effect July 1, 2023. The Health
Department has its own pay plan because Section 10.107 of the Metro Charter provides that the Board of
Health shall constitute a civil service board with respect to the Health employees. The primary effect of this
resolution would be to continue the pay plan, continue increment pay, provide a 4% cost-of-living-adjustment
(COLA), and provide for the possibility of merit pay increases for open range employees. Step increases
known as “increments” are pay increases for certain employment classifications on a six month, one year,
eighteen month, or two year interval, depending upon the position. In addition to step increases, the equivalent
of an additional 3% merit pay increase would be available for open range employees (who do not receive
increments). The amount of individual raises for open range employees are determined by department heads.
The pay plan contemplates that open range employees are to be paid based upon merit, not length of service.
Per section 12.10 of the Metropolitan Charter, pay plans may not be amended by the Council except by
making uniform modifications of all employment grades (because the relationship between pay grades must
remain the same under the Charter). The pay plan submitted by this resolution has been approved by the
Finance Director, the Board of Health, and the Mayor.
An amendment is anticipated from the sponsor that would amend the pay plan to include an additional 2%
COLA for employees, consistent with the proposed substitute to BL2023-1867, the operating budget
ordinance.

Metropolitan Nashville and Davidson County, TN

Page 2 of 2

Printed on 7/20/2026
powered by Legistar™
