CONTRACT

Between The

SCHOOL COMMITTEE OF THE TOWN OF HOLLISTON

& The

HOLLISTON SCHOOL SECRETARIES ASSOCIATION

Effective
July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2017

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.

AGREEMENT

​
2

II.

PREAMBLE

​
2

III.

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

​
2

IV.

NON­DISCRIMINATION

​
2

V.

RECOGNITION

​
3

VI.

DURATION

​
3

VII.

DEFINITION

​
3

VIII.

JOB POSTINGS, SALARY& EVALUATION POLICIES
a.
Job Postings
b.
New Hires
c.
Evaluations
d.
Involuntary Transfer
e.
Salary Increases
f.
Method of Payment
g.
Overtime
h.
Travel Allowance
i.
Years of Service Grant

4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5

LEAVES, VACATIONS, HOLIDAYS & BEREAVEMENT
a.
Sick Leave/ Sick Leave Pool
b.
Emergency Leave
c.
Personal Leave
d.
Family and Medical Leave
e.
Vacations
f.
Paid Holidays
g.
Emergency Days
h.
Bereavement
i.
Tuition/Conference Allotments
j.
Religious Observances

6­7
7
7
7
7­8
8­9
9
9
9
9

X.

LENGTH OF DAY & LENGTH OF SCHOOL YEAR

10

XI.

INSURANCE & DEDUCTIONS
a.
Medical, Dental and Life Insurance
b.
Tax Sheltered Annuities
c.
Group Income Protection Insurance
d.
Worker’s Compensation
e.
Credit Union
f.
Association Dues
g.
Service Fee

10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10­11

XII.

SENIORITY & REDUCTION IN FORCE

11

XIII.

MISCELLANEOUS

​1
1

IX.

IX.

GRIEVANCE & GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Appendix A

13
14

Appendix B

15

I. A
​GREEMENT
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 150E of the General Laws of this Commonwealth of
st​
Massachusetts as amended, THIS CONTRACT IS MADE this 21​
day of August 2014 by the SCHOOL
COMMITTEE OF THE TOWN OF HOLLISTON (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Committee)
and the HOLLISTON SCHOOL SECRETARIES ASSOCIATION, HOLLISTON FEDERATION OF
TEACHERS LOCAL 3275 AFT­MASSACHUSETTS, AFL­CIO (hereafter sometimes referred to as the
Federation or HSSA/HFT).

II. P
​REAMBLE
The Holliston School Secretaries Association, HFT Local 3275, AFT­MA, AFL­CIO​
​nd the Holliston
a
School Committee recognize the valuable contribution made by the members of the bargaining unit in
the school system and are committed to the principle that these employees should be treated and treat
each other with mutual respect, dignity and appreciation by school administrators, teachers,
paraprofessionals and other employees, parents and students.

III. M
​ANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Under the Laws of Massachusetts, the Committee, elected by the citizens of Holliston, has final
responsibility for establishing the educational, financial, and business policies of the public schools of
Holliston. The Committee is a public body established under and with powers provided by the Statutes
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and nothing in this Contract shall be deemed to derogate from
or impair any powers, right or duty conferred upon the Committee by Statute or any Rule or Regulation
of any Agency of the Commonwealth. As to every matter not specifically mentioned or provided for in
this contract, the Committee, the Superintendent of Schools and the Principals retain all powers, rights,
and duties that it has by law and may exercise the same at its discretion without any such exercise being
considered in any way to be in violation of the terms of this Contract.

IV. N
​ON­DISCRIMINATION
The Holliston School Secretaries Association, HFT Local 3275, AFT­MA, AFL­CIO​
s​hall represent
equally all employees covered under this Agreement without regard to membership or participation in or
association with the activities of the Federation and membership in or support of any employee
organization shall not be a requirement or condition of employment or a condition of the maintenance of
employment except as provided in Article XI Section G Service Fee.
The HSSA/HFT shall represent equally all employees covered by this Agreement without regard to race,

religion, color, sex, national origin, age, sexual orientation or disability.

The Holliston School Committee shall employ, assign, and promote persons without regard to race,
religion, color sex, national origin, participation in an employee organization, age, sexual orientation or
disability.
­2V. R
​ECOGNITION
a. The Holliston School Committee recognizes the Holliston School Secretaries Association, Holliston
Federation of Teachers Local 3275, AFT­MA, AFL as the exclusive and representing bargaining
agent for all receptionists, administrative secretaries, financial secretaries, and data specialists in the
school system, with the exception of the secretary to the School Committee, secretary to the
Superintendent of Schools, secretary to the Assistant Superintendent of Schools, and excluding all
other employees of the Holliston Public Schools.
b. The jurisdiction of the Union shall include those persons now or hereafter who perform the
duties or functions of the categories of employees in the bargaining unit, regardless of whether
these duties or functions are cited in this contract.
VI. D
​URATION
This agreement and each of its provisions shall be in effect as of July 1, 2014, and shall continue in
full force and effect until June 30, 2017. This agreement shall remain in full force and effect until
such time a successor agreement is successfully negotiated.
VII. D
​EFINITION
Where the word “Supervisor” is used in this contract, it refers to the Superintendent, Assistant
Superintendent, Business Manager, Student Support Services Director, Student Services
Administrator, Director of Technology, Principal and Assistant Principals.
Personnel:
a. School Year – 40 week schedule
b. Calendar Year – 52 week schedule
c. Part­Time – employee scheduled to work less than 40 hours per week
d. Full­Time – employee scheduled to work 40 hours per week
HSSA/HFT Temporary Assignments:
The parties recognize that additional temporary work assignments may arise from time to
time. If the work assignment is on an intermittent basis or represents one project, this
additional work, on an overtime basis, shall be first offered to existing members, as long as
the member is qualified to do the work and the project can be completed in a timely manner.
If the need arises, it may be necessary for a member to perform a temporary assignment in
a different position. That member, after five (5) consecutive days will receive per diem
th​
compensation at the higher rate, if applicable, beginning with the sixth (6​
) day.
Non­Member Temporary/Substitute Assignment:

If a work assignment arises because a member is absent for more than fifteen (15) days,
and no member is qualified and interested, the Supervisor may hire an individual to perform
that work on a temporary basis. Non­member, temporary personnel not employed by an
agency, will be paid at the lowest hourly rate in that job category.

­3VIII​
. JOB POSTINGS, SALARY & EVALUATION POLICIES
c. Job Postings:
Whenever a secretarial vacancy occurs or a new position is created, the Supervisor will inform
the President of the HSSA/HFT and post the position for ten (10) business days. All internal
candidates shall be given the opportunity to apply and interview for vacancies or new positions
prior to the position being publicly advertised and filled. During the school year and summer
months, when school year personnel are not at work, the HSSA/HFT President/designee will
notify all members of job postings.
b. New Hires:
Each new employee and each employee hired after a break in service (except for recall from
layoff) shall be considered as a probationary employee until he/she has actually worked ninety
(90) days. Probationary employees may be disciplined, discharged, or otherwise terminated by
the Superintendent and/or Principal, as the case may be, and such action shall not be subject to
challenge. Employees who are continued in the employ of the Holliston Public School District
beyond their probationary period shall not be disciplined except for just cause.
Every effort will be made by the Supervisor, with final approval of the Superintendent, to
compensate a new hire at an hourly rate no higher than an existing employee in the same
position with comparable experience, unless market conditions dictate otherwise.
c.

Evaluations:
Each member will be evaluated in writing by their Supervisor no later than July 1 of each year
using an agreed to format. A copy of the July 1 written evaluation will be signed by the employee
and the Supervisor and sent to the Superintendent’s office to become part of the employee’s
permanent personnel file. The member may append the evaluation prior to signing.

d.

Involuntary Transfer
Any involuntary transfer or re­assignment shall be made only after a meeting between the
Secretary and the Superintendent and/or his/her designee at which time the Secretary shall
be provided written notification as to the reasons for such transfer or re­assignment. If so
requested, the Secretary may have a representative present at the transfer / re­assignment
meeting. The parties agree that a transfer or re­assignment shall not be subject to grievance
and/or arbitration.

e. Salary Increases:

Contingent upon receiving a satisfactory performance evaluation as outlined in Section C above,
unit members will progress up the salary scale included in Appendix A of this agreement one (1)
step per year. This annual progression will continue until the unit member reaches the top step.

­4f. Method of Payment:
HSSA/HFT members shall be paid every two weeks based on timesheets.
Payments for extra assignments will be made on a bi­weekly basis. In such cases, record of
hours worked with approval of the Supervisor, must be submitted before payment can be
processed.
g. Overtime:
All full­time (40 hours per week) members shall receive overtime pay at the rate
of one and one half their regular hourly rate for all hours worked beyond 40 hours/week. All
part­time (less than 40 hours per week) members shall receive their regular hourly rate for all
hours worked up to 40 hours/week. Thereafter, these employees shall receive overtime pay at
the rate of one and one half their regular rate for all hours worked beyond 40 hours/week.
Overtime time sheets are to be approved by the Supervisor prior to being processed for payment.
If the employee and Supervisor agree, compensatory leave may be allowed in lieu of overtime
pay.
h. Travel Allowance:
A travel allowance at the current IRS approved rate will be paid to a member when it is necessary
for them, in the course of employment, to use their automobile. The Supervisor must authorize
such use in advance. Allowance shall not be paid from the member’s home to the first stop or
from the last stop to the member’s home.
i. Years of Service Grant:
The Committee will grant a $1,000 payment to any member who separates from the Holliston
Public Schools, except for an employee discharged for cause, provided that the secretary has
completed fifteen (15) years of service in the Holliston Public Schools.
The Committee will grant a $2,500 payment to any member who separates from the Holliston
Public Schools, except for an employee discharged for cause, provided that the member has
completed twenty (20) years of service in the Holliston Public Schools.
Any secretary who separates from the Holliston Public Schools, except for an employee
discharged for cause, and has completed ten (10) years of service in the Holliston Public Schools
shall receive the sum of twenty­five dollars ($25.00) for each accumulated day of sick leave
beyond twenty­five (25) up to the total days accumulated. This shall be paid in the last paycheck
received by the member.

IX​
.

­5LEAVES, VACATIONS, HOLIDAYS & BEREAVEMENT
a. Sick Leave:
Calendar Year Personnel​
: Fifteen (15) paid days sick leave will be allowed per year cumulative
to a maximum of 180 days.
School Year Personnel​
: Twelve (12) paid days sick leave will be allowed per year cumulative to
a maximum of 172 days.
Adjustment is made on final paycheck on a pro­rated basis if the member should leave before the
end of the year and have, during the time of service in the schools, used more than the total sick
leave earned.
Sick Leave Pool:
Under the provisions of this contract, a Sick Leave Pool is created whereby a member of the
HSSA/HFT may contribute up to a total of three (3) of the accumulated sick days annually. The
purpose of this pool is to provide a bank against which secretaries may draw in the event of
extended illness or accident, which has depleted a secretary’s sick day accumulation. In order to
be eligible for the Sick Leave Pool, a secretary shall have contributed at least one (1) sick day
per year. Sick Leave Pool days shall not exceed 125 days, except that a new secretary may
contribute a day in order to be eligible for the Sick Leave Pool and days presently in the pool in
excess of 125, if any, will remain in the pool until utilized. These exceptions may increase the
Sick Leave Pool days in excess of 125 and not violate the agreement. In the event the sick bank
depletes to 80 days, members will be contacted to contribute again in the same school year. In
the event that the Sick Bank Pool nears its maximum limit to 125 days, members will be asked to
sign a waiver and eligibility will revert to their contribution in the previous school year.
A secretary or appointed representative will petition the Superintendent of Schools to draw days
from the pool.
A doctor’s certificate indicating that the inability to perform is due to an extended illness or
accident and indicating the probable continued duration of the absence shall be submitted to the
Superintendent of Schools.
A Sick Leave Pool Board comprised of two (2) secretaries appointed by HSSA/HFT and two (2)
Administrators appointed by the Superintendent will approve or disapprove the request. Upon a
tie vote, any member of the Sick Leave Pool Board may seek to further discuss the issue prior to
a revote. There will not be more than two re­votes. If two re­votes fail to resolve the tie, a fifth
member will serve in a tie­breaking capacity. The Superintendent or designee or the HSSA/HFT
President or designee, will serve in this tie­breaking capacity on an alternating year basis. For

the school year 2014­2015, the Superintendent or designee will serve in the tie­breaking
capacity.
Upon approval of an allotment of days, the Office of the Superintendent of Schools will be notified
in writing in order that the said secretary will continue to receive her check in the routine manner.

­6The Sick Leave Pool shall be available for use for a reasonable period. Each case shall be
reviewed and extensions of use beyond an original allotment shall be determined by the Sick
Leave Pool Board.​
​ecisions of the Sick Leave Pool Board are not subject to grievance and/or
D
arbitration​
.
b.

Emergency Leave:
Emergency leave is deducted from sick leave days.
In the event of serious illness in the immediate family the following is allowed:
Calendar Year Personnel​
: A maximum of six (6) paid days a year paid leave will be allowed.
School Year Personnel​
: A maximum of five (5) paid days a year paid leave will be allowed.

c. Personal Leave:
Personal leave is to allow employees time for business or personal commitments that cannot be
scheduled at any other time than during the regular workweek. Personal leave is not cumulative
from year to year, nor may personal leave, over and above the number of days allowed, be
charged against sick leave. Requests for personal days, except for emergencies or unforeseen
situations, shall be approved by the Supervisor and submitted to the Superintendent/designee at
least 48 hours in advance of the day taken. In the event of emergencies or unforeseen
circumstances, the request shall be filed as soon as possible but no later than three (3) school
days after the employee has returned to work.
Personal leave may not be taken on days immediately before or after a vacation period, holiday
weekend, or holiday. Exceptions may be made by the Superintendent. Such decisions are not
subject to the Grievance Procedure.
Calendar Year Personnel:​
A maximum of four (4) paid days a year may be allowed for personal
reasons.
School Year Personnel:​
A maximum of three (3) paid days a year may be allowed for personal
reasons.
d.

Family and Medical Leave:
All employees are eligible for leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act.

e. Vacations:
Calendar Year Members

Members hired prior to July 1, 2004 will be entitled to twenty­five (25) paid vacation days per
year. Calendar year members hired after July 1, 2004 will follow the schedule below.
Vacation requests must be approved by the Supervisor. For Calendar year employees, up to ten
(10) paid vacation days may be carried over to be used the next year. Carry over requests must
be in writing with approval of the Supervisor.

­7School Year Members
School year members hired prior to July 1, 2004 will be compensated for 200 days (not to
exceed a maximum of 190 days of employee attendance) plus 15 earned vacation days at the
appropriate per diem rate. Based on the schedule below, additional days earned beyond 15 up
to 20 can be taken as vacation days during the school year with the approval of the Supervisor or
will be paid at the employee’s per diem rate in the last pay period of the fiscal year.
School year members hired prior to July 1, 2004 who move to calendar year positions will receive
twenty­five (25) paid vacation days per year.
School year members hired subsequent to July 1, 2004 will be compensated for 200 days (not to
exceed a maximum of 190 days of employee attendance) plus earned vacation days per year
based on the schedule below up to 15 days at the appropriate per diem rate. Based on the
schedule below, additional days earned beyond 15 up to 20 can be taken as vacation days
during the school year with the approval of the Supervisor or will be paid at the employee’s per
diem rate in the last pay period of the fiscal year.
Vacation Schedule​
:
1­4 years of service
5 years of service
6 years of service
7 years of service
8 years of service
9 years of service
10 years of service
11 years of service
12 years of service
13 years of service
14 years of service
15 years of service

Calendar Year
​ays Earned
D
10
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

School Year
Days Earned
10
11
12
13
14
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

At the discretion of the Supervisor, each member will be entitled to up to one five­day unpaid
vacation each year if the member has a special basis on which to take said vacation. The
member must request the days in advance.
f. Paid Holidays:
The Holidays listed below will be allowed when they fall within the regular workweek, or on a
Monday when the holiday, itself, falls on Sunday. If one of these Holidays falls on a Saturday,
secretaries may take either Friday or Monday of that period, or some other mutually agreed upon

day, at the discretion of the Supervisor. If a secretary should work on a paid Holiday,
arrangements will be made to take off some other day.
th​
July 4​
and the day before
Labor Day
Rosh Hashanah*
Yom Kippur*
Columbus Day
Veterans Day*

­8Thanksgiving and the day after
Christmas and one additional day before or one day after
New Year’s Day and one additional day before or one day after
Martin Luther King Day
Presidents’ Day
Good Friday
Patriots’ Day
Memorial Day
*These holidays are allowed as paid holidays only when school is closed in observance of the
holiday.
Labor Day shall be allowed as a paid holiday for all secretaries, regardless of when the school
year begins.
g. Emergency Days:
On days when school is not in session due to inclement weather or natural emergencies,
members shall not be required to work but shall receive their regular compensation for the day.
If the school year extends beyond the 40 week period in June, school year personnel will work
through the last day of school and be compensated at their regular per diem rate via time sheet
or allowed compensatory time the following school year.
In the event of emergency dismissal, members will be allowed to leave at the discretion of the
Supervisor.
In the event of a natural emergency where roads are deemed safe for travel and the school
offers sanitary conditions, members may be required to report to work.
h. Bereavement:
Employees shall be entitled to up to five (5) paid work days leave for bereavement. The amount
of days taken shall be at the employee’s discretion. The employee shall notify the Supervisor of
the number of days requested.
i

Tuition/Conference Allotments:
The School Committee shall provide up to $500 per year per member to allow attendance at
conferences and workshops. The Supervisor and the Superintendent must approve said
conference or workshop, in advance.

The School Committee shall provide up to $500 per year per secretary as tuition payment for
secretaries who have such course work approved in advance by the Supervisor and the
Superintendent.
j.

Religious Observances
Religious holidays are allowed. They are not charged against personal or sick leave.

­9X. LENGTH OF DAY & LENGTH OF YEAR FOR SCHOOL YEAR MEMBERS
Length of Day:
The regular workday for all 40­hour members is eight hours, inclusive of a half­hour paid lunch,
which shall be duty free. The offices will be covered during lunch period.
Length of Year for School Year Members:
School Year members will begin work up to five days prior to the students’ first day, which may
include Professional Development days and end their work year to coincide with the school year
calendar. At the Supervisor’s discretion, a School Year member may work a combination of days
before the students’ first day and after the students’ last day up to a total of five.
School year members do not work school vacation periods (December, February & April)
designated by the annual school calendar.
XI​
. INSURANCE & DEDUCTIONS
a. Medical, Dental and Life Insurance: Medical, dental and life insurance are available under the
Town of Holliston’s participatory program as for all other Town employees.
b. Tax Sheltered Annuities: All personnel may purchase tax sheltered
annuities.
c. Group Income Protection Insurance: Also available to all personnel is Group
Income Protection Insurance. Premiums vary in price in accordance to age of employee and
coverage. Payment can be made direct or through payroll deductions.
d. Worker’s Compensation​
:​All Town employees are covered under the Town’s
Blanket Policy. Any accident during school time should be reported promptly and, the required
forms filed, with the Central Office. (This coverage will pay doctors’ and hospital bills and
percentage of salary in case of long­term absence resulting from such injury.)
e. Credit Union​
:​Payroll deductions to a Credit Union shall be made available to
all secretaries. Deductions shall be on those pay days agreed to by the secretary and the Town
Treasurer.
f.

Association Dues​
:​Association Dues are collected in full by October 1 or by
st​
payroll deduction. Employees hired after March 1​
will be assessed one­third of the current
year’s dues.

g.

Service Fee​
:​In accordance with the provision of Section 12 of Chapter
150E of the General Laws, the employer shall require as a condition of
th​
employment during the life of this Agreement, the payment on or after the 30​
day
following the beginning of such employment or the effective date of this
Agreement, whichever is later, of a service fee to the Association. The amount of
the service fee shall be equal to the amount required to become a member and
remain a member in good standing of the Association. The Association will
defend, indemnify, and hold the employer harmless in the event of any litigation
arising out of the implementation of this section.
­10­

XII​
.
SENIORITY AND REDUCTION IN FORCE
Seniority shall be defined as the period of time beginning on the date of hire by the Holliston Public
Schools in a position included in the HSSA/HFT contract. All employees shall be placed in rank
order, least senior to most senior member. The Seniority List will be updated by the Office of the
st​
Superintendent by October 1​
each year and sent to the HSSA/HFT President. The President will
distribute to all members.
In the event that employees are to be reduced in number, the following procedure will be used to
determine the individual or individuals whose employment will be terminated or whose position will be
reduced by hours or days.
a. If a layoff will occur, the parties agree that any member may elect to be laid off prior to the
involuntary layoff of a member.
b. Employees and the HSSA/HFT President/designee will be provided with two (2) weeks notice
prior to layoff.
c. If a position is eliminated or reduced, said elimination or reduction shall affect the
least senior employee in that position. A calendar­year person can only displace
the least senior calendar­year person. A school­year person can only displace the
least senior school­year person.
d. If an employee chooses not to exercise their displacement rights, they will be
treated as a laid off employee.
e. An employee who has been displaced or laid off under the provisions of this
Article will, for two (2) years, be notified of any available HSSA/HFT positions and
be given the opportunity to return to work provided said employee notifies the
st​
Office of the Superintendent of Schools in writing by July 1​
of each year that
said employee wants to be notified of openings and/or considered for recall.
XIII.

MISCELLANEOUS
a. The Holliston School Department shall provide the Federation a seniority list of all employees in
the bargaining unit indicating the date of hire. The list shall be given to the Federation sixty (60)
days after the execution of this Agreement and annually thereafter by October 1.
b. Employees shall not be required to transport students in their personal automobiles.

c. Jointly acknowledging the value and need for quality professional development for HSSA/HFT
th​
members, District Administration and the HSSA/HFT agree to meet between August 15​
and
th​
September 15​of each year to develop professional development opportunities for the
HSSA/HFT members. These may include activities that occur on professional days or not, and
may be held on or off campus. If a HSSA/HFT member is asked by an administrator to attend
any additional professional development program days, the member shall be paid for his/her
attendance at such a program.
d. The cost of production of the final contract document shall be borne equally by the Committee
and the Federation.
­11XIV​
. GRIEVANCE AND GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
a. Definition of a Grievance
For the purpose of this Agreement, a Grievance will be defined as a dispute between a member
of the bargaining unit covered by this Agreement or the Association and the Committee over the
interpretation or application of this Agreement, or the alleged inequitable or discriminatory
treatment of an employee under this Agreement.
b. Grievance Procedure – Three Levels:
Level One:​A written statement of the alleged grievance shall be filed by the individual employee,
or the Association, on behalf of the employee to the employee’s immediate Supervisor.
The written statement must specify the section of the contract violated, the redress sought, and
must be filed within fifteen (15) working days after the alleged violation occurred or became
known.
The Supervisor will meet with the grievant and a representative of the Association within ten (10)
working days of receipt of the grievance statement.
Within ten (10) working days thereafter the Supervisor will render his/her decision in writing to the
grievant and the Association.
Level Two:​If the grievant or Association is dissatisfied with the decision of the Supervisor at
Level One, the grieved party will, within fifteen (15) working days of the receipt of the decision,
submit the grievance in writing to the Superintendent of Schools, stating the dissatisfaction with
decision at Level One.
If in the judgment of the Association, the grievance affects a group or class of employees, the
grievance may be submitted at this level. A meeting with the Superintendent or designee will be
scheduled with the grievant and a representative of the Association within ten (10) working days
of the receipt of
the written grievance.
The Superintendent or designee will render a written decision to the grievant and the Association
within fifteen (15) working days of the meeting. Copies of the written statement or grievance and
copies of the written decision at Levels One
and Two shall be submitted to the School Committee.

Level Three:​If the grievant and/or Association is/are dissatisfied with the decision at Level Two
or if no decision has been rendered within fifteen (15) working days after the Level Two meeting,
the Association may within twenty (20) working days submit the grievance to arbitration as
provided in this Contract.
The grievance shall be submitted to an Arbitrator who shall be selected mutually by both parties.
If the parties do not mutually select an Arbitrator within fifteen (15) working days from the date of
submission of the grievance to arbitration, then either party may file a demand for arbitration with
the American Arbitration Association.
­12The Arbitrator shall be bound by the terms and conditions of this agreement and
by the written submissions of both parties of the grievance to arbitration. The Arbitrator’s decision
shall not extend beyond said submissions nor alter, amend or modify the provisions of this
Contract.
Further, the Arbitrator shall render a decision within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the
completion of the arbitration hearing. Such decision shall be final and binding on both parties to
this agreement.
The cost of the services of the Arbitrator and costs incurred which were mutually agreed to shall
be born equally by the Committee and the Association.
c. No Discrimination Based on Grievance Filings
No written communications or other document or record relating to a grievance shall be filed in
the personnel file maintained by the Holliston School Department for any employee involved in
presenting such grievance, nor shall such grievance become a part of any file or record which is
utilized in the promotion procedure, nor shall it be used in any recommendation for job placement,
nor shall there be any other discrimination against any party in interest or any member of the
Grievance Committee or Association representative.
d. Savings Clause
If any provision of this Agreement is or shall at any time be contrary to law, then such provision
shall not be applicable or performed or enforced, except to the extent permitted by law and
substitute action shall be subject to appropriate consultation and negotiation with the Federation.
In the event that any provision of the Agreement is or shall be contrary to law, all other provisions
of the Agreement shall continue in effect.

­13­

Appendix A Salary Schedule

Effective 7/1/2014, each salary step is increased by $0.46 over current but employees shall not advance a step.

Step

Schedule A

Schedule B

1

$19.09

$17.06

2

$19.88

$17.77

3

$20.46

$18.51

4

$21.18

$19.26

5

$22.01

$20.06

6

$23.07

$21.37

7

$23.85

$21.71

8

$24.27

$22.20

9

$24.87

$22.75

Effective 7/1/2015, there shall be no increase to salary and steps shall resume where relevant. In addition a new top step 10 shall be added to the schedule which shall be 1.5% higher than the
2014-2015 school year step 9.
Step

Schedule A

Schedule B

1

$19.09

$17.06

2

$19.88

$17.77

3

$20.46

$18.51

4

$21.18

$19.26

5

$22.01

$20.06

6

$23.07

$21.37

7

$23.85

$21.71

8

$24.27

$22.20

9

$24.87

$22.75

10

$25.24

$23.09

Effective 7/1/2016, there shall be a 1.5% increase to the salary schedule and step movement where relevant.
Step

Schedule A

Schedule B

1

$19.38

$17.32

2

$20.18

$18.04

3

$20.77

$18.79

4

$21.50

$19.55

5

$22.34

$20.36

6

$23.42

$21.69

7

$24.21

$22.04

8

$24.63

$22.53

9

$25.24

$23.09

10

$25.62

$23.44

Placement on Salary Schedule:

SCHEDULE A
Administrative Secretaries
Financial Secretaries
Data Specialists
Guidance Secretaries

SCHEDULE B
Receptionists
