The Weddington Journal
Official Newsletter of the Town of Weddington

July 2016

WEDDINGTON TOWN HALL
Information you might not know...
Weddington Town Hall is one of the most unique in Union County. It
was built in 1894 and was originally known as the Thomas-Wrenn
House. What is now the current Council Chambers was an addition in
Town of Weddington
1924 Weddington Road
Weddington, NC 28104
Phone: 704-846-2709
Fax: 704-844-6372

Website:
www.townofweddington.com

1962. The Town agreed to purchase the house in 1992 for use as the
Weddington Town Hall and it was designated as a Weddington Historic
Home in 1994. Like most homes, but especially with one that is 122
years old, significant wood rot and assorted weather related damage occurs. In April the Town contracted with a company which specializes in
the restoration of old, historic buildings. The contractor, Nu Hue, was
given the task to come as close as possible to bringing the building back
to its magnificent origin. We are delighted with the outcome and invite
you to drive by and see for yourself.

An update on the Water Tower
from Union County Public Works

Mayor
Bill Deter
Mayor Pro Tem
Don Titherington
Council
Janice Propst
Scott Buzzard
Michael Smith
Inside this issue:
Town Events

Pg. 2/3

Planning

Pg. 4/5

Taxes

Pg. 6

Budget

Pg. 6

Public Safety

Pg. 5

Deputy Corner

Pg. 7

We wrote you last December to update you on the progress of
the new water tower being built on Hemby Road in Weddington. When completed, this new tower will significantly improve the water pressure in the Weddington area. At the
time, we expected the tower to be in service by the end of
May. The tower is essentially complete, however we regret
that there has been a delay in the construction of the pump
station that supplies water to this tank. Without the completion of this pump station we cannot fill the tank to its proper
operating level to create this higher pressure in our system.
Our contractor working on this pump station has not yet completed all the work necessary to place the water tower in service. We are confident that once the pump station is
up and running, we will be able to complete the project quickly and provide more consistent, sustainable water pressure for you and your family.
We now expect the project to be completed by late July or early August 2016.
We appreciate your patience and understanding as we complete the project, and will be
providing you further updates as we are ready to put the water tower in service.
Should you have any questions, please call me at (704)296-4211.
Scott Huneycutt
Union County Public Works
scotthuneycutt@co.union.nc.us

PAGE 2

THE WEDDINGTON JOURN AL

TOWN EVENTS
Easter Egg Hunt - March 26, 2016
We had a wonderful event for our kids and families this year. We had over 4000 eggs filled with
candy hidden around the Town Hall. The children enjoyed various crafts including the popular spin
art. Several lucky children were the winners of bikes in the raffle giveaway. Once again our DJ
didn’t disappoint. He provided fun music to go along with the hula hoop and limbo contests. The
Easter Bunny and the Chick-fil-A cow made an appearance for pictures. Thank you to everyone
who brought in canned goods. The Union County Community Shelter thanks you as well.
Everyone worked so hard on this event. It was a wonderful fun-filled day for the community.

2016 Easter Egg Hunt Sponsors!
Chick-fil-A
Harris Teeter
Kuester Company
Park Sterling Bank
Polivka
RCS, Inc.
Southeastern Gymnastics
Taylor Made Solutions

PAGE 3

THE WEDDINGTON JOURN AL

TOWN EVENTS..continued
Spring Litter Sweep - April 16, 2016
Mayor Bill Deter would like to thank the volunteers from Weddington High School and the many
residents who spent their Saturday morning picking up trash in our town. It is estimated that we
had 100 hours of volunteer time invested. What a great way to show your town support and help
keep Weddington “litter” free.
Congratulations to Kelsey Stanton for the most unusual “trash” item found – a switch blade knife.
The Spring Litter Sweep was a great and productive day! Keep an eye out for the Fall Litter Sweep
date to be sometime in October.

Country Festival - September 17, 2016
Weddington will once again feature:
“Art at the Corners”
and our famous “Baking Contest“
Please visit our website at www.townofweddington.com
to get entry rules, guidelines and applications.

Calling all Bakers

Art at the Corners

Dust off your recipes and enter to win 1st, 2 or 3
nd

rd

prize in the following categories:
Pies (fruit or pumpkin), Cakes (Layered, Bundt or
Angel Food), Candy, Cookies (need a dozen drop or
rolled only) and/or Brownies, and Bread (Yeast,
Quick, Muffins, Pastry, Coffee Cake)

Stop by and visit your local artists.
We have an early bird rate of $40 if you register
before August 15th. It will be $50 after that date.
For an application please visit our website at
www.townofweddington.com

PAGE 4

THE WEDDINGTON JOURN AL

Update from the Planning/Zoning Office…
New and Proposed Subdivisions
Carringdon – Sketch Plan
Carringdon is a proposed 71 lot conservation subdivision located at the intersection of Weddington-Matthews
Road and Hemby Road. Public Involvement meetings were held on December 8th and 9th, and the Planning
Board approved the sketch plan with conditions at the December 21st meeting. The conditions have since been
met by the applicant and staff is awaiting submittal of the preliminary plat.

The Enclave at Weddington – Sketch Plan and Preliminary Plat
The Planning Board approved a sketch plan application for a 42 lot conservation subdivision named The Enclave
at Weddington on June 22nd, 2015. The proposed subdivision will have one access point off Antioch Church
Road and will preserve the existing ponds on the property, as well as large sections of hardwood forest. The
Council approved the preliminary plat on February 8th, 2016.

Sugar Magnolia – Preliminary Plat

On December, 21st, The Planning Board approved the Sketch Plan for the 18 lot conservation subdivision, Sugar
Magnolia, located off Highway 84. The Public Involvement meetings were on November 2nd and November 3rd.
The applicant has submitted the preliminary plat and it will likely be on the July Planning Board agenda for review.

Amenity site at The Falls at Weddington
The Town Council approved the preliminary plat for the 185 lot subdivision, The Falls at Weddington, on December 8th, 2014. The Town of Weddington Zoning Ordinance requires a conditional zoning approval for a subdivision amenity center, and the Town Council approved an application for an amenity center on September 14th,
2015. The approved site plan includes a club house and a pool, and the applicant is also required to get Council
approval for all construction documents. The Construction Documents were approved on May 9th, 2016 by the
Town Council

New Policy in Weddington
Viewshed and Conservation Land – Section 58-58; Section 58-4
The Town Council approved two text amendments to further prioritize viewshed in conservation subdivisions,
both in Section 58-58 and Section 58-4. Furthermore, the Council also approved an amendment to Section 58-58
to encourage both sides of a conservation subdivision to contain 50% conservation land when the entire property
is bisected by a major or minor thoroughfare.

Conditional Rezonings
All Saints Anglican Church
All Saints Anglican Church submitted a conditional zoning request for a church on approximately 8 acres, located
off Hemby Rd. Phase 1 includes a 13,000 square foot structure, parking, and stormwater management facilities.
The Planning Board reviewed the application on January 26th, 2015, and recommended approval with conditions
to the Town Council. The Town Council approved the conditional rezoning on July 13th, 2015, and approved the
construction documents on October 12th, 2015. The church is currently under construction.
Planning Continued on Page 5

PAGE 5

THE WEDDINGTON JOURN AL

Planning Continued from Page 4

Threshold Church
The Town Council approved Phase I for the Conditional Zoning request from Threshold Church in December of 2014
and the approved plan includes parking and a new driveway. Threshold Church has submitted a sketch plan for Phase
II, and is undergoing the traffic impact analysis procedure with Town Staff and the Town’s traffic consultant.

PUBLIC SAFETY UPDATE
Unsafe Driving at Optimist Park

Interested in the roads in Weddington?
The Charlotte Regional Transportation Planning
Organization (CRTPO) is the federallydesignated Metropolitan Planning Organization
(MPO) for the Charlotte urbanized area. The
CRTPO will hold a public input period for the
Division Needs tier between July and September, and the Town will post the official dates on
our website (www.townofWeddington.com)
when they are finalized. Please refer to the
website www.crtpo.org for more information and
to add your input!

Established in 1987, Weddington Optimist Park provides a positive and safe environment for our community to create lasting and joyful memories. Built
entirely through dedicated volunteers, children learn
sportsmanship, teamwork and the values to become
productive future citizens.
Unfortunately in the last few weeks some of those
future citizens who are now driving have demonstrated a blatant disrespect for the park. On several occasions, witnesses have reported young drivers doing “spin-outs” in the parking lots and speeding down the “straight away” at 30+ mph. These
actions are clearly unsafe and is a serious concern
for park officials.
If you are a coach, player, umpire or spectator, we
ask for you to drive safely and adhere to Optimist
Park’s maximum speed limit of 15 mph. If you witness any unsafe driving, please get a vehicle description and call 911 to report it.
The Weddington Public Safety Committee’s vision is
to share ideas and information to help make our
community to be a safe and enjoyable place to live.
If you as a Weddington citizen have any suggestions
to complement our efforts, please have your voice
heard.

2016 Country Festival: September 17, 2016
2016 Tree Lighting: December 9, 2016
2016 Holiday Schedule
Independence Day

July 4

Labor Day

Sept. 5

Veteran’s Day

Nov. 11

Thanksgiving

Nov. 24-25

Christmas

Dec 23, 26

2016 Schedule of
Town Council Meetings
7:00 pm at Weddington Town Hall
unless otherwise posted
July 18

Aug. 8

Sept. 12

Oct. 10

Nov. 14

Dec. 12

2016 Schedule of
Planning Board Meetings
7:00 pm at Weddington Town Hall
unless otherwise posted
June 27

July 25

Aug. 22

Sept. 26

Oct. 24

Nov. 28
Dec. 19

PAGE 6

THE WEDDINGTON JOURN AL

A Word From Our Tax Collector
Weddington property taxes are due on September 1 of every year and payable without penalty until January 6
of the following year. Property owners whose payments are postmarked on or after January 6 will be assessed
a penalty of 2 percent interest for the month of January and an additional ¾ percent every month thereafter
until the bill is paid.
The town tax rate for FY2016 is $0.052 per $100 assessed valuation. The 2016 tax bills will go out at the end
of July. The Town does not send tax notices to taxpayers whose taxes are paid through their escrow account. If
you pay your taxes directly and have not received a tax notice by August 15, please contact the Tax Collector.
You may also make your tax payment online via our secure website at www.townofweddington.com. There is a
fee of $4.95 for use of this service. Please see the following helpful hints for paying via the website:
Name

Tax Type

Tax Year

Leave Tax Type Blank

Receipt Number

**This field is the bill number on your tax notice

Map Number

**This field is the property ID number on your tax notice

For further information regarding Weddington taxes
Contact: Kim Woods, Tax Collector
Town of Weddington
704-846-2709
704-844-6372 Fax
kwoods@townofweddington.com
Union County Tax Office
704-283-3848

FINAL FISCAL YEAR BUDGET APPROVED
Revenues

A public hearing on the Fiscal Year 2017
budget was held at the June 13, 2016 Council
meeting and a final budget for the Town was
approved by the Town Council. The tax rate

Ad Valorem Taxes

$1,072,250

State-Collected Revenues

831,250

Zoning and Subdivision Revenues

83,150

Other Revenues

6,000

Total Revenues

$1,992,650

will remain unchanged at 5.2 cents. The bulk
of the budget is for public safety and is used to

Operating Expenditures

pay for fire and police services. A summary of

Administrative Expenditures

$484,170

the budget is shown here. A more detailed ver-

Planning and Zoning Expenditures

292,400

sion is available on the Town’s website.

General Government Expenditures

1,216,080

Total Expenditures

$1,992,650

PAGE 7

THE WEDDINGTON JOURN AL

The majority of contact law enforcement has with the public happen during emergencies or emotional situations.
Those situations are not always the most effective times for relationship building with the community, and some
community members may feel that Deputies are unapproachable on the street.
In an effort to break down barriers and allow for a relaxed, one-on-one interaction, feel free to contact me and
invite me to your community gathering or event in order to discuss how we can make your community a safer
place to live and work.
I hope that members of the Weddington community will feel comfortable to ask questions, bring concerns, or
simply get to know our Deputies. These interactions are the foundation of community partnerships.
Please call or email me in order to arrange a meeting .
Louie Rodriguez, UCSO Deputy
704 320 6529
louierodriguez@co.union.nc.us
Deputy Louie Rodriguez
louierodriguez@co.union.nc.us

Deputy Chris Black
chrisblack@co.union.nc.us

Deputy Ryan Hedlund
ryanhedlund@co.union.nc.us

New Congressional District Map
Many voters are confused about what District they now live in with the new Congressional District map.
Follow this link and type in your address and your new District information will be provided to you:
http://www.ncsbe.gov/webapps/redistrict/uscongmaps.html

Stop by the Town Hall to
purchase Town Apparel
Modeled by:
Mayor Bill Deter,
Mayor Pro-Tem Don Titherington
Councilman Michael Smith
Councilwoman Janice Propst
and Councilman Scott Buzzard
short sleeve t-shirts
(navy, white, red, purple) $8
long sleeve t-shirts
(navy, white, dark heather) $13
hoodies
(dark gray) $20
baseball hats
(khaki, navy, white) $13
Weddington bag
or car magnet $3

THE WEDDINGTON JOURN AL
TOWN OF WEDDINGTON
1924 Weddington Road
Weddington, NC 28104
Phone: 704-846-2709
Fax: 704-844-6372
Email: townclerk@townofweddington.com
Website: www.townofweddington.com
Town Hall Hours:
Monday, Wednesday & Friday 9AM to 1PM
or by appointment

Have a story idea for us? A question
you want answered? Something you’d
like to see in the newsletter? Give us
a call. Drop us a note. Send us an
e-mail. We’ll do our best to respond.

Members of the Weddington Town Council are available
to speak to any club, group or neighborhood meeting. If
your group would like a council member present to talk
about issues facing Weddington, call Town Hall at
704-846-2709 to schedule a speaker.
