A.F.S.C.M.E.
M.S.A.D. #44

A.F.S.C.M.E.
M.S.A.D. #44

AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE
COUNCIL #93
A.F.S.C.M.E. A.F.L. C.I.O.
and
MAINE SCHOOL ADMINISTRATIVE DISTRICT #44
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
(Food Service, Bus Drivers, Custodians, Maintenance)

JULY 1, 2024, THROUGH JUNE 30, 2027

A.F.S.C.M.E.
M.S.A.D. #44

A.F.S.C.M.E.
M.S.A.D. #44

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREAMBLE
1
ARTICLE 1. RECOGNITION 1
ARTICLE 2. CHECK-OFF
1
ARTICLE 3. DEFINITIONS
2
ARTICLE 4. MANAGEMENT RIGHTS 3
ARTICLE 5. HOURS OF WORK
3
ARTICLE 6. MEAL PERIODS 6
ARTICLE 7. HOLIDAYS
6
ARTICLE 8. VACATIONS
7
ARTICLE 9. INSURANCE/ANNUITIES/TAX-DEFERRED INVESTMENTS
ARTICLE 10. SENIORITY
11
ARTICLE 11. LAYOFF 11
ARTICLE 12. LEAVES OF ABSENCE 12
ARTICLE 13. SICK LEAVE
14
ARTICLE 14. EMPLOYEES' CATASTROPHIC ILLNESS/INJURY BANK 17
ARTICLE 15. DISCIPLINE
18
ARTICLE 16. SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTE
18
ARTICLE 17. WORK RULES 20
ARTICLE 18. SCOPE AND SEPARABILITY
21
ARTICLE 19. NO STRIKE
21
ARTICLE 20. EMPLOYEE RIGHTS
21
ARTICLE 21. CLOTHING ALLOWANCE
22
ARTICLE 22. WAGES 22
ARTICLE 23. PERSONNEL FILES
22
ARTICLE 24. EARNED PAID LEAVE 22
ARTICLE 25. DURATION
23
APPENDIX A – ADDITIONAL TIME ASSIGNMENTS
25
APPENDIX B – SALARY SCALES
27

9

PREAMBLE
WHEREAS, MSAD #44 (hereinafter referred to as "Employer"), and Council #93,
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, AFLCIO (hereinafter
referred to as the "Union") desire to establish a constructive, cooperative and harmonious
relationship; to set forth the entire Agreement in relation to salaries, wages, hours of work
and other terms and conditions of employment; to promote effective service towards the
accomplishment of the mission of the agency; and to establish an equitable and peaceful
procedure for the resolution of differences;
THEREFORE, this Agreement by and between the parties is entered into on June 17,
2024.
ARTICLE 1. RECOGNITION
This collective bargaining Agreement covers all employees in the bargaining unit as
defined in Article 3 & 5. The employer recognizes that A.F.S.C.M.E. has been certified
by the Maine Labor Relations Board to be the elected bargaining unit as specified in the
MLRB Bargaining Agent Certification dated May 7, 1976. This unit includes food
service workers, custodians, maintenance, bustodians, bus drivers, and dispatchers who
have been employed with MSAD #44 for six (6) months or more. It has been agreed by
the parties that the Supervisor of Food Services, Buildings & Grounds Supervisor, and
Transportation Supervisor are not to be included in the bargaining unit nor any other
employee as defined in 26 M.R.S.A. 962(6).
ARTICLE 2. CHECK-OFF
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Union to provide MSAD #44 with a sufficient
supply of itemized sheets of all Employees for deduction of dues. Weekly dues
shall be deducted in equal amounts only during the actual time employed
(biweekly).
B. The Employer agrees to deduct the Union membership dues from the pay of those
Employees who individually request, in writing, that such deductions be made.
The amounts to be deducted shall be certified to the Employer by the Treasurer of
the Union, and aggregate deductions of all Employees shall be remitted to the
Treasurer of Council #93, after such deductions are made, no later than the 15th of
the following month after the deductions are made.
1

C. This authorization may be revoked upon written notice to the Union and the
Superintendent no earlier than thirty (30) days prior to the termination of this
Agreement.
D. The Union shall indemnify and hold the Board harmless against any and all claims and
suits which may arise by reason of any action taken in making deductions pursuant to this
Article.

ARTICLE 3. DEFINITIONS

A. BARGAINING UNIT. Whenever the term "Bargaining Unit" is used, it shall refer
to all employees in the Classified Personnel Bargaining Unit as specified in the
Unit Determination, dated March 30, 1976, of the Maine Labor Relations Board,
and shall also refer to any additional personnel that the Employer and the Union
mutually and voluntarily agree to include in writing in the Classified Unit.
B. BOARD. Whenever the term "Board" is used, it shall refer to the School
Administrative District No. 44 Board of Directors and any designated
representative by committee, individual members, or authorized agent whether or
not a member.
C. CONTRACT. Whenever the term "Contract" is used, it shall refer to this
Collective Bargaining Agreement unless otherwise clearly indicated by the
context.
D. EMPLOYEE. Whenever the term "Employee" is used, unless otherwise expressly
provided or clearly indicated by the context of this Contract, it shall refer to all
employees who are included in the Bargaining Unit.
E. EMPLOYER. Whenever the term "Employer" is used, it shall refer to MSAD #44
or the MSAD #44 Board of Directors.
F. PRINCIPAL. Whenever the term "Principal" is used, it is to include any full time
supervising Principal.

2

G. STEWARD. Whenever the term "Steward" is used, it shall refer to an employee
selected by the Union to represent the members of the bargaining unit in matters
related to this contract.
H. SUPERINTENDENT. Whenever the term "Superintendent" is used, it shall
include the Superintendent of Schools of School Administrative District No. 44 or
any person whom the Superintendent specifically designates to act for the
Superintendent in any particular situation or class of situations.
I. UNION. Whenever the term "Union" is used, it shall refer to Council #93,
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, AFLCIO.

ARTICLE 4. MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Except as explicitly limited by a specific provision of this Agreement, Management shall
continue to have all rights and authority available to it under law, including the exclusive
right to take any action it deems appropriate in the management or operation of the
school system, in the implementation of educational policies and in the direction of the
work of Employees covered herein in accordance with its judgment. Such rights shall
include but shall not be limited to, the operation of the school system, direction of the
Employees, the right to assign work, to change assignments, to promote, to suspend, to
discharge, to reduce or expand the staff, to transfer, to maintain discipline, to establish
schedules, to establish work rules, and to introduce new or improved methods or
facilities. Union agrees that Management does not lose any rights simply by virtue of not
exercising those rights.
ARTICLE 5. HOURS OF WORK
A. Drivers on regularly scheduled bus runs transporting students from home to school
or from school to home shall be paid for hours worked. When such runs are less
than two hours in duration, bus drivers shall be provided additional work in order
that a minimum of two hours pay can be earned or, if no additional work is
available, shall be paid a minimum of two hours. Late runs shall be paid a
minimum of two (2) hours and shall be awarded annually based on seniority.
Higher pay for higher classification: Any employee, who is temporarily assigned
to work in a higher classification where a higher rate of pay is applicable, shall
3

receive such a higher rate of pay for hours worked in the higher classification.
Should an employee be temporarily assigned to work in a lower-paid
classification, the employee shall do so with no loss of pay.
B. WORK SCHEDULE. A work schedule showing the Employee’s hours of work
shall be posted by the immediate supervisor. Employees shall not be asked to
change their work schedule unless a substitute is not qualified to perform the
assigned work as determined by the supervisor.

C. WORK YEAR. School year employees work the student school year, plus a
certain number of days based on operational needs as determined by the
Superintendent. Calendar year employees are those who work twelve (12) months
per year. Whenever possible, school year employees shall be notified prior to
summer break of any additional days they shall be required to work before the
beginning of the next school year.
D. CALL IN. (Including Boiler Checks) There will be a minimum of three (3) hours
pay for anyone called in after their regular work shift is over. This Section applies
only when call-in results in hours worked which are not annexed consecutively to
one end or the other of the working day or working shift. This Section does not
apply to scheduled overtime, call-in time annexed to the beginning of the work
shift, or holdover times annexed to the end of the work shift or work day.
E. ELIGIBILITY FOR EXTRA-TIME OR OVERTIME FOR BUS DRIVERS. At
the beginning of the year, non-probationary bus drivers desiring extra-time or
overtime assignments may volunteer for any the following additional assignments
by filling out an Eligibility List provided by the District. Each list shall be
established by order of seniority, and assignment shall be made on a rotating basis
throughout the school year in accordance with the Extra Time Assignment
provision attached in Appendix A.
a. FILL-IN DRIVER FOR ADDED SCHOOL YEAR RUNS (NOT
INCLUDING REGULAR AM AND PM TO-SCHOOL RUNS). Added
School Year Runs are those regular and recurring runs that occur during the
school year such as Freshmen Academy, Region 9, Late Run, Lunch Run,
or any other added run the District establishes. A separate Fill-In driver list
will be maintained for each Added School Year Run for those drivers
4

wanting to drive as a replacement when a regularly assigned driver is
unavailable.
b. MISCELLANEOUS RUNS/DRIVING ASSIGNMENTS. Miscellaneous
runs/driving assignments are those assignments that occur on a sporadic or
inconsistent basis throughout the work week such as picking a school bus
up at a dealership, picking up parts, or other types of driving that may
occur.
c. SPORT/FIELD TRIPS. Sports/Field trips are those trips associated with
stipend activities that occur outside the regular school day or during school
vacation during the school year.
F. NORMAL DAILY RATE OF PAY. Whenever the term “Normal Daily Rate of
Pay” is used, it refers to the employee’s hourly wage times the number of hours
assigned to that employee on a typical work day.
G. OVERTIME. Overtime will be paid at the rate of one and one-half (1½) times the
regular rate for hours compensated for over forty (40) hours in a week. Overtime
within each classification will be distributed on a rotating basis by eligibility,
seniority, and qualifications, and when appropriate, by building. The
Transportation Director will make a good faith attempt to distribute overtime on
an equitable basis over the school year.
H. If all eligible bus drivers reject an extra time or overtime assignment, the eligible
employee with the least number of hours accumulated for that week, provided the
employee is qualified to perform the work as determined by the Supervisor, shall
be assigned the extra time or overtime. When an employee refuses extra time or
overtime, the time shall be charged against the employee as if the employee had
worked it, for purposes of determining qualifications for future overtime.
I. SPARE-HELP. Spare-help shall be eligible for all assignments. If no bargaining
unit member is available for extra time, the spare help may be called.
J. SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL. Shift differential will be paid to those custodians whose
assigned shift starts after the normal educational day ends.
K. ACTING LEAD CUSTODIAN. Management will designate, in writing, the
Custodian who, after completion of one full shift in the acting Lead Custodian
capacity, will be paid an additional one dollar ($1.00) per hour for the first thirty
5

(30) consecutive work days. After thirty (30) consecutive work days, the dollar
stipend will be increased to one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per hour. After sixty
(60) consecutive work days, the dollar and fifty cents per hour will increase to two
dollars ($2) per hour.
L. SNOW DAYS. School-year employees will be provided an opportunity to make
up for work lost on snow days when school is canceled.

ARTICLE 6. MEAL PERIODS
A. Each full time employee shall be granted a thirty (30) minute unpaid lunch period
for each shift of eight (8) hours of work. Such lunch period will be provided near
the middle of this eight (8) hour shift whenever feasible. Longer meal periods
may be granted with the approval of the employee's immediate supervisor.
B. Each full time employee shall be granted one (1) fifteen (15) minute paid rest
period for each consecutive four (4) hours of work. Such a rest period will be
provided near the middle of this four (4) hour shift whenever feasible.
C. Employees who are required to make bus trips of more than five (5) hours duration
shall be reimbursed for a meal in an amount not to exceed eighteen dollars ($18)
upon presentation of the receipt for such expenditure.

ARTICLE 7. HOLIDAYS
A. Each employee will receive the following days as paid holidays provided that the
employee works the day before and the day after the holiday, excluding Saturday,
Sunday, vacations, and sick days. If sick leave is taken on more than one (1)
instance on the day before or the day after a holiday, a doctor's certificate must be
submitted. Holiday pay will be based on a normal daily rate of pay.
FULL YEAR EMPLOYEES
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
Presidents’ Day

SCHOOL YEAR EMPLOYEES
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
President’s Day
6

Patriots’ Day
Memorial Day
Juneteenth
Independence Day
Labor Day
Indigenous Peoples’ Day
Veterans’ Day
Thanksgiving Day
Day After Thanksgiving
Day Before Christmas *
Christmas Day

Memorial Day
Labor Day
Indigenous Peoples’ Day
Veterans’ Day
Thanksgiving Day
Day After Thanksgiving
Day Before Christmas*
Christmas Day

*The “day before Christmas” may be taken either before or after Christmas Day with
prior approval of the Superintendent.
B. Two (2) of the paid holidays may be treated as floating holidays. This means that
if an employee is required to work on a particular holiday, they have the option to
take another day off with pay at their regular daily rate. Alternatively, the
employee may instead elect to be compensated for the hours worked at their
regular daily rate. Any alternative day off must be approved by the employee's
immediate supervisor. Additionally, if a paid holiday falls during the employee's
vacation, they can either take another day off with pay or receive compensation for
the holiday at their regular daily rate.
C. If a holiday occurs on a Saturday or Sunday, the Superintendent of Schools will
designate either the Friday before or the Monday after as the date on which the
holiday is to be observed. For the purpose of this article, the day to be observed
shall be as designated by the State in accordance with State law and the school
calendar.
D. School year employees who work during the summer for the district shall be paid
for Independence Day provided that the employee works for the district the day
before or after the holiday.

ARTICLE 8. VACATIONS

7

A. ELIGIBILITY. A full year employee will be eligible for the following vacation
benefits:
Vacation Allowances:
Less than 1 full year of continuous service:

No vacation

One year of service but less than 2 years of continuous service: 5 days’ vacation
Two years of service but less than 3 years of continuous
service:
Three years of service but less than 4 years of continuous
service:
Four years of service but less than 5 years of continuous
service:
Five years of service but less than 6 years of continuous
service:
Six years of service but less than 7 years of continuous
service:
Seven years of service but less than 8 years of continuous
service:
Eight years of service but less than 9 years of continuous
service:
Nine years of service but less than 10 years of continuous
service:
Ten years of service but less than 11 years of continuous
service:
Eleven years of service but less than 20 years of continuous
service:
Twenty years or more of continuous service:

7 days’ vacation
10 days’ vacation
11 days’ vacation
12 days’ vacation
13 days’ vacation
14 days’ vacation
15 days’ vacation
16 days’ vacation
18 days’ vacation
20 days’ vacation
25 days’ vacation

B. Vacation dates will be requested by employees through their supervisor. Final vacation
dates will be approved in advance by the supervisor.

C. Vacation pay will be equal to the hourly rate of pay for the employee during the
week immediately prior to the employee's vacation.
D. Any employee who is laid off or retires from service of the employer prior to
taking the employee's vacation leave, shall be compensated in cash for the unused
vacation the employee had accumulated at the time of separation on the next
regular payroll date. Any employee who is dismissed or voluntarily quits prior to
taking the employee's vacation leave, shall be compensated in cash for the unused
vacation the employee has accumulated at the time of the employee's anniversary
date. The employee shall give fourteen (14) calendar days notice of their intent to
8

quit or forfeit one (1) day's pay for each day short of the fourteen (14) calendar
day's notice to a maximum of seven (7) day's pay.
E. Vacation must be taken within the fiscal year or the vacation time is lost.

ARTICLE 9. INSURANCE/ANNUITIES/TAX-DEFERRED INVESTMENTS
A. XRays, TB tests, and physical examinations, required by the District, will be paid
for by the district at an amount not to exceed the rates established by the
designated school physician.

B. HEALTH INSURANCE. The District shall contribute the following amounts
towards the health insurance plan, which the employee is eligible:
School Year Employees: 100% of Single subscriber and up to 69% of Adult with
Child for those electing dependent coverage (family, two person or adult with
child).
Full Year Employees: 100% of Single subscriber and up to 93% of Adult with
Child for those electing dependent coverage (family, two person or adult with
child).
Board contributions shall be determined under the MEA Choice Plus plan.
Employees electing Standard shall be responsible for any additional cost.
Alternatively, employees electing the less-expensive Standard 500 or Standard
1000 plans may use Board contributions under the Choice Plus plan towards these
less-expensive plans, thereby reducing their own contribution levels.
In the event a successor contract is not negotiated by the expiration of this
contract, Board dollar ($) contributions toward health insurance shall remain at the
2023-2024 levels until negotiated otherwise.

C. CASH-IN-LIEU. Eligible employees who demonstrate proof of health insurance
coverage elsewhere may elect to receive cash in lieu of district insurance
according to the following schedule:
9

School Year Employees:
Full Year Employees:

$2,985
$4,030

Cash in lieu payment shall be subject to federal and state taxes, as provided by law.
Employees must select how their contribution will be applied and so indicate to the
payroll department in writing by the first workday in September of each year.

D. PRORATION FOR PART-TIME EMPLOYEES. Employees regularly scheduled
to work more than seventeen (17) hours but less than twenty (20) hours per week
shall be entitled to fifty percent (50%) of the above health or cash in lieu benefits.
Employees regularly scheduled to work less than seventeen (17) hours shall not be
entitled to district health or cash in lieu benefits.
E. ELIGIBILITY. The above benefits apply to regular employees of the district and
do not include temporary, spare or substitute help. An employee coming off
probation during the course of a year shall be eligible for a portion of the benefits,
prorated on a semimonthly basis, according to the length of time remaining in the
year.
In the event that an employee’s spouse is also employed by the District, only one
employee may elect two person or family coverage and the other may re enroll as
a dependent.
F. The Employer agrees to continue the "premium only tax deferred cafeteria plan"
for employees who pay their share of the health insurance premium.
The Employer agrees to renegotiate the economic impact if present or future laws
do not allow a "premium only tax deferred cafeteria plan."
G. CONTRACT REOPENER – “CADILLAC” TAX. To the extent that any of the
health insurance plans selected by the employee would generate a so-called
“Cadillac” tax penalty under the Affordable Care Act in 2020 or beyond, the
parties agree to reopen the contract for the limited purpose of negotiating an
alternative health insurance plan and, if appropriate, contribution rates and/or the
10

assignment of any additional costs/penalties/assessments between the parties
associated with the so-called Cadillac tax.

ARTICLE 10. SENIORITY
A. SENIORITY. Seniority is to mean an employee's length of continuous service
with MSAD #44 since their last date of hire. Seniority shall begin from the time an
employee is hired by the Board to fill a regular bargaining unit position.
B. PROBATIONARY PERIOD. New employees shall be required to complete a
twelve (12) month probationary period.
C. A probationary employee may be disciplined or terminated without compliance
with terms of this contract. A probationary employee may be eligible for the
benefits set forth in Article 9 after completion of thirty (30) days employment. All
other benefits bestowed by this contract shall accrue but not vest until the
satisfactory completion of the six (6) month statutory exclusionary period referred
to in Article 1.
D. CONTINUOUS SERVICE. Shall mean employment by MSAD #44 which has
not been interrupted by anything other than approved leave.
E. By September 30th each year, a copy of the seniority list shall be furnished to the
local union. Changes, additions, and/or deletions to the prior accepted seniority
list shall be considered to be final with the currently posted seniority list if those
changes, additions, and/or deletions are not challenged by the Union within thirty
(30) days after the seniority list is made available to the Union.
F. VACANCIES AND POSTINGS. Except in emergencies, vacancies shall be
posted internally for five (5) days. Interested applicants shall follow the
procedures in the posting. Vacancies may be filled by reinstatement from layoffs,
transfers, demotions, promotions, or external applicants. In the event qualifications
and abilities are equal, the most senior in-house applicant shall be selected.
ARTICLE 11. LAYOFF

11

A. DEFINITION. Layoff shall mean the temporary or indefinite separation of an
employee by the employer for other than reasons of discipline or performance.
B. NOTICE. An employee shall be given one (1) week notice by the employer of any
layoff except in emergencies.
C. ORDER OF LAYOFF. In the event it becomes necessary for the employer to lay
off employees for any reason, employees shall be laid off by job classification
according to evaluations and qualifications. In the event evaluation and
qualifications are, in the opinion of the Superintendent, substantially similar,
seniority shall prevail. The right to reassign thereafter remains with the Board.
D. EVALUATIONS. If employees in the classification in which the layoff is to occur
have not been formally evaluated in the prior year immediately preceding the
layoff, then seniority shall be the sole criteria for layoff.
E. ORDER OF RECALL. Employees shall be recalled from layoff in the inverse
order of layoff by job classification performing the recall. Recalled employees
must accept offered employment within ten (10) days of recall or forfeit all rights
under this contract. Recall rights shall continue for eighteen (18) months from the
date of layoff. Thereafter, the Employer may hire new employees to fill vacancies
resulting from layoffs. No employee shall be allowed to fill a position for which
the employee is not qualified nor has the ability to perform the work required of
the position.
F. For purposes of layoff and recall, the following classifications shall be recognized:
1. Bus Driver
2. Maintenance
3. Custodian
4. Food Service
G. Employees will be placed in the classification in which they are regularly assigned
the majority of their work week during the school year.

ARTICLE 12. LEAVES OF ABSENCE
12

A. BEREAVEMENT LEAVE. Up to five (5) consecutive days with pay, with
exceptions granted by the Superintendent, may be taken for the death of a parent,
spouse, child, sibling, parent-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, grandparent, grandchild, stepchild, step grandchild, relative
domiciled in the employee's house, or significant other living in the household.
B. PERSONAL. There shall be three (3) days with pay per year non-accumulative.
Notice must be given to the supervisor at least two (2) days in advance of the date
of the leave stating the nature of the personal leave. Personal days that lead into or
out of a vacation or long weekend cannot be taken except in an established
emergency. Such leave may be taken only with permission of the Superintendent
of Schools or their designee. (Personal days are not to be equated with vacation
time.)
C. Rate of pay for these leaves of absence will be based upon the normal daily rate of
pay of the employee.
D. JURY DUTY. Employees shall be granted a leave of absence from work anytime
they are required to report for jury duty. Employees shall be paid the difference
between any jury duty compensation they receive and their regular wages for each
day of jury service provided they are performing their jury duty. Employees who
are released from jury duty with at least one quarter (1/4) of their normal work day
remaining, shall report to their supervisor and accept a work assignment for the
remainder of the day.
E. UNPAID INJURY/ILLNESS LEAVE OF ABSENCE. An employee shall be
eligible for an unpaid leave of absence upon completion of the employee’s
probationary period. An unpaid leave of absence may be granted at the discretion
of the Superintendent of Schools. Time spent on unpaid leave shall be credited
toward seniority and longevity. The duration of the leave shall not exceed eight
(8) weeks. The employee may then request an additional unpaid leave of absence
up to an additional eight (8) weeks. Any application must be in writing and
specifically state the reasons for such application and the length of time requested.
Such a request must be substantiated with a physician's statement and the cost of
such a statement will be paid by the employee. Upon return to work after
completion of a period of unpaid leave of absence, not to exceed the maximum of
sixteen (16) weeks, the employee shall be returned to the position held
immediately prior to the beginning of the leave of absence.
13

F. CANCELLATION OF LEAVES OF ABSENCE. All leaves of absence shall be
subject to the condition that the Superintendent of Schools may cancel the leave
for just cause at any time upon prior written notice to the employee, specifying a
reasonable date of termination of the leave, and the reason for such cancellation.
This item is not subject to the grievance procedure.
G. UNPAID MATERNITY LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Employees may be granted an
unpaid maternity leave of absence by the Superintendent of Schools upon written
request from the employee.
H. OTHER UNPAID LEAVES OF ABSENCE. Employees covered by this
Agreement may be allowed to be absent from work without pay for a period not
exceeding a total of sixty (60) days upon written application stating the reason for
such leave to the Superintendent of Schools.
I. FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE. Eligible employees shall be provided leave as
provided by the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA). The employer may require,
or the employee may elect, to use their accumulated sick leave, if qualifying,
vacation, or personal leave, to cover any FMLA leave. Any leaves granted under
the FMLA shall run concurrently with, and not in addition to, any leaves granted
under Article 12. Effective with the implementation of the Maine Paid Family and
Medical Leave law, the Board will comply with the state law regarding Maine’s
Paid Family and Medical Leave program.

J. TRAINING AND COURSE REIMBURSEMENT. Employees who obtain prior
written approval from the Superintendent or their designee to attend courses or
other job related training shall be reimbursed for tuition costs and fees upon
documentation of successful completion of the course(s).

ARTICLE 13. SICK LEAVE
Any employee unable to perform the duties of the employee's employment shall receive
sick leave with pay to the extent of the employee's accumulated sick leave. However, any
employee who is injured while working for another employer shall not be eligible for sick
leave.
14

A. Sick leave eligibility will accumulate for each individual employee at the rate of
one (1) day per calendar month worked, and will be limited to a maximum of
twelve (12) days accumulation in one (1) year. Yearly accumulation may be
carried forward each year to a maximum accumulation of one hundred (100) days
per employee.
B. Sick leave pay will be based upon the normal daily rate of pay. The
Superintendent reserves the right to require a medical authentication of any need
for sick leave pay claimed, including the right to withhold the sick leave pay until
such authentication is received. Such authentication may be required from a
doctor designated by the Superintendent, in which case the cost of such
authentication shall be paid by the Employer.
C. Employees must call their immediate supervisor at least one half (1/2) hour prior
to the beginning of their work shift and report that they are sick if they desire to
receive sick leave pay that day, except in extreme emergencies.
D. All injuries incurred in the workplace will be immediately reported to a direct
supervisor and in cases covered under the Worker's Compensation Act, an
employee will receive from the employee's accumulated sick leave only the
difference between the amount of the employee's normal daily rate of pay and the
amount received as Worker's Compensation. The difference shall be charged on a
pro rata daily basis to the employee's accumulated sick leave and shall cease when
the employee's sick leave is exhausted. If the employee indicates that the
employee will reimburse the District the full amount received from Worker's
Compensation, the employee will receive full sick leave compensation from the
District. If the employee exhausts the employee's sick leave, the employee will be
entitled to only the full amount of Worker's Compensation from that time forward.
The District may require any employee on sick leave to apply for Worker's
Compensation if it applies and to take such further steps as may be necessary to
obtain the same.

E. SICK LEAVE INCENTIVE
15

1.

Any full year employee who works a full fiscal year without using any sick
leave will be able, if the employee so desires, to trade in up to twelve (12)
of the aforesaid twelve (12) sick leave days in exchange for six (6) days
bonus pay, payable at the end of the fiscal year. A full-year employee who
works a full fiscal year using two (2) or fewer sick leave days will be able
to trade up to ten (10) of the sick leave days in exchange for five (5) days
bonus pay, payable at the end of the fiscal year.

2.

Alternatively, a full school year employee who works a full school year
using two (2) or fewer sick leave days will be able to trade up to four (4) of
the sick leave days in exchange for two (2) days bonus pay, payable at the
end of the fiscal year.

3.

The incentives under Subsections E(1) and E(2) will not be accumulative.
In addition, the days traded in will also not be accumulative. Days in this
Paragraph will be prorated on the same basis as in Paragraph B above.

F. SICK LEAVE UPON RETIREMENT. Upon submission of a letter of retirement
at least three (3) months in advance, an employee shall receive a retirement cash
bonus equal to half (1/2) of all accumulated sick leave. Payment shall be no later
than the beginning of the fiscal year following retirement. In the event of death,
during the three (3) month period or prior to payment of this bonus, such payment
shall go to the beneficiary of the estate. This shall apply to only those employees
with over fifteen (15) years of work experience in public schools.
G. SICK LEAVE COMPUTATION. When employees are scheduled to work four (4)
ten (10) hour days per week instead of the normal five (5) eight (8) hour days per
week schedule, they will be paid ten (10) hours of pay for a day of sick leave and
be charged for 1 1/4 days sick leave.
H. FAMILY ILLNESS LEAVE. Family illness will be allowed in accordance with
School Board Policy GBO Family Care Leave only if the benefits are greater than
the Maine Family Sick Leave Act, otherwise the Maine Family Sick Leave Act
shall prevail.

16

ARTICLE 14. EMPLOYEES' CATASTROPHIC ILLNESS/INJURY BANK
A. The Employees' Catastrophic Illness/Injury Bank, hereafter known as the "bank,"
must have a minimum of forty-five (45) days to be started. Days will be added to
the bank during the first full week of each school year.
B. Each employee who desires to participate in the bank must contribute up to two
(2) days at the beginning of each school year. Once started, if the total number of
days drops below forty five (45), an emergency call will go out to eligible
employees to add days to the bank. Only those employees who donated up to two
(2) days at the beginning of the year are eligible to donate an additional day to the
bank during that year.
C. Only non probationary employees who have contributed days to the bank during
any given year are eligible to use days out of the bank during any given year.
D. No one (1) employee can draw from the bank until all of one's accumulated sick
days have been used, nor can any one (1) employee draw more than forty-five (45)
days during one (1) year, or until the illness/injury is officially declared a
permanent disability, whichever is less.
E. All requests for use of days in the bank must be made in writing stating the exact
reason(s) for the request. A supporting doctor's statement will accompany each
written request. The written request and doctor's statement will be submitted to
the Superintendent of Schools. Each request will be reviewed by the Catastrophic
Illness/ Injury Bank Governance Committee consisting of the Superintendent of
Schools, an AFSCME representative, and a School Board representative. This
committee will determine whether a participant is eligible to use days from the
bank on an individual case by case basis.
Catastrophic Illness or Injury: A catastrophic illness or injury is one that is sudden
and unforeseen, involves extraordinary or catastrophic injuries or illness, and
requires immediate medical attention or is a chronic illness in which bodily health
impairment is substantial, constant, consistent, and of long duration. The Bank is
reserved for those illnesses or injuries that are serious in nature and necessitate a
prolonged and unanticipated absence from work.
17

Determination of whether each request meets this catastrophic or chronic threshold
will be based upon a physician's verification and diagnosis, any medical
complications, and any other facts and circumstances within the discretion of the
Committee.
F. After the initial contribution by the eligible employees at the beginning of each
school year, unused bank days will be carried over from the previous year to
comprise a total not to exceed one hundred thirty five (135) days.
G. The bank is not subject to the grievance procedure.

ARTICLE 15. DISCIPLINE
Disciplinary action shall include the following:
Oral reprimand
Written reprimand
Suspension (in writing)
Demotion (in writing)
Discharge (in writing)
The listing of actions above is not to be construed as being necessary in progression or
limiting the appointing authority or the appointing authorities’ designee's discretion as to
which action to take.
Any disciplinary action taken on an employee who has completed the probationary period
shall be for just cause and may be processed through the Grievance and Arbitration
Procedure commencing at Step #2.
ARTICLE 16. SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTE
Grievance and Arbitration Procedure. Should the Union or an employee have a dispute
about the meaning or application of any provisions of this Agreement, they may seek
adjustment of the grievance as follows:

18

STEP #1. The Union Steward, with the employee, shall take up the grievance or dispute
with the employee's immediate supervisor within ten (10) working days of the event
giving rise to the grievance. The Supervisor shall attempt to adjust the matter and shall
respond to the Steward within three (3) working days.
STEP #2. If the grievance has not been settled, it shall be presented in writing by the
Union Steward or the Union Grievance Committee to the Superintendent of Schools
within seven (7) working days after the Supervisor's response is due. The Superintendent
of Schools shall respond to the Union Steward or the Grievance Committee in writing
within ten (10) working days.
STEP #3. If the grievance still remains unadjusted, it shall be presented by the Union
Steward, Union Representative, or Grievance Committee to the Board of Directors in
writing within seven (7) working days after the response of the Superintendent of Schools
is due. The Board of Directors shall respond in writing to the Union Steward, Union
Representative, or Grievance Committee (with a copy of the response to the local Union
President) within fifteen (15) days after the next regularly scheduled Board meeting.
STEP #4. If the grievance is still unsettled, the Union may, within thirty (30) working
days after the reply of the Board of Directors is due by written notice to the other, request
arbitration.
The arbitration proceeding shall be conducted by an arbitrator to be selected by the
Employer and the Union within seven (7) working days after notice has been given. If
the parties do not mutually agree upon an arbitrator, the Union shall contact the American
Arbitration Association to help in the selection of an arbitrator in accordance with their
rules of procedure.
The decisions of the arbitrator(s) shall be final and binding on the parties, subject to
judicial review as provided for under 26 M.R.S.A. Chapter 9-A, 972. 14 M.R.S.A. Sect.
5927 et. seq., and the arbitrator(s) shall be requested to issue the Arbitrator(s) decision
within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of testimony and argument. The arbitrator(s)
shall have no power to add to, subtract from, or modify this Agreement.
Expenses of the arbitrator's service and the proceedings shall be borne equally by the
Employer and the Union, however, each party shall be responsible for compensating its
own representatives and witnesses.
19

If either party desires a verbatim record of the proceedings, it may cause such a record to
be made, providing it pays for the record.
GRIEVANCE COMMITTEES
Employees selected by the Union to act as Union representatives shall be known as
"stewards". The name of the employees selected as stewards, and the names of other
Union representatives who may represent employees shall be certified in writing to the
Employer by the local Union and the individuals so certified shall constitute the Union
Grievance Committee.
The Employer agrees to meet once a month, if requested in writing, with the Union
Grievance Committee to discuss matters pertaining to items in this Agreement, providing
the Union Grievance Committee submits a written agenda of items for discussion at least
three (3) working days prior to the meeting date. Such meetings shall be held at a
mutually agreeable time. The Employer, when necessary, may defer such meetings up to
thirty (30) days for scheduling purposes.

PROCESSING GRIEVANCES DURING WORKING HOURS
The Union President, or the President's designee, may investigate and process grievances
during working hours without loss of pay, to a maximum of three (3) working hours per
week, but only with permission of the Superintendent of Schools in advance.
ARTICLE 17. WORK RULES
A. INFORMING EMPLOYEES. The Employer agrees to furnish each employee in
the bargaining unit with a copy of all work rules within thirty (30) days after the
signing of this Agreement and within thirty (30) days of the establishment of any
new and/or changed work rules. New employees shall be provided with a copy of
the rules and the collective bargaining agreement at the time of hire. All
bargaining unit employees shall be provided with a copy of the bargaining
agreement and it will be made available online within ninety (90) days of the
signing of the agreement.

20

B. ENFORCING. Employees shall comply with all rules that are not in conflict with
the terms of this Agreement, provided the rules are uniformly applied and
enforced.
C. The Employer shall provide to each employee job descriptions of their respective
classifications.
D. If an employee cannot continue their normal work duties due to a disability, the
employee shall be required to submit a doctor's certificate to that effect, specifying
any suggested work restrictions or reasonable accommodations.

ARTICLE 18. SCOPE AND SEPARABILITY
In the event any of the provisions contained in this Agreement are found to be contrary to
any applicable provisions of law, such applicable provisions of law shall control and the
remaining provisions in this Agreement shall not be affected thereby.
ARTICLE 19. NO STRIKE
For the duration of this Agreement, the Union, its officers, representatives, and members
shall not authorize, instigate, cause, aid, encourage, ratify or condone, nor shall any
employee take part in, any strike, slowdown, or stoppage of work, boycott, job action,
unlawful picketing or any other interruption of the school program. Failure or refusal on
the part of any employee to comply with any provision of this Article shall be cause for
whatever disciplinary action, including suspension or discharge, deemed necessary by the
Board. Alleged violation of any provision of this Article is appealable immediately by
either party to the Superior Court, the grievance procedure notwithstanding.
The Board agrees that there shall be no lockout of employees during the term of this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 20. EMPLOYEE RIGHTS
No employee shall be required to appear before the Superintendent or the Board on a
matter which could adversely affect continued employment or increments without prior
written reasons for the meeting and the opportunity to have representation.
21

ARTICLE 21. CLOTHING ALLOWANCE
The Board will provide the same level of uniform support for the duration of this contract
as provided in FY 15. The Maintenance workers and Custodians shall be reimbursed up
to two hundred dollars ($200) per year toward the purchase of safety footwear. Food
Service employees shall be reimbursed up to one hundred and fifty dollars ($150) per
year for necessary protective clothing and proper footwear.
ARTICLE 22. WAGES
Employees shall be paid in accordance with the scale attached in Appendix B.
Food Service employees may, prior to the start of a contract year, elect to receive their
wages in equal installments pro-rated over the course of the contract year. The District
shall establish a procedure for such election.
ARTICLE 23. PERSONNEL FILES
The Board shall maintain, for official purposes, one (1) personnel file for each employee
in accordance with 20-A MRSA Section 6101 and 6102. This file shall be kept under
conditions to ensure its integrity and shall contain copies of personnel forms, official
correspondence, written evaluations and other types of records and documents pertaining
to employment.

An employee shall be given a copy of all evaluations and any detrimental materials prior
to its being placed in the personnel file. An employee shall also have the right to submit
a written answer to any materials placed in the file within thirty (30) days.
An employee shall have the right to examine their file in the presence of the
Superintendent/designee or appropriate administrative personnel, during normal business
hours of the office in which the file is kept and within a reasonable period of time of the
request. Once a year, an employee may request copies of any materials in their personnel
file without cost.

ARTICLE 24. EARNED PAID LEAVE

22

Under Maine’s new Earned Paid Leave statute (26 M.R.S.A. §637), employees accrue
one (1) hour of earned paid leave for each forty (40) hours actually worked, up to a
maximum of forty (40) hours per year, and are permitted to use up to forty (40) hours of
accrued earned paid leave time in any one year. Earned Paid Leave time is not additional
leave over and above any paid leave time available to employees under this Agreement.
Any paid leave time taken under this contract (sick, personal, vacation) shall concurrently
be designated as earned paid leave time for purposes of §637 and deducted from the
employee’s earned paid leave accrual. To comply with §637, the first forty (40) hours of
any paid leave under this contract (sick, personal, and/or vacation) in any contract year
may be used in one (1)-hour increments, and an employee may use personal leave for any
reason. Thereafter, the contractual terms for each type of leave shall control.
There will be no payout of unused earned time upon an employee’s separation of
employment but employees will be entitled to any other payouts that are permitted under
the terms of this collective bargaining agreement.

ARTICLE 25. DURATION
This Agreement is effective as of July 1, 2024, and shall remain in full force and effect
until June 30, 2027.
23

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands this ____ day of
___________, 2024.
For:

DATE:
Chairperson, Board of Directors,
Maine School Administrative District No. 44

DATE:
President, A.F.S.C.M.E (Local)

DATE:
Chair, MSAD #44 Negotiations Team

DATE:
Staff Representative

24

APPENDIX A – ADDITIONAL TIME ASSIGNMENTS
1.

BUS DRIVERS. The Board will assign regularly scheduled runs to bus drivers in
accordance with the best interest of the District. Regularly scheduled runs shall mean
daily recurring bus runs which transport students to and from school and shall include
the Morning and Afternoon runs and Added School Year Runs.

2.

Bus Drivers who have completed their probationary period will be provided an
opportunity to work extra-time and/or overtime on a voluntary basis for any of the
following additional assignments:

a)

A FILL-IN DRIVER FOR ADDED SCHOOL YEAR RUNS. Added School Year Runs
are those regular and recurring runs such as Freshman Academy, Region 9, Late Run,
Lunch Run, or any other regular and recurring run the District may establish during the
school year. Drivers may supplement their work as a Fill-In driver when the regularly
assigned driver is unavailable.

b)

MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING ASSIGNMENTS. Miscellaneous driving assignments
are those assignments that occur on a sporadic or as needed basis throughout the work
week such as picking up a school bus from the dealership/repair garage, picking up
parts, or other types of jobs that may occur for the benefit of the transportation
department.

c)

SPORTS/FIELD TRIPS. Sports and Field trips are those trips that transport students
and are associated with stipend activities that occur outside the regular day or during
school vacation during the school year. Sports/Field Trips shall include Field Trips,
Athletic Trips, and Week-end Runs (other than those assigned on a negotiated flat-fee
basis) and Vacation Runs (except runs occurring during summer vacation).

3.

Each of the Extra Time lists above shall be posted at the bus garage. Employees shall
confirm the list to be accurate at the workshop day/s. The List may be amended from
time to time to incorporate new bus drivers who have successfully completed their
probationary period or other qualified drivers who want to be added, or to remove
drivers who wish to be taken off the list.

4.

EXTRA TIME ASSIGNMENTS. Extra Time Assignments shall normally be assigned
on a rotating basis to bus drivers on the List(s), provided the assignment does not
25

interfere with the drivers regularly scheduled run, and/or create overtime. The
Superintendent may determine that it is in the best interest of the District to waive the
restriction against assigning extra-time assignments to a driver that would interfere with
the driver’s regular run or create overtime. In such instances, such waiver shall be for
all drivers, and its duration, shall be communicated, by posting, to all drivers in advance
of any waivers being allowed and shall be uniformly applied. The Superintendent shall
notify the unit chair when he determines the need to waive the restriction.
5.

REFUSAL. A bus driver must accept an Extra Time Assignment within twenty-four
hours of posting otherwise the assignment shall be deemed a refusal and the extra time
assignment will be assigned to the next driver on the List in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Subsection 4. Any driver, who refuses an Extra Time Assignment
without a bone fide reason, will be charged with the extra time hours refused and will be
ineligible for subsequent assignments until a full rotation on the List.

6.

POSTING. Extra Time Assignments will normally be posted on a weekly basis.
Additional assignments may be added.

7.

SPARES. Spares may be used for Extra Time Assignments when regular bus drivers are
unavailable due to the conditions set forth in Subsection 4.

8.

DISPUTE AS TO ASSIGNMENT OF ADDITIONAL RUNS. The Board or its
designee shall use its best faith efforts to assign extra time runs in accordance with
Subsection 4. The parties recognize that the assignment of such runs requires a degree
of judgment and discretion.

9.

LOST EXTRA TIME. Any bus driver who is deprived of an extra time run in
accordance with this provision shall be afforded the first reasonable opportunity to make
up the lost extra time.

10.

EMERGENCIES. Unscheduled or unanticipated additional runs may be assigned to
regular bus drivers or spares without regard to Subsection 4. An unscheduled or
unanticipated additional run shall mean an additional run, which the Transportation
Director did not have twenty-four hours prior notice of its need.

26

APPENDIX B – SALARY SCALES
7/1/24 - $1.75 Increase

6 mos-1 yr

1-2 yrs

2-3 yrs

3-4 yrs

4-5 yrs

5-10
yrs

10-15
yrs

15+ yrs

Custodians / Food Service

$18.95

$19.12

$19.37

$19.65

$20.01

$20.54

$20.94

$21.32

Maintenance / Bus
Drivers

$19.37

$19.55

$19.82

$20.10

$20.46

$21.08

$21.47

$21.86

6 mos-5 yrs

5-7 yrs

5-9 yrs

10-15
yrs

15+ yrs

$23.06

$23.46

$23.87

$24.29

$24.74

7/1/25 - $1.75 Increase

6 mos-1 yr

1-2 yrs

2-3 yrs

3-4 yrs

4-5 yrs

5-10
yrs

10-15
yrs

15+ yrs

Custodians / Food Service

$20.70

$20.87

$21.12

$21.40

$21.76

$22.29

$22.69

$23.07

Maintenance / Bus
Drivers

$21.12

$21.30

$21.57

$21.85

$22.21

$22.83

$23.22

$23.61

6 mos-5 yrs

5-7 yrs

7-9 yrs

10-15
yrs

15+ yrs

$24.81

$25.21

$25.62

$26.04

$26.49

7/1/26 - $1.50 Increase

6 mos-1 yr

1-2 yrs

2-3 yrs

3-4 yrs

4-5 yrs

5-10
yrs

10-15
yrs

15+ yrs

Custodians / Food Service

$22.20

$22.37

$22.62

$22.90

$23.26

$23.79

$24.19

$24.57

Maintenance / Bus
Drivers

$22.62

$22.80

$23.07

$23.35

$23.71

$24.33

$24.72

$25.11

7/1/24 - $1.75 Increase
Lead Custodians

7/1/25 - $1.75 Increase
Lead Custodians

27

7/1/26 - $1.50 Increase
Lead Custodians

6 mos-5 yrs

5-7 yrs

5-9 yrs

10-15
yrs

15+ yrs

$26.31

$26.71

$27.12

$27.54

$27.99

Shift differential: 2nd shift: $0.50 per hour, 3rd shift: $0.50 per hour.
Telstar’s Lead Custodian shall receive an annual stipend of $500 in FY’24 for remote
monitoring of buildings, to be adjusted in subsequent years in accordance with documented
hours.
New covered staff hired under this agreement shall be placed on the wage scale based on their
years of comparable experience, as determined by the Superintendent. Comparable experience
means previous employment in public schools in the same or a similar position to the one for
which the staff member is being hired.

28
