City of Williamsburg, Virginia

Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2018

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2018

PREPARED BY:
Department of Finance

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Introductory Section
Letter of Transmittal
GFOA Certificate of Achievement
Organizational Chart
List of Elected and Appointed Officials

I-VII
VIII
IX
X

Financial Section
Independent Auditors’ Report

1-3

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

4-18

Basic Financial Statements
Government-wide Financial Statements:
Exhibit 1

Statement of Net Position

19-20

Exhibit 2

Statement of Activities

21-22

Fund Financial Statements:
Exhibit 3

Balance Sheet – Governmental Funds

23

Exhibit 4

Reconciliation of the Balance Sheet of Governmental Funds
to the Statement of Net Position

24

Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund
Balances – Governmental Funds

25

Reconciliation of Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and
Changes in Fund Balances of Governmental Funds to the
Statement of Activities

26

Exhibit 5
Exhibit 6

Exhibit 7

Statement of Net Position – Proprietary Funds

Exhibit 8

Statement of Revenues, Expenses and Changes in Net
Position – Proprietary Funds

29

Exhibit 9

Statement of Cash Flows – Proprietary Funds

30

Exhibit 10

Statement of Fiduciary Net Position –Fiduciary Funds

31

Notes to Financial Statements

27-28

32-106

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Financial Section (Continued)

Page

Required Supplementary Information:
Exhibit 11

Schedule of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund Balances – Budget
and Actual – General Fund

107

Exhibit 12

Schedule of Changes in Net Pension Liability and Related
Related Ratios

108

Exhibit 13

Schedule of Employer Contributions – Pension Plan

109

Exhibit 14

Notes to Required Supplementary Information – Pension Plan

Exhibit 15

Schedule of City’s Share of Net OPEB Liability – Group Life Insurance

112

Exhibit 16

Schedule of Employer Contributions – Group Life Insurance

113

Exhibit 17

Notes to Required Supplementary Information – Group Life Insurance

Exhibit 18

Schedule of Employer’s Share of Net LODA OPEB Liability – Line of Duty Act
Program (LODA)

116

Exhibit 19

Schedule of Employer Contributions – Line of Duty Act Program (LODA)

117

Exhibit 20

Notes to Required Supplementary Information–– Line of Duty Act Program
(LODA)

110-111

114-115

118-119

Other Supplementary Information:
Exhibit 21

Combining Balance Sheet – Nonmajor Special Revenue Funds

120

Exhibit 22

Combining Statement of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund
Balances – Nonmajor Special Revenue Funds

121

Exhibit 23

Schedule of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund
Balances – Budget and Actual - Nonmajor Special Revenue Funds

122-123

Exhibit 24

Combining Statement of Fiduciary Net Position – Fiduciary Funds

124

Exhibit 25

Combining Statement of Changes in Assets and Liabilities – Agency Funds

125-126

Supporting Schedules:
Schedule 1

Schedule of Revenues – Budget and Actual - Governmental Funds

127-130

Schedule 2

Schedule of Expenditures – Budget and Actual - Governmental Funds

131-134

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Statistical Section

Page

Table 1

Net Position by Component

135-136

Table 2

Changes in Net Position

137-140

Table 3

Fund Balances of Governmental Funds

141-142

Table 4

Changes in Fund Balances of Governmental Funds

143-144

Table 5

Tax Revenues by Source, Governmental Funds

145-146

Table 6

Assessed Value and Estimated Actual Value of Taxable Property

147

Table 7

Direct Tax Rates

148

Table 8

Principal Real Estate Property Taxpayers

149

Table 9

Property Tax Levies and Collections

150

Table 10

Ratios of Outstanding Debt by Type

151

Table 11

Ratios of General Bonded Debt Outstanding

152

Table 12

Legal Debt Margin Information

Table 13

Demographic and Economic Statistics

155

Table 14

Principal Employers

156

Table 15

Full-time Equivalent City Employees by Function/Program

157

Table 16

Operating Indicators by Function/Program

158

Table 17

Capital Asset Statistics by Function

159

153-154

Compliance Section
Independent Auditors’ Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and on
Compliance and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements
Performed in Accordance with Government Auditing Standards

160-161

Independent Auditors’ Report on Compliance For Each Major Program and on Internal
Control over Compliance Required by the Uniform Guidance

162-163

Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards

164

Notes to Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards

165

Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs

166

Summary Schedule of Prior Audit Findings

167

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

INTRODUCTORY SECTION

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

C ITY OF W ILLIAMSBURG
Department of Finance

November 20, 2018
To the Honorable Mayor, Members of City Council, and Citizens of the City of Williamsburg:
The Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) of the City of Williamsburg, Virginia for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2018, is submitted herewith in accordance with Section 15.2-2511 of the Code of Virginia. This report is
designed in a manner to fairly set forth the financial position and results of operations of the City as measured by the
financial activity of its various funds in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America (GAAP). We also believe that all disclosures necessary to enable the reader to gain the maximum
understanding of the City's financial affairs are included. This report has been prepared by the Department of Finance
in accordance with all governmental accounting and financial reporting standards as prescribed by the Governmental
Accounting Standards Board (GASB), the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) where applicable, and the
Commonwealth of Virginia’s Auditor of Public Accounts (APA).
This report consists of management’s representations concerning the finances of the City. Consequently,
management assumes full responsibility for the completeness and reliability of all of the information presented in this
report. To provide a reasonable basis for making these representations, management of the City has established a
comprehensive internal control framework that is designed both to protect the City’s assets from loss, theft, or misuse
and to compile sufficient reliable information for the preparation of the City’s financial statements. Because the cost of
internal controls should not outweigh their benefits, the City’s comprehensive framework of internal controls has been
designed to provide reasonable rather than absolute assurance that the financial statements will be free from material
misstatement. As management, we assert that, to the best of our knowledge and belief, this financial report is
complete and reliable in all material respects, and presents fairly the financial position and results of operations of the
various funds of the City.
This report is intended to provide informative and relevant financial information for the citizens of the City, the City
Council, investors, creditors and other concerned readers. All are encouraged to contact the Department of Finance
with any comments or questions concerning this report.
The City’s financial statements have been audited by Robinson, Farmer, Cox Associates, a firm of licensed certified
public accountants. This is the fourth year of a renewed multi-year contract for professional auditing services with this
firm. The goal of the independent audit was to provide reasonable assurance that the financial statements of the City
for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018, are free of material misstatement. The independent audit involved examining,
on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements; assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management; and evaluating the overall financial
statement presentation.
The independent auditor concluded, based upon the audit, that there was a reasonable basis for rendering an
unmodified opinion that the City of Williamsburg financial statements for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018, are
fairly presented in conformity with generally accepted accounting principals (GAAP). The independent auditor’s report
is presented as the first component of the financial section of this report.
The independent audit of the financial statements of the City was part of a broader, federally mandated “Single Audit”
designed to meet the special needs of federal grantor agencies. The standards governing Single Audit engagements
require the independent auditor to report not only on the fair presentation of the financial statements, but also on the
City’s compliance with the financial and administrative requirements applicable to each of the City’s major federal
programs. These reports are available in the Compliance Section of this report.
GAAP requires that management provide a narrative introduction, overview, and analysis to accompany the basic
financial statements in the form of Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A). This letter of transmittal is

I

designed to complement the MD&A and should be read in conjunction with it. The City’s MD&A can be found
immediately following the independent auditor’s report.

Profile of the City
The City of Williamsburg was established by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Virginia in 1699 and was
incorporated by British Royal Charter in 1722. Today, it operates under the Council-Manager form of government
substantially as established in the City Charter of 1932, and as an independent city under the Constitution and laws of
the Commonwealth of Virginia. Policy-making and legislative authority are vested in a governing City Council
consisting of the Mayor and four other members. The City Council members serve four-year staggered terms. The
Mayor is chosen from among City Council members every two years. The City Council is responsible, among other
things, for passing ordinances, adopting the budget, appointing committees, and hiring both the City Manager and
City Attorney. The City Manager is responsible for carrying out the policies and ordinances of the City Council, for
overseeing the day-to-day operations of the City, and for appointing the heads of the various departments.
Williamsburg encompasses some nine square miles located between the James and York Rivers on the Virginia
Peninsula in Southeastern Virginia. The 2010 U.S. Census showed Williamsburg with a population of 14,068, up
17.2% from the 2000 U.S. Census. The City is home to two premier institutions: the College of William & Mary,
established in 1693, and the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation recreating the days when Williamsburg was the
Capital of Colonial Virginia, from 1699 to 1780.
The financial reporting entity includes all the funds of the City of Williamsburg. The financial reporting entity consists
of (a) the primary government, (b) organizations for which the primary government is financially accountable, and (c)
other organizations for which the nature and significance of their relationship with the primary government are such
that exclusion would cause the reporting entity's financial statements to be misleading or incomplete. In September,
2012 by ordinance the Williamsburg City Council effectively terminated the Williamsburg Redevelopment & Housing
Authority (WRHA) Board of Commissioners, and appointed City Council members in their place. In February 2013 a
Memorandum of Understanding between the City and the WRHA was signed, integrating services of existing City
departments with WRHA. This change was made for operational assistance and administrative convenience, and
also as a cost control measure. The WRHA operation has been presented as a component unit of the City in the
financial statements since Fiscal Year 2013.
The City provides the full range of municipal services including public safety, (police, fire and emergency medical
services, parking garage), public works, (street construction and maintenance, landscaping, stormwater
management, engineering, refuse collection, public cemetery), economic development, planning and zoning, code
compliance, human and public housing services, parks and recreation, and general administrative services. In
addition, the City provides water and sewer services to approximately 3,795 residential and 916 commercial
customers, with user charges set by City Council to ensure adequate coverage of operating and capital expenses.
The City provides education jointly by contract with neighboring James City County for both localities through the
Williamsburg-James City County Public Schools (W-JCC Schools). This strong partnership between the City and
County governments has served the K-12 education needs of the jurisdictions for over 50 years. FY 2018 marked the
first year of a restated five-year contract for operating and capital funding of the joint School system, for fiscal years
2018 thru 2022. The contract essentially covers board membership, operational and capital funding allocations, use of
School surplus operating and capital funds, and equity interest in School property.
The City also provides library services jointly by contract with James City County through the Williamsburg Regional
Library. The joint contract provides for board membership, operational funding, and responsibilities for repair and
maintenance of facilities and grounds of the respective library building located in each locality. In June 2013 City
Council approved an amendment to the joint contract to include neighboring York County. The agreement represents
another step forward for regionalism in the Historic Triangle to benefit the citizens of all three jurisdictions.
The annual budget serves as the foundation for the City’s financial planning and control. The budget process
incorporates City Council strategic plan “Biennial Goals, Initiatives and Outcomes,” and defines, communicates, and
funds the City’s programs and priorities. The completed budget is City Council’s road map, and a primary
management tool for the City Manager and Department Heads. The annual Budget Guide is a formal call for all
departments of the City, and agencies associated with it, to prepare and submit an estimate of the resources required
for the next fiscal year. It includes a set of procedures for building a comprehensive budget for the City Manager to

II

submit to City Council each year. City Council is required to hold public hearings on the proposed budget and tax
rates, and to adopt a final budget resolution no later than June 30th. The appropriated budget is prepared by fund,
function (e.g., public works), and department (e.g., streets). Department heads may make necessary transfers of
appropriations within a department, with the approval of the City Manager. Budget amendments requiring changes in
total fund appropriations require subsequent approval of City Council, and a public hearing if it exceeds one percent
of the total expenditures adopted in the current year. Budget-to-actual comparisons are provided in this report for
each individual governmental fund for which an appropriated annual budget has been adopted. For the general fund,
this comparison is presented as part of the required supplementary information other than management’s discussion
and analysis under the combining and individual funds tab of the report.

Factors Affecting Financial Condition
The information presented in the financial statements is perhaps best understood when it is considered from the
broader perspective of the specific environment within which the City operates.
Economic Condition and Outlook:
The economy of the City of Williamsburg is propelled by tourism and education. Tourism – including major attractions
and the hospitality industry – continues to provide the most significant source of tax base for the city government.
Within the city limits are 26 hotels/motels with approximately 3,342 rooms, 18 operating bed and breakfasts (with 69
rooms), and 93 restaurants.
The lynch pin of tourism is the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, which operates the nation’s most extensive living
history museum. Encompassing 578 restored or reconstructed buildings and employing approximately 2,700, the
Foundation interprets the 18th century history of America in Virginia’s colonial capital. Other nearby attractions not
located in the city include Jamestown (site of the first permanent English settlement in 1607), Yorktown (site of
Washington’s victory over Cornwallis in the Revolutionary War), and Busch Gardens and Water Country USA theme
parks. Next to tourism, higher education drives the Williamsburg economy. The College of William and Mary, located
within the City, is the nation’s second oldest university. The College owns 22.6% of the land area of the City, currently
enrolls about 8,700 students, and employs about 2,500 faculty and staff.
The City has seen a mix of economic activity over the last three fiscal years. For FY 2018, room tax receipts
increased by $42K or 1.3% compared to last year. Meal taxes increased slightly by $19K, or .3% over last year, and
have been on the rise since FY 2009. Revenues from $2/night lodging tax, which are a pass-thru to the Williamsburg
Area Destination Marketing Committee, were down slightly by $5K from last year. In total, these three significant
taxes increased slightly by $56K, or .5% compared to FY 2017. Another significant tax, dedicated to capital
improvements within the City, is the 1% State sales tax. These taxes were $4.7 million for FY 2018, an increase of
7.2% from last year’s receipts. While this is still below the pre-recessionary level of $4.9 million in FY 2017, this
increase surpasses the cumulative increase in sales tax of 5.5 % from FY 2013 thru FY 2017. In addition, business
license taxes increased 12%, or $216K, compared to FY 2017. Revenues from the Prince George Parking Garage
decreased by $33K or 9% compared to last year; however, this resulted from faulty equipment which interfered with
the collection of fees. New parking equipment and software implementation will be completed in November 2018 and
Prince George Garage parking revenues are expect to return to normal levels.
Although real estate values in Williamsburg have not experienced double-digit declines that communities in northern
Virginia and other parts of the country have endured during the recent recession, values declined about 14% from FY
2010 thru FY 2013. The real estate tax rate was adjusted for FY 2013 from $.54/100 to $.57/100 in response to the
cumulative decline in the tax base. On a positive note, assessed values were up 10.2% from FY 2014 to FY 2018.
City staff continues to monitor the real estate assessment to sales ratio each month by closely tracking sales activity.
The ratio is important in analyzing sales trends in neighborhoods, and is vital to the City Assessor’s job of assessing
properties at market value each year. As of October 2018 the City’s assessment to sales ratio of residential sales
since July 1st, 2018, on average, is approximately 98%, which shows current assessments are close to market value.
Real estate assessments for FY 2018, on average, are up 1.6%, indicating continued improvement in both residential
and commercial values.
Economic Development Activity – Recent economic development activity in the City includes the following:


Commercial development projects are progressing:

III



"Quarterpath at Williamsburg," a 350-acre mixed-use development in the southeast quadrant of the
City is zoned for retail, Class-A office space, and a 40-bed acute care doctor's hospital operated by
Riverside Health System, which opened in May 2013. Riverside is working with JLL commercial
brokerage to attract retail and Class-A office space users



Downtown redevelopment continues with Amber Ox Kitchen & Brewery opening in the newly
constructed Prince George Commons mixed use building.



Copper Fox Distillery continues its $1,000,000 investment in its Phase 3 renovation to open a larger
distilling and event area in addition to the existing tasting room, malting building, storage buildings
and distilling buildings.



Discount Tires has opened and a Popeye’s restaurant is under construction on the last of the two
outparcels at the Aldi development.



In 2017, Broad St LLC purchased the 20 acre Williamsburg Shopping Center property and 5 acre
Monticello Shopping Center at Midtown. Plans to construct a $120 million vertical mixed use project
on the property have received City approval, and construction has commenced. Fed Ex and Earth
Fare opened at the renovated Monticello Shopping Center, and Ace Hardware is relocating to that
location. Earth Fare reported this opening was in its top three of the fifty stores it has opened. Broad
St continues to announce leases with new tenants for this project, and demolition has started at the
Williamsburg Shopping Center portion of the project.



New businesses openings after renovating existing commercial space between July 1, 2017 and June 30, 2018
include Stensland Dental Studio, Walsh Family Chiropractic, the Brow Studio, Luck Kee Hair, Earth Fare, Colonial
Pie, Justified Bakeshop, the Sideshow, Amber Ox Kitchen & Brewery, and several professional service operations
(accounting, medical, counseling, design, etc.)



New businesses openings in newly constructed space include Dunkin Donuts, Discount Tire, and Firestone Auto.



The Economic Development Authority approved a demolition grant to demolish an old motel at 1900 Richmond
Road in 2017. The motel was demolished, and Firestone Auto built a new facility that opened on the property in
August 2018.



The Virginia Assembly approved Senate Bill 942 in the FY 2018 Session. This bill levied a one percent sales tax
in the Historic Triangle, which includes the City of Williamsburg, James City County, and York County. Half of the
funds collected from the additional sales tax will fund the Historic Triangle Marketing Fund and the other half will
be distributed to the locality in which the sales tax was collected. The sole purpose of the Historic Triangle
Marketing fund is to market and promote the Historic Triangle area as a tourist destination.
In addition,
Williamsburg’s City Council established a Tourism Fund for the City and will use the City’s share of the Historic
sales tax as one of the revenue sources for the Fund. The purpose of the City’s Tourism Fund is to provide
financial assistance and reinvestment in tourism products through public-private partnerships, place-making
projects, special events and destination marketing that are designed to promote economic growth in the City.

Budget Policies
The City’s adopted Financial Planning Policies include requirements for balanced budgets and long-range planning.
The FY 2018 General Fund balanced operating budget was approved in May, 2017. As discussed in the
Management’s Discussion and Analysis section of this report, the operating surplus for the year ended June 30, 2018
was $1.5 million. Long-range planning is part of the budget process each year, and included (1) Planning
Commission review of current and future capital projects; (2) consideration of revenue, expenditure, and service
implications of continuing existing programs, or adding new programs; (3) condition assessment of major buildings,
roads, sidewalks, bridges, water lines, vehicles, and equipment; (4) maintaining, as a minimum, the City’s 35% of total
operating revenues as its unassigned fund balance, which can only be used for emergencies, non-recurring
expenditures, or major capital purchases that cannot be acquired on a pay-as-you-go basis.

IV

Revenue policies taken into consideration during the budget process included annual review of tax rates, collection
rates, and identification of all revenue and grant options available to the City. In addition, user fees and charges were
reviewed in order to ensure keeping pace with service delivery. Building permit and inspection fees, as well as all
recreation program charges, were also reviewed during the budget process.
Expenditure policies which also contributed to the positive operating outcome of FY 2018 include financing all current
operating expenditures with current revenues. In addition, the City staff began a multi-year financial software
conversion from its legacy software to a comprehensive and multi-functional Tyler-Munis platform during June 2017.
Budgetary, as well as internal controls have been further enhanced with the new software. The new accounting
software went live July 1, 2017, followed payroll, which went live January 2018. Cash receipts, utility and tax billing,
and codes compliance is expected to be live April 2019. The final phase, taxes and business licenses, is anticipated
to go live December 2019. Staff also expanded the City’s performance management system with Socrata software,
with revisions of monthly departmental operating reports, available on the City’s website.
Long-Term Financial Planning
Major Operating Revenues - The City of Williamsburg takes pride in providing a high level of public services to its
residents at a reasonable cost. The real estate tax rate of 57¢ per $100 of assessed value continues to be one of the
lowest city tax rates in Virginia. Prior to FY 2009, room and meal taxes provided the largest source of funding for City
services since the mid-1980s. Rising property assessments brought revenues that surpassed room and meal taxes
during FY 2009 for the first time, when most local governments began to feel the effects of the recent recession. Real
estate taxes made up 28.7% of total revenues in FY 2018, compared to 19.9% in FY 2000. This shifting of tax base is
more pronounced when comparing actual tax revenues. During that 18-year period room and meal taxes increased
from $9.17 million to $10.42 million, a 14% increase. Real estate taxes increased from $4.5 million in FY 2000 to
$10.6 million in FY 2018, an increase of 133%. The FY 2018 real estate tax base increased 1.6% from the prior year.
The City’s total personal property tax collections, including State reimbursement for the Car Tax program, remained
level with collections from last year.

Millions

Though declining for two years from the highs of FY 2008, room and meal taxes tracked upward from FY 2010 to FY
2013, and declined about 1.9% during FY 2014. Room and meal taxes received during FY 2014 were about 8%
higher than the all-time lows of FY 2010, and briefly surpassed real estate taxes in FY 2012 & FY 2013, more so from
meal taxes, and from reduced real estate values from FY 2010 thru FY 2013. The gap between room and meal tax
receipts and real estate taxes for FY 2014 was just over $100K. Room and meal taxes again surpassed real estate
taxes during FY15 and FY16, but that trend changed again slightly during FY 2017 and FY 2018. Room and meal
taxes accounted for 28.2% of the General Fund operating revenues for FY 2018, compared to 39.7% in FY 20001.

$12
$11
$10
$9
$8

Room & Meals Taxes

$7

Real Estate Taxes

$6
$5
$4

1 Not including the $2/night lodging tax, which is dedicated for tourism promotion.

V

Revenue trends for other local taxes were up 4.2% compared to last year. The 1% State sales tax receipts were $4.7
million, up $318K, or 7.2% from last year. Business license taxes were up by $216K, or 11.8%. Bank stock taxes
increased 15.8%, recordation taxes increased by $101K or 34.6%, and tobacco taxes increased 28.9% from last year.
Utility taxes increased slightly by.8%. Total other local taxes collected for FY 2018, including room & meal taxes, were
up about $63K, or .5% over FY 2017.
Total revenue from the Commonwealth decreased overall by 12.5% for FY 2018, largely due to a decrease in grant
funding for street paving. Reimbursement for street maintenance costs increased by $41K, or 2.3% over last year
because of increased state funding per lane mileage and additional lane miles reimbursed for FY 2018. State sales
tax for education receipts decreased by $38K, or 3.4% compared to last year.
Business growth and economic development initiatives mentioned above, along with investment by new and existing
businesses in the City, will help to strengthen the City’s real estate, personal property, and retail sales tax bases in
the next few years.
A more detailed analysis of revenue trends is included in Management’s Discussion and Analysis.
Major Operating Expenditures - The economy continues to challenge the City’s ability to provide the type and
quality of services our residents are accustomed to, and at relatively low tax rates. Total approved full-time positions
remained relatively level in FY 2018 at 197 full-time equivalent (FTEs) positions, an increase of .5 FTEs compared to
FY 2017. This included the addition of one full-time police officer and the reduction of a part-time administrative aide
in the City Manager’s office.
Personnel Costs - Employee benefit costs have increased substantially over the past several years. Healthcare
benefits are analyzed each year relative to increases in premiums, and adjustments are recommended, if necessary,
during the budget process. Beginning July 1, 2012, the City ended its self-insured healthcare plan, which was
administered by Anthem, and now is offering employee & family coverage through the State’s Local Choice
healthcare plan. This move was intended (1) to limit exposure by joining a traditional insurance plan, with partial risk
absorbed by the overall plan, which is made up of thousands of employees statewide; and (2) to reduce overall
healthcare premiums by offering employees two different deductible plans.
The City is a member locality of the Virginia Retirement System (VRS). Pension costs are compensation-based, with
funding rates set by VRS actuaries bi-annually. Significant increases in defined-benefit pension costs around the
country have forced a variety of pension reform initiatives, as liabilities continue to outpace assets backing these longterm benefits. Pension reform by the Virginia General Assembly in 2011 has impacted localities and school districts
by mandating employee contributions and changes in various components of benefit formulas. Note 13 of the
financial statements includes extensive information on all VRS pension options, including the new Hybrid pension
plan which was effective in January, 2014.
The City’s full-time salaried permanent employees are also covered by the VRS Group Life Insurance Program and
all paid employees and volunteers in hazardous duty positions are automatically covered by the Line of Duty Act
Program (LODA). The City implemented the financial reporting provisions of Governmental Accounting Standards
Board Statement No. 75, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Postemployment Benefits Other Than Pensions
during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018. Note 15 of the financial statement includes information regarding the
Group Life Insurance Program and Note 16 covers information regarding the Line of Duty Act Program.
Debt Service - In November 2017, City Council approved $19,630,000 in general obligation bonds and refunding
bonds to finance capital improvements to fire and police facilities and to refund the City’s General Obligation Bonds,
Series 2013 and a portion of the City’s General Obligation bonds, series 2010. The bonds were rated “Aa1” by
Moody’s rating agency and “AAA” by Standard & Poor’s rating agency. The proceeds of the Series 2013 Bonds were
used to finance the construction and equipping of the renovated Stryker Center, which contains library space, public
meeting rooms, and the City Council’s chamber and workroom. The proceeds of the Series 2010 Bonds were used to
refund certain prior bonds of the City.
City staff continues to analyze market conditions, and formulate financing strategies with financial advisors,
Davenport and Co., LLC, in order to stay on schedule with major projects. Since 2004 the City’s financial policies

VI

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

VIII

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

City of Williamsburg
Organizational Chart
Boards and Commissions
Operational:
*School Board (WJCC)
*Library Board (WRL)
Advisory
*Planning Commission
*Economic Dev. Authority
*Arts Commission
*Soc. Services Advisory Brd
*Finance & Audit Committee
*Public Housing
Semi-Judicial
*Architectural Review Board
*Board of Zoning Appeals
*Board of Bldg Code Appeals
*Board of Equalization

Mayor

CITY COUNCIL
City Attorney

Clerk of Council/
Admin. Assistant

FTE 1.5

FTE 6

City Manager
Executive Assistant

Human Resources
Communications

Economic Dev. Dir.
FTE 2

FTE 3

Parks & Recreation
*Recreation Center
*Parks
*Athletics

FTE 8.5

Court System
*Circuit Court Judge
*Clerk of Circuit Court
*District Court Judge
*Juvenile/Domestic
Relations Judge
*Commonwealth Attorney
*City/County Sheriff
Commissioner of Revenue
City/County Treasurer
Electoral Board
Voter Registrar

Vice Mayor

Assistant City Manager



Constitutional and
Independent Offices

WILLIAMSBURG VOTERS

Police

Public Works & Utilities

Fire

*Uniform Services
*Investigations
*Support Services
*Public Safety/E911
Comm.
*Parking Garage

*Suppression
*Prevention
*Emergency Medical
*Emergency Management
FTE 40

FTE 42

Public Works:
*Engineering
*Streets & Stormwater
*Mosquito Control
*Landscaping
*Vehicle Maintenance
*Facilities Maintenance
*Refuse/Recycling
*Cemetery
FTE 23

Human Services
*Income Eligible Benefits
*Adult and Child Protection
*Community Outreach
*Public Housing
FTE 19

Planning & Codes
*Planning & Zoning
*Codes Compliance

FTE 9

Finance
*Accounting
*Collections, Disbursements
*Purchasing
*Assessments
*Investments
*Payroll
FTE 11

IX

Public Utilities:
*Water Treatment
*Water Distribution
*Wastewater
FTE 26

IT
*Information Technology
FTE 3

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Members of the City Council
Paul Freiling, Mayor
D. Scott Foster, Vice-Mayor
Douglas G. Pons
Benming Zhang

Barbara L. Ramsey
Andrew O. Trivette, Clerk of Council

City Officials
Interim City Manager .......................................................... Andrew O. Trivette
Director of Finance ........................................................... Barbara A. Dameron
Assistant City Manager ........................................................ Andrew O. Trivette
Commonwealth’s Attorney ............................................................ Nate Green
City Attorney ......................................................................Christina Shelton
Treasurer ...................................................................... Jennifer Otey Tomes
Commissioner of Revenue ........................................................ Lara M. S. Overy
Clerk of Circuit Court................................................................. Mona A. Foley
Sheriff .................................................................................... Robert Deeds
Director of Public Works & Utilities ....................................... Daniel G. Clayton, III
Director of Planning ............................................................... Carolyn Murphy
Director of Human Services ................................................. Peter P. Walentisch
Director of Information Technology ............................................. Mark A. Barham
Director of Recreation ............................................................... Robbi Hutton
Director of Economic Development ..................................... Michele Mixner DeWitt
Chief, Fire Department ............................................................ W. Patrick Dent
Chief, Police Department ................................................................ Sean Dunn

X

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

FINANCIAL SECTION

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

ROBINSON, FARMER, COX ASSOCIATES
A PROFESSIONAL LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY

CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS

Independent Auditors’ Report

To The Honorable Members of the City Council
City of Williamsburg
Williamsburg, Virginia

Report on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of the governmental activities, the business-type
activities, the discretely presented component unit, each major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund
information of the City of Williamsburg, Virginia, as of and for the year ended June 30, 2018, and the related
notes to the financial statements, which collectively comprise the City’s basic financial statements as listed in
the table of contents.
Management’s Responsibility for the Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial statements in accordance
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America; this includes the design,
implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of
financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
Auditors’ Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express opinions on these financial statements based on our audit. We conducted our
audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of America; the standards
applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of
the United States; and the Specifications for Audits of Counties, Cities, and Towns, issued by the Auditor of
Public Accounts of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit
to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free from material misstatement.
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the
financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditors’ judgment, including the assessment of
the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error. In making those
risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant to the entity’s preparation and fair presentation
of the financial statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but
not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal control. Accordingly,
we express no such opinion. An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used
and the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the
overall presentation of the financial statements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our
audit opinions.

1

Opinions
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the respective
financial position of the governmental activities, the business-type activities, the discretely presented
component unit, each major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund information of City of Williamsburg,
Virginia, as of June 30, 2018, and the respective changes in financial position, and, where applicable, cash
flows thereof for the year then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
Change in Accounting Principle
As described in Note 17 to the financial statements, in 2018, the City adopted new accounting guidance, GASB
Statement Nos. 75 Accounting and Financial Reporting for Postemployment Benefits Other Than Pensions and 85
Omnibus 2017. Our opinion is not modified with respect to this matter.
Restatement of Beginning Balances
As described in Note 17 to the financial statements, in 2018, the City restated beginning balances to reflect the
requirements of GASB Statement No. 75. Our opinion is not modified with respect to this matter.
Other Matters
Required Supplementary Information
Accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America require that the management’s
discussion and analysis, budgetary comparison information, and schedules related to pension and OPEB funding
progress on pages 4-18, 107, 108-119 be presented to supplement the basic financial statements. Such
information, although not a part of the basic financial statements, is required by the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board, who considers it to be an essential part of financial reporting for placing the basic financial
statements in an appropriate operational, economic, or historical context. We have applied certain limited
procedures to the required supplementary information in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted
in the United States of America, which consisted of inquiries of management about the methods of preparing the
information and comparing the information for consistency with management’s responses to our inquiries, the
basic financial statements, and other knowledge we obtained during our audit of the basic financial statements.
We do not express an opinion or provide any assurance on the information because the limited procedures do
not provide us with sufficient evidence to express an opinion or provide any assurance. The budgetary
comparison information has been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audit of the basic financial
statements and, in our opinion, is fairly stated in all material respects in relation to the basic financial
statements taken as a whole.
Supplementary and Other Information
Our audit was conducted for the purpose of forming opinions on the financial statements that collectively
comprise City of Williamsburg, Virginia’s basic financial statements. The introductory section, other
supplementary information, and statistical section are presented for purposes of additional analysis and are not
a required part of the basic financial statements. The schedule of expenditures of federal awards is presented
for purposes of additional analysis as required by Title 2 U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 200,
Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and is also
not a required part of the basic financial statements.

2

Supplementary and Other Information (Continued)
The other supplementary information and the schedule of expenditures of federal awards are the responsibility
of management and were derived from and relate directly to the underlying accounting and other records used
to prepare the basic financial statements. Such information has been subjected to the auditing procedures
applied in the audit of the basic financial statements and certain additional procedures, including comparing
and reconciling such information directly to the underlying accounting and other records used to prepare the
basic financial statements or to the basic financial statements themselves, and other additional procedures in
accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of America. In our opinion, the
other supplementary information and the schedule of expenditures of federal awards are fairly stated in all
material respects in relation to the basic financial statements as a whole.
The introductory and statistical sections have not been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audit
of the basic financial statements and, accordingly, we do not express an opinion or provide any assurance on
them.
Other Reporting Required by Government Auditing Standards
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards, we have also issued our report dated November 2, 2018, on
our consideration of City of Williamsburg, Virginia’s internal control over financial reporting and on our tests of
its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements and other matters.
The purpose of that report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control over financial
reporting and compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of
City of Williamsburg, Virginia’s internal control over financial reporting or on compliance. That report is an
integral part of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering City of
Williamsburg, Virginia’s internal control over financial reporting and compliance.

Richmond, Virginia
November 2, 2018

3

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

City of Williamsburg, Virginia

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) offers readers of the City's financial statements a
narrative overview and analysis of the City's financial activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018.
Readers are encouraged to consider the information presented here in conjunction with additional
information furnished in our letter of transmittal, and in the financial statements and notes to the financial
statements (which immediately follow this discussion).
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
Government-wide:




The City’s assets and deferred outflows exceeded its liabilities and deferred inflows (net position) at
the close of Fiscal Year 2018 by $109.7 million. The unrestricted portion of net position is $19.1
million for the Governmental Activities and $5.7 million for the Business-type Activities, for a total of
$24.8 million. In the current year, the unrestricted net position increased $34.8 thousand in the
Governmental Activities and $1.3 million in the Business-type Activities.
The City’s total net position increased by $2.9 million from the prior fiscal year, of which the
governmental activities increased by $1.7 million, and business-type activities increased by $1.2
million. In the governmental activities, total revenues increased $1.7 million, or 5%, while expenses
increased $1.7 million from the prior fiscal year. In the business-type activities, total revenues
exceeded expenses by $1.2 million.

Fund Level:


Total General Fund (including 1% Sales Tax) revenues were $42.6 million for FY 2018, up by $.63
million from last year. General property tax receipts were $13.1 million, up 1.3% from last year. Other
local taxes were up 4.2%, mostly from increased sales tax, business licenses, and recordation taxes.
Room taxes increased by $42K and meal taxes increased by $19K, or .3%, compared to the previous
fiscal year.



Total General Fund expenditures, excluding capital projects and debt service payments, increased
$1.1 million or 3.2% compared to FY 2017. Increases in public safety (55.2% of the increase),
education (13.6%), community development (9.1%) and public works (9%) make up 86.9% of this
increase. Spending on capital projects decreased by $2 million or 23.7%. Debt service expenditures
increased by $3.8 million compared to last year; however, $3.9 million relates debt that was retired
from refunding bonds that were issued. When adjusted for the refunding, debt service payments
decreased by $59K, or 5%.



The City’s General Fund bonded debt increased by $10.7 during FY 2018, with the issuance of $12.3
million in new debt, $3.9 million refunding debt, regular debt service payments of $1.1 million, and
$4.4 in payments to escrow agents for refunded bonds.



The City’s governmental funds reported combined ending fund balances of $45.2 million, an increase
of $13.2 million from the prior year. Fund balances are further categorized as Nonspendable ($2.8
million for real property owned by the City and held for resale), Restricted ($13.1 million for general
obligation bonds issued for public safety facilities and $0.6 million for the Public Assistance Fund),
Assigned ($15.8 million for carryover and future capital projects), and Unassigned ($12.9 million). The
unassigned fund balance is equal to the City Council reserve policy of 35% of total General Fund
operating revenues for FY 2018, and effectively represents the City’s rainy day fund. The Assigned
category includes $14.5 million of prior year carryover capital projects, and also $1.3 million to fund
future capital projects included in the City’s five-year capital improvement program.



In October 2012 the Williamsburg City Council members were appointed as the Board of
Commissioners of the Williamsburg Redevelopment & Housing Authority (WRHA). With the fiscal
dependence, by way of City staff involvement in the areas of payroll, accounts payable, and other
managerial responsibilities, the WRHA is presented in this report as a Discretely Presented
Component Unit of the City. Financial information is included herein for WRHA’s latest fiscal year
ending September 30, 2017.

4

City of Williamsburg, Virginia


Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Business-type activities (Utility Fund) reported net position at June 30, 2018 of $24.5 million. Capital
assets (net of depreciation and related debt) account for 77% of this amount, with the remaining net
position of $5.7 million available without restriction. The Utility Fund reports combined cash and
investments at year-end of $7 million, with total current liabilities of $1.8 million, including the current
portion (due within one year) of compensated absences and bonds payable.

OVERVIEW OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
This discussion and analysis is intended to serve as an introduction to the City’s basic financial
statements. The basic financial statements are comprised of three components: 1) government-wide
financial statements, 2) fund financial statements and budgetary comparison, and 3) notes to the financial
statements. This report also contains other supplementary information in addition to the basic financial
statements.
Government-wide Financial Statements
There are two government-wide financial statements, which are designed to provide readers with a broad
overview of the City’s finances in a manner similar to a private-sector business. Both of the governmentwide financial statements distinguish functions of the City that are principally supported by taxes and
intergovernmental revenues (governmental activities) from other functions that are intended to recover all
or a significant portion of their costs through user fees and charges (business-type activities). The
governmental activities include general government, judicial, public safety, public works, health and
welfare, education, parks and recreation, cultural, community development, and debt service. The sole
business-type activity of the City of Williamsburg is the water utility.
The government-wide financial statements (Exhibits 1 and 2) include not only the City itself (known as the
primary government), but also a legally separate Housing Authority for which the City is financially
accountable. Financial information for this component unit is reported separately from the financial
information presented for the primary government itself.
The Statement of Net Position presents information on all of the City’s assets and liabilities, with the
difference between the two reported as net position. This statement serves a purpose similar to that of the
balance sheet of a private-sector business. Over time, increases or decreases in net position may serve
as a useful indicator of whether the financial position of the City is improving or deteriorating. However,
this is just one indicator of financial health of the City. Other indicators include the condition of the City's
infrastructure systems (roads, drainage systems, bridges, etc.), changes in property tax base, and
general economic conditions within the City.
The Statement of Activities presents information showing how the government's net position changed
during the most recent fiscal year. Because it separates program revenue (revenue generated by specific
programs through charges for services, grants, and contributions) from general revenue (revenue
provided by taxes and other sources not tied to a particular program), it shows to what extent each
program has to rely on taxes for funding. All changes in net position are reported using the accrual basis
of accounting, similar to the method used by most private-sector companies. The accrual basis of
accounting requires that revenues be reported when they are earned and expenses are reported when
the goods and services are received, regardless of the timing of the cash flow. Items such as uncollected
taxes, unpaid vendor invoices for items received before June 30, 2018, and earned but unused vacation
and sick leave will be included in the statement of activities as revenue and expense, even though the
cash associated with these items will not be received or distributed until after June 30, 2018.
Fund Financial Statements
A fund is a grouping of related accounts that is used to maintain control over resources that have been
segregated for specific activities or objectives. The City of Williamsburg, like other state and local
governments, uses fund accounting to ensure and demonstrate compliance with finance-related legal
requirements. All of the funds of the City of Williamsburg can be divided into three categories:
governmental funds, proprietary funds, and fiduciary funds. Governmental Funds are used to account for
most, if not all, of a government's tax-supported activities. Proprietary Funds are used to account for a
government's business type activities, where all or part of the costs of activities are supported by fees and

5

City of Williamsburg, Virginia

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

charges that are paid directly by those who benefit from the activities. Fiduciary Funds are used to
account for resources that are held by the government as a trustee or agent for parties outside of the
government. The resources of fiduciary funds cannot be used to support the government's own programs.
Governmental Funds. The Governmental Fund Balance Sheet and the Governmental Fund Statement of
Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balances present separate columns of financial data for
the General Fund. GASB Statement No. 34 defines a major fund as a fund who's assets, liabilities,
revenues or expenditures comprise: 1) at least 10% of the total dollar amount of the same category within
either all government or all enterprise funds, as appropriate; and, 2) at least 5% of the total dollar amount
of all governmental and enterprise funds combined for the same category. The General Fund is always
considered a major fund. The governmental fund financial statements can be found immediately following
the government-wide financial statements.
Governmental funds are used to account for essentially the same functions reported as governmental
activities in the government-wide financial statements. However, unlike government-wide financial
statements' use of accrual accounting, governmental fund financial statements focus on near-term inflows
and outflows of spendable resources and on balances of spendable resources available at the end of the
fiscal year. Such information is useful in evaluating a government's near-term financing requirements in
comparison to near-term resources available.
Because the focus of governmental fund financial statements is narrower than that of government-wide
financial statements, it is useful to compare information presented for governmental funds with similar
information presented for governmental activities in the government-wide financial statements. By doing
so, readers may better understand the long-term impact of the government's near-term financing
decisions. Both the governmental fund balance sheet and the governmental fund statement of revenues,
expenditures, and changes in fund balances provide reconciliation to the governmental activities column
in the government-wide statements, in order to facilitate this comparison.
The City maintains budgetary controls over its operating funds. The objective of budgetary controls is to
ensure compliance with legal provisions embodied in the annual appropriated budget. Budgets for
governmental funds are established in accordance with state law, and are adopted on a fund level.
Personnel services are budgeted by fulltime positions. Capital outlays are approved on an item-by-item
basis or project basis. A budgetary comparison statement is provided for the General Fund to
demonstrate compliance with the budget. Major fund budgetary variance statements are included with the
basic financial statements. Non-major fund information follows the notes to the financial statements.
Budgetary variances for the General Fund are discussed in some detail later in this section.
Proprietary Funds. The City uses an enterprise fund to account for its water utility operations. Enterprise
Funds are used to report the same functions presented as business-type activities in the governmentwide financial statements.
Proprietary fund statements follow the governmental fund statements in this report. They provide the
same type of information as the government-wide financial statements, only in more detail, since both
apply the accrual basis of accounting. The proprietary fund financial statements provide information for
the Water Utility Fund, which is considered to be the only major proprietary fund of the City. There are no
reconciling differences from the Proprietary Fund Statement of Net Position to the business-type activity
column on the Government-Wide Statement of Net Position.
Fiduciary Funds. Fiduciary funds are used to account for resources held for the benefit of parties outside
the government. Fiduciary funds are not reflected in the government-wide financial statement because
the resources of those funds are not available to support the City’s own programs. The accounting used
for fiduciary funds is much like that used for proprietary funds. The City of Williamsburg has one type of
fiduciary funds - Agency Funds (which are clearing accounts for assets held by the City in its role as
custodian until the funds are allocated to the organizations or government agencies to which they
belong). The Statement of Fiduciary Net Position can be found following the proprietary fund financial
statements.

6

City of Williamsburg, Virginia

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Notes to the Financial Statements
The notes provide additional information that is essential to a full understanding of the data provided in
the government-wide and fund financial statements. The notes to the financial statements can be found
immediately following the basic financial statements in this report.
Other Information
In addition to the basic financial statements and accompanying notes, this report also presents certain
required supplementary information (RSI) concerning the (1) General Fund revenues, expenditures, and
changes in fund balances-budget and actual; and (2) the City’s progress in funding its obligations to
provide pension and other post-employment benefits to its current and future retirees. This required
supplementary information can be found at Exhibit 11 through 20 of this report.
The combining financial statements for nonmajor special revenue funds and fiduciary funds immediately
follow the required supplementary information at exhibits 21 through 25 of this report.
This report also contains a statistical section that supplements the basic financials statements by
presenting detail trend information to assist the users in assessing the economic condition of the City. We
encourage readers to review the statistical section to better understand the City’s operations, services,
and financial condition.
The last section of this report contains a compliance section, including the City’s Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards and related notes, and the independent auditors’ required reports on
compliance and internal control.
GOVERNMENT-WIDE FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
Statement of Net Position
As noted earlier, changes in net position may serve over time as a useful indicator of a City’s financial
position. The City's net position totaled $109.7 million at June 30, 2018. The following table reflects the
condensed Government-Wide Statement of Net Position:
City of Williamsburg, Virginia - Summary of Net Position
Governmental Activities
2018
2017
Current and Other Assets
Capital Assets
Total Assets
Deferred Outflow of
Resources
Long-term Liabilities
Other Liabilities

$

Deferred Inflow of Resources

8,148,210
23,802,309

$

6,912,381
24,362,558

$

$ 119,021,987

$ 105,733,262

$

31,950,519

$

31,274,939

$ 150,972,506

$ 137,008,201

$

1,416,254

$

2,474,429

$

319,038

$

320,788

$

1,735,292

$

2,795,217

$

31,426,275
2,282,109

$

20,404,722
1,870,238

$

6,375,403
1,202,704

$

7,247,891
983,852

$

37,801,678
3,484,813

$

27,652,613
2,854,090

$33,708,384
$

1,456,570

$22,274,960
$

52,444,883

85,273,287

$

64,556,652

13,144,192
584,890
19,099,322
$

409,883

$7,578,107
237,331

83,621,173

$

18,769,281

19,064,521
$

$8,231,743

5,684,838
$

24,454,119

*Please refer to Note 17 for information regarding restatement

7

$

52,617

55,468,142
95,504,364

2017

$

Net Position:
Net investment in capital
assets
Restricted for:
Fire and Police capital
Other restrictions
Unrestricted - restated*
Total Net Position

$

Total
2018

34,057,770
71,675,492

Total Liabilities

47,319,932
71,702,055

Business-Type Activities
2018
2017

$

$41,286,491
$

1,693,901

40,970,151
96,038,050

$30,506,703
$

462,500

18,835,808

71,214,164

83,392,460

4,372,473

13,144,192
584,890
24,784,160

23,436,994

23,208,281

$ 109,727,406

$ 106,829,454

City of Williamsburg, Virginia

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The City of Williamsburg's total assets were $151 million as of June 30, 2018. The largest portion, $95.5
million (63.3%), reflects its investment in capital assets (e.g., land, building, machinery, and equipment),
less any related debt used to acquire assets that is still outstanding. The City uses these capital assets to
provide services to citizens; consequently, these assets are not available for future spending. Although
the City’s investment in capital assets is reported net of related debt, it should be noted that the resources
needed to repay this debt must be provided from other sources, since the capital assets themselves
cannot be used to liquidate these liabilities. Of the remaining City assets, approximately $48 million is
accounted for in cash, cash equivalents, and pooled investments, $3.4 million in accounts and notes
receivable, and amounts due from other governmental units, with the remainder spread among
miscellaneous assets.
At June 30, 2018, outstanding liabilities were $41.3 million, with $37.8 million in general obligation bonds
payable, compensated absences, net pension liability, and net other post-employment benefits (OPEB)
liability. Of the bonds payable, $2.2 million is due within one year, with the remainder due at various dates
until 2037. Additional information on the City’s long term debt obligations is included in Note 8 in the notes
to the financial statements. Included in other liabilities above are $2.086 million in accounts payable,
$488K in accrued interest payable, $376K in unearned revenue, $298K in accrued liabilities, and $237K
in customer deposits payable. In addition, net pension liability totaling $10.6 million and net OPEB liability
totaling $1.9 million is included in the Statement of Net Position, as required by GASB Statement No. 68
and No. 75.
At June 30, 2018, the City had positive balances in all categories of net position, for the government as a
whole, and for its separate governmental and business-type activities.

The remainder of the page left blank intentionally.

8

City of Williamsburg, Virginia

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The following schedule summarizes the Statement of Activities of the primary government for the fiscal
years ended June 30, 2018 and 2017:
City of Williamsburg, Virginia - Summary of Changes in Net Position
Governmental
Activities
2018
2017

Business-Type
Activities
2018
2017

2018

2017

$1,734,483
2,939,477
3,329,824

$8,176,441
-

$7,325,679
-

$9,910,924
2,939,477
3,329,824

$8,917,430
6,485,071
-

13,056,359
12,882,213
19,684,136
18,898,134
3,032,169
3,814,608
$ 44,558,887 $ 42,889,338 $

283,030
8,459,471 $

13,056,359
12,882,213
19,684,136
18,898,134
219,899
4,097,638
3,252,068
7,545,578 $ 53,018,358 $ 50,434,916

$

5,009,427 $ 6,828,770 $
422,688
412,269
10,746,688
10,805,800
4,716,472
5,792,493
2,816,519
2,546,971
10,936,896
10,121,948
2,648,545
2,875,228
5,013,184
5,036,866
596,354
158,220
-

- $
6,713,633
500,000

- $ 5,009,427 $ 6,828,770
422,688
412,269
10,746,688
10,805,800
4,716,472
5,792,493
2,816,519
2,546,971
10,936,896
10,121,948
2,648,545
2,875,228
5,013,184
5,036,866
596,354
158,220
6,521,031
6,713,633
6,521,031
500,000
-

Total Expenses

$ 42,906,773 $ 44,578,565 $

7,213,633 $

6,521,031 $ 50,120,406 $ 51,099,596

Increase in net position
Net position - beginning, as restated
Restated for GASB 75/Special Welfare*

$

Net position - ending

$ 85,273,287 $ 83,621,173 $ 24,454,119 $ 23,208,281 $ 109,727,406 $ 106,829,454

Revenues:
Program Revenues:
Charges for services
Operating grants and contributions
Capital grants and contributions
General Revenues:
Property taxes
Other local taxes
Other
Total Revenues
Expenses:
General government
Judicial administration
Public safety
Public works
Health and welfare
Education
Parks, recreation, & cultural
Community Development
Interest expense
Water
Transfers

$1,591,751
6,485,071
-

Total

1,652,114 $ (1,689,227) $ 1,245,838 $ 1,024,547 $ 2,897,952 $
(664,680)
83,621,173
87,212,075
23,208,281
22,286,820
106,829,454
109,498,895
(1,901,675)
(103,086)
(2,004,761)

* Please refer to note 17 for information regarding restatement

9

City of Williamsburg, Virginia

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Governmental Activities – Revenues
The City’s total revenues from governmental activities were $44.6 million for FY 2018, an increase of $1.7
million from last year. Percentages of FY 2018 governmental revenues by source are as follows:

Taxes are the largest City revenue source – property and other local taxes accounted for 74% of the
City’s governmental activities. General property tax receipts were $13.1 million, up 1.4% from last year,
with property values again turning positive for the fourth consecutive year following a three year decline
totaling about 14% during the recession. Other local taxes totaled $19.7 million during FY 2018, and were
up 4.2% from the prior year.
Governmental Activities – Expenses
The Summary of Changes in Net Position shows that total expenses for all of the City’s governmental
activities for FY 2018 were $42.9, a decrease of $1.7 million compared to FY 2017.
Highlights of expense activity for governmental funds include:





General Government Administration expenses decreased by $1.8 million compared to FY
2017, largely due to property that was purchased last year for economic development
purpose.
Public Works expenses decreased by $1.1 million, in part due to an expanded street
repaving program in FY 2017. Street repaving expenses totaled $505K in FY 2018
compared to slightly over $1 million in FY 2017. The remaining decrease related to
reduced spending for other capital improvement projects during the year compared to last
year.
Education expenses increased $815K compared to last year, with $670K due to higher
capital spending, which included the new Middle School. Operating costs increased by
$145K compared to FY 2017.

10

City of Williamsburg, Virginia

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Business-type activities - The Utility Fund is the City’s only business-type activity. The utility rate
structure recovers as much as possible of the operating expenses incurred to meet service demands
through user charges. Change in the fund’s net position is the difference between revenues and
expenses, which for FY 2018 resulted in an increase of $1.2 million. More operating information for the
Utility Fund operation is shown below in the Funds section of this discussion.
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS OF THE CITY’S FUNDS
As noted earlier, the City of Williamsburg uses fund accounting to ensure and demonstrate compliance
with finance-related legal requirements. The following is a financial analysis of the City’s governmental
and proprietary funds.
Governmental Funds Revenues - Analysis
Governmental Funds

Revenues by Source
General Property Taxes
Other Local Taxes
Licenses and permits
Fines & Forfeitures
Use of Money and Property
Charges for Services
Miscellaneous
Recovered Costs
Intergovernmental

June 30, 2018
Percent of
Amount
Total
$13,089,822
29.77%
19,684,136
44.76%
302,819
0.69%
249,211
0.57%
1,200,582
2.73%
1,182,453
2.69%
525,463
1.19%
1,026,582
2.33%
15.27%
6,712,840

June 30, 2017
Percent of
Amount
Total
$12,917,015
29.37%
18,898,134
42.98%
249,819
0.57%
181,175
0.41%
962,887
2.19%
1,160,757
2.64%
503,578
1.15%
996,265
2.27%
7,317,493
16.64%

Total Revenues

$43,973,908

$43,187,123

100.00%

98.21%

Increase/(Decrease)
Percent of
Amount
Change
$172,807
1.34%
786,002
4.16%
53,000
21.22%
68,036
37.55%
237,695
24.69%
21,696
1.87%
21,885
4.35%
30,317
3.04%
(604,653)
-8.26%
$786,785

1.82%

The Governmental Funds consist of the General Fund, Public Assistance Fund, and the Law
Enforcement Block Grant Fund. The general governmental functions are contained in the General Fund,
the City’s chief operating fund. The focus of the City’s governmental funds is to provide information on
near-term inflows, outflows, and balances of spendable resources. On June 30, 2018, total fund balance

11

City of Williamsburg, Virginia

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

of the General Fund was $44.6 million. Of that amount, Nonspendable fund balance was approximately
$2.8 million, consisting of prepaid expenditures and current market value of five City-owned properties for
sale. Assigned fund balance is $15.8 million, representing a combination of appropriations carried over for
capital projects of $14.5 million and future capital projects of $1.3 million. Restricted fund balance was
$13.1 million for general obligation bonds issued for public safety facilities. The remainder of $12.9 million
is shown as Unassigned fund balance, representing the City’s unassigned fund balance policy of 35% of
operating revenues for the year.
The following provides more detailed information about major General Fund operating revenue collections
during FY 2018:




General Property Taxes –This consists of real and personal property tax receipts. Real property
tax receipts were $10.6 million, an increase of 1.5% compared to last year. Personal property tax
receipts for individuals and businesses totaled $2.9 million, including reimbursement for the
State’s Car Tax relief block grant program, and were level with the previous fiscal year.
Other Local Taxes - Overall these revenues increased 4.2% from last year. Local 1% share of
the State sales tax receipts increased 7.2%, business licenses increased 11.8%, recordation
taxes increased 34.6%, bank stock taxes increased 15.8%, and cigarette taxes increased 28.9%
compared to the previous fiscal year. Room taxes were $3.4 million, an increase from the prior
fiscal year of 1.3%, while meals taxes totaled $7.1 million, realizing a slight increase of .3%
compared to last year. The $2 lodging taxes, which are passed-thru to the Williamsburg Area
Destination Marketing Committee (WADMC), decreased by almost $5K, or .4%, compared to last
year. Franchise taxes increased by 2.5% while consumer utility taxes increased by 1% compared
to last year. Overall, increases in local taxes above suggest positive signs of an improving local
economy.

12

City of Williamsburg, Virginia









Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Revenue from the Use of Money and Property – Interest earnings were $479K for the year, a
significant increase from last year’s $167K. The average yield on deposits and investments for FY
2018 was 1.13%. Prince George Parking Garage receipts were $318K, a decrease of 9.4% from
last year as a result of mechanical failures with equipment. New equipment and parking software
are being installed in the current year that will eliminate the mechanical failures and allow parking
fees to be collected consistently.
Charges for Services – This category consists largely of EMS medical transport fees, recreation
programs and facility rentals, and cemetery lots and fees. Overall revenues in this category were
$1.18 million, an increase of 1.9% compared to last year. An increase in charges for emergency
medical services in the amount of $36.2K is the primary reason for the increase in this category.
Miscellaneous/Recovered Costs – These include reimbursements for Utility Fund overhead
charges, public safety overtime, stormwater management fees, and James City County’s
reimbursed portion of annual Arts Commission grants under miscellaneous receipts.
Intergovernmental – Overall, intergovernmental revenues were $6.7 million, a decrease of 8.3%
compared to last year, largely due to reduced VDOT state construction grant funding for various
repaving projects in FY 2018. State highway maintenance payments were $1.8 million, up 2.3%
for the year based on a slight increase in lane miles maintained by the City.

Governmental Funds Expenditures - Analysis
The following table represents Governmental expenditures by function, including capital projects,
compared to prior year amounts.

Expenditures By Function
Governmental Funds

Expenditures by Function
General Government
Judicial Administration
Public Safety
Public Works
Health and Welfare
Education
Parks, Recreation, and Cultural
Community Development
Capital Projects
Principal Retirement
Interest

June 30, 2018
Percent of
Amount
Total
$3,852,694
8.01%
422,688
0.88%
10,641,971
22.13%
2,986,028
6.21%
2,865,062
5.96%
8,962,074
18.64%
2,104,895
4.38%
4,896,820
10.18%
6,323,793
13.15%
4,880,676
10.15%
0.31%
147,577

Total Expenditures

$48,084,278

100.00%

June 30, 2017
Percent of
Amount
Total
$3,786,601
8.44%
401,237
0.89%
10,034,562
22.36%
2,890,124
6.44%
2,552,959
5.69%
8,817,150
19.65%
2,060,645
4.59%
4,799,435
10.70%
8,289,153
18.47%
1,032,568
2.30%
204,016
0.45%

Increase/(Decrease)
Percent of
Amount
Change
$66,093
1.75%
21,451
5.35%
607,409
6.05%
95,904
3.32%
312,103
12.23%
144,924
1.64%
44,250
2.15%
97,385
2.03%
(1,965,360)
-23.71%
3,848,108
372.67%
(56,439)
-27.66%

$44,868,450

$3,215,828

13

100.00%

7.17%

City of Williamsburg, Virginia

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The City’s FY 2018 budget included $450K in the General Fund to implement a portion of the findings of
the Compensation and Classification Study. An additional $40K was budgeted to recognize employees
based on performance as indicated by annual performance evaluation. The employer contribution rate
during FY 2018 for all full-time employees covered by the Virginia Retirement System was 14.09% of
salary, with covered employees contributing their 5% share above the employer rate. Healthcare
premiums for the City’s plan with the Anthem’s Local Choice program administered by the State were
incurred no increase for FY 2018.
The following analysis provides additional information on the City’s expenditures by function that changed
significantly over the prior year.


















General Government Administration – increased by 1.7% largely due to increased costs in
various departments, including General Fund Contingency, Finance, Information Technology and
City Shop, compared to FY 2017.
Judicial Administration – The City funds judicial offices with James City County in the jointly
owned Courthouse, according to a population-based formula each year. The City’s share of
expenditures totaled $423K, up $22K from last year.
Public Safety – This category includes the Police Department, the Fire Department cost for
correction and detention and several departments. This category of expenditures increased
607.4K, or 6.1% compared to the previous fiscal year. The majority of the increase related to
increased salary and related expenses in both the Police Department and the Fire Department as
a result of the implementation of the Compensation and Classification Study, the addition of one
new police officer, and overtime. Juvenile detention services are provided by the Middle
Peninsula Juvenile Detention Commission, which operates the 48-bed Merrimac Center. Days
used by City kids during FY 2018 totaled 245 compared to 116 last year. Juvenile detention
costs, which were based on per diems, were $74K compared to $19K last year.
Public Works – Overall costs were up 3.3% over last year. Streets department was increased by
3.4% and stormwater operations increased by 7.5%, both due to increased salary and related
benefits. Sanitation costs increased 3.8% due to increased cost for garbage collection.
Engineering and building and grounds expenditures increased slightly by $8K compared to last
year, while landscaping expenditures were up $17K.
Health & Welfare – Local health department costs were $193K, up slightly from last year.
Contributions to Colonial Behavioral Health were $255K, level with last year. Cost for welfare and
social service programs increased $304K compared to last year, the majority of which were for
Comprehensive Service Act expenditures (increase of $131K) and public assistance (increase of
$112K).
Education – Education costs were $9 million, an increase of 1.6% from last year. The City’s
share of the jointly operated Williamsburg-James City County Schools for Fiscal Year 2018 was
9.46%. FY 2018 was the first year of a five year renegotiated joint agreement, with operating
funding based on the City’s share of student population multiplied by a 14% factor, then averaged
over the past three years. The City also funds approved capital projects at that same rate. The
City’s share of school capital costs paid during the year was $2.0 million, and included new
projects, the new Middle School, and others carried forward from prior years.
Parks, Recreation and Cultural – Parks and recreation costs of $1.2 million were level with last
year, with minimal increases for salary adjustments which were offset by a reduction in the cost of
maintenance service contracts cost. Library expenditures of $860K, an increase of 2.1%
compared to last year. Williamsburg’s support of the Regional Library is based on a joint contract
with the counties of James City and York.
Community Development – Planning expenditures increased 14.3%, primarily due to the filling
of positions that were vacant in the previous year. Contributions to outside agencies, not including
pass-thru funding of the $2 lodging taxes to the Williamsburg Area Destination Marketing
Committee, was $2.9 million, an increase of $30K compared to last year. Most of the increase
was due to additional funding for the Williamsburg Area Transport. Arts Commission expenditures
of $153.8 were 3.9% less than last year, primarily as a result of a $6K reduction in expenditures
for First Night of Williamsburg.
Capital Projects – Capital project spending varies each year depending on the 5-year program.
City project spending totaled $6.3 million for FY 2018. Capital projects included street resurfacing
program, sidewalk construction, underground wiring, school improvements, and vehicles. More
information is provided under the Capital Asset section of this analysis.

14

City of Williamsburg, Virginia


Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Principal and Interest payments –Total principal payments during FY 2018 were 4.9K, of which
$3.9 was from refunding bonds issued to pay off bank qualified bonds used to finance the Stryker
Center. Interest payments on outstanding debt totaled $148K. Details of long term debt
obligations are included in the notes to the financial statements.

Budget Variances
Included in the Final Budget column of the Schedule of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund
Balance – Budget and Actual - are carryover funds for Capital Projects. Since all planned projects rarely
are completed by fiscal year end, this carryover is required in order to complete planned and previously
approved projects.
General Fund operating revenues exceeded the budget by $906K for FY 2018, while operating
expenditures were under budget by $640K, for an operating surplus of $1.5 million. Although many
revenue sources were slightly lower than budgeted, many sources, including all property taxes, business
licenses, meal taxes, hotel and motel taxes, building permits, court fines and forfeitures, and parking fines
all ended the year higher than budgeted. On the expenditure side, major contributing departments that
were underspent for FY 2018 included City Council, Clerk of City Council, Fire, Planning, Recreation and
Codes Compliance. In addition, the Williamsburg-James City County Schools were under their operating
budget by $261K.
Fund Balance
Total Fund Balance for the General Fund increased from $31.3 million to $44.6 million for the year. Of
that, (1) $2.8 Million is nonspendable, and represents prepaid items and City-owned land held for resale;
(2) 13.1 million that is restricted bond funds to be used for capital improvements to Fire and Police
facilities (3) $15.8 Million is assigned for subsequent years’ carryover capital expenditures. This category
includes $14.5 million of prior year carryover capital projects for street resurfacing, road intersection
projects, multi-use trail, underground wiring, vehicles, recreation projects, professional studies, and
school capital projects. The remaining $1.3 million of assigned fund balance will fund future capital
projects included in the City’s five-year capital improvement program; (3) and $12.9 million is unassigned.
General Fund Reserve Policy
At June 30, 2018 the unassigned fund balance of approximately $12.9 million is 35% of FY 2018
operating revenues, consistent with the City’s fund balance reserve policy.

15

City of Williamsburg, Virginia

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Enterprise Funds Revenue/Expense Analysis
The business-type activity (water and sewer services of the Utility Fund) operating revenues for the year
were $8.4 million, an increase of 11.9% from last year. There was no increase in Water rates, which are
$5.30 per 1,000 gallons. Highlights include:









Total billed water consumption for FY 2018 was 825 million gallons, a slight increase of
about .8% from 818 million gallons last year.
Water revenues were $4.7 million, an increase of 1.7% compared to last year.
Sewer revenues were $2.4 million, up 11.2% from last year, due to a 9% increase in
Hampton Roads Sanitation District (HRSD) sewer charges (pass-thru), and increased
sewer consumption billed for FY 2018.
Tap and availability fees were $1.1 million, up from last year’s $519K.
Total operating expenses increased $328K, or 5.1%, compared to last year. The majority
of this increase is attributed to increased cost for contractual services (pass-thru
payments to HRSD for sewage treatment).
Investment earnings were $57.4K, an increase of 70.5% from last year.

The City received $218K this year from contracts with cell-phone providers using water tanks as a base
for telecommunications equipment, a 25% increase compared to last year. Utility Fund operating
expenses totaled $6.7 million for the year, up 5.1% from last year, largely due to the increased sewer
rates collected and remitted to HRSD. Depreciation charges include a portion of the 25-year amortization
of the total $12.5 million cost of the Newport News Water agreement, classified as intangible water rights
in the Utility Fund. Operating income for the year was $1.7 million, a 51% increase from the $1.1 million
reported last year. Total net position of the Utility Fund increased by the total net income for FY 2018 of
$1.2 million, leaving the fund’s ending total net position at $24.5 million.

16

City of Williamsburg, Virginia

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

ORIGINAL AND FINAL AMENDED BUDGETS
By resolution, the General Fund’s FY 2018 General Fund Budget was amended for public safety grants
totaling $39K, donations for park renovations in the amount of $2,287 and a grant for parks and
recreation in the amount of $19.6K. The public safety grants were used tor personnel cost to enforce
alcohol violations and for fire training. The majority of the donations for parks were used for renovations
of picnic areas at Waller Mill Park and the grant was used to purchase outdoor water fountains and bottle
refilling stations at Quarterpath Park and the Recreation Center and Kiwanis Park. The FY 2018 capital
budget was amended for a grant in the amount of $10,570 to purchase a commercial gear dryer and four
safer search markers for the Fire Department. Williamsburg-James City County (WJCC) Public Schools
had an operating surplus at June 30, 2017 in the amount of $1,970,663. The City’s share of for local
funding of Schools was 9.46% and, as a result, $186,425 of the surplus was City funds. In October of
2017, WJCC School Board asked for, and City Council approved, an appropriation in the amount of
$61,028 from surplus funds for Impact Insight (service that provides information regarding the impact of
instructional initiatives), replacement of textbooks, replacement of cafeteria tables, to conduct a
compensation and salary analysis, and to replace four school buses.
CAPITAL ASSET AND DEBT ADMINISTRATION
Capital Assets
The City of Williamsburg’s total investment in capital assets, including construction in progress, for its
governmental and business type activities as of June 30, 2018, was $96 million (net of accumulated
depreciation). This investment in capital assets includes land, buildings, machinery and equipment, and
recreation and park facilities. Major capital assets of the Utility Fund consist of all assets used to provide
water and sewer services to City residents, including the major investment of the Waller Mill Reservoir
and all properties adjacent to this watershed, and intangible water rights with the Newport News water
agreement.
Major capital project fund activities during the current fiscal year included the following:
Governmental Funds:





The City’s annual street resurfacing program continued during the year at a cost of $505K.
Ironbound Rd/Longhill Rd intersection right-of-way work continued with costs totaling $663K in FY
2018.
Information technology PC replacement program and telephone system replacement were completed
at a cost of $77K.
Second year costs of the Tyler/Munis ERP financial system software totaled $86K.

17

City of Williamsburg, Virginia







Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Park Improvements at Quarterpath Park, Kiwanis Park, and Waller Mill Park were made totaling
$371.
Renovations were made to the regional library with Williamsburg’s share of the cost totaling $321K.
The Fire Department replaced Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus on all emergency response
apparatus at a cost of $239K.
The Fire Department purchased automated external defibrillators, McGrath Video Laryngoscopes,
and pediatric restraint kits at a cost of $106K utilizing Four-for-Life grant funds.
School project costs, including renovations to existing facilities, were paid during the year in the
amount of $2 million.
Vehicles were replaced citywide under the replacement plan at a cost of $652K.

The budget balances of any appropriated capital projects not completed at year end are carried forward
to the next fiscal year, as provided for in the City’s financial policies. Carryover funds for capital projects
totaled approximately $14.5 million, including $4.2 million for Monticello Avenue improvements, $2.9 for
Capital Landing Road intersection improvements, $1.8 million in School Capital Projects, $1.3 million for
Second Street underground wiring, $1.2 million for Bicycle Facility Improvements, $746K for Fire Station
renovations, and $494K Ironbound Rd/Longhill Rd intersection improvements, $466K for Park
improvements, $350K for Police Station renovations, $263K for Parking Study implementation, $241K for
Tyler/Munis software implementation, and $500K in various other projects.
Utility Fund:



Water distribution and collection systems maintenance and upgrades totaled $39 in the Utility
Fund, plus $500 that was transferred from the Utility Fund General Fund capital improvements for
water improvements on the Monticello Avenue project.
Water treatment improvements totaled $28K.

Additional information on the City of Williamsburg’s capital assets can be found in the Note 6-Capital
Assets, on pages 48 – 50 of the Notes to the Financial Statements section of this report.
Long-Term Debt
At June 30, 2018, the City of Williamsburg’s total outstanding bonded debt was $22.1 million. Bonds
payable for Governmental Activities were $17.7 million, while business-type activities owed $4.4 million at
year end. The full faith and credit of the government backs these instruments. The City’s total bonded
debt increased $9.5 million. The City's remaining capacity for debt at June 30, 2018 is approximately
$164 million.
City staff continues to work with financial advisors, Davenport and Company, to analyze all aspects of
capital project borrowing needs in order to secure the best interest rates if and when future borrowing is
necessary. Additional information on the City’s long-term debt can be in Note 8 to the financial
statements– Long-Term Obligations, on pages 51 – 53 of this report
Requests for Information
This financial report is designed to provide a general overview of the City of Williamsburg’s finances for all
those with an interest in its finances. Questions concerning any of the information provided in this report
or requests for additional financial information should be addressed to the Director of Finance, City of
Williamsburg, 401 Lafayette St., Williamsburg, VA 23185

18

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

GOVERNMENT-WIDE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

Exhibit 1
Page 1 of 2

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Statement of Net Position
June 30, 2018
Primary Government

Governmental
Activities
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
$
22,721,497
Investments
4,795,919
Investments in custody of others
13,144,192
Receivables (net of allowance for uncollectibles):
Taxes receivable
267,853
Accounts receivable
1,384,466
Notes receivable
624,026
Due from other governmental units
1,611,905
Inventories
2,650,700
Prepaid items
119,374
Capital assets (net of accumulated depreciation):
Land and land improvements
8,797,413
Works of art
28,400
Buildings and system
24,566,789
Improvements other than buildings
4,972,916
Machinery and equipment
4,387,600
Intangibles
417,341
Infrastructure
27,939,566
Construction in progress
592,030
Total assets
$ 119,021,987
DEFERRED OUTFLOWS OF RESOURCES
Pension related items
OPEB related items
Deferred charges on refunding
Total deferred outflows of resources
LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Refundable deposits
Accrued interest payable
Unearned revenue
Long-term liabilities:
Due within one year
Due in more than one year
Net pension liability, due in more than
one year
Net OPEB liability, due in more than one
year
Total liabilities

$

$
$

$

Business-type
Activities

$

Total

Component
Unit
Williamsburg
Redevelopment
and Housing
Authority

3,091,268
3,919,207
-

$ 25,812,765
8,715,126
13,144,192

1,137,735
-

267,853
2,522,201
624,026
1,611,905
2,650,700
119,374

9,323
100,459
6,531
21,169

6,434,330
4,555,198
2,715,078
347,731
9,692,361
57,611
$ 31,950,519

15,231,743
28,400
29,121,987
7,687,994
4,735,331
10,109,702
27,997,177
592,030
$ 150,972,506

$

2,377,895
1,441,944
33,941
8,435
4,806,284

1,301,552
92,988
21,714
1,416,254

$

162,895
5,935
150,208
319,038

$

1,464,447
98,923
171,922
1,735,292

$

1,374,919
263,032
174,859
385,165
84,134

$

711,488
34,504
62,095
102,544
292,073

$

2,086,407
297,536
236,954
487,709
376,207

$

$

$

$

$

558,981
247,606
-

31,124
9,012
35,899
316

1,559,660
18,657,629

621,325
4,537,981

2,180,985
23,195,610

-

9,434,109

1,128,974

10,563,083

114,000

87,123
7,578,107

1,862,000
$ 41,286,491

1,774,877
33,708,384

19

$

$

190,351

Exhibit 1
Page 2 of 2

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Statement of Net Position
June 30, 2018
Primary Government

DEFERRED INFLOWS OF RESOURCES
Pension related items
OPEB related items
Total deferred inflows of resources
NET POSITION
Net Investment in capital assets
Restricted for:
Fire and police capital improvements
Other restrictions
Unrestricted
Total net position

Governmental
Activities

Business-type
Activities

$

$

$

1,258,153
198,417
1,456,570

$

$

52,444,883

$

13,144,192
584,890
19,099,322
85,273,287

226,748
10,583
237,331

1,484,901
209,000
1,693,901

$

-

$ 18,769,281

$ 71,214,164

$

3,748,215

5,684,838
$ 24,454,119

13,144,192
584,890
24,784,160
$ 109,727,406

$

867,718
4,615,933

The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.

20

Total

$

Component
Unit
Williamsburg
Redevelopment
and Housing
Authority

$

$

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Statement of Activities
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018
Program Revenues

Expenses

Functions/Programs
PRIMARY GOVERNMENT:
Governmental activities:
General government administration
Judicial administration
Public safety
Public works
Health and welfare
Education
Parks, recreation, and cultural
Community development
Interest on long-term debt
Total governmental activities

Charges for
Services

$

$

5,009,427
422,688
10,746,688
4,716,472
2,816,519
10,936,896
2,648,545
5,013,184
596,354
42,906,773

Business-type activities:
Utility Fund
Total business-type activities
Total primary government

$
$
$

COMPONENT UNIT:
WRHA
Total component unit

$
$

$

$

249,548
1,039,496
391,493
53,946
1,734,483

6,713,633
6,713,633
49,620,406

$
$
$

922,118
922,118

$
$

Operating
Grants and
Contributions

Capital
Grants and
Contributions

$

$

$

131,399
800
404,093
1,250,088
1,096,059
57,038
2,939,477

$

3,329,824
3,329,824

8,176,441
8,176,441
9,910,924

$
$
$

2,939,477

$
$
$

3,329,824

461,046
461,046

$
$

168,739
168,739

$
$

164,940
164,940

General revenues:
General property taxes
Local sales and use taxes
Restaurant food taxes
Hotel and motel taxes
$2 lodging taxes
Business license taxes
Other local taxes
Unrestricted revenues from use of money and property
Miscellaneous
Grants and contributions not restricted to specific programs
Transfers
Total general revenues and transfers
Change in net position
Net position - beginning, as restated
Net position - ending
The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.

21

Exhibit 2

Net (Expense) Revenue and
Changes in Net Position
Primary Government
Governmental
Activities

$

Business-type
Activities

Total

$

(4,878,028) $
(172,340)
(9,303,099)
(1,386,648)
(1,566,431)
(9,840,837)
(2,257,052)
(4,902,200)
(596,354)
(34,902,989) $

-

$
$
$

- $
- $
(34,902,989) $

1,462,808
1,462,808
1,462,808

$

$
$
$

13,056,359
4,706,583
7,062,010
3,358,649
1,123,558
2,049,988
1,383,348
1,200,582
525,463
1,588,563
500,000
36,555,103
1,652,114
83,621,173
85,273,287

$

$
$
$

57,365
225,665
(500,000)
(216,970)
1,245,838
23,208,281
24,454,119

$

Component Unit
Williamsburg
Redevelopment
and Housing
Authority

$

(4,878,028) $
(172,340)
(9,303,099)
(1,386,648)
(1,566,431)
(9,840,837)
(2,257,052)
(4,902,200)
(596,354)
(34,902,989) $

-

$
$
$

1,462,808 $
1,462,808 $
(33,440,181) $

-

$
$

(127,393)
(127,393)

$

2,366
2,366
(125,027)
4,740,960
4,615,933

$

$
$
$

13,056,359
4,706,583
7,062,010
3,358,649
1,123,558
2,049,988
1,383,348
1,257,947
751,128
1,588,563
36,338,133
2,897,952
106,829,454
109,727,406

22

$
$
$

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

FUND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

Exhibit 3
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Balance Sheet
Governmental Funds
June 30, 2018
Other
Governmental
Funds

General
Fund
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Investments
Investments in custody of others
Receivables (net of allowance for uncollectibles):
Taxes receivable
Accounts receivable
Notes receivable
Due from other funds
Due from other governmental units
Inventories
Prepaid items
Total assets
LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Refundable deposits
Due to other funds
Unearned revenue
Total liabilities
DEFERRED INFLOWS OF RESOURCES
Unavailable revenue - property taxes
Total deferred inflows of resources
FUND BALANCES
Nonspendable
Restricted
Assigned
Unassigned
Total fund balances
Total liabilities, deferred inflows of resources
and fund balances

$

$

$

22,153,599
4,795,919
13,144,192
267,853
1,384,466
624,026
43,378
1,462,056
2,650,700
119,374
46,645,563

$

1,345,069
263,032
174,859
772
23,733
1,807,465

$
$
$

$

$

$

Total

567,898
772
149,849
718,519

$

$

267,853
1,384,466
624,026
44,150
1,611,905
2,650,700
119,374
47,364,082

$

29,850
43,378
60,401
133,629

$

1,374,919
263,032
174,859
44,150
84,134
1,941,094

216,244
216,244

$
$

-

$
$

216,244
216,244

$

$

584,890
584,890

$

$

2,770,074
13,144,192
15,788,818
12,918,770
44,621,854

$

2,770,074
13,729,082
15,788,818
12,918,770
45,206,744

$

46,645,563

$

718,519

$

47,364,082

The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.

23

$

22,721,497
4,795,919
13,144,192

Exhibit 4
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Reconciliation of the Balance Sheet of Governmental Funds
To the Statement of Net Position
June 30, 2018
Amounts reported for governmental activities in the statement of net position are
different because:
$

Total fund balances per Exhibit 3 - Balance Sheet - Governmental Funds
Capital assets used in governmental activities are not financial resources and,
therefore, are not reported in the funds.

45,206,744
71,702,055

Other long-term assets are not available to pay for current-period expenditures and,
therefore, are reported as deferred inflows of resources in the funds. The
following is a summary of items supporting this adjustment:
Unavailable revenue - property taxes
$

216,244

216,244

21,714
1,301,552
92,988

1,416,254

Long-term liabilities, including bonds payable, are not due and payable in the current
period and, therefore, are not reported in the funds. The following is a summary of
items supporting this adjustment:
General obligation bonds
$ (17,712,733)
Deferred issuance premium
(1,522,725)
Net OPEB liability
(1,774,877)
Net pension liability
(9,434,109)
Accrued interest payable
(385,165)
Compensated absences
(981,831)

(31,811,440)

Deferred inflows of resources are not due and payable in the current period and,
therefore, are not reported in the funds.
OPEB related items
$
(198,417)
Pension related items
(1,258,153)

(1,456,570)

Deferred outflows of resources are not availabe to pay for current-period
expenditures and, therefore, are not reported in the funds.
Deferred charge on refunding
Pension related items
OPEB related items

Net position of governmental activities

$

$

The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.

24

85,273,287

Exhibit 5
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Statement of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balances
Governmental Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018
General
Fund
REVENUES
General property taxes
Other local taxes
Permits, privilege fees, and regulatory licenses
Fines and forfeitures
Revenue from the use of money and property
Charges for services
Miscellaneous
Recovered costs
Intergovernmental:
Commonwealth
Federal
Total revenues

$

$

13,089,822
19,684,136
302,819
249,211
1,200,576
1,182,453
484,084
1,026,582
5,245,005
178,518
42,643,206

EXPENDITURES
Current:
General government administration
Judicial administration
Public safety
Public works
Health and welfare
Education
Parks, recreation, and cultural
Community development
Capital projects
Debt service:
Principal retirement
Interest and other fiscal charges
Total expenditures

$

4,880,676
147,577
45,666,673

Excess (deficiency) of revenues over
(under) expenditures

$
$

OTHER FINANCING SOURCES (USES)
Transfers in
Transfers out
Issuance of bonds
Bond premium issuance
Payment to refunded bond escrow agent
Bond issuance costs
Total other financing sources (uses)
Net change in fund balances
Fund balances - beginning, as restated
Fund balances - ending

$

$
$
$

3,852,694
422,688
10,602,751
2,986,028
486,677
8,962,074
2,104,895
4,896,820
6,323,793

Other
Governmental
Funds
$

$

$

511,761
777,556
1,330,702

39,220
2,378,385
-

$

$

13,089,822
19,684,136
302,819
249,211
1,200,582
1,182,453
525,463
1,026,582
5,756,766
956,074
43,973,908

3,852,694
422,688
10,641,971
2,986,028
2,865,062
8,962,074
2,104,895
4,896,820
6,323,793

$

(3,023,467) $

(1,086,903) $

(4,110,370)

500,000 $
(1,050,533)
16,180,700
1,539,845
(561,403)
(273,376)
16,335,233 $

1,050,533
1,050,533

$

1,550,533
(1,050,533)
16,180,700
1,539,845
(561,403)
(273,376)
17,385,766

(36,370) $
621,260
584,890 $

13,275,396
31,931,348
45,206,744

13,311,766
31,310,088
44,621,854

$

$
$

2,417,605

$

4,880,676
147,577
48,084,278

The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.

25

6
41,379
-

Total

$

Exhibit 6
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Reconciliation of Statement of Revenues,
Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balances of Governmental Funds
To the Statement of Activities
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018
Amounts reported for governmental activities in the statement of activities are different because:
Net change in fund balances - total governmental funds

$ 13,275,396

Governmental funds report capital outlays as expenditures. However, in the statement of
activities the cost of those assets is allocated over their estimated useful lives and
reported as depreciation expense. This is the amount by which the capital outlays
exceeded the depreciation expense in the current period. The following is a summary
of items supporting this adjustment:
Capital outlay
$ 3,714,606
Depreciation expense
(3,688,043)

26,563

Revenues in the statement of activities that do not provide current financial resources are
not reported as revenues in the funds.
Property taxes
$

(33,463)

(33,463)

The issuance of long-term debt (e.g. bonds, leases) provides current financial resources to
governmental funds, while the repayment of the principal of long-term debt consumes
the current financial resources of governmental funds. Neither transaction, however,
has any effect on net position. Also, governmental funds report the effect of premiums,
discounts, and similar items when debt is first issued, whereas these amounts are
deferred and amortized in the statement of activities. This amount is the net effect
of these differences in the treatment of long-term debt and related items. The following
is a summary of items supporting this adjustment:
Principal retirement on general obligation bonds
$ 1,029,676
Issuance of bond
(16,180,700)
Payment to refunding bonds
4,436,288
Premium on issuance
(1,539,845)

(12,254,581)

Some expenses reported in the statement of activities do not require the use of current
financial resources and, therefore are not reported as expenditures in governmental funds.
The following is a summary of items supporting this adjustment:
Change in compensated absences
$
(1,432)
OPEB expense
(11,310)
Pension expense
850,227
Amortization of premium
161,848
Amortization of deferred charges on refunding
(2,171)
Change in accrued interest payable
(358,963)

638,199

Change in net position of governmental activities

$

The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.

26

1,652,114

Exhibit 7
Page 1 of 2
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Statement of Net Position
Proprietary Funds
June 30, 2018

Utility
Fund
ASSETS
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
Investments
Accounts receivable (net of allowances for uncollectibles)
Total current assets
Noncurrent assets:
Capital assets:
Land and land improvement and open easement
Buildings and system
Improvements other than buildings
Machinery and equipment
Intangibles
Infrastructure
Accumulated depreciation
Total net capital assets
Total noncurrent assets
Total assets
DEFERRED OUTFLOWS OF RESOURCES
Deferred charges on refundings
Pension related items
OPEB related items
Total deferred outflows of resources

$

$

$

$
$
$

$

$

LIABILITIES
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Refundable deposits
Accrued interest payable
Compensated absences - current portion
Unearned revenue
General obligation bonds - current portion
Total current liabilities

$

$

27

3,091,268
3,919,207
1,137,735
8,148,210

6,434,330
11,842,633
8,518,945
2,322,204
12,525,344
83,860
(17,925,007)
23,802,309
23,802,309
31,950,519

150,208
162,895
5,935
319,038

711,488
34,504
62,095
102,544
83,696
292,073
537,629
1,824,029

Exhibit 7
Page 2 of 2
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Statement of Net Position
Proprietary Funds
June 30, 2018

Utility
Fund
LIABILITIES (Continued)
Noncurrent liabilities:
General obligation bonds - net of current portion
Net pension liability
Net OPEB liability
Compensated absences - net of current portion
Total noncurrent liabilities
Total liabilities

$

$
$

DEFERRED INFLOWS OF RESOURCES
Pension related items
OPEB related items
Total deferred inflows of resources

$
$

NET POSITION
Net investment in capital assets
Unrestricted
Total net position

$
$

The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.

28

4,495,399
1,128,974
87,123
42,582
5,754,078
7,578,107

226,748
10,583
237,331

18,769,281
5,684,838
24,454,119

Exhibit 8
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Statement of Revenues, Expenses, and Changes in Net Position
Proprietary Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018
Utility
Fund
OPERATING REVENUES
Charges for services:
Water revenues
Sewer revenues
Tap and availability fees
Penalty and interest
Miscellaneous
Total operating revenues

$

$

OPERATING EXPENSES
Personnel services
Fringe benefits
Contractual services
Other charges
Depreciation
Total operating expenses

$

4,687,485
2,402,770
1,059,375
20,811
225,665
8,396,106

$

1,270,502
494,439
2,671,281
1,450,082
831,135
6,717,439

$

1,678,667

$
$
$

57,365
3,806
6,000
67,171
1,745,838

Transfers out
Change in net position

$

(500,000)
1,245,838

Total net position - beginning, as restated
Total net position - ending

$

23,208,281
24,454,119

Operating income (loss)
NONOPERATING REVENUES (EXPENSES)
Investment income
Interest and other fiscal charges
Connection fees
Total nonoperating revenues (expenses)
Income before transfers

The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.

29

Exhibit 9
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Statement of Cash Flows
Proprietary Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018
Utility
Fund
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Receipts from customers and users
Payments to suppliers
Payments to and for employees
Net cash provided by (used for) operating activities
CASH FLOWS FROM NONCAPITAL FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Connection fees
Transfers to other funds
Net cash provided by (used for) noncapital financing activities
CASH FLOWS FROM CAPITAL AND RELATED FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Purchases of capital assets
Proceeds from refunding bond issued
Principal payments on bonds
Refunding escrow payment
Interest expense
Net cash provided by (used for) capital and related financing activities

$

$
$
$

6,000
(500,000)
(494,000)

$

(270,886)
4,095,646
(454,324)
(4,048,824)
(159,377)
(837,765)

Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents

$

1,095,903

Cash and cash equivalents - beginning
Cash and cash equivalents - ending

$

1,995,365
3,091,268

$

1,678,667

$

831,135
(82,561)
157,874
(23,768)
(11,438)
8,628
157,073
2,006
(21,879)
(452,783)
184,714
749,001
2,427,668

Reconciliation of operating income (loss) to net cash
provided by (used for) operating activities:
Operating income (loss)
Adjustments to reconcile operating income to net cash
provided by (used for) operating activities:
Depreciation
(Increase) decrease in accounts receivable
(Increase) decrease in deferred outflows of resources related to pension and OPEB
Increase (decrease) in compensated absences
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable
Increase (decrease) in accrued liabilities
Increase (decrease) in unearned revenue
Increase (decrease) refundable deposits
Increase (decrease) in OPEB liability
Increase (decrease) in net pension liability
Increase (decrease) in deferred inflows of resources related to pension and OPEB
Total adjustments
Net cash provided by (used for) operating activities
The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.

30

$

8,472,624
(4,124,173)
(1,920,783)
2,427,668

$
$

Exhibit 10
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Statement of Fiduciary Net Position
Fiduciary Funds
June 30, 2018
Agency
Funds
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Investments, at fair value:
Other investments
Other assets
Total assets
LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Amounts held for others
Total liabilities

$

1,837,177

$

1,586,067
22,813
3,446,057

$
$

The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.

31

152,729
238,975
3,054,353
3,446,057

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies:
The City of Williamsburg, Virginia (the "City") was established by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Virginia in 1699 and was incorporated by British Royal Charter in 1722. The City is a municipal corporation
governed by an elected mayor and four-member council. The accompanying financial statements present the
government and the entities for which the government is considered to be financially accountable.
Financial Statement Presentation
Management’s Discussion and Analysis - GASB Statement No. 34 requires the financial statements be
accompanied by a narrative introduction and analytical overview of the government’s financial activities in the
form of “Management’s Discussion and Analysis” (MD&A).
Government-wide and Fund Financial Statements
Government-wide financial statements - The reporting model includes financial statements prepared using full
accrual accounting for all of the government’s activities. This approach includes not just current assets and
liabilities but also capital assets and long-term liabilities (such as buildings and general obligation debt).
The government-wide financial statements (i.e., the Statement of Net Position and the Statement of Activities)
report information on all of the nonfiduciary activities of the primary government. For the most part, the effect
of interfund activity has been removed from these statements. Governmental activities, which normally are
supported by taxes and intergovernmental revenues, are reported separately from business-type activities,
which rely to a significant extent on fees and charges for support. Likewise, the primary government is reported
separately from certain legally separate component units for which the primary government is financially
accountable.
Statement of Net Position - The Statement of Net Position is designed to display financial position of the primary
government (governmental and business-type activities) and its discretely presented component unit.
Governments will report all capital assets in the government-wide Statement of Net Position and will report
depreciation expense - the cost of “using up” capital assets - in the Statement of Activities. The net position of
a government will be broken down into three categories - 1) net investment in capital assets; 2) restricted; and
3) unrestricted.

The remainder of this page left blank intentionally

32

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: (Continued)
Statement of Activities - The government-wide Statement of Activities reports expenses and revenues in a
format that focuses on the cost of each of the government’s functions. The expense of individual functions is
compared to the revenues generated directly by the function (for instance, through user charges or
intergovernmental grants).
The statement of activities demonstrates the degree to which the direct expenses of a given function or segment
is offset by program revenues. Direct expenses are those that are clearly identifiable with a specific function or
segment. Program revenues include 1) charges to customers or applicants who purchase, use, or directly benefit
from goods, services, or privileges provided by a given function or segment and 2) grants and contributions that
are restricted to meeting the operational or capital requirements of a particular function or segment. Taxes and
other items not properly included among program revenues are reported instead as general revenues.
Separate financial statements are provided for governmental funds, proprietary funds, and fiduciary funds, even
though the latter are excluded from the government-wide financial statements. Major individual governmental
funds and major individual enterprise funds are reported as separate columns in the fund financial statements.
Budgetary comparison schedules - Demonstrating compliance with the adopted budget is an important
component of a government’s accountability to the public. Many citizens participate in one way or another in
the process of establishing the annual operating budgets of state and local governments, and have a keen
interest in following the actual financial progress of their governments over the course of the year. Many
governments revise their original budgets over the course of the year for a variety of reasons. Under the GASB
34 reporting model, governments provide budgetary comparison information in their annual reports, including
the original budget and a comparison of final budget and actual results.
A. Financial Reporting Entity
The basic criterion for determining whether a governmental department, agency, institution, commission,
public authority, or other governmental organization should be included in a primary governmental unit's
reporting entity for the basic financial statements is financial accountability. Financial accountability
includes the appointment of a voting majority of the organization’s governing body and the ability of the
primary government to impose its will on the organization or if there is a financial benefit/burden
relationship. In addition, an organization which is fiscally dependent on the primary government should be
included in its reporting entity. These financial statements present the City of Williamsburg (the primary
government) and its component unit. Blended component units, although legally separate entities, are in
substance, part of the government’s operations and so data from these units are combined with data of the
primary government. Each discretely presented component unit, on the other hand, is reported in a
separate column in the combined financial statements to emphasize it is legally separate from the
government.
B. Individual Component Unit Disclosures
Blended Component Unit - The City has no blended component units to be included for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2018.

33

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: (Continued)
B. Individual Component Unit Disclosures (Continued)
Discretely Presented Component Units – The Williamsburg Redevelopment and Housing Authority (WRHA) is
responsible for operating a low income housing program in the City which provides housing for eligible
families, for operating redevelopment and conservation programs and for delivering of services to citizens of
low income housing and urban renewal areas through the encouragement and development of social and
economic opportunities. The Commissioners of the Authority are the members of City Council in addition to
a Member-at-Large and a Public Housing Resident Member. The Authority is fiscally dependent on the City.
The City does not have operational responsibility for the WRHA. The City is involved in the day-to-day fiscal
operations of the WRHA, including the processing of their payroll, accounts payable and other managerial
functions and therefore, the WRHA is included in the City’s financial statements as a discrete presentation
for the year ended June 30, 2018. WRHA’s fiscal year of October 1 to September 30 differs from the City’s
fiscal year of July 1 to June 30. A copy of the separately issued financial statements may be obtained for
the WRHA by writing to Williamsburg Redevelopment and Housing Authority, 401 Lafayette Street, P.O. Box
411, Williamsburg, VA 23185 or by calling (757) 220-3477.
C. Other Related Organizations
Not included in the City’s financial statements are certain entities created as separate governments under
the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. These agencies are separate legal entities having governmental
character and sufficient autonomy in the management of their own affairs to distinguish them as separate
from the administrative organization of the City, although certain members of their governing bodies are
appointed by the City Council. Specific information on the nature of the individual agencies and description
of their financial transactions affecting the City are provided in the following paragraphs:
1. The City of Williamsburg – County of James City, Virginia Joint Public Schools – Under the terms of an
agreement dated January 14, 1954, and subsequently revised, between the governing bodies and the
school boards of the City of Williamsburg, Virginia and the County of James City, Virginia, effective July
1, 1955, the two localities consolidated the operations of their schools. The latest agreement was
amended April 24, 2012 for Fiscal Years 2013 through 2018. That agreement provides that the City’s
share of operational costs will be equivalent to the percentage of City students each year, times an addon factor, then averaged over the two past fiscal year funding shares. The add-on factor for Fiscal Year
2018 is as follows:

Fiscal Year
2018

Factor
1.14

34

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: (Continued)
C. Other Related Organizations (Continued)
1. The City of Williamsburg – County of James City, Virginia Joint Public Schools (Continued)
Summary financial information on the school operations (General Fund) as of June 30, 2018, is as
follows:
Total assets

$

Liabilities
Fund equity and other credits

17,599,282
17,399,282
200,000

Total liabilities, fund equity, and other credits
Revenues
Expenditures and other financing uses
Excess of expenditures and other financing uses over revenues

$

17,599,282

$ 128,706,028
128,934,949
$
(228,921)

Fund balance, beginning

428,921

Fund balance, ending

$

200,000

General long-term obligations of the joint school operations consists of liabilities for early retirement,
compensated absences, pensions, and obligations under capital leases. Each participating government is
responsible for its own debt related to school properties.
2. Williamsburg Regional Library – The Library is a joint operation of the City of Williamsburg and the
Counties of James City and York, Virginia, operating under a contract dated September 26, 2013. It
receives funding from the Commonwealth of Virginia, the federal government, and some private sources.
The Library’s board is split between City and County appointees. The Library’s management is
independent from City and County control. During the current fiscal year, the City contributed $859,699
to the Library’s operating budget, or 14.48% of its net appropriated support. Separate financial
statements are prepared and are available, which reflect the details of its operations.
3. Other Agencies – Certain agencies and commissions service both the City of Williamsburg and surrounding
localities. Board membership is allocated among the localities and their governing bodies make
appointments. These agencies include: Hampton Roads Planning District Commission (HRPDC), Colonial
Behavioral Health, Virginia Peninsula Regional Jail, Colonial Group Home Commission, Middle Peninsula
Juvenile Detention Commission, Peninsula Agency on Aging, Community Action Agency, Virginia Peninsula
Public Service Authority, Greater Williamsburg Partnership, and the Williamsburg Area Arts Commission.

35

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: (Continued)
D. Measurement Focus, Basis of Accounting and Financial Statement Presentation
The accompanying financial statements are prepared in accordance with pronouncements issued by the
Governmental Accounting Standards Board. The principles prescribed by GASB represent generally accepted
accounting principles applicable to governmental units.
The government-wide financial statements are reported using the economic resources measurement focus
and the accrual basis of accounting, as are the proprietary fund and fiduciary fund financial statements.
Revenues are recorded when earned and expenses are recorded when a liability is incurred, regardless of
timing of related cash flows. Property taxes are recognized as revenues in the year for which they are
levied. Grants and similar items are recognized as revenue as soon as all eligibility requirements imposed by
the provider have been met.
The government-wide Statement of Activities reflects both the gross and net cost per functional category
(public safety, public works, health and welfare, etc.) which are otherwise being supported by general
government revenues, (property, sales and use taxes, certain intergovernmental revenues, fines, permits
and charges, etc.) The Statement of Activities reduces gross expenses (including depreciation) by related
program revenues, operating and capital grants, and contributions. The program revenues must be directly
associated with the function (public safety, public works, health and welfare, etc.) or a business-type
activity.
Governmental fund financial statements are reported using the current financial resources measurement
focus and the modified accrual basis of accounting. This is the manner in which these funds are normally
budgeted. Revenues are recognized as soon as they are both measurable and available. Revenues are
considered to be available when they are collectible within the current period or soon enough thereafter to
pay liabilities of the current period. For this purpose, the government considers revenues to be available if
they are collected within 60 days of the end of the current fiscal period. All other revenue items are
considered to be measurable and available only when cash is received by the government. Expenditures
generally are recorded when a liability is incurred, as under accrual accounting. However, debt service
expenditures as well as expenditures related to compensated absences and claims and judgments, are
recorded only when payment is due.
The City’s fiduciary funds are presented in the fund financial statements by type and have no measurement
focus but use the accrual basis of accounting for asset and liability recognition. Since by definition these
assets are being held for the benefit of a third party and cannot be used to address activities or obligations
of the government, these funds are not incorporated into the government-wide statements.

36

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: (Continued)
D. Measurement Focus, Basis of Accounting and Financial Statement Presentation (Continued)
Property taxes, franchise taxes, licenses, and interest associated with the current fiscal period are all
considered to be susceptible to accrual and so have been recognized as revenues of the current fiscal period.
Accordingly, real and personal property taxes are recorded as revenues and receivables when billed, net of
allowances for uncollectible amounts. Property taxes not collected within 60 days after year-end are
reflected as unavailable revenues. Sales and utility taxes, which are collected by the state or utilities and
subsequently remitted to the City, are recognized as revenues and receivables upon collection by the state
or utility, which is generally within two months preceding receipt by the City.
Licenses, permits, fines and rents are recorded as revenues when received. Intergovernmental revenues,
consisting primarily of federal, state and other grants for the purpose of funding specific expenditures, are
recognized when earned or at the time of the specific expenditure. Revenues from general purpose grants
are recognized in the period to which the grant applies. All other revenue items are considered to be
measurable and available only when cash is received by the government.
In the fund financial statements, financial transactions and accounts of the City are organized on the basis of
funds. The operation of each fund is considered to be an independent fiscal and separate accounting entity,
with a self-balancing set of accounts recording cash and/or other financial resources together with all
related liabilities and residual equities or balances, and changes therein, which are segregated for the
purpose of carrying on specific activities or attaining certain objectives in accordance with special
regulations, restrictions, or limitations.
1. Governmental Funds
Governmental Funds are those through which most governmental functions typically are financed. The
City reports the General Fund as a major governmental fund.
The General Fund is the primary operating fund of the City. This fund is used to account for and report
all financial transactions and resources except those required to be accounted for and reported in
another fund. Revenues are derived primarily from property and other local taxes, state and federal
distributions, licenses, permits, charges for service, and interest income.
Special Revenue Funds account for and report the proceeds of specific revenue sources that are
restricted, committed, or assigned to expenditure for specified purposes other than debt service or
capital projects requiring separate accounting because of legal or regulatory provisions or administrative
action. Special Revenue Funds consist of the following nonmajor funds: Virginia Public Assistance Fund
and Law Enforcement Block Grant Fund. The Virginia Public Assistance Fund accounts for the Social
Services programs of the City and is funded primarily through intergovernmental revenues.
2. Proprietary Funds
Proprietary Funds account for operations that are financed in a manner similar to private business
enterprises. The Proprietary Fund measurement focus is upon determination of net income, financial
position, and changes in financial position. Proprietary Funds consist of Enterprise Funds.

37

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: (Continued)
D. Measurement Focus, Basis of Accounting and Financial Statement Presentation (Continued)
Enterprise funds distinguish operating revenues and expenses from nonoperating items. Operating
revenues and expenses generally result from providing services and producing and delivering goods in
connection with a proprietary fund’s principal ongoing operations. All revenues and expenses not
meeting this definition are reported as nonoperating revenues and expenses. The City’s major Enterprise
Fund consists of the Utility Fund.
3. Fiduciary Funds
Fiduciary Funds (Trust and Agency Funds) account for assets held by the City unit in a trustee capacity or
as an agent or custodian for individuals, private organizations, other governmental units, or other funds.
These funds include Agency Funds. Agency Funds utilize the accrual basis of accounting as described in
the Proprietary Funds Presentation. Agency funds do not have a measurement focus. Agency funds
include the Williamsburg Regional Library, the Williamsburg Tricentennial Fund, Economic Development
Authority, the Farmers Market Fund, and the Special Welfare Fund. Fiduciary funds are not included in
the government-wide financial statements.
E. Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include amounts in demand deposits as well as short-term investments with a
maturity date within three months of the date acquired by the government.
F. Investments
Money market investments, participating interest-earning investment contracts (repurchase agreements)
that have a remaining maturity at time of purchase of one year or less, nonparticipating interest-earning
investment contracts (nonnegotiable certificates of deposit (CDs)) and external investment pools are
measured at amortized cost. All other investments are reported at fair value.
State statutes authorize the government to invest in obligations of the U.S. Treasury, commercial paper,
corporate bonds and repurchase agreements.

The remainder of this page left blank intentionally

38

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: (Continued)
G. Receivables and payables
Activity between funds that are representative of lending/borrowing arrangements outstanding at the end of
the fiscal year are referred to as either “due to/from other funds” (i.e. the current portions of the interfund
loans). All other outstanding balances between funds are reported as “advances to/from other funds.”
All trade and property tax receivables are shown net of an allowance for uncollectibles. The City calculates
its allowance for uncollectible accounts using historical collection data and, in certain cases, specific
account analysis. The allowance amounted to approximately $423,333 at June 30, 2018 and is comprised of
property taxes of $76,041 water and sewer charges of $110,483, and ambulance recovery fees of $236,809.
Real and Personal Property Tax Data:
The tax calendars for real and personal property taxes are summarized below.

Levy
Due Date
Lien Date

Real Property

Personal Property

July 1
December 1 / June 1
July 1

January 1
December 1
January 1

The City bills and collects its own property taxes. The City follows the practice of reassessing real estate
annually and personal property annually.
H. Capital Assets
Capital assets, which include property, plant and equipment, infrastructure, and intangibles are reported in
the applicable governmental columns in the government-wide financial statements. Capital assets are
defined by the City as land, buildings, infrastructure, and equipment with an initial individual cost of more
than $5,000 (amount not rounded) and an estimated useful life in excess of two years. Such assets are
recorded at historical cost or estimated historical cost if purchased or constructed. Donated capital assets
are recorded at acquisition value at the date of donation. Intangible assets lack physical substance and have
a nonfinancial nature and initial useful life extending beyond a single reporting period.
The costs of normal maintenance and repairs that do not add to the value of the asset or materially extend
the asset’s life are not capitalized.
Major outlays for capital assets and improvements are capitalized as projects are constructed. Interest
incurred during the construction phase of capital assets of business-type activities is included as part of the
capitalized value of the assets constructed. Interest attributable to capitalized assets as of June 30, 2018
was immaterial.

39

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: (Continued)
H. Capital Assets (Continued)
Property, plant and equipment, infrastructure, and intangibles of the primary government are depreciated
(including amortization of intangible assets) using the straight-line method over the following estimated
useful lives.

Assets

Years

Buildings
Improvements other than buildings
Infrastructure
Roads
Bridges and culverts
Water/sewer system
Machinery and equipment
Intangibles

40
20
30
50
40
3-10
40

I. Compensated Absences
Vested or accumulated vacation leave that is expected to be liquidated with expendable available financial
resource is reported as an expenditure and liability of the governmental fund that will pay it when it is
matured. Compensated absences are reported in governmental funds only if they have matured to include
unused reimbursable leave still outstanding following an employee’s resignation or retirement. Thus, the
only portion of a compensated absences liability that is reported in the governmental funds would be the
amount of reimbursable unused vacation leave or sick leave payable to employees who had terminated their
employment as of June 30th. Amounts of vested or accumulated vacation leave that are not expected to be
liquidated with expendable available financial resources are reported as an expense in the Statement of
Activities and a long-term obligation in the Statement of Net Position. In accordance with the provisions of
Governmental Accounting Standards No. 16, Accounting for Compensated Absences, no liability is recorded
for nonvesting accumulating rights to receive sick pay benefits. However, a liability is recognized for that
portion of accumulating sick leave benefits that is estimated will be taken as “terminal leave” prior to
retirement.
J. Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect certain reported amounts and disclosures.
Accordingly, actual results could differ from those estimates.

40

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: (Continued)
K. Deferred Outflows/Inflows of Resources
In addition to assets, the statement of financial position will sometimes report a separate section for
deferred outflows of resources. This separate financial statement element, deferred outflows of resources,
represents a consumption of net position that applies to a future period(s) and so will not be recognized as
an outflow of resources (expense/expenditure) until then. The City has multiple items that qualify for
reporting in this category. One item is the deferred charge on refunding reported in the government-wide
statement of net position. A deferred charge on refunding results from the difference in the carrying value
of refunded debt and its refunded or refunding debt. The other item is comprised of certain items related to
the measurement of the net pension liability and net OPEB liabilities and contributions to the pension and
OPEB plans made during the current year and subsequent to the net pension and net OPEB liability
measurement date. For more detailed information on these items, reference the related notes.
In addition to liabilities, the statement of financial position will sometimes report a separate section for
deferred inflows of resources. This separate financial statement element, deferred inflows of resources,
represents an acquisition of net position that applies to a future period(s) and so will not be recognized as an
inflow of resources (revenue) until that time. The City has multiple items that qualify for reporting in this
category. Under a modified accrual basis of accounting, unavailable revenue representing property taxes
receivable is reported in the governmental funds balance sheet. This amount is comprised of uncollected
property taxes due prior to June 30 and is deferred and recognized as an inflow of resources in the period
that the amount becomes available. In addition, certain items related to the measurement of the net
pension liability and net OPEB liabilities are reported as deferred inflows of resources. These include
differences between expected and actual experience, change in assumptions, and the net difference
between projected and actual earnings on pension plan investments. For more detailed information on these
items, reference the pension note.
L. Net Position
Net position is the difference between (a) assets and deferred outflows of resources and (b) liabilities and
deferred inflows of resources. Net investment in capital assets represents capital assets, less accumulated
depreciation, less any outstanding debt related to the acquisition, construction or improvement of those
assets. Deferred outflows of resources and deferred inflows of resources that are attributable to the
acquisition, construction, or improvement of those assets or related debt are also included in this component
of net position.
M. Net Position Flow Assumption
Sometimes the City will fund outlays for a particular purpose from both restricted (e.g. restricted bond or
grant proceeds) and unrestricted resources. In order to calculate the amounts to report as restricted – net
position and unrestricted – net position in the financial statements, a flow assumption must be made about
the order in which the resources are considered to be applied. It is the City’s policy to consider restricted –
net position to have been depleted before unrestricted – net position is applied.

41

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: (Continued)
N. Pensions
For purposes of measuring the net pension liability, deferred outflows of resources and deferred inflows of
resources related to pensions, and pension expense, information about the fiduciary net position of the
City’s Retirement Plan and the additions to/deductions from the City’s Retirement Plan’s net fiduciary
position have been determined on the same basis as they were reported by the Virginia Retirement System
(VRS). For this purpose, benefit payments (including refunds of employee contributions) are recognized when
due and payable in accordance with the benefit terms. Investments are reported at fair value.
O. Other Postemployment Benefits (OPEB)
Group Life Insurance
The Virginia Retirement System (VRS) Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program provides coverage to state
employees, teachers, and employees of participating political subdivisions. The GLI Program was established
pursuant to §51.1-500 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and which provides the authority under
which benefit terms are established or may be amended. The GLI Program is a defined benefit plan that
provides a basic group life insurance benefit for employees of participating employers. For purposes of
measuring the net GLI Program OPEB liability, deferred outflows of resources and deferred inflows of
resources related to the GLI OPEB, and GLI OPEB expense, information about the fiduciary net position of the
VRS GLI Program OPEB and the additions to/deductions from the VRS GLI OPEB’s net fiduciary position have
been determined on the same basis as they were reported by VRS. In addition, benefit payments are
recognized when due and payable in accordance with the benefit terms. Investments are reported at fair
value.
Line of Duty Act Program
The Virginia Retirement System (VRS) Line of Duty Act Program (LODA) was established pursuant to §9.1-400
et seq. of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and which provides the authority under which benefit terms are
established or may be amended. The LODA Program provides death and health insurance benefits to eligible
state employees and local government employees, including volunteers, who die or become disabled as a
result of the performance of their duties as a public safety officer. In addition, health insurance benefits are
provided to eligible survivors and family members. For purposes of measuring the net LODA OPEB liability,
deferred outflows of resources and deferred inflows of resources related to the LODA OPEB, and related
LODA OPEB expense, information about the fiduciary net position of the VRS LODA Program OPEB Plan and
the additions to/deductions from the VRS LODA Program OPEB Plan’s net fiduciary position have been
determined on the same basis as they were reported by VRS. In addition, benefit payments are recognized
when due and payable in accordance with the benefit terms. Investments are reported at fair value.
P. Long-term Obligations
In the government-wide financial statements, long-term obligations are reported as liabilities in the
applicable governmental activities, business-type activities, or proprietary fund type statement of net
position. Bonds payable are reported net of the applicable bond premium or discount. In the fund financial
statements, governmental fund types recognize bond premiums and discounts during the current period. The
face amount of debt issued is reported as other financing sources while discounts on debt issuances are
reported as other financing uses.

42

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: (Continued)
Q. Prepaid Items
Certain payments to vendors represent costs applicable to future accounting periods and are recorded as
prepaid items in the financial statements using the consumption method.
R. Inventory
Inventory is valued at cost using the weighted average method. Inventory consists of expendable supplies
held for consumption and is recorded as expenditures when used (consumption method). Inventory in the
General Fund includes land purchased by the City and held for resale. These amounts are valued at their
estimated fair market value.
S. Fund Equity
The City Council reports fund balance in accordance with GASB Statement 54, Fund Balance Reporting and
Governmental Fund Type Definitions. The following classifications describe the relative strength of the
spending constraints placed on the purposes for which resources can be used:









Nonspendable fund balance – amounts that are not in spendable form (such as inventory and prepaids) or
are required to be maintained intact (corpus of a permanent fund);
Restricted fund balance – amounts constrained to specific purposes by their providers (such as grantors,
bondholders, and higher levels of government), through constitutional provisions, or by enabling
legislation;
Committed fund balance – amounts constrained to specific purposes by a government itself, using its
highest level of decision-making authority; to be reported as committed, amounts cannot be used for any
other purpose unless the government takes the same highest level action to remove or change the
constraint;
Assigned fund balance – amounts a government intends to use for a specific purpose; intent can be
expressed by the governing body or by the City Manager to which the governing body delegates the
authority;
Unassigned fund balance – amounts that are available for any purpose; positive amounts are only
reported in the general fund.

When fund balance resources are available for a specific purpose in more than one classification, it is the
City’s policy to use the most restrictive funds first in the following order: restricted, committed, assigned,
and unassigned as they are needed.
City Council establishes (and modifies or rescinds) fund balance commitments by passage of a resolution.
This is typically done through adoption and amendment of the budget. A fund balance commitment is further
indicated in the budget document as a designation or commitment of the fund (such as for special
incentives).
Assigned fund balance is established by the City Manager, who has been given the delegated authority by the
City Council to assign amounts for a specific purpose (such as the purchase of capital assets, construction,
debt service, or for other purposes).

43

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: (Continued)
S. Fund Equity (Continued)
In the general fund, the City strives to maintain an unassigned fund balance to be used for unanticipated
emergencies equal to a minimum of 35% of General Fund operating revenue as shown in the City’s most
recent comprehensive annual financial report.
The details of governmental fund balances, as presented in aggregate on Exhibit 3, are as follows:
Nonmajor Special
Revenue Funds
Virginia

Law

Public

Enforcement

General

Assistance

Block Grant

Fund

Fund

Fund

Total

Fund Balances:
Nonspendable:
Prepaid Items

$

Inventory of land held for resale
Total Nonspendable

$

119,374 $

- $

- $

119,374

2,650,700

-

-

2,650,700

2,770,074 $

- $

- $

2,770,074

- $

572,411 $

- $

572,411

Restricted:
Social services

$

Law enforcement
Fire and police capital improvements
Total Restricted

-

-

12,479

12,479

13,144,192

-

-

13,144,192

$

13,144,192 $

572,411 $

12,479 $

13,729,082

Future capital projects

$

15,788,818 $

- $

- $

15,788,818

Total Assigned

$

15,788,818 $

- $

- $

15,788,818

$
$

12,918,770 $
44,621,854 $

- $
572,411 $

- $
12,479 $

12,918,770
45,206,744

Assigned:

Unassigned
Total Fund Balances

Note 2—Stewardship, Compliance, and Accounting:
The following procedures are used by the City in establishing the budgetary data reflected in the financial
statements:
1. The City Charter requires the City Manager to submit to the City Council an annual budget for the ensuing
fiscal year at least 60 days prior to the beginning of such fiscal year.

44

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 2—Stewardship, Compliance, and Accounting: (Continued)
2. A public hearing on the budget is held after a synopsis of the budget is published in a local newspaper of
general circulation. After a public hearing, the City Council may change any item in the budget (other than
debt service or items required by law). A budget resolution must be adopted by the City Council prior to
June 30 or as soon thereafter as is practicable.
3. The City utilizes the budget resolution of budgetary control whereby City Council adopts budgets for
estimated revenues and expenditures on a departmental basis for the General Fund and Special Revenue
Funds. Adopted budgets may be amended or superseded by action of City Council.
4. Budgets are also adopted by City Council for the Enterprise Funds. Budget to actual comparisons for these
funds are not presented herein since there is no legal requirement for such presentation.
5. All operating budgets include proposed expenditures and the means of financing them. The City Manager has
the authority to transfer amounts within the departments, so long as the total appropriation for a
department is not adjusted. Budgeted amounts as presented in the financial statements reflect reallocations
within budget categories through June 30, 2018.
6. Appropriation control is maintained at the department level. Appropriations lapse at year end.
Encumbrances and committed fund balances outstanding at year end are re-appropriated in the succeeding
year.
7. All budgets are adopted on a basis consistent with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
8. The City utilizes a Finance and Audit Committee to assist City Council in carrying out its oversight
responsibilities as they relate to financial reporting, internal controls and compliance with laws and
regulations.
Expenditures and Appropriations
Expenditures exceeded appropriations in the following departments:
Final
Department

Over exceed

Budget

General Fund:
Other general and financial administration

$

Principal retirement
Virginia Public Assistance Fund:
Welfare administration
Comprehensive services

124,000
1,029,676

351,490
231,789

45

Actual

$

135,566
4,880,676

376,082
307,885

Amount

$

(11,566)
(3,851,000)

(24,592)
(76,096)

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 3—Deposits and Investments:
Deposits
Deposits with banks are covered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and collateralized in
accordance with the Virginia Security for Public Deposits Act (the “Act”) Section 2.2-4400 et. seq. of the Code of
Virginia. Under the Act, banks and saving institutions holding public deposits in excess of the amount insured by
the FDIC must pledge collateral to the Commonwealth of Virginia Treasury Board. Financial Institutions may
choose between two collateralization methodologies and depending upon that choice, will pledge collateral that
ranges in the amounts from 50% to 130% of excess deposits. Accordingly, all deposits of the Williamsburg
Redevelopment and Housing Authority, a discretely presented component unit, are considered fully
collateralized.
At year-end the carrying value of the City’s deposits with banks and savings institutions was $26,913,972 and the
bank balance was $27,636,776. Of the bank balance, $27,636,776 was covered by Federal Depository Insurance
Corporation. Of the Bank balance, $14,778,769 was uncollateralized in banks or savings and loans not qualifying
under the Virginia Security for Public Deposits Act at June 30, 2018.
Investments
Statutes authorize the City to invest in obligations of the United States or agencies thereof, obligations of the
Commonwealth of Virginia or political subdivisions thereof, obligations of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (World Bank), the Asian Development Bank, the African Development Bank,
“prime quality” commercial paper and certain corporate notes, banker’s acceptances, repurchase agreements
and the State Treasurer’s Local Government Investment Pool (LGIP).
Credit Risk of Debt Securities
The City’s rated debt investments as of June 30, 2018 were rated by Standard and Poor’s and the ratings are
presented below using the Standard and Poor’s rating scale. The City’s investment policy has an emphasis on
high credit quality and known marketability. Holdings of commercial paper are not allowed to exceed thirty-five
percent of the investment portfolio, and not more than 5% per issuer.

City's Rated Debt Investments' Values
Fair Quality
Ratings

Rated Debt Investments

AAAm
Local Government Investment Pool
Virginia State Non-Arbitrage Pool
Total

46

$

10,301,193
13,144,192

$

23,445,385

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 3—Deposits and Investments: (Continued)
Interest Rate Risk
According to the City’s investment policy, no more than 50% of the portfolio may be invested in securities
maturing in greater than one year.

Investment Maturities (in years)
Fair Value

Less Than
1 Year

$ 10,301,193
13,144,192

$ 10,301,193
13,144,192

$

-

$ 23,445,385

$ 23,445,385

$

-

Investment Type
Local Government Investment Pool
Virginia State Non-Arbitrage Pool
Total

1-5 Years

External Investment Pools
The fair value of the positions in the external investment pools (Local Government Investment Pool and State
Non-Arbitrage Pool) is the same as the value of pool shares. As LGIP and SNAP are not SEC registered, regulatory
oversight of the pool rests with the Virginia State Treasury. LGIP and SNAP are amortized cost basis portfolios
under the provisions of GASB Statement No. 79. There are no withdrawal limitations or restrictions imposed on
participants.
Note 4—Due from Other Governments:
At June 30, 2018, the City has receivables from other governments as follows:
Governmental
Activities
Other Local Governments:
Williamsburg-James City County Public Schools
Williamsburg Redevelopment and Housing Authority

$

266,345
9,463

Commonwealth of Virginia:
Communications tax
CSA pool funds
Local sales tax
Recordation tax
Shared expenses
Social services
State sales tax
Other

105,538
43,201
885,333
15,924
8,235
28,935
153,835
8,427

Federal Government:
Local law enforcement block grant
Transportation safety
Social Services

29,850
8,956
47,863

Total

$

47

1,611,905

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 5—Interfund Obligations:
Details of the Primary Government's interfund receivables and payables as of June 30, 2018 are as follows:
Interfund
Receivables

Fund
General
Law Enforcement Block Grant
Virginia Public Assistance
Total

Interfund
Payables

$

43,378
772
-

$

772
43,378

$

44,150

$

44,150

The outstanding balances between funds result mainly from the time lag between the dates that (1) interfund
goods and services are provided or reimbursable expenditures occur, (2) transactions are recorded in the
accounting system, and (3) payments between funds are made.

The remainder of this page left blank intentionally

48

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 6—Capital Assets:
The following is a summary of changes in capital assets for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018:
Balance
July 1, 2017

Additions

Balance
June 30, 2018

Deletions

Governmental activities:
Capital assets not subject to depreciation:
Land and land improvements
Works of art
Construction in progress

$

8,797,413
28,400
-

$

592,030

$

-

$

8,797,413
28,400
592,030

Total capital assets not subject to depreciation

$

8,825,813

$

592,030

$

-

$

9,417,843

Capital assets subject to depreciation:
Buildings and system
Improvements other than buildings
Infrastructure
Intangible
Machinery and equipment

$ 43,590,797
14,580,970
59,266,300
597,600
11,558,064

$

439,772
1,145,024
85,709
1,452,071

$

190,288
58,385

$ 43,590,797
15,020,742
60,221,036
683,309
12,951,750

Total capital assets subject to depreciation

$ 129,593,731

$ 3,122,576

$

248,673

$ 132,467,634

Accumulated depreciation:
Buildings and system
Improvements other than buildings
Infrastructure
Intangible
Machinery and equipment

$ 17,815,411
9,589,313
31,220,971
221,182
7,897,175

$

1,208,597
458,513
1,250,787
44,786
725,360

$

190,288
58,385

$ 19,024,008
10,047,826
32,281,470
265,968
8,564,150

Total accumulated depreciation

$ 66,744,052

$ 3,688,043

$

248,673

$ 70,183,422

Total capital assets subject to
depreciation, net

$ 62,849,679

$

(565,467)

$

-

$ 62,284,212

Governmental activities capital assets, net

$ 71,675,492

$

26,563

$

-

$ 71,702,055

49

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 6—Capital Assets: (Continued)
The following is a summary of changes in capital assets for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018:
Balance
July 1, 2017
Business-type activities:
Capital assets not subject to depreciation:
Land and land improvements
Open easement

$

Total capital assets not subject to
depreciation

5,780,530
653,800

Deletions

Balance
June 30, 2018

-

$

-

$

5,780,530
653,800

-

$

-

$

6,434,330

Additions

$

6,434,330

Capital assets subject to depreciation:
Buildings and system
Intangibles
Improvements other than buildings
Infrastructure
Machinery and equipment

$ 11,842,633
12,525,344
8,337,611
83,860
2,232,652

$

181,334
89,552

$

-

$ 11,842,633
12,525,344
8,518,945
83,860
2,322,204

Total capital assets subject to depreciation

$ 35,022,100

$

270,886

$

-

$ 35,292,986

$

7,057,124
2,517,949
5,637,684
23,102
1,858,013

$

230,311
315,034
166,183
3,147
116,460

$

-

$

Total accumulated depreciation

$ 17,093,872

$

831,135

$

-

$ 17,925,007

Total capital assets subject to
depreciation, net

$ 17,928,228

$ (560,249)

$

-

$ 17,367,979

Business-type activities capital assets, net

$ 24,362,558

$ (560,249)

$

-

$ 23,802,309

Accumulated depreciation:
Buildings and system
Intangibles
Improvements other than buildings
Infrastructure
Machinery and equipment

50

7,287,435
2,832,983
5,803,867
26,249
1,974,473

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 6—Capital Assets: (Continued)
Depreciation expense was charged to functions/programs as follows:
Governmental activities:
General government administration
Public safety
Public works
Health and welfare
Parks, recreation and cultural
Community development

$

1,398,120
662,119
1,212,271
10,491
395,822
9,220

Total depreciation expense - governmental activities

$

3,688,043

Business-type activites:
Utility Fund

$

831,135

Note 7— Interfund Transfers:
Interfund transfers for the year ended June 30, 2018, consisted of the following:
Fund

Transfers In

General Fund
Utility Fund
Special Revenue Fund:
Virginia Public Assistance Fund

$

500,000
-

Transfers Out
$

1,050,533

Total

$

1,550,533

1,050,533
500,000
-

$

1,550,533

Transfers are used to (1) move revenues from the fund that statute or budget requires to collect them to the
fund that statute or budget requires to expend them and (2) use unrestricted revenues collected in the General
Fund to finance various programs accounted for in other funds in accordance with budgeting authorization.

51

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 8—Long-Term Obligations:
The following is a summary of long-term obligation transactions of the City for the year ended June 30, 2018:
Primary Government:
Restated
Balance
July 1, 2017

Issuances/
Increases

Retirements/
Decreases

Balance
June 30, 2018

Amounts
Due Within
One Year

$

6,974,112

$ 16,180,700

$

5,442,079

$ 17,712,733

$

Compensated absences
980,399
Net pension liability
12,305,483
Net OPEB liability
1,957,998
Adjustment for deferred amounts:
For issuance premium
144,728

259,970
5,282,151
97,252

258,538
8,153,525
280,373

981,831
9,434,109
1,774,877

722,290
-

1,539,845

161,848

1,522,725

-

$ 23,359,918

$ 14,296,363

$ 31,426,275

$ 1,559,660

$

$

$

$

Governmental activities:
General obligation bond

Total Governmental activities

$ 22,362,720

Business-type activities:
General obligation bonds
$
Compensated absences
Net pension liability
Net OPEB liability
Adjustment for deferred amounts:
For issuance premium
Total Business-type activities

$

5,285,886
150,046
1,581,757
109,002
240,864
7,367,555

3,449,300
19,855
620,445
748

4,337,920
43,623
1,073,228
22,627

646,346
$

4,736,694

4,397,266
126,278
1,128,974
87,123

251,448
$

5,728,846

635,762
$

6,375,403

Annual requirements to amortize long-term obligations and related interest are as follows:

Year Ended
June 30
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024 - 2028
2029 - 2033
2034 - 2038
Total

$

Governmental Activities

Business-type Activities

Principal

Principal

837,370
870,225
862,300
905,920
952,200
5,155,360
3,849,360
4,279,998

$ 17,712,733

Interest
$

752,932
690,039
650,194
605,989
559,535
2,022,266
975,450
337,769

$ 6,594,174
52

$

537,629
564,777
362,700
379,080
397,800
1,979,640
175,640
-

$ 4,397,266

Interest
$

347,790
317,948
155,669
137,124
117,702
268,047
4,387
-

$ 1,348,667

837,370

537,629
83,696
-

$

621,325

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 8—Long-Term Obligations: (Continued)
Details of long-term indebtedness are as follows:
Long-Term Obligations, Governmental Activities:

Total
Amount

General Obligation Bonds :

The City authorized and issued a $5,180,000 general obligation refunding bond in
June 2012 for the purpose of refunding a Series 2005 general government obligation.
The bond is payable in annual principal installments plus semi-annual interest
payments at a various coupon rates, 2.00% thru 4.00%. Payments are due the first
day October and April. Payments began October 1, 2012 and end April 1, 2020.
Carrying value of debt is $1,395,000 plus amortized premium of $75,262.

$

1,470,262

The City authorized and issued a $10,635,000 general obligation refunding bond in
October 2010 for the purpose of refunding a Series 2002 general government
obligation and a Series 2009 enterprise fund obligation. The bond is payable in
annual principal installments plus semi-annual interest payments at various coupon
rates, 2.005% thru 4.50%. The bond was partially refunded on December 8, 2017 by
another general obligation refunding bond. The final payments are due May 1, 2019
and end May 1, 2020. Carrying value of the debt allocable to general government is
$137,033 plus unamortized premium of $7,959.

144,992

The City authorized and issued a $7,370,000 general obligation refunding bond in
December 2017 for the purpose of refunding a Series 2010 and a Series 2013 general
obligation and enterprise fund obligation bonds. The bond is payable in annual
principal installments plus semi-annual interest payments at 5.00%. Payments are
due on July 1 and January 1. Payments began July 1, 2018 and end June 30, 2029.
Carrying value of the debt allocable to general government is $3,920,700 plus
unamortized premium of $518,869.

4,439,569

The City authorized and issued a $12,260,000 general obligation public improvement
bond to finance fire and police capital improvements in December 2017. The bond is
payable in annual principal installments plus semi-annual interest payments at various
coupon rates, 3.00% thru 5.00%. Payments are due on July 1 and January 1.
Payments began July 1, 2018 and end June 30, 2038. Carrying value of the debt is
$12,260,000 plus unamortized premium of $920,635.

13,180,635

Total general obligation bonds

$

19,235,458

Compensated absences (payable from General Fund)

$

981,831

Net pension liability (payable from General Fund)

$

9,434,109

Net OPEB liability (payable from General Fund)

$

1,774,877

$

31,426,275

Total Long-Term Obligations, Governmental Activities

53

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 8—Long-Term Obligations: (Continued)
Details of long-term indebtedness are as follows (Continued):
Long-Term Obligations, Business-type Activities:

Total
Amount

General Obligation Bond :
The City authorized and issued a $10,635,000 general obligation refunding bond in
October 2010 for the purpose of refunding a Series 2002 general government obligation
and a Series 2009 enterprise fund obligation. The bond is payable in annual principal
installments plus semi-annual interest payments at various coupon rates, 2.00% thru
4.50%. The bond was partially refunded on December 8, 2017 by another general
obligation refunding bond. The final payments are due May 1, 2019 and May 1, 2020.
Carrying value of the debt allocable to the business-type activities is $947,966 plus
unamortized premium of $48,175.

$

The City authorized and issued a $7,370,000 general obligation refunding bond in
December 2017 for the purpose of refunding a Series 2010 and a Series 2013 general
obligation and enterprise fund obligation bonds. The bond is payable in annual principal
installments plus semi-annual interest payments at 5.00%. Payments are due on July 1
and January 1. Payments began July 1, 2018 and end June 30, 2029. Carrying value of
the debt allocable to the business-type activities is $3,449,300 plus unamortized
premium of $587,587.
Total general obligation bond

996,141

4,036,887
$

5,033,028

Compensated absences (payable from Enterprise Fund)

$

126,278

Net pension liability (payable from Enterprise Fund)

$

1,128,974

Net OPEB liability (payable from Enterprise Fund)

$

87,123

$

6,375,403

Total Long-Term Obligations, Business-type Activities

Bond Refundings
The City issued $7,370,000 of Refunding Bonds, Series 2017 with a true interest cost of 2.12%. A portion of the
proceeds were used to refund $3,851,000 of outstanding general obligation bonds, Series 2013 which had an
interest rate of 2.60% and to partially advance refund outstanding general obligation refunding bonds, Series
2010 that was split between general government and business-type activities totaling $4,445,000 which had
interest rates ranging from 3.00% to 5.00%. The net proceeds of $8,487,060 (to include premium on the bond of
$1,217,102 and payment of $100,041 in issuance costs) were used to call the Series 2013 bond and partially
refund the Series 2010 bond. As a result, the 2013 bond and a portion of the Series 2010 bond have been
removed from the statement of net position.

54

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 8—Long-Term Obligations: (Continued)
Bond Refundings (Continued)
The reacquisition price exceeded the net carrying amount of the old debt by $189,113. This amount is reported
as a deferred outflow of resources and is being amortized over the remaining life of the refunding debt. The
City refunded the Series 2013 bond and a portion of the Series 2010 bond to reduce its total debt service
payments over 12 years by $342,535 and to obtain an economic gain (difference between the present value of
the debt service payments on the old and new debt) of $211,436.
Note 9—Unearned and Unavailable Revenue:
Unearned and unavailable revenue represents amounts for which asset recognition criteria have been met, but
for which revenue recognition criteria have not been met. Under the modified accrual basis of accounting, such
amounts are measurable, but not available. Unavailable revenue of $216,244 and unearned revenue of $376,207
is comprised of the following:
Unavailable Property Tax Revenue: Unavailable revenue representing uncollected tax billings not available for
funding of current expenditures totaled $216,244 at June 30, 2018.
Unearned Revenue: Unearned revenue representing state personal property tax relief, courthouse maintenance
funds, and other amounts not available for funding of current expenditures totaled $23,733 at June 30, 2018 and
were reported in the general fund. The Special Revenue Funds reports $60,401 in unearned revenue related to
summer youth program funds received but not expended at June 30, 2018.
The Utility Fund reports unearned revenue of $292,073 which represents a lease agreement paid in advance by
Crossroads Community Youth Home totaling $130,500 and $161,573 received in advance from a vendor for timber
sales.
Note 10—Commitments and Contingencies:
Federal programs in which the City participates were audited in accordance with the provisions of Title 2 U.S.
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit
Requirements for Federal Awards. Pursuant to the provisions of the Uniform Guidance all major programs and
certain other programs were tested for compliance with applicable grant requirements.
While no matters of noncompliance were disclosed by the audit, the Federal Government may subject grant
programs to additional compliance tests which may result in disallowed expenditures. In the opinion of
management, any future disallowance of current grant program expenditures, if any, would be immaterial.
Note 11—Litigation:
At June 30, 2018, there were no matters of litigation involving the City or which would materially affect the
City's financial position should any court decisions on pending matters not be favorable to such entities.

55

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 12—Risk Management:
The City is exposed to various risks of loss related to torts; theft of, damage to, and destruction of assets; errors
and omissions; injuries to employees; and natural disasters. The City joined together with other local
governments in Virginia to form the Virginia Municipal Liability Pool, a public entity risk pool currently operating
as a common risk management and insurance program for participating local governments. The City pays annual
premiums to the pool for its property, theft, auto liability, and general liability coverage. Settled claims for the
City resulting from these risks have not exceeded insurance coverage for each of the past three years. There
was no reduction in insurance coverage during fiscal year 2018.
The City is also a participating member in the Virginia Municipal Group Self Insurance Association. This nonprofit entity provides workers’ compensation coverage in compliance with the Virginia Workers’ Compensation
Code. Each Association member jointly and severally agrees to assume, pay and discharge any liability. The City
pays Virginia Municipal Group contributions and assessments based upon classifications and rates into a
designated cash reserve fund out of which expenses of the Association and claims and awards are to be paid.
In the event of a loss deficit and depletion of all available excess insurance, the pool may assess all members in
the proportion, which the premium of each bears to the total premiums of all members in the year in which such
deficit occurs. In addition, the City provides various surety bond coverage as required under regulations and at
industry recommended levels. Settlements have not exceeded commercial insurance coverage in any of the
three past years.

56

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan:
Plan Description
All full-time, salaried permanent employees of the City are automatically covered by a VRS Retirement Plan
upon employment. This is an agent multiple-employer plan administered by the Virginia Retirement System
(the System) along with plans for other employer groups in the Commonwealth of Virginia. Members earn
one month of service credit for each month they are employed and for which they and their employer pay
contributions to VRS. Members are eligible to purchase prior service, based on specific criteria as defined in
the Code of Virginia, as amended. Eligible prior service that may be purchased includes prior public service,
active military service, certain periods of leave, and previously refunded service.
The System administers three different benefit structures for covered employees – Plan 1, Plan 2, and
Hybrid. Each of these benefit structures has different eligibility criteria. The specific information for each
plan and the eligibility for covered groups within each plan are set out in the table below:
RETIREMENT PLAN PROVISIONS
PLAN 1

PLAN 2

HYBRID RETIREMENT PLAN

About Plan 1
Plan 1 is a defined benefit plan.
The retirement benefit is based
on a member’s age, creditable
service and average final
compensation at retirement using
a formula.

About Plan 2
Plan 2 is a defined benefit plan.
The retirement benefit is based
on a member’s age, creditable
service and average final
compensation at retirement using
a formula.

About the Hybrid Retirement
Plan
The Hybrid Retirement Plan
combines the features of a defined
benefit plan and a defined
contribution plan.

57

• The defined benefit is based
on a member’s age,
creditable service and
average final compensation
at retirement using a
formula.
• The benefit from the defined
contribution component of
the plan depends on the
member and employer
contributions made to the
plan and the investment
performance of those
contributions.

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Plan Description (Continued)
RETIREMENT PLAN PROVISIONS (CONTINUED)
PLAN 1
About Plan 1 (Continued)

PLAN 2
About Plan 2 (Continued)

HYBRID RETIREMENT PLAN
About the Hybrid Retirement
Plan (Continued)
• In addition to the monthly
benefit payment payable
from the defined benefit plan
at retirement, a member may
start receiving distributions
from the balance in the
defined contribution account,
reflecting the contributions,
investment gains or losses,
and any required fees.

Eligible Members
Employees are in Plan 1 if their
membership date is before July 1,
2010, and they were vested as of
January 1, 2013, and they have
not taken a refund.
Hybrid Opt-In Election
VRS non-hazardous duty covered
Plan 1 members were allowed to
make an irrevocable decision to
opt into the Hybrid Retirement
Plan during a special election
window held January 1 through
April 30, 2014.

Eligible Members
Employees are in Plan 2 if their
membership date is on or after
July 1, 2010, or their membership
date is before July 1, 2010, and
they were not vested as of
January 1, 2013.
Hybrid Opt-In Election
Eligible Plan 2 members were
allowed to make an irrevocable
decision to opt into the Hybrid
Retirement Plan during a special
election window held January 1
through April 30, 2014.

The Hybrid Retirement Plan’s
effective date for eligible Plan 1
members who opted in was July
1, 2014.

The Hybrid Retirement Plan’s
effective date for eligible Plan 2
members who opted in was July
1, 2014.

If eligible deferred members
returned to work during the
election window, they were also
eligible to opt into the Hybrid
Retirement Plan.

If eligible deferred members
returned to work during the
election window, they were also
eligible to opt into the Hybrid
Retirement Plan.

58

Eligible Members
Employees are in the Hybrid
Retirement Plan if their
membership date is on or after
January 1, 2014. This includes:
• Political subdivision
employees*
• Members in Plan 1 or Plan 2
who elected to opt into the
plan during the election
window held January 1-April
30, 2014; the plan’s effective
date for opt-in members was
July 1, 2014.
*Non-Eligible Members
Some employees are not eligible to
participate in the Hybrid
Retirement Plan. They include:
• Political subdivision
employees who are covered
by enhanced benefits for
hazardous duty employees.

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Plan Description (Continued)
RETIREMENT PLAN PROVISIONS (CONTINUED)
PLAN 1

PLAN 2

HYBRID RETIREMENT PLAN

Hybrid Opt-In Election (Cont.)
Members who were eligible for an
optional retirement plan (ORP)
and had prior service under Plan
1 were not eligible to elect the
Hybrid Retirement Plan and
remain as Plan 1 or ORP.

Hybrid Opt-In Election (Cont.)
Members who were eligible for an
optional retirement plan (ORP)
and have prior service under Plan
2 were not eligible to elect the
Hybrid Retirement Plan and
remain as Plan 2 or ORP.

*Non-Eligible Members (Cont.)
Those employees eligible for an
optional retirement plan (ORP)
must elect the ORP plan or the
Hybrid Retirement Plan. If these
members have prior service under
Plan 1 or Plan 2, they are not
eligible to elect the Hybrid
Retirement Plan and must select
Plan 1 or Plan 2 (as applicable) or
ORP.

Retirement Contributions
Employees contribute 5% of their
compensation each month to
their member contribution
account through a pre-tax salary
reduction. Member contributions
are tax-deferred until they are
withdrawn as part of a retirement
benefit or as a refund. The
employer makes a separate
actuarially determined
contribution to VRS for all
covered employees. VRS invests
both member and employer
contributions to provide funding
for the future benefit payment.

Retirement Contributions
Employees contribute 5% of their
compensation each month to
their member contribution
account through a pre-tax salary
reduction.

Retirement Contributions
A member’s retirement benefit is
funded through mandatory and
voluntary contributions made by
the member and the employer to
both the defined benefit and the
defined contribution components
of the plan. Mandatory
contributions are based on a
percentage of the employee’s
creditable compensation and are
required from both the member
and the employer. Additionally,
members may choose to make
voluntary contributions to the
defined contribution component of
the plan, and the employer is
required to match those voluntary
contributions according to
specified percentages.

59

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Plan Description (Continued)
RETIREMENT PLAN PROVISIONS (CONTINUED)
PLAN 1
Creditable Service
Creditable service includes active
service. Members earn creditable
service for each month they are
employed in a covered position.
It also may include credit for
prior service the member has
purchased or additional
creditable service the member
was granted. A member’s total
creditable service is one of the
factors used to determine their
eligibility for retirement and to
calculate their retirement
benefit. It also may count toward
eligibility for the health insurance
credit in retirement, if the
employer offers the health
insurance credit.

PLAN 2
Creditable Service
Same as Plan 1.

HYBRID RETIREMENT PLAN
Creditable Service
Defined Benefit Component:
Under the defined benefit
component of the plan, creditable
service includes active service.
Members earn creditable service
for each month they are employed
in a covered position. It also may
include credit for prior service the
member has purchased or
additional creditable service the
member was granted. A member’s
total creditable service is one of
the factors used to determine their
eligibility for retirement and to
calculate their retirement benefit.
It also may count toward eligibility
for the health insurance credit in
retirement, if the employer offers
the health insurance credit.
Defined Contributions
Component:
Under the defined contribution
component, creditable service is
used to determine vesting for the
employer contribution portion of
the plan.

60

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Plan Description (Continued)
RETIREMENT PLAN PROVISIONS (CONTINUED)
PLAN 1
Vesting
Vesting is the minimum length of
service a member needs to
qualify for a future retirement
benefit. Members become vested
when they have at least five
years (60 months) of creditable
service. Vesting means members
are eligible to qualify for
retirement if they meet the age
and service requirements for
their plan. Members also must be
vested to receive a full refund of
their member contribution
account balance if they leave
employment and request a
refund.

PLAN 2
Vesting
Same as Plan 1.

HYBRID RETIREMENT PLAN
Vesting
Defined Benefit Component:
Defined benefit vesting is the
minimum length of service a
member needs to qualify for a
future retirement benefit.
Members are vested under the
defined benefit component of the
Hybrid Retirement Plan when they
reach five years (60 months) of
creditable service.
Plan 1 or Plan 2 members with at
least five years (60 months) of
creditable service who opted into
the Hybrid Retirement Plan remain
vested in the defined benefit
component.
Defined Contributions
Component:
Defined contribution vesting refers
to the minimum length of service a
member needs to be eligible to
withdraw the employer
contributions from the defined
contribution component of the
plan.

Members are always 100% vested
in the contributions that they
make.

Members are always 100% vested in
the contributions that they make.
Upon retirement or leaving
covered employment, a member is
eligible to withdraw a percentage
of employer contributions to the
defined contribution component of
the plan, based on service.
• After two years, a member is
50% vested and may withdraw
50% of employer
contributions.

61

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Plan Description (Continued)
RETIREMENT PLAN PROVISIONS (CONTINUED)
PLAN 1
Vesting (Cont.)

PLAN 2
Vesting (Cont.)

HYBRID RETIREMENT PLAN
Vesting (Cont.)
Defined Contributions
Component: (Cont.)
• After three years, a member
is 75% vested and may
withdraw 75% of employer
contributions.
• After four or more years, a
member is 100% vested and
may withdraw 100% of
employer contributions.
Distribution is not required by law
until age 70½.

Calculating the Benefit
The Basic Benefit is calculated
based on a formula using the
member’s average final
compensation, a retirement
multiplier and total service credit
at retirement. It is one of the
benefit payout options available
to a member at retirement.

Calculating the Benefit
See definition under Plan 1.

Defined Contribution Component:
The benefit is based on
contributions made by the member
and any matching contributions
made by the employer, plus net
investment earnings on those
contributions.

An early retirement reduction
factor is applied to the Basic
Benefit if the member retires
with a reduced retirement
benefit or selects a benefit
payout option other than the
Basic Benefit.
Average Final Compensation
A member’s average final
compensation is the average of
the 36 consecutive months of
highest compensation as a
covered employee.

Calculating the Benefit
Defined Benefit Component:
See definition under Plan 1.

Average Final Compensation
A member’s average final
compensation is the average of
their 60 consecutive months of
highest compensation as a
covered employee.

62

Average Final Compensation
Same as Plan 2. It is used in the
retirement formula for the defined
benefit component of the plan.

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Plan Description (Continued)
RETIREMENT PLAN PROVISIONS (CONTINUED)
PLAN 1

PLAN 2

HYBRID RETIREMENT PLAN

Service Retirement Multiplier
VRS: The retirement multiplier is
a factor used in the formula to
determine a final retirement
benefit. The retirement
multiplier for non-hazardous duty
members is 1.70%.

Service Retirement Multiplier
VRS: Same as Plan 1 for service
earned, purchased or granted
prior to January 1, 2013. For nonhazardous duty members the
retirement multiplier is 1.65% for
creditable service earned,
purchased or granted on or after
January 1, 2013.

Service Retirement Multiplier
Defined Benefit Component:
VRS: The retirement multiplier for
the defined benefit component is
1.00%.

Sheriffs and regional jail
superintendents: The retirement
multiplier for sheriffs and
regional jail superintendents is
1.85%.
Political subdivision hazardous
duty employees: The retirement
multiplier of eligible political
subdivision hazardous duty
employees other than sheriffs and
regional jail superintendents is
1.70% or 1.85% as elected by the
employer.
Normal Retirement Age
VRS: Age 65.
Political subdivisions hazardous
duty employees: Age 60.

Sheriffs and regional jail
superintendents: Same as Plan 1.
Political subdivision hazardous
duty employees: Same as Plan 1.

For members who opted into the
Hybrid Retirement Plan from Plan
1 or Plan 2, the applicable
multipliers for those plans will be
used to calculate the retirement
benefit for service credited in
those plans.
Sheriffs and regional jail
superintendents: Not applicable.
Political subdivision hazardous
duty employees: Not applicable.
Defined Contribution Component:
Not applicable.

Normal Retirement Age
VRS: Normal Social Security
retirement age.

Normal Retirement Age
Defined Benefit Component:
VRS: Same as Plan 2.

Political subdivisions hazardous
duty employees: Same as Plan 1.

Political subdivisions hazardous
duty employees: Not applicable.
Defined Contribution Component:
Members are eligible to receive
distributions upon leaving
employment, subject to
restrictions.

63

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Plan Description (Continued)
RETIREMENT PLAN PROVISIONS (CONTINUED)
PLAN 1

PLAN 2

HYBRID RETIREMENT PLAN

Earliest Unreduced Retirement
Eligibility
VRS: Age 65 with at least five
years (60 months) of creditable
service or at age 50 with at least
30 years of creditable service.

Earliest Unreduced Retirement
Eligibility
VRS: Normal Social Security
retirement age with at least five
years (60 months) of creditable
service or when their age and
service equal 90.

Earliest Unreduced Retirement
Eligibility
Defined Benefit Component:
VRS: Normal Social Security
retirement age and have at least
five years (60 months) of
creditable service or when their
age and service equal 90.

Political subdivisions hazardous
duty employees: Age 60 with at
least five years of creditable
service or age 50 with at least 25
years of creditable service.

Political subdivisions hazardous
duty employees: Same as Plan 1.

Political subdivisions hazardous
duty employees: Not applicable.
Defined Contribution Component:
Members are eligible to receive
distributions upon leaving
employment, subject to
restrictions.

Earliest Reduced Retirement
Eligibility
VRS: Age 55 with at least five
years (60 months) of creditable
service or age 50 with at least 10
years of creditable service.
Political subdivisions hazardous
duty employees: 50 with at least
five years of creditable service.

Earliest Reduced Retirement
Eligibility
VRS: Age 60 with at least five
years (60 months) of creditable
service.

Political subdivisions hazardous
duty employees: Same as Plan 1.

Earliest Reduced Retirement
Eligibility
Defined Benefit Component:
VRS: Age 60 with at least five
years (60 months) of creditable
service.
Political subdivisions hazardous
duty employees: Not applicable.
Defined Contribution Component:
Members are eligible to receive
distributions upon leaving
employment, subject to
restrictions.

64

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Plan Description (Continued)
RETIREMENT PLAN PROVISIONS (CONTINUED)
PLAN 1

PLAN 2

HYBRID RETIREMENT PLAN

Cost-of-Living Adjustment
(COLA) in Retirement
The Cost-of-Living Adjustment
(COLA) matches the first 3%
increase in the Consumer Price
Index for all Urban Consumers
(CPI-U) and half of any additional
increase (up to 4%) up to a
maximum COLA of 5%.

Cost-of-Living Adjustment
(COLA) in Retirement
The Cost-of-Living Adjustment
(COLA) matches the first 2%
increase in the CPI-U and half of
any additional increase (up to
2%), for a maximum COLA of 3%.

Cost-of-Living Adjustment (COLA)
in Retirement
Defined Benefit Component:
Same as Plan 2.

Eligibility:
For members who retire with an
unreduced benefit or with a
reduced benefit with at least 20
years of creditable service, the
COLA will go into effect on July 1
after one full calendar year from
the retirement date.

Eligibility:
Same as Plan 1 and Plan 2.

Eligibility:
Same as Plan 1.

For members who retire with a
reduced benefit and who have
less than 20 years of creditable
service, the COLA will go into
effect on July 1 after one
calendar year following the
unreduced retirement eligibility
date.
Exceptions to COLA Effective
Dates:
The COLA is effective July 1
following one full calendar year
(January 1 to December 31) under
any of the following
circumstances:
• The member is within five
years of qualifying for an
unreduced retirement
benefit as of January 1,
2013.
• The member retires on
disability.

Defined Contribution Component:
Not applicable.

Exceptions to COLA Effective
Dates:
Same as Plan 1.

65

Exceptions to COLA Effective
Dates:
Same as Plan 1 and Plan 2.

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Plan Description (Continued)
RETIREMENT PLAN PROVISIONS (CONTINUED)
PLAN 1

PLAN 2

HYBRID RETIREMENT PLAN

Cost-of-Living Adjustment
(COLA) in Retirement (Cont.)

Cost-of-Living Adjustment
(COLA) in Retirement (Cont.)

Cost-of-Living Adjustment (COLA)
in Retirement (Cont.)

Exceptions to COLA Effective
Dates: (Cont.)
• The member retires directly
from short-term or longterm disability under the
Virginia Sickness and
Disability Program (VSDP).
• The member is involuntarily
separated from employment
for causes other than job
performance or misconduct
and is eligible to retire
under the Workforce
Transition Act or the
Transitional Benefits
Program.
• The member dies in service
and the member’s survivor
or beneficiary is eligible for
a monthly death-in-service
benefit. The COLA will go
into effect on July 1
following one full calendar
year (January 1 to
December 31) from the date
the monthly benefit begins.

Exceptions to COLA Effective
Dates: (Cont.)
Same as Plan 1.

Exceptions to COLA Effective
Dates: (Cont.)
Same as Plan 1 and Plan 2.

Disability Coverage
Members who are eligible to be
considered for disability
retirement and retire on
disability, the retirement
multiplier is 1.7% on all service,
regardless of when it was earned,
purchased or granted.

Disability Coverage
Members who are eligible to be
considered for disability
retirement and retire on
disability, the retirement
multiplier is 1.65% on all service,
regardless of when it was earned,
purchased or granted.

Disability Coverage
Employees of political subdivisions
(including Plan 1 and Plan2 optins) participate in the Virginia
Local Disability Program (VLDP)
unless their local governing body
provides an employer-paid
comparable program for its
members.

66

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Plan Description (Continued)
RETIREMENT PLAN PROVISIONS (CONTINUED)
PLAN 1

PLAN 2

HYBRID RETIREMENT PLAN

Disability Coverage (Cont.)

Disability Coverage (Cont.)

Disability Coverage (Cont.)
Hybrid members (including Plan 1
and Plan 2 opt-ins) covered under
VLDP are subject to a one-year
waiting period before becoming
eligible for non-work-related
disability benefits.

Purchase of Prior Service
Members may be eligible to
purchase service from previous
public employment, active duty
military service, an eligible
period of leave or VRS refunded
service as creditable service in
their plan. Prior creditable
service counts toward vesting,
eligibility for retirement and the
health insurance credit. Only
active members are eligible to
purchase prior service. Members
also may be eligible to purchase
periods of leave without pay.

Purchase of Prior Service
Same as Plan 1.

Purchase of Prior Service
Defined Benefit Component:
Same as Plan 1, with the following
exceptions:
Hybrid Retirement Plan
members are ineligible for
ported service.
Defined Contribution Component:
Not applicable.

Pension Plan Data
Information about the VRS Political Subdivision Retirement Plan is also available in the separately issued VRS
2017 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR). A copy of the 2017 VRS CAFR may be downloaded
from the VRS website at http://www.varetire.org/Pdf/Publications/2017-annual-report.pdf, or by writing to
the System’s Chief Financial Officer at P.O. Box 2500, Richmond, VA 23218-2500.

67

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Employees Covered by Benefit Terms
As of the June 30, 2016 actuarial valuation, the following employees were covered by the benefit terms of
the pension plan:

Number
Inactive members or their beneficiaries currently receiving benefits

215

Inactive members:
Vested inactive members

43

Non-vested inactive members

30

Inactive members active elsewhere in VRS

103

Total inactive members

176

Active members

177

Total covered employees

568

Contributions
The contribution requirement for active employees is governed by §51.1-145 of the Code of Virginia, as
amended, but may be impacted as a result of funding options provided to political subdivisions by the
Virginia General Assembly. Employees are required to contribute 5.00% of their compensation toward their
retirement. Prior to July 1, 2012, all or part of the 5.00% member contribution may have been assumed by
the employer. Beginning July 1, 2012 new employees were required to pay the 5% member contribution. In
addition, for existing employees, employers were required to begin making the employee pay the 5.00%
member contribution. This could be phased in over a period of up to 5 years and the employer is required to
provide a salary increase equal to the amount of the increase in the employee-paid member contribution.
The City’s contractually required employer contribution rate for the year ended June 30, 2018 was 14.09%
of covered employee compensation. This rate was based on an actuarially determined rate from an actuarial
valuation as of June 30, 2015.
This rate, when combined with employee contributions, was expected to finance the costs of benefits
earned by employees during the year, with an additional amount to finance any unfunded accrued liability.
Contributions to the pension plan from them were $1,464,447 and $1,407,381 for the years ended June 30,
2018 and June 30, 2017, respectively.

68

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Net Pension Liability
The City’s net pension liability was measured as of June 30, 2017. The total pension liability used to
calculate the net pension liability was determined by an actuarial valuation performed as of June 30, 2016,
using updated actuarial assumptions, applied to all periods included in the measurement and rolled forward
to the measurement date of June 30, 2017.
Actuarial Assumptions – General Employees
The total pension liability for General Employees in the City’s Retirement Plan was based on an actuarial
valuation as of June 30, 2016, using the Entry Age Normal actuarial cost method and the following
assumptions, applied to all periods included in the measurement and rolled forward to the measurement
date of June 30, 2017.

Inflation

2.5%

Salary increases, including inflation

3.5% – 5.35%

Investment rate of return

7.0%, net of pension plan investment
expense, including inflation*
* Administrative expenses as a percent of the market value of assets for the last experience study were
found to be approximately 0.06% of the market assets for all of the VRS plans. This would provide an
assumed investment return rate for GASB purposes of slightly more than the assumed 7.0%. However, since
the difference was minimal, and a more conservative 7.0% investment return assumption provided a
projected plan net position that exceeded the projected benefit payments, the long-term expected rate of
return on investments was assumed to be 7.0% to simplify preparation of pension liabilities.
Mortality rates:
Largest 10 – Non-Hazardous Duty: 20% of deaths are assumed to be service related
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 81 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males 95% of rates; females 105% of rates.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males set forward 3 years; females 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years, 110%
of rates; females 125% of rates.

69

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Actuarial Assumptions – General Employees (Continued)
All Others (Non 10 Largest) – Non-Hazardous Duty: 15% of deaths are assumed to be service related
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 81 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males 95% of rates; females 105% of rates.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males set forward 3 years; females 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years, 110%
of rates; females 125% of rates.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial
assumptions as a result of the experience study are as follows:
Largest 10 – Non-Hazardous Duty:

Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)
Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates
Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP2014 projected to 2020
Lowered rates at older ages and changed final
retirement from 70 to 75
Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year
age and service through 9 years of service
Lowered rates
No change
Increased rate from 14% to 20%

All Others (Non 10 Largest) – Non-Hazardous Duty:

Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)
Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates
Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP2014 projected to 2020
Lowered rates at older ages and changed final
retirement from 70 to 75
Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year
age and service through 9 years of service
Lowered rates
No change
Increased rate from 14% to 15%
70

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Actuarial Assumptions – Public Safety Employees with Hazardous Duty Benefits
The total pension liability for Public Safety employees with Hazardous Duty Benefits in the City’s Retirement
Plan was based on an actuarial valuation as of June 30, 2016, using the Entry Age Normal actuarial cost
method and the following assumptions, applied to all periods included in the measurement and rolled
forward to the measurement date of June 30, 2017.

Inflation

2.5%

Salary increases, including inflation

3.5% – 4.75%

Investment rate of return

7.0%, net of pension plan investment
expense, including inflation*

* Administrative expenses as a percent of the market value of assets for the last experience study were
found to be approximately 0.06% of the market assets for all of the VRS plans. This would provide an
assumed investment return rate for GASB purposes of slightly more than the assumed 7.0%. However, since
the difference was minimal, and a more conservative 7.0% investment return assumption provided a
projected plan net position that exceeded the projected benefit payments, the long-term expected rate of
return on investments was assumed to be 7.0% to simplify preparation of pension liabilities.
Mortality rates:
Largest 10 – Hazardous Duty: 70% of deaths are assumed to be service related
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 81 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males 90% of rates; females set forward 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year, 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90; females
set forward 3 years.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years; unisex
using 100% male.
All Others (Non 10 Largest) – Hazardous Duty: 45% of deaths are assumed to be service related
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 81 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males 90% of rates; females set forward 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year, 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90; females
set forward 3 years.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years; unisex
using 100% male.

71

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Actuarial Assumptions – Public Safety Employees with Hazardous Duty Benefits (Continued)
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial
assumptions as a result of the experience study are as follows:
Largest 10 – Hazardous Duty:

Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)
Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates
Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability
All Others (Non 10 Largest) – LEOS:

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014
projected to 2020
Lowered rates at older ages
Adjusted rates to better fit experience
Increased rates
No change
Increased rate from 60% to 70%

Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014
projected to 2020
Increased age 50 rates, and lowered rates at older
ages
Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year
age and service through 9 years of service
Adjusted rates to better fit experience
No change
Decreased rate from 60% to 45%

Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates
Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

72

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Long-Term Expected Rate of Return
The long-term expected rate of return on pension System investments was determined using a log-normal
distribution analysis in which best-estimate ranges of expected future real rates of return (expected
returns, net of pension System investment expense and inflation) are developed for each major asset class.
These ranges are combined to produce the long-term expected rate of return by weighting the expected
future real rates of return by the target asset allocation percentage and by adding expected inflation. The
target asset allocation and best estimate of arithmetic real rates of return for each major asset class are
summarized in the following table:

Asset Class (Strategy)
Public Equity
Fixed Income
Credit Strategies
Real Assets
Private Equity
Total

Target
Allocation
40.00%
15.00%
15.00%
15.00%
15.00%
100.00%

Arithmetic
Long-term
Expected
Rate of Return

Weighted
Average
Long-term
Expected
Rate of Return

4.54%
0.69%
3.96%
5.76%
9.53%

1.82%
0.10%
0.59%
0.86%
1.43%
4.80%

Inflation
*Expected arithmetic nominal return

2.50%
7.30%

* The above allocation provides a one-year return of 7.30%. However, one-year returns do not take into
account the volatility present in each of the asset classes. In setting the long-term expected return for the
system, stochastic projections are employed to model future returns under various economic conditions. The
results provide a range of returns over various time periods that ultimately provide a median return of
6.83%, including expected inflation of 2.50%.
Discount Rate
The discount rate used to measure the total pension liability was 7.00%. The projection of cash flows used
to determine the discount rate assumed that System member contributions will be made per the VRS
Statutes and the employer contributions will be made in accordance with the VRS funding policy at rates
equal to the difference between actuarially determined contribution rates adopted by the VRS Board of
Trustees and the member rate. Through the fiscal year ending June 30, 2019, the rate contributed by the
employer for the City Retirement Plan will be subject to the portion of the VRS Board-certified rates that
are funded by the Virginia General Assembly. From July 1, 2019 on, participating employers are assumed to
contribute 100% of the actuarially determined contribution rates. Based on those assumptions, the pension
plan’s fiduciary net position was projected to be available to make all projected future benefit payments of
current active and inactive employees. Therefore the long-term expected rate of return was applied to all
periods of projected benefit payments to determine the total pension liability.

73

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Changes in Net Pension Liability

Balances at June 30, 2016

$

Primary Government
Increase (Decrease)
Total
Plan
Pension
Fiduciary
Liability
Net Position
(a)
(b)

Net
Pension
Liability
(a) - (b)

67,301,618 $

53,414,378 $

13,887,240

1,169,362 $
4,592,124

- $
-

1,169,362
4,592,124

Changes for the year:
Service cost
$
Interest
Differences between expected
and actual experience
Assumption changes
Contributions - employer
Contributions - employee
Net investment income
Benefit payments, including refunds
Refunds of employee contributions
Administrative expenses
Other changes
Net changes
$

(515,043)
(295,496)
-

1,390,195
494,042
6,434,478

(515,043)
(295,496)
(1,390,195)
(494,042)
(6,434,478)

(3,399,707)
1,551,240 $

(3,399,707)
(37,916)
(5,696)
4,875,396 $

37,916
5,696
(3,324,156)

Balances at June 30, 2017

68,852,858 $

58,289,774 $

10,563,084

$

74

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Sensitivity of the Net Pension Liability to Changes in the Discount Rate
The following presents the net pension liability of the City using the discount rate of 7.00%, as well as what
the City’s net pension liability would be if it were calculated using a discount rate that is one percentage
point lower (6.00%) or one percentage point higher (8.00%) than the current rate:

Rate
Current Discount
(7.00%)

1% Decrease
(6.00%)
City Net Pension
Liability
$

18,796,037 $

10,563,084 $

1% Increase
(8.00%)

3,671,639

Pension Expense and Deferred Outflows of Resources and Deferred Inflows of Resources Related to
Pensions
For the year ended June 30, 2018, the City recognized pension expense of $476,276. At June 30, 2018, the
City reported deferred outflows of resources and deferred inflows of resources related to pensions from the
following sources:

Deferred Outflows Deferred Inflows
of Resources
of Resources
Differences between expected and actual
$
experience

- $

481,701

Change in assumptions

-

182,279

Net difference between projected and actual
earnings on pension plan investments

-

820,921

1,464,447

-

Employer contributions subsequent to the
measurement date
Total

$

75

1,464,447 $

1,484,901

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 13―Pension Plan: (Continued)
Pension Expense and Deferred Outflows of Resources and Deferred Inflows of Resources Related to
Pensions (Continued)
$1,464,447 reported as deferred outflows of resources related to pensions resulting from the City’s
contributions subsequent to the measurement date will be recognized as a reduction of the Net Pension
Liability in the fiscal year ending June 30, 2019. Other amounts reported as deferred outflows of resources
and deferred inflows of resources related to pensions will be recognized in pension expense in future
reporting periods as follows:

Year ended June 30
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Thereafter

$

(1,015,825)
70,070
10,862
(550,008)
-

Note 14–Surety Bonds:
Surety bonds covered the following constitutional officers and City employees at June 30, 2018:

Amount
Travelers Casualty and Surety Company of America
Barbara A. Dameron, Director of Finance
Lara M.S. Overy, Commissioner of the Revenue
Mona A. Foley, Clerk of Circuit Court
Robert Deeds, Sheriff
Employees of Constitutional officers - blanket bond
Police Department - blanket bond
All City of Williamsburg employees except Constitutional
Officers and their subordinates and the Police Department

76

$ 500,000
3,000
103,000
30,000
1,000,000
100,000
100,000

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan):
Plan Description
All full-time, salaried permanent employees of the state agencies, teachers, and employees of participating
political subdivisions are automatically covered by the VRS Group Life Insurance Program upon employment.
This is a cost-sharing multiple-employer plan administered by the Virginia Retirement System (the System),
along with pensions and other OPEB plans, for public employer groups in the Commonwealth of Virginia.
In addition to the Basic Group Life Insurance benefit, members are also eligible to elect additional coverage
for themselves as well as a spouse or dependent children through the Optional Group Life Insurance Program.
For members who elect the optional group life insurance coverage, the insurer bills employers directly for the
premiums. Employers deduct these premiums from members’ paychecks and pay the premiums to the insurer.
Since this is a separate and fully insured program, it is not included as part of the Group Life Insurance Program
OPEB.
The specific information for Group Life Insurance Program OPEB, including eligibility, coverage and benefits
is set out in the table below:
GROUP LIFE INSURANCE PROGRAM PLAN PROVISIONS
Eligible Employees
The Group Life Insurance Program was established July 1, 1960, for state employees, teachers and
employees of political subdivisions that elect the program, including the following employers that do not
participate in VRS for retirement:
 City of Richmond
 City of Portsmouth
 City of Roanoke
 City of Norfolk
 Roanoke City School Board
Basic group life insurance coverage is automatic upon employment. Coverage ends for employees who leave
their position before retirement eligibility or who take a refund of their member contributions and accrued
interest.

77

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)
Plan Description (Continued)
GROUP LIFE INSURANCE PROGRAM PLAN PROVISIONS (CONTINUED)
Benefit Amounts
The benefits payable under the Group Life Insurance Program have several components.
 Natural Death Benefit - The natural death benefit is equal to the employee’s covered compensation
rounded to the next highest thousand and then doubled.
 Accidental Death Benefit – The accidental death benefit is double the natural death benefit.
 Other Benefit Provisions – In addition to the basic natural and accidental death benefits, the
program provides additional benefits provided under specific circumstances. These include:
o Accidental dismemberment benefit
o Safety belt benefit
o Repatriation benefit
o Felonious assault benefit
o Accelerated death benefit option
Reduction in Benefit Amounts
The benefit amounts provided to members covered under the Group Life Insurance Program are subject to
a reduction factor. The benefit amount reduces by 25% on January 1 following one calendar year of
separation. The benefit amount reduces by an additional 25% on each subsequent January 1 until it reaches
25% of its original value.
Minimum Benefit Amount and Cost-of-Living Adjustment (COLA)
For covered members with at least 30 years of creditable service, there is a minimum benefit payable under
the Group Life Insurance Program. The minimum benefit was set at $8,000 by statute. The amount is
increased annually based on the VRS Plan 2 cost-of-living adjustment and is currently $8,111.
Contributions
The contribution requirements for the Group Life Insurance Program are governed by §51.1-506 and §51.1-508
of the Code of Virginia, as amended, but may be impacted as a result of funding provided to state agencies
and school divisions by the Virginia General Assembly. The total rate for the Group Life Insurance Program
was 1.31% of covered employee compensation. This was allocated into an employee and an employer
component using a 60/40 split. The employee component was 0.79% (1.31% x 60%) and the employer
component was 0.52% (1.31% x 40%). Employers may elect to pay all or part of the employee contribution;
however, the employer must pay all of the employer contribution. Each employer’s contractually required
employer contribution rate for the year ended June 30, 2018 was 0.52% of covered employee compensation.
This rate was based on an actuarially determined rate from an actuarial valuation as of June 30, 2015. The
actuarially determined rate, when combined with employee contributions, was expected to finance the costs
of benefits payable during the year, with an additional amount to finance any unfunded accrued liability.
Contributions to the Group Life Insurance Program from the entity were $55,094 and $51,946 for the years
ended June 30, 2018 and June 30, 2017, respectively.

78

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)
GLI OPEB Liabilities, GLI OPEB Expense, and Deferred Outflows of Resources and Deferred Inflows of
Resources Related to the Group Life Insurance Program OPEB
At June 30, 2018, the entity reported a liability of $815,000 for its proportionate share of the Net GLI OPEB
Liability. The Net GLI OPEB Liability was measured as of June 30, 2017 and the total GLI OPEB liability used
to calculate the Net GLI OPEB Liability was determined by an actuarial valuation as of that date. The covered
employer’s proportion of the Net GLI OPEB Liability was based on the covered employer’s actuarially
determined employer contributions to the Group Life Insurance Program for the year ended June 30, 2017
relative to the total of the actuarially determined employer contributions for all participating employers. At
June 30, 2017, the participating employer’s proportion was .05415% as compared to .05471% at June 30, 2016.
For the year ended June 30, 2018, the participating employer recognized GLI OPEB expense of $7,000. Since
there was a change in proportionate share between measurement dates, a portion of the GLI OPEB expense
was related to deferred amounts from changes in proportion.
At June 30, 2018, the employer reported deferred outflows of resources and deferred inflows of resources
related to the GLI OPEB from the following sources:

Deferred
Outflows
of Resources

Deferred
Inflows
of Resources

Differences between expected and actual experience$

- $

18,000

Net difference between projected and actual
earnings on GLI OPEB program investments

-

31,000

Change in assumptions

-

42,000

Changes in proportion

-

8,000

55,094

-

Employer contributions subsequent to the
measurement date
Total

$

79

55,094 $

99,000

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)
GLI OPEB Liabilities, GLI OPEB Expense, and Deferred Outflows of Resources and Deferred Inflows of
Resources Related to the Group Life Insurance Program OPEB (Continued)
$55,094 reported as deferred outflows of resources related to the GLI OPEB resulting from the employer’s
contributions subsequent to the measurement date will be recognized as a reduction of the Net GLI OPEB
Liability in the fiscal year ending June 30, 2019. Other amounts reported as deferred outflows of resources
and deferred inflows of resources related to the GLI OEPB will be recognized in the GLI OPEB expense in future
reporting periods as follows:

Year Ended June 30
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Thereafter

$

(21,000)
(21,000)
(21,000)
(21,000)
(11,000)
(4,000)

Actuarial Assumptions
The total GLI OPEB liability was based on an actuarial valuation as of June 30, 2016, using the Entry Age
Normal actuarial cost method and the following assumptions, applied to all periods included in the
measurement and rolled forward to the measurement date of June 30, 2017.

Inflation

2.5%

Salary increases, including inflation:
General state employees
Teachers
SPORS employees
VaLORS employees
JRS employees
Locality - General employees
Locality - Hazardous Duty employees

3.5% – 5.35%
3.5%-5.95%
3.5%-4.75%
3.5%-4.75%
4.5%
3.5%-5.35%
3.5%-4.75%

Investment rate of return

7.0%, net of investment expenses,
including inflation*

*Administrative expenses as a percent of the market value of assets for the last experience study were found
to be approximately 0.06% of the market assets for all of the VRS plans. This would provide an assumed
investment return rate for GASB purposes of slightly more than the assumed 7.0%. However, since the
difference was minimal, and a more conservative 7.0% investment return assumption provided a projected
plan net position that exceeded the projected benefit payments, the long-term expected rate of return on
investments was assumed to be 7.0% to simplify preparation of OPEB liabilities.

80

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)

Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality Rates – General State Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males set back 1 year, 85% of rates; females set back 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with scale
BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year; females set back 1 year with 1.5% increase compounded from
ages 70 to 85.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; males 115% of rates; females 130%
of rates.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial assumptions
as a result of the experience study are as follows:

Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP2014 projected to 2020

Retirement Rates

Lowered rates at older ages and changed final
retirement from 70 to 75

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year
age and service through 9 years of service

Disability Rates

Adjusted rates to better match experience

Salary Scale

No change

Line of Duty Disability

Increased rate from 14% to 25%

81

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)

Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality Rates – Teachers
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 White Collar Employee Rates to age 80, White Collar Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 81 and
older projected with scale BB to 2020.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 White Collar Employee Rates to age 49, White Collar Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and
older projected with scale BB to 2020; males 1% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90; females set
back 3 years with 1.5% increase compounded from ages 65 to 70 and 2.0% increase compounded from
ages 75 to 90.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; 115% of rates for males and females.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial assumptions
as a result of the experience study are as follows:

Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)
Retirement Rates

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP2014 projected to 2020

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year
age and service through 9 years of service

Disability Rates

Adjusted rates to better match experience

Salary Scale

No change

Lowered rates at older ages and changed final
retirement from 70 to 75

82

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)

Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality Rates – SPORS Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males 90% of rates; females set forward 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with scale
BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year with 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90; females set
forward 3 years.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years; unisex
using 100% male.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial assumptions
as a result of the experience study are as follows:

Retirement Rates

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014
projected to 2020 and reduced margin for future
improvement in accordance with experience
Increased age 50 rates and lowered rates at older ages

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted rates to better fit experience

Disability Rates

Adjusted rates to better match experience

Salary Scale

No change

Line of Duty Disability

Increased rate from 60% to 85%

Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

83

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)

Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality Rates – VaLORS Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males 90% of rates; females set forward 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with scale
BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year with 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90; females set
forward 3 years.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years; unisex
using 100% male.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial assumptions
as a result of the experience study are as follows:

Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014
projected to 2020 and reduced margin for future
improvement in accordance with experience

Retirement Rates

Increased age 50 rates and lowered rates at older ages

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year
age and service through 9 years of service

Disability Rates

Adjusted rates to better match experience

Salary Scale

No change

Line of Duty Disability

Decreased rate from 50% to 35%

84

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)

Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality Rates – JRS Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males set back 1 year, 85% of rates; females set back 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with scale
BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year; females set back 1 year with 1.5% compounding increase from
ages 70 to 85.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; males 115% of rates; females 130%
of rates.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial assumptions
as a result of the experience study are as follows:

Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP2014 projected to 2020

Retirement Rates

Decreased rates at first retirement eligibility

Withdrawal Rates

No change

Disability Rates

Removed disability rates

Salary Scale

No change

85

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)

Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality Rates – Largest Ten Locality Employers – General Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males 95% of rates; females 105% of rates.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with scale
BB to 2020; males set forward 3 years; females 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years, 110% of
rates; females 125% of rates.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial assumptions
as a result of the experience study are as follows:

Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP2014 projected to 2020

Retirement Rates

Lowered retirement rates at older ages and
extended final retirement age from 70 to 75

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted termination rates to better fit
experience at each age and service year

Disability Rates

Lowered disability rates

Salary Scale

No change

Line of Duty Disability

Increased rate from 14% to 20%

86

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)

Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality Rates – Non-Largest Ten Locality Employers – General Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males 95% of rates; females 105% of rates.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with scale
BB to 2020; males set forward 3 years; females 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years, 110% of
rates; females 125% of rates.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial assumptions
as a result of the experience study are as follows:
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, post- Updated to a more current mortality table - RPretirement healthy, and disabled)
2014 projected to 2020

Retirement Rates

Lowered retirement rates at older ages and
extended final retirement age from 70 to 75

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted termination rates to better fit
experience at each age and service year

Disability Rates

Lowered disability rates

Salary Scale

No change

Line of Duty Disability

Increased rate from 14% to 15%

Mortality Rates – Largest Ten Locality Employers – Hazardous Duty Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males 90% of rates; females set forward 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with scale
BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year with 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90; females set
forward 3 years.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years; unisex
using 100% male.

87

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)

Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality Rates – Largest Ten Locality Employers – Hazardous Duty Employees: (Continued)
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial assumptions
as a result of the experience study are as follows:

Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP2014 projected to 2020

Retirement Rates

Lowered retirement rates at older ages

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted termination rates to better fit
experience at each age and service year

Disability Rates

Increased disability rates

Salary Scale

No change

Line of Duty Disability

Increased rate from 60% to 70%

Mortality Rates – Non-Largest Ten Locality Employers – Hazardous Duty Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males 90% of rates; females set forward 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with scale
BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year with 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90; females set
forward 3 years.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Mortality Rates projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years; unisex
using 100% male.

88

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)

Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality Rates – Non-Largest Ten Locality Employers – Hazardous Duty Employees: (Continued)
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial assumptions
as a result of the experience study are as follows:

Mortality Rates (pre-retirement,
post-retirement healthy, and

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014
projected to 2020

Retirement Rates

Increased age 50 rates and lowered rates at older ages

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted termination rates to better fit experience at
each age and service year

Disability Rates

Adjusted rates to better match experience

Salary Scale

No change

Line of Duty Disability

Decreased rate from 60% to 45%

NET GLI OPEB Liability
The net OPEB liability (NOL) for the Group Life Insurance Program represents the program’s total OPEB liability
determined in accordance with GASB Statement No. 74, less the associated fiduciary net position. As of June
30, 2017, NOL amounts for the Group Life Insurance Program is as follows (amounts expressed in thousands):

Group Life
Insurance OPEB
Program
Total GLI OPEB Liability
Plan Fiduciary Net Position
Employers' Net GLI OPEB Liability (Asset)
Plan Fiduciary Net Position as a Percentage
of the Total GLI OPEB Liability

$
$

2,942,426
1,437,586
1,504,840

48.86%

The total GLI OPEB liability is calculated by the System’s actuary, and each plan’s fiduciary net position is
reported in the System’s financial statements. The net GLI OPEB liability is disclosed in accordance with the
requirements of GASB Statement No. 74 in the System’s notes to the financial statements and required
supplementary information.

89

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)
Long-Term Expected Rate of Return
The long-term expected rate of return on the System’s investments was determined using a log-normal
distribution analysis in which best-estimate ranges of expected future real rates of return (expected returns,
net of System’s investment expense and inflation) are developed for each major asset class. These ranges are
combined to produce the long-term expected rate of return by weighting the expected future real rates of
return by the target asset allocation percentage and by adding expected inflation. The target asset allocation
and best estimate of arithmetic real rates of return for each major asset class are summarized in the following
table:

Target
Allocation

Arithmetic
Long-term
Expected
Rate of Return

Weighted
Average
Long-term
Expected
Rate of Return

Public Equity
Fixed Income
Credit Strategies
Real Assets
Private Equity

40.00%
15.00%
15.00%
15.00%
15.00%

4.54%
0.69%
3.96%
5.76%
9.53%

1.82%
0.10%
0.59%
0.86%
1.43%

Total

100.00%

Asset Class (Strategy)

Inflation
*Expected arithmetic nominal return

4.80%
2.50%
7.30%

*The above allocation provides a one-year return of 7.30%. However, one-year returns do not take into account
the volatility present in each of the asset classes. In setting the long-term expected return for the system,
stochastic projections are employed to model future returns under various economic conditions. The results
provide a range of returns over various time periods that ultimately provide a median return of 6.83%,
including expected inflation of 2.50%.
Discount Rate
The discount rate used to measure the total GLI OPEB liability was 7.00%. The projection of cash flows used
to determine the discount rate assumed that member contributions will be made per the VRS guidance and
the employer contributions will be made in accordance with the VRS funding policy at rates equal to the
difference between actuarially determined contribution rates adopted by the VRS Board of Trustees and the
member rate. Through the fiscal year ending June 30, 2019, the rate contributed by the entity for the GLI
OPEB will be subject to the portion of the VRS Board-certified rates that are funded by the Virginia General
Assembly. From July 1, 2019 on, employers are assumed to contribute 100% of the actuarially determined
contribution rates. Based on those assumptions, the GLI OPEB’s fiduciary net position was projected to be
available to make all projected future benefit payments of eligible employees. Therefore the long-term
expected rate of return was applied to all periods of projected benefit payments to determine the total GLI
OPEB liability.

90

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 15―Group Life Insurance (GLI) Program (OPEB Plan): (Continued)
Sensitivity of the Employer’s Proportionate Share of the Net GLI OPEB Liability to Changes in the
Discount Rate
The follow presents the employer’s proportionate share of the net GLI OPEB liability using the discount rate
of 7.00%, as well as what the employer’s proportionate share of the net GLI OPEB liability would be if it were
calculated using a discount rate that is one percentage point lower (6.00%) or one percentage point higher
(8.00%) than the current rate:

1% Decrease
(6.00%)
City's proportionate
share of the Group Life
Insurance Program
Net OPEB Liability

$

1,054,000 $

Rate
Current Discount
(7.00%)

815,000 $

1% Increase
(8.00%)

622,000

Group Life Insurance Program Fiduciary Net Position
Detailed information about the Group Life Insurance Program’s Fiduciary Net Position is available in the
separately issued VRS 2017 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR). A copy of the 2017 VRS CAFR may
be downloaded from the VRS website at http://www.varetire.org/Pdf/Publications/2017-annual-report.pdf,
or by writing to the System’s Chief Financial Officer at P.O. Box 2500, Richmond, VA, 23218-2500.

91

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 16―Line of Duty Act (LODA) Program:
Plan Description
All paid employees and volunteers in hazardous duty positions in Virginia localities and hazardous duty
employees who are covered under the Virginia Retirement System (VRS), the State Police Officers’
Retirement System (SPORS), or the Virginia Law Officers’ Retirement System (VALORS) are automatically
covered by the Line of Duty Act Program (LODA). As required by statute, the Virginia Retirement System
(the System) is responsible for managing the assets of the program. Participating employers made
contributions to the program beginning in FY 2012. The employer contributions are determined by the
System’s actuary using anticipated program costs and the number of covered individuals associated with all
participating employers.
The specific information for the LODA Program OPEB, including eligibility, coverage and benefits is set out in
the table below:
LINE OF DUTY ACT PROGRAM PLAN PROVISIONS
Eligible Employees
The eligible employees of the Line of Duty Act Program are paid employees and volunteers in hazardous
duty positions in Virginia localities and hazardous duty employees who are covered under the Virginia
Retirement System (VRS), the State Police Officers’ Retirement System (SPORS), or the Virginia Law
Officers’ Retirement System (VALORS).
Benefit Amounts
The Line of Duty Act Program provides death and health insurance benefits for eligible individuals:
 Death – The Line of Duty Act program death benefit is a one-time payment made to the
beneficiary or beneficiaries of a covered individual. Amounts vary as follows:
o $100,000 when a death occurs as the direct or proximate result of performing duty as of
January 1, 2006, or after.
o $25,000 when the cause of death is attributed to one of the applicable presumptions and
occurred earlier than five years after the retirement date.
o An additional $20,000 benefit is payable when certain members of the National Guard and
U.S. military reserves are killed in action in any armed conflict on or after October 7, 2001.


Health Insurance – The Line of Duty Act program provides health insurance benefits.
o Prior to July 1, 2017, these benefits were managed through the various employer plans and
maintained the benefits that existed prior to the employee’s death or disability. These
premiums were reimbursed to the employer by the LODA program.
o Beginning July 1, 2017, the health insurance benefits are managed through the Virginia
Department of Human Resource Management (DHRM). The health benefits are modeled
after the State Employee Health Benefits Program plans and provide consistent, premiumfree continued health plan coverage for LODA-eligible disabled individuals, survivors, and
family members. Individuals receiving the health insurance benefits must continue to meet
eligibility requirements as defined by the Line of Duty Act.

92

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 16―Line of Duty Act (LODA) Program: (Continued)
Contributions
The contribution requirements for the Line of Duty Act Program are governed by §9.1-400.1 of the Code of
Virginia, as amended, but may be impacted as a result of funding provided to state agencies by the Virginia
General Assembly. Each employer’s contractually required employer contribution rate for the Line of Duty
Act Program for the year ended June 30, 2018 was $567.37 per covered full-time-equivalent employee. This
rate was based on an actuarially determined rate from an actuarial valuation as of June 30, 2015 and
represents the pay-as-you-go funding rate and not the full actuarial cost of the benefits under the program.
The actuarially determined pay-as-you-go rate was expected to finance the costs and related expenses of
benefits payable during the year. Contributions to the Line of Duty Act Program from the entity were
$43,829 and $42,978 for the years ended June 30, 2018 and June 30, 2017, respectively.
LODA OPEB Liabilities, LODA OPEB Expense, and Deferred Outflows of Resources and Deferred Inflows
of Resources Related to the LODA OPEB
At June 30, 2018, the entity reported a liability of $1,047,000 for its proportionate share of the Net LODA
OPEB Liability. The Net LODA OPEB Liability was measured as of June 30, 2017 and the total LODA OPEB
liability used to calculate the Net LODA OPEB Liability was determined by an actuarial valuation as of that
date. The entity’s proportion of the Net LODA OPEB Liability was based on the entity’s actuarially
determined pay-as-you-go employer contributions to the LODA OPEB plan for the year ended June 30, 2017
relative to the total of the actuarially determined pay-as-you-go employer contributions for all participating
employers. At June 30, 2017, the entity’s proportion was .39849% as compared to .39883% at June 30, 2016.
For the year ended June 30, 2018, the entity recognized LODA OPEB expense of $91,000. Since there was a
change in proportionate share between measurement dates, a portion of the LODA OPEB expense was
related to deferred amounts from changes in proportion.

93

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 16―Line of Duty Act (LODA) Program: (Continued)
LODA OPEB Liabilities, LODA OPEB Expense, and Deferred Outflows of Resources and Deferred Inflows
of Resources Related to the LODA OPEB: (Continued)
At June 30, 2018, the entity reported deferred outflows of resources and deferred inflows of resources
related to the LODA OPEB from the following sources:

Deferred Outflows
of Resources
Differences between expected and actual experience

$

- $

Deferred Inflows
of Resources
-

Net difference between projected and actual
earnings on LODA OPEB plan investments

-

2,000

Change in assumptions

-

108,000

43,829

-

Employer contributions subsequent to the
measurement date
Total

$

43,829 $

110,000

$43,829 reported as deferred outflows of resources related to the LODA OPEB resulting from the entity’s
contributions subsequent to the measurement date will be recognized as a reduction of the Net LODA OPEB
Liability in the fiscal year ending June 30, 2019. Other amounts reported as deferred outflows of resources
and deferred inflows of resources related to the LODA OPEB will be recognized in LODA OPEB expense in
future reporting periods as follows:

Year Ended June 30
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Thereafter

$

94

(14,000)
(14,000)
(14,000)
(14,000)
(13,000)
(41,000)

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 16―Line of Duty Act (LODA) Program: (Continued)
Actuarial Assumptions

The total LODA OPEB liability was based on an actuarial valuation as of June 30, 2016, using the Entry
Age Normal actuarial cost method and the following assumptions, applied to all periods included in the
measurement and rolled forward to the measurement date of June 30, 2017.
Inflation

2.5%

Salary increases, including inflation:
General state employees

3.50%-5.35%

SPORS employees

3.50%-4.75%

VaLORS employees

3.50%-4.75%

Locality employees

3.50%-4.75%

Medical cost trend rates assumption:
Under age 65

7.75%-5.00%

Ages 65 and older

5.75%-5.00%

Investment rate of return

3.56%, net of OPEB plan investment
expenses, including inflation*

*Administrative expenses as a percent of the market value of assets for the last experience study were
found to be approximately 0.06% of the market assets for all of the VRS plans. This would provide an
assumed investment return rate for GASB purposes of slightly more than the assumed 3.56%. However, since
the difference was minimal, a more conservative 3.56% investment return assumption has been used. Since
LODA is funded on a current-disbursement basis, the assumed annual rate of return of 3.56% was used since
it approximates the risk-free rate of return.

95

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 16―Line of Duty Act (LODA) Program: (Continued)
Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality rates – General State Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males set back 1 year, 85% of rates; females set back 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year; females set back 1 year with 1.5% increase compounded
from ages 70 to 85.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Life Mortality Table projected with scale BB to 2020; males 115% of rates; females
130% of rates.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial
assumptions as a result of the experience study are as follows:
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014
projected to 2020

Retirement Rates

Lowered rates at older ages and changed final retirement
from 70 to 75

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year age and
service through 9 years of service

Disability Rates

Adjusted rates to better match experience

Salary Scale

No change

Line of Duty Disability

Increased rate from 14% to 25%

96

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 16―Line of Duty Act (LODA) Program: (Continued)
Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality rates – SPORS Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males 90% of rates; females set forward 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year with 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90;
females set forward 3 years.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Life Mortality Table projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years;
unisex using 100% male.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial
assumptions as a result of the experience study are as follows:
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014
projected to 2020 and reduced margin for future
improvement in accordance with experience

Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates

Increased age 50 rates and lowered rates at older ages
Adjusted rates to better fit experience

Disability Rates

Adjusted rates to better match experience

Salary Scale

No change

Line of Duty Disability

Increased rate from 60% to 85%

97

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 16―Line of Duty Act (LODA) Program: (Continued)
Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality rates – VaLORS Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males 90% of rates; females set forward 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year with 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90;
females set forward 3 years.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Life Mortality Table projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years;
unisex using 100% male.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial
assumptions as a result of the experience study are as follows:
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014
projected to 2020 and reduced margin for future
improvement in accordance with experience

Retirement Rates

Increased age 50 rates and lowered rates at older ages

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year age and
service through 9 years of service

Disability Rates

Adjusted rates to better match experience

Salary Scale

No change

Line of Duty Disability

Decreased rate from 50% to 35%

98

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 16―Line of Duty Act (LODA) Program: (Continued)
Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality Rates – Largest Ten Locality Employers with Public Safety Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males 90% of rates; females set forward 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year with 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90;
females set forward 3 years.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Life Mortality Table projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years;
unisex using 100% male.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial
assumptions as a result of the experience study are as follows:
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014
projected to 2020

Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates

Lowered retirement rates at older ages

Disability Rates

Increased disability rates

Salary Scale

No change

Line of Duty Disability

Increased rate from 60% to 70%

Adjusted termination rates to better fit experience at each
age and service year

99

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 16―Line of Duty Act (LODA) Program: (Continued)
Actuarial Assumptions: (Continued)
Mortality Rates – Non-Largest Ten Locality Employers with Public Safety Employees
Pre-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 80, Healthy Annuitant Rates to 81 and older projected with scale BB
to 2020; males 90% of rates; females set forward 1 year.
Post-Retirement:
RP-2014 Employee Rates to age 49, Healthy Annuitant Rates at ages 50 and older projected with
scale BB to 2020; males set forward 1 year with 1.0% increase compounded from ages 70 to 90;
females set forward 3 years.
Post-Disablement:
RP-2014 Disability Life Mortality Table projected with scale BB to 2020; males set forward 2 years;
unisex using 100% male.
The actuarial assumptions used in the June 30, 2016 valuation were based on the results of an actuarial
experience study for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2016. Changes to the actuarial
assumptions as a result of the experience study are as follows:
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014
projected to 2020

Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates

Increased age 50 rates and lowered rates at older ages

Disability Rates

Adjusted rates to better match experience

Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

No change
Decreased rate from 60% to 45%

Adjusted termination rates to better fit experience at each
age and service year

100

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 16―Line of Duty Act (LODA) Program: (Continued)
Changes to the LODA Program Associated with HB 1345 (2016) and HB 2243 (2017)
The following changes were made to the LODA Program as a result of legislation in 2016 and 2017, but were
specifically not considered in the June 30, 2016 actuarial valuation results which were rolled forward to the
measurement date of June 30, 2017. There was no current actuarial experience on which to base the
adjustments and the combined impact of the changes was not considered to be material to the final results.
These changes will be factored into future actuarial valuations for the LODA Program.
-

The discontinuance of spouse health care coverage, if a covered spouse divorces a disabled employee or
a covered surviving spouse remarries.
The potential for VRS’s periodic review of the disability status of a disabled employee.
For those beneficiaries who become eligible for health care benefits as the result of a disability
occurring after June 30, 2017, the suspension of health care benefits in years when VRS certifies current
income exceeds salary at the time of the disability, indexed for inflation.
The extension of health care benefits for dependent children to age 26.
The expansion of the definition of presumption of death or disability to include infectious diseases.

Net LODA OPEB Liability
The net OPEB liability (NOL) for the Line of Duty Act Program represents the program’s total OPEB liability
determined in accordance with GASB Statement No. 74, less the associated fiduciary net position. As of June
30, 2017, NOL amounts for the Line of Duty Act Program is as follows (amounts expressed in thousands):
LODA Program
Total LODA OPEB Liability
Plan Fiduciary Net Position
Employers' Net OPEB Liability (Asset)
Plan Fiduciary Net Position as a Percentage
of the Total LODA OPEB Liability

$
$

266,252
3,461
262,791

1.30%

The total LODA OPEB liability is calculated by the System’s actuary, and each plan’s fiduciary net position is
reported in the System’s financial statements. The net OPEB liability is disclosed in accordance with the
requirements of GASB Statement No. 74 in the System’s notes to the financial statements and required
supplementary information.
Long-Term Expected Rate of Return
The long-term expected rate of return on LODA OPEB Program’s investments was set at 3.56% for this
valuation. Since LODA is funded on a current-disbursement basis, it is not able to use the VRS Pooled
Investments 7.00% assumption. Instead, the assumed annual rate of return of 3.56% was used since it
approximates the risk-free rate of return. This Single Equivalent Interest Rate (SEIR) is the applicable
municipal bond index rate based on the Bond Buyer General Obligation 20-year Municipal Bond Index
published monthly by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System as of the measurement date of
June 30, 2017.

101

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 16―Line of Duty Act (LODA) Program: (Continued)
Discount Rate
The discount rate used to measure the total LODA OPEB liability was 3.56%. The projection of cash flows
used to determine the discount rate assumed that employer contributions will be made per the VRS Statutes
and that they will be made in accordance with the VRS funding policy and at rates equal to the actuarially
determined contribution rates adopted by the VRS Board of Trustees. Through the fiscal year ending June
30, 2019, the rate contributed by participating employers to the LODA OPEB Program will be subject to the
portion of the VRS Board-certified rates that are funded by the Virginia General Assembly.
Sensitivity of the Covered Employer’s Proportionate Share of the Net LODA OPEB Liability to Changes
in the Discount Rate
The following presents the covered employer’s proportionate share of the net LODA OPEB liability using the
discount rate of 3.56%, as well as what the covered employer’s proportionate share of the net LODA OPEB
liability would be if it were calculated using a discount rate that is one percentage point lower (2.56%) or
one percentage point higher (4.56%) than the current rate:

Discount Rate
Current
(3.56%)

1% Decrease
(2.56%)
County's proportionate
share of the total LODA
Net OPEB Liability

$

1,187,000

$

1% Increase
(4.56%)

1,047,000

$

930,000

Sensitivity of the Covered Employer’s Proportionate Share of the Net LODA OPEB Liability to Changes
in the Health Care Trend Rate
Because the Line of Duty Act Program contains a provision for the payment of health insurance premiums,
the liabilities are also impacted by the health care trend rates. The following presents the covered
employer’s proportionate share of the net LODA OPEB liability using the health care trend rate of 7.75%
decreasing to 5.00%, as well as what the covered employer’s proportionate share of the net LODA OPEB
liability would be if it were calculated using a health care trend rate that is one percentage point lower
(6.75% decreasing to 4.00%) or one percentage point higher (8.75% decreasing to 6.00%) than the current
rate:

Health Care Trend Rates
1% Decrease
Current
1% Increase
(6.75% decreasing (7.75% decreasing (8.75% decreasing
to 4.00%)
to 5.00%)
to 6.00%)
County's proportionate
share of the total LODA
Net OPEB Liability

$

888,000

102

$

1,047,000

$

1,244,000

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 16―Line of Duty Act (LODA) Program: (Continued)
LODA OPEB Fiduciary Net Position
Detailed information about the Line of Duty Act Program Fiduciary Net Position is available in the separately
issued VRS 2017 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR). A copy of the 2017 VRS CAFR may be
downloaded from the VRS website at http://www.varetire.org/Pdf/Publications/2017-annual-report.pdf, or
by writing to the System’s Chief Financial Officer at P.O. Box 2500, Richmond, VA, 23218-2500.

The remainder of this page left blank intentionally.

103

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 17 – Adoption of Accounting Principles and Restatement of Beginning Net Position and Fund Balance:
The City implemented the financial reporting provisions of Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement
No. 75, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Postemployment Benefits Other Than Pensions during the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2018. This Statement establishes standards for measuring and recognizing liabilities,
deferred outflows of resources, deferred inflows of resources, and expense/expenditures related to
postemployment benefits other than pensions (other postemployment benefits or OPEB). Note disclosure and
required supplementary information requirements about OPEB are also addressed. The requirements of this
Statement will improve accounting and financial reporting by state and local governments for OPEB. In addition,
the City implemented Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 85, Omnibus 2017 during the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2018. This Statement addresses practice issues identified during implementation and
application of certain GASB statements for a variety of topics including issues related to blending component
units, goodwill, fair value measurement and application, and postemployment benefits (pensions and other
postemployment benefits (OPEB)). The implementation of these Statements resulted in the following
restatement of net position to include a restatement to reclassify special welfare funds previously reported in
the Virginia Public Assistance Fund to an Agency Fund:
Governmental
Primary Government

Funds
Virginia
Public

Governmental

Business-type

Assistance

Activities

Activities

Fund

85,522,848 $

23,311,367 $

Adjustment to record OPEB GLI liability as
reported by VRS at the beginning of the year

(847,998)

(109,002)

-

Adjustment to record deferred outflow of
resources related to OPEB GLI liability at the
beginning of the year

46,024

5,916

-

Adjustment to record OPEB LODA liability as
reported by VRS at the beginning of the year

(1,110,000)

-

-

42,978

-

-

(32,679)

-

(32,679)

Net position, July 1, 2017, as previously
stated

$

641,475

Implementation of GASB 75:

Adjustment to record deferred outflow of
resources related to OPEB LODA liability at
the beginning of the year
Other restatement:
Adjustment to reclassify the Special Welfare
cash balance to be reported as an Agency
fund beginning in current fiscal year
Net position, July 1, 2017, as restated

$

83,621,173 $

104

23,208,281 $

608,796

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 18—Upcoming Pronouncements:
Statement No. 83, Certain Asset Retirement Obligations, addresses accounting and financial reporting for
certain asset retirement obligations (AROs). An ARO is a legally enforceable liability associated with the
retirement of a tangible capital asset. A government that has legal obligations to perform future asset
retirement activities related to its tangible capital assets should recognize a liability based on the guidance in
this Statement. This Statement establishes criteria for determining the timing and pattern of recognition of a
liability and a corresponding deferred outflow of resources for AROs. The requirements of this Statement are
effective for reporting periods beginning after June 15, 2018.
Statement No. 84, Fiduciary Activities, establishes criteria for identifying fiduciary activities of all state and
local governments. The focus of the criteria generally is on (1) whether a government is controlling the assets of
the fiduciary activity and (2) the beneficiaries with whom a fiduciary relationship exists. Separate criteria are
included to identify fiduciary component units and postemployment benefit arrangements that are fiduciary
activities. This Statement describes four fiduciary funds that should be reported, if applicable: (1) pension (and
other employee benefit) trust funds, (2) investment trust funds, (3) private-purpose trust funds, and (4)
custodial funds. This Statement also provides for recognition of a liability to the beneficiaries in a fiduciary fund
when an event has occurred that compels the government to disburse fiduciary resources. The requirements of
this Statement are effective for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018.
Statement No. 87, Leases, increases the usefulness of governments’ financial statements by requiring recognition
of certain lease assets and liabilities for leases that previously were classified as operating leases and recognized
as inflows of resources or outflows of resources based on the payment provisions of the contract. It establishes a
single model for lease accounting based on the foundational principle that leases are financings of the right to
use an underlying asset. Under this Statement, a lessee is required to recognize a lease liability and an
intangible right-to-use lease asset, and a lessor is required to recognize a lease receivable and a deferred inflow
of resources, thereby enhancing the relevance and consistency of information about governments’ leasing
activities. The requirements of this Statement are effective for reporting periods beginning after December 15,
2019.
Statement No. 88, Certain Disclosures Related to Debt, Including Direct Borrowings and Direct Placements,
clarifies which liabilities governments should include when disclosing information related to debt. It defines debt
for purposes of disclosure in notes to financial statements as a liability that arises from a contractual obligation
to pay cash (or other assets that may be used in lieu of cash) in one or more payments to settle an amount that
is fixed at the date the contractual obligation is established. The Statement requires that additional essential
information related to debt be disclosed in notes to financial statements, including unused lines of credit; assets
pledged as collateral for the debt; and terms specified in debt agreements related to significant events of
default with finance-related consequences, significant termination events with finance-related consequences,
and significant subjective acceleration clauses. For notes to financial statements related to debt, it requires
that existing and additional information be provided for direct borrowings and direct placements of debt
separately from other debt. The requirements of this Statement are effective for reporting periods beginning
after June 15, 2018.

105

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA
Notes to Financial Statements (Continued)
As of June 30, 2018
Note 18—Upcoming Pronouncements: (Continued)
Statement No. 89, Accounting for Interest Cost Incurred Before the End of a Construction Period, enhances the
relevance and comparability of information about capital assets and the cost of borrowing for a reporting period
and simplifies accounting for interest cost incurred before the end of a construction period. Such interest cost
includes all interest that previously was accounted for in accordance with the requirements of paragraphs 5-22
of Statement No. 62, Codification of Accounting and Financial Reporting Guidance Contained in Pre-November
30, 1989 FASB and AICPA Pronouncements, which are superseded by this Statement. This Statement requires
that interest cost incurred before the end of a construction period be recognized as an expense in the period in
which the cost is incurred for financial statements prepared using the economic resources measurement focus.
As a result, interest cost incurred before the end of a construction period will not be included in the historical
cost of a capital asset reported in a business-type activity or enterprise fund. This Statement also reiterates that
in financial statements prepared using the current financial resources measurement focus, interest cost incurred
before the end of a construction period should be recognized as an expenditure on a basis consistent with
governmental fund accounting principles. The requirements of this Statement are effective for reporting periods
beginning after December 15, 2019.
Management is currently evaluating the impact these standards will have on the financial statements when
adopted.

106

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

Exhibit 11
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
General Fund
Schedule of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balances - Budget and Actual
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018
Budgeted Amounts
Final

Actual
Amounts

$ 13,014,128
18,732,200
195,990
195,200
875,056
1,203,200
543,456
996,666

$ 13,089,822
19,684,136
302,819
249,211
1,200,576
1,182,453
484,084
1,026,582

$

10,752,370
542,074
$ 47,050,340

5,245,005
178,518
$ 42,643,206

(5,507,365)
(363,556)
$ (4,407,134)

$

$

Original
REVENUES
General property taxes
$ 13,014,128
Other local taxes
18,732,200
Permits, privilege fees, and regulatory licenses
195,990
Fines and forfeitures
195,200
875,056
Revenue from the use of money and property
Charges for services
1,203,200
Miscellaneous
510,999
Recovered costs
996,666
Intergovernmental:
Commonwealth
10,749,875
Federal
527,664
Total revenues
$ 47,000,978

Variance with
Final Budget Positive
(Negative)

EXPENDITURES
Current:
General government administration
Judicial administration
Public safety
Public works
Health and welfare
Education
Parks, recreation, and cultural
Community development
Nondepartmental
Capital projects
Debt service:
Principal retirement
Interest and other fiscal charges
Total expenditures

$ 3,879,648
450,000
10,414,277
2,924,011
486,419
9,222,757
2,136,226
4,911,153
490,871
13,138,260

$

1,029,676
181,515
$ 49,264,813

1,029,676
181,515
$ 59,739,247

Excess (deficiency) of revenues over (under)
expenditures

$ (2,263,835) $ (12,688,907) $ (3,023,467) $

3,916,648
450,000
10,721,141
2,999,617
487,139
9,222,757
2,211,354
4,935,018
10,480
23,573,902

3,852,694
422,688
10,602,751
2,986,028
486,677
8,962,074
2,104,895
4,896,820
6,323,793

4,880,676
147,577
$ 45,666,673

75,694
951,936
106,829
54,011
325,520
(20,747)
(59,372)
29,916

63,954
27,312
118,390
13,589
462
260,683
106,459
38,198
10,480
17,250,109

(3,851,000)
33,938
$ 14,072,574
9,665,440

OTHER FINANCING SOURCES (USES)
Transfers in
Transfers out
Issuance of bonds
Bond premium issuance
Payment to refunded bond escrow agent
Bond issuance costs
Total other financing sources (uses)

575,000 $
575,000 $
500,000 $
(75,000)
(1,050,533)
(1,050,533)
(1,050,533)
16,180,700
16,180,700
1,539,845
1,539,845
(561,403)
(561,403)
(273,376)
(273,376)
$
(475,533) $
(475,533) $ 16,335,233 $ 16,810,766

Net change in fund balances
Fund balances - beginning
Fund balances - ending

$ (2,739,368) $ (13,164,440) $ 13,311,766
2,739,368
13,164,440
31,310,088
$
- $
- $ 44,621,854

$

107

$ 26,476,206
18,145,648
$ 44,621,854

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA

Exhibit 12

Schedule of Changes in Net Pension Liability and Related Ratios
For the Years Ended June 30, 2015 through June 30, 2018
2017

2016

2015

2014

1,169,362 $
4,592,124
(515,043)
(295,496)

1,192,219 $
4,472,336
(554,448)
-

1,178,813 $
4,331,841
(361,478)
-

1,182,529
4,155,774
-

(3,399,707)
1,551,240 $
67,301,618
68,852,858 $

(3,398,006)
1,712,101 $
65,589,517
67,301,618 $

(2,886,192)
2,262,984 $
63,326,533
65,589,517 $

(2,759,933)
2,578,370
60,748,163
63,326,533

1,390,195 $
494,042
6,434,478

1,666,704 $
487,862
915,305

1,649,556 $
506,966
2,381,156

1,558,890
478,336
7,179,163

$

(3,399,707)
(37,916)
(5,696)
4,875,396 $
53,414,378
58,289,774 $

(3,398,006)
(33,783)
(392)
(362,310) $
53,776,688
53,414,378 $

(2,886,192)
(32,867)
(500)
1,618,119 $
52,158,569
53,776,688 $

(2,759,933)
(38,979)
379
6,417,856
45,740,713
52,158,569

$

10,563,084 $

13,887,240 $

11,812,829 $

11,167,964

84.66%

79.37%

81.99%

9,988,509 $

9,830,879 $

9,695,347 $

105.75%

141.26%

121.84%

Total pension liability
Service cost
$
Interest
Difference between expected and actual experience
Changes in assumptions
Benefit payments, including refunds of employee
contributions
Net change in total pension liability
$
Total pension liability - beginning
Total pension liability - ending (a)
$
Plan fiduciary net position
Contributions - employer
Contributions - employee
Net investment income
Benefit payments, including refunds of employee
contributions
Administrative expense
Other
Net change in plan fiduciary net position
Plan fiduciary net position - beginning
Plan fiduciary net position - ending (b)
City's net pension liability - ending (a) - (b)

$

$

Plan fiduciary net position as a percentage of the total
pension liability
Covered payroll
City's net pension liability as a percentage of
covered payroll

$

82.36%
9,570,924

116.69%

Schedule is intended to show information for 10 years. Information prior to the 2014 valuation is not available.
However, additional years will be included as they become available.

108

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA

Exhibit 13

Schedule of Employer Contributions
Pension Plan
For the Years Ended June 30, 2008 through June 30, 2018

Contractually
Required
Contribution
(1)

Date
2018
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
2009

$

1,464,447 $
1,407,381
1,675,182
1,652,087
1,559,104
1,503,579
1,020,021
1,002,249
923,738
1,010,919

Contributions in
Relation to
Contractually
Required
Contribution
(2)

Contribution
Deficiency
(Excess)
(3)

1,464,447 $
1,407,381
1,675,182
1,652,087
1,559,104
1,503,579
1,020,021
1,002,249
923,738
1,010,919

109

- $
-

Employer's
Covered
Payroll
(4)

Contributions
as a % of
Covered
Payroll
(5)

10,581,720
9,988,509
9,830,879
9,695,347
9,570,924
9,230,075
8,916,264
8,760,922
8,805,887
9,636,974

13.84%
14.09%
17.04%
17.04%
16.29%
16.29%
11.44%
11.44%
10.49%
10.49%

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA

Exhibit 14
Page 1 of 2

Notes to Required Supplementary Information
Pension Plan
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Changes of benefit terms – There have been no actuarially material changes to the System benefit provisions since
the prior actuarial valuation. The 2014 valuation includes Hybrid Retirement Plan members for the first time. The
hybrid plan applies to most new employees hired on or after January 1, 2014 and not covered by enhanced hazardous
duty benefits. Because this is a fairly new benefit and the number of participants was relatively small, the impact on
the liabilities as of the measurement date of June 30, 2017 are not material.
Changes of assumptions – The following changes in actuarial assumptions were made effective June 30, 2016 based
on the most recent experience study of the System for the four-year period ending June 30, 2016:
Largest 10 – Non-Hazardous Duty:
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, post-retirement
healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
to 2020

Retirement Rates

Lowered rates at older ages and changed final retirement from
70 to 75

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year age and
service through 9 years of service

Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Lowered rates
No change
Increased rate from 14% to 20%

Largest 10 – Hazardous Duty:
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, post-retirement
healthy, and disabled)
Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates
Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability
All Others (Non 10 Largest) – Non-Hazardous Duty:
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, post-retirement
healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
to 2020
Lowered rates at older ages
Adjusted rates to better fit experience
Increased rates
No change
Increased rate from 60% to 70%

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
to 2020

Retirement Rates

Lowered rates at older ages and changed final retirement from
70 to 75

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year age and
service through 9 years of service

Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Lowered rates
No change
Increased rate from 14% to 15%

110

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA

Exhibit 14
Page 2 of 2

Notes to Required Supplementary Information
Pension Plan
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018
All Others (Non 10 Largest) – Hazardous Duty:
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, post-retirement
healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
to 2020

Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates

Increased age 50 rates, and lowered rates at older ages
Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year age and
service through 9 years of service

Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Adjusted rates to better fit experience
No change
Decreased rate from 60% to 45%

111

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA

Exhibit 15

Schedule of City's Share of Net OPEB Liability
Group Life Insurance Program
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Date
(1)
2017

Employer's
Proportion of the
Net GLI OPEB
Liability (Asset)
(2)
0.05415% $

Employer's
Proportionate
Share of the
Net GLI OPEB
Liability (Asset)
(3)
815,000 $

Employer's
Covered
Payroll
(4)

Employer's
Proportionate Share
of the Net GLI OPEB
Liability (Asset)
as a Percentage of
Covered Payroll
(3)/(4)
(5)

Plan Fiduciary
Net Position
as Percentage
of Total GLI
OPEB Liability
(6)

9,988,509

8.16%

48.86%

Schedule is intended to show information for 10 years. Information prior to the 2017 valuation is not available.
However, additional years will be included as they become available.

112

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA

Exhibit 16

Schedule of Employer Contributions
Group Life Insurance Program
For the Years Ended June 30, 2016 through June 30, 2018

Date
2018
2017
2016

Contributions in
Relation to
Contractually
Contractually
Required
Required
Contribution
Contribution
(1)
(2)
$
55,094 $
55,094 $
51,940
51,940
47,188
47,188

Contribution
Deficiency
(Excess)
(3)
- $
-

Employer's
Covered
Payroll
(4)
10,594,918
9,988,509
9,830,879

Contributions
as a % of
Covered
Payroll
(5)
0.52%
0.52%
0.48%

Schedule is intended to show information for 10 years. Information is only available from 2016. Additional
informaiton will be added to table as it becomes available.

113

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA

Exhibit 17
Page 1 of 2

Notes to Required Supplementary Information
Group Life Insurance Program
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018
Changes of benefit terms – There have been no actuarially material changes to the System benefit provisions since
Changes of assumptions – The following changes in actuarial assumptions were made effective June 30, 2016
based on the most recent experience study of the System for the four-year period ending June 30, 2016:
General State Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
to 2020

Retirement Rates

Lowered rates at older ages and changed final retirement from
70 to 75

Withdrawal Rates
Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year age and
service through 9 years of service
Adjusted rates to better match experience
No change
Increased rate from 14% to 25%

Teachers
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
to 2020

Retirement Rates

Lowered rates at older ages and changed final retirement from
70 to 75

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year age and
service through 9 years of service
Adjusted rates to better match experience
No change

Disability Rates
Salary Scale
SPORS Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)
Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates
Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability
VaLORS Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
to 2020 and reduced margin for future improvement in
accordance with experience
Increased age 50 rates and lowered rates at older ages
Adjusted rates to better fit experience
Adjusted rates to better match experience
No change
Increased rate from 60% to 85%

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
to 2020 and reduced margin for future improvement in
accordance with experience

Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates

Increased age 50 rates and lowered rates at older ages
Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year age and
service through 9 years of service

Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Adjusted rates to better fit experience
No change
Decreased rate from 50% to 35%

114

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA

Exhibit 17
Page 2 of 2

Notes to Required Supplementary Information
Group Life Insurance Program
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018 (Continued)
JRS Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postretirement healthy, and disabled)
Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates
Disability Rates
Salary Scale

Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
to 2020
Decreased rates at first retirement eligibility
No change
Removed disability rates
No change

Largest Ten Locality Employers - General Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postUpdated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
retirement healthy, and disabled)
to 2020
Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates
Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Lowered retirement rates at older ages and extended final
retirement age from 70 to 75
Adjusted termination rates to better fit experience at each age
and service year
Lowered disability rates
No change
Increased rate from 14% to 20%

Non-Largest Ten Locality Employers - General Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postUpdated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
retirement healthy, and disabled)
to 2020
Retirement Rates

Lowered retirement rates at older ages and extended final
retirement age from 70 to 75

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted termination rates to better fit experience at each age
and service year
Lowered disability rates
No change
Increased rate from 14% to 15%

Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Largest Ten Locality Employers - Hazardous Duty Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postUpdated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
retirement healthy, and disabled)
to 2020
Retirement Rates
Lowered retirement rates at older ages
Withdrawal Rates
Adjusted termination rates to better fit experience at each age
and service year
Disability Rates
Increased disability rates
Salary Scale
No change
Line of Duty Disability
Increased rate from 60% to 70%
Non-Largest Ten Locality Employers - Hazardous Duty Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, postUpdated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected
retirement healthy, and disabled)
to 2020
Retirement Rates
Increased age 50 rates and lowered rates at older ages
Withdrawal Rates
Adjusted termination rates to better fit experience at each age
and service year
Disability Rates
Adjusted rates to better match experience
Salary Scale
No change
Line of Duty Disability
Decreased rate from 60% to 45%

115

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA

Exhibit 18

Schedule of Employer's Share of Net LODA OPEB Liability
Line of Duty Act Program (LODA)
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Date
(1)
2017

Employer's
Proportion of the
Net LODA OPEB
Liability (Asset)
(2)
0.39849% $

Employer's
Proportionate
Share of the
Net LODA OPEB
Liability (Asset)
(3)
1,047,000 $

CoveredEmployee
Payroll *
(4)
N/A $

Employer's
Proportionate Share
of the Net LODA OPEB
Plan Fiduciary
Liability (Asset)
Net Position
as a Percentage of its
as a Percentage
Covered-Employee Payroll of Total LODA
(3)/(4)
OPEB Liability
(5)
(6)
N/A

1.30%

Covered payroll for the LODA Program is not a relevant measurement as 30% of covered participants are
volunteers rather than employees.
*

The contributions for the Line of Duty Act Program are based on the number of participants in the Program
using a per capita-based contribution versus a payroll-based contribution. Therefore, covered-employee
payroll is the relevant measurement, which is the total payroll of the employees in the OPEB plan. However,
when volunteers and part-time employees make up a significant percentage of the employer's members in
the plan, the employer may determine that covered-employee payroll is misleading and, therefore, not
applicable for disclosure.

Schedule is intended to show information for 10 years. Since 2018 is the first year for this presentation, only
one year of data is available. However, additional years will be included as they become available.

116

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA

Exhibit 19

Schedule of Employer Contributions
Line of Duty Act Program (LODA)
For the Years Ended June 30, 2016 through June 30, 2018

Contractually
Required
Contribution
(1)

Date
2018
2017
2016

$

43,829 $
42,978
38,913

Contributions in
Relation to
Contractually
Required
Contribution
(2)

Contribution
Deficiency
(Excess)
(3)

43,829 $
42,978
38,913

- $
-

CoveredEmployee
Payroll *
(4)

Contributions
as a % of
Covered Employee
Payroll
(5)

N/A
N/A
N/A

N/A
N/A
N/A

* The contributions for the Line of Duty Act Program are based on the number of participants in the Program using a
per capita-based contribution versus a payroll-based contribution. Therefore, covered-employee payroll is the
relevant measurement, which is the total payroll of employees in the OPEB plan. However, when volunteers and
part-time employees make up a significant percentage of the employer's members in the plan, the employer may
determine that covered-employee payroll is misleading and, therefore, not applicable for disclosure.
FY 2011 was the first year for the Line of Duty Act Program (LODA), however there were no contributions.
Information is available beginning in 2016. Ten years of information will be accumulated moving forward.

117

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA

Exhibit 20
Page 1 of 2

Notes to Required Supplementary Information
Line of Duty Act Program (LODA)
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018
Changes of benefit terms – There have been no actuarially material changes to the System benefit provisions since the
prior actuarial valuation.
Changes of assumptions – The following changes in actuarial assumptions were made effective June 30, 2016 based on
the most recent experience study of the System for the four-year period ending June 30, 2016:
General State Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, post-retirement Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected to
healthy, and disabled)
2020
Retirement Rates

Lowered rates at older ages and changed final retirement from 70
to 75

Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year age and
service through 9 years of service

Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Adjusted rates to better match experience
No change
Increased rate from 14% to 25%

SPORS Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, post-retirement Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected to
healthy, and disabled)
2020 and reduced margin for future improvement in accordance
with experience
Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates
Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Increased age 50 rates and lowered rates at older ages
Adjusted rates to better fit experience
Adjusted rates to better match experience
No change
Increased rate from 60% to 85%

VaLORS Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, post-retirement Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected to
healthy, and disabled)
2020 and reduced margin for future improvement in accordance
with experience
Retirement Rates
Withdrawal Rates

Increased age 50 rates, and lowered rates at older ages
Adjusted rates to better fit experience at each year age and
service through 9 years of service

Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Adjusted rates to better match experience
No change
Decreased rate from 50% to 35%

Employees in the Largest Ten Locality Employers with Public Safety Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, post-retirement Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected to
healthy, and disabled)
2020
Retirement Rates
Lowered retirement rates at older ages
Withdrawal Rates
Adjusted termination rates to better fit experience at each age
and service year
Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Increased disability rates
No change
Increased rate from 60% to 70%

118

CITY OF WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA

Exhibit 20
Page 2 of 2

Notes to Required Supplementary Information
Line of Duty Act Program (LODA)
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018
Employees in the Non-Largest Ten Locality Employers with Public Safety Employees
Mortality Rates (pre-retirement, post-retirement Updated to a more current mortality table - RP-2014 projected to
healthy, and disabled)
2020
Retirement Rates
Increased age 50 rates and lowered rates at older ages
Withdrawal Rates

Adjusted termination rates to better fit experience at each age
and service year

Disability Rates
Salary Scale
Line of Duty Disability

Adjusted rates to better match experience
No change
Decreased rate from 60% to 45%

119

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

OTHER SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

Exhibit 21
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Combining Balance Sheet
Nonmajor Special Revenue Funds
June 30, 2018
Virginia
Public
Assistance
Fund
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Due from other funds
Due from other governmental units
Total assets
LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Due to other funds
Unearned revenue
Total liabilities
FUND BALANCES:
Restricted
Total fund balances
Total liabilities and fund balances

$

Law
Enforcement
Block Grant
Fund

556,191
119,999
676,190

$

$

$

43,378
60,401
103,779

$
$
$

572,411
572,411
676,190

$

$

120

Total

11,707
772
29,850
42,329

$

$

$

29,850
29,850

$

29,850
43,378
60,401
133,629

$
$
$

12,479
12,479
42,329

$
$
$

584,890
584,890
718,519

$

$

567,898
772
149,849
718,519

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

Exhibit 22
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Combining Statement of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balances
Nonmajor Special Revenue Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018
Virginia
Public
Assistance
Fund
REVENUES
Revenue from the use of money and property
Miscellaneous
Intergovernmental:
Commonwealth
Federal
Total revenues

$

$

41,379
510,082
740,006
1,291,467

EXPENDITURES
Current:
Public safety
Health and welfare
Total expenditures

$

2,378,385
2,378,385

Excess (deficiency) of revenues over (under)
expenditures
OTHER FINANCING SOURCES (USES)
Transfers in
Total other financing sources (uses)
Net change in fund balances
Fund balances - beginning, as restated
Fund balances - ending

$

Law
Enforcement
Block Grant
Fund
$

$

6
1,679
37,550
39,235

$

$

511,761
777,556
1,330,702

$

$

39,220
2,378,385
2,417,605

$

(1,086,918) $

15

$

(1,086,903)

$
$

1,050,533
1,050,533

$
$

-

$
$

1,050,533
1,050,533

(36,385) $
608,796
572,411 $

15
12,464
12,479

$

(36,370)
621,260
584,890

$

121

$

6
41,379

39,220
39,220

$

$

Total

$

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Schedule of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balances - Budget and Actual
Nonmajor Special Revenue Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018
Virginia Public Assistance Fund

Budgeted Amounts
Original
Final
REVENUES
Revenue from the use of money and property
Miscellaneous
Intergovernmental:
Commonwealth
Federal
Total revenues
EXPENDITURES
Current:
Public safety
Health and welfare
Total expenditures

$

$

555,266
558,466
1,113,732

$

$

$

2,231,503
2,231,503

Excess (deficiency) of revenues over (under)
expenditures

$

(1,117,771) $

OTHER FINANCING SOURCES (USES)
Transfers in
Total other financing sources (uses)

$
$

1,117,771
1,117,771

$

-

Net change in fund balances
Fund balances - beginning, as restated
Fund balances - ending

$

-

$

122

$

Actual
-

641,666
632,066
1,273,732

$

510,082
740,006
1,291,467

$

(131,584)
107,940
17,735

(1,086,918) $

30,853

$
$

1,117,771
1,117,771

$
$

1,050,533
1,050,533

$
$

(67,238)
(67,238)

$

-

$

(36,385) $
608,796
572,411 $

(36,385)
608,796
572,411

$

$

41,379

(1,117,771) $

$

2,378,385
2,378,385

$

$

$

$

41,379

13,118
13,118

$

2,391,503
2,391,503

$

Variance with
Final Budget
Positive
(Negative)

Exhibit 23

Law Enforcement Block Grant Fund

Budgeted Amounts
Original
Final
$

$

$

-

$

$

$

$

-

$

Actual
1,679
37,550
39,229

$

$

$

$

39,229
39,229

-

$

$
$

-

$

-

$

Variance with
Final Budget
Positive
(Negative)
6
-

1,679
37,550
39,235

$

$

6
6

$

$

39,220
39,220

$

9
9

-

$

15

$

15

$
$

-

$
$

-

$
$

-

$

-

$

15
12,464
12,479

$

15
12,464
12,479

$

$

123

$

Exhibit 24
City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Combining Statement of Fiduciary Net Position
Fiduciary Funds
June 30, 2018
Agency Funds
Williamsburg
Regional
Williamsburg
Economic
Tricentennial Development
Library
Fund
Authority
Fund
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,612,142
Investments, at fair value:
Other investments
1,205,893
Other assets
22,813
Total assets
$ 2,840,848
LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Amounts held for others
Total liabilities

$

80,928
238,975
2,520,945
$ 2,840,848

$

-

$

6,708
6,708

$
$

6,708
6,708

$

156,036

$

242,813
398,849

$
$

124

69,700
329,149
398,849

Farmers
Market
Fund
$

30,378

$

130,653
161,031

$
$

2,101
158,930
161,031

Special
Welfare
Fund

Total

$

38,621

$ 1,837,177

$

38,621

1,586,067
22,813
$ 3,446,057

38,621
38,621

$

$
$

152,729
238,975
3,054,353
$ 3,446,057

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Combining Statement of Changes in Assets and Liabilities
Agency Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Balance
Beginning
of Year
Williamsburg Regional Library Fund:
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Investments, at fair value:
Other investments
Other assets
Total assets

Additions

1,482,009

$ 6,749,494

$

1,188,237
32,193
2,702,439

Balance
End
of Year

Deductions

$

6,619,361

17,656
22,813
$ 6,789,963

$

32,193
6,651,554

$

80,928
238,975
6,470,060
$ 6,789,963

$

$

71,429
183,133
2,447,877
2,702,439

Williamsburg Tricentennial Fund:
ASSETS
Investments, at fair value:
Other investments
Total assets

$
$

6,610
6,610

$
$

LIABILITIES
Amounts held for others
Total liabilities

$
$

6,610
6,610

Quarterpath CDA Fund:
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Total assets

$
$

LIABILITIES
Amounts held for others
Total liabilities

$
$

LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Amounts held for others
Total liabilities

$

Exhibit 25
Page 1 of 2

$

125

$

1,612,142

$

1,205,893
22,813
2,840,848

$

$

71,429
183,133
6,396,992
6,651,554

$

80,928
238,975
2,520,945
2,840,848

98
98

$
$

-

$
$

6,708
6,708

$
$

98
98

$
$

-

$
$

6,708
6,708

-

$
$

470,880
470,880

$
$

470,880
470,880

$
$

-

-

$

470,880
470,880

$

470,880
470,880

$
$

-

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Combining Statement of Changes in Assets and Liabilities
Agency Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Balance
Beginning
of Year
Economic Development Authority:
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Investments, at fair value:
Other investments
Total assets
LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Amounts held for others
Total liabilities
Farmers Market Fund:
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Investments, at fair value:
Other investments
Total assets
LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Amounts held for others
Total liabilities

Additions

Deductions

397,793

$

103,381

$

345,138

$

156,036

$

120,446
518,239

$

122,367
225,748

$

345,138

$

242,813
398,849

$

$

$

1,783
516,456
518,239

$
$
$

$

$

69,700
156,048
225,748

27,261

$

158,556
185,817

$
$

$

Special Welfare Fund:
ASSETS
Cash in custody of others
Total assets

$
$

LIABILITIES
Amounts held for others
Total liabilities

LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Amounts held for others
Total liabilities

Balance
End
of Year

$

7,668
178,149
185,817

Totals - All Agency Funds:
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Investments, at fair value:
Other investments
Other assets
Total assets

Exhibit 25
Page 2 of 2

$

$

1,783
343,355
345,138

$

69,700
329,149
398,849

205,779

$

202,662

$

30,378

205,779

$

27,903
230,565

$

130,653
161,031

$

$

2,101
203,678
205,779

32,679
32,679

$
$

$
$

32,679
32,679

$
$

$

$
$
$

$

$

7,668
222,897
230,565

$

2,101
158,930
161,031

49,435
49,435

$
$

43,493
43,493

$
$

38,621
38,621

49,435
49,435

$
$

43,493
43,493

$
$

38,621
38,621

1,939,742

$ 7,578,969

$

7,681,534

$

1,837,177

1,473,849
32,193
3,445,784

140,121
22,813
$ 7,741,903

$

27,903
32,193
7,741,630

$

1,586,067
22,813
3,446,057

80,880
183,133
3,181,771
3,445,784

$

$

126

152,729
238,975
7,350,199
$ 7,741,903

$

80,880
183,133
7,477,617
7,741,630

$
$

152,729
238,975
3,054,353
3,446,057

SUPPORTING SCHEDULES

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

Schedule 1
Page 1 of 4

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Schedule of Revenues - Budget and Actual
Governmental Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Variance with
Final Budget Positive
(Negative)

Fund, Major and Minor Revenue Source

Original
Budget

Final
Budget

Actual

General Fund:
Revenue from local sources:
General property taxes:
Real property taxes
Real and personal public service corporation taxes
Personal property taxes
Business property taxes
Penalties
Interest
Total general property taxes

$ 10,540,000
308,700
741,428
1,345,000
49,000
30,000
$ 13,014,128

$ 10,540,000
308,700
741,428
1,345,000
49,000
30,000
$ 13,014,128

$ 10,589,077
312,974
761,270
1,342,087
60,494
23,920
$ 13,089,822

$

$

4,400,000
307,000
1,780,000
116,000
320,000
200,000
3,300,000
6,995,000
1,130,000
150,000
34,200
$ 18,732,200

$

4,400,000
307,000
1,780,000
116,000
320,000
200,000
3,300,000
6,995,000
1,130,000
150,000
34,200
$ 18,732,200

$

4,706,583
292,763
2,049,988
122,942
355,989
392,423
3,358,649
7,062,010
1,123,558
167,638
51,593
$ 19,684,136

$

Other local taxes:
Local sales and use taxes
Consumers' utility taxes
Business license taxes
Franchise license taxes
Bank stock taxes
Taxes on recordation and wills
Hotel and motel taxes
Restaurant food taxes
$2 lodging taxes
Tobacco taxes
Penalty and interest on other local taxes
Total other local taxes

$

$

49,077
4,274
19,842
(2,913)
11,494
(6,080)
75,694

306,583
(14,237)
269,988
6,942
35,989
192,423
58,649
67,010
(6,442)
17,638
17,393
951,936

Permits, privilege fees, and regulatory licenses:
Animal licenses
Land use application fees
Transfer fees
Permits and other licenses
Total permits, privilege fees, and regulatory
licenses

$

2,000
1,200
500
192,290

$

2,000
1,200
500
192,290

$

3,395
5,244
1,243
292,937

$

1,395
4,044
743
100,647

$

195,990

$

195,990

$

302,819

$

106,829

Fines and forfeitures:
Court fines and forfeitures

$

195,200

$

195,200

$

249,211

$

54,011

$

150,000
725,056
875,056

$

150,000
725,056
875,056

$

478,858
721,718
1,200,576

$

328,858
(3,338)
325,520

Revenue from use of money and property:
Revenue from use of money
Revenue from use of property
Total revenue from use of money and property

$

127

$

$

$

Schedule 1
Page 2 of 4

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Schedule of Revenues - Budget and Actual
Governmental Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Original
Budget

Fund, Major and Minor Revenue Source
General Fund: (Continued)
Revenue from local sources: (Continued)
Charges for services:
Charges for law enforcement and traffic control
Charges for courthouse maintenance
Charges for emergency medical services
Charges for Commonwealth's Attorney
Charges for planning and community development
Charges for parks and recreation
Total charges for services
Miscellaneous:
Miscellaneous
Williamsburg Health Foundation Grant
Total miscellaneous
Recovered costs:
Enterprise fund
Overtime - police and fire
Stryker Building recovered cost
Other recovered costs
Total recovered costs
Total revenue from local sources
Intergovernmental:
Revenue from the Commonwealth:
Noncategorical aid:
Rolling stock tax
Motor vehicle rental tax
Grantors tax
Communications tax
Personal property tax relief funds
Total noncategorical aid
Categorical aid:
Shared expenses:
Commissioner of revenue
Treasurer
Registrar/electoral board
Total shared expenses
Other categorical aid:
599 Funds
Streets and sidewalks
EMS funds - 4 for life and emergency services
Litter control grant
Rescue squad assistance grant

$

$

Final
Budget

1,350
40,000
751,000
250
45,600
365,000
1,203,200

$

250,999
260,000
510,999

$

650,000
105,000
166,666
75,000
996,666

$

$
$
$

$

$

$

$

Actual

1,350
40,000
751,000
250
45,600
365,000
1,203,200

$

283,456
260,000
543,456

$

650,000
105,000
166,666
75,000
996,666

$

$

$

$

Variance with
Final Budget Positive
(Negative)

1,366
735,311
337
53,946
391,493
1,182,453

$

224,084
260,000
484,084

$

687,925
97,491
166,666
74,500
1,026,582

$

$

$

$

16
(40,000)
(15,689)
87
8,346
26,493
(20,747)
(59,372)
(59,372)
37,925
(7,509)
(500)
29,916

$ 35,723,439

$ 35,755,896

$ 37,219,683

$ 1,463,787

$

$

$

$

$

9,000
33,000
57,000
705,000
773,572
1,577,572

$

74,000
18,500
36,000
128,500

$

385,333
1,810,000
25,000
5,000
20,000

$

$
$

$

128

$

9,000
33,000
57,000
705,000
773,572
1,577,572

$

74,000
18,500
36,000
128,500

$

385,333
1,810,000
25,000
5,000
20,000

$

$

13,181
40,134
104,466
657,210
773,572
1,588,563

$

75,701
18,299
37,399
131,399

$

385,332
1,799,468
30,000
7,038
21,566

$

$

4,181
7,134
47,466
(47,790)
10,991

1,701
(201)
1,399
2,899
(1)
(10,532)
5,000
2,038
1,566

Schedule 1
Page 3 of 4

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Schedule of Revenues - Budget and Actual
Governmental Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Original
Budget

Fund, Major and Minor Revenue Source
General Fund: (Continued)
Intergovernmental: (Continued)
Revenue from the Commonwealth: (Continued)
Categorical aid: (Continued)
Other categorical aid: (Continued)
Fire programs
Asset forfeiture
State sales tax
State transportation funds
VRA demolition grant

$

48,726
800
1,096,059
86,054
50,000

$

$ 9,043,803
$ 9,172,303
$ 10,749,875

$ 9,046,298
$ 9,174,798
$ 10,752,370

$
$
$

3,525,043
3,656,442
5,245,005

$ (5,521,255)
$ (5,518,356)
$ (5,507,365)

$

527,664
$
527,664
$
527,664
$ 47,000,978

$

14,410
527,664
$
542,074
$
542,074
$ 47,050,340

$

14,410
164,108
$
178,518
$
178,518
$ 42,643,206

$

$
$

-

$
$

-

$
$

41,379
41,379

$
$

41,379
41,379

Total revenue from local sources
Intergovernmental:
Revenue from the Commonwealth:
Categorical aid:
Public assistance and welfare administration
Comprehensive services act
Total categorical aid

$

-

$

-

$

41,379

$

41,379

$

$

$

368,012
142,070
510,082

$

$

515,411
126,255
641,666

$

$

429,011
126,255
555,266

$

(147,399)
15,815
(131,584)

Total revenue from the Commonwealth

$

555,266

$

641,666

$

510,082

$

(131,584)

Revenue from the federal government:
Categorical aid:
Public assistance and welfare administration
Homeland security grant

$

558,466
-

$

632,066
-

$

721,249
18,757

$

89,183
18,757

Total categorical aid

$

558,466

$

632,066

$

740,006

$

107,940

Total revenue from the federal government
Total Virginia Public Assistance Fund

$
$

558,466
1,113,732

$
$

632,066
1,273,732

$
$

740,006
1,291,467

$
$

107,940
17,735

Special Revenue Funds:
Virginia Public Assistance Fund:
Revenue from local sources:
Miscellaneous:
Summer youth program
Total miscellaneous

45,000
1,142,717
5,560,753
50,000

129

$

Actual

46,695
800
1,142,717
5,560,753
50,000

Total other categorical aid
Total categorical aid
Total revenue from the Commonwealth
Revenue from the Federal government:
Categorical aid:
Transportation safety grant
VDOT grant
Total categorical aid
Total revenue from the federal government
Total General Fund

$

Final
Budget

Variance with
Final Budget Positive
(Negative)

2,031
(46,658)
(5,474,699)
-

(363,556)
$ (363,556)
$ (363,556)
$ (4,407,134)

Schedule 1
Page 4 of 4

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Schedule of Revenues - Budget and Actual
Governmental Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Original
Budget

Fund, Major and Minor Revenue Source
Special Revenue Funds: (Continued)
Law Enforcement Block Grant Fund:
Revenue from local sources:
Revenue from use of money and property:
Revenue from the use of money
Total revenue from use of money and property

Final
Budget

Variance with
Final Budget Positive
(Negative)

Actual

$
$

-

$
$

-

$
$

6
6

$
$

6
6

$

-

$

-

$

6

$

6

$
$

-

$
$

1,679
1,679

$
$

1,679
1,679

$
$

-

$

-

$

1,679

$

1,679

$

-

$

$

$

3,500
34,050
37,550

$

$

3,500
34,050
37,550

$

$

-

$

-

Total revenue from the federal government

$

-

$

37,550

$

37,550

$

-

Total Law Enforcement Block Grant Fund

$

-

$

39,229

$

39,235

$

6

Total Primary Government

$ 48,114,710

Total revenue from local sources
Intergovernmental:
Revenue from the Commonwealth:
Categorical aid:
Other categorical aid
Total categorical aid
Total revenue from the Commonwealth
Revenue from the federal government:
Categorical aid:
Transportation safety grant
Local law enforcement block grant
Total categorical aid

130

$ 48,363,301

$ 43,973,908

$ (4,389,393)

Schedule 2
Page 1 of 4

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Schedule of Expenditures - Budget and Actual
Governmental Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Original
Budget

Fund, Function, Activity and Elements
General Fund:
General government administration:
Legislative:
City council
Clerk of council
Total legislative
General and financial administration:
City manager
City attorney
Human resources
Commissioner of revenue
Assessor
Treasurer
Director of finance
Information technology
Automotive/motor pool
Other general and financial administration
Total general and financial administration
Board of elections:
Electoral board and officials
Registrar
Total board of elections
Total general government administration
Judicial administration:
Courts:
Courthouse activities
Public safety:
Law enforcement and traffic control:
Police department
Prince George parking garage
E-911
Total law enforcement and traffic control
Fire and rescue services:
Fire department
Correction and detention:
Juvenile detention commission
Regional jail
Group home commission
Total correction and detention

$
$
$

$
$

Final
Budget

155,248
202,434
357,682

$

507,684
291,285
112,858
213,201
182,582
62,533
818,287
776,395
256,325
124,000
3,345,150

$

$

$

Actual

155,248
143,047
298,295

$

531,967
292,964
112,858
233,034
196,002
69,719
838,869
803,439
235,702
124,000
3,438,554

$

Variance with
Final Budget Positive
(Negative)

128,526
119,007
247,533

$

530,748
285,637
104,333
233,026
196,002
69,719
838,869
797,381
234,081
135,566
$ 3,425,362

$

$

$

29,097
150,702
179,799

$
$

-

$ 3,852,694

$

63,954

$

422,688

$

27,312

$

$

$

26,722
24,040
50,762
1,219
7,327
8,525
8
6,058
1,621
(11,566)
13,192

$

$

24,133
152,683
176,816

$

29,097
150,702
179,799

$

3,879,648

$

3,916,648

$

450,000

$

450,000

$

$

$

4,018,061
130,082
561,108
4,709,251

$

4,219,623
133,891
561,108
4,914,622

$ 4,218,436
133,811
561,108
$ 4,913,355

$

1,187
80
1,267

$

3,937,483

$

4,028,784

$ 3,981,397

$

47,387

$

73,698
1,151,327
96,909
1,321,934

$

73,698
1,151,877
96,909
1,322,484

$

$

2
14
16

$

131

$

$

73,696
1,151,863
96,909
$ 1,322,468

$

Schedule 2
Page 2 of 4

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Schedule of Expenditures - Budget and Actual
Governmental Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Original
Budget

Fund, Function, Activity and Elements

Final
Budget

Actual

Variance with
Final Budget Positive
(Negative)

General Fund: (Continued)
Public safety: (Continued)
Inspections:
Building

$

426,709

$

436,351

$

366,631

$

69,720

$

18,900

$

18,900

$

18,900

$

-

Total other protection

$

18,900

$

18,900

$

18,900

$

-

Total public safety

$ 10,414,277

$

10,721,141

$ 10,602,751

$

118,390

895,598
275,898
205,921

$

916,168
284,881
221,719

$

916,166
277,258
221,671

$

2
7,623
48

1,377,417

$

1,422,768

$ 1,415,095

$

7,673

$

486,300

$

486,300

$

480,576

$

5,724

$

$

486,062
604,295
$ 1,090,357

$

$

486,158
604,391
1,090,549

$

$

471,259
589,035
1,060,294

$

96
96
192

$

2,924,011

$

2,999,617

$ 2,986,028

$

13,589

Health:
Local health department

$

193,719

$

193,719

$

193,266

$

453

Mental health and mental retardation:
Administration - mental health and retardation

$

255,000

$

255,000

$

255,000

$

-

Other protection:
Animal control

Public works:
Maintenance of highways, streets, bridges and sidewalks:
Highways, streets, bridges and sidewalks
$
Engineering
Stormwater operations
Total maintenance of highways, streets, bridges
and sidewalks
$
Sanitation and waste removal:
Refuse collection
Maintenance of general buildings and grounds:
Maintenance of general buildings and grounds
Landscaping
Total maintenance of general buildings and
Total public works
Health and welfare:

132

Schedule 2
Page 3 of 4

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Schedule of Expenditures - Budget and Actual
Governmental Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Original
Budget

Fund, Function, Activity and Elements
General Fund: (Continued)
Health and welfare: (Continued)
Welfare:
Public assistance
Transportation programs for elderly
Total welfare

$

$

35,000
2,700
37,700

Total health and welfare

$

Education:
Other instructional costs:
Contribution to local school board
Parks, recreation, and cultural:
Parks and recreation:
Supervision of parks and recreation
Waller Mill park facility
Recreation facility programs
Cemeteries
Total parks and recreation
Library:
Contribution to regional library
Total parks, recreation, and cultural
Community development:
Planning and community development:
Planning
Community development
Triangle building management
Economic development
Other community development
Total planning and community development
Total community development
Nondepartmental:
Personnel contingency
Total nondepartmental

$

Final
Budget

Variance with
Final Budget Positive
(Negative)

Actual

$

$

35,000
3,420
38,420

$

$

35,000
3,411
38,411

$

9
9

486,419

$

487,139

$

486,677

$

462

$

9,222,757

$

9,222,757

$ 8,962,074

$

260,683

$

$

$

343,611
259,595
602,664
69,657
1,275,527

$

363,804
289,617
519,887
71,888
$ 1,245,196

$

$

363,837
289,648
625,271
71,899
1,350,655

$

33
31
105,384
11
105,459

$

860,699

$

860,699

$

859,699

$

1,000

$

2,136,226

$

2,211,354

$ 2,104,895

$

106,459

$

$

428,070
3,998,336
60,990
379,377
30,047
$ 4,896,820

$

$

447,853
4,016,621
61,010
379,487
30,047
4,935,018

$

$

435,284
4,016,621
42,000
387,201
30,047
4,911,153

$

19,783
18,285
20
110
38,198

$

4,911,153

$

4,935,018

$ 4,896,820

$

38,198

$
$

490,871
490,871

$
$

10,480
10,480

$
$

$
$

10,480
10,480

133

-

Schedule 2
Page 4 of 4

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Schedule of Expenditures - Budget and Actual
Governmental Funds
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Original
Budget

Fund, Function, Activity and Elements
General Fund: (Continued)
Capital projects:
Street construction
Corridor enhancement
Pedestrian bicycle improvements
Recreation facilities
Public safety facilities and equipment
General government facilities and technology
Vehicles
School construction
Other capital projects
Total capital projects
Debt service:
Principal retirement
Interest and other fiscal charges
Total debt service

Actual

Variance with
Final Budget Positive
(Negative)

11,704,216
1,261,782
1,379,090
841,010
1,136,840
1,225,409
1,105,352
3,750,308
1,169,895
23,573,902

$ 1,284,658
6,414
178,059
371,256
465,140
741,335
651,512
1,974,822
650,597
$ 6,323,793

$ 10,419,558
1,255,368
1,201,031
469,754
671,700
484,074
453,840
1,775,486
519,298
$ 17,250,109

$ 4,880,676
147,577
$ 5,028,253

$
$

Final
Budget

$

8,869,300
295,000
863,315
1,217,000
851,000
287,645
755,000
$ 13,138,260

$

$

$

$

1,029,676
181,515
1,211,191

$

1,029,676
181,515
1,211,191

$ 49,264,813

$

59,739,247

$ 45,666,673

$ 14,072,574

$

$

376,082
1,694,418
307,885
$ 2,378,385

$

$

351,490
1,808,224
231,789
2,391,503

$

$

311,490
1,688,224
231,789
2,231,503

$

(24,592)
113,806
(76,096)
13,118

Total health and welfare

$

2,231,503

$

2,391,503

$ 2,378,385

$

13,118

Total Virginia Public Assistance Fund

$

2,231,503

$

2,391,503

$ 2,378,385

$

13,118

$

-

$

39,229

$

39,220

$

9

Total Law Enforcement Block Grant Fund

$

-

$

39,229

$

39,220

$

9

Total Primary Government

$ 51,496,316

$

62,169,979

Total General Fund
Special Revenue Funds:
Virginia Public Assistance Fund:
Health and welfare:
Welfare and social services:
Welfare administration
Public assistance
Comprehensive services
Total welfare and social services

Law Enforcement Block Grant Fund:
Public safety:
Other protection:
Other protection

$

134

$ 48,084,278

(3,851,000)
33,938
(3,817,062)

$ 14,085,701

STATISTICAL SECTION

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

Statistical Section
Contents

Tables

Financial Trends
These tables contain trend information to help the reader understand how the
the City's financial performance and well-being have changed over time.

1-4

Revenue Capacity
These tables contain information to help the reader assess the factors affecting
the City's ability to generate its property and sales taxes.

5-9

Debt Capacity
These tables present information to help the reader assess the affordability of
the City's current levels of outstanding debt and the City's ability to issue
debt in the future.

10 - 12

Demographic and Economic Information
These tables offer demographic and economic indicators to help the reader
understand the environment within which the City's financial activities take
place and to help make comparisons over time and with other governments.

13-14

Operating Information
These tables contain information about the City's operations and resources
to help the reader understand how the City's financial information relates to
the services the City provides and the activities it performs.

15-17

Sources: Unless otherwise noted, the information in these tables is derived from the comprehensive
annual financial reports for the relevant year.

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Net Position by Component
Last Ten Fiscal Years
(accrual basis of accounting)

2009
Governmental activities
Net investment in capital assets
Restricted for:
Fire and police capital improvements
Other restricitions
Unrestricted
Total governmental activities net position
Business-type activities
Net investment in capital assets
Unrestricted
Total business-type activities net position
Primary government
Net investment in capital assets
Restricted for:
Fire and police capital improvements
Other restricitions
Unrestricted
Total primary government net position

$

58,769,012

$

25,864,437
84,633,449

$

2010
$

59,868,232

$

25,744,448
85,612,680

$

$

15,601,976
4,960,402
20,562,378

$

74,370,988

30,824,839
$ 105,195,827

135

2011
$

61,799,859

$

26,187,098
87,986,957

$

$

15,748,286
4,483,874
20,232,160

$

75,616,518

30,228,322
$ 105,844,840

2012
$

60,919,382

$

27,808,616
88,727,998

$

$

16,771,608
5,067,039
21,838,647

$

17,403,766
4,473,289
21,877,055

$

78,571,467

$

78,323,148

31,254,137
$ 109,825,604

32,281,905
$ 110,605,053

Table 1

2013
$

62,277,812

$

30,324,199
92,602,011

$

2014
$

61,470,986

$

31,727,986
93,198,972

$

$

17,888,271
4,198,379
22,086,650

$

80,166,083

34,522,578
$ 114,688,661

2015
$

58,427,633

$

24,496,187
82,923,820

$

$

17,806,425
4,537,882
22,344,307

$

79,277,411

36,265,868
$ 115,543,279

2016
$

64,690,552

$

22,521,523
87,212,075

$

$

17,981,499
3,143,100
21,124,599

$

76,409,132

27,639,287
$ 104,048,419

2017
$

64,556,652

$

20,966,196
85,522,848

$

$

18,084,285
4,202,535
22,286,820

$

82,774,837

26,724,058
$ 109,498,895

136

2018
$

52,444,883

$

13,144,192
584,890
19,099,322
85,273,287

$

$

18,835,808
4,475,559
23,311,367

$

18,769,281
5,684,838
24,454,119

$

83,392,460

$

71,214,164

$

13,144,192
584,890
24,784,160
109,727,406

25,441,755
$ 108,834,215

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Changes in Net Position
Last Ten Fiscal Years
(accrual basis of accounting)
2009
Expenses
Governmental activities:
General government administration
Judicial administration
Public safety
Public works
Health and welfare
Education
Parks, recreation and cultural
Community development
Interest expense
Total governmental activities expenses
Business-type activities
Water and sewer services
Total business-type activities expenses
Total primary government expenses

$

2010

$

$

4,206,889
373,159
9,626,052
4,493,041
2,335,735
7,913,290
2,535,481
5,091,394
408,129
36,983,170

$
$
$

$

$

$

4,350,670
524,247
9,200,629
3,314,209
2,319,951
8,439,060
2,362,491
4,788,236
303,123
35,602,616

4,862,433
4,862,433
41,845,603

$
$
$

$

Program Revenues
Governmental activities:
Charges for services:
General government administration
Judicial administration
Public safety
Public works
Parks, recreation and cultural
Community development
Operating grants and contributions
Capital grants and contributions
Total governmental activities program revenues

$

4,760
147,160
295,207
317,573
42,198
4,008,035
133,363
4,948,296

Business-type activities:
Charges for services:
Water and sewer
Total business-type activities program revenues
Total primary government program revenues

$
$
$

5,575,174
5,575,174
10,523,470

137

2011

2012

$

$

3,563,461
405,416
9,275,831
4,750,649
2,245,513
7,736,481
2,314,517
4,482,731
284,738
35,059,337

$

4,067,673
375,239
9,638,966
4,505,943
2,414,154
7,756,817
2,424,850
4,418,902
472,343
36,074,887

6,025,427
6,025,427
41,628,043

$
$
$

6,046,002
6,046,002
41,105,339

$
$
$

5,935,670
5,935,670
42,010,557

$

$

222,572
155,522
390,220
43,742
4,715,846
5,527,902

$

$

108,161
260,751
350,497
37,881
4,314,763
5,072,053

$

259,700
183,113
401,398
42,702
4,414,469
21,777
5,323,159

$
$
$

5,398,525
5,398,525
10,470,578

$
$
$

7,496,603
7,496,603
13,024,505

$
$
$

5,783,098
5,783,098
11,106,257

Table 2
Page 1 of 2

2014

2013

$

$

4,252,911
501,565
9,671,016
4,142,471
2,251,382
8,205,970
2,430,750
4,512,839
122,847
36,091,751

$
$
$

$

$

2015

$

$

4,070,451
439,441
10,122,867
4,526,929
2,309,325
9,170,571
2,399,212
4,684,339
175,563
37,898,698

6,019,724
6,019,724
42,111,475

$
$
$

$

$

331,835
578,682
419,959
4,062,259
2,322,693
7,715,428

$
$
$

6,024,722
6,024,722
13,740,150

2016

$

$

3,998,879
459,778
9,777,938
5,056,076
2,208,356
9,132,615
2,455,296
4,666,769
207,260
37,962,967

6,042,928
6,042,928
43,941,626

$
$
$

$

$

242,359
673,805
3,500
361,824
38,667
4,888,993
6,209,148

$
$
$

6,102,936
6,102,936
12,312,084

2017

$

$

4,072,768
525,421
10,290,497
3,721,977
2,452,903
8,929,127
2,285,504
5,055,084
185,452
37,518,733

6,827,214
6,827,214
44,790,181

$
$
$

$

$

256,600
695,048
14,960
341,745
43,300
4,934,029
6,285,682

$
$
$

6,932,559
6,932,559
13,218,241

2018

$

$

6,828,770
412,269
10,805,800
5,792,493
2,546,971
10,121,948
2,875,228
5,036,866
158,220
44,578,565

$

5,009,427
422,688
10,746,688
4,716,472
2,816,519
10,936,896
2,648,545
5,013,184
596,354
42,906,773

6,202,622
6,202,622
43,721,355

$
$
$

6,521,031
6,521,031
51,099,596

$
$
$

6,713,633
6,713,633
49,620,406

$

$

192,412
950,334
398,700
50,305
6,485,071
8,076,822

$

$

315,991
936,509
342,613
53,734
4,597,704
1,357,913
7,604,464

$

249,548
1,039,496
391,493
53,946
2,939,477
3,329,824
8,003,784

$
$
$

7,061,086
7,061,086
14,665,550

$
$
$

7,325,679
7,325,679
15,402,501

$
$
$

8,176,441
8,176,441
16,180,225

138

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Changes in Net Position
Last Ten Fiscal Years
(accrual basis of accounting)
2009

2010

2011

2012

Net (Expense)/Revenue
Governmental activities
Business-type activities

$ (32,034,874)
712,741

$ (30,530,563)
(626,902)

$ (29,531,435)
1,450,601

$ (30,751,728)
(152,572)

Total primary government net expense

$ (31,322,133)

$ (31,157,465)

$ (28,080,834)

$ (30,904,300)

$

$

$

$

General Revenues and Other Changes in Net Position
Governmental activities:
Taxes
General property taxes
Sales taxes
Business property taxes
Consumer utility taxes
Business license taxes
Hotel and room taxes
$2 lodging taxes
Meals taxes
Other local taxes
Use of Money & Property
Gain on sale of capital assets
Grants and contributions not restricted to specific
programs
Miscellaneous
Transfers
Total governmental activities
Business-type activities:
Investment earnings
Miscellaneous
Transfers
Total business-type activities
Total primary government

$
$

$
$

11,190,551
3,844,275
1,307,209
1,040,510
1,595,535
3,574,810
1,347,470
5,522,541
576,653
930,037
820,341
871,641
32,621,573
97,165
182,884
280,049
32,901,622

$
$

$
$

11,247,772
3,885,065
1,276,328
1,047,378
1,571,483
3,248,789
1,277,760
5,607,318
609,055
730,861
887,684
812,215
886,798
33,088,506
26,248
270,436
296,684
33,385,190

$
$

$
$

10,745,485
3,963,454
1,329,808
300,969
1,497,159
3,384,922
1,299,244
5,989,446
640,363
624,386
1,463,933
666,543
31,905,712

$

8,536
147,350
155,886
32,061,598

$

$
$

10,367,460
4,161,131
1,304,252
295,788
1,598,958
3,396,446
1,264,046
6,277,434
655,754
647,887
1,491,961
720,497
32,181,614
29,772
161,208
190,980
32,372,594

Change in Net Position
Governmental activities
Business-type activities

$

586,699
992,790

$

2,557,943
(330,218)

$

2,374,277
1,606,487

$

1,429,886
38,408

Total primary government

$

1,579,489

$

2,227,725

$

3,980,764

$

1,468,294

139

Table 2
Page 2 of 2

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

$ (28,376,323)
4,998

$ (31,689,550)
60,008

$ (31,677,285)
105,345

$ (29,914,269)
858,464

$ (36,501,743)
804,648

$ (34,902,989)
1,462,808

$ (28,371,325)

$ (31,629,542)

$ (31,571,940)

$ (29,055,805)

$ (35,697,095)

(33,440,181)

$

$

$

$

$

$
$

$
$

10,494,240
4,494,328
1,096,833
306,596
1,646,691
3,369,785
1,222,448
6,391,022
821,634
775,355
1,540,889
216,620
32,376,441
29,914
174,683
204,597
32,581,038

$
$

$
$

10,613,393
4,239,957
1,326,998
309,602
1,630,018
3,129,262
1,130,804
6,446,505
762,296
756,800
1,587,926
352,950
32,286,511
28,330
169,319
197,649
32,484,160

$
$

$
$

11,050,728
4,352,601
1,213,731
308,027
1,685,718
3,220,638
1,122,632
6,819,384
884,244
794,410
1,605,883
246,268
33,304,264
28,353
193,023
221,376
33,525,640

$
$

$
$

11,370,789
4,298,743
1,257,334
308,493
1,790,395
3,319,625
1,130,176
7,022,994
831,413
888,071
1,567,337
417,154
34,202,524
29,570
274,187
303,757
34,506,281

$
$

$
$

11,511,859
4,388,596
1,370,354
290,524
1,833,991
3,316,634
1,128,430
7,043,184
896,775
962,887
1,565,704
503,578
34,812,516
33,650
186,249
219,899
35,032,415

$

$
$

$
$

11,714,272
4,706,583
1,342,087
292,764
2,049,988
3,358,649
1,123,558
7,062,010
1,090,584
1,200,582

1,588,563
525,463
500,000
36,555,103
57,365
225,665
(500,000)
(216,970)
36,338,133

$

4,000,118
209,595

$

596,961
257,657

$

1,626,979
326,721

$

4,288,255
1,162,221

$

(1,689,227)
1,024,547

$

1,652,114
1,245,838

$

4,209,713

$

854,618

$

1,953,700

$

5,450,476

$

(664,680)

$

2,897,952

140

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Fund Balances, Governmental Funds,
Last Ten Fiscal Years
(modified accrual basis of accounting)

2009
General Fund
Reserved
Unreserved
Nonspendable
Restricted
Assigned
Unassigned
Total general fund

$

2010

2011 *

2012

124,011
26,253,762
$ 26,377,773

$

8,287
25,983,407
$ 25,991,694

$

13,326
3,591,208
22,875,543
$ 26,480,077

$

All Other Governmental Funds
Unreserved (Special Revenue funds)
Assigned (Special Revenue funds)

$

250,939
-

$

337,593
-

$

399,209

$

365,844

Total all other governmental funds

$

250,939

$

337,593

$

399,209

$

365,844

* City Council adopted GASB Statement 54, Fund Balance
Reporting and Governmental Fund Type Definitions, in
June 2011, which changed fund balance classifications.

141

1,178,530
1,375,060
25,288,755
$ 27,842,345

Table 3

2013
$

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

1,179,522
18,037,302
11,426,473
$ 30,643,297

$

1,178,480
4,820,655
19,317,000
11,707,336
$ 37,023,471

$

1,918,709
1,748,630
20,318,269
11,991,519
$ 35,977,127

$

1,919,711
18,818,825
12,382,517
$ 33,121,053

$

3,201,923
15,458,283
12,649,882
$ 31,310,088

$

-

$

2,770,074
13,144,192
15,788,818
12,918,770
44,621,854

$

275,829

$

300,711

$

428,711

$

524,301

$

653,939

$

584,890

$

275,829

$

300,711

$

428,711

$

524,301

$

653,939

$

584,890

142

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Changes in Fund Balances, Governmental Funds,
Last Ten Fiscal Years
(modified accrual basis of accounting)
2009
Revenues

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Taxes
Licenses, fees, and permits
Fines and penalties
Use of money and property
Charges for services
Intergovernmental
Other revenues

$ 29,922,838
207,637
233,262
930,037
347,740
4,971,107
1,683,536

$ 29,602,186
164,699
202,487
730,861
390,104
4,930,242
1,929,868

$ 29,210,384
154,108
221,767
624,377
436,181
6,179,779
1,343,191

$ 29,274,314
181,806
259,308
647,887
445,799
5,928,207
1,489,696

$ 29,786,811
151,637
228,172
775,355
950,667
5,603,148
1,015,233

$ 29,736,493
240,017
214,373
756,797
865,765
6,476,919
1,279,747

Total revenues

$ 38,296,157

$ 37,950,447

$ 38,169,787

$ 38,227,017

$ 38,511,023

$ 39,570,111

$

$

$

$

$

$

Expenditures
General government
Judicial
Police
Fire
Other public safety
Public works
Health and welfare
Education
Parks and recreation
Library
Community Development
Non-departmental
Capital projects
Debt Service
Principal
Interest
Total expenditures

3,247,353
373,159
4,273,913
3,293,365
1,686,790
4,185,312
2,311,671
7,023,314
1,387,111
884,971
5,070,823
5,699,783

3,130,496
332,736
3,916,856
2,983,054
1,670,784
3,404,437
2,318,563
6,923,146
1,272,611
840,727
4,760,075
6,181,634

3,341,506
405,416
3,876,496
3,108,601
1,744,010
2,877,077
2,241,201
6,991,174
1,205,651
750,959
4,469,891
5,206,675

3,781,205
371,366
4,069,699
3,146,035
1,829,335
3,129,845
2,416,361
7,337,320
1,232,402
779,744
4,419,267
3,701,211

3,509,833
398,300
4,197,314
3,297,878
1,694,206
2,922,135
2,256,347
7,673,329
1,220,914
819,526
4,478,159
2,432,992

3,403,525
411,806
4,417,042
3,479,594
1,719,162
2,914,416
2,306,790
8,181,450
1,202,169
820,156
4,591,577
3,820,162

1,036,704
377,798
$ 40,852,067

1,064,816
337,621
$ 39,137,556

1,149,694
275,348
$ 37,643,699

886,240
354,583
$ 37,454,613

758,761
140,392
$ 35,800,086

683,990
213,216
$ 38,165,055

$ (2,555,910)

$ (1,187,109)

$

526,088

$

772,404

$

2,710,937

$

1,405,056

$

-

$

887,684
-

$

1,398,911
(1,375,000)
-

$

5,481,048
(5,376,749)
-

$

-

$

5,000,000
-

Total other financing
sources (uses)

$

-

$

887,684

$

23,911

$

104,299

$

-

$

5,000,000

Net change in fund balances

$ (2,555,910)

$

(299,425)

$

549,999

$

876,703

$

2,710,937

$

6,405,056

Debt service as a percentage
of noncapital expenditures

3.92%

Excess of revenues
over (under) expenditures
Other Financing
Sources (Uses)
Issuance of bonds
Refunding bonds issued
Bond premium issuance
Bond issuance cost
Redemption of refunded bonds
Disposal of capital asset
Sale of capital assets
Transfers in

4.01%

143

4.19%

3.55%

2.82%

2.48%

Table 4

2015

2016

2017

2018

$ 30,628,000
255,915
197,117
794,407
898,621
6,539,912
1,181,005

$ 31,301,136
229,485
155,032
888,063
1,264,330
7,522,954
1,375,375

$ 31,815,149
249,819
181,175
962,887
1,160,757
7,317,493
1,499,843

$ 32,773,958
302,819
249,211
1,200,582
1,182,453
6,712,840
1,552,045

$ 40,494,977

$ 42,736,375

$ 43,187,123

$ 43,973,908

$

$

$

$

3,493,522
400,605
4,368,153
3,556,562
1,718,468
2,936,678
2,255,020
8,540,794
1,138,321
827,166
4,599,954
6,180,712

3,475,742
365,281
4,515,626
3,734,705
1,793,039
2,786,405
2,499,978
8,388,204
1,120,804
842,160
4,776,918
9,958,807

3,786,601
401,237
4,566,572
3,727,221
1,740,769
2,890,124
2,552,959
8,817,150
1,218,835
841,810
4,799,435
8,289,153

3,852,694
422,688
4,952,575
3,981,397
1,707,999
2,986,028
2,865,062
8,962,074
1,245,196
859,699
4,896,820
6,323,793

988,147
252,415
$ 41,256,517

1,006,410
232,780
$ 45,496,859

1,032,568
204,016
$ 44,868,450

4,880,676
147,577
$ 48,084,278

$

(761,540)

$ (2,760,484)

$ (1,681,327)

$

$

(156,804)
-

$

-

$

-

$ 12,260,000
3,920,700
1,539,845
(273,376)
(561,403)
500,000

$

(156,804)

$

-

$

-

$ 17,385,766

$

(918,344)

$ (2,760,484)

$ (1,681,327)

$ 13,275,396

3.34%

3.36%

2.92%

11.33%

(4,110,370)

144

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Tax Revenues by Source, Governmental Funds,
Last Ten Fiscal Years
(modified accrual basis of accounting)

Fiscal Year
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

Property
$

13,194,616
13,128,910
12,908,398
12,351,657
12,307,879
12,861,621
13,008,328
13,372,869
13,690,588
13,863,394

1% Sales &
Use
$

3,844,275
3,885,065
3,963,454
4,161,131
4,494,328
4,239,957
4,352,601
4,298,743
4,388,595
4,706,583

$

Consumer
Utility

Business
License

1,040,510
1,047,378
1,049,808
1,029,412
1,042,165
1,032,653
1,024,760
1,004,008
968,943
949,973

$ 1,595,535
1,571,483
1,497,160
1,598,958
1,646,691
1,630,018
1,685,718
1,790,395
1,833,991
2,049,988

145

Franchise
$

108,020
121,248
111,020
103,571
104,682
129,792
123,048
114,402
119,948
122,942

Tobacco
$

144,534
158,460
148,032
147,870
183,155
148,320
156,911
134,640
130,032
167,638

Table 5

Hotel &
Motel

$2 Lodging

Restaurant

$ 3,574,810
3,248,789
3,384,922
3,396,446
3,369,785
3,129,262
3,220,638
3,319,625
3,316,633
3,358,649

$ 1,347,470
1,277,760
1,299,244
1,264,046
1,222,448
1,130,804
1,122,632
1,130,176
1,128,430
1,123,558

$

5,522,541
5,607,318
5,989,446
6,277,434
6,391,022
6,446,505
6,819,384
7,022,994
7,043,184
7,062,010

Other

Total

$ 324,099
329,347
381,311
404,313
533,798
484,184
604,285
582,371
646,796
800,005

$ 30,696,410
30,375,758
30,732,795
30,734,838
31,295,953
31,233,116
32,118,305
32,770,223
33,267,140
34,204,740

146

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Assessed Value and Estimated Actual Value of Taxable Property
Last Ten Fiscal Years

Real Property

Table 6

Personal Property

Fiscal
Year

Residential
Property

Commercial
Property ¹

Motor
Vehicles ²

Other

2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

$ 1,215,949,800
1,202,447,900
1,166,641,800
1,134,906,200
1,064,590,700
1,083,446,200
1,108,726,200
1,168,895,100
1,190,581,300
1,216,085,400

$ 1,226,781,800
1,246,006,000
1,335,437,900
1,373,260,600
1,408,826,400
1,522,534,200
1,571,532,200
1,581,516,100
1,610,013,500
1,620,357,700

$ 35,034,560
35,605,695
35,652,620
36,082,270
39,582,570
40,845,200
42,220,440
43,377,030
44,053,770
44,479,900

$ 38,278,637
39,204,545
39,303,636
39,746,802
37,495,959
38,241,433
36,393,827
37,405,286
39,765,792
42,369,965

$

Less: Tax
Exempt Real
Property

Total Taxable
Assessed Value

Total
Direct
Tax Rate

547,275,600
555,882,100
674,570,500
772,009,200
845,513,900
918,768,400
943,646,700
964,234,400
971,263,000
976,996,200

$ 1,968,769,197
1,967,382,040
1,902,465,456
1,811,986,672
1,704,981,729
1,766,298,633
1,815,225,967
1,866,959,116
1,913,151,362
1,946,296,765

$ 4.04
4.04
4.04
4.04
4.07
4.07
4.07
4.07
4.07
4.07

Source: City of Williamsburg Assessor's Office, Commissioner of the Revenue
¹ Includes tax-exempt property.
² Motor vehicles are assessed at NADA average loan value as of January 1st each year
Note:

Real property in the City of Williamsburg is reassessed every year. Code of Virginia § 58.1-3201 requires that
annual assessments of real estate shall be made at 100 percent fair market value.

147

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Direct Tax Rates
Last Ten Fiscal Years

Table 7

Fiscal Year Ended
June 30

Real Estate
Tax¹

Personal
Property Tax¹

Room Tax

2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

$0.54
$0.54
$0.54
$0.54
$0.57
$0.57
$0.57
$0.57
$0.57
$0.57

$3.50
$3.50
$3.50
$3.50
$3.50
$3.50
$3.50
$3.50
$3.50
$3.50

5%
5%
5%
5%
5%
5%
5%
5%
5%
5%

¹ per $100 assessed value
² Collected by State, remitted monthly to City

148

Meal Tax

Retail Sales
Tax ²

Total
Direct
Tax Rate

5%
5%
5%
5%
5%
5%
5%
5%
5%
5%

1%
1%
1%
1%
1%
1%
1%
1%
1%
1%

$4.04
$4.04
$4.04
$4.04
$4.07
$4.07
$4.07
$4.07
$4.07
$4.07

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Principal Real Estate Property Taxpayers
Current Year and Nine Years Ago

Table 8

2009

Taxpayers
Colonial Williamsburg Foundation
Bluegreen Vacations, Unlimited
Riverside Healthcare Associates
Westgate Resorts, LTD
King James Group, LLC
Sunrise Investment Group, LLC
Williamsburg Improvements, LLC
JIN, Inc
Oam Shree Corporation
Woodshire, LTD
351 York Street LLC
Quarterpath Williamsburg LLC
BRG Quarterpath LLC
High Street Retail Phase I LLC
Sterling Manor Apartments LLC
SLN Quarterpath Associates LLC
BSV Colonial Owner LLC

Taxable
Assessed
Value
$ 266,119,000
26,132,300
25,004,400
21,479,600
19,086,800
18,646,800
17,627,600
13,406,500
13,228,400
9,710,100

2018

Percentage of
Total City
Taxable
Rank Assessed Value
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

14.04%
1.38%
1.32%
1.13%
1.01%
0.98%
0.93%
0.71%
0.70%
0.51%

149

Taxable
Assessed
Value

Percentage of
Total City
Taxable
Rank Assessed Value

$ 256,149,400
16,213,300
40,555,400
15,109,500

1
7
2
8

13.78%
0.87%
2.18%
0.81%

35,149,100
25,677,000
21,258,200
27,044,800
14,804,700
13,050,700

3
5
6
4
9
10

1.89%
1.38%
1.14%
1.45%
0.80%
0.70%

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Property Tax Levies and Collections
Last Ten Fiscal Years

Table 9

Collected Within the
Fiscal Year of the Levy
Fiscal Year
Ended
June 30

Taxes Levied
for the Fiscal
Year

Amount

Percentage
of Levy

2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

$ 12,813,916
12,829,534
12,471,576
11,970,235
11,945,819
12,348,440
12,632,981
13,009,018
13,314,963
13,477,747

$ 12,635,773
12,554,463
12,218,215
11,725,636
11,687,094
12,122,381
12,409,075
12,796,868
13,079,983
13,258,466

98.61%
97.86%
97.97%
97.96%
97.83%
98.17%
98.23%
98.37%
98.24%
98.37%

Total Collections to Date
Collections in
Subsequent
Years
$

168,190
269,900
241,915
227,721
213,810
170,906
181,600
148,154
130,468
n/a

Amount

Percentage
of Levy

$ 12,803,963
12,824,363
12,460,130
11,953,357
11,900,904
12,293,287
12,590,675
12,796,868
13,079,983
13,258,466

99.92%
99.96%
99.91%
99.86%
99.62%
99.55%
99.67%
98.37%
98.24%
98.37%

Source: City of Williamsburg Assessor's Office
Notes: Property in the City of Williamsburg is reassessed every year. Code of Virginia § 58.1-3201
requires that annual assessments of real estate shall be made at 100 percent fair market
value. Estimated actual taxable value is calculated by dividing taxable assessed value by
100%. The set amount of receipts from the State's Personal Property Tax Relief Act may skew
the collection rate, depending on the relief rate set by the City each year.

150

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Ratios of Outstanding Debt by Type
Last Ten Fiscal Years

Table 10

Governmental
Activities
General
Obligation
Bonds

Fiscal Year
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

$

9,497,443
8,432,627
7,306,844
6,796,767
5,997,390
10,270,795
9,241,038
8,193,018
7,118,840
19,235,458

Business-type
Activities

General
Obligation Bonds

Total Primary
Government

$

$

10,433,333
9,808,700
9,231,593
8,643,971
8,051,980
7,446,884
6,819,945
6,184,269
5,526,750
5,033,028

151

19,930,776
18,241,327
16,538,437
15,440,738
14,049,370
17,717,679
16,060,983
14,377,287
12,645,590
24,268,486

Debt Per
Capita
$

1,492
1,297
1,160
1,080
969
1,190
1,066
968
820
1,575

Debt as
Percentage of
Personal
Income
0.5%
0.5%
0.4%
0.3%
0.3%
0.4%
0.4%
0.3%
0.2%
0.5%

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Ratios of General Bonded Debt Outstanding
Last Ten Fiscal Years

Fiscal Year
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

Total General
Obligation Bonds
$

Table 11

Percentage of
Actual Taxable
Value of
Property¹

19,930,776
18,241,327
16,538,437
15,440,738
14,049,370
17,717,679
16,060,983
14,377,287
12,645,590
24,268,486

1.01%
0.96%
0.87%
0.85%
0.82%
1.00%
0.88%
0.77%
0.66%
1.25%

¹ See Table 6 for property value data.
² Population data can be found in Table 13

152

Per Capita²
$

1,492
1,297
1,160
1,065
943
1,176
1,081
932
821
1,575

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Legal Debt Margin Information
Last Ten Fiscal Years

2009

2010

2011

$189,545,600

$189,257,180

$182,750,920

$173,615,760

Total net debt applicable to limit

19,930,775

18,241,325

16,538,737

15,440,738

Legal debt margin

169,614,825

171,015,855

166,212,183

158,175,022

10.52%

9.64%

9.05%

8.89%

Debt Limit

Total net debt applicable to the limit
as a percentage of debt limit

2012

Legal Debt Margin Calculation for Fiscal Year 2017:
Assessed Value
Debt Limit (10% of assessed value)
Debt applicable to limit:
General obligation bonds
Legal debt margin

$ 1,859,446,900
185,944,690

$

24,268,486
161,676,204

Note: Virginia statute limits bond issuing authority of Virginia cities to 10% of the assessed real estate value.
The above calculation includes all debt secured by the full faith and credit of the City.

153

Table 12

2013

2014

2015

2016

$162,790,320

$168,721,200

$173,661,170

$178,617,680

14,049,370

17,717,679

16,060,983

14,377,287

12,645,590

24,268,486

148,740,950

151,003,521

157,600,187

164,240,393

170,287,590

161,676,204

8.63%

10.50%

9.25%

8.05%

6.91%

13.05%

154

2017

2018

$182,933,180 $ 185,944,690

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Demographic and Economic Statistics
Last Ten Fiscal Years

Table 13

Fiscal
Year

City
Population *

Area
Population *

Personal
Income
(thousands
of dollars)²

2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

13,354
14,068
14,256
14,503
14,893
15,064
14,860
15,429
15,404
**

79,805
81,440
82,591
84,149
85,709
87,274
88,199
89,044
90,126
**

$ 4,078,729
4,196,931
4,474,583
4,703,429
4,745,679
4,954,338
5,160,028
5,344,090
**
**

Per
Capita
Personal
Income²
$

51,109
51,538
54,224
55,990
55,550
56,960
58,504
59,632
**
**

Public
School
Enrollment ³

Unemployment
Rate¹

10,248
10,503
10,549
10,671
10,748
10,998
11,116
11,303
11,431
11,477

14.8%
10.1%
9.0%
8.3%
7.7%
7.3%
6.3%
5.6%
4.40%
**

* Population figures supplied by Weldon Cooper Center for Public Service (University of VA) & U.S. Bureau of Census
** not available
¹ Virginia Employment Commission (calendar year figures)
² Source - U.S. Bureau of Census, Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
population and per capita personal figures are only available for the City of Williamsburg and neighboring
James City County combined
³ Source - Williamsburg-James City County Public Schools

155

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Principal Employers
Current Year and Nine Years Ago

Table 14

2009

Employer
College of William & Mary
Colonial Williamsburg Foundation
Colonial Williamsburg Company
Aramark
City of Williamsburg
Red Lobster & The Olive Garden
Walsingham Academy
National Center for State Courts
Outback Steakhouse
Yankee Candle
W-JCC Schools
Sodexo
Riverside Doctors' Hospital

2018

Employees¹

Rank

Percentage of
Total City
Employment

1,000+
1,000+
500 to 999
250 to 499
250 to 499
100 to 249
100 to 249
100 to 249
50 to 99
50 to 99

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

20.29%
9.82%
5.96%
1.39%
1.25%
0.56%
0.56%
0.56%
0.28%
0.28%

¹ includes part-time and seasonal employees

156

Employees¹

Rank

Percentage of
Total City
Employment

1,000+
1,000+
250 to 499

1
2
3

19.10%
11.53%
7.36%

100 to 249

7
8
10
9

1.91%
1.26%
0.76%
0.79%

250 to 499
250 to 499
100 to 249

5
4
6

2.58%
3.06%
1.99%

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Full-time-Equivalent City Employees by Function/Program
Last Ten Fiscal Years

Table 15

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

City Manager

5.5

5.5

5.5

5.5

6.5

6.5

6.5

6.5

6.5

6.0

Clerk of Council

1.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

City Attorney

1.0

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

Commissioner of Revenue

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

General Government

Treasurer

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Registrar

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

2.0

2.0

2.0

Assessor

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

Information Technology

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

Finance

9.0

9.0

9.0

9.0

8.0

8.0

8.0

8.0

9.0

9.0

Officers

36.0

33.0

34.0

35.0

35.0

35.0

35.0

36.0

36.0

38.0

Civilians

18.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

4.0

Firefighters & officers

36.0

36.0

36.0

36.0

36.0

36.0

36.0

36.0

39.0

39.0

Civilians

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Police

Fire

Public Works
Engineering

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

Streets

10.0

10.0

9.0

9.0

9.0

9.0

9.0

9.0

9.0

9.0

Landscape

8.0

8.0

7.0

7.0

7.0

7.0

7.0

7.0

7.0

7.0

Shop

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

Building Maintenance

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

Planning

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

Code Compliance

7.0

5.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Recreation

9.0

9.0

8.0

8.0

8.5

8.5

8.5

8.5

8.5

8.5

Human Services/Public Housing

13.0

13.0

13.0

13.0

17.0

19.0

19.0

19.0

19.0

19.0

Public Utilities

26.0

26.0

26.0

26.0

26.0

26.0

26.0

26.0

26.0

26.0

Total

202.0

185.5

182.5

183.5

188.0

190.0

191.0

192.5

196.5

197.0

Source: City Finance Department
Note: A full-time employee is scheduled to work 2,080 hours per year (including vacation and sick leave). Full-time-equivalent
employment is calculated by dividing total labor hours by 2,080.

157

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Operating Indicators by Function/Program
Last Ten Fiscal Years

General Government
Real estate parcels appraised
Real estate property transfers
Police
Calls for service
Moving violations
Offenses
Fire
Emergency fire responses
Emergency EMS responses
Public Works
Street miles maintained
Tons of res. solid waste collected
Planning
Subdivision lots approved
Site plans processed
Code Compliance
Total permits issued
Total inspections performed
Recreation
Program participants
Waller Mill Park attendance
Human Services (avg. monthly)
Total benefit program cases
Total service cases
Public Utilities
Water consumed (million gallons)
Water leaks repaired
Sewer backups

Table 16

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018*

4,135
242

4,202
277

4,220
330

4,220
337

4,214
285

4,216
302

4,299
415

4,313
370

4,318
421

4,319
505

31,711
2,118
340

28,758
1,377
354

37,844 37,283
1,586
1,800
403
389

36,956
1,457
376

37,774
1,107
307

36,168
1,147
314

34,837
1,238
301

34,033
1,364
333

34,385
1,228
280

1,338
2,200

1,778
2,294

1,738
2,164

1,834
2,443

1,884
2,455

1,988
2,435

2,226
2,523

2,792
2,788

2,522
3,113

1,327
2,947

54
4,061

65
2,182

65
2,108

65
2,250

65
2,094

65
1,966

65
1,814

65
1,925

65
2,063

65
2,170

0
10

0
8

4
9

0
1

2
5

0
1

0
1

0
2

0
0

14
18

1,475
6,706

1,792
7,169

1,725
6,824

1,436
5,171

1,336
5,491

1,555
5,178

1,344
6,966

1,538
7,284

1,920
7,082

1,968
4,427

20,902 21,376
249,226 261,144

22,010 26,135
86,413 81,254

25,886 25,487 21,684
90,066 109,144 112,854

23,135 23,706 16,159
95,312 107,036 137,894

693
174

942
193

1,125
236

1,182
230

1,228
202

1,248
224

1,365
209

1,320
193

1,338
191

1,420
204

1,172
49
72

1,008
40
80

1,059
32
65

1,015
36
53

937
45
53

931
31
31

997
32
35

959
31
47

953
26
22

918
35
31

Source: City operating departments
*In FY 2018, some performance measures were modified, which may create variances in comparison with prior years.

158

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Capital Asset Statistics by Function
Last Ten Fiscal Years

Table 17

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Function/Program
General Government
Number of buildings
Number of parking structures
Total number of active vehicles in
vehicle replacement plan

28
2

28
2

28
2

28
2

28
2

28
2

28
2

28
2

28
2

28
2

77

77

80

83

84

82

83

84

85

85

Public Safety
Number of police stations
Number of fire stations

1
1

1
1

1
1

1
1

1
1

1
1

1
1

1
1

1
1

1
1

Public Works
Lane miles of streets maintained
Number of traffic signals
Bridges

54
15
4

65
15
4

65
15
4

65
15
4

65
15
4

65
15
4

65
15
4

65
15
4

65
15
4

65
15
4

Education-Regional Schools
Grades: K - 5
Grades: 6 - 8
Grades: 9 -12

8
4
3

9
4
3

9
3
3

9
3
3

9
3
3

9
3
3

9
3
3

9
3
3

9
3
3

9
3
3

4
6
10
2,036

4
6
10
2,036

4
6
10
2,036

4
6
10
2,036

4
6
10
2,036

4
6
10
2,036

4
6
10
2,036

4
6
10
2,036

4
6
10
2,036

4
6
10
2,036

Culture
Number of public libraries (regional)

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

Public Utilities
Miles of water distribution
Number of water tanks
Number of pump stations

48
5
14

48
5
14

48
5
14

48
6
14

48
6
14

48
6
15

48
6
15

48
6
15

48
6
15

48
6
15

Parks & Recreation
Number of parks
Number of ball fields
Number of tennis courts
Number of total acres

Source: City departments.

159

COMPLIANCE SECTION

THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY

ROBINSON, FARMER, COX ASSOCIATES
A PROFESSIONAL LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY

CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS

Independent Auditors’ Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and on
Compliance and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements
Performed in Accordance with Government Auditing Standards

To The Honorable Members of the City Council
City of Williamsburg
Williamsburg, Virginia
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of America;
the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards, issued by the
Comptroller General of the United States; and the Specifications for Audits of Counties, Cities, and Towns,
issued by the Auditor of Public Accounts of the Commonwealth of Virginia, the financial statements of the
governmental activities, the business-type activities, the discretely presented component unit, each major fund,
and the aggregate remaining fund information of the City of Williamsburg, Virginia, as of and for the year ended
June 30, 2018, and the related notes to the financial statements, which collectively comprise the City of
Williamsburg, Virginia’s basic financial statements, and have issued our report thereon dated November 2, 2018.
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the City of Williamsburg,
Virginia’s internal control over financial reporting (internal control) to determine the audit procedures that are
appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinions on the financial statements, but not
for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of City of Williamsburg, Virginia’s internal control.
Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the City of Williamsburg, Virginia’s internal
control.
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow management or
employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct,
misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in
internal control, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the entity’s financial
statements will not be prevented, or detected and corrected on a timely basis. A significant deficiency is a
deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control that is less severe than a material weakness, yet
important enough to merit attention by those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the first paragraph of this section
and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be material weaknesses or,
significant deficiencies. Given these limitations, during our audit we did not identify any deficiencies in internal
control that we consider to be material weaknesses. However, material weaknesses may exist that have not
been identified.

160

Compliance and Other Matters
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether City of Williamsburg, Virginia’s financial statements are
free from material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws,
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material effect
on the determination of financial statement amounts. However, providing an opinion on compliance with those
provisions was not an objective of our audit, and accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. The results of
our tests disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required to be reported under
Government Auditing Standards.
Purpose of this Report
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and compliance and
the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal control or
on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing
Standards in considering the entity’s internal control and compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not
suitable for any other purpose.

Richmond, Virginia
November 2, 2018

161

ROBINSON, FARMER, COX ASSOCIATES
A PROFESSIONAL LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY

CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS

Independent Auditors’ Report on Compliance For Each Major Program and on
Internal Control over Compliance Required by the Uniform Guidance
To The Honorable Members of the City Council
City of Williamsburg
Williamsburg, Virginia

Report on Compliance for Each Major Federal Program
We have audited the City of Williamsburg, Virginia’s compliance with the types of compliance requirements
described in the OMB Compliance Supplement that could have a direct and material effect on each of City of
Williamsburg, Virginia’s major federal programs for the year ended June 30, 2018. The City of Williamsburg,
Virginia’s major federal programs are identified in the summary of auditors’ results section of the accompanying
schedule of findings and questioned costs.
Management’s Responsibility
Management is responsible for compliance with federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of its
federal awards applicable to its federal programs.
Auditors’ Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on compliance for each of the City of Williamsburg, Virginia’s major
federal programs based on our audit of the types of compliance requirements referred to above. We conducted
our audit of compliance in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America; the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards, issued by the
Comptroller General of the United States; and the audit requirements of Title 2 U.S. Code of Federal
Regulations Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for
Federal Awards (Uniform Guidance). Those standards and the Uniform Guidance require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether noncompliance with the types of compliance
requirements referred to above that could have a direct and material effect on a major federal program
occurred. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence about the City of Williamsburg, Virginia’s
compliance with those requirements and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the
circumstances.
We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion on compliance for each major federal
program. However, our audit does not provide a legal determination of the City of Williamsburg, Virginia’s
compliance.
Opinion on Each Major Federal Program
In our opinion, City of Williamsburg, Virginia complied, in all material respects, with the types of compliance
requirements referred to above that could have a direct and material effect on each of its major federal
programs for the year ended June 30, 2018.

162

Report on Internal Control over Compliance
Management of City of Williamsburg, Virginia is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal
control over compliance with the types of compliance requirements referred to above. In planning and
performing our audit of compliance, we considered City of Williamsburg, Virginia’s internal control over
compliance with the types of requirements that could have a direct and material effect on each major federal
program to determine the auditing procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of
expressing an opinion on compliance for each major federal program and to test and report on internal control
over compliance in accordance with the Uniform Guidance, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on
the effectiveness of internal control over compliance. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the
effectiveness of City of Williamsburg, Virginia’s internal control over compliance.
A deficiency in internal control over compliance exists when the design or operation of a control over
compliance does not allow management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned
functions, to prevent, or detect and correct, noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal
program on a timely basis. A material weakness in internal control over compliance is a deficiency, or
combination of deficiencies, in internal control over compliance, such that there is a reasonable possibility that
material noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program will not be prevented, or
detected and corrected, on a timely basis. A significant deficiency in internal control over compliance is a
deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over compliance with a type of compliance
requirement of a federal program that is less severe than a material weakness in internal control over
compliance, yet important enough to merit attention by those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control over compliance was for the limited purpose described in the first
paragraph of this section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control over compliance
that might be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies. We did not identify any deficiencies in internal
control over compliance that we consider to be material weaknesses. However, material weaknesses may exist
that have not been identified.
The purpose of this report on internal control over compliance is solely to describe the scope of our testing of
internal control over compliance and the results of that testing based on the requirements of the Uniform
Guidance. Accordingly, this report is not suitable for any other purpose.

Richmond, Virginia
November 2, 2018

163

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the year ended June 30, 2018
Federal Grantor/State Pass - Through Grantor/
Program Title
Department of Health and Human Services:
Pass Through Payments:
Department of Social Services:
Promoting Safe and Stable Families
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
Refugee and Entrant Assistance - State Administered Programs
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance
Child Care Mandatory and Matching Funds of the Child Care and
Development Fund
Stephanie Tubbs Jones Child Welfare Services Program
Foster Care - Title IV-E
Adoption Assistance
Social Services Block Grant
Chafee Foster Care Independence Program
Children's Health Insurance Program
Medical Assistance Program

Federal
CFDA
Number

Pass-Through
Entity
Identifying
Number

93.556
93.558
93.566
93.568
93.596

0950109/0950110
0400111/0400112
0500111/0500112
0600411/0600412
0760111/0760112

93.645
93.658
93.659
93.667
93.674
93.767
93.778

0900111/0900112
1100111/1100112
1120111/1120112
1000111/1000112
9150111/9150112
0540111/0540112
1200111/1200112

Total Department of Health and Human Services
Department of Agriculture:
Pass Through Payments:
Department of Social Services:
State Administrative Matching Grants for the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program

10.561

0010111/0010112
0040111/0040112

Total Department of Agriculture
Department of Justice:
Pass Through Payments:
Department of Criminal Justice Services:
Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant Program

16.738

12-J1208LO11
13-K1208LO12

Total Department of Justice
Department of Transportation:
Pass Through Payments:
Department of Transportation
Highway Planning and Construction
Department of Motor Vehicles
Alcohol Open Container Requirements
Highway Safety Cluster:
National Priority Safety Programs
State and Community Highway Safety

20.205

N/A

20.607

N/A

20.616
N/A
20.600
K81252285
Highway Safety Cluster

Federal
Expenditures

$

8,621
103,490
127
10,477
12,465
234
81,858
82,707
69,235
483
5,999
172,705

$

548,401

$

172,849

$

172,849

$

34,050

$

34,050

$

164,107
8,350

$

6,760
2,800
9,560

$

182,017

$

18,757

Total Department of Homeland Security

$

18,757

Total Expenditures of Federal Awards

$

956,074

Total Department of Transportation
Department of Homeland Security:
Pass Through Payments:
Department of Emergency Services:
Homeland Security Grant Program

97.067

See accompanying notes to schedule of expenditures of federal awards.

164

7750100-52703/62704

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Notes to Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2018

Note 1 - Basis of Presentation
The accompanying schedule of expenditures of federal awards (the Schedule) includes the federal award
activity of the City of Williamsburg, Virginia under programs of the federal government for the year ended
June 30, 2018. The information in this Schedule is presented in accordance with the requirements of Title 2
U.S. Code of Federal Regulations Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit
Requirements of Federal Awards (Uniform Guidance). Because the Schedule presents on a selected portion
of the operations of the City of Williamsburg, Virginia, it is not intended to be and does not present the
financial position, changes in net position, or cash flows of the City of Williamsburg, Virginia.
Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
(1) Expenditures reported on the Schedule are reported on the accrual basis of accounting. Such
expenditures are recognized following the cost principles contained in the Uniform Guidance, wherein
certain types of expenditures are not allowable or are limited as to reimbursement.
(2) Pass-through entity identifying numbers are presented where available.
Note 3 - Food Donation
The value of federal awards expended in the form of noncash assistance for food commodities is reported in
the schedule.
Note 4 - Relationship to Financial Statements
Federal expenditures, revenues, and capital contributions are reported in the City's basic financial
statements as follows:
Intergovernmental federal revenues per the basic financial statements:
Primary government:
General fund
Virginia public assistance fund
Law enforcement block grant fund
Total federal expenditures per the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards

$

178,518
740,006
37,550

$

956,074

Note 5 - Subrecipients
No awards were passed through to subrecipients.
Note 6 - De Minimis Cost Rate
The City did not elect to use the 10-percent de minimis indirect cost rate allowed under Uniform Guidance.
Note 7 - Loan Balances
The City has no loans or loan guarantees which are subject to reporting requirements for the current year.

165

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the year ended June 30, 2018
Section I–Summary of Auditors’ Results
Financial Statements

Type of auditors' report issued:
Internal control over financial reporting:
Material weakness(es) identified?
Significant deficiency(ies) identified that are
not considered to be material weakness(es)?

unmodified
yes



no

yes



none reported

Noncompliance material to financial statements noted?

yes



no

yes
yes




no
no

Federal Awards

Internal control over major programs:
Material weakness(es) identified?
Significant deficiency(ies) identified?
Type of auditors' report issued on compliance
for major programs:

unmodified

Any findings disclosed that are required to be
reported in accordance with 2 CFR section
200.516 (a)?

yes



no

Identification of major programs:
CFDA Number(s)

Name of Federal Program or Cluster

93.778

Medical Assistance Program

10.561

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)

Dollar threshold used to distinguish between type A
and type B programs:

$750,000

Auditee qualified as low-risk auditee?



yes

Section II–Financial Statement Findings
None
Section III-Federal Award Findings and Questioned Costs
None

166

no

City of Williamsburg, Virginia
Summary Schedule of Prior Audit Findings
For the year ended June 30, 2018

There were no prior audit findings.

167
