Remote Right-to-Know Access – Town Council 5/13/2020
Due to the COVID-19/Coronavirus crisis and in accordance with Governor Sununu’s
Emergency Order #12 pursuant to Executive Order 2020-04, Town Council is authorized to
meet electronically

Please note that there is no physical location to observe and listen contemporaneously to this
meeting, which was authorized pursuant to the Governor’s Emergency Order. However, in
accordance with the Emergency Order, all members of the Council will be given the means to
communicate contemporaneously during this meeting through the Zoom Software platform.
The public may access the meeting as it’s ongoing through the following methods:
1. Dialing one of the following phone numbers: (1) 877 853 5247 US Toll-free
(1) 888 788 0099 US Toll-free +1 312 626 6799 US (Chicago)+1 929 436 2866 US (New York)
+1 301 715 8592 US (Germantown)+1 346 248 7799 US (Houston)+1 669 900 6833 US (San
Jose)+1 253 215 8782 US (Tacoma)
2. Entering the following Meeting ID: 856 0400 9084
3. Entering in the following passcode #: 3365
You can also “join” this meeting by following this link and using the same Meeting ID and
Passcode:
https://us02web.zoom.us/j/85604009084?pwd=VlhjZHBkUEVHZmw1RlZ2S3pyaXVwZz09
….Or watch/listen with a delay at: http://hooksett.granicus.com/ViewPublisher.php?view_id=2

This access notice was posted on www.hooksett.org/town-council and physically posted at the main
Entrances at 35 Main Street in Hooksett. Up to 24 hours prior, any updates to these instructions will be
posted in the same location and clearly marked as updates

During the Meeting:


If anybody has a problem, please call 603-485-8472 Ext. 1 or email at ngermain@hooksett.org.



In the event the public is unable to access the meeting, the meeting will adjourn and be rescheduled.
Telephonic access using the method found under 1. will be considered the primary public
access method in accordance with the Emergency Order.



All votes that are taken during this meeting shall be done by Roll Call vote, and the meeting
will commence by taking a Roll Call attendance.



When each member states their presence, they will also state whether there is anyone in the
room with them during this meeting, which is required under the Right-to-Know law.



Public Input will be conducted at the discretion of Town Council through methods of its choosing,
and no communication by the public will be permitted until or unless authorized. Non-public
sessions will trigger removal of all participants save Council and their designees.

AGENDA
Town of Hooksett Town Council
Wednesday, May 13, 2020 at 6:00 PM
A meeting of the Town Council will be held Wednesday, May 13, 2020 in the Hooksett Municipal Building
commencing at 6:00 PM.
Page
1.

THIS MEETING IS A VIRTUAL MEETING - SEE 1.1 FOR DETAILS ON
PARTICIPATION
1.1.

This meeting is open to the public, however this will be a virtual Zoom
software platform meeting to comply with Governor's orders regarding
COVID-19 social-distancing & no scheduled gatherings of 10 or more
individuals. See cover sheet to this agenda for instructions on how to
participate in this Zoom meeting.
Also, the Public is encouraged to send their comments about items on this
agenda to the Town Council via dfitzpatrick@hooksett.org until Noon on May
13, 2020.
On behalf of the Hooksett Town Council and Town Administration, we thank
you for your patience and understanding during these challenging times.

2.

CALL TO ORDER

3.

PROOF OF POSTING

4.

ROLL CALL

5.

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE (AND MOMENT OF SILENCE)

6.

AGENDA OVERVIEW

7.

PUBLIC HEARINGS

8.

7.1.

Public Hearing is to accept an unanticipated revenue in the amount of
$58,178.00 ($30,178.00 + $28,000.00) from Lamontagne Builders (Stinson
Hills, LLC) (not in lieu of Impact Fees) per RSA 31:95-b, III (a). (public hearing
opened, Tabled at 3/11/2020 Town Council Meeting, 4/22/2020 motion to
remove from table failed)
Staff Report - SR-20-084 - Pdf

5-7

7.2.

Public Hearing to discuss the proposed amendments to Recycling & Transfer
Ordinance #00-31.
Staff Report - SR-20-081 - Pdf

9 - 22

7.3.

Public hearing for the Town Council to accept the $12,944.82 from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act from the US
Health and Human Services to the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Fire
Rescue Department's Ambulance Revenue Line under RSA 31:95-b III (a).
Staff Report - SR-20-079 - Pdf

23 - 24

SPECIAL RECOGNITION
8.1.

Hooksett Youth Achiever - Parker Boulanger
Anyone requesting auxiliary aids or services is asked to contact
the Administration Department five business days prior to the meeting.

Page 1 of 154

9.

8.2.

Hooksett Municipal Employee - New Hire

8.3.

Lion's Club Citizens of the Year - John Pieroni
Staff Report - SR-20-092 - Pdf

SCHEDULED APPOINTMENTS
9.1.

10.

25

Cindy Robertson, Chair of the Conservation Commission, Approval of Sole
Source Agreement with the Student Conservation Association (SCA)
Staff Report - SR-20-074 - Pdf

27 - 35

CONSENT AGENDA
10.1.

Motion to accept a donation in the amount of $100.00 from Jameson Saykaly
and Tracy Saykaly, to the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Police
Department per RSA 31:95-b, III (b) and return said amount to the Police
Departments, 2019/2020 FY budget and applied to the donation line.
Staff Report - SR-20-072 - Pdf

37 - 38

10.2.

Motion to accept a donation in the amount of $200.00 from Jameson Saykaly
and Tracy Saykaly, to the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Fire- Rescue
Department per RSA 31:95-b, III (b) and return said amount to the Fire-Rescue
Department, 2019/2020 FY budget and apply $100.00 to the Ambulance Fund
Donation and $100.00 to the Fire donation line.
Staff Report - SR-20-073 - Pdf
Saykaly Note

39 - 41

10.3.

Town Council to accept the UV Disinfecting Lights, valued at $2,050.00,
through a grant from the Gary Sinise Foundation for the Town of Hooksett for
the Hooksett Fire Rescue Department's Ambulances under RSA 31:95-e, II.
Staff Report - SR-20-080 - Pdf

43

10.4.

Release Landscape Surety of $10,000 for #88/#90 West River Road (Site of
Dunkin Donuts and Subway)
Staff Report - SR-20-088 - Pdf

45 - 46

11.

TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S REPORT

12.

PUBLIC INPUT - 15 MINUTES

13.

NOMINATIONS AND APPOINTMENTS
13.1.

May Nominations and Appointments
Staff Report - SR-20-090 - Pdf

14.

BRIEF RECESS

15.

OLD BUSINESS

47 - 52

15.1.

Accept an unanticipated revenue in the amount of $58,178.00 ($30,178.00 +
$28,000.00) from Lamontagne Builders (Stinson Hills, LLC), (not in lieu of
Impact Fees) per RSA 31:95-b, III (a). (Tabled at 3/11/2020 Town Council
Meeting, 4/22/2020 motion to remove from table failed)
Staff Report - SR-20-085 - Pdf

53 - 60

15.2.

Storm Water Management Program Ordinance #2020-1.
Staff Report - SR-20-082 - Pdf

61 - 64

Anyone requesting auxiliary aids or services is asked to contact
the Administration Department five business days prior to the meeting.

Page 2 of 154

15.3.
16.

17.

Volunteer Appreciation Night (tabled at 4/22/2020 Town Council Meeting)
Staff Report - SR-20-091 - Pdf

65 - 66

NEW BUSINESS
16.1.

Conservation Commission Request for Approval of a Sole Source Agreement
with the Student Conservation Association, Inc. (SCA)
Staff Report - SR-20-075 - Pdf

67 - 75

16.2.

License to use the Town of Hooksett's land off of Merrimack Street and
surrounding fields at 161 Merrimack Street
Staff Report - SR-20-076 - Pdf

77 - 80

16.3.

Community Development Permitting Software Recommendation
Staff Report - SR-20-089 - Pdf

81 - 84

16.4.

Town Council to accept the $12,944.82 from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act from the US Health and Human Services to
the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Fire Rescue Department's Ambulance
Revenue Line under RSA 31:95-b III (a).
Staff Report - SR-20-078 - Pdf

85

16.5.

Donation to the Town of Hooksett, for the Hooksett Fire-Rescue Department
from the Leon C Boisvert Revocable Trust
Staff Report - SR-20-087 - Pdf

87 - 89

16.6.

Quarterly Financial Report as of March 31, 2020
Staff Report - SR-20-086 - Pdf

91 - 107

16.7.

COVID-19 - Request to Town Council to Ease Requirements of Employee
Earned Vacation Time Carry Over Limits through December 31, 2020
Staff Report - SR-20-067 - Pdf

109 - 111

16.8.

Town of Hooksett, NH - Municipal Volunteers (tabled at 04/22/2020 Town
Council Meeting)
Staff Report - SR-20-043 - Pdf

113 - 116

APPROVAL OF MINUTES
17.1.

Public: 03/11/2020 (tabled at the 04/22/2020 Town Council Meeting)
TC Minutes 03112020

117 - 129

17.2.

Public: 04/22/2020
TC Minutes 04222020

131 - 154

17.3.

Non-Public: 03/11/2020 (tabled at the 04/22/2020 Town Council Meeting)

17.4.

Non-Public: 04/22/2020

18.

SUB-COMMITTEE REPORTS (TABLED AT THE 04/22/2020 TOWN COUNCIL
MEETING)

19.

PUBLIC INPUT

20.

NON-PUBLIC SESSION NH RSA 91-A:3 II

21.

ADJOURNMENT
PUBLIC INPUT
Anyone requesting auxiliary aids or services is asked to contact
the Administration Department five business days prior to the meeting.

Page 3 of 154

1. Two 15-minute Public Input sessions will be allowed during each Council
Meeting. Time will be divided equally among those wishing to speak,
however,no person will be allowed to speak for more than 5 minutes.
2. No person may address the council more than twice on any issue in any
meeting.Comments must be addressed to the Chair and must not be personal
or derogatory about any other person.
3. Any questions must be directly related to the topic being discussed and must
be addressed to the Chair only, who after consultation with Council and Town
Administrator, will determine if the question can be answered at that time.
Questions cannot be directed to an individual Councilor and must not be
personal in nature. Issues raised during Public Input, which cannot be resolved
or answered at that time, or which require additional discussion or research,
will be noted by the Town Administrator who will be responsible for researching
and responding to the comment directly during normal work hours or by
bringing to the Council for discussion at a subsequent meeting. The Chair
reserves the right to end questioning if the questions depart from clarification to
deliberation.
4. Council members may request a comment be added to New Business at a
subsequent meeting.
5. No one may speak during Public Input except the person acknowledged by the
Chair. Direct questions or comments from the audience are not permitted
during Public Input.

Anyone requesting auxiliary aids or services is asked to contact
the Administration Department five business days prior to the meeting.

Page 4 of 154

Agenda Item #7.1.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
Public Hearing is to accept an unanticipated revenue in the amount of $58,178.00
($30,178.00 + $28,000.00) from Lamontagne Builders (Stinson Hills, LLC) (not in
lieu of Impact Fees) per RSA 31:95-b, III (a). (Tabled at 4/22/2020 Town Council
Meeting.)
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Public Works
Staff Contact: Earl Labonte, Director of Public Works
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
At their meeting on 4/22/2020, the Town Council opened the Public Hearing but removal from table
failed.
The Hooksett Town Council will be holding a public hearing on Wednesday, April 22, 2020 @ 6:00pm
at the Hooksett Town Hall Chambers, 35 Main Street, Hooksett, NH. The purpose of the public
hearing is to accept an unanticipated revenue in the amount of $58,178.00 ($30,178.00 +
$28,000.00) from Lamontagne Builders (Stinson Hills, LLC) (not in lieu of Impact Fees) per RSA
31:95-b, III (a). For documentation or questions contact the Hooksett Public Works Department at
603-668-8019.
FINANCIAL IMPACT:
Unanticipated revenue in the amount of $58,178.00.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
None.
RECOMMENDATION:
Remove from table, listen to public hearing, close public hearing.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
Motion to remove from table, listen to public hearing and close public hearing.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur. Staff has asked Planning Board Chair, Dick Marshal to attend the meeting to share his
thoughts on this matter. I've also asked legal counsel to attend as well to share his perspective on
legal aspect of these conditions. My thoughts are that the planning board and the developer at time,
agreed to these conditions. These conditions are set by the planning board, not the DPW Director.
Despite the unfortunate matter that took place 12-13 years ago, these conditions were still set by the
planning board. The time to appeal these conditions to Superior Court should have taken place 12
years ago. Mr. Lamontagne understanding of these conditions should have been address by the

Page 5 of 154

Agenda Item #7.1.

previous owner of the development, and if he did not verify the information shared with him by the
previous developer, that is no fault of the town of Hooksett.
ATTACHMENTS:
Public Hearing Notice for Donation

Page 6 of 154

Agenda Item #7.1.

TOWN OF HOOKSETT
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
The Hooksett Town Council will be holding a public hearing on Wednesday, April 22,
2020 @ 6:00pm at the Hooksett Town Hall Chambers, 35 Main Street, Hooksett, NH.
The purpose of the public hearing is to accept an unanticipated revenue in the amount of
$58,178.00 ($30,178.00 + $28,000.00) from Lamontagne Builders (Stinson Hills, LLC)
(not in lieu of Impact Fees) per RSA 31:95-b, III (a). For documentation or questions
contact the Hooksett Public Works Department at 603-668-8019.
Pursuant to Governor Sununu’s Emergency Order #12 and #16, the Town will be
conducting meetings remotely until further notice. The Public will only be able to
participate via phone. The specific instructions are posted on the Town website,
www.hooksett.org.

Page 7 of 154

Page 8 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Cleaner
Public Hearing to discuss the proposed amendments to Recycling & Transfer
Ordinance #00-31.
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Public Works
Staff Contact: Earl Labonte, Director of Public Works
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
The Hooksett Town Council will be holding a public hearing on Wednesday, May 13, 2020 @ 6:00pm
at the Hooksett Town Hall – Council Chambers, 35 Main Street, Hooksett, NH. The purpose of the
public hearing is to discuss the proposed amendments to Recycling & Transfer Ordinance #00-31.
This notice is per Chapter 231:132-a of the NH Revised Statutes annotated, and section 3.6 of the
Hooksett Town Charter. The full text of the proposed ordinance amendment is available on the Town
Clerk and Public Works Department web pages via www.hooksett.org for your inspection. Questions
should be directed to the Hooksett Public Works Department at 603-668-8019.
Pursuant to Governor Sununu’s Emergency Order #12 and #16, the Town will be conducting
meetings remotely until further notice. The Public will only be able to participate via phone. The
specific instructions are posted on the Town website, www.hooksett.org.
FINANCIAL IMPACT:
None.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
The proposed amendments will combine the two (2) existing ordinances, Solid Waste Ordinance and
Recycling and Transfer Ordinance into one ordinance.
RECOMMENDATION:
Open Public Hearing, listen to public input and close the Public Hearing.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
Motion to open Public Hearing, listen to public input and close the Public Hearing.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur
ATTACHMENTS:
Public Hearing Notice Recycling Transfer
R&T Ordinance 00-31 Final

Page 9 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

TOWN OF HOOKSETT
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
The Hooksett Town Council will be holding a public hearing on Wednesday, May 13,
2020 @ 6:00pm at the Hooksett Town Hall – Council Chambers, 35 Main Street,
Hooksett, NH. The purpose of the public hearing is to discuss the proposed amendments
to Recycling & Transfer Ordinance #00-31. This notice is per Chapter 231:132-a of the
NH Revised Statutes annotated, and section 3.6 of the Hooksett Town Charter. The full
text of the proposed ordinance amendment is available on the Town Clerk and Public
Works Department web pages via www.hooksett.org for your inspection. Questions
should be directed to the Hooksett Public Works Department at 603-668-8019.
Pursuant to Governor Sununu’s Emergency Order #12 and #16, the Town will be
conducting meetings remotely until further notice. The Public will only be able to
participate via phone. The specific instructions are posted on the Town website,
www.hooksett.org.

Page 10 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

RECYCLING & TRANSFER
ORDINANCE # 00-31
The Town of Hooksett ordains that, pursuant to the authority granted under Section 3.6 of the
Hooksett Town Charter, the following ordinance is hereby enacted in the Town of Hooksett:
INTRODUCTION
An Ordinance is hereby created establishing control of solid waste in the Town of Hooksett
(Town), implementing rules and regulations for the operation of the Transfer and Recycling and
Transfer Center (Center), curbside collection of trash and setting fees for the use of the facilities
thereof.
Whereas, the control and regulation of solid waste will serve the public interest, protect the
health and safety of Town residents, and conserve our natural resources, and,
Whereas the Town has authority pursuant to State law and the Town Charter to establish rules
and regulations for the control of solid waste, to establish permit regulations, and to prescribe
penalties for the violations thereof, and,
Whereas it is necessary to establish the rules and regulations for the acceptance of solid waste,
therefore be it ordained by the Town of Hooksett, the County of Merrimack, and the State of
New Hampshire, that a solid waste ordinance is hereby established setting forth regulations
governing the use of the Center and requiring that permits be obtained and fees paid.
SECTION I
DEFINITIONS AND WORD USAGE
As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE – Household garbage, trash, rubbish and refuse originating within the
boundaries of the Town, normally collected or disposed of as a result of residential pickups or
deliveries.
AUTOMATED COLLECTION – Shall mean a method of collecting refuse and recycling through
the use of mechanical collection equipment and special carts issued for the storage and
collection of rubbish and recyclables.
AUTOMATED COLLECTION CART – Shall mean a specially designed cart with wheels and
town seal, issued by the town of Hooksett to be used for the storage of acceptable refuse or
recyclables in the automated collection operation.
CENTER - The Town of Hooksett Transfer and Recycling and Transfer Center situated off
Route 3A.
COMMERCIAL - Any and all nonresidential activities.
COMMERCIAL RESIDENTS – Residential abode with more than 3 units.
CONDOMINIUM - Individually owned multi-family units

Page 11 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS - Non-putrescible waste building materials and rubble.
CURB LINE – shall mean the area directly behind or adjacent to the curb; in the absence of a
curb, the area adjacent to the edge of pavement or road within 5 feet traveled portion of
roadway.
CURBSIDE COLLECTION – Shall mean the pickup of acceptable trash and recyclables at
certain residences in the Town.
CUSTOMER – Shall mean any resident who delivers waste to the facility or receives trash and
or recycling service from the Town.
DEMOLITION WASTE - See Construction Debris.
DESIGNATED COLLECTION POINT – Shall mean the place where the automated cart shall be
placed for service, as determined by the Recycling and Transfer Department.
DISPOSAL - The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placement of any
solid waste into or onto any land or water so that such solid waste or any constituent of it may
enter the environment, be emitted into the air, or be discharged into any water, including
groundwater.
EXTRA REFUSE – Shall mean any refuse placed on, or around automated collection cart in
excess capacity of the automated cart.
HAZARDOUS WASTE - Any material which has been identified as hazardous waste by the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services. Such wastes include, but are not limited to,
those which are ignitable, irritants, or strong sensitizers, or which generate pressure through
decomposition, heat, or other means. Such term also encompasses any solid, semisolid, liquid
or contained gaseous waste, or any combination of these wastes which, because of either
quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: a) cause or
contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in irreversible or incapacitating reversible
illness; and/or b) pose a present or potential threat to humans or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise mismanaged.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE – Hazardous waste generated from non-commercial
usage by persons in their living abodes.
INFECTIOUS WASTE - Any waste which, because of its infectious nature, may cause or
significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or
incapacitating reversible illness, or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE - Hazardous waste generated from non-commercial
usage by persons in their living abodes.
MANDATORY – Officially required.

Page 12 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

METAL GOODS (METAL) - Metal goods include household appliances, air conditioners,
aluminum lawn chairs, aluminum windows, outside grills, hot water tanks, and other metallic
items that can be readily recycled and marketed.
MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE - Used motor oil, motor vehicle batteries, antifreeze, and tires from
motorized vehicles.
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY – Shall mean more than one (1) but not more than
three (3) dwelling units in a building.
RECYCLABLES - Any item within the Town recycling program which can be recycled with the
intent of reusing that item.
RECYCLING - The collection, storage processing, and redistribution of separated solid waste so
as to return material to the marketplace.
REFUSE - Any solid waste product which is composed wholly or partly of such materials as
garbage, swill, sweepings, cleanings, trash, rubbish, litter, industrial solid wastes, organic
wastes, and domestic solid wastes.
RESIDENT - A person who is domiciled or has a place of abode in the Town of Hooksett and
who has, through all of his or her actions, demonstrated a current intent to designate that place
of abode as his or her principal place of physical presence for the indefinite future to the
exclusion of all others.
SOLID WASTE - Any matter consisting of putrescible material, refuse, and other discarded or
abandoned material. It includes solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting
from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, it does not include hazardous waste as defined in RSA
147A:2, infectious waste as defined in this Section, solid or dissolved materials and irrigation
return flows, or municipal and industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits
under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, or source special
nuclear or by-product material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. Solid
waste includes municipal solid waste (MSW) as defined in State Solid Waste Rule ENV-Wm
103.23.
USER FEE - A charge usually by a municipality to users of a service.
YARD WASTE - Leaves, grass clippings, weeds, hedge clippings, garden waste, and twigs.
SECTION II
CURBSIDE AUTOMATED COLLECTION
Currently any recyclable materials (see current list at hooksett.org) that can be removed from
the waste stream at the curb and recycled at the CENTER, will help in waste and cost
avoidance. The reason for separation is to help control the costs associated with the disposal
and management of solid waste by diverting as many recyclables from the solid waste stream
as possible. The listing of acceptable materials will be available at the Recycling and Transfer
Center, or online at www.hooksett.org under the Recycling and Transfer Department.

Page 13 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

1. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for the storage, collection,
transportation and disposal of solid waste and recycling, utilizing an automated collection
program to promote the health, safety , and welfare of the Town’s residents, employees
and environment, and to minimize the amount of trash generated in the Town.
2. The Crew Chief shall have the direct responsibility for the administration of this section
subject to the direction and control of the Town Administrator and the Town Council.
3. The Town will provide curbside collection of residential solid waste from municipal
buildings, single family dwellings, multi-family dwellings (3 units or less).
4. Two automated collection carts, one for trash, one for recycling, and instructions for use
will be distributed for residents who receive collection services from the Town. Currently
the town does not do curbside recycling, the recycling cart may be used for normal
thrash until curbside recycling is resumed.
5. It will be the resident’s responsibility to assure that automated collection carts are placed
in the appropriate location designated by the Town, by 7:00 am on collection day. The
Crew Chief or his/her designee shall have the authority to review and approve or
disapprove placement of the collection carts. Alternative sites may be necessary to
safeguard public safety and minimize risk of damage to public or private property during
the collection process.
6. It is the resident’s responsibility to remove the automated cart from the curb line by the
end of the collection day.
7. It is prohibited to overload automated carts in a manner that is likely to cause damage to
the collection vehicle, the automated cart or to create a litter condition or to impede
collection. It shall be an infraction to place or deposit any refuse whatsoever in or around
an automated cart owned or provided for the use of another customer without that
customer’s approval.
8. The Town shall not be responsible for collection if there are any infractions of any
section of this policy, or if there are any circumstances that are beyond the control of the
Town. Infractions or circumstances include, but are not limited to, automated cart
overload, unacceptable materials, improperly loaded automated cart, blocked access,
automated cart inaccessibility, improper carts or dangerous situations.
9. Automated Carts:
a) All automated carts are the property of the Town of Hooksett and are not to be
removed from the property even in the event of a change in ownership or
resident status. All automated carts will be assigned to a street address and have
an imprinted number for identification purposes. One cart shall be used for trash
and one cart for mixed recyclables.
b) Any repairs to the containers will be performed by the Town. The property
owner/customer shall contact the Recycling and Transfer office to report damage
and request a repair. Containers damaged beyond repair will be replaced by the
Town. If the containers are subject to neglect or other preventable damage as
determined by the Crew Chief, the Crew Chief will require a charge for the

Page 14 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

replacement. The property owners are the ultimate party responsible for all
damages or removed containers by tenants. The owner shall pay the cost of
$50.00 for any replacement containers. The owner should work to educate the
household members on the proper use and maintenance of the containers.
c) All trash and recyclables shall be placed into the appropriate containers so that
the lid can be securely shut. No trash placed on the ground or in any unapproved
containers shall be picked-up by the town. The containers shall not be overfilled
or arranged in any manner that will prevent the lid from remaining closed at all
times to prevent water from filling the container, and access by animals. In the
event of overflow, residents may bring the extra material to the facility or must
wait till the next scheduled collection day.
10. Placement of Carts - It shall be the duty of each customer to place the carts as follows:
a) Within two (2) feet of the curb line not more than 5 feet from traveled portion of
roadway or where directed by the Town.
b) At least five (5) feet away from all objects such as fences, mailboxes, and utility
poles, and clear of overhanging vegetation, utility wires, etc. to allow for the
unimpeded operation of collection vehicles.
c) So that the automated cart handle is facing the dwelling unit.
d) At least two (2) feet from the other cart.
e) At least ten (10) feet away from parked vehicles.
11. Approved Materials for Automated Curbside Collection
a) All household trash must be bagged before placing into the trash container for
the automated curbside program.
b) ONLY household trash will be collected at the curb. All other material for disposal
must be brought to the Recycling and Transfer Center at 210 West River Rd.

12. Enforcement - Collection
It is the intention of the Department to educate residents as to the value of recycling and
the appropriate procedures for doing so. If, however, a resident or tenant violates any
provision of this section (Section II) it may result in the issuance of notices, warnings and
possible loss of services.
First Violation – A courtesy notice will be issued. If the violation is the disposal of any
unacceptable material, the cost of disposal (user fee) will be incurred.
Second Violation – A written warning will be issued. If the violation is the disposal of any
unacceptable material the cost of the disposal (user fee) will be incurred.

Page 15 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

Third Violation – A third violation will result in the loss of collection privileges, for an
amount of time determined by the Crew Chief, with approval by the Town Administrator.
The violator shall have the right to appeal to the Town Council.
SECTION III
CONDOMINIUMS
Condominiums will be required to provide for the collection and disposal of domestic trash within
their communities. The Town will reimburse tonnage at a maximum of 21 pounds per unit per
week at the Town budgeted rate (for trash disposal), paid semi-annually, upon submission and
verification of paid invoices by the condominium association. The Town may rescind or amend
this section at any time.
SECTION IV
RECYCLING AND TRANSFER CENTER
The Center is operated and maintained in accordance with RSA 149-M:17 solely to receive,
transport, and dispose of authorized solid waste generated within the geographical boundaries
of the Town.
These regulations have been recommended by the Recycling and Transfer Advisory Committee
and adopted by the Town Council pursuant to the authority granted the Council by RSA 149M:17, II and 31:39, I (f). These regulations are intended to:
1. Prevent unauthorized entrance into and/or use of the Center;
2. Prohibit the disposal of illegal and/or unacceptable waste;
3. Control the disposal of authorized solid waste to facilitate compliance with operating
standards, improve efficiency and productivity, require recycling and reuse of our
resources, and maximize the life of the Center; and
4. Establish permit procedures.
5. The Crew Chief of the Center is authorized to promulgate additional regulations subject
to the approval of the Town Council which may include, but are not limited to, the
following subjects:
a) Separation of solid wastes and other materials;
b) Inspection procedures;
c) Hours of operation; and,
d) Establishing fees.
SECTION V
USE OF CENTER

Page 16 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

It is mandatory, that residents, who use the facility to drop off material, will separate all
designated recyclable materials from the solid waste stream and dispose of them in the
approved recycling containers. The reason for separation is to help control the costs associated
with the disposal and management of solid waste by diverting as many recyclables from the
solid waste stream as possible. The listing of acceptable materials will be available at the
Recycling and Transfer Center, or online at www.hooksett.org under the Recycling and Transfer
Department.
1. Permit Required.
a) Permits will be issued for all residents who use the facility if the vehicle is
registered in Hooksett.
b) Permits will not be issued to residents who do not have a registered vehicle.
Access will be granted with proof of residency in the way of a bill or license with
Hooksett address.
c) Contractors working for Hooksett residences or businesses, must present letter
documentation from property/business owners they are working for.
Documentation must contain name, address, phone number, signature and
current date for each trip to the CENTER. Charges and all rules will apply.
2. Removal of material:
authorization.

No material shall be removed from the Center without

3. Designated Areas: Solid Waste shall be disposed of only in the designated areas.
4. Unauthorized Entry: No person shall enter or attempt to enter the Center at times other
than during the posted operating hours.
5. Acceptable Solid Waste
Solid waste which is allowed to be received at the Center includes refuse, recycling,
construction debris and demolition waste, motor vehicle waste, yard waste, appliances,
and scrap metal. Not all Commercial solid waste is acceptable, please call ahead for
approval. User fees may apply. See website at www.hooksett.org or call facility at 603669-5198.
a) Clean demolition, wood, sheetrock (kept separate), asphalt shingles (kept
separate and free of trash)
b) Furniture
c) Metal items and appliances will be accepted. Appliances with freon will be kept
separately
d) Yard Waste (grass clippings, garden waste, leaves and branches no larger than
3” in diameter) must be brought to the designated area (compost pile). Yard

Page 17 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

waste brought in plastic bags must be emptied. No brush clearing will be
accepted.
e) Some household hazardous wastes may be brought to the facility. Residents
need to contact the facility to determine if it can be accepted.
6. Unacceptable Solid Waste
Materials which will not be accepted at the Center shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
a) Hazardous waste. Hazardous waste or material which the Town considers to be
detrimental to the operation of the Center or which require special handling or
disposal procedures.
b) Other. Infectious, pathological and biological waste, radioactive materials, oil
sludges, hazardous refuse of any kind, or other substances which are now or are
hereafter considered harmful, inflammable, hazardous, or toxic, or which would
pose a threat to health or safety, or which may cause damage to or adversely
affect the operation of the Center.
c) Tires on rims.
d) Stumps, logs, and branches greater than three inches in diameter or three feet in
length.
7. ENFORCEMENT
Use of Recycling and Transfer Facility
It is the intention of the Department to educate residents as to the value of recycling and
the appropriate procedures for doing so. If, however, a resident, tenant or Hooksett
Commercial Business violates any provision of this section it may result in the issuance
of notices, warnings and possible loss of privileges at the facility.
SECTION VI
RECYCLING
The policy of the Center is to promote and encourage recycling within the Town. The recycling
program is intended to facilitate the reuse of resources, reduce operating costs through
avoidance of tipping fee rates, and provide additional income to the Town (when applicable).
Residents, who use the facility, will be required to recycle cardboard. Cardboard is easily
accepted in an area clearly marked. The recycling of other materials is strongly encouraged.
SECTION VII
PERMIT PROCEDURES
In General, Permits may be obtained during normal business hours at the Center, 210 West
River Road, Hooksett, New Hampshire. All permits shall be nontransferable. Each vehicle
intended for transport of solid waste to the Center must be permitted. Permits must be

Page 18 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

prominently displayed on the window of the passenger side of the vehicle, which is bearing solid
waste to be disposed of at the Center.
1. Residential.
i.

Any person applying for a permit must present a vehicle registration
showing residence in the Town.

ii.

Permits are issued free of charge.

2. Commercial.
i.

Any commercial entity must call the office for permission to enter the
premises and has proper identification of legal Hooksett address.

ii.

Permits will not be issued.

iii.

Hooksett commercial entities may use the facility only to bring in solid
waste that is generated in Hooksett.

3. Revocation of Permit:
The Crew Chief may revoke the permit of any holder when a written finding is made that
the holder of the permit or the holder's agent has violated any provisions of these
regulations or any regulations promulgated hereunder. The Crew Chief will provide
written notice of the revocation to the holder of the permit by certified mail. Any person
with such notice of revocation may request a hearing before the Town Administrator
within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of such notice. The Town Administrator will affirm,
reverse, or modify the action of the Crew Chief. The revocation of the permit will be
stayed during the pendency of the appeal.
SECTION VIII
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person or commercial entity violating any provision of this ordinance or any regulation
adopted pursuant to this Ordinance shall:
1. Be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $3, 000 for each act constituting a violation of
this Ordinance or the regulations adopted pursuant hereto;
2. Be subject to revocation of permission to use the Center;
3. Be liable for all costs incurred by the Town resulting from the violation and enforcement
of this Ordinance, including attorney's fees; and,
4. Be liable for all costs of removal of solid waste improperly disposed of and all costs
incurred by the Town resulting from the improper disposal of waste at the Center.
SECTION IX
FEES

Page 19 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

The following disposal fees (user fees) are designed to defray some of the expense incurred by
the Town in administering and operating the Center. The Town reserves the right to update
these fees. Current Disposal Fees can be obtained by calling the office at 603-669-5198 or
checking the website at www.hooksett.org, Recycling and Transfer Division page.
The following charges and restrictions are in effect as of 3/25/2020.

For Hooksett Residents
No mixed loads. Must be placed in proper location.
Construction/demolition debris - $100.00 per ton/$.05 per pound; $2.00 minimum load
(wood, insulation, bathroom fixtures, cabinets, siding, flooring, roofing , etc.) No asbestos or
hazardous material will be accepted.
Vinyl Siding / plastic pipe must be kept separate and under 4’ in length.
Asphalt Shingles must be kept separate and clean no wood, trash or metal.
Sheetrock must be kept separate.
Large plastic and fiberglass items must be cut up to be less than 4’ x 4’.
Concrete – Bricks – Asphalt – etc. $10.00 per pickup load.
Furniture - $100.00 per ton ($.05 per pound)
Twin/full mattresses $3.00
Recliner $5.00
Stuffed chair $4.00
Office chair
$2.00
King mattresses
Sleep sofa $7.00
$5.00
Sofa $6.00

Queen mattresses $4.00
Loveseat $5.00
Sofa W/ recliners $5.00
per recliner

Carpet - $100.00 per ton $.05 per pound. (Must be cut into 3-4’ square sections)
Metal - Units with FREON (refrigerators, freezers, A/C’s, dehumidifiers)
$11.00 per unit. DOORS MUST BE REMOVED
White goods - washers, dryers, dishwashers, stoves, hot water heaters, $5.00 per unit. No
charge other metal (oil, gas and antifreeze must be removed)
Electronics – Please refer to website or Center for current rate per pound.
Small computer drive $2.00, personal printer $2.00, 13”computer monitor $5.00, laptop $2.00,
17”computer monitor $7.00, 19”TV $9.00, 13”TV $4.00, (Electronics to include: copy machines,
fax machines.) All flat monitors less than 20” $4.00. For TVs and monitors over 19” fee based
per pound. Call facility for other electronic fees.
Propane Tanks - 20lb., $4.00 each; 30lb, $6.00; 100lb., $20.00; 1 lb., no charge
Recycling - No charge.

Page 20 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

Tires - No charge for the first four tires per year per Hooksett registered vehicle. Thereafter, a
charge of $2.00 for each tire. Must be off rims.
Yard Waste - No charge for leaves and grass.
No land clearing, no tree cutting. See attendant for list of place to go with larger loads, stumps,
logs. INVASIVE PLANTS must be kept separate. SEE ATTENDANT. No stumps will be
accepted
Any resident bringing material from outside Hooksett will have their permit revoked.
For Commercial Users
Construction/demolition debris - $100.00 per ton/$.05 per pound; $2.00 minimum load.
(wood, insulation, bathroom fixtures, cabinets, siding, flooring, roofing, etc.) No asbestos or
hazardous material will be accepted.
Vinyl siding / plastic pipe must be kept separate and under 4’ in length.
Asphalt Shingles must be kept separate and clean no wood, trash or metal.
Sheetrock must be kept separate.
Large plastic and fiberglass items must be cut up to be less than 4’ x 4’.
Solid Waste/trash - $100 per ton
Furniture - $100.00 per ton $.05 per pound. All solid wood furniture $100.00 per ton.
Carpet - $100.00 per ton $.05 per pound. Must be cut into 3-4’ square sections.
Metal - Units with FREON (refrigerators, freezers, A/C’s, dehumidifiers)
20.00 per unit. DOORS MUST BE REMOVED
White goods - washers, dryers, dishwashers, stoves, hot water heaters, $5.00 per unit (oil, gas
and antifreeze must be removed)
Electronics - Please refer to website or Center for current rate per pound.
Florescent tubes - $.25 per foot, compact lights $1 Each, Ballast $2 each
Propane Tanks - 20lb, $4.00 each; 30lb, $6.00; 100lb, $20.00; 1 lb, no charge
Recycling - Cardboard No Charge; Paper/glass, $45 per ton.
Tires - Not accepted from commercial
Yard Waste - $15 per load (Based on 1 ton truck).
Hazardous materials are not accepted from commercial accounts.

Page 21 of 154

Agenda Item #7.2.

No stumps will be accepted
Any businesses bringing materials from outside Hooksett will have their dumping privileges
revoked.
Adopted:
Amended:
Amended:
Amended:

6/11/1997
3/10/2010
10/8/2014
Town Council Meeting Date

_____________________________
James Sullivan
Town Council Chair

_____________________________
Todd Rainier
Town Clerk

Page 22 of 154

Agenda Item #7.3.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
Public hearing for the Town Council to accept the $12,944.82 from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act from the US Health
and Human Services to the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Fire Rescue
Department's Ambulance Revenue Line under RSA 31:95-b III (a).
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Fire and Rescue
Staff Contact: Joseph Stalker, Captain
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is delivering $30 billion in relief funding to providers in support of
the national response to COVID-19 as part of the distribution of the $100 billion provider relief fund provided for in the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act recently passed by Congress and signed by President
Trump. The funding will be used to support healthcare-related expenses or lost revenue attributable to coronavirus and to
ensure uninsured Americans can get the testing and treatment they need without receiving a surprise bill from a provider.

FINANCIAL IMPACT:
$12,944.82 deposited into the Ambulance Revenue account.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
N/A
RECOMMENDATION:
Open public hearing, listen to public input, close public hearing, go to new business section of this
agenda and discuss this item same night and vote.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
N/A
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur.
ATTACHMENTS:
CARES-Public Hearing

Page 23 of 154

Agenda Item #7.3.

Town of Hooksett
Public Hearing Notice
The Hooksett Town Council will be holding a public hearing on Wednesday, May 13th @ 6:00pm at the
Hooksett Town Hall chambers, 35 Main Street, Hooksett, NH. The purpose of the public hearing is to
accept the $12,944.82 in relief funding from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act from the US Health and Human Services to the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Fire Rescue
Department's Ambulance Revenue Line under RSA 31:95-b III (a). For documentation or questions,
contact the Hooksett Fire Rescue Department at 603-623-7272.
Pursuant to the Governor’s Emergency Order, the Town will be conducting meetings remotely until
further notice. The Public will be able to telephonic access. The specific instructions for accessing this
meeting (and any changes to Governor’s Emergency Orders) are posted on the Town website,
http://www.hooksett.org.

Page 24 of 154

Agenda Item #8.3.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
To:
Title:
Meeting:
Department:
Staff Contact:

Tonw Council
Lion's Club Citizens of the Year - John Pieroni
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Administration
Nick Germain, Project Coordinator

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
The Lion's Club has selected John Pieroni as it's 2020 Citizen of the Year.
Town Council traditionally appoints someone to go to the Club's yearly dinner and present the winner
with an award certificate.
FINANCIAL IMPACT:
n/a
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
n/a
RECOMMENDATION:
Look for a volunteer or volunteers to go and present the award.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
"I motion Town Council Appoints Councilor ________ to present the Citizen of the Year
Proclamation as
read to John Pieroni at said event."

TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur and Congratulations to Mr. Pieroni.

Page 25 of 154

Page 26 of 154

Agenda Item #9.1.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
Cindy Robertson, Chair of the Conservation Commission, Approval of Sole Source
Agreement with the Student Conservation Association (SCA)
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Community Development
Staff Contact: Leann Fuller, Community Development Clerk
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
The Student Conservation Association, Inc. (SCA) was contacted by the Hooksett Conservation
Commission to provide a proposal to complete a trail loop on the Pinnacle. Last year, the SCA
completed a trail loop in the Clay Pond Conservation Area and the Conservation Commission was
very pleased with their work. Five to seven members of the SCA Conservation Corps Crew will work
for an 11-day "hitch". The project is planned for July 14 - July 24.
One advantage of having students devoted to conservation complete this task is that there is a
minimal amount of brush and tree disturbance. Using mostly hand tools, the trail can be routed
around large trees, dense vegetation and any other obstacles.
FINANCIAL IMPACT:
Per the SCA contract, the amount for this work is $10,500.
RECOMMENDATION:
Listen to Cindy Robertson speak about the Conservation Commission's past experience with the
Student Conservation Association, Inc. and the hard work they do to assist the Conservation
Commission in their goal to create an additional trail on the Pinnacle.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
See New Business item.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur. Conservation has a capital reserve fund to pay for this work by this organization.
ATTACHMENTS:
Map for Future Trail
2020 SCA Contract

Page 27 of 154

Agenda Item #9.1.

Page 28 of 154

Agenda Item #9.1.

1

AGMT Hooksett CC

AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE STUDENT CONSERVATION ASSOCIATION, INC.
AND
THE HOOSETT CONSERVATION COMMISSION
This Agreement is made and entered into by and between The Student Conservation Association,
Inc., a nonprofit New York corporation, with its principal place of business at 4601 North
Fairfax Drive, Suite 900 Arlington, VA 22203 (“SCA”), and the Hooksett Conservation
Commission with its principal place of business at 35 Main Street, Hooksett, NH 03106.

1. BACKGROUND
The SCA is a nonprofit organization which fosters life-long stewardship of the
environment by offering opportunities for education, leadership and personal
development to its participants while providing a high quality public service in natural
resource management and conservation. SCA recruits, trains and places qualified young
adults to serve in environmental conservation projects as members of the SCA
conservation corps program. The SCA’s residential New Hampshire program provides
conservation crew services statewide to partner Agencies.
The Hooksett Conservation Commission is a public commission with a mission
to work with town, state, federal and private agencies and individuals on wetland and
conservation issues. They review and update Town ordinances and resource information
concerning wetlands, prime wetlands, natural resources inventory and other conservation
concerns, and other activities as determined by the Commission. Lastly, the commission
plans for and preserves community green spaces. The commission has authority to enter into
this agreement to accomplish the purposes of its mission. Throughout this agreement the
commission will be referred to as “the Project Partner.”
2. PARTY RESPONSIBILITIES
A. It is mutually agreed by the parties that SCA and Project Partner shall cooperate in
the placement of one 5-7 member SCA Conservation Corps crew for an 11-day term of
service during the 2020 field season (07/14/2020 or whichever later date the crew begins
service through 10/09/2020 or whichever later date the crew completes service) to
perform trail service and other conservation service activities in New Hampshire as
further described in this agreement.
2.1

SCA agrees (“Project Services”):
a. To provide one well-trained, team of 5-7 corps members for an 11-day hitch
period, July 14 – July 24, during the 2020 field season;

Page 29 of 154

Agenda Item #9.1.

2

AGMT Hooksett CC

b. To manage the crew and to implement the project activities as described in
this section 2;
c. To develop a new trail at Pinnacle Park as identified as "Future Trail" on the
map
located
at https://www.nhmountainhiking.com/hike/pinnacle/mapbig.html and installation of posts and signage provided by HCC. It is
anticipated that 4x4 posts with a small map will be located at trail junctions.
The trail, as pictured on the trail map, will be built according to sustainable
trail design. Trail structures will be added, where applicable, to provide
drainage or stability while following sustainable practices requiring minimal
routine maintenance. Trailblazing (in appropriate color) will be included.
Any Potential trail closures will be determined by the HCC.
d. To develop the new trail at Pinnacle Park. The trail, as pictured on the trail
map, will be built according to sustainable trail design. Trail structures will
be added, where applicable, to provide drainage or stability while following
sustainable practices requiring minimal routine maintenance.
e. To provide food, tools, vehicles, and equipment necessary to complete the
projects;
f. To provide staff support: staff members are responsible for all supervision of
the corps members as needed;
f. To provide an AmeriCorps Educational Award to qualifying SCA members,
but only if and when made available by the Corporation for National and
Community Service; The Corporation for National and Community
Service has prohibited the following activities for AmeriCorps members
while they are accumulating service or training hours, or otherwise
performing activities associated with the program:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Attempting to influence legislation.
Organizing or engaging in protests, petitions, boycotts, or strikes.
Assisting, promoting or deterring union organizing.
Impairing existing contracts for services of collective bargaining agreements.
Engaging in partisan political activities or other activities designed to influence the
outcome of an election to any public office.
6. Participating in, or endorsing, events or activities that are likely to include advocacy
for or against political parties, political platforms, political candidates, proposed
legislation, or elected officials.
7. Engaging in religious instruction, conducting worship services, providing instruction
as part of a program that includes mandatory religious instruction or worship,
constructing or operating facilities devoted to religious instruction or worship,

Page 30 of 154

Agenda Item #9.1.

3

AGMT Hooksett CC

maintaining facilities primarily or inherently devoted to religious instruction or
worship, or engaging in any form of religious proselytization;
8. Providing a direct benefit for
a. A business organized for profit;
b. A labor union;
c. A partisan political organization;
d. A nonprofit organization that fails to comply with the restrictions contained
in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 except that nothing
in this section shall be construed to prevent participants from engaging in
advocacy activities undertaken at their own initiative; and
e. An organization engaged in the religious activities described in paragraph (g)
of this section, unless Corporation assistance is not used to support those
religious activities;
9. Voter registration drives held by AmeriCorps members.
10. Providing abortion services or referrals for receipt of such services.
11. Writing grants or raising funds for an organization's general operating expenses or
endowment. The only kind of fundraising that members are allowed to do is
fundraising directly in support of their particular project. Examples of allowable
activities: Seeking donations (in the form of in-kind materials or dollars) for a
specific project they are carrying out as an AmeriCorps member; Writing a grant to a
foundation for funds for a specific project they’re carrying out, such as a community
clean-up. Allowable fundraising activities must add up to no more than 10% of the
member’s total hours; and
12. Other activities that the Corporation determines will be prohibited.
g. To provide Project Partner with a summary report of services performed.

C. The Project Partner agrees:
a. To provide site and project work specifications, technical assistance as
required, and to collaborate with the SCA staff as mutually agreed to carry
out Project work;
b. To pay SCA a project fee of $10,500 (Ten Thousand five Hundred Dollars)
for Project Services to be paid in accordance to below 3.1.e; and any
additional amounts that may be required by section 5 of this Agreement.
c. To purchase and provide all necessary building materials and supplies for the
projects;
d. To provide safe and meaningful stewardship projects appropriate for SCA
members consistent with members’ training;

Page 31 of 154

Agenda Item #9.1.

4

AGMT Hooksett CC

e. To permit SCA members to wear an approved SCA uniform during their term
of service;
f. If required by federal, state, municipal or local subdivision law or
regulations, to arrange for all permits, licenses, and approvals and other
administrative or governmental clearances necessary with regard to the
administration of the project;
g. To provide safe and adequate housing or tent space for the members to stay
in while working on the projects;
h. To provide a written evaluation of the members’ performance within fifteen
calendar days of termination of the Agreement.
3. PROGRAM CONDITIONS
3.1 The parties mutually agree:
a. SCA members shall not be assigned law enforcement or firefighting duties; and
shall not be permitted to handle or discharge any firearms or explosives unless
provided explicit permission by SCA’s National Program Manager - Residential.
b. SCA agrees to accept any extra tools, materials, equipment and facilities
furnished by the Project Partner on a loan basis only, and such items shall, where
applicable, be returned in the same condition received except for normal wear
and tear in project use.
c.

SCA members over eighteen (18) years of age may be allowed to drive a
vehicle that is owned, rented, leased or loaned by or to the Project Partner only
when (i) the vehicle is used with written permission of the Project Partner site
supervisor and only for official use; (ii) the driver is properly licensed and
qualified to operate the vehicle; (iii) the Project Partner maintains, and the
driver is made aware of the requirements of, a safe driver policy; (iv) both the
driver and the vehicle will be covered by an insurance policy maintained by the
Project Partner for the use of such vehicle and (v) subject to any additional
Project Partner policies and regulations.

d.

The Project Partner shall have the right to require the removal of any SCA
member on the basis of unacceptable performance and/or conduct problems that
could not be resolved with the help of SCA. SCA shall have the right to
withdraw any SCA member if the Project Partner fails to provide sufficient and
appropriate project assignments, safe conditions including without limitation free
from discrimination and harassment, appropriate housing, training, or project

Page 32 of 154

Agenda Item #9.1.

5

AGMT Hooksett CC

oversight. Provided there is no imminent threat to safety or health, the relevant
party shall, prior to taking such corrective action, take the following steps:
document the problem in writing, provide prior notice to the other party, and
provide the other party with an opportunity to take corrective action.
e.

g.

SCA may present two invoices for costs and obligations undertaken for the
Project, as follows: (1) An initial invoice requesting 50% of the estimated Project
cost will be submitted to the Project Partner prior to the start of the Project, and
(2) the remaining costs shall be invoiced upon completion of the Project. The
Project Partner agrees to make payment to SCA within 30 days of the date of
such invoices. In the event any itemized invoice remains unpaid for more than
30 days, the Project Partner agrees to pay SCA an interest charge on the
outstanding balance at the rate of 1% a month from the date the invoice was
rendered. All invoices should be emailed to: Leann Fuller - LFuller@hooksett.org.
The Project Partner shall not hire any SCA member as an employee of the
Project Partner prior to, or during, the SCA member’s service as a corps member.

4. INSURANCE
Project Partner shall add SCA as an additional insured to its general liability policy
and provide SCA with such certificate of insurance. In addition, SCA shall maintain
its current general liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for
bodily injury and property damage, subject to the usual and customary policy
conditions (including standard exclusion on vehicles licensed for highway use and on
property in the care, custody and control of the policyholder). For the purposes of
workers compensation claims, responsibility and coverage for all SCA staff and crew
members is borne by the SCA.
5. TERM and TERMINATION.
5.1 This Agreement shall become effective upon the date it is signed by both parties
and shall remain in effect during the period of performance specified for this project.
Either party may cancel this Agreement immediately upon written notice (including
email) as a result of (i) material breach by the other party, or (ii) for COVID-19
reasons. In the event of a material breach, Project Partner shall pay SCA for all work
performed through the notice date. In the event of termination due to COVID-19
reasons, Project Partner shall pay SCA for all work performed through notice period
and shall reimburse SCA for wind-down of the program, including but not limited to
travel, housing and other costs associated with safely securing program participants.
5.2 Either party may cancel the Agreement without cause with thirty (30) days’
notice. In the event either party cancels without cause, SCA shall wind down work
upon notice and Project Partner shall pay SCA for all work performed through the

Page 33 of 154

Agenda Item #9.1.

6

AGMT Hooksett CC

notice period as well as a service fee of 20 percent (20%) of the remaining balance, as
Project Partner acknowledgment of SCA’s upfront investment in standing up the
program that it would have otherwise recovered throughout the term of the
Agreement.

6. PROJECT COORDINATORS
The Project Coordinators for this Agreement are:
A. For the Project Partner:
Programmatically: Cindy Robertson
Chair
Hooksett Conservation Commission
cindyrob79@gmail.com
Administratively:

Leann Fuller
Administrative Assistant
Town of Hooksett

(603) 485-8471
LFuller@hooksett.org

B. For the SCA
Programmatically: Davis Brush
Program Manager,
SCA NH Corps
75 South Main St. Unit 7 PMB 116
Concord NH 03301,
P: 603-485-2191
dbrush@thesca.org
Zach Colatch
Conservation Coordinator
SCA NH Corps
P: 603.485.2191
zcolatch@thesca.org

Administratively: Rebecca Donovan
Agreements Administrator
Student Conservation Association
689 River Road

Page 34 of 154

Agenda Item #9.1.

7

AGMT Hooksett CC

Charlestown, NH 03603
P: 603.504.3239, ext. 1149
C: 413.695.6155
rdonovan@thesca.org

7. ENTIRE AGREEMENT.
This Agreement contains the entire agreement of the parties and may only be amended
by written agreement, signed by both Parties.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be
executed by their duly authorized officers on the dates set forth below.
THE STUDENT CONSERVATION PROJECT PARTNER
ASSOCIATION, INC.

By:
Name:
Title:
Date:

By:
Name: Cindy Robertson
Title: Chair, Hooksett Conservation Commission
Date:

Page 35 of 154

Page 36 of 154

Agenda Item #10.1.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
Motion to accept a donation in the amount of $100.00 from Jameson Saykaly and
Tracy Saykaly, to the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Police Department per
RSA 31:95-b, III (b) and return said amount to the Police Departments, 2019/2020
FY budget and applied to the donation line.
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Police Department
Staff Contact: Jake Robie, Captain
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
On March 19, 2020, Jameson Saykaly and Tracy Saykaly delivered a check and a handwritten note to the Town
Clerks office. The check was written out to the Hooksett Police Department, in the amount of $100.00. The
donation is to be used for the purchase of cleaning/PPE supplies.

FINANCIAL IMPACT:
None
SUGGESTED MOTION:
Motion to accept a donation in the amount of $100.00 from Jameson Saykaly and Tracy Saykaly, to
the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Police Department per RSA 31:95-b, III (b) and return said
amount to the Police Departments, 2019/2020 FY budget and applied to the donation line.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur
ATTACHMENTS:
20200415072541216

Page 37 of 154

Agenda Item #10.1.

Page 38 of 154

Agenda Item #10.2.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
Motion to accept a donation in the amount of $200.00 from Jameson Saykaly and
Tracy Saykaly, to the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Fire- Rescue Department
per RSA 31:95-b, III (b) and return said amount to the Fire-Rescue Department,
2019/2020 FY budget and apply $100.00 to the Ambulance Fund Donation and
$100.00 to the Fire donation line.
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Fire and Rescue
Staff Contact: Regina Howard, Administrative Assistant
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
On March 19, 2020, prior to the Town Offices being closed to the public, Jameson Saykaly and Tracy Saykaly
delivered a check and a handwritten note to the Town Clerk's office. They had wanted to donate hand
sanitizer to donate to the Department, but were unable to find any so they chose to donate. The check was
written out to the Hooksett Fire Department, in the amount of $200.00. The donation is to be divided as
follows: $100.00 for the ambulance service and $100 for general fire response, for needed supplies.
FINANCIAL IMPACT:
None
SUGGESTED MOTION:
Motion to accept a donation in the amount of $200.00 from Jameson Saykaly and Tracy Saykaly, to
the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Fire- Rescue Department per RSA 31:95-b, III (b) and return
said amount to the Fire-Rescue Department, 2019/2020 FY budget and apply $100.00 to the
Ambulance Fund Donation and $100.00 to the Fire donation line.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur
ATTACHMENTS:
Saykaly Note

Page 39 of 154

a

?// u- tlh - tr tt

a

o

Agenda Item #10.2.

Page 40 of 154

a

?// u- tlh - tr tt

a

o

Agenda Item #10.2.

Page 41 of 154

Page 42 of 154

Agenda Item #10.3.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
Town Council to accept the UV Disinfecting Lights, valued at $2,050.00, through a
grant from the Gary Sinise Foundation for the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett
Fire Rescue Department's Ambulances under RSA 31:95-e, II.
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Fire and Rescue
Staff Contact: Joseph Stalker, Captain
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
Thorough cleaning and disinfecting of the ambulances is a very important task, especially given the
COVID-19 pandemic that has affected the world. Within our department, this process is done after
every emergency medical call, every morning at the beginning of shift and a more thorough cleaning
done every other week. As thorough as a job we do, national data shows that approximately 50% of
surface areas within patient care areas are cleaned manually with chemicals. The department has
sought the use of a ultra-violet (UV) light technology that is able to completely disinfect all areas of
the patient compartment. Last month, we applied for a grant, valued at $2,050.00 (including shipping)
from the Gary Sinise Foundation to purchase these devices for our department; see attachments. We
were subsequently awarded this grant to purchase the following: two (2) of the Razor-UV handheld
disinfecting lights and two (2) of the Turbo-UV disinfecting lights. This will give us a standard light and
a portable light for each station.
FINANCIAL IMPACT:
None
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
None
RECOMMENDATION:
Accept the UV Disinfecting Lights purchased through a grant from the Gary Sinise Foundation for the
Fire Rescue Department.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
Town Council to accept the UV Disinfecting Lights through a grant from the Gary Sinise Foundation
for the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Fire Rescue Department's Ambulances under RSA 31:95-e,
II.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur

Page 43 of 154

Page 44 of 154

Agenda Item #10.4.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
Release Landscape Surety of $10,000 for #88/#90 West River Road (Site of
Dunkin Donuts and Subway)
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Community Development
Staff Contact: Bruce Thomas, Town Engineer
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
The work on the referenced site was completed two years ago. The landscaping looks fine, therefore the
current Landscape surety of $10,000 may be released to the developer Westriv Realty, LLC.
FINANCIAL IMPACT:
None.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
None.
RECOMMENDATION:
Release the current Landscape surety for #88/#90 West River Road of $10,000 to the developer Westriv
Realty, LLC.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
To release the current Landscape surety for #88/#90 West River Road of $10,000 to the developer
Westriv Realty, LLC.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur
ATTACHMENTS:
Memo to release bond - #88 & #90 West River Road

Page 45 of 154

Agenda Item #10.4.

Town of Hooksett

Community

Development

Memo
F mm:

Bruce A. Thomas, P.E., Tuwn Engineer

W

(Tc:

Date:

April 30, 2020

Re:

#88 and #90 West River Road (Site of Dunkin Donuts and Subway)

Please be advised that the wurk on the referenced site was completed two years ago. The
landscaping looks ?ne, therefore I recommend that the current Landscape surety of
$10,000 be released to the developer Westriv Realty, LLC.

Page 46 of 154

Agenda Item #13.1.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
To:
Title:
Meeting:
Department:
Staff Contact:

Town Council
May Nominations and Appointments
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Administration
Nick Germain, Project Coordinator

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
On April 22nd, Council nominated Cassandra Brown to the Bicentennial Committee to a term expiring
June 30th 2023
Town Council recently endorsed the creation of a committee to help plan and organize Bicentennial
celebrations in the town. To limit public exposure to the present health crisis, an initial organizing
meeting in March was cancelled and will take place at a future date. Staff are still accepting
applications to join the committee, however, and currently there is one application for Town Council to
consider.
Cassandra Brown is an Attorney and lifelong resident of NH. She previously lived on the Hooksett line
in Manchester, but moved to Hooksett proper in 2019. Her intention for joining the Committee is to get
more involved with her community and provide it with something truly enjoyable.
I would like to take this opportunity to remind Council members that there are a number of openings
on appointed town boards or committees. It would be a great help to the town if members could
actively promote and recruit volunteers to participate on these entities. If you have any questions
about particular boards or committees that would help in this effort, you should feel free to ask. Staff
already advertise through natural, existing channels regularly, but it is evident this may not be
enough.
Attached to this staff report is also the present list of openings as understood by the Administration
Department.
FINANCIAL IMPACT:
n/a
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
n/a
RECOMMENDATION:
n/a

Page 47 of 154

Agenda Item #13.1.

SUGGESTED MOTION:
"I motion to appoint Cassandra Brown to a term on the Bicentennial Committee expiring June 30th,
2023." Second required.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur and appreciate Ms.Cassandra Brown stepping up to volunteer for the Bicentennial Committee
ATTACHMENTS:
May 2020 Nominations and Appointments
Available Appointed Town Positions
committee app

Page 48 of 154

Agenda Item #13.1.

April 2020 Nominations
Cassandra Brown – Bicentennial Committee – Term expiring June 30th 2023

May Appointments
Cassandra Brown – Bicentennial Committee – Term expiring June 30th 2023

Page 49 of 154

Agenda Item #13.1.
Available Appointed Town Positions

https://www.hooksett.org/print/88973

Published on Hooksett NH (https://www.hooksett.org)
Home > Available Appointed Town Positions

Entity

Heritage Commission

Assigned

Available

Councilor

Positions

James
Sullivan

Expiration

Contact Town
Staff

(x2) Commissioner 6/30/2021

Administration

(x2) Alternate

6/30/2021

Administration

Bicentennial Committee

James
Sullivan

(TBD) Member

6/30/2023

Administration

Town Hall Preservation
Committee

James
Sullivan

(x4) Committee
Member

6/30/2021

Administration

Planning Board

Robert
Duhaime

(2)Alternate
Member

6/30/2022

Community
Development

Parks and Recreation
Adviosry Board

Alex Walczyk

1 Member

6/30/2022

Public Works

Zoning Board of
Adjustment

James
Levesque

(1) Alternate

6/30/2021

Community
Development
Last updated
4/7/2020

1 of 2

4/7/2020, 1:27 PM

Page 50 of 154

Agenda Item #13.1.

Town

Hooksett

APPLICATION FOR APPOINTED TOWN BOARD POSITION
Date Submitted:

3 G»

Cassandra A. Brown

603-533-0018
Address: 18A Merrimack St., Hooksett, NH 03106
Ema“ Addmss: cabrown.bbrlaw@gmai|.com
Name:

Phone:

Signature:

?***************************************************************************************************

Return completed

form to: Town of Hooksett, 35 Main Street, Hooksett NH 03106,

Attn: Administration Department or email to NGermain

hooksett.or

****************************************************************************************************

I am willing to serve on the following Town Boards/Committees/Commissions. I understand if
appointed, I am required to attend the regular meetings.
BOARDS COMMISSIONS & COMMITTEES

Role Preference
Alternate, Regular, or None?

Page 51 of 154

Agenda Item #13.1.

Page 52 of 154

Agenda Item #15.1.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
Accept an unanticipated revenue in the amount of $58,178.00 ($30,178.00 +
$28,000.00) from Lamontagne Builders (Stinson Hills, LLC), (not in lieu of Impact
Fees) per RSA 31:95-b, III (a).
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Public Works
Staff Contact: Earl Labonte, Director of Public Works
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
Earlier, the Town Council held a Public Hearing to accept an unanticipated revenue in the amount of
$58,178 from LaMontagne Builders. When Beaver Brook Development (now Brookview) was
approved by the Planning Board, there were two (2) stipulations. The first stipulation was for the
developer to assist with the payment of a lease for a street sweeper in the amount of $30,178.00. At
the time Hooksett was in the process of leasing a street sweeper. No payment was received. That
sweeper lease had since been bought out and this year replaced by the combination Basin
Cleaner/Sweeper unit. The second stipulation was for the developer to assist with recreation
improvements in the amount of $28,000.00. There were no requirements as to what improvements
were to be. It is recommended to use $28,000.00 to update the bathroom facilities at Donati Field to
be ADA compliant.
FINANCIAL IMPACT:
An unanticipated revenue in the amount of $58,178.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
None.
RECOMMENDATION:
Remove from table and accept the donation of $58,178.00, $30,178.00 of which, to be used to offset
the purchase cost of the combination Basin Cleaner/Sweeper unit delivered earlier this year and
$28,000.00 to be used to update the bathroom facilities at Donati Field to be ADA compliant per RSA
31:95-b, III (a).
SUGGESTED MOTION:
Motion to remove from table and motion to accept the donation of $58,178.00, $30,178.00 of which,
to be used to offset the purchase cost of the combination Basin Cleaner/Sweeper unit delivered
earlier this year and $28,000.00 to be used to update the bathroom facilities at Donati Field to be
ADA compliant per RSA 31:95-b, III (a).
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:

Page 53 of 154

Agenda Item #15.1.

Concur. Staff has asked Planning Board Chair, Dick Marshal to attend the meeting to share his
thoughts on this matter. I've also asked legal counsel to attend as well to share his perspective on
legal aspect of these conditions. My thoughts are that the planning board and the developer at time,
agreed to these conditions. These conditions are set by the planning board, not the DPW Director.
Despite the unfortunate matter that took place 12-13 years ago, these conditions were still set by the
planning board. The time to appeal these conditions to Superior Court should have taken place 12
years ago. Mr. Lamontagne understanding of these conditions should have been address by the
previous owner of the development, and if he did not verify the information shared with him by the
previous developer, that is no fault of the town of Hooksett.
ATTACHMENTS:
Donation from Lamontagne Bldrs
Public Hearing Notice for Donation

Page 54 of 154

Agenda Item #15.1.

Memo
,,

To:

NicholasWilliams,Town Planner

From:

Biuee A. Thomas,P.E., Town Engineer

Cc:

Leanne Fuller, AdministrativeAssistanet

Date:

November 27, 2019.

Re:

BrcokviewSubdivision Checks for Street Sweeper and RecreationFees

K

—

1

Attached are two checksthat RobertLamontagneof Lamontagnc Buildersdelivered for the
referencedproject as requiredon page 6 of the Brookview Development plans (see attached).

Page 55 of 154

Agenda Item #15.1.

Town of Hooksett
Cash Receipts
Cash

—

_

Daté ,

-

Amounts

Check
‘

Amquntsi

30,178,00
315

17/27/2019

$ 28,000.00

_

I

CK#

_

Description

_

V
‘

.

‘

_

_

I

Accou?ts

O01,000_2220—029,0o
1412 _D_onation
Lamontagne Bldrs-Street Sweeper
1413 Donation
001,000.22Z0-029.000
Lamontagne Bidrs-Rec Dept

\

4

i

1

-——

Totals
checks

$
Cash

-

Checks
Tota|Deposit

$58,178.00
$
$ 58.17800
$5B178.00
—

‘

___j__
_RemiItedBy: Evelyn Horn

Remitted‘I'Ei{»)J0]9
‘

I

:0

T

Date:

Hi?/711:;
u 1

‘

l
‘

‘

5

J

i

3
I

Page 56 of 154

Agenda Item #15.1.

Stinson Hills LLC

I-I000 0 2

.

n?e.~1ww$m'

,

11-26—19

BVRECCONT

0000000:

.,

Recreanon

Dpt

Town

..mM§W

,..

Contrib

of

Hooksett

_

28000.00

28000.00

§

2

$53‘ 11»27—19

??jfjék

1413

28000.00

TOTAL>

1

29000.00

.00

1

E

PLEASE DETACH AND RETAINFORYOUR RECORDS
_
“"“"“"i!i§E%?5€3§2is52f‘.§P¢?zY,Ll:!l£€Y§i!Iu'Z1l§TJ1im‘x‘

»-’'7“''*““

1
‘

immpm;mmmuEmmm?nmmrmmE£ma Hww
TD E
141

k
5:11
RiverRd.

‘

§:;"§g:m“Fg:L:,LR5,‘:‘

54-71114 BE

1413

.

Bedlord.NH 03110

Bedmd NH03110
503 558'7933

1
DATE 11/27/2019

thousand dollars and no cents
Pay:“‘"“""""*"""*“““"““‘*"““‘“1\Nenty-eight

5 --*'23,ooo_oo

‘

(

5

1
TD
THE
ORDER

Town of Hooksett
35 Main Street
Huoksetk, NH 03106-1631

OF

mé$%£%%@§£%Q$$?g
u-00000

.

LI. 131- 1:01. H.000?

1.-: 0 at. 101.0 371.11-

Page 57 of 154

Agenda Item #15.1.

StinsqrgHills LLC

W92”3: :rM.>liiEhi.o

11—25—19

CHECK

We

BVSWEEPER

11«2"/-19

E§$.a'1V$’E1§1*“

Roadway

CHECK
NUMBER

Maint Fee/Swee

1412

30179.00

3o17a.co

TOTAL>

.00

30173.00

PLEASE DETACH AND RErAINFCIRmun RECORDS

'Ei‘1‘A.-‘IKE
mm:

rat»-w:"“‘wIwm §m

?i\L<l?£i'j:Y;.&'null\.|<.

"'9 93"“
1“ 50"“ “W RdWfont "WHO

Stinson Hills LLC
317 south River Rd.
Bedford NHowe
603 668-7933

544/114 we

1412

DATE 11/27/2019

Pay:'“"*“"*"Th1‘r1ythousand one hundred seven(y—eigh!dollars and no cents

To
THE
ORDER

?
;w;mm,.,»,3,«?a,,~wa...n.w.mwm..mm«.

$ “‘*‘30,17S.00

1‘

Town af Hooksett
35 MainStreet
Hookselt.NH 03106-1631

OF

Jen/t».»Ju/nMa«,,uw..«;¢
, }2.;J11,,/rr/Mas!» Funls

"

£%7s"§'.%33."!éE.‘~‘_-‘3EEt‘.?W3;?QH§.$:'¥’.ai.e

||'UUUDD

4261'

re;

we

135.

Ll: InEnl I10 L I-1:000’? LI: ‘ill.

L??ai?axm?fm?m??s?lwaxw?ws

I-U|«?3'?l«I|'

Page 58 of 154

Agenda Item #15.1.

In

I

,

gn?v

‘

.

/

smmmr.

,

I

-

—

,

MAP 49 LB‘! 50

up mm
mus!
IMOINV Bmsxa?i, WIUSTEE

/

)9

2.“;

K

an man
rgmo<s_m'.

~

?Y

WWI

rm um

ruxxstn,

/‘X

/

/

/

9 LOT 51

m mums
mm swam

,0 mu

zoom‘

mmy-w

a LOT 4e
gm
mm

/

/

I

W.nu mm
.

,.,,,,.,,,,E

,

/ PFOXE /A».

MIL! cunmmv

wwsmucwmu

um

PD I
5)

JJIIEIEYIOIAL VETLINDS 910‘!!! N TSIS PLAN EH2 DBINEAIE EV SOUND? DIWNDNMDIYM
2066 W AEDNDANIIVAN WE
LLCIf LOUDDN, NR |N ME WJIIW U NG\&£
TEGCNVCM.REPDIIY
IX’ WE |J.S. AIMV DDNF00' GQIEDIS IIEHANDIEJNEAYKD4 MANUAL

CCI15JLVMl|S.

‘5TA;l3AND5
W

IXNIIGIXIS
BA“
000
EEPEFME

PAGE BS!

VDYIJ.
Sf

I

ACTMVES EXEEDS
SHE AREA '0 E DIEIUCIIU EV PI.AD|'lI£D CUESIFILICYIUOI
SEIJTIE PEIIIIV |S REGIME FM ‘M15 FIQEEY

A NHDIZS?fi

V

I
;
1

m Accommx
YELEPHONL
k emu mu. as msnum uunaleawun
an um.nns(a.:c1n1c.
umm mwmzn.
mm wassozmmuousur we mm or nooxzrr AND um APFUCAHLE
mamas man u: ssulnm
n) M: can-sun aware nun mnmuu wu ntsm Am|E510?
UVNE TDVH ADD naaummn EGAHJLYNIIAT OR
rm DIEREWE. IIIVEW Md} APPKOVIL
warm. we rmmnuc As A us or 1»: mm uumm.
mm In VIE vnz—m«smucum
:ALnuLAvIms srmma at A ouuxen FE umm: m Am.
A. nan
m)

5*“

531

_

sum: nmu

cmvnmnNA.L'

NE

EuW;B2f?£g§g“
.
“N35

I.

awn‘

DEAIIIG CAFAETV. ll??.
(IWEJJDLNG
UAIHTY B-ILDILAYIOM!

summ;

MD

—

c

’ *9‘

II.

DVSWWCY.

E
\2)
§
‘

(IF mnvmznmum!
HE WVIUDIT
LAYEAL EMTH
?ll!
SJRMLRII LDADINEAW W??ml?l’
mom»

,..

.

»

~

55. pm

>

l|C|1|>)IYI1lllK)I|SHAI.I.BE|4ID(ATTWES\’N?lOIYP>??|l

'

“W

W W‘

naz ms

.-

~..»~;’

-..~=.

‘D law

Amomm

my mum
Ann uuums, Lrss
3‘
W"-"5

""°

my -

.-.»

AFPl0P?|A'l'?.Y

;'Ix‘Rrv$'a‘aMA£Ans
‘"9’

mauxnmaunmnsmmnenmmzrmmornoosssn

Al?€A—

mzamuuzzzb

Acsuz;

as An:A or cmunu um vacuum

in .

.

W‘; 94
..‘
u.
rxuu:wAv sow: mzsmcnou.

mamas):

PERIIHS
annexAuennmu or nan»
mm snow wnuuu PERMIV
mans umuz wsluuo mm!
szrmzsmnmsmcPmmr
il>L|I.£s
u.n‘n.a.1. mun

mm

.w:os mam: AI.\'E?A‘|'|DN av mm»

I/2:/on

u=s—7:7nA

>U\'~O5E

was/A2

znos-«mm

In

:nIs—mtm

suuovuouu
us—na—oz

11}/n7
1

..

u

uz/um

mm/an

umcvznm we mmvAmm

zasmmy

sumac? 1: 1»:
mmmaz m
mean u. mums uis or m: Lzanznvuvm :A§:M:m

AKA

‘

W

5“

.

Mnen Mom

or W"“"'
mun
um

Acszs
-

W”

“mm

um

..

nu:

I7) wmms have em:
IIGIINB AS FOLLONS:

cmurmB! m: HDMSEH suuaumc.awn Kr m: we»

17,

1:

secnou um

Etzvmous Av A cm:
1 naosm: wsowlsnu

mmpm
r Ann
J.
)0

gr.

- mus‘

3-Mu.

cmwu

rnomoau- s,me,zza sr on

naval:

“"5

“RA
3

,.

{gum

916

H}
’
vaumnewt’
0&5

il»E.m\£vww
F Max

mm

nvMwAys
smu. sun»: mr saw me rINs4 noamm
'bmzuAvar
or as raw2n~r:zr non M cm: or PA\?lDlV.
mg;
mum‘.-‘ Imuun mg.
RUIIDFF
n.u.uu ‘nn?uuasmu Ann msu
Simon
mm 2 msunap
mun: sun 9: :—ng mm
m: an zmmmAND
cuulzms
mans Amp: 1 occuwsnmlznc canm Am cm7IL am.

mm

.

run an m

Am
cmmwA1:uc :As£uan
mu. m:
ur man mm»:
nzcuwznIuunois A Aznmu um (an) mar mt snur(sum
I2 or ax) to me uamnm?
mL—u:—sAc mus 9; 1»: sum: mu: mmr.nc—wAv
mum.
ms
.5
5,...
rm
mam
nu)
M
mama:
wm
acumnAnv uu: Aw-mmwnv
mm :Assmu mu. muvmx ANY
umaammmmzgazm.
NI)

If) M:

moss mm:

i
5

momnmunmmmvsmns?armnmuorluwrrrua

nu sx-mus

’”““

-‘

AMDEEBIVAII

u

-

an

(musmucnoo<o1cuu.:aan:AcA£)

Housme Is

‘

..

FEISINIDDEFKKALEAEFAVIDIICIIISETUMIS|'REEfSV£E%lNnISNU1Il<|.|EUDF

C0?TR5l|H?l0782B,D00.

so’ ‘ 3

ll. mA ms wunassme mu

‘

A

u)na:navaac=musnssro«sumAmmurmoxs:nn:cnzA1mua»Anruz:«

nmouansa—"MD

“'15

.

1
‘

run A mm or >moK:z:rr nmovm MNNYENANCK
M2 ncvnnu/uuummm Is Assmsnu:
FINS1£'lI1CATE
W OCBJPANEY ‘BK
W IJ'L17&0? 1D BE PAID NEW 1'} IEMNK W "VH5

mm

sins:-1‘ cums»

.

OVE NRMNG I

FIAEIJYV,

mzvmmvum AMI! :vAn.uAuaus

MID mm

\'"B!{,:on—FrEr

N
vu
uns 50-15 5: 55-15 Alli sumac: In u~—ws,:a.47(n;{5) III"
oi)n¢wumsurux:uAssaa5Acux»zvma:nAm.mow.nmamm,onsm:»4smLnm
mmm.
wwcuzvzn
B
sr..
cwaz
ox
um
M-Dz-Imus
zxuzn Aux

FLAT WAS I
.n-usSUBDIVISION

omtrcs UNDERMY DIRECTSL
ll»! 11
FIELD WORKPERFORMED

PLATHAS A LINEARERROR <
THAN CINE mm IN TEN mm

Page 59 of 154

Agenda Item #15.1.

TOWN OF HOOKSETT
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
The Hooksett Town Council will be holding a public hearing on Wednesday, April 22,
2020 @ 6:00pm at the Hooksett Town Hall Chambers, 35 Main Street, Hooksett, NH.
The purpose of the public hearing is to accept an unanticipated revenue in the amount of
$58,178.00 ($30,178.00 + $28,000.00) from Lamontagne Builders (Stinson Hills, LLC)
(not in lieu of Impact Fees) per RSA 31:95-b, III (a). For documentation or questions
contact the Hooksett Public Works Department at 603-668-8019.
Pursuant to Governor Sununu’s Emergency Order #12 and #16, the Town will be
conducting meetings remotely until further notice. The Public will only be able to
participate via phone. The specific instructions are posted on the Town website,
www.hooksett.org.

Page 60 of 154

Agenda Item #15.2.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
To:
Title:
Meeting:
Department:
Staff Contact:

Town Council
Storm Water Management Program Ordinance #2020-1.
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Public Works
Earl Labonte, Director of Public Works

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
At the Town Council's meeting on April 22, 2020, a Public Hearing was held to adopt an ordinance
which will establish the Town's legal and administrative authority to regulate, respond and enforce
illicit discharges in the community.
FINANCIAL IMPACT:
None.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
The establishment of the Town's legal and administrative authority to regulate, respond and enforce
illicit discharges in the community.
RECOMMENDATION:
To adopt the proposed Storm Water Management Program Ordinance # 2020-01.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
Motion to adopt the proposed Storm Water Management Program Ordinance # 2020-01.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur
ATTACHMENTS:
Proposed Storm Water Management Program Ordinance

Page 61 of 154

Agenda Item #15.2.

STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
ORDINANCE # 2020-1
SECTION I: PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to mandate a storm water management program to reduce the
discharge of pollutants from municipal storm water collection systems within the urbanized area
of the Town of Hooksett, NH as mandated by the U.S. EPA Phase II National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Program.
SECTION II: AUTHORITY
This Ordinance has been enacted pursuant to the statutory authority granted to the Town of
Hooksett by provisions of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251, under 40 CFR part 122 EPA
Administered Permit Programs: The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
SECTION III: DEFINITIONS
Regulated Storm Water - Water from rain and /or melting snow or ice, which flows over paved
or unpaved surfaces to a Town of Hooksett storm water collection system and migrates to a
State of New Hampshire water resource.
Storm Water Conveyance System - A storm water collection mechanism and discharge point
for storm water runoff.
Impaired Waters - Waters of the State of New Hampshire that are adversely affected by nonnatural impacts of contamination and have been designated as such by the State.
Illicit Discharge - Non-storm water discharge or contaminated storm water, which is not
authorized for discharge to a Hooksett storm water collection system.
Ms4 Plan - Municipal separate storm water sewer systems plan to control storm water pollution.
Control Measures - Required elements within the MS4 Plan.
SECTION IV: PROGRAM CONTROL MEASURES:
Each of the six mandated Control Measures, listed below have associated goals or "Best
Management Practices (BMPs)", which shall be implemented during the term of the NPDES
Permit and presented in detail in the Town's mandated MS4 Plan.
A. Public Education and Outreach.
B. Public Participation/Involvement.
C. Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination.
D. Construction Site Runoff Control.
E. Post-Construction Runoff Control.
F. Pollution Prevention/Good Housekeeping.
SECTION V: RECORD KEEPING
Records will be kept public for period of 5 years. Records will be only submitted when requested
by the permitting authority.

Page 62 of 154

Agenda Item #15.2.

SECTION VI: ENFORCEMENT
The Town Council is hereby charged to carry out the enforcement of the provisions within this
Ordinance and the provisions within the MS4 Plan this Ordinance represents by statute. The
Town Council may delegate such powers to one or more designees with authority to bring
actions to force compliance with this Ordinance and the MS4 Plan.
SECTION VII: PENALTIES
Any person(s) (including individuals, corporations, associations, etc.) who knowingly violate(s)
the provisions of this Ordinance and its referenced MS4 Plan shall be subject to imposition of
the following:
A. Hooksett procedural rules regulating planning & development, construction, postconstruction, and road maintenance are used in conjunction with the MS4 Plan.
These rules include, but not limited to, Site Plan Regulations, Subdivision Regulations,
and Zoning & Land Use Ordinance. Violations and penalties of the above regulations
are levied through designated Town authorities.
B. Penalties relating to illicit discharges or improper run-off controls as referenced in the
Storm Water Plan and not under the jurisdiction of Hooksett Community Development
Department or other regulating authority shall be levied by an agent of the Town Council.
Penalties are as follows:
1. Aforesaid persons shall receive a written notification to cease and desist discharging
into Hooksett’s storm water conveyance system and shall be required to take
corrective measures to permanently eliminate the illicit discharge from entering
Hooksett’s storm water conveyance system and for correct the run-off controls
within 10 days of the notification.
2. Upon non-compliance of the cease and desist notification aforesaid persons shall be
fined $1000/day until illicit discharge is eliminated from the Hooksett storm water
conveyance system.
3. Upon 30 days of non-compliance, the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services (NH DES) and the US EPA shall be notified for further enforcement actions.
4. In additional to the monetary fines established by this policy, the Town further
reserves the right to require with the assistance of NH DES and US EPA, aforesaid
persons to remediate any infrastructure and/or environmental damages caused by
the illicit discharge.
SECTION VIII: WAIVERS
The Hooksett Town Council reserves the right, for good cause shown, to make special
exceptions and/or waive any portion of the regulations.
SECTION IX: SEVERABILITY
If any provision of these Regulations is held to be invalid, other provisions and sections shall not
be affected, and to this end, the provisions and sections hereof are declared to be severable.
SECTION X - AMENDMENTS
These Regulations shall be adopted, and subsequent amendments shall be adopted from time
to time by the Town Council, following a public hearing. notice of which shall be posted

Page 63 of 154

Agenda Item #15.2.

pursuant to State and local laws in two (2) or more public places, or published in a newspaper
of general circulation not less than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
SECTION XII -ADOPTION:
These Regulations shall take effect immediately upon adoption of the Town Council.
Adopted: Town Council Meeting Date

________________________________
James Sullivan, Town Council Chair

________________________________
Todd Rainier, Town Clerk

Page 64 of 154

Agenda Item #15.3.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
To:
Title:
Meeting:
Department:
Staff Contact:

Town Council
Volunteer Appreciation Night
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Administration
Nick Germain, Project Coordinator

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
An Appreciation Dinner is regularly provided by the Town to celebrate the efforts of volunteers
orelected officials who serve on town boards, committees, or other similar organs. In recent years, the
dinners have been put on at the local Merrill-Follansbee Legion Post on a Friday in June. In the
Spring, Administration staff make arrangements related to planning the event, such as reserving
space, scheduling catering, and sending out invitations. Usually, Council's selected the exact date
and made a final determination on what to do for the dinner. Since 2016, generally 30-45 people
attend the dinners or stop in during the course of the evenings; a significant portion of attendees are
elderly. Changes have been suggested periodically, but a Council hasn't taken any action in recent
years. June is traditionally targeted as convenient given most current town board terms are set to
expire on June 30th each year. Obviously, a significant difference in 2020 is the ongoing threat posed
by the COVID-19 outbreak. The Governor's Executive Order #16, limiting public gatherings above 10
individuals, was recently extended to early May. Staff currently don't know if that order will be
extended further. What's more, even if the order is allowed to expire, it's currently unknown how much
longer a COVID-19 community health threat will persist after a tangible "peak" of infections is passed.
Projections on how long the disease will remain a significant public threat vary significantly. Council
should consider the subject carefully and advise staff of their wishes regarding this matter. It's
estimated that it would take about a week to prepare invitations and send them out. Attendees and
potential attendees have indicated receiving them as early as feasible would help them attend or
make plans. Catering and reservation arrangements need to be made as far in advance as possible
to guarantee presence.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
-Public health may be a concern and it's unknown if by June gathering or business establishment
restrictions will be lifted.
-Delays could have minor budget implications (Current Fiscal year ends June 30th)
-Possibly too late to give notice for attendance levels in an event in June
RECOMMENDATION:
Discuss the event
SUGGESTED MOTION:
n/a

Page 65 of 154

Agenda Item #15.3.

TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Discuss potential event options available to the Council

Page 66 of 154

Agenda Item #16.1.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
Conservation Commission Request for Approval of a Sole Source Agreement with
the Student Conservation Association, Inc. (SCA)
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Community Development
Staff Contact: Leann Fuller, Community Development Clerk
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
Cindy Robertson, Chair of the Conservation Commission, spoke regarding the Student Conservation
Association, Inc. creating a walking trail on the Pinnacle. This work is scheduled to be done July 14 July 24. The Conservation Commission is requesting approval of a sole source agreement with the
Student Conservation Association, Inc.
RECOMMENDATION:
Vote to approve the sole source agreement with the Student Conservation Association, Inc. for the
work to be done on the Pinnacle in the amount of $10,500.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
Motion to approve the sole source agreement with the Student Conservation Association, Inc. for the
work to be completed in July 2020 in the amount of $10,500.
ATTACHMENTS:
2020 SCA Contract
Map for Future Trail

Page 67 of 154

Agenda Item #16.1.

1

AGMT Hooksett CC

AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE STUDENT CONSERVATION ASSOCIATION, INC.
AND
THE HOOSETT CONSERVATION COMMISSION
This Agreement is made and entered into by and between The Student Conservation Association,
Inc., a nonprofit New York corporation, with its principal place of business at 4601 North
Fairfax Drive, Suite 900 Arlington, VA 22203 (“SCA”), and the Hooksett Conservation
Commission with its principal place of business at 35 Main Street, Hooksett, NH 03106.

1. BACKGROUND
The SCA is a nonprofit organization which fosters life-long stewardship of the
environment by offering opportunities for education, leadership and personal
development to its participants while providing a high quality public service in natural
resource management and conservation. SCA recruits, trains and places qualified young
adults to serve in environmental conservation projects as members of the SCA
conservation corps program. The SCA’s residential New Hampshire program provides
conservation crew services statewide to partner Agencies.
The Hooksett Conservation Commission is a public commission with a mission
to work with town, state, federal and private agencies and individuals on wetland and
conservation issues. They review and update Town ordinances and resource information
concerning wetlands, prime wetlands, natural resources inventory and other conservation
concerns, and other activities as determined by the Commission. Lastly, the commission
plans for and preserves community green spaces. The commission has authority to enter into
this agreement to accomplish the purposes of its mission. Throughout this agreement the
commission will be referred to as “the Project Partner.”
2. PARTY RESPONSIBILITIES
A. It is mutually agreed by the parties that SCA and Project Partner shall cooperate in
the placement of one 5-7 member SCA Conservation Corps crew for an 11-day term of
service during the 2020 field season (07/14/2020 or whichever later date the crew begins
service through 10/09/2020 or whichever later date the crew completes service) to
perform trail service and other conservation service activities in New Hampshire as
further described in this agreement.
2.1

SCA agrees (“Project Services”):
a. To provide one well-trained, team of 5-7 corps members for an 11-day hitch
period, July 14 – July 24, during the 2020 field season;

Page 68 of 154

Agenda Item #16.1.

2

AGMT Hooksett CC

b. To manage the crew and to implement the project activities as described in
this section 2;
c. To develop the new trail at Pinnacle Park. The trail, as pictured on the trail
map, will be built according to sustainable trail design. Trail structures will
be added, where applicable, to provide drainage or stability while following
sustainable practices requiring minimal routine maintenance.
d. To provide food, tools, vehicles, and equipment necessary to complete the
projects;
e. To provide staff support: staff members are responsible for all supervision of
the corps members as needed;
f. To provide an AmeriCorps Educational Award to qualifying SCA members,
but only if and when made available by the Corporation for National and
Community Service; The Corporation for National and Community
Service has prohibited the following activities for AmeriCorps members
while they are accumulating service or training hours, or otherwise
performing activities associated with the program:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Attempting to influence legislation.
Organizing or engaging in protests, petitions, boycotts, or strikes.
Assisting, promoting or deterring union organizing.
Impairing existing contracts for services of collective bargaining agreements.
Engaging in partisan political activities or other activities designed to influence the
outcome of an election to any public office.
6. Participating in, or endorsing, events or activities that are likely to include advocacy
for or against political parties, political platforms, political candidates, proposed
legislation, or elected officials.
7. Engaging in religious instruction, conducting worship services, providing instruction
as part of a program that includes mandatory religious instruction or worship,
constructing or operating facilities devoted to religious instruction or worship,
maintaining facilities primarily or inherently devoted to religious instruction or
worship, or engaging in any form of religious proselytization;
8. Providing a direct benefit for
a. A business organized for profit;
b. A labor union;
c. A partisan political organization;
d. A nonprofit organization that fails to comply with the restrictions contained
in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 except that nothing
in this section shall be construed to prevent participants from engaging in
advocacy activities undertaken at their own initiative; and

Page 69 of 154

Agenda Item #16.1.

3

AGMT Hooksett CC

e. An organization engaged in the religious activities described in paragraph (g)
of this section, unless Corporation assistance is not used to support those
religious activities;
9. Voter registration drives held by AmeriCorps members.
10. Providing abortion services or referrals for receipt of such services.
11. Writing grants or raising funds for an organization's general operating expenses or
endowment. The only kind of fundraising that members are allowed to do is
fundraising directly in support of their particular project. Examples of allowable
activities: Seeking donations (in the form of in-kind materials or dollars) for a
specific project they are carrying out as an AmeriCorps member; Writing a grant to a
foundation for funds for a specific project they’re carrying out, such as a community
clean-up. Allowable fundraising activities must add up to no more than 10% of the
member’s total hours; and
12. Other activities that the Corporation determines will be prohibited.
g. To provide Project Partner with a summary report of services performed.

C. The Project Partner agrees:
a. To provide site and project work specifications, technical assistance as
required, and to collaborate with the SCA staff as mutually agreed to carry
out Project work;
b. To pay SCA a project fee of $10,500 (Ten Thousand five Hundred Dollars)
for Project Services to be paid in accordance to below 3.1.e; and any
additional amounts that may be required by section 5 of this Agreement.
c. To purchase and provide all necessary building materials and supplies for the
projects;
d. To provide safe and meaningful stewardship projects appropriate for SCA
members consistent with members’ training;
e. To permit SCA members to wear an approved SCA uniform during their term
of service;
f. If required by federal, state, municipal or local subdivision law or
regulations, to arrange for all permits, licenses, and approvals and other
administrative or governmental clearances necessary with regard to the
administration of the project;

Page 70 of 154

Agenda Item #16.1.

4

AGMT Hooksett CC

g. To provide safe and adequate housing or tent space for the members to stay
in while working on the projects;
h. To provide a written evaluation of the members’ performance within fifteen
calendar days of termination of the Agreement.
3. PROGRAM CONDITIONS
3.1 The parties mutually agree:
a. SCA members shall not be assigned law enforcement or firefighting duties; and
shall not be permitted to handle or discharge any firearms or explosives unless
provided explicit permission by SCA’s National Program Manager - Residential.
b. SCA agrees to accept any extra tools, materials, equipment and facilities
furnished by the Project Partner on a loan basis only, and such items shall, where
applicable, be returned in the same condition received except for normal wear
and tear in project use.
c.

SCA members over eighteen (18) years of age may be allowed to drive a
vehicle that is owned, rented, leased or loaned by or to the Project Partner only
when (i) the vehicle is used with written permission of the Project Partner site
supervisor and only for official use; (ii) the driver is properly licensed and
qualified to operate the vehicle; (iii) the Project Partner maintains, and the
driver is made aware of the requirements of, a safe driver policy; (iv) both the
driver and the vehicle will be covered by an insurance policy maintained by the
Project Partner for the use of such vehicle and (v) subject to any additional
Project Partner policies and regulations.

d.

The Project Partner shall have the right to require the removal of any SCA
member on the basis of unacceptable performance and/or conduct problems that
could not be resolved with the help of SCA. SCA shall have the right to
withdraw any SCA member if the Project Partner fails to provide sufficient and
appropriate project assignments, safe conditions including without limitation free
from discrimination and harassment, appropriate housing, training, or project
oversight. Provided there is no imminent threat to safety or health, the relevant
party shall, prior to taking such corrective action, take the following steps:
document the problem in writing, provide prior notice to the other party, and
provide the other party with an opportunity to take corrective action.

e.

SCA may present two invoices for costs and obligations undertaken for the
Project, as follows: (1) An initial invoice requesting 50% of the estimated Project
cost will be submitted to the Project Partner prior to the start of the Project, and
(2) the remaining costs shall be invoiced upon completion of the Project. The

Page 71 of 154

Agenda Item #16.1.

5

g.

AGMT Hooksett CC

Project Partner agrees to make payment to SCA within 30 days of the date of
such invoices. In the event any itemized invoice remains unpaid for more than
30 days, the Project Partner agrees to pay SCA an interest charge on the
outstanding balance at the rate of 1% a month from the date the invoice was
rendered. All invoices should be emailed to: Leann Fuller - LFuller@hooksett.org.
The Project Partner shall not hire any SCA member as an employee of the
Project Partner prior to, or during, the SCA member’s service as a corps member.

4. INSURANCE
Project Partner shall add SCA as an additional insured to its general liability policy
and provide SCA with such certificate of insurance. In addition, SCA shall maintain
its current general liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for
bodily injury and property damage, subject to the usual and customary policy
conditions (including standard exclusion on vehicles licensed for highway use and on
property in the care, custody and control of the policyholder). For the purposes of
workers compensation claims, responsibility and coverage for all SCA staff and crew
members is borne by the SCA.
5. TERM and TERMINATION.
5.1 This Agreement shall become effective upon the date it is signed by both parties
and shall remain in effect during the period of performance specified for this project.
Either party may cancel this Agreement immediately upon written notice (including
email) as a result of (i) material breach by the other party, or (ii) for COVID-19
reasons. In the event of a material breach, Project Partner shall pay SCA for all work
performed through the notice date. In the event of termination due to COVID-19
reasons, Project Partner shall pay SCA for all work performed through notice period
and shall reimburse SCA for wind-down of the program, including but not limited to
travel, housing and other costs associated with safely securing program participants.
5.2 Either party may cancel the Agreement without cause with thirty (30) days’
notice. In the event either party cancels without cause, SCA shall wind down work
upon notice and Project Partner shall pay SCA for all work performed through the
notice period as well as a service fee of 20 percent (20%) of the remaining balance, as
Project Partner acknowledgment of SCA’s upfront investment in standing up the
program that it would have otherwise recovered throughout the term of the
Agreement.

Page 72 of 154

Agenda Item #16.1.

6

AGMT Hooksett CC

6. PROJECT COORDINATORS
The Project Coordinators for this Agreement are:
A. For the Project Partner:
Programmatically: Cindy Robertson
Chair
Hooksett Conservation Commission
cindyrob79@gmail.com
Administratively:

Leann Fuller
Administrative Assistant
Town of Hooksett

(603) 485-8471
LFuller@hooksett.org

B. For the SCA
Programmatically: Davis Brush
Program Manager,
SCA NH Corps
75 South Main St. Unit 7 PMB 116
Concord NH 03301,
P: 603-485-2191
dbrush@thesca.org
Zach Colatch
Conservation Coordinator
SCA NH Corps
P: 603.485.2191
zcolatch@thesca.org

Administratively: Rebecca Donovan
Agreements Administrator
Student Conservation Association
689 River Road
Charlestown, NH 03603
P: 603.504.3239, ext. 1149
C: 413.695.6155
rdonovan@thesca.org

Page 73 of 154

Agenda Item #16.1.

7

AGMT Hooksett CC

7. ENTIRE AGREEMENT.
This Agreement contains the entire agreement of the parties and may only be amended
by written agreement, signed by both Parties.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be
executed by their duly authorized officers on the dates set forth below.
THE STUDENT CONSERVATION PROJECT PARTNER
ASSOCIATION, INC.

By:
Name:
Title:
Date:

By:
Name: Cindy Robertson
Title: Chair, Hooksett Conservation Commission
Date:

Page 74 of 154

Agenda Item #16.1.

Page 75 of 154

Page 76 of 154

Agenda Item #16.2.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
License to use the Town of Hooksett's land off of Merrimack Street and
surrounding fields at 161 Merrimack Street
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Community Development
Staff Contact: Leann Fuller, Community Development Clerk
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
In past years, the Town Administrator has signed a License for use of the Town of Hooksett's land off
of Merrimack Street and the surrounding fields located at 161 Merrimack Street. This license allows
the use of the property for agricultural purposes. The grantee will hay the open fields 2 to 3 times per
year, including mowing, raking and baling the hay. The grantee will also keep the land clean and
fertile.
RECOMMENDATION:
Recommend to have the Town Administrator sign the License to allow Iraklis Lazaridis to use the
Town of Hooksett's land off of Merrimack Street and surrounding fields located at 161 Merrimack
Street.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
Motion to have the Town Administrator sign the License to allow Iraklis Lazaridis to use the Town of
Hooksett's land off of Merrimack Street and the surrounding fields located at 161 Merrimack Street.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur. Map 1 Lot 34 is a different lot from the one Town council granted approval to use to RMI
(Map 1 Lot 37).
ATTACHMENTS:
License to Use-Town and Lazaridis
Map of Field Locations
M. Serge Email of approval

Page 77 of 154

Agenda Item #16.2.

LICENSE
The Town of Hooksett, a municipal corporation, with an address of 35 Main Street,
Hooksett, New Hampshire, 03106, (Grantor or Town) grants to Iraklis Lazaridis, an individual
with an address of 1662 Elm Street, Manchester, New Hampshire, 03101 (Grantee or Lazaridis)
a license to use the Town of Hooksett’s land off of Merrimack Street and surrounding fields located
at 161 Merrimack Street, Tax Map 1 Lot 34.
The Grantee will use the Property for agricultural purposes and will hay the open fields 2 to 3
times per year, including mowing, tedding, raking, and baling the hay. In doing so, he also agrees to
keep the land clean and fertile, and to be used solely for agricultural purposes. The Grantee also
agrees to trim any limbs that lean over the field and remove any natural debris.

This license is valid until either the Property is sold, or the Town revokes the license,
whichever occurs first. The Town reserves the right to revoke this license for any reason.
The Grantor shall provide the Grantee with a minimum of 30 days written notice prior to
terminating this license.
The Town makes no warranty or guarantee concerning the condition of the property.
The Grantee agrees to assume all risks associated with his use of the Property.
The Grantee agrees to hold harmless, release, and indemnify the Grantor for any
and all liability and/or claims for personal injury or damage to property arising from the
Grantee’s use of the Property, except those claims based on the Grantor’s alleged
intentional or reckless conduct.
The Grantee agrees to repair any damage caused to the Property as a result of the parking
use and restore the property to its original condition.
This license shall become binding when signed by the parties. This license supersedes all
prior or contemporaneous communications and negotiations, both oral and written and
constitutes the entire agreement between the parties relating to the use(s) set out above.
No amendment shall be effective except in writing signed by both parties.
If any provision of this license is held invalid, the other provisions shall not be affected
thereby.
TOWN OF HOOKSETT
Date:
André Garron, Duly Authorized
Date:
Iraklis Lazaridis

Page 78 of 154

Agenda Item #16.2.

-

W‘“JW’°F HMS:

xxxxxx
2

IJcucnu

—

mam

ugzuou Hwkziu
-

.-

Page 79 of 154

Agenda Item #16.2.

Leann Fuller
—e

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Matthew R. Serge <MSerge@dwm|aw.com>
Friday, April 17, 2020 11:49 AM
Leann Fuller
Steve Couture; Cindy Robertson
RE: Hooksett property

Hi, Leann. l have reviewed the license agreement and see no reason why it cannot still be used. I believe I had
a hand in preparing the prior license as it contains the sort of provisions I would usually include in a document
of this nature.

Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any additional questions. Have a nice weekend.
-Matt

From: Leann Fuller [mailto:LFu||er@hooksett.org]
Sent: Tuesday, April 14, 2020 11:17 AM
To: Matthew R. Serge <MSerge@dwm|aw.com>
Cc: Steve Couture <stevecouture4@gmai|.com>;
Cindy Robertson <cindyrob79@gmai|.com>
Subject: FW: Hooksett property

Matt,

Please review the attached license agreement. This agreement is for the use otthe Hooksett property located at
161 l\/lerrimackystreet for agricultural use. As you can see from the email thread, the Conservation Commission is
lool<ingfor your approval to use the same agreement they have used previously. l have included Steve Couture
and CindyRobertson on this e—mailas they would be able to answer any questions that may come up.
Thank you,

_%,m

A

.

Leann Fuller
Administrative Assistant
Community Development Department
Town of Hooksett

35 Main Street
(603) 4894117

'

mail.com>
From: Steve Couture <stevecouture4
Sent: Tuesday, April 14, 2020 11:12 AM
mail.com>
To: Cindy Robertson <cind rob79
hooksett.or >
Cc: Leann Fu||er<LFuller
Subject: Re: Hooksett property

Page 80 of 154

Agenda Item #16.3.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
To:
Title:
Meeting:
Department:
Staff Contact:

Town Council
Community Development Permitting Software Recommendation
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Community Development
Leann Fuller, Community Development Clerk

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
The Town of Hooksett Community Development Department currently has a permitting software
system called ViewPermit. ViewPermit is transitioning to a new cloud based system called VIewPoint
Cloud. This transition comes with a price. This price triggered the requirement for the RFP process.
In March, the Town of Hooksett received seven bids for a new Community Development Permitting
Software. André Garron, Councilor Walczyk, Nick Germain, Christine Soucie, Kathy Lawrence and
Leann Fuller reviewed all seven bids and narrowed it down to three companies to interview.
The three companies interviewed were:
LAMA Software
CitizenServe
Full Circle Technologies
FINANCIAL IMPACT:
Partial funding for the Community Development Software is in the budget for FY 2020-2021. The
remaining to come from FY 2019-2020 budget surplus.
RECOMMENDATION:
We recommend the Town Council allow staff to negotiate a contract with Full Circle Technologies.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
Motion to accept the bid from Full Circle Technologies for a first year cost of $39,070.00. $31,000.00
to come from the operating budget and the additional $8,070 to come from the surplus from this years
budget.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur. Full Circle Technologies was the lowest bidder and was also the unanimous selection, from a
field of seven proposals, by the review committee. Councilor Walczyk, Kathy Lawrence, Comm. Dev.
Admin. Asst., Leann Fuller, Comm. Dev. Admin. Asst., Nick Germain, Project Coordinator and
Christine Soucie, Finance Director and myself.
ATTACHMENTS:
Scoring Sheet-Town Council

Page 81 of 154

Agenda Item #16.3.

Software Cost Comparison-Town Council

Page 82 of 154

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT SOFTWARE
Company Name

LAMA Software

Quality of Proposal

Meet the
Timeline

4: Custom Software, Traditional License, Team is
comprised of Planners, Engineers and IT professionals 2: 5-6 months

Municipal
Experience

Delivery of
Firm
Services Experience

3: No NH Clients

4

4

2: 5-6 months 3: No NH Clients

4

4

5: 4 weeks

4

4

3: Annual subscription based on users, Unlimited
CitizenServe

support, Custom reports, Browser based

4: Integrates with Assessor Software, Customizeable,
Full Circle Technologies

Works with EB2Gov payment processor

4: NH Client-Derry

Agenda Item #16.3.

Page 83 of 154

Community Development Permitting Software
Bid Opening: March 19, 2020 at 10AM

Bidder Name

Location

Software Cost

Training Cost

Migration Cost

Year 1 Total

Year 2 Total

Year 3 Total

Dude Solutions
*CitizenServe
*Full Circle
Technologies
BS&A Software
*LAMA Software
General Code
Central Square

North Carolina
Arizona
Boston

$20,160.00
$14,700.00
$34,820.00

$32,000.00
$8,400.00
INCLUDED

$10,200.00
$30,000.00
$4,250.00

$62,360.00
$53,100.00
$39,070.00

$20,160.00
$14,700.00
$9,050.00

$20,160.00
$14,700.00
$9,500.00

Michigan
Illinois
New York
Florida

$17,925.00
$59,399.00
$21,950.00
$23,125.00

$40,025.00
$11,110.00
$31,688.00
$19,656.00

$8,930.00
$3,840.00
$6,000.00
$93,420.00

$66,880.00
$74,349.00
$59,638.00
$136,201.00

$3,585.00
$12,832.00
$18,800.00
$13,125.00

$3,693.00
$13,088.00
$18,800.00
$13,781.00

*Interviewed bidders

Agenda Item #16.3.

Page 84 of 154

Agenda Item #16.4.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
Town Council to accept the $12,944.82 from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act from the US Health and Human Services to the
Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Fire Rescue Department's Ambulance Revenue
Line under RSA 31:95-b III (a).
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Fire and Rescue
Staff Contact: Joseph Stalker, Captain
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is delivering $30 billion in relief funding to providers in support of
the national response to COVID-19 as part of the distribution of the $100 billion provider relief fund provided for in the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act recently passed by Congress and signed by President
Trump. The funding will be used to support healthcare-related expenses or lost revenue attributable to coronavirus and to
ensure uninsured Americans can get the testing and treatment they need without receiving a surprise bill from a provider.

FINANCIAL IMPACT:
$12,944.82 to be deposited into the Ambulance Revenue Line.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
N/A
RECOMMENDATION:
Close public hearing and vote same night.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
1) Motion to waiver Town Council Rules of Procedure and vote same night as public hearing
2) Motion to accept the $12,944.82 from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act from the US Health and Human Services to the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Fire
Rescue Department's Ambulance Revenue Line under RSA 31:95-b III (a).
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur. Hooksett was allocated a share of the federal funds, through the Health and Human
Services section of the CARES Act, that will be used to replenish Hooksett's Fire Rescue Ambulance
fund.

Page 85 of 154

Page 86 of 154

Agenda Item #16.5.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
Donation to the Town of Hooksett, for the Hooksett Fire-Rescue Department from
the Leon C Boisvert Revocable Trust
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Fire and Rescue
Staff Contact: James Burkush, Chief of Hooksett Fire&Rescue
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
The Town of Hooksett received notification of a donation from the Leon C Boisvert Revocable Trust;
"The Sum of Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to the Trustees of the Trust Funds, Town of
Hooksett, New Hampshire, to establish the "Leon C Boisvert Fire Department Trust Fund" with the
income therefrom to be used, in the sole discretion of the Fire Chief, for the purchase of fire
department equipment for the benefit of the Hooksett Fire Department".
See attached for details regarding RSA 31:19 Trust Funds.
FINANCIAL IMPACT:
none
RECOMMENDATION:
To accept the Donation to be used only as intended
SUGGESTED MOTION:
Motion 1) “Motion to establish the Leon C Boisvert Fire Department Trust Fund under 31:19 for the
purpose of Hooksett Fire Department equipment and to name the Fire Chief as the agent to expend.”
Motion 2) “Motion to accept $50,000.00 donation to the Leon C Boisvert Fire Department Trust fund
from the estate of Leon C Boisvert.”

TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Concur. Our sincere appreciation to the Boisvert family for this very thoughtful gift to the Fire
Department
ATTACHMENTS:
HFR TRUST FUND 05132020

Page 87 of 154

Agenda Item #16.5.

Donna Fitzpatrick
From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Regina Howard <RHoward@hooksettfire.org>
Thursday, April 30, 2020 12:54 PM
Donna Fitzpatrick
James Burkush
50K Trust/PublicHearing Necessity

Importance:

High

Hi Donna,

The Chief asked me to con?rm with Christine that there was no need for a Public Hearing for the acceptance of
the $50,000 Trust Fund being gifted to the Fire-Rescue. Per Christine, the NH RSA that applies to Town
receipt of Trust Gifts is found in RSA 31:19 (link below). Additionally, once the Town Council accepts such
fund, the Town Charter Section 5.14 “Gifts and Grants” gives the ability to accept and expend such funds. No
stipulation for public hearing is noted in either of those guidelines. Hope this is helpful in clarifying.
ht : wvvw. encourt.state.nh.us rsa html III 1 1-1 .htm
Thanks,
Gina
Regina M. Howard
Administrative Assistant
Hooksett Fire-Rescue Department
15 Legends Drive
Hooksett, NH 03106

(603) 623-7272

Visit our website: www.hooksett?re.org
Find us on Facebook: Hooksett Fire Rescue Department

Page 88 of 154

Agenda Item #16.5.

Section 31:19 In General.

Page 1 of 1

TITLE III
TOWNS, CITIES, VILLAGE DISTRICTS,
AND UNINCORPORATED PLACES
CHAPTER 31
POWERS AND DUTIES OF TOWNS

Trust Funds
Section 31:19
31:19 In General.
I. Towns may take and hold in trust gifts, legacies, and devises made to them for the establishment,
maintenance, and care of libraries, reading—rooms,schools, and other educational facilities, parks,
cemeteries, and burial lots, the planting and care of shade and ornamental trees upon their highways and
other public places, and for any other public purpose that is not foreign to their institution or
incompatible with the objects of their organization.
II. Towns may authorize the board of selectrnen, or town council if there is one, to accept such trusts
without further action by the town.
III. Such authority to accept shall continue in effect for one year from the date of town meeting or action
by the town council. The authority to accept trusts may be granted for an indefinite period, in which case
the warrant article or vote granting such authority shall use the words, “indef1nitely“or “until rescinded"
or similar language.
—

Source. GL 49:7; 50:3. PS 40:5. 1901, 83:1.1907, 70:1. PL 42:18.1941, 43:1. RL 51:19. RSA 31:19.
1995, 137:1, eff. May 24,1995.

?le://toh-th-dcfp.hooksett.local/FLDREDIR/d?tzpatrick/Desktop/Section%2031
19%20In... 4/3 0/2020

Page 89 of 154

Page 90 of 154

Agenda Item #16.6.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
To:
Title:
Meeting:
Department:
Staff Contact:

Town Council
Quarterly Financial Report as of March 31, 2020
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Finance
Christine Soucie, Finance Director

TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Monthly financial update. The council had questions relative to the town's financial status in the midst
of the COVID 19 pandemic.
ATTACHMENTS:
PP Quarterly Financial Report for March 31, 2020

Page 91 of 154

Quarterly Financial Report
for March 31, 2020
THIRD QUARTER OF FY 2019-20
UNAUDITED

Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 92 of 154

COVID 19 Impact on Budgets
The Governor declared a State of Emergency on March 13, 2020.
As of April 30th, the Town has spent approximately $35,000 for services related to the pandemic.
◦ Fire Overtime & benefits
◦ Fire Supplies (gloves, masks, sanitizer)
◦ Police Supplies (sanitizer)
◦ Families First Coronavirus Reponses Act
◦ Legal Fees
◦ Town welfare
◦ Vertical meetings
Total as of April 30th

$ 17,709*
5,666*
25
5,278
250
5,800
500
$35,228

*The Town is seeking reimbursements for the Fire’s overtime and supplies.

Currently the operating budget has the ability to handle the expenses related to the pandemic.
There are cost savings in the budget for such things as training, travel, fuel and even overtime.
Next fiscal year: The Town is concerned with the long term effects on the Town welfare line.

Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 93 of 154

COVID 19 Impact on Revenues
For the Month of April the Town revenues have decreased as follows:
Motor Vehicle Registrations down 50% (short $150,000)
Interest on Deposits down 50% (short $8,000)
Building permits down 50% (short $9,000)

Next fiscal year: The Town is concerned with loss of State revenues and the ability for residents
to pay tax bills timely.
The State’s Meals and Room Tax comes from taxes on lodging, restaurants and mv rentals and
the State’s Highway Block funds are collected on tolls, gas tax, and state share of MV
registrations. Both revenue streams are highly dependent on a healthy economy.

Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 94 of 154

General Fund Operating Budget
Total Operating Budget
Year
FY 2019-20 $
FY 2018-19
FY 2017-18

1

Budget
17,750,209
17,329,841
20,347,252

$

Actual
12,406,162
12,327,252
14,788,360

Remaining
Budget
$ 5,344,047
5,002,589
5,558,892

%
70%
71%
73%

$25,000,000
$20,000,000
$15,000,000

Budget
Actual

$10,000,000
$5,000,000
$0
FY 2019-20

FY 2018-19

FY 2017-18

Page 95 of 154

Agenda Item #16.6.

1) Budget amounts include encumbrances, transfers, grants and donations approved by Council as of March 31 st of each year.

Administration Department Expenditure
Administration Department
Year
Budget
Actual
2019-20 $1,146,823 $ 883,336
2018-19
1,075,943
794,373
2017-18
1,120,996
770,217

%
77%
74%
69%

Administration Department
$1,500,000
$1,000,000

Budget

$500,000

Actual

$0
2019-20 2018-19 2017-18

The budget has remained relatively stable for the last three
years.
The department is responsible for large town-wide
expenditures, such as property liability insurance, workers
compensation, legal service and computers.
FY 2018-19 was a default budget, but does include $60,576
of encumbrances related to IT projects. The current
budget, FY 2019-20, includes $24,046 in encumbrances
primarily for IT projects for the Fire Department.
Spending is up just over $88,000 from last year due to
employee changes.

Page 96 of 154

Agenda Item #16.6.

The legal line can be very volatile. Currently it is on target
for the year at 77% spent. This compares to last March
which was 82% spent and March of 2018 which was 95%
spent.

Fire-Rescue Department Expenditure
Fire-Rescue Department
Year
Budget
Actual
2019-20 $4,255,331 $ 2,995,462
2018-19
4,120,634
2,866,721
2017-18
4,084,332
2,970,929

%
70%
70%
73%

Fire-Rescue Department
$5,000,000
$4,000,000
$3,000,000
$2,000,000
$1,000,000
$0

Budget
Actual

2019-20 2018-19 2017-18

Over the last three fiscal years, this budget has increased
about $171,000 or 4%. This increase includes a 2%
increase in wages and overtime; a 1% decrease in health
insurance costs and another 3% increase in general
operations for items such as hydrant rentals and vehicle
maintenance.

Page 97 of 154

Agenda Item #16.6.

Spending has stayed at or near the March benchmark of
73% each year. Minimum staffing is being utilized to
keep the department’s expense down. The department
is struggling with overtime and vehicle maintenance.
Normal maintenance has been performed on all fleet
and additional cost for Engine 5’s lighting, Engine 4’s
radiator and upgrades to the Ladder truck were
incurred.

Police Department Expenditure
Year
2019-20
2018-19
2017-18

Police Department
Budget
Actual
$4,709,950 $ 3,202,563
4,642,057
3,210,796
4,637,169
3,001,918

%
68%
69%
65%

Police Department
$5,000,000
$4,000,000
$3,000,000
$2,000,000
$1,000,000
$0

Budget
Actual

2019-20 2018-19 2017-18

The overall increase in the Police budget for the last
three fiscal years was just under $75,000 or 1.5%. Wages
increased 2.2%; health insurance decreased 1% and
general operations increased just under 0.3%.
The department historically underspends its budget due
to vacant positions. There have been five patrol officers,
one sergeant, one dispatch and a prosecution assistant’s
position vacant this year. The length of vacancies varies
with each position. Last year at this time, there were
seven full-time employee turnovers compared to eight
this year.
Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 98 of 154

PW – Highway Division Expenditures
PW - Highway Division
Year
Budget
Actual
2019-20 $3,317,103 $ 2,216,414
2018-19
3,518,487
2,650,943
2017-18
6,487,932
5,235,717

%
67%
75%
81%

PW - Highway Division
$6,000,000
$4,500,000
$3,000,000
$1,500,000
$0

Budget

This division of Public Works includes Administration,
Roads, Fleet and Building Maintenance.
Each year road paving is encumbered into the following
year’s budget. The FY 2019-20 budget includes
$374,540 from the prior year. In FY 2018-19 there was
$628,015 from FY 2017-18 and in FY 2017-18 there was
$241,381 encumbered for paving and $3,424,776 for
the pedestrian bridge.

Actual

2019-20 2018-19 2017-18

Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 99 of 154

If you remove all of the encumbrances from each of the
budget years, the actual budget has increased $120,000
or 4.5% over the three years. This breaks down as
follows: 7% increase in wages and overtime, 1.5
decrease in health insurance, 0.5% increase in the
employer share of NH Retirement and 1.5% decrease in
general operations.

PW – Highway Division Expenditures, continued
Year to date actuals are 67% of the budget,
which is lower than the prior two years. In FY
2017-18 the Town was working on the
pedestrian bridge and in FY 2018-19 the town
had spent just under a million dollars on paving
roads compared to the current year having
spent $629,053.
Staffing levels for the highway division have
remained level. For the past two years, the
division has had two full-time staff turnovers.

Year
2019-20
2018-19
2017-18

PW - Highway Division
Budget
Actual
$3,317,103 $ 2,216,414
3,518,487
2,650,943
6,487,932
5,235,717

%
67%
75%
81%

PW - Highway Division
$6,000,000
$4,500,000
$3,000,000
$1,500,000
$0

Budget
Actual

2019-20 2018-19 2017-18

Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 100 of 154

PW – Recycling & Transfer Division Expenditures
PW - Recycling & Transfer Division
Year
Budget
Actual
%
2019-20 $1,213,158 $ 699,173 58%
2018-19
1,114,714
684,674 61%
2017-18
1,165,097
740,663 64%
PW - Recycling & Transfer Division
$1,500,000
$1,000,000

Budget
Actual

$500,000
$0
2019-20 2018-19 2017-18

This budget has increased $48,000 or 4.5% over the
past three years. Wages and overtime have increased
just over 2% with no changes in the staffing levels.
Health insurance has increased by 1%, the Town share
of NH Retirement has increased by 0.5%, and general
operations have increased by 1%.
Position vacancies explain why actuals are 15% below
the March benchmark. Currently there have been three
full-time position vacancies. This compares to last year
at this time having two positions vacant.

Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 101 of 154

Actual spending has remained level for the last three
years. The Town continues to watch the tipping fee line
closely, having spent $320,012 on trach disposal for the
year. This is $27,000 more than last year at this time
and $41,000 more than the five-year average.

PW – Recycling & Transfer Division Expenditures,
continued
The cost to dispose of trash has increased for two reasons.
First, the contractual rate for tipping fees has increased. The Town is in a long term contract, to
dispose of trash, which has a slight rate increase each year.
Second, there has been a change in the recycling market. For many years recycling was less
expensive than trash to dispose of and good for the environment. Currently it costs more to
recycle materials than to dispose of as trash, which lead the Town to end curbside collection in
2018 and the single stream recycling program in April 2019.
The Town still recycles whenever possible. Items like cardboard, metals and aluminum are being
recycled.

Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 102 of 154

General Fund Revenues
Total Revenues
Uncollected
1

Year
FY 2019-20 $
FY 2018-19
FY 2017-18

Budget
8,934,463
7,941,343
5,483,194

$

Actual
7,539,442
5,918,765
5,259,978

Budget
$ (1,395,021)
(2,022,578)
(223,216)

%
84%
75%
96%

$10,000,000
$8,000,000
$6,000,000

Budget

$4,000,000

Actual

$2,000,000
$0
FY 2019-20

FY 2018-19

FY 2017-18

Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 103 of 154

Motor Vehicle Registration Revenues
Motor Vehicle Registration
Year
Budget
Actual
2019-20 $ 4,000,000 $ 3,010,491
2018-19
3,400,000
2,810,879
2017-18
3,400,000
2,519,539

%
75%
83%
74%

The top revenue source for the Town are fees collected
for registering motor vehicles. The increase in the
budget is based on actual collections at the end of the
year.
As of June 2019 the Town collected $3,873,297

Motor Vehicle Registration

June 2018 collections were $3,481,730

$4,000,000

$3,000,000
Budgeted

$2,000,000

June 2017 collections finished at $3,456,725

Collected

$1,000,000
$0
2019-20

2018-19

2017-18

Based on year to date actuals, it is anticipated that
collections will be $4 million as of June 2020.
Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 104 of 154

Interest & Penalties on Tax Revenues
Interest & Penalties on Taxes
Year
Budget
Actual
2019-20 $ 280,000 $ 121,319
2018-19
150,000
133,273
2017-18
300,000
93,857

%
43%
89%
31%

Interest & Penalties on Taxes
$400,000
$300,000

Budgeted

$200,000

Collected

$100,000

This interest comes from property taxes not being paid
timely and the penalties are fees to execute liens and
notices. Many property owners pay off delinquent taxes
in the spring to avoid the Town deeding their property
and also when property owners want to sell their
property.
Both the budget and collections have been up and down
over the last three years. Year end collections are as
follows:
June 2019

$304,891

June 2018

$171,195

June 2017

$222,279

$0
2019-20

2018-19

2017-18

Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 105 of 154

The State has lowered the penalties by 4% on liens and
delinquent payments effective April 2019.

Building Permit Revenues
Year
2019-20
2018-19
2017-18

Building Permits
Budget
Actual
$ 200,000 $ 170,477
150,000
146,310
100,000
89,518

%
85%
98%
90%

These fees are paid for residential and commercial
construction. Collections have increased over the last
three fiscal years.

Number of permits issued as of March of each year are
as follows:
7/1/19 to 3/31/20
7/1/18 to 3/31/19
7/1/17 to 3/31/18

Building Permits
$250,000
$200,000
$150,000
$100,000
$50,000
$0

938
882
511

Budgeted
Collected

2019-20

2018-19

2017-18

Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 106 of 154

State of NH Revenues
Year
2019-20
2018-19
2017-18

State Revenues
Budget
Actual
$ 1,213,075 $ 1,174,694
1,219,082
993,657
1,053,183
991,842

%
97%
82%
94%

State Revenues
$1,500,000
$1,000,000

Budgeted

$500,000

Collected

$0
2019-20

2018-19

2017-18

The Meals & Rooms Tax and Highway Block Grant have
been steady for the last three years.

The State sent additional Highway Block Grant funds in
2017 to each community. Hooksett’s share was
$260,243.
In October 2019 the State sent Municipal Aid in the
amount of $152,392 to the Town. This same amount is
anticipated in October 2020.
No State Shared Revenues have been received since FY
2009-10.
Agenda Item #16.6.

Page 107 of 154

Page 108 of 154

Agenda Item #16.7.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
COVID-19 - Request to Town Council to Ease Requirements of Employee Earned
Vacation Time Carry Over Limits through December 31, 2020
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Administration
Staff Contact: Donna Fitzpatrick, Administrative Services Coordinator
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
Town Administration is seeking the Town Council's approval to ease requirements of employee
earned vacation time carry over limits through December 31, 2020 due to Federal, State and Local
COVID-19 restrictions for non-union employees, union employees and contracted employees. With
the unknown of COVID-19's impact on travel in the U.S. & abroad and the mandated restriction
orders for social-distancing and gatherings, employees with planned vacation time or vacations to be
planned prior to their max carry over are now faced with forfeiting this vacation time.
Town Administration recommends to provide as much flexibility to employees at this challenging time.
We do not know on a case-by-case basis if time off is needed in the future (have not been able to
take time off to refresh then COVID-19 hit) or if money is needed in the future (COVID-19
unemployment or other monetary results) or both is needed in the future of each household. We
recommend the Town Council, due to COVID-19 orders, provide that employees exceeding their
threshold of vacation time carry over through December 31, 2020 be allowed to:
1) carry over excess vacation time for 2020, but then must use that time by their respective vacation
time carry over limit in 2021: (a) June 30, 2021 for non-union & Public Works Union, b) anniversary
date in 2021 for Fire-Rescue Union or Police Union OR
2) buy out excess vacation time for 2020 on their respective vacation carry over in 2020: a) June 30,
2020 for non-union & Public Works Union, b) anniversary date in 2020 for Fire-Rescue Union or
Police Union OR
3) do a combination of 1 (carry over) & 2 (buy out) above
Note: Those who wish to carry over excess vacation time and use prior to their carry over limit in
2021 must still obtain the approval of their department head for the specific dates for vacation leave
based on the operations of the department.

Below is the current breakdown of the respective vacation hours max carry over that Town
Administration is requesting be eased due to COVID-19:
Non-union employees: (vacation earned monthly - June 30th 100 hours max carry over or
forfeited)

Page 109 of 154

Agenda Item #16.7.

Town Personnel Plan - Vacation time accrued max carry over as of June 30th each year 100 hours. If accruals exceed
the maximum caps, the accrual overages are forfeited.

Fire-Rescue union employees (vacation dumped on anniversary - end of anniversary 120
hours max carry over or buy out excess hours)
Town of Hooksett and Hooksett Permanent Firefighters Association, Local 3264, IAFF 07/01/2019-06/30/2020 & Town
of Hooksett and Hooksett Permanent Firefighters Association, Local 3264, IAFF 07/01/2020-06/30/2023- When each
employee reaches their anniversary date, they are allowed to carry over no more than 120 hours of vacation time
earned.

Police union employees: (vacation dumped on anniversary - through 06/30/2020 CBA end of
anniversary no carry over - forfeited, as of 07/01/2020 CBA end of anniversary 42.5 hours carry
over)
Town of Hooksett, NH & NEPBA Local 46 0701/2017-06/30/2020 - Vacation accruals are by anniversary date and do not
accrue from year to year. In the event that an employee's scheduled vacation is canceled by the Chief, for the good of the
Department, the employee may request to have the canceled portion of the vacation carried over to the next fiscal year or to be
paid for the canceled portion. The final determination of how canceled vacation will be treated will be made by the Police Chief or
his/her designee and the needs of the Department.
Town of Hooksett, NH & NEPBA Local 46 0701/2020-06/30/2023Vacation accruals are by anniversary date *and do not accrue
from year to year. In the event that an employee's scheduled vacation is canceled by the Chief, for the good of the Department, the
employee may request to have the canceled portion of the vacation carried over to the next fiscal year or to be paid for the canceled
portion. The final determination of how canceled vacation will be treated will be made by the Police Chief or his/her designee and
the needs of the Department.
*42.5 hours of vacation time may be carried over as of the employee’s anniversary date of Town of Hooksett NH
employment.
Public Works union employees: (vacation earned monthly - June 30th 240 hours max carry over (0-14 years
employment) 320 hours max carry over (15 years+ employment) or forfeited)
Town of Hooksett NH and Teamsters Local 633 07/01/2019-06/30/2021

Town Administrator Contract (terms July 1st - June 30th - vacation dumped July 1st)
The Administrator may have no more than thirty (30) days of vacation leave at any given time; use it or lose it.

Fire Chief Contract (terms May 1st - April 30th - vacation dumped May 1st - no carry over as of
April 30th - forfeited)
The employee will not receive any compensation for any unused vacation days.

FINANCIAL IMPACT:
Employee vacation time is budgeted, since the employee earns this time.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
Temporary easing of Town Personnel Plan, Union Contracts and Employee Contracts as a result of
COVID-19 orders.
RECOMMENDATION:
Town Council, due to COVID-19 orders, provide that employees exceeding their threshold of vacation
time carry over through December 31, 2020 be allowed to:
1) carry over excess vacation time for 2020, but then must use that time by their respective vacation
time carry over limit in 2021: (a) June 30, 2021 for non-union & Public Works Union, b) anniversary
date in 2021 for Fire-Rescue Union or Police Union OR

Page 110 of 154

Agenda Item #16.7.

2) buy out excess vacation time for 2020 on their respective vacation carry over in 2020: a) June 30,
2020 for non-union & Public Works Union, b) anniversary date in 2020 for Fire-Rescue Union or
Police Union OR
3) do a combination of 1 (carry over) & 2 (buy out) above
Note: Those who wish to carry over excess vacation time and use prior to their carry over limit in
2021 must still obtain the approval of their department head for the specific dates for vacation leave
based on the operations of the department.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
Motion to Approve COVID-19 HOOKSETT ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER 2020-B Town Council, due to
COVID-19 orders, provide that employees exceeding their threshold of vacation time carry over
through December 31, 2020 be allowed to:
1) carry over excess vacation time for 2020, but then must use that time by their respective vacation
time carry over limit in 2021: (a) June 30, 2021 for non-union & Public Works Union, b) anniversary
date in 2021 for Fire-Rescue Union or Police Union OR
2) buy out excess vacation time for 2020 on their respective vacation carry over in 2020: a) June 30,
2020 for non-union & Public Works Union, b) anniversary date in 2020 for Fire-Rescue Union or
Police Union OR
3) do a combination of 1 (carry over) & 2 (buy out) above
Note: Those who wish to carry over excess vacation time and use prior to their carry over limit in
2021 must still obtain the approval of their department head for the specific dates for vacation leave
based on the operations of the department.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
COVID 19 has cause many operational disruptions to the function of municipal government. COVID
19 has caused many of Hooksett's municipal staff to change, if not, cancel their vacation plans. What
staff proposes are options to allow employees to either carry over, buy out or a combination of both
for Council's consideration.

Page 111 of 154

Page 112 of 154

Agenda Item #16.8.

Town Council

STAFF REPORT
Town Council
Town of Hooksett, NH - Municipal Volunteers (tabled at 04/22/2020 Town Council
Meeting)
Meeting:
Town Council - 13 May 2020
Department:
Administration
Staff Contact: Donna Fitzpatrick, Administrative Services Coordinator
To:
Title:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION:
The Town of Hooksett, NH is looking closer at our use of volunteers on our Town properties. There are many benefits to
having volunteers (both as a community group or individually), however we also want to minimize our liability.
Town Administration has gathered the following information:
Primex - Volunteer Overview Sheet
FLSA – volunteer is defined as an individual who performs hours of service for a public agency for civic, charitable, or
humanitarian reasons, without promise, expectation or receipt of compensation for services rendered.
Primex – workers' compensation policy - volunteers are not covered under workers’ compensation
Primex – property-liability policy – volunteers covered “out of pocket medical expenses up to $10,000 for reasonable
and necessary medical expenses incurred within two (2) years of the accident date, and excess of any other insurance or
coverage, for injuries sustained by a Volunteer within the scope and arising out of their assigned volunteer activities for
the municipality”
NHDOL - volunteers must be rostered and supervised by a staff member of the municipality and have a scope of duties
NHMA Conference 2019 – Session on Volunteer Risk Management – Participant Agreements, Waivers and Releases of
Liability “A written waiver of liability will probably not provide full protection against liability to the municipality for every
possible harm or injury arising out an agreement.”
Community Group Volunteers - obtain insurance for activity on Town property
Collective Bargaining Agreements – volunteers should be discussed with the respective union to minimize a potential
grievance of volunteers doing union job duties and taking away potential wages/overtime.

FINANCIAL IMPACT:
To be determined
POLICY IMPLICATIONS:
Town policy should be developed for recruiting, retaining, evaluating, ending volunteer relationships
for both community groups and individuals.

Page 113 of 154

Agenda Item #16.8.

RECOMMENDATION:
Initiate discussion on Town of Hooksett, NH - Municipal Volunteers at the Town Council meeting of
May 13, 2020 and continue discussion/make motion at the Council meeting of May 27, 2020.
SUGGESTED MOTION:
No motion needed at the Town Council May 13, 2020 meeting; initiating discussion on subject matter.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S RECOMMENDATION:
Discussion purposes only
ATTACHMENTS:
Volunteers and Interns_Jan 2018

Page 114 of 154

Agenda Item #16.8.

Volunteers and Interns
PRIMEX3 RISK MANAGEMENT BULLETIN
Status
Volunteers are persons who perform work for a defined period of time
without compensation in order to contribute. Interns are persons placed
in a work setting for a defined period of time without compensation to gain
educational enrichment. Neither role constitutes an employment relationship.

Primex3 Coverage
Neither role would enable the person in it to be covered by the public
entity’s workers compensation insurance (with the exception of the few
special categories of public safety volunteers recognized as “employees” under
RSA 281-A). Interns hosted by a public entity are not covered by the public entity’s liability insurance. Volunteers,
however, have coverage through the public entity for covered claims occurring within the scope and course of
their official volunteer duties. Public entities hosting internships and utilizing volunteer services have liability
coverage for covered claims that occur in the scope and course of administering and supervising these arrangements.

Department of Labor Compliance
Volunteers do not present a compliance concern if they are properly documented and treated as volunteers.
Effective documentation and practices will protect against claims that a volunteer is actually an employee that
should be made whole. Volunteers should generally be age 18 or older. Youth volunteers present special concerns
because of youth labor laws, and should only be allowed to volunteer with written parental consent for a limited
assignment that is safe, brief and not recurring. Youth volunteers should furnish “working papers” and the assignments
should comply with youth labor laws. Youth volunteer scenarios, because they vary greatly and have significant legal
implications, should be reviewed with your legal counsel.
Click the links below for more detailed information.
https://www.nh.gov/nhsl/documents/best_practice_volunteers.pdf
https://www.nh.gov/labor/inspection/wage-hour/youth-employment.htm
https://www.nh.gov/labor/documents/child-labor-guide.pdf
Interns, barring any regulatory exception, should only be accepted in conjunction with a Department of
Labor (DOL) approved “school to work” program and if your agency has been approved as a host site:
https://www.nh.gov/labor/inspection/school-to-work.htm Interns, from the DOL perspective, can’t be utilized
as a source of labor; they are allowed in the workplace for educational enrichment as it relates to the workplace.
Internship placements typically should involve an agreement between the school and the host relative to
responsibilities and expectations, and should provide for written proof of parental consent in the case of minors.
The host site should request documentation of parental consent and that the educational program is presently
DOL approved.
- continued -



Trust. Excellence. Service.

JAN
2018

Page 115 of 154

Agenda Item #16.8.

PRIMEX3 RISK MANAGEMENT BULLETIN
Vo l u n t e e r s a n d I n t e r n s - c o n t i n u e d

DOL compliance will turn on documentation and practices. DOL review
would likely focus on whether a person was properly classified and managed
in their role. Lack of documentation is of course construed against the entity.

Background Checks

County Commissioners may require any volunteer to submit to background
check. RSA 28:10-c. In a Town Manager form of local government, a public
entity may require volunteers who work with children, the elderly, public funds,
or who enter citizens’ homes, to undergo a background check. RSA 41:9-b. In schools, volunteers
whose roles place them in proximity to children generally must receive a background check. RSA 189:13-a.

Some Best Practices
§§ Use an “Intern File” or “Volunteer” file in the person’s name to hold documentation.
§§ Implement an efficient on-boarding process that includes application, agreement, background check
when applicable, completion and review of necessary paperwork, review and distribution of applicable
policies (behavioral and safety) and procedures, review of assignments, program or functions, introduction
to supervisor(s) or mentor(s), training as needed, tour of relevant facility, etc.
§§ Use an agreement that establishes status, mutual expectations, authority, and responsibilities.
§§ Don’t allow service or internship to begin until all paperwork is completed and on file.
§§ Keep track of hours and monitor activities to ensure that persons remain within roles.
§§ Review with relevant staff how to professionally interact with interns and/or volunteers, and keep
an eye out to make sure the interaction proceeds smoothly.
§§ Review the person’s file to ensure it contains information sufficient to establish the person’s lawful
role in the context of a DOL review.
§§ Prevent interns and volunteers (with the exception of specialized public safety volunteers recognized
by RSA 281-A) from encountering any dangerous tasks, equipment or environments.
§§ Meet with intern or volunteer as practicable to ensure the experience is on track and consider having
a brief exit discussion at the end of the arrangement to wrap-up.
§§ Document termination of the arrangement.

If you have any questions, please contact your Risk Management Consultant at 800-698-2364.



Trust. Excellence. Service.

JAN
2018

Page 116 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

Town of Hooksett
Town Council Meeting Minutes
Wednesday, March 11, 2020
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47

The Hooksett Town Council met on Wednesday, March 11, 2020 at 5:30 in the Hooksett Municipal
Building.
CALL TO ORDER
Chair Sullivan called the meeting of 11 Mar 2020 to order at 5:30 pm.
PROOF OF POSTING
Administrative Services Coordinator Donna Fitzpatrick provided proof of posting.
ROLL CALL- ATTENDANCE
In Attendance: Councilor James Sullivan, Councilor John Durand, Councilor James Levesque,
Councilor Clifford Jones, Councilor Timothy Tsantoulis, Councilor Clark Karolian
Arrived late: Councilor Robert Duhaime (5:35 pm); Councilor Avery Comai (5:41 pm)
Missing: Councilor Alex Walczyk
NON-PUBLIC SESSION #1 NH RSA 91-A:3 II (a)
Chair Sullivan motioned to enter non-public session at 5:32 pm. C. Karolian seconded the
motion.
Roll Call Vote #2
R. Duhaime Not present (arrived at 5:35 pm)
J Durand
Aye
C. Jones
Aye
J. Levesque Aye
A. Walczyk Not present
A. Comai
Not present (arrived at 5:41 pm)
C. Karolian Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (6-0).
RSA 91-A:3, II (a) The dismissal, promotion, or compensation of any public employee or the disciplining
of such employee, or the investigation of any charges against him or her, unless the employee affected
(1) has a right to a public meeting, and (2) requests that he meeting be open, in which case the request
shall be granted.
Chair Sullivan motioned to leave public session at 6:48 pm. T. Tsantoulis seconded the motion.
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
T. Tsantoulis motioned to seal the minutes of the non-public session. J. Levesque seconded the
motion.
Roll Call Vote #3
TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

1

Page 117 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98

A. Walczyk Not present
J. Levesque Aye
C. Jones
Aye
R. Duhaime Aye
J. Durand
Aye
C. Karolian Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
A. Comai
Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
Chair Sullivan called for the Pledge of Allegiance.
AGENDA OVERVIEW
Chair Sullivan: We will first have a Public Hearing regarding the acceptance of a donation. We also
have a Scheduled Appointment with Town Clerk Todd Rainier and Town Moderator Marc Miville who
will report on the March 10, 2020 election.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
Public Hearing to accept the donation of $58,178.00 from Lamontagne Builders (Stinson Hills,
LLC) to the Town of Hooksett (not in lieu of Impact Fees).
Chair Sullivan: I will read the Public Hearing Notice.
The Hooksett Town Council will be holding a public hearing on Wednesday, March 11, 2020 @
6:00 pm at the Hooksett Town Hall Chambers, 35 Main Street, Hooksett, NH. The purpose of
the public hearing is to accept a donation for a total amount of $58,178 ($30,178 + $28,000)
from Lamontagne Builders (Stinson Hills, LLC) to the Town of Hooksett (not in lieu of Impact
Fees) per RSA 31:95-b, III (a). For documentation or questions, contact the Hooksett Public
Works Department at 603-668-8019.
David Ross, 56 Sherwood Drive: There are a couple of concerns I have. I was made privy to one of the
checks; on the memo line was written ‘signed in protest.’ How can a donation be made in protest?
Another document I saw says that, effectively, this is a fee for road maintenance. A donation made
under protest is an oxymoron. I am very concerned that this may put the Town in legal jeopardy. Being
forced to donate in order to do business is extortion. Call it a fee or call it a charge. I think the Council
needs to rethink this before accepting it.
R. Duhaime: I was on the Planning Board when the developer, Stinson Hills, LLC, bought this
subdivision from another developer. The purchasing developer assumes all of the rights and
requirements of the plan. He can’t pick and choose which responsibilities he wants to assume.
Chair Sullivan: I want to answer a question just posed to me by Councilor Karolian. This is a Public
Hearing, not Public Input, so Councilors may respond to questions and comment on the issue.
A. Garron: This project was approved in 2008 as a conservation subdivision. As such, the developer
was required to have open space and an active recreational space. A provision allows for the developer
to provide something in lieu of the recreational space if the abutters are concerned about noise from the
recreational area. In this case, they did, and the developer agreed to instead pay for the lease of a
street sweeper. At that time, the Town was leasing a street sweeper. Going forward 12 years, the
TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

2

Page 118 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149

situation is different because the Town now has purchased a street sweeper. Town Planner Nick
Williams brought me in on the conversation with Mr. Lamontagne when he voiced his displeasure.
Unfortunately, these were the conditions of approval.
J. Durand: Is it possible to see these checks? It is hard to read them in our packets.
C. Karolian: I have it up here on my screen.
D. Ross: It’s not a donation; it’s a fee, a contract obligation. That’s a different RSA.
A. Garron: Councilor Karolian asked to meet with me on this. I brought in Finance Director Christine
Soucie, who said these funds are unanticipated revenue. When I was speaking with Mr. Lamontagne
and Nick Williams, Mr. Lamontagne said he was paying under protest. We could have called it a
number of things. ‘Donation’ is probably the best term.
C. Karolian: When it comes to the street sweeper…this is supposed to be a payment on…according
to…I am going to read for the public and for the public’s benefit what it actually says for language on
the approved plan. I have on my screen a check dated November 27, 2019 in the amount of $30,178.
On the bottom left it says, ’paid under protest, funds for roadway maintenance, fee intended for a street
sweeper lease.’ Another check with the same date in the amount of $28,000 says ‘Recreation
Department contribution.’ I have a few questions: Why is this person protesting? This was approved in
2008. When did the first contractor start working on the project, and when was the project purchased by
Mr. Lamontagne? Do you have ballpark dates?
R. Duhaime: The development started no more than three years ago. They did no blasting. They only
put in the main road up to the first major wetlands crossing. Mr. Lamontagne has had the project for
about one and a half years.
A. Garron: Actually, the first plan was approved in 2004 but was modified and approved again in
2008.The plan we have before us is the one approved in 2008.
R. Duhaime: In 2012 an Alternation of Terrain (AOT) permit was granted, and in 2013 a Wetlands
permit was obtained.
C. Karolian: When a plan is approved, isn’t there a five-year window that they have to…
R. Duhaime: … show some substantial completion to occur. Right, but the original plan didn’t have it
connecting to Jacob Avenue. It was not a phasing plan. There were stages and amendments to the
plan. More land was purchased and a phasing plan was implemented.
C. Karolian: For the benefit of the public, I will read from the approved plan. Number 12 says,” The
developer/contractor is responsible to the Town of Hooksett for a roadway maintenance fee of $30,178,
to be paid prior to the issuance of the first Certificate of Occupancy (CO), to be a lease payment for a
street sweeper and not in lieu of Impact Fees.” I would like to know if this street sweeping work was
subcontracted to a private company or the lease of equipment.
Earl Labonte, Public Works Director: It was for the lease of a street sweeper.
C. Karolian: Number 13 says, “The developer is responsible for making a Recreation Department
contribution of $28,000 at the start of phase two. It is not in lieu of Impact Fees.” This is for the
construction of Colleen Circle, which I think has just started. Was the first CO granted prior to the
TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

3

Page 119 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200

payment for roadway maintenance? I asked the Town Administrator and the Finance Director about the
deposit of these checks, because at a meeting a few months ago, I was told that checks are held until
the Town Council accepts them. On November 27, 2019 check #1412 from Lamontagne Builders – a
donation for a street sweeper - was deposited, and a second check – a donation to the Recreation
Department – was also deposited, and in the same account for unanticipated revenue. These were not
accepted by the Town Council. For the record, I do not know Mr. Lamontagne. I have no business with
him and no connection whatsoever. Why were these checks not accepted in November? Apparently,
these deposits were discovered during auditing or reconciliation of accounts.
Chair Sullivan: Regarding all donations to the Town, this is a question which needs to be addressed.
You did bring up the question of where checks are kept. There is a four-month delay here, and we need
to clarify that. I would like to get back first to the original question.
C. Karolian: I beg to differ. This is important. Under RSA 31-95 b, the law is very specific about what is
to be done with unanticipated revenue and donations.
A. Garron: Councilor Karolian asked me the same question. According to the Finance Director, the
checks were deposited but not spent, awaiting a Town Council decision.
Chair Sullivan: Why did it take so long?
C. Karolian: It does matter what it is being called. It was required to be paid by the developer. There is
a huge time lag since 2004 and even 2008. On page six of the Brookview Development Plan, if says
that if these amounts were not paid, they could not continue with the development. What will happen to
these plans, going forward, if the Town Council doesn’t accept the funds?
A. Garron: This was discussed in my office. My perspective may be different from that of Councilor
Karolian. My assumption, given that these payments were in place of creating a recreation area, is that
the opportunity to appeal that decision was in 2004.
T. Tsantoulis: Originally, this item had a particular smell that was not pleasant. It helps to now know that
the subdivision changed hands. The second developer was perhaps caught off guard and blindsided
about the $58,178 and not prepared for it. I want to thank the Town Administrator and Councilor
Duhaime for their explanations. To go any further would be to call into question the integrity of these
two individuals, which I am not prepared to do. I do wonder why the checks were cashed. We may have
to later address the checks deposited prematurely.
J. Durand: Page eight of our packet says this is a fee, and it is called a fee in other places. Now it is a
donation. I want Mr. Lamontagne to be here for a discussion about the checks.
J. Durand motioned to table this item and take it up when Mr. Lamontagne can be here. C.
Karolian seconded the motion.
Chair Sullivan: This may require additional posting.
C. Karolian: Can I amend a motion to table?
Chair Sullivan: No, a motion to table cannot be amended.
A roll call vote was taken on the motion.
TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

4

Page 120 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213
214
215
216
217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233
234
235
236
237
238
239
240
241
242
243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251

Roll Call Vote #4
A. Walczyk Not present
J. Levesque Aye
C. Jones
Aye
R. Duhaime Nay
J. Durand
Aye
C. Karolian Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
A. Comai
Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted in favor (7-1).
C. Karolian: I was not attacking the integrity or credibility of anyone.
T. Tsantoulis: I was just saying that I wasn’t prepared to do that.
PUBLIC INPUT
D. Ross, 56 Sherwood Drive: The landscape bond release for Osborne Agway is coming up on the
agenda. I just want to say that this is premature when it is not even Spring. They were going to create a
wetland on the side of the road, a ditch. What is there does not resemble a wetland. Drainage is coming
out under the pavement. I asked about a berm. They have paid no attention to that insight. Water will
continue to rise. I am concerned because it is the Town’s responsibility to protect landowners. I
recommend holding off on the release of the bond.
SPECIAL RECOGNITION
Hooksett Municipal Employee - New Hires
A. Garron: We have two new hires. Kari Barton is a new Laborer in the Public Works Department, and
Jennifer Neely is a new Police Patrol Officer.
SCHEDULED APPOINTMENTS
Todd Rainier, Town Clerk and Marc Miville, Town Moderator - March 10, 2020
Town/School/Special General Election Results
T. Rainer: We began the election yesterday with 10,702 registered voters. The checklist supervisors
reported 27 new registrations at the election. Ballots cast totaled 2,021, with 83 of these being
absentees. It was a fantastic turnout. I posted the results on the website at 10:30 pm. Notification letters
were mailed today to candidates voted into office.
T. Rainier: In District 6, two candidates received two votes each. Letters have been sent informing them
of a coin toss to determine the outcome per RSA 669:36. The coin toss will be held in the Town Clerk’s
office on Tuesday, March 17, 2020 at 2:00 pm.
T. Rainier: The vacancy for the Cemetery Commission did not appear on the ballot due to an error on
my part. In transposing the list of candidates in the order they were to appear on the ballot to the order
form for the printer, I inadvertently left that section off. There was no candidate; it would have been a
write-in. I have consulted Attorney Serge, and he recommends appointing someone to fill this position,
per your usual process, until the 2021 town election, and then electing someone for a two-year term.
TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

5

Page 121 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

252
253
254
255
256
257
258
259
260
261
262
263
264
265
266
267
268
269
270
271
272
273
274
275
276
277
278
279
280
281
282
283
284
285
286
287
288
289
290
291
292
293
294
295
296
297
298
299
300
301
302
303

T. Rainier: Our thanks to everyone who helped at the polls. The DPW sets up and breaks down the
voting booths for us at every election, and we are grateful. I want to thank the Police Department,
especially Officer Logan and Lieutenant Robie, for their engagement in the process on Election Day.
They pitched in, handing out stickers and performing other tasks. We had a resident with a medical
emergency late in the day, and Lieutenant Robie immediately responded. Additional thanks go to the
School District Clerk/Moderator Leeann Moynihan. She was a tremendous help throughout the entire
day. Thanks, Leeann. Next, thanks to David Ross, who cannot seem to sit still when we are reconciling
the results before announcing them. He was a tremendous help with breaking down and packing the
election materials. Councilors were key assistants throughout the day. You experienced firsthand the
difference you made, and we appreciate your inclusion in this process. No matter what size the election
is, it takes a group of people to assist the Board of Elections in an execution of a successful event. We
had six to ten voters who volunteered their time to count unmarked ballots in the weeks before the
Election. For the Town, School, and State Elections, we counted and collated over 11,000 pages.
Another 12 to 30 unpaid residents assisted with reconciling the checklist and write-in results at the
close of the polls. These individuals are committed to the process and all they receive is a “thank you”
and maybe a bottle of water in return for their many hours of effort. They are an integral part of the
team that makes elections successful.
T. Rainier: Yesterday was not without its hiccups. Wet ballots do not agree with the 1980’s technology
of the Accuvote tabulators, and we had numerous issues throughout the day as a direct result of the
use of hand sanitizer and disinfectant wipes by the voters. The three elections we have facilitated in the
last two months have each offered challenges, some we have never seen before. The Board of
Elections, volunteers, elected officials and staff have met each of these challenges as a team, and we
all should be happy with the outcome. Be aware that we have two large elections in the Fall: the State
Primary on September 8th (the day after Labor Day) and the General Election on November 3rd. Please
mark your calendars now, because we need you there.
M. Miville: I reminded candidates throughout the day yesterday that, per State law, they have ten (10)
days to remove their signs.
CONSENT AGENDA
Osborne’s Agway Site Letter of Credit Release of $346,363.00 to Farm Credit East, ACA
B. Thomas: I am in charge of inspecting the site work, not so much the foundation. Mr. Ross said when
the foundation was put in there was water around the foundation, which could come up and out of
pavement, possibly destabilizing the pavement or the foundation. Matt Lavoie, Code Enforcement
Officer, and I I will go to see Mr. Osborne before we close out the project. We may call Mr. Ross to
share his pictures again. I am happy to do that.
R. Duhaime: We still have the landscaping bond.
B. Thomas: That is only $7,000. I would still like to reduce the bond.
C. Karolian motioned to table this item until the Council gets information back from the Town
Engineer that every step from the pouring of the foundation is complete and until he gets back
to us about the water, drainage, and wetlands. T. Tsantoulis seconded the motion.
Voted in favor (7-1). R. Duhaime voted nay.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S REPORT
A. Garron: We have put information about the coronavirus on the Administration and Code
Enforcement pages of the Town website, with links to Health & Human Services and ultimately to the
TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

6

Page 122 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

304
305
306
307
308
309
310
311
312
313
314
315
316
317
318
319
320
321
322
323
324
325
326
327
328
329
330
331
332
333
334
335
336
337
338
339
340
341
342
343
344
345
346
347
348
349
350
351
352
353
354

CDC. The message is still the same regarding precautions everyone should be taking. There are three
reported cases in Grafton County and two in Rockingham at this time.
A. Garron: As you will remember, the DES was here on January 22nd. They have set a meeting for May
instead of April so that they can get additional well water samples. Bonnie Smith has arranged for the
workshop to take place at Cawley Middle School on May 11th beginning at 6:00 pm.
T. Tsantoulis: Would you please email us the information regarding the date and time?
A. Garron: Yes, I will do that.
A. Garron: I was interviewed today by a Union Leader reporter about our labor contracts which passed
at the Town Election yesterday. We had two successful negotiations, with cost savings for one and
maintenance plus some cost savings for the other.
A. Garron: I want to announce that a meeting for the organization of the bicentennial celebration will be
held on March 18th beginning at 6:00 pm in the Council Chambers. I want to thank Nick Germain and
Chair Sullivan for their work on this.
OLD BUSINESS
TIF District Sewer Final Design Amendment
A. Garron: This is a follow-up to the January 22nd presentation of the EDAC on the TIF Sewer District
Design.
B. Thomas: To summarize, the Town wants to provide sewer to the west side of Hooksett. The
engineering study of the basic layout is complete, including the cost to design the water system, given
that it has been determined that water is included in infrastructure items approved via the warrant
article which was passed two years ago. Funding includes $1.2 million from the Sewer Department and
$2.25 million of TIF funds already collected and to be collected. There could also be Clean Water
Revolving Funds from the State. The Town Council has approved moving forward with this plan.
Underwood Engineering has now submitted a proposal for the final design of the TIF Distract sewer
and water in the form of an amendment to their existing contract. The existing contact in the amount of
$431,800 was for the engineering study and preliminary design. The proposed amendment includes
$807,200 for the final design, for a total of $1,239,000. It does not include construction monitoring
costs.
B. Thomas: Phases 1 and 2 will take place in the Exit 10 area and will include a new pump station in
the Kimball Drive area, a second river crossing to connect the proposed sewer to the Martins Ferry
Road pump station, and upgrades to the Martins Ferry Road pump station. Phase 1 will require gravity
sewer from the new pump station on Kimball Drive to Route 3A at the intersection of Goonan Road.
Phase 2 will require gravity sewer from the new pump station on Kimball Drive to Route 3A just north of
the self-storage facility. The Town will pay for sewer to Route 3A, north of Walmart. Working with the
business owners, hopefully they will build the sewers for their own properties. Phases 1 and 2 will be
designed this year and construction will start in 2021 and finish in 2022. The others will be designed
next year, going up Cross Street over two State-owned parcels to the Larrabee property. Phases 3
through 5 will be done by 2024, according to the plan.
R. Duhaime: Why does the design go up Cross Street? Why would we design Phase 3? Why don’t we
stop at Route 3A?

TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

7

Page 123 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

355
356
357
358
359
360
361
362
363
364
365
366
367
368
369
370
371
372
373
374
375
376
377
378
379
380
381
382
383
384
385
386
387
388
389
390
391
392
393
394
395
396
397
398
399
400
401
402
403
404
405

A. Garron: The reason we are paying for the design is because we want to make sure it is built
according to our design. This will help with negotiations.
Chair Sullivan: I understand your concern, Councilor Duhaime, is going up Cross Street to the Larrabee
property.
R. Duhaime: It goes out of the TIF District.
B. Thomas: One reason for us to do the design is so that it will be complete. We have a history of
developers disappearing. Second, we have more control over the design if we do it ourselves. Third, we
are trying to make a deal with developers; this will make it easier for them to come to the table. They
will do all of the construction after a certain point. The design goes out of the TIF District because it is
the simplest and easiest way. Supreme Industries has been involved in many of the discussions and
they are very much interested in this. What we have designed is the most efficient way to get to their
property. We can service the whole neighborhood. There is a benefit to getting the one property not in
the TIF District developed too.
R. Duhaime: By 2023, Supreme may not own that property. I don’t see the benefit in going there until
Phases 1 and 2 are done. Three years from now, none of this may be developed.
B. Thomas: There is no guarantees that anybody stays. This is a decent property and a good location.
We are designing outside of the district to get to another part of the district. Supreme would do the
construction; this is just the design.
C. Karolian: I want to go to the map to clarify the area to which Councilor Duhaime is referring.
B. Thomas: Supreme Industries, the Larrabee property, is the yellow-shaded area.
C. Karolian: What will be developed there?
B. Thomas: I am not sure what will be developed there.
R. Duhaime: There is no concrete agreement to develop that property.
Chair Sullivan: Phase 2 raises the same question.
T. Tsantoulis: One side is in the TIF District and one is not.
R. Duhaime: This is an $800,000 design.
B. Thomas: This is a very small part of the design.
R. Duhaime: Where the blue line is, a dry line is already there.
A. Garron: The TIF Committee worked from July through December on this plan. These items were
debated. For Phases 1 and 2, businesses are already there. It is a good start. Water and sewer
projects are expensive. We want to design them ourselves so they fit into our system. We will build
some and the private entities will build the rest. There was a lot of discussion about Phase 3. Supreme
Industries attended a lot of meetings. We will back off on construction but provide the design. It is
topographically the best, and the Town could more easily get the needed wetland easements from the
State than private property owners. January 22nd was the time to flesh this out.
TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

8

Page 124 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

406
407
408
409
410
411
412
413
414
415
416
417
418
419
420
421
422
423
424
425
426
427
428
429
430
431
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
439
440
441
442
443
444
445
446
447
448
449
450
451
452
453
454
455

Chair Sullivan: The big purple area on the map is the commercial zone.
R. Duhaime: That is already an accepted town road. We are crossing into something…the State could
sell its surplus land. We are getting out of the TIF District. We are not looking for commercial
development on Cross Road. We are stepping out of bounds from what we agreed to. There is nothing
on paper. There is no agreement.
C. Karolian: For clarity, is the dotted red line the border of the TIF area?
R. Duhaime: Correct.
A. Garron: This has been voted on and done.
C. Karolian: The Town has decided that the TIF District will go from the east side of Route 93 and shoot
northwest to those two properties and then back down to the river. Why didn’t the design go farther up
Route 3A, east of Route 93, and stay along the Route 3A corridor?
A. Garron: Bruce, do you know why the sewer goes along the riverbank and not along Route 3A?
B. Thomas: They are thinking about it. That is the one place they are thinking of moving it.
R. Duhaime: Why are the engineers designing the water system for Phase 1?
B. Thomas: It is not a big deal. Two water companies end at Hackett Hill Road. This will connect them
and we control where the lines go. This is 3,600 feet from Dunkin Donuts to New England Records
Retention.
R. Duhaime: What is the cost?
Chair Sullivan: We have established that infrastructure does include water.
R. Duhaime: Once we get to Route 3A, I don’t remember seeing this design.
A. Garron: This is exactly the same plan we saw in January.
Chair Sullivan: We are debating what is already approved. The voters approved the funding but the
outline of the TIF District is up to us.
C. Karolian: Why does the design not bring water as far as it brings the sewer to Supreme Industries?
B. Thomas: They will have to design it. For now, just ignore the green line. I was trying to tell you, but I
didn’t get to.
R. Duhaime: Why does the design go beyond Phase 2?
B. Thomas: By awarding the whole design, it gets done faster.
Chair Sullivan: It is comparable to the Master Plan.
TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

9

Page 125 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

456
457
458
459
460
461
462
463
464
465
466
467
468
469
470
471
472
473
474
475
476
477
478
479
480
481
482
483
484
485
486
487
488
489
490
491
492
493
494
495
496
497
498
499
500
501
502
503
504
505

A. Garron: I thought this was a high priority of the community. Phases 1 and 2 are the low hanging fruit.
I would hate to be behind schedule and miss opportunities.
T. Tsantoulis: When we agreed to form a TIF District, Phases 1 and 2 had immediate needs. We
understood there was a certain amount of gamble. We hired an engineering firm in which we have faith
and confidence. More harm than good will be done if we pick this thing apart. We need to get it running.
We have used a lot of time arguing over a small part of the project.
C. Karolian: Is this the complete design for Phases 1 through 5?
B. Thomas: Yes, it is. The bond is for the whole design.
C. Karolian: Should we need to spend more on design?
A. Garron: Only if we change the design. That is the caveat.
T. Tsantoulis motioned to approve of the Town Administrator signing Amendment Number 1 of
Underwood Engineering’s contract with the Town to increase the existing contract by $807,200
for a new contract amount of $1,239,000. Chair Sullivan seconded the motion.
Chair Sullivan called for a roll call vote on the motion.
R. Duhaime: From Tri-Town to the Larrabee property is adding sewer and water for one specific
property. There has to be a cost for this. It should go all the way to Bass Pro Shop and all of the other
businesses.
C. Karolian: From the old amount to the new is an increase of 100% or double? Does it cost $800,000
to go from the Larrabee property back to the TIF District?
B. Thomas: The first part, $431,800, was the engineering study and preliminary design. The $807,200
is for the actual design and other costs such as the water main, traffic studies, easements, and surveys.
Chair Sullivan: The project is $2.5 million. We must have discussed going through private property
lines. We need to pull back if we told the voters differently. We need to close up shop.
R. Duhaime: What we are looking at is a different plan.
Chair Sullivan: This one has a different color format.
T. Tsantoulis: Mr. Chairman, may I call the question?
Chair Sullivan called for a vote on the motion to approve Amendment Number 1 of Underwood
Engineering’s contract with the Town to increase the existing contract by $807,for a new contract
amount of $1,239,000.
Roll Call Vote #5
T. Tsantoulis Aye
C. Jones
Nay
R. Duhaime Nay
A. Walczyk Not present
J. Levesque Nay
TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

10

Page 126 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

506
507
508
509
510
511
512
513
514
515
516
517
518
519
520
521
522
523
524
525
526
527
528
529
530
531
532
533
534
535
536
537
538
539
540
541
542
543
544
545
546
547
548
549
550
551
552
553
554
555

C. Karolian Nay
J. Durand
Nay
A. Comai
Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
The motion failed (3-5).
T. Tsantoulis: I would like to ask the Town Administrator to invite the project manager from Underwood
Engineering to a future meeting to explain this to us.
Chair Sullivan: We should contact the TIF Committee to whom we assigned this task. We have
subcommittees, but if we want to change the Charter and have the Town Council make all decisions
about planning and zoning, we are going to have very long meetings.
A. Garron: The TIF Committee did a good job presenting this plan.
D. Fitzpatrick: I have a comment. At our January 22nd meeting, many things you are talking about were
covered. The 3,600-foot water line connection from the Records Retention Center to Dunkin Donuts, for
example. I can share these minutes with you or you can go on line to read them.
NEW BUSINESS
Storm Water Management Program / Ordinance # 2020-1
E. Labonte: We need to enact an ordinance for storm water management. This is a requirement under
the EPA mandate and NHDES mandates. This is one phase of completing the rest of the storm water
management plan. This proposed ordinance mirrors those of nearby communities. It will bring us one
step closer to compliance with federal and state requirements. It will allow us to work on an Illicit
Discharge Detection & Elimination (IDDE) management plan.
T. Tsantoulis motioned to hold a public hearing on the Storm Water Management Program/
Ordinance #220-1 at the next Town Council meeting on March 25, 2020. A. Comai seconded the
motion.
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
J. Levesque left the meeting at 9:00 pm.
NHMA 2021-2022 Legislative Policy Process
D. Fitzpatrick: At the last meeting, Mr. Garron gave a brief overview of the NHMA Legislative Policy
Process. If anyone wants to volunteer for one of the committees, please contact me now. Their first
meeting will be on April 3rd. Page 37 of your packets lists the three committees on which you might
volunteer to serve: Finance and Revenue; General Administration and Governance; and Infrastructure,
Development, and Land Use. At the last meeting, we distributed an orange packet with proposed
legislative policies. It might give you ideas for things to bring forward. This is a biennial process.
Chair Sullivan: I would like to check the RSA requiring that three Town Councilors be in attendance at
the end of the Town Meeting. I am wondering if it is possible to appoint someone to act on behalf of a
Councilor.
D. Fitzpatrick: I will check with the Town Clerk on that.

TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

11

Page 127 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

556
557
558
559
560
561
562
563
564
565
566
567
568
569
570
571
572
573
574
575
576
577
578
579
580
581
582
583
584
585
586
587
588
589
590
591
592
593
594
595
596
597
598
599
600
601
602
603
604
605
606

R. Duhaime: This is something I have talked about for years. I think there should be an exemption or at
least a discount on transponders for Hooksett residents. Trucks and cars avoid the tolls by going
around, and we wait in traffic. Hampton would support this, being in a similar situation. We have no
roundabout and no improvements. This is a ten-year plan, and it is not moving along. The House and
Senate were to vote on the Merrimack toll, but the Executive Council on its own voted to waive the toll
for Merrimack residents. They pay nothing. One of our State Representatives would help with the
drafting of the legislation. Then there is Exit 10. When we were laying out the TIF District, the State told
us we had to build our own highway intersection, that we couldn’t have access to the limited highway
access ramp. Then DeMoulas was given this access and Hooksett was not consulted. Then a $1
million easement was required to protect the State of New Hampshire taxpayers. We have been treated
unfairly.
D. Fitzpatrick. We can bring these proposals to our governing body, the Town Council, and by majority
vote present them to the NHMA. I may have one suggestion regarding the New Hampshire Retirement
System, if Mr. Garron agrees with me. I recommend waiting until July when the new Council is seated
to pick a conference delegate. Councilor Walczak is unable to volunteer this year.
APPROVAL OF MINUTES
Public: 02/26/2020
T. Tsantoulis motioned to approve the minutes of the public session of February 26, 2020 as
written. R. Duhaime seconded the motion.
Chair Sullivan: Councilor Comai, did you receive any corrections?
A. Comai: I did not.
Voted unanimously in favor (6-0). J. Levesque left the meeting prior to the vote; C. Karolian was
out of the room during the vote.

SUB-COMMITTEE REPORTS
T. Tsantoulis: The Board of Assessors has been busy with abatements, especially hardship
abatements.
Chair Sullivan: From the Heritage Commission, the owner of the barn at the old Duford house will be
tearing it down. It did not meet the demo criteria. However, the owner plans to preserve as much as he
can, including the cupola and surrounding woods. The plan is to recreate and expand the barn, creating
a function pavilion with inside dining. The Heritage Commission plans to meet with Code Enforcement
Officer Matt Lavoie about demo review criteria.
Chair Sullivan: I attended the Eagle Court of Honor on March 6th for Alex Gannon, a Hooksett resident
and Youth Achiever, who is at the US Naval Academy. It was fantastic and brought back a lot of
scouting memories. This was the 60th Court of Honor for Troop 292, which will be 70 years old in 2021.
R. Duhaime: The Planning Board approved a subdivision in the back of Webster Wood. Bernice Street
will continue to Granite Street. This is 27 single-family homes.
T. Tsantoulis: Is this a 55+ community?
TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

12

Page 128 of 154

Agenda Item #17.1.

607
608
609
610
611
612
613
614
615
616
617
618
619
620
621
622
623
624
625

R. Duhaime: No, it is not. Another subdivision proposal was postponed. The location is off Spruce Court
and off Farmer Road. It loops to Laurel Acres. There are a lot of wetlands and the land is hilly. The
subdivision consists of 133 acres for 37 homes.

626

Kathleen Donnelly

627
628
629
630

Kathleen Donnelly
Records Clerk

C. Karolian: I attended the Village Water Works presentation on March 3rd. It was informative and the
presentation was very well done. They have 1,200 customers, and their water source is Penacook
Pond. They have three pumping stations and plans to upgrade water lines and maintain their hydrants.
They talked about their new backflow valves and new water storage structure near the Pike Industries
quarry. Probably the first one in New Hampshire, it is built on the ground, one floor at a time. They
talked about the plumbing under Lilac Bridge, which was interesting. They are replacing old meters with
cellular ones so that people can look at their accounts. I have a better understanding of this operation
now, and I am glad that I attended. Village Water Works was happy to have a Town Council member in
attendance.
R. Duhaime motioned to adjourn at 9:18 pm. J. Durand seconded the motion.
Voted unanimously in favor (7-0).
Respectfully submitted,

TC MINUTES 03-11-2020

13

Page 129 of 154

Page 130 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

Town of Hooksett
Town Council Meeting Minutes
Wednesday, April 22, 2020
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

The Hooksett Town Council met on Wednesday, April 22, 2020 at 6:00. This was a virtual meeting, as
described by Chair Sullivan below.
CALL TO ORDER
Chair Sullivan called the meeting of 22 Apr 2020 to order at 6:08 pm.
Chair Sullivan: Please note that there is no physical location to observe and listen contemporaneously
to this meeting, which was authorized pursuant to the Governor’s Emergency Order. However, in
accordance with the Emergency Order, all members of the Council will be given the means to
communicate contemporaneously during this meeting through the Zoom Software platform. The public
may access the meeting as it is ongoing by dialing 1-877-853-5247 and then entering the Meeting ID,
which is 957-5157-0892, followed by the passcode, which is 2245. The meeting can also be joined via
this link: https://zoom.us/j/95751570892?pwd=UXhyMOFyTnpLV1dZUEc2MIFGUWRUZz09. The
public may also watch/listen with a delay at this location:
http://hooksett.granicus.com/ViewPublisher.php?view_id=2. This access notice was posted on
www.hooksett.org/town_council . It was physically posted at the main entrance at 35 Main Street in
Hooksett. If anyone has a problem during the meeting, please call 603-485-8472 Ext. 1. In the event
the public is unable to access the meeting, the meeting will adjourn and be rescheduled. Telephonic
access using the method just described will be considered the primary public access method in
accordance with the Emergency Order. All votes taken during this meeting shall be done by Roll Call
vote, and the meeting will commence by taking a Roll Call attendance. When each member states his
presence, he will also state whether there is anyone in the room with him during this meeting, which is
required under the Right-to-Know law. We requested that Public Input be communicated via email or a
letter. None was received.
PROOF OF POSTING
Town Administrator Andre Garron provided proof of posting.
ROLL CALL
In Attendance: Councilor James Sullivan, Councilor Robert Duhaime, Councilor John Durand,
Councilor Avery Comai, Councilor James Levesque, Councilor Clifford Jones, Councilor Timothy
Tsantoulis, Councilor Clark Karolian, and Councilor Alex Walczyk
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
Chair Sullivan called for the Pledge of Allegiance.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
Public hearing to accept unanticipated revenue in the amount of $58,178.00 ($30,178.00 +
$28,000.00) from Lamontagne Builders (Stinson Hills, LLC) (not in lieu of Impact Fees) per RSA
31:95-b, III (a). (tabled at 03/11/2020 Town Council Meeting).
Chair Sullivan: This item was tabled at the March 11, 2020 meeting by Councilor Durand. Does anyone
wish to motion to remove it from the table?
J. Durand: I would first like to hear the letter from Mr. Lamontagne.

TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

1

Page 131 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94

A. Garron: On February 26, 2020, Mr. Lamontagne was invited to attend this meeting. He told us he did
not wish to attend, but he submitted a letter instead.
Chair Sullivan: Does any Councilor object to having Town Administrator Garron read the letter?
All nine Councilors responded individually that they had no objection.
April 17, 2020
Nicholas Williams
Town of Hooksett Planning Director
RE:

Beaver Brook (aka "Brookview")
Note 12 - Sweeper Payment of $30,178; and Note
13 Recreation Payment of $28,000

Dear Nicholas:
You asked for my thoughts about the payments made by Stinson Hills, LLC which were marked as
"Paid under Protest" when delivered. First, I want to disclose that when Stinson acquired the
Project, the owner told us the payments described in Notes 12 and 13 no longer applied because
the Public Works Director had been fired. I admit I did not look into this with the Town because I
knew the circumstances surrounding the firing of the DPW Director had been very embarrassing.
When Stinson acquired the Project, we were never asked for either payment, which is why
receiving an email from Hooksett DPW last October asking for them, almost 2 years after we
began the Project, was a surprise, causing me to recall what the owner had told us about
those payments.
I am very uncomfortable with making payments when their purpose is in question and feel
strongly that the Town must do more research before asking for them to be made. When we
asked for additional information, it was presumably not readily available, likely because this
Project began on or about 2004. However, I need to insist someone dig into the old paper
records of the Planning Board, because we are entitled to know the requested payments
were legal and not payoffs. I offer more specific comments below.
Sweeper Payment
Note 12 states the developer is responsible to pay a "Town of Hooksett Roadway Maintenance
Fee of $30,178.00" to cover a lease payment for a street sweeper. Neither I nor anyone else I
know in the development community has ever heard of a Hooksett Roadway Maintenance Fee.
More importantly, Stinson does all its own road maintenance and plowing until the town
accepts the roads. Since Stinson will receive no benefit from a $31,078 lease payment for Town
equipment, I oppose making this payment and leave it to the Town to convince me it is
warranted.
Recreation Payment
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

2

Page 132 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125

The Project was approved under the Conservation Development Ordinance, which allows
additional "Recreational Lots" be developed for active recreation in addition to the Open Space.
Both benefit the residents residing in the development as opposed to the public and a
Recreational Lot is not required. The Project's open space exceeds the open space size
required by the Ordinance and for active recreation; there are sidewalks running along each
road throughout. Both benefit its residents, as opposed to the public at large. When I asked
others who were present at the Planning Board about this payment, they told me the Planning
Board expressed concern about requiring a developer to provide a "Recreational Lot" because
they impose additional maintenance costs on homeowners' associations, require insurance to
manage the risk and create problems when members of the public try to use them.
Note 13 required the developer make a $28,000 payment to the Hooksett Recreation
Department but then states the payment is not an impact fee. If it is not an impact fee, what is
it? The Hooksett Recreation Department only manages public recreation improvements to
which impact fees contribute. Each time Stinson builds a new home, it makes a $695.00
recreation impact fee payment. When the Project is complete, Stinson will have contributed
more than $60,000 in recreation impact fees. Since the former DPW Director also managed the
Parks and Recreation Department, I need to know the purpose of the $28,000 payment. If this
fee was imposed because the original developer elected to not develop a "Recreational Lot",
that does not work because the benefits of a Recreational Lot only apply to the lot owners in
the subdivision, not the general public.
I hope this letter helps the Board to understand Stinson's concerns and why it does not wish to
make any payments to the Town not knowing what they are for. These payments have no
rational basis, and we need to know more. Please feel free to seek legal advice on this action.

.

Sincerely,
Bob LaMontagne, Manager
Stinson Hills, LLC

126
127
128

C. Karolian: I would like to make a motion that this item remain on the table until the Planning Board
Chair appears before us with evidence that prior to and after 2004, when this project was approved, the
Town of Hooksett had roadway maintenance fees that had to be paid by other developers.

129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139

Chair Sullivan: We should not be talking about this item until it is taken off the table.
R. Duhaime: Legal can go back into this, but when a subdivision is approved, the plan is recorded with
the State and with the County Registry of Deeds. Anything recorded on the plan is vested and stays
with the deed.
T. Tsantoulis: We are violating our own rules by discussing this before it has been taken off the table.
R. Duhaime motioned to remove this item from the table. T. Tsantoulis seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #2
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

3

Page 133 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187

R. Duhaime Aye
J Durand
Nay
C. Jones
Nay
J. Levesque Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
A. Comai
Nay
C. Karolian Nay
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Sullivan
Nay
Motion failed (4-5).
C. Karolian motioned to have the Planning Board Chair appear before the Council with evidence
that prior to and after 2004 the Town of Hooksett had roadway maintenance fees that had to be
paid by other developers. Chair Sullivan seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote (called by Chair Sullivan)
C. Jones
Aye
R. Duhaime Aye
T. Tsantoulis Nay
A. Comai
Aye
C. Karolian Aye
J. Durand
Nay
A. Walczyk Aye
J Levesque Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted in favor (8-1).
A. Garron: Do we want to consult legal as well?
C. Jones motioned to solicit legal counsel on this issue. C. Karolian seconded the motion.
A roll call vote was taken on the motion.
Roll Call Vote #3
A. Comai
Aye
C. Jones
Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
J. Durand
Aye
R. Duhaime Aye
T. Tsantoulis Nay
J. Levesque Aye
C. Karolian Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted in favor (8-1).
Public Hearing to discuss the proposed Storm Water Management Program Ordinance #2020-1.
Chair Sullivan: I am going to read the Public Hearing Notice:

TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

4

Page 134 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213
214
215
216
217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233
234
235
236
237
238
239
240

The Hooksett Town Council will be holding a public hearing on Wednesday, April 22, 2020 @
6:00 pm at the Hooksett Town Hall – Council Chambers, 35 Main Street, Hooksett, NH. The
purpose of the public hearing is to discuss the proposed Storm Water Management Program
Ordinance #2020-1. This notice is per Chapter 231: 132-a of the NH Revised Statutes
Annotated, and Section 3.6 of the Hooksett Town Charter. The full text of the proposed
ordinance is available at the Town Clerk’s office and the Public Works Department and via
www.hooksett.org for your inspection. Questions should be directed to the Hooksett Public
Works Department at 603-668-8019 or the Office of the Town Clerk at 603-485-9534.
Chair Sullivan opened the Public Hearing at 6:40 pm.
E. Labonte stated that having this ordinance is a requirement of the EPA, and it establishes the Town’s
legal and administrative authority to regulate, respond to and enforce illicit discharges in the
community. It includes the authority to impose penalties as well.
R. Duhaime: Is this an amendment?
E. Labonte: No. It is a new ordinance. We did not have one prior to this.
J. Levesque: Is this retroactive?
E. Labonte: No, it is not retroactive but it is something which we should have done already.
Chair Sullivan: I will close the public hearing at the end of the meeting.
SPECIAL RECOGNITION
Hooksett Municipal Employee - New Hire
A Garron: We have one new hire. Mr. Kenneth Conaty is the new Wastewater Department
Superintendent, replacing Mr. Bruce Kudrick.
Chair Sullivan: We thank Mr. Kudrick for his many years of service, and I assume we will honor him at
some time in the future.
SCHEDULED APPOINTMENTS
Appointment with Judy Mason
Judy Mason, 115 Merrimack Street: May 7, 2020 is recognized as a National Day of Prayer. I would like
to gather with a small group of ten or fewer people outside by the flagpole on that day. Because of
COVID-19, I wanted to present this to the Town Council before inviting anyone, and if we are able to
have the gathering, I would like to invite someone to represent Town Hall.
T. Tsantoulis: While I would normally support this, I think this sends a mixed message about social
distancing. There is enough controversy about this; we don’t need to add to it. I am opposed to this at
this time.
C. Karolian: I feel the same as Councilor Tsantoulis.
R. Duhaime: I would be glad to join you, Judy. I suggest holding the event at the Veterans Park flagpole
where it would be safer and those gathering would be less conspicuous. How do you feel, Mr. Garron?
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020
5

Page 135 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

241
242
243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
255
256
257
258
259
260
261
262
263
264
265
266
267
268
269
270
271
272
273
274
275
276
277
278
279
280
281
282
283
284
285
286
287
288
289

A. Garron: I want the viewpoint of the Town Council.
Chief Bouchard: My only concern is who will enforce the guidelines if more than ten people show up.
J. Miller: This is by invitation only, and everyone will wear a mask.
Chief Burkush: I am okay with it.
Chair Sullivan: Could this be held at a place of worship?
C. Karolian: The intention is good, but this is Town property. How do we stop others from joining in?
What would be the enforcement?
J. Levesque: The parks are closed, aren’t they?
C. Karolian: What is the purpose of doing this in public?
J. Miller: The National Day of Prayer was established in 1952 by Ronald Reagan. I have been the State
coordinator for 15 years. We had an application in to hold this at the State capital, but it was cancelled.
The quantity of people and distancing were the issues. This is usually done in a public arena. We are
praying for the country; it is not a religious event.
R. Duhaime motioned to allow Judy Miller to hold a gathering of no more than ten people at
Veterans Park on May 7, 2020 to recognize the National Day of Prayer. J. Durand seconded the
motion.
T. Tsantoulis: We have no business authorizing this when the parks are closed.
R. Duhaime: The participants could gather on the Town right of way without being in the park. There is
plenty of room there for ten people to distance, or they can stay in their vehicles. We need all of the
prayers we can get.
C. Karolian: We need clarification as to whether or not this is a violation of the Governor’s order.
J. Levesque: What is there to stop others from showing up? Could there be a sign instructing people to
stay in their cars?
C. Karolian: This could set a precedent. What if others come forth with similar requests? This is a
slippery slope. I call the question.
A. Garron: The Governor’s order says that ten or more people should not gather.
Roll Call Vote #4
A. Walczyk Nay
J. Levesque Nay
C. Jones
Aye
R. Duhaime Aye
J. Durand
Aye
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

6

Page 136 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

290
291
292
293
294
295
296
297
298
299
300
301
302
303
304
305
306
307
308
309
310
311
312
313
314
315
316
317
318
319
320
321
322
323
324
325
326
327
328
329
330
331
332
333
334
335
336
337
338
339

C. Karolian Nay
T. Tsantoulis Nay
A. Comai
Nay
J. Sullivan
Nay
The motion failed (3-6).
David Boutin, Chair - Town of Hooksett Tax Increment Finance (TIF) Advisory Committee and
David Mercier, Underwood Engineering - TIF District Sewer Final Design Amendment (see item
15.1 for details)
Chair Sullivan: I am going to ask the Town Administrator to explain some confusion which resulted from
the minutes of the February 22, 2020 meeting.
A. Garron: At the meeting of February 22nd, during the discussion of the TIF District Sewer Final Design
Amendment, a motion to authorize the Town Administrator to sign the Amendment failed. Then,
Councilor Tsantoulis motioned to request that the Town Administrator invite the project engineer to a
future meeting. The motion was seconded by Councilor Levesque. However, a vote was not taken on
that motion. Then, the Town Administrator was simply asked to invite the project engineer to a future
meeting, which he did. Therefore, David Mercier of Underwood Engineering is with us tonight to provide
the information needed. He has been working on this project since June of 2019.
Chair Sullivan: A reconsideration motion and vote is needed.
D. Mercier: The TIF Advisory Committee met on November 20, 2019 specifically to consider two
alternate routes to get new sewer to the northwest side of Route 93 and the Exit 11 exchange. The first
option calls for continuing along Route 3A to the north beyond the Tri-Town Ice Arena, and cutting
cross-country parallel to Hackett Hill Road, drilling under the highway, and coming out on the other
side. The second option is to tie into the sewer line to the south of Tri-Town and up Cross Road, then
through the two DOT properties up to the private development. The owner of the private property was
invited to the meeting and was anxious that the second option be selected. He has a large pit as a
result of heavy soil mining. To have sewer, he would need to install a pump station and to pay the
maintenance associated with that. With the second option, he could connect to the Town’s gravity
sewer line. The plan is to get to the Route 3A/Cross Road intersection regardless. The TIF Advisory
Committee was not opposed to this if the developer is willing to pay for all of that sewer. They adopted
the second option unanimously, and the Town Council voted on it at the January 22nd meeting, when
they approved the proposal of the TIF Advisory Committee.
A. Garron: What portion of the project are we looking at exactly? Where does it start and where does it
end?
D. Mercier: If you look at the map which is being displayed, Cross Road is on the far left. There is a
thick, dark pink line going from E to F, to G, to G¹ and to H. The Supreme Industries property has a light
blue dotted line indicating private property from G¹ to H, which is the DOT properties.
Chair Sullivan: This was shown to us in January, so it is not new to us, correct?
D. Mercier: That is correct.
Chair Sullivan: Can we go out of the TIF District? Can the line be changed?
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

7

Page 137 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

340
341
342
343
344
345
346
347
348
349
350
351
352
353
354
355
356
357
358
359
360
361
362
363
364
365
366
367
368
369
370
371
372
373
374
375
376
377
378
379
380
381
382
383
384
385
386
387
388
389

D. Mercier: Your first question is not a question for me. Yes, you can expand the TIF District line.
R. Duhaime: We had this same presentation at the Planning Board meeting on Monday. Others on the
Planning Board agree with me that we should have something in writing from the developer; we do not
have that. Also, we have no easements from the State to go into that residential area. The idea is to
stay in the commercial district, not to bring sewer to residential areas. We should concentrate on
Phases I and II. New Hampshire could do anything with those properties after we bring sewer and
water to them. We would have no say about that.
Chair Sullivan: Do we have any agreements with anyone?
A. Garron: No, but we will be pursing those for Phases I and II. It is up to Supreme Industries or other
developers to connect to the sewer.
Chair Sullivan: Could we motion to expand the TIF District? Wouldn’t a developer need our approval on
a development project?
D. Mercier: The answer to both of your questions is yes. I just want to clarify that my company has no
ownership of this plan. This is a very small area of the total project, and it is not a major issue. If
Supreme Industries proposes a development, yes, they will need Planning Board approval.
T. Tsantoulis: Thank you for this information, Mr. Mercier. The TIF Committee has made this a priority.
We can’t pick this apart. These are untapped resources, and we have a great opportunity which other
communities would love to have. If the State builds something on their land, it is not necessarily
negative. It will probably benefit Hooksett and the rest of the State. We need to keep this project
moving.
D. Mercier: The TIF Advisory Committee’s goal is to encourage development. Supreme Industries is the
largest parcel that is close to being developed.
C. Karolian: Thank you for being here. You have clarified a lot. From the pump station to X versus D to
H, there is not a huge difference in linear footage, is there? The difference for Supreme Industries is
going from Z to X if they want to connect, right?
D. Mercier: The only reason for the second option is to eliminate the need for Supreme Industries to
install a pump station and incur the associated maintenance costs. The Advisory Committee wanted to
do what it could to help make this attractive to Supreme Industries without undo cost to the Town.
C. Karolian: This is not an advantage to the Town. I am looking at a map indicating a proposed area for
private funding. Can you explain that?
D. Mercier: That is not part of the TIF District. It is a separate project planning by the Sewer Department
to coordinate with the installation of public water and has nothing to do with the TIF plan. Also, these
maps have changed over time, so it is important to look at the date. In general, the goal of the Advisory
Committee is to get major components in place.
C. Karolian: Supreme Industries, which was in Phase 5, has been moved to Phase 3, correct?
D. Mercier: Yes, that is correct.
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

8

Page 138 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

390
391
392
393
394
395
396
397
398
399
400
401
402
403
404
405
406
407
408
409
410
411
412
413
414
415
416
417
418
419
420
421
422
423
424
425
426
427
428
429
430
431
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
439

A. Garron: I would like to address the concern with the contract amendment. In 2019, the voters
approved a $2.5 million bond. An RFP was issued and Underwood Engineering was chosen for the
project. Per Section 4, Subsection 5, the initial contract was for the preliminary engineering. The cost of
the final design was to be determined and added to the contract as an amendment. That is, the cost for
the final design was to be determined after the preliminary engineering was done and added as an
amendment. The third stage, for construction, would be another amendment. This is what we asked for.
Chair Sullivan: At this point we need a motion to reconsider or we need a new motion on the
amendment to the contract.
C. Karolian: If we do not include that route, the dollar amount of the amendment would change. Where
would that design stop?
D. Mercier: We were asked to separate the section from the intersection of Cross Road and Route 3A.
Doing so would reduce the amount of the amendment to the contract by $34,400. You could design an
alternate way to get to Hackett Hill Road or you could ask us to create another route.
C. Karolian: Does the route still include east of 3A and along the river to the neighborhoods to the north
to the pump station?
D. Mercier: Yes, it does.
R. Duhaime: The third phase will not be done until 2021.
A. Garron: If we subtract $34,400 from the contract amendment amount of $807,200, the revised
amount is $772,800.
R. Duhaime motioned to reduce the amount of the contract amendment to $772,800. T.
Tsantoulis seconded the motion.
T. Tsantoulis: If we take this piece out, what are the ramifications of these changes?
D. Mercier: If you take this piece out, which is a small part of the much larger project, the cost goes
down. If it is added, say five years later, as a stand-alone project, the price will literally be double.
R. Duhaime: The west side, which is residential, was never supposed to part of the District.
T. Tsantoulis: I want this project to continue. I am very much in favor of it. We want to be certain not to
blow it out of the water.
C. Karolian: We will still have the opportunity to connect later.
J. Levesque: It will cost a lot more later.
Chair Sullivan: The cost would be twice as much, per Mr. Mercier.
C. Karolian: He didn’t say it would be twice as much.
D. Mercier: I did say it could double if done as a stand-alone project. It would be about $70,000. This is
because we would have to create all of the documents for one small project.
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020
9

Page 139 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

440
441
442
443
444
445
446
447
448
449
450
451
452
453
454
455
456
457
458
459
460
461
462
463
464
465
466
467
468
469
470
471
472
473
474
475
476
477
478
479
480
481
482
483
484
485
486
487
488
489
490
491
492
493
494
495
496
497
498
499

A roll call vote was taken on the motion to reduce the amount of the contract amendment to $772,800.
Roll Call Vote #5
T. Tsantoulis Aye
C. Jones
Not present
R. Duhaime Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
J. Levesque Aye
C. Karolian Aye
J. Durand
Aye
A. Comai
Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
(Councilor Jones left the virtual meeting at some point prior to Roll Call Vote #5.)

CONSENT AGENDA
Accept donation of (1) 2011 Pace open utility trailer from SAU 15 valued at $450.00 to the Town
of Hooksett for the DPW Parks & Recreation Division per RSA 31:95-e, II.
Motion to accept donation money totaling $363.85 from the Hooksett Police Association and a
miscellaneous donation to the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Police Department per RSA
31:95-b, III(b) and return that amount to the Police Departments, K9 Trust Fund.
Motion to accept the donation of a black aluminum pole valued at approximately $50.00 from
Blue Ribbon Company, of Hooksett, NH, to the Town of Hooksett for the Hooksett Police
Department per RSA 31:95-e: II.
Motion to accept the terms of the 2018 Homeland Security Grant Program for EMS Warm Zone
Equipment, as presented in the amount of $6,000.00 to the Town of Hooksett for the Fire Rescue
Department to purchase equipment for the department's active shooter response program per
RSA 31:95-b III(b).
R. Duhaime motioned to approve the first four items of the Consent Agenda (10.1, 10.2, 10.3 and
10.4). A. Walczyk seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #6
J. Durand
Aye
J. Levesque Aye
C. Karolian Aye
A. Comai
Aye
C. Jones
Not present
T. Tsantoulis Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
R. Duhaime Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
CONSENT AGENDA (continued)
Bussiere Property #237 Londonderry Turnpike (Across from Zapora Dr.) Reduce Site Bond from
$220,000 to $125,000
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

10

Page 140 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

500
501
502
503
504
505
506
507
508
509
510
511
512
513
514
515
516
517
518
519
520
521
522
523
524
525
526
527
528
529
530
531
532
533
534
535
536
537
538
539
540
541
542
543
544
545
546
547
548
549
550
551
552

Urgent Care Facility - #1228 Hooksett Road - Bond Release of $23,745
Site Bond Release - O'Reilly's Auto Parts - #1339 Hooksett Road - $210,000
Walnut Hill Avenue - Dion Subdivision Partial Bond Release of $68,118.81
C. Karolian: Why is it when requesting a bond, do we piecemeal giving it back? Why not release all of
the bond when the project is done?
B. Thomas: It is a common practice to issue a partial release when a major part of the project is done.
The developers save money on payments, based on the amount of the bond.
T. Tsantoulis motioned to follow the recommendations of the Town Engineer and approve the
release of bonds as requested in the last four items of the Consent Agenda (10.5, 10.6, 10.7 and
10.8). A. Comai seconded the motion.
R. Duhaime: For Urgent Care and O’Reilly’s, are we still holding only the landscaping bonds?
B. Thomas: Yes. We will hold those for about two years – a little less because they were issued a short
while ago.
R. Duhaime: Bussiere received permission from the Planning Board on Monday to add two more
buildings. I’m surprised that the bond is being reduced.
B. Thomas: The original bond included those two buildings, and the site looks good. It is really taking
shape.
C. Karolian: Which of these is 100% done?
B. Thomas: Urgent Care and O’Reilly are 100% done. We hold the landscaping bond for two years
after completion.
C. Karolian: I am confused about that. Is that so they won’t move the trees or shrubs or change it?
R. Duhaime: It is to give the plants two years to acclimate. If a plant dies, they need to replace it.
B. Thomas: The two-year landscaping bond is to be sure that the project stays completely done.
A. Walczyk: Are the landscaping bonds done separately?
B. Thomas: Yes.
C. Karolian: Wouldn’t the inspection be the job of the Code Enforcement Officer?
B. Thomas: I don’t know how it came about, but it is pretty clearly my job.
C. Karolian: I call the question.
Roll Call Vote #7
C. Jones
Not present
C. Karolian Aye
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

11

Page 141 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

553
554
555
556
557
558
559
560
561
562
563
564
565
566
567
568
569
570
571
572
573
574
575
576
577
578
579
580
581
582
583
584
585
586
587
588
589
590
591
592
593
594
595
596
597
598
599
600
601
602

J. Levesque Aye
R. Duhaime Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
J. Durand
Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
A. Comai
Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR'S REPORT
A. Garron: First I want to provide some information about COVID-19 and the closing of Town Hall,
DPW, and Parks & Rec. On March 13th, Governor Sununu declared a State of Emergency in New
Hampshire. On March 16th, schools were closed, and have since then been declared closed until the
end of the school year. We then closed Town Hall, DPW and Parks & Rec to the public, as other
communities have done. The Transfer Station remains open. People may hike, walk and run through
the parks, but gatherings of ten or more are not allowed as of March 23rd. At first that was set at 50
people or more. My question to the Council is this: Do you want to set an end date for the restrictions?
Chair Sullivan: The school year will end on June 2nd, for everyone’s information.
T. Tsantoulis: I believe we should continue until there is general loosening of the order by the Governor.
We should follow the cues of the Governor and of other communities. We want to do this in an
appropriate way. I like the dimmer switch analogy: the light is off now and will gradually come back on.
Chair Sullivan: Is there any opposition to following this plan? I hear no opposition, so this will be our
procedure. You have your guidance, Andre.
A. Garron: I appreciate that, and I also appreciate the patience and support of the Hooksett residents
and the Town employees. The NHMA recently conducted a survey of the financial impact on
municipalities of the COVID-19 pandemic. This was an attempt to put numbers and dollar figures to the
financial impact. I want to thank our department heads for their quick response to this survey. I know
that businesses are struggling and going through tough times, but the same is true of municipal
governments. When will there be stimulus funds to help us?
A. Garron: As a sort of PSA, I encourage everyone to fill out the census form. Please do it, because it
provides important information for the allocation of federal funds for such items as schools, hospitals,
fire departments and roads. Our representation in Congress is also affected. As of today, 50.5% of
people in the United States have completed the form, while New Hampshire’s response rate is 48.7%.
In Hooksett, an impressive 64.4% have responded.
A. Garron: I received a note from Barbara Brennan, who runs the Food Pantry. She said that with the
schools closed, they have many more clients and are providing meals for children, especially those with
free or reduced-price lunches, at their weekly distribution. They cannot accept food donations now
because the food would have to be quarantined for seven to ten days, but they are getting food from
the schools which would expire if not used. They have only three volunteers at a time. They are social
distancing, wearing masks & gloves, and sanitizing constantly. Ms. Brennan says they have had many
generous money donations. When they can next accept food donations, they want to store the food in
the gym, if possible.
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

12

Page 142 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

603
604
605
606
607
608
609
610
611
612
613
614
615
616
617
618
619
620
621
622
623
624
625
626
627
628
629
630
631
632
633
634
635
636
637
638
639
640
641
642
643
644
645
646
647
648
649
650
651
652

R. Duhaime: How does Town revenue look? I know there was a lot of Fire Department overtime.
A. Garron: The Fire Department is updating its quarterly report. I will have an update at the next
meeting. Budget-wise, the Town is looking good. As of today, in spite of the COVID-19 situation, the
budget is not too bad. There has been overtime in the Fire Department because a couple of firefighters
had to quarantine for ten days, and a couple are out on short-term disability, not related to COVID-19.
R. Duhaime: Can we stay within the budget, even with the Fire Department overtime?
A. Garron: As of now, yes. We are using less fuel, so there are some savings, along with the additional
costs.
C. Karolian: Andre, will there be federal dollars for the Town due to the crisis? The TIF District was a
warrant article and the citizens want us to go through with it.
A. Garron: There should be some stimulus money, and we are in a good position. That is why you hear
the urgency in my voice regarding the TIF district. The more shovel-ready we are, the better. Bruce
Thomas has filled out forms relative to this.
C. Karolian: I want to commend the TIF Advisory Committee, which has worked hard and put in many
long hours. I also commend the Town employees for all that they have done.
PUBLIC INPUT
None.
NOMINATIONS AND APPOINTMENTS
Nominations for Renewal of Health Officer - Matthew Lavoie and New Appointment of Deputy
Health Officer Cpt. Joe Stalker
R. Duhaime motioned, per RSA 128 A, to renew the appointment of Matthew Lavoie for a third
term consisting of three (3) years to the position of Hooksett Health Officer and for the new
appointment of Hooksett Deputy Health Officer Captain Joe Stalker, also an appointment term of
three (3) years, which shall run concurrently with the Health Officer’s term. J. Levesque
seconded the motion.
R. Duhaime: Captain Stalker is being added as an assistant. We didn’t have before. Is that correct?
M. Lavoie: Every town is supposed to have an assistant in case the health officer is out of town.
R. Duhaime: Is there an extra cost?
M. Lavoie: No, there is not.
D. Fitzpatrick: It is correct that we have not had one to date. This will be the first time.
Roll Call Vote #8
J. Levesque Aye
R. Duhaime Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

13

Page 143 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

653
654
655
656
657
658
659
660
661
662
663
664
665
666
667
668
669
670
671
672
673
674
675
676
677
678
679
680
681
682
683
684
685
686
687
688
689
690
691
692
693
694
695
696
697
698
699
700
701
702
703
704
705

A. Walczyk Aye
J. Durand
Aye
C. Jones
Not present
A. Comai
Aye
C. Karolian Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
D. Fitzpatrick: I will need to have the Councilors’ signatures on this and a few other documents, so I ask
that all of you stop by between now and Friday. We can bring the documents to your vehicles for
signatures.
Nominations and Appointments for April 2020
R. Duhaime motioned to nominate Cassandra Brown to the Bicentennial Committee.
Chair Sullivan: We will appoint her at the next meeting.
OLD BUSINESS
TIF District Sewer Final Design Amendment Tabled at March 11th Town Council Meeting
(This was taken up under Scheduled Appointments earlier in the meeting.)
Solid Waste/Recycling & Transfer Ordinance 00-31 Amendment (tabled at 02/26/2020 Town
Council Meeting)
Chair Sullivan motioned to remove this item from the table. J. Levesque seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #9
J. Durand
Aye
A Comai
Aye
C. Jones
Not present
R. Duhaime Aye
C. Karolian Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Levesque Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
T. Tsantoulis motioned to schedule a Public Hearing on the Solid Waste/Recycling & Transfer
Ordinance Amendment. C. Karolian seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #10
C. Karolian Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Levesque Aye
C. Jones
Not present
A. Comai
Aye
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

14

Page 144 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

706
707
708
709
710
711
712
713
714
715
716
717
718
719
720
721
722
723
724
725
726
727
728
729
730
731
732
733
734
735
736
737
738
739
740
741
742
743
744
745
746
747
748
749
750
751
752
753
754
755
756
757
758

J. Durand
Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
R. Duhaime Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
NEW BUSINESS
Accept an unanticipated revenue in the amount of $58,178.00 ($30,178.00 + $28,000.00) from
Lamontagne Builders (Stinson Hills, LLC), (not in lieu of Impact Fees) per RSA 31:95-b, III (a).
(tabled at 03/11/2020 Town Council Meeting.)
Chair Sullivan: This item was removed from the table at this meeting, discussed, and returned to the
table.
Osborne's Agway - 1224 Hooksett Road - Update on Site Bond Release of $346,363 (tabled at
03/11/20 Town Council Meeting)
R. Duhaime motioned to remove this item from the table. T. Tsantoulis seconded the motion.
Roll Call #11
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Levesque Aye
J. Durand
Aye
C. Jones
Not present
C. Karolian Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
R. Duhaime Aye
A. Comai
Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
B. Thomas: I am responding to the comments and concerns which David Ross presented at the March
11, 2020 meeting regarding the release of the construction site bond for Osborne’s Agway. First, I want
to emphasize that this is the construction site bond, not the landscape bond. Mr. Ross stated that the
release of the bond was a bit premature on the landscaping because it was not even spring. My
response to that is that the landscaping bond will be in place for two years. Mr. Ross also said that
there was supposed to be a beautiful wetland beside the road, and it is just a ditch. My response is that
it will take a while for this landscaped swale to be vegetated. I will check it in two years. Another
concern expressed by Mr. Ross is erosion coming from under the pavement. I walked the entire
perimeter and found no water coming up from under the pavement. In the upper right corner, there is
some minor erosion which the owner, Tom Osborne, told me will be fixed next week. Mr. Ross gave me
photographs of the footings where he claims there is water on the southeast corner. Code Inspection
Officer Matt Lavoie and I met with Keystone Enterprises, J. Parker & Sons, the owner of Osborne’s
Agway, and his brother to check this. There is no water there. It seems there might have been a recent
thunderstorm at the time the photos were taken which left a small amount of water. This is not unusual.
Mr. Keystone was actually insulted by this. He has been doing footings for 44 years and has the
reputation of doing a good job, according to Mr. Lavoie. Mr. Ross also claimed that snow is being
plowed into a ditch. In fact, the snow is removed to an area designated for snow storage. The footings
for this building are higher than they were for the house that was previously there. That basement was
always dry. Rain would fall into the swales and drain off before reaching the building. I do not agree
with Mr. Ross; his concerns have no merit. Mr. Lavoie and I made it clear that our doors are always
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

15

Page 145 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

759
760
761
762
763
764
765
766
767
768
769
770
771
772
773
774
775
776
777
778
779
780
781
782
783
784
785
786
787
788
789
790
791
792
793
794
795
796
797
798
799
800
801
802
803
804
805
806
807

open if anyone wants to talk about a project. Those with concerns should see us in our offices before
taking up valuable time at Town Council meetings.
C. Karolian: When are inspections done? That is, what sequence does Mr. Lavoie follow for
inspections?
B. Thomas: I am not sure.
Chair Sullivan: Since Mr. Lavoie does not seem to be in the meeting, we can ask the Town
Administrator to get a report from him for the next meeting.
C. Karolian motioned to table this item until the information he has requested is provided. J.
Durand seconded the motion.
T. Tsantoulis: Can I sound off?
Chair Sullivan: A motion to table is not debatable, but I will allow you to speak if no one objects.
B. Thomas: A construction site bond is not a building bond. The foundation and work on the actual
building is not site work.
C. Karolian: What is included in site work?
B. Thomas: That would be items such as parking lots, curbing, landscaping, drainage structures and
swales.
C. Karolian: Is there a separate building bond?
B. Thomas: Personally, I don’t know.
N. Germain: Matt Lavoie is back in the meeting.
M. Lavoie: First, there is no footing drain when the building is on a slab on grade.
C. Karolian: Did you inspect each stage?
M. Lavoie: In every instance, I inspect the construction of the footings prior to the placement of
concrete. I signed off on both in this case. I am there to observe the pouring of the foundation wall.
C. Karolian: Was there a water issue at Osborne’s Agway?
M. Lavoie: No. In fact, they delayed the pouring of the foundation because of a heavy downpour. A lot
of water stayed in the hole.
C. Karolian: As long as you say everything was in order when you inspected and signed off.
M. Lavoie: This is a privately-owned building, so if there is a problem, they must handle it.
C. Karolian: Why do we have inspections then?
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

16

Page 146 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

808
809
810
811
812
813
814
815
816
817
818
819
820
821
822
823
824
825
826
827
828
829
830
831
832
833
834
835
836
837
838
839
840
841
842
843
844
845
846
847
848
849
850
851
852
853
854
855
856
857

M. Lavoie: My role is to see that they follow the State Building Code.
C. Karolian withdrew his motion to table this item.
R. Duhaime motioned to release the site work letter of credit for the Osborne’s Agway site –
1224 Hooksett Road of $346,363 to Farm Credit East, ACA. T. Tsantoulis seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #12
A. Comai
Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
J. Durand
Aye
C. Karolian Aye
J. Levesque Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
R. Duhaime Aye
C. Jones
Not present
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (7-0).
2020 MS-232 Report of Appropriations Actually Voted totaling $21,502,637
T. Tsantoulis made a motion to sign the “2020 MS-232 Report of Appropriations Actually Voted”
totaling $21,502.637. R. Duhaime seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #13
R. Duhaime Aye
J. Durand
Aye
C. Jones
Not present
J. Levesque Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
A Comai
Aye
C. Karolian Abstain
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted in favor (7-0). Councilor Karolian abstained because he wasn’t sure what he was voting
on.
D. Fitzpatrick: Before leaving this item, the 2020 MS-232 is another document which all Councilors
must sign, so please make arrangements to do this by Friday. When you get to the building, if you can’t
get in, call this cell number: 340-8419. The Finance Director has informed me that she has the
Quarterly Reimbursements for Chair Sullivan to sign.
Chair Sullivan will sign the Quarterly Reimbursements by Friday, April 24th.
COVID-19 - Request to Town Council to Ease Town Personnel Plan Sick Leave Policy prior to
April 1, 2020

TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

17

Page 147 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

858
859
860
861
862
863
864
865
866
867
868
869
870
871
872
873
874
875
876
877
878
879
880
881
882
883
884
885
886
887
888
889
890
891
892
893
894
895
896
897
898
899
900
901
902
903
904
905
906
907

D. Fitzpatrick: There are a couple of new federal laws affecting an employee unable to work because
said employee is caring for his/her child whose school or place of care is closed (or child care provider
is unavailable) due to COVID-19 related reasons. These are the Families First Coronavirus Response
Act (FFCRA), to include the additional section of the FMLA Expansion Act (FEA). FFCRA allows an
employee qualifying under reason five (5) to receive two/thirds of his or her sick pay. Since this is
available from April 1st through December 31st, we are asking for an easing of the Town’s Personnel
Plan to allow these employees to use sick time, not vacation time, for the period between March 16th –
March 31st, the period of time when the schools and care centers were closed, but this law was not in
effect. This is not a change in the Personnel Plan, only an easing.
R. Duhaime motioned to approve COVID-19 HOOKSETT ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER 2020-A to
ease Town Personnel Plan sick leave policy to allow an employee to use his or her accrued sick
time prior to April 1, 2020 for full-time employees FFCRA reason #5, an employee unable to work
because the employee is caring for his or her child whose school or place of care closed (or
child care provider is unavailable) due to COVID-19 related reasons. A. Walczyk seconded the
motion.
A. Walczyk: This is a step in the right direction.
C. Karolian: How many employees does this involve?
D. Fitzpatrick: There is one in Town Hall and two in Public Works, for a total of three.
C. Karolian motioned that these employees should not have to use sick time or vacation time,
that they should get their regular salaries and it should be retroactive to make them whole. J.
Durand seconded the motion.
D. Fitzpatrick: We have not budgeted for this. We just want them to be able to use sick time. Other
employees have made arrangements for child care; only these three have been out. Many more may
have made a different choice if they had known they could be on paid administrative leave.
Chair Sullivan called the question.
Roll Call Vote #13
C. Karolian Nay
A. Comai
Nay
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Levesque Nay
A. Walczyk Nay
R. Duhaime Aye
J. Durand
Aye
C. Jones
Not present
J. Sullivan
Aye
Tie vote; motion failed (4-4).
Chair Sullivan: We will take up Councilor Karolian’s idea as the last item of new business - !6.9.
A. Garron: I sincerely hope we can act on Councilor Karolian’s idea. We haven’t run the numbers yet.
Classification Pay Plan - Maximum Levels
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

18

Page 148 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

908
909
910
911
912
913
914
915
916
917
918
919
920
921
922
923
924
925
926
927
928
929
930
931
932
933
934
935
936
937
938
939
940
941
942
943
944
945
946
947
948
949
950
951
952
953
954
955
956

D. Fitzpatrick: At the March 10, 2020 Town Election, all non-union employees were voted a 2.5% pay
increase as of July 1, 2020. Since 2013, the maximum range has been increased by the amount of a
COLA or COLA-type increase. This is a COLA-type increase. Would you like to move the maximum
range up by 2.5%? This will affect only a few employees.
R. Duhaime motioned to increase the maximum range of the non-union pay scale by 2.5%
because of the COLA-like increase granted at the March 10th Town Meeting. T. Tsantoulis
seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #14
R. Duhaime Aye
J Durand
Aye
C. Jones
Not present
J. Levesque Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
A. Comai
Aye
C. Karolian Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
Volunteer Appreciation Night Dinner
Chair Sullivan: The Volunteer Appreciation Dinner is usually held in June. Because of COVID-19
restrictions, we are looking for suggestions about handling this.
T. Tsantoulis motioned to table this item until the next meeting. C. Karolian seconded the
motion.
R. Duhaime: The dinner could be canceled and staff could work on getting gift cards to send to the
volunteers instead.
N. Germain: We don’t know what the situation will be in June. It is up to the Council. There are several
options: The dinner could be held later in the year. Gift cards could be given, as suggested by
Councilor Duhaime. We could just set a date in June and see what happens. Because people have
busy schedules in the summer, if we plan to do this in June, we should set the date quickly.
Roll Call Vote #15
A. Comai
Nay
C. Jones
Not present
A. Walczyk Aye
J. Durand
Aye
R. Duhaime Nay
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Levesque Aye
C. Karolian Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted in favor (6-2).
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

19

Page 149 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

957
958
959
960
961
962
963
964
965
966
967
968
969
970
971
972
973
974
975
976
977
978
979
980
981
982
983
984
985
986
987
988
989
990
991
992
993
994
995
996
997
998
999
1000
1001
1002
1003
1004
1005
1006
1007
1008

Town of Hooksett, NH - Municipal Volunteers
Chair Sullivan: We should skip this item.
R. Duhaime motioned to table this item. T. Tsantoulis seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #16
A. Walczyk Aye
J. Levesque Aye
C. Jones
Not present
R. Duhaime Aye
J. Durand
Aye
C. Karolian Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
A. Comai
Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
NHRS Certification Form - needed when new Police Patrol Officer (DOH 03/16/2020) fills a vacant
slot (vs. replaces another Officer leaving)
D. Fitzpatrick: This does not require a motion, but one can be made. This is another document requiring
the signatures of the Town Councilors by Friday.
T. Tsantoulis motioned to have the Town Councilors sign the NHRS Certification form. A. Comai
seconded the motion.
T. Tsantoulis withdrew his motion.
C. Karolian motioned to extend the meeting. A. Walczyk seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #17
T. Tsantoulis Aye
C. Jones
Not present
R. Duhaime Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
J. Levesque Aye
C. Karolian Aye
J. Durand
Aye
A. Comai
Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (8-0).
A. Walczyk motioned to reconsider item 16.4, COVID-19 – Request to Town Council to Ease
Town Personnel Plan Sick Leave prior to April 1, 2020. R. Duhaime seconded the motion.
Chair Sullivan: Can we debate this?
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

20

Page 150 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

1009
1010
1011
1012
1013
1014
1015
1016
1017
1018
1019
1020
1021
1022
1023
1024
1025
1026
1027
1028
1029
1030
1031
1032
1033
1034
1035
1036
1037
1038
1039
1040
1041
1042
1043
1044
1045
1046
1047
1048
1049
1050
1051
1052
1053
1054
1055
1056
1057
1058
1059

D. Fitzpatrick: Town Council follows “Robert’s Rules” as noted in the Town Council Rules of Procedures
1.a. According to Roberts Rules of Order “The effect of the motion to reconsider, if adopted, is that
debate resumes right where the board left off prior to its original vote.”
Roll Call Vote #18
J. Durand
Aye
A Comai
Aye
C. Jones
Not present
R. Duhaime Aye
C. Karolian Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Levesque Aye
J. Sullivan
Nay
Voted in favor (7-1).
A. Walczyk: I agree with making the employees whole, but knowing that we don’t have the numbers,
and in light of timing, we should take action now.
C. Karolian: Should this be effective today or is it retroactive?
A. Garron: It is retroactive to March 16, 2020.
D. Fitzpatrick: The federal law is granting federal medical leave expansion for up to 12 weeks at twothirds pay. This item allows two weeks of pay from the town also, from March 16 through April 1st.
C. Karolian: We don’t know how many?
A. Garron: It is three.
D. Fitzpatrick: There could have been a lot more if employees had known about this. It is a morale
issue. Employees may be upset to know they could have had this benefit but did not.
C. Karolian: Out of order.
Chair Sullivan: I don’t know who is out of order. Mrs. Fitzpatrick answered the question.
C. Karolian: Mr. Garron answered by question.
Chair Sullivan: We will put this on our next agenda when we will have the pertinent numbers. I am now
calling for a re-vote on item 16.4, COVID-19 – Request to Town Council to Ease Town Personnel Plan
Sick Leave prior to April 1, 2020.
Roll Call Vote #19
C. Jones
Not present
C. Karolian Aye
J. Levesque Not present
R. Duhaime Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
J. Durand
Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

21

Page 151 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

1060
1061
1062
1063
1064
1065
1066
1067
1068
1069
1070
1071
1072
1073
1074
1075
1076
1077
1078
1079
1080
1081
1082
1083
1084
1085
1086
1087
1088
1089
1090
1091
1092
1093
1094
1095
1096
1097
1098
1099
1100
1101
1102
1103
1104
1105
1106
1107
1108
1109
1110
1111

A. Comai
Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (7-0).
(Councilor Levesque left the virtual meeting at some point prior to this vote.)
APPROVAL OF MINUTES
Public: 03/11/2020
Non-Public: 03/11/2020
SUB-COMMITTEE REPORTS
Chair Sullivan motioned to table the Approval of Public and Non-public Minutes, as well as the
Sub-Committee Reports. R. Duhaime seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #20
J. Levesque Not present
R. Duhaime Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
J. Durand
Aye
C. Jones
Not present
A. Comai
Aye
C. Karolian Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (7-0).
PUBLIC INPUT
None.
NON-PUBLIC SESSION NH RSA 91-A:3 II
Chair Sullivan motioned to enter non-public session in accordance with the provisions of NH
RSA 91-A:3, II (a) at 9:53 pm. R. Duhaime seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #21
J. Durand
Aye
A Comai
Aye
C. Jones
Not present
R. Duhaime Aye
C. Karolian Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Levesque Not present
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (7-0).
RSA 91-A:3, II (a) The dismissal, promotion, or compensation of any public employee or the disciplining
of such employee, or the investigation of any charges against him or her, unless the employee affected
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

22

Page 152 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

1112
1113
1114
1115
1116
1117
1118
1119
1120
1121
1122
1123
1124
1125
1126
1127
1128
1129
1130
1131
1132
1133
1134
1135
1136
1137
1138
1139
1140
1141
1142
1143
1144
1145
1146
1147
1148
1149
1150
1151
1152
1153
1154
1155
1156
1157
1158
1159
1160

(1) has a right to a public meeting, and (2) requests that he meeting be open, in which case the request
shall be granted.
Chair Sullivan motioned to leave public session at 10:32 pm. A. Walczyk seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #24
A. Comai
Aye
A. Walczyk Aye
J. Durand
Aye
C. Karolian Aye
J. Levesque Not present
T. Tsantoulis Aye
R. Duhaime Aye
C. Jones
Not present
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (7-0).
Chair Sullivan motioned to seal the minutes of the non-public session. R. Duhaime seconded
the motion.
Roll Call Vote #25
C. Karolian Aye
A. Comai
Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Levesque Not present
A. Walczyk Aye
R. Duhaime Aye
J. Durand
Aye
C. Jones
Not present
J. Sullivan
Aye
Voted unanimously in favor (7-0).
Chair Sullivan closed the Public Hearing on the proposed Storm Water Management Program,
Ordinance #2020-1 at 10:32 pm
ADJOURNMENT
R. Duhaime motioned to adjourn at 10:32 pm. T. Tsantoulis seconded the motion.
Roll Call Vote #26
R. Duhaime Aye
J Durand
Aye
C. Jones
Not present
J. Levesque Not present
A. Walczyk Aye
A. Comai
Aye
C. Karolian Aye
T. Tsantoulis Aye
J. Sullivan
Aye.
Voted unanimously in favor (7-0).
TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

23

Page 153 of 154

Agenda Item #17.2.

1161
1162
1163
1164
1165
1166
1167
1168

Respectfully submitted,
Kathleen Donnelly
Kathleen Donnelly
Records Clerk

Please see subsequent meeting minutes for any amendments to these minutes.

TC MINUTES 04-22-2020

24

Page 154 of 154
