DIVISION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND SCHOOL ACCOUNTABILITY

REPORT OF EXAMINATION

Village of Owego

Board Oversight and Financial
Operations
SEPTEMBER 2018

| 2018M-101

Contents
Report Highlights .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
Board Oversight and Financial Operations .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
What Internal Controls Should Be in Place?. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
The Board Was Unable to Provide Sufficient Oversight. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
The Clerk-Treasurer Did Not Implement Adequate Internal Controls .  . 3
What Do We Recommend? . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5
Appendix A – Response From Village Officials .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
Appendix B – Audit Methodology and Standards .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8
Appendix C – Resources and Services.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  10

Report Highlights
Village of Owego

Audit Objective
Determine whether Village officials implemented adequate
internal controls to safeguard money in the custody of the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office.

Key Findings
ll The Board was unable to sufficiently oversee the

Clerk-Treasurer’s duties.

accurate budget-to-actual reports and complete
financial reports each month. Further, the value
of these reports was greatly diminished because
accounting records were unreliable and bank
reconciliations were inaccurate and not prepared for
all accounts.

ll Because of ineffective recordkeeping, the certified

public accounting firm (firm) was unable to complete
its audits for the last two years. The Board hired
another certified public accountant (CPA) who was
paid $30,000 to correct the records.

Quick Facts

ll The Clerk-Treasurer did not adequately segregate the

deputies’ duties or provide sufficient oversight of their
work. As a result, many of their duties were performed
without Board approval or the Clerk-Treasurer’s
knowledge or oversight.

ll Continue efforts to sufficiently oversee the Clerk-

Treasurer’s duties and work with CPAs to improve
financial records and reports.

ll Ensure that financial records and reports are timely

and accurate.

The Village of Owego (Village)
is located in the Town of Owego
in Tioga County. The Village is
governed by an elected Board of
Trustees (Board) composed of six
Trustees and the Mayor.
The elected Clerk-Treasurer,
as the chief financial officer, is
responsible for collecting real
property taxes and sewer fees,
preparing and distributing payroll
and recording and reporting
financial information. Three
deputies, including a bookkeeper,
payroll clerk and sewer clerk,
assist with these duties.

ll The Clerk-Treasurer failed to provide the Board with

Key Recommendations

Background

2017-18 General Fund
Appropriations

$2.9 million

2017-18 General Fund
Tax Levy

$2.1 million

Population

3,396

Audit Period
August 1, 2015 – July 31, 2017.
We extended our audit period back
to August 1, 2012 to review the
annual financial reports (AUDs)
filed with the Office of the State
Comptroller (OSC).

ll Segregate the deputies’ duties or implement

compensating controls.

Village officials agreed with our recommendations and
indicated they planned to initiate corrective action.

Of f ic e of t he New York State Comptroller

1

Board Oversight and Financial Operations
What Internal Controls Should Be in Place?
The board is responsible for overseeing financial operations and safeguarding
village resources. To do this, the board must ensure that the clerk-treasurer
prepares and provides accurate financial records and reports.1 The board also
should ensure that financial duties are segregated so that no one individual
controls all phases of a transaction. Additionally, Village Law2 requires the board
to annually audit or cause to be audited the treasurer’s records.
The clerk-treasurer’s responsibilities include maintaining custody of financial
assets; implementing adequate internal controls over deputies’ work; ensuring
that transactions are properly accounted for; and maintaining accurate, complete
and timely records of such activity. To fulfill these responsibilities, the clerktreasurer should implement adequate internal controls to safeguard money and
prevent, detect and correct any errors or discrepancies by properly segregating
duties over cash receipts and disbursements and providing sufficient employee
oversight.
One individual should not have the ability to authorize, execute and record a
transaction. When it is neither practical nor cost-effective to segregate duties,
the clerk-treasurer and board must ensure compensating controls are in place.
Compensating controls include oversight procedures designed to reduce the risk
of errors or irregularities not being detected.
Additionally, the clerk-treasurer should ensure that all money received is
deposited intact in the same form as received (i.e., cash or check). The clerktreasurer should ensure that operational activities agree with board directives and
interfund borrowings are approved by the board. Further, all budget amendments
(increases or decreases in estimated revenues and/or appropriations and
transfers between individual budget line items) should be approved by the board
and properly recorded to prevent overspending.

The Board Was Unable to Provide Sufficient Oversight
The Board was unable to sufficiently oversee the Clerk-Treasurer’s duties.
Although it reviewed claims and received a monthly report from the ClerkTreasurer, these reports were inaccurate. The Board requested that the ClerkTreasurer provide reports with more accurate and complete information. However,
the Clerk-Treasurer failed to do so.

1 Village Law, Section 4-408 requires the Clerk-Treasurer to account for all revenues and expenditures as
prescribed by the Office of the State Comptroller (OSC). Refer to OSC publication Accounting and Reporting
Manual available at www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/pubs/arm.pdf
2 Ibid.

2

Of f ic e of t he New York State Comptroller

The Board hired a firm to audit the annual financial statements. However, the
firm was unable to complete the audits for the last two years (2015-16 and 201617) because progress was impeded by the Clerk-Treasurer’s incomplete and
inaccurate financial records. As a result, the Board hired another CPA, who was
paid more than $30,000, to correct errors, assess financial condition and provide
training for the deputies.
From July 31, 2015 through July 31, 2016, the general fund balance decreased
by almost 60 percent. As a result, Village officials were unable to meet general
fund obligations incurred near the July 31, 2016 year-end. Officials met these
obligations by obtaining unapproved borrowings from the sewer fund totaling
more than $272,000. Although all but $15,000 was repaid in 2016-17, the ClerkTreasurer did not bring the cash flow issues to the Board’s attention, and the
interfund borrowings were made without its approval and direction. Furthermore,
because the Clerk-Treasurer’s records and reports were inaccurate and
unreliable, the Board did not appropriate any amount of fund balance in the 201718 budget to finance general fund operations because it was unaware how much
fund balance was available for that purpose.
In the absence of complete, accurate and timely financial information, officials,
taxpayers and oversight agencies are unaware of the Village’s financial condition.
As a result, the Board is unable to adopt effective budgets and Village officials
could incorrectly charge taxpayers’ real property taxes, which could either be
more than necessary or insufficient to fund operations. Further, the Board is
unable to make prudent financial decisions and ensure a continued level of
service for taxpayers.

The Clerk-Treasurer Did Not Implement Adequate Internal Controls
The Clerk-Treasurer did not establish adequate internal controls over the
deputies’ duties. More specifically, the Clerk-Treasurer did not adequately
segregate the deputies’ duties or provide sufficient oversight of their work.3 For
example, the deputies performed the following duties without the Board’s approval
and Clerk-Treasurer’s knowledge or oversight:
ll All the deputies were able to make journal entries and collected real property

taxes.

ll The bookkeeper collected and recorded real property tax receipts, altered

the account codes expenditures are charged to (within and across
departments) and initiated budget amendments. While the altered codes
did not indicate any fraudulent activity, these changes created confusion

3 We reported similar findings in our prior audit report Village of Owego – Clerk-Treasurer’s Office and Parking
Tickets (2015M-30) released in May 2015 www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/audits/villages/2015/owego.pdf.

Of f ic e of t he New York State Comptroller

3

as to how much money was available in specific budget lines and created
discrepancies when reviewing budget vs. actual reports.
In addition, the Clerk-Treasurer did not review deposit compositions, bank
statements or reconciliations and did not receive or review canceled check
images for general fund or sewer fund bank accounts during the audit period.
The Clerk-Treasurer told us that he prefers to delegate these responsibilities to
the deputies and believed that existing controls were adequate to prevent errors
and safeguard operations. However, the Clerk-Treasurer was unaware that the
bookkeeper frequently altered the financial records.
This resulted in significant errors and discrepancies in the records, which the
Clerk-Treasurer was also unaware of. These discrepancies can affect how
residents are billed for real property taxes or sewer rents. Furthermore, the lack
of oversight and the concentration of key duties with the bookkeeper could lead to
unauthorized disbursements or receipts not deposited intact in a timely manner.
Our audit testing identified the following deficiencies:4
ll The bookkeeper made unapproved budget amendments affecting 72 line

items totaling nearly $1.5 million, including increases and decreases to the
budget and transfers between line items, but did not record 12 of 26 Boardapproved budget amendments.

ll Even with the budget amendments recorded during our audit period, the

general fund had 112 line items overspent by a total of more than $1.4
million and the sewer fund had 13 line items overspent by a total of almost
$241,000.

ll General fund bank reconciliations prepared by the bookkeeper were

inaccurate due to differences in outstanding checks and electronic transfers
and were not completed for two months of our audit period. For instance,
one check for $836 cleared the bank in February 2017 but was included as
an outstanding check on the reconciliations prepared for March 2017 and
July 2017.

ll Payroll bank reconciliations were not prepared during our audit period.
ll Payrolls, prepared by the payroll clerk for 80 employees, lacked

documentation or had errors for 14 of 59 employees tested, involving pay
rates, work hours, overtime hours, leave, severance pay and one retroactive
pay raise. This resulted in $3,350 in unsupported payments or overpayments
(to employees other than the payroll clerk and Clerk-Treasurer) and $47 in
underpayments.

4 Refer to Appendix B for information on our sampling methodology.

4

Of f ic e of t he New York State Comptroller

ll In one instance, in 2016-17, the sewer clerk relevied $470 in sewer fees to

the wrong taxpayer’s account.

As a result of ineffective recordkeeping, the financial reports presented to the
Board were inaccurate, despite being presented each month and in a proper
format. The disbursements presented to the Board in budget-to-actual reports did
not agree with supporting claims or versions of these same reports printed at a
later date. For example, in July 2017, total sewer fund expenditures from claims
paid totaled more than $93,000.
However, the report presented to the Board showed sewer fund expenditures
of approximately $44,000, while the computerized accounting records showed
almost $162,000. While we found that the disbursements we reviewed were for
proper purposes, there is an increased risk that funds could be misappropriated
when accurate financial records and reports are not prepared.
In addition, the Clerk-Treasurer failed to file the AUDs with OSC within 60 days
following the close of the fiscal year as required. For 2011-12 through 2014-15,
AUDs were late from between 111 to 890 days. As of July 31, 2017, the 2015-16
AUD has not been filed. We reviewed the 2013-14 and 2014-15 AUD and found
that they did not agree with the CPA audit reports.
The Clerk-Treasurer’s failure to adequately segregate the deputies’ duties or
implement compensating controls led to a lack of complete, timely and accurate
information reported to the Board. This contributed directly to the Board’s inability
to adopt effective budgets and make prudent financial decisions.

What Do We Recommend?
The Board should:
1. Continue its efforts to sufficiently oversee the Clerk-Treasurer’s duties.
2. Approve all budget amendments before appropriations are overexpended.
3. Ensure that financial records and reports are accurately and timely
maintained.
4. Continue to work with CPAs to improve the financial records and reports.
5. Determine if the unsupported payroll payments were appropriate, pursue
collection of overpaid payroll amounts and ensure the Clerk-Treasurer
makes accurate payroll payments.
The Clerk-Treasurer should:
6. Properly segregate the deputies’ duties or implement compensating
controls to safeguard operations, such as providing additional oversight.
Of f ic e of t he New York State Comptroller

5

7. Ensure that budget-to-actual reports are timely and accurate.
8. Notify the Board when budget amendments are needed and request its
approval.
9. Implement procedures to ensure the accuracy of payrolls.
10. Ensure the AUD is filed in a timely manner.
The Board and the Clerk-Treasurer should:
11. Review the training resources listed in Appendix C of this report and our
publication entitled Fiscal Oversight Responsibilities of the Governing
Board, which can be accessed on our website at: www.osc.state.ny.us/
localgov/pubs/lgmg/fiscal_oversight.pdf.

6

Of f ic e of t he New York State Comptroller

Appendix A: Response From Village Officials

Of f ic e of t he New York State Comptroller

7

Appendix B: Audit Methodology and Standards
We conducted this audit pursuant to Article V, Section 1 of the State Constitution
and the State Comptroller’s authority as set forth in Article 3 of the New York
State General Municipal Law. To achieve the audit objective and obtain valid audit
evidence, we performed the following audit procedures:
ll We interviewed Village officials and reviewed Board meeting minutes to gain

an understanding of the Village’s internal controls and to determine whether
these were implemented adequately.

ll For four judgmentally selected months (December 2015, February 2016,

March 2017 and July 2017) chosen with no expectation that more or fewer
errors would occur during the selected month than any other month of our
audit period:
¡¡ We compared expenditures supported by claims with expenditures on

budget-to-actual reports presented to the Board and on those reports
retained in the Village’s computerized accounting system to identify any
discrepancies.

¡¡ We traced all canceled check images from bank statements to Board-

approved abstracts and claims vouchers to determine whether they
were Board-approved. We also reviewed the vouchers for supporting
documentation.

ll We tabulated all budget amendments that the Board approved as shown

in the Board minutes for our audit period and compared them with all those
included on budget-to-actual reports. We determined whether the Boardapproved amendments were recorded. We also determined whether any
amendments were not approved and whether overspending appropriations
was prevented.

ll We reviewed the unpaid sewer bills relevied on 2017-18 tax bills to assess

whether taxpayers were charged the proper amount, where applicable.

ll We traced four judgmentally selected months (August 2015, October 2015,

March 2016, and July 2016) of sewer revenues from cash receipts records
to bank statement deposits to determine whether deposits were timely and
intact. We chose those months with no expectation that more or fewer errors
would occur during the selected month than any other month of our audit
period.

ll We traced all August 2015 real property tax receipts from cash receipts

records to bank statement deposits to determine whether deposits were
made intact in a timely manner.

ll We reviewed the completeness and accuracy of bank reconciliations for

eight judgmentally selected months (August 2015, October 2015, December
2015, February 2016, March 2016, July 2016, March 2017 and July 2017)
for general fund and sewer fund accounts and reviewed payroll bank

8

Of f ic e of t he New York State Comptroller

account reconciliations for the entire audit period. We chose the judgmentally
selected months with no expectation that more or fewer errors would occur
during the selected month than any other month of our audit period.
ll We reviewed four months of payroll records for 59 of 80 employees paid

during the audit period to determine whether employees’ net pay, work
hours, overtime and leave were supported. We also reviewed supporting
documentation for severance payments and retroactive raises. We noted any
instances where supporting documentation was either missing or would have
led to a difference in pay. We judgmentally selected our sample by choosing
sets of employee records from each payroll period to include one employee
per department per month, with one full-time and one part-time employee,
when applicable. We selected these months by excluding any months we
previously selected for our claims and deposits testing.

ll We obtained AUD filing dates for our audit period to determine whether the

AUD was filed timely and calculated how late it was if filed after the deadline.

ll We compared revenues and expenditures from 2014-15 and 2015-16

audited financial statements to the AUDs submitted to OSC to assess the
report’s accuracy.

ll We reviewed all interfund activity (electronic transfers, withdrawals and

deposits) on bank statements to assess the extent of interfund borrowing
between the sewer and general funds and the extent to which that borrowing
was repaid.

ll We estimated the general fund balance available as of July 31, 2017.

We conducted this performance audit in accordance with GAGAS (generally
accepted government auditing standards). Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objective.
Unless otherwise indicated in this report, samples for testing were selected based
on professional judgment, as it was not the intent to project the results onto the
entire population. Where applicable, information is presented concerning the
value and/or relevant population size and the sample selected for examination.
A written corrective action plan (CAP) that addresses the findings and
recommendations in this report should be prepared and provided to our office
within 90 days, pursuant to Section 35 of General Municipal Law. For more
information on preparing and filing your CAP, please refer to our brochure,
Responding to an OSC Audit Report, which you received with the draft audit
report. We encourage the Board to make the CAP available for public review in
the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
Of f ic e of t he New York State Comptroller

9

Appendix C: Resources and Services
Regional Office Directory
www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/regional_directory.pdf
Cost-Saving Ideas – Resources, advice and assistance on cost-saving ideas
www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/costsavings/index.htm
Fiscal Stress Monitoring – Resources for local government officials
experiencing fiscal problems
www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/fiscalmonitoring/index.htm
Local Government Management Guides – Series of publications that include
technical information and suggested practices for local government management
www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/pubs/listacctg.htm#lgmg
Planning and Budgeting Guides – Resources for developing multiyear financial,
capital, strategic and other plans
www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/planbudget/index.htm
Protecting Sensitive Data and Other Local Government Assets – A nontechnical cybersecurity guide for local government leaders
www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/lgli/pdf/cybersecurityguide.pdf
Required Reporting – Information and resources for reports and forms that are
filed with the Office of the State Comptroller
www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/finreporting/index.htm
Research Reports/Publications – Reports on major policy issues facing local
governments and State policy-makers
www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/researchpubs/index.htm
Training – Resources for local government officials on in-person and online
training opportunities on a wide range of topics
www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/academy/index.htm

10

Of f ic e of t he New York State Comptroller

Contact
Office of the New York State Comptroller
Division of Local Government and School Accountability
110 State Street, 12th Floor, Albany, New York 12236
Tel: (518) 474-4037 • Fax: (518) 486-6479 • Email: localgov@osc.ny.gov
www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/index.htm
Local Government and School Accountability Help Line: (866) 321-8503

BINGHAMTON REGIONAL OFFICE – Ann C. Singer, Chief Examiner
State Office Building, Suite 1702 • 44 Hawley Street • Binghamton, New York 13901-4417
Tel (607) 721-8306 • Fax (607) 721-8313 • Email: Muni-Binghamton@osc.ny.gov
Serving: Broome, Chenango, Cortland, Delaware, Otsego, Schoharie, Sullivan, Tioga, Tompkins
counties

Like us on Facebook at facebook.com/nyscomptroller
Follow us on Twitter @nyscomptroller
