NYS PERB Contract Collection – Metadata Header
This contract is provided by the Martin P. Catherwood Library, ILR School,
Cornell University. The information provided is for noncommercial educational use only.
Some variations from the original paper document may have occurred during the
digitization process, and some appendices or tables may be absent. Subsequent
changes, revisions, and corrections may apply to this document.
For more information about the PERB Contract Collection, see
http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/perbcontracts/
Or contact us:
Catherwood Library, Ives Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
607-254-5370 ilrref@cornell.edu

Contract Database Metadata Elements
Title: Southold, Town of and Town of Southold Unit 8485, CSEA Local 1000,
AFSCME, AFL-CIO, Suffolk County Local 852 (2013)
Employer Name: Southold, Town of
Union: Town of Southold Unit 8485, CSEA, AFSCME, AFL-CIO
Local: Suffolk County Local 852, 1000
Effective Date: 01/01/2013
Expiration Date: 12/31/2016
PERB ID Number: 7472
Unit Size:
Number of Pages: 52

For additional research information and assistance, please visit the Research page of
the Catherwood website - http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/library/research/
For additional information on the ILR School - http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/

/n H ~ l

ORIGINAL

AGREEMENT
by and between the
*TOWN OF SOUTHOLD
and the
CIVIL SERVICE
EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION, INC.
Local 1000, AFSCME, AFL-CIO

CSEA
Town of Southold Unit
Suffolk County Local 852

January 1,2013 - December 31,2016

12/1/15

TABLE OF CONTENTS

AGENCY SHOP FEE
AMENDMENTS
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
CIVIL SERVICE PROTECTION
COMPENSATORY TIME
CSEA RIGHTS
DEFINITIONS
DISABILITY INSURANCE
DUES
EMPLOYEE BENEFIT FUND
EMPLOYEE DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING
EMPLOYEE LEAVE REQUESTS
EMPLOYEE TRAINING
GOOD FAITH AGREEMENT
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
HAZMAT DUTIES
HEALTH INSURANCE AND HOSPITALIZATION
HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT
HOLIDAYS
HOURS OF WORK
INJURIES SUSTAINED IN THE COURSE OF
EMPLOYMENT
JURY DUTY
LAYOFFS
LEAVE FOR CIVIL SERVICE EXAMINATION
LEAVE OF ABSENCE
LEGAL SERVICES
LEGISLATIVE APPROVAL
LICENSES
LONGEVITY

SECTION

PAGE

3
37
16
7
22
36
6
50
26
24
49
47
45
4
35
51
23
48
20
34

2
26
7
3
10
24
3
28
17
16
28
28
28
2
23
28
11
28
9
21

11
... 15
9
52
18
10
39
33
30
0
32
MILEAGE ALLOWANCE
5-------- :
NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE---------------------------- —
38
NO STRIKE PLEDGE
29
OVERTIME
44
PAYROLL CHECKS
l

5
7 ...
4
28
7
5
26
21
20
1
21
----------- 2
26
19
27

12/1/15

21
12
43
28
1
25
27
8
42
31
19
53
40
46
17
13
14
41

PERSONAL LEAVE
PERSONNEL RECORDS'
PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHERS
RECALL
RECOGNITION
RETIREMENT BENEFITS
SALARIES
SENIORITY
SEVERABILITY
SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL
SICK LEAVE
TERM OF AGREEMENT
TERMINATION BENEFITS
TIME CLOCKS
UNAUTHORIZED ABSENCE
UNIFORMS
VACATIONS
WAIVER-ZIPPER
APPENDIX A
APPENDIX B
APPENDIX C
APPENDEXD
APPENDIX E
APPENDIX F
APPENDIX G
APPENDIX H
PART TIME RATES

*
•

10
5
27
•19
1
16
17
3
27
21
8
30
•26
28
7
6
6
27
31
32
33
34
: 35
38
41
44
■47

12/1/15

THIS AGREEMENT made this 14th day of October 2015, between the TOWN
OF SOUTHOLD, a municipal corporation of the State o f New York, having its principal
office at 53095 Main Road, Southold, Suffolk County, New York (“the TOWN”) and the
C.S.E.A. Inc., Local 1000, AFSCME, AFL-CIO, Southold Unit 8785, a membership
corporation o f the State o f New York, with offices located at 143 Washington Avenue,
Albany, New York (“the CSEA”).
WHEREAS, the CSEA has been duly recognized as the employee organization to
represent all persons holding a position by appointment or employment in the Town,
except elected officials o f the Town, the Town Attorney, Assistant Town Attorney,
Assistant Superintendent o f Highways, secretary to the Town Supervisor, secretary to the
Town Attorney, Town Comptroller, lifeguards, beach attendants, school crossing guards,
TCO’s, all other seasonal employees except deputy tax receivers, appointees, volunteers,
interns, police officers o f the police department o f the Town, and all positions designated
as managerial and/or confidential by PERB in Case No. E-2359, hereinafter referred to as
“employees,” for the purpose o f negotiating collectively with the Town in a
determination o f the terms and conditions o f employment and to enter into written
agreements with respect thereto.
SEC. 1. RECOGNITION
1.1
The Town does hereby recognize C.S.E.A. Inc., Local 1000, AFSCME, AFL-CIO,
Southold Unit 8785 as the exclusive employee organization to represent the employees
and extends to the CSEA the following rights:
a)
grievances;

To represent the employees in negotiations and in the settlement o f

b)
To membership dues deduction, upon presentation o f dues deduction
authorization cards signed by individual employees; and
c)
To unchallenged representation status until seven months prior to the
expiration date of this Agreement, as per the Taylor Law.
SEC. 2. MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
2.1
Not contrary or inconsistent with the terms o f this Agreement, the Town reserves
thejcight_tofietermine_the_standards_o£service_to.be_offerecLby_itsjvariousjdepartments;_tQ
set standards o f selection for employment; to direct its employees; to regulate work
schedules; to take disciplinary action; to abolish positions; to maintain the efficiency o f
governmental operations; to determine the methods, means and personnel by which
municipal operations are to be conducted; to determine the content o f job classifications
subject to Civil Service Department approval; to take all actions necessary to carry out its
1

12/1/15

mission in emergencies; and the technology of performing its works.
SEC. 3 AGENCY SHOP FEE
3.1

The CSEA will have the following security:

a)
Every employee who is a member of the CSEA will remain a member o f
the CSEA in good standing for the term o f this Agreement or pay to the CSEA a service
fee.
b)
Every employee hired during the term o f this Agreement will, no later than
the first pay day after the date o f hire, either:
1.
Become a member o f the CSEA and remain a member in good
standing for the term of this Agreement; or
2.

Pay the CSEA service fee.

c)
The CSEA service fee is a fee equal to the biweekly dues o f the CSEA, to
be paid to the CSEA by the employees who do not become members o f the CSEA. The
amount will be deducted from the employee’s biweekly pay check and will be paid
directly to the CSEA on each month.
d.
The Town assumes no liability or responsibility for the disposition o f the
agency fee funds collected by it for the CSEA after the same are transmitted to the CSEA
pursuant to the provisions o f this Section. Nor does the Town assume any liability or
responsibility whatsoever for the acts or omissions o f the CSEA in the administration o f
its affairs regarding the agency fee, against all claims the CSEA holds the Town
harmless.
SEC. 4. GOOD FA ITH AGREEM ENT
4.1 The parties agree that they will each conduct grievance hearings and contract
negotiations in good faith, exchange viewpoints, make proposals and counter-proposals,
make available to each other all relevant records, data and information in the possession
o f the other to the end that mutual understanding and agreement may be reached with
respect to the terms and conditions o f employment and the administration o f grievances
of-the-employees-------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------SEC. 5. NEGOTIATING C O M M ITTEE------------------------------------------- ---------5.1 The CSEA negotiating committee will consist of no more than five employees
who are negotiating on Town time. No more than five negotiation sessions will be held
2

12/1/15

during the normal work day without the consent o f both parties.
SEC. 6. DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Agreement, the following definitions will apply:
6.1
“Full-time employee” means those employees who regularly work 12 months per
year, five days per week and not less than seven hours per day and those employees who
work the schedule set forth in Section 34.6.
6.2
“Part-time employee” means those employees who regularly work less than 12
months per year, or who work less than five days per week, or who work less than a
seven hour day.
SEC. 7. CIVIL SERVICE PROTECTION
7.1
Employees appointed from a valid Civil Service list will be granted the protection
afforded to them by the applicable provision of Article 5 o f the Civil Service Law.
7.2
Full-time employees in the non-competitive class who will have rendered 12
months of continuous service will be granted the protection o f the applicable provisions
o f Article 5 o f the Civil Service Law.
7.3
Employees will have the right to be represented by persons o f their choice,
including representatives o f CSEA, in all proceedings relative to grievances, disciplinary
proceedings and the terms and conditions o f employment.
7.4
Notice of all positions o f employment to be filled within the bargaining unit will
be posted on available bulletin boards and all eligible employees will be given adequate
opportunity to submit an application.
7.5
Prior to creating a new position covered by the recognition clause and rate for
same, the Town will notify the Association President in writing. The Association and
Town will confer within 15 days to discuss the new title. I f no agreement is reached, the
new position may go into effect at the expiration o f the 15. days.
SEC. 8. SENIORITY
j
r

!
|

8.1
Seniority will be determined on the basis o f continuous employment in the service
------------------o f the Town and each department of the Town will establish and maintain a seniority list ---------------- -------of the full-time employees in the department. Unless otherwise provided by law,
seniority for full-time employees will include full credit for each year o f full-time
employment in the service o f the Town, and Vz year credit for each year o f any part-time
3

1

12/1/15

service with the Town. This provision will not be construed to require credit for parttime service for purposes o f leave time accruals or longevity.
8.2. Unless otherwise provided by law, and subject to the provisions o f Section 9
(LAY OFFS), in cases of promotion, transfer from one position to another, filling new or
vacant positions, or the assignment o f employees to overtime work on a rotating basis,
the Town agrees to accomplish the same on the basis o f seniority within j ob
classifications within each department, provided that the employee, in the opinion o f the
Department Head, is competent by reason o f ability, training, experience and fitness to
properly perform the duties of the position.
SEC. 9. LAYOFFS
9.1
During the terms o f this Agreement, the Town will not lay off employees hired
prior to December 31,1980, unless there is reasonable cause.
9.2
In the event that it is necessary to lay-off full-time employees, the Town agrees
that the same will be accomplished on the basis o f seniority within job classifications
within each department (i.e., employees with the least seniority will be first laid-off).
Any part-time employees in the job classification within the department will be laid-off
first, in inverse order of seniority. Effective October 24,2014, this paragraph will be
deleted.
Effective October 24, 2014, lay-off and recall rights for competitive class
employees will be as set forth in applicable law, rules and regulations.
The lay-off and recall o f full-time non-competitive and labor class employees will
be made within the affected job classification and will be based upon Town-wide
seniority, provided that the job skills, training, qualifications and work record o f the
retained person(s) in the affected classification are determined to be equal. Laid-off fulltime non-competitive and labor class employees in promotional titles will have so called
bump and retreat rights as set forth in law for competitive class employees, except that
they will not have the right to displace part-time employees.
The lay-off and recall of part-time employees will be made within the affected job
classification and will be based upon Town-wide seniority, provided that the job skills,
training, qualifications, experience and disciplinary records o f the retained person(s) in
the-affieefed-elassifieation-are-detemined-to-be-equal.-----------------------------------------------Any part-time employees in the job classification within the department will be
laid-off first.

4

12/1/15

9.3
When it is necessary to employ additional employees, the positions will be offered
first to former qualified employees of the department in question, who have been laid off
as provided in die preceding section. Notice of the employment will be sent to each
employee by registered mail directed to the employee’s last known address advising of
same.
9.4
In the event of lay-offs, the Town will make every reasonable effort to notify in
writing both the CSEA Unit President and the employee affected at least 45 calendar days
prior to tide effective date o f the layoff.
SEC. 10. LEGAL SERVICES
10.1 The Town will provide legal services to an employee against whom an action or
proceeding has been commenced involving any matter occurring within the scope o f
employment as an officer or employee o f the Town.
SEC. 11. INJURIES SUSTAINED IN THE COURSE OF EMPLOYMENT
11.1 Employees who sustain physical injuries in the course o f their employment with
the Town may, in the discretion o f the Town Board, continue to receive full salary during
the period o f incapacity or until eligible for a disability pension, or death, whichever will
first occur. I f an employee receives salary during a period o f incapacity, any sums
received by the employee under the provisions o f the Workers ’ Compensation Law for
lost earnings as a result o f the injury will be paid by the employee to the Town. The
employee may utilize his/her unused accrued sick time, compensatory time, personal time
and vacation time, in that order, during absences from work for which the Town does not
agree to continue to pay the employee’s full salary. Nothing contained herein will in any
way be deemed to restrict the Town’s right to separate employees pursuant to the
provisions o f Civil Service Law Sections 71-73.
SEC. 12. PERSONNEL RECORDS
12.1 Any employee, not more than twice yearly, will be entitled to examine his/her
official personnel file upon making a request to die person having custody o f the records.
12.2 Upon request, any employee will be furnished with a copy o f any material in
his/her personnel file.
12.3 Only one employee official personnel file will be maintained that will contain all
material with respect to the employee.
------------------------------- --------------------------12.4 No material derogatory to any employee, his/her conduct, character or service will
be placed in his/her personnel file unless he/she has been given the opportunity to
5

12/1/15

examine the same and affix his/her signature thereon, which signature will not be deemed
to indicate that the employee in any way consents to or agrees with the contents. The
employee may place in the personnel file a written answer to any derogatory material in
the files within 10 working days after receiving notification o f the proposed inclusion o f
the material in the file.
SEC. 13. UNIFORMS
13.1 Public Safely Dispatchers, Traffic Control Officers, Bay Constables and
employees from the Landfill, Highway Department and Human Resource Center, who
are supplied uniforms may either, at their option, clean their uniforms themselves or elect
to utilize the Town selected cleaning service.
SEC. 14. VACATIONS
14.1 All full-time employees will be entitled to vacation time in accordance with the
following schedule:
VACATION CREDIT

LENGTH OF SERVICE

3 days
10 days
12 days
15 days
18 days
20 days
23 days
25 days
30 days

After 6 months
Start o f 2nd year through the 3rd year
Start o f 4th year through the 6th year
Start of 7th year through the 9th year
Start o f 10thyear through the 11th year
Start o f 12th year through the l4Ulyear
Start o f 15th year through the 19th year
Start of20dl year though the 22nd year
Start of 23rd year and thereafter

14.2 Advanced payment for earned vacation will be paid to the employee prior to
commencement o f the vacation, provided that the employee gives at least three weeks’
prior written notice o f the time of the commencement to the Department Head.
14.3 The head o f each department will approve the vacation schedules for the
employees in the respective departments.
T4^4~“Notmore{han-f2-days-Gfunused'VaGation-time-maybe'Carried-over-into-the---succeeding year.
14.5 Subject to the prior approval o f the Department Head, vacation may be taken in
increments o f one day at a time, so long as it does not interfere with the day to day
operation of services to the Town.
■*
6

12/1/15

14.6 No time will be accrued during leaves o f absence and/or suspensions from work
exceeding 30 calendar days.
14.7 If the Town cancels a previously approved vacation, or any part thereof, it will pay
the employee for any time that cannot be rescheduled that year.
SEC. 15. JURY DUTY
15.1 Employees who are required to serve on jury duty will receive full salary during
the period of service, subject to their payment to the Town o f all amounts received for
duty, exclusive o f expenses of travel and meals, and will receive full excusal for the day
o f jury duty, regardless of shift.
SEC. 16. BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
16.1 Full-time employees will be entitled to four days’ leave of absence with pay for
the purpose o f arranging and attending the funeral o f the spouse, child, parent, brother,
sister, parent-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law or, effective October 24,2014, stepparent or step-child, o f the employee. A full-time employee will be granted one working
day with pay to attend the funeral on the employee’s working day of the employee’s
grandparents, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, half-brothers or half-sisters, or other
relatives living in the household of the employee unless additional time is authorized by
the Supervisor. The leave of absence for funeral purposes will be in addition to any other
leave of absence to which the employee is entitled under any other provision o f this
Agreement. The Town Supervisor will also have the sole, non-grievable discretion to
grant bereavement leave for the loss o f other persons.
SEC. 17. UNAUTHORIZED ABSENCE
17.1 An employee who will be absent without authorization, for which no satisfactory
explanation is given, will not be compensated for the period o f absence, and if the
absence will continue for 10 continuous working days, the unauthorized absence will be
deemed to constitute just cause for dismissal in accordance with applicable rules o f the
Suffolk County Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
SEC. 18. LEAVE OF ABSENCE
18.1__ Uponxequest,_fulL-time_employees_mayhe-granted_axhilcLcareieave_o£absence__
not exceeding two years without pay by reason o f the birth to or adoption o f a child by
the employee. The employee, upon the expiration o f the period of leave o f absence, will
be restored to same or comparable position o f employment, if available. Part-time
employees may be granted a leave o f absence without pay for these reasons, at the
discretion o f the Town Board.

7

12/1/15

18.2 Upon request, full-time employees may be granted a leave o f absencewithout pay
not exceeding one year for reasons o f personal health or that o f their immediate family,
provided, however, that the necessity therefor is certified in writing to the Town Board by
a physician.
SEC. 19. SICK LEAVE
19.1 Upon completion o f one year of service, full-time employees will be entitled to 15
days’ sick leave with pay. Full-time employees with less than one year o f service will be
entitled to one day o f sick leave with pay for each month o f service. Part-time employees
will accrue one hour o f sick leave for each 20 hours actually worked. N ot more than 1/3
o f this accrued time may be utilized annually, pursuant to the procedures contained in
Section 21 arid applicable department practices, if any, as though it were personal leave.
I
19.2 Full-time employees hired after October 15, 1996 will be entitled to 12 days’ sick
leave during their first year o f employment, 13 days during their second year o f
employment,, 14 days during their third year o f employment and 15 days’ sick leave
thereafter.
19.3

Unused sick leave may be accumulated up to a maximum o f 280 days.

19.4 An employee who becomes sick while on vacation may have the period o f illness
charged against any unused sick leave, provided that a physician certifies to the illness
and its duration in writing, and the vacation period o f the employee will be extended
accordingly.1
19.5 An employee who becomes sick while at work, who is required to leave work, will
be charged for one-half day o f sick leave if he/she worked at least 50% o f the normal
work day, otherwise he/she will be charged for a full day o f sick leave.
19.6 Employees who are required to attend a doctor’s appointment during normal
working hours and cannot reschedule the appointment after working hours, will have sick
leave time deducted in the same manner as in Section 19.5, except that, for up to 10 hours
per year, absences of less than one-half day will be charged as actual hours o f work
missed.
19.7 A Department Head may request a written physician’s certificate in all cases
where-an-employee-is-absentby-reason-oflillness_for-more-than-three_consecutivejwQric___
days. In addition, a Department Head may, in consultation with the CSEA President, also
require a physician’s statement if the Department Head has reason to believe that an------employee is abusing his/her sick leave privileges by, for example, exhibiting a pattern o f
absences on the first or last days o f the employee’s regularly scheduled workweek, the
days immediately before or after a holiday or vacation period, or due to use o f sick leave
8

12/1/15

in excess of the unit average for the past three full calendar years. A person who is at or
exceeding the average will be notified in advance that a doctor’s note will be necessary
for future absences.
19.8 Upon retirement, a full-time employee will be entitled to payment for the first 40
days of accumulated unused sick leave. For days accumulated over 40, additional
payment will be made at the rate o f one day for each three accumulated over 40. In no
event will the grand total payment exceed 120 days.
i

In order to be paid for unused accumulated sick leave, the employee must notify
the Town Comptroller, on a Town provided form, of the employee’s non-binding
intention to retire no fewer than 45 calendar days prior to the date o f the adoption o f the
budget, but in no event later than October 1st. The retiree will receive the monies due
provided that the required notice was provided. I f the required notice was not provided,
then the payriient will not be lost, but will become payable 30 calendar days after the
commencement of the fiscal year for which the Town budgeted for the same or had an
opportunity tp do so.
19.9 No time will be accrued during leaves o f absence and/or suspension from work
exceeding 30; calendar days.
SEC. 20. HOLIDAYS
20.1

Full-time employees will be entitled to the following holidays off with pay:
‘•
!•
'[•
’•
•
’•
;>

the first day o f January, known as New Year’s Day
the third Monday o f January, known as Martin Luther King, Jr. Day
the third Monday in February, known as President’s Day
the last Monday in May, known as Memorial Day
the fourth day o f July, known as Independence Day ~
the first Monday in September, known as Labor Day
the second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day
the Tuesday next succeeding the first Monday in November, known as
Election Day
: • the eleventh day of November, known as Veteran’s Day
! • the fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day
;> the day after Thanksgiving Day, except for employees assigned to the
: Landfill, who will receive a floating holiday to be scheduled as though
j __it were a personal day_________ ______________________________
! • the twenty-fifth day o f December, knows as Christmas Day
■« the eve o f Thanksgiving Day, 14 day
; • the eve o f Christmas Day, 14 day

9

12/1/15

'•

the eve o f New Year’s Day, Vi day

20.2 Where a federally observed holiday differs from the list of holidays set forth in
Section 20.1, ithe federal holiday will be observed.
20.2a Holidays for Public Safety Dispatchers and Bay Constables will be observed on
the day of the actual holiday.
20.3 In the event that any of the above specified holidays occurs on a Saturday, the
preceding Friday will be observed as a holiday, and if any o f the above specified holidays
occurs on a Sunday, the succeeding Monday will be observed as a holiday.
i
20.4 In the event, however, that it may be deemed necessary by the head o f a
department that certain employees are required to be on duty on those days, the
employees so requested to work on the above named holidays agree to do so and will be
compensated in accordance with Section 29.2.
t

20.5 Unless on vacation or an approved compensatory time, holiday, personal or sick
day, employee must work his/her last regularly scheduled day before and the first
following the, holiday in order to receive holiday pay or compensatory time off.
20.6 Employees will have the option o f receiving pay rather than time o ff for all
holidays per calendar year, provided written notice Is provided to the Accounting
Department, pn a form prepared; by the Town after notice to the CSEA, by not later than
December 31; o f that year. Employees continue to have the right to carry over unused
holidays into the next calendar year, per existing practices.
SEC. 21. PERSONAL LEAVE
21.1 Full-time employees will be entitled to five days’ personal leave o f absence with
pay in each calendar year for personal business reasons (personal leave days), provided
that time for taking the leave will be subject to prior approval by the Department Head.
Personal leave will be prorated for new full-time employees and for full-time employees
during their last year o f employment as follows: two days credited on January 1, one on
March 1, one on June 1 and one on September 1.
SEC. 22. COMPENSATORY TIME
22.1 Whenever ah employee is entitled to compensatory time off, it will be taken at the
time and for the duration as is mutually agreed to by the employee and the Department
Head of the department in which he/she is employed.
(a) Employees in safety sensitive positions may accrue up to, but no more
10

12/1/15

than, 240 hours of compensatory time, and employees in non-safety sensitive positions
may accrue up to, but no more than, 160 hours of compensatory time as of each
December 31st Except where otherwise agreed to in writing by the Department Head,
the employee must request the use and/or payment of 50% of his/her compensatory time
that exceeds 120 hours by each September 1st and must make at least one request for the
use of compensatory time every two months. Any denial o f a request to use
compensatory time will be automatically reviewed by the Town Supervisor or designee
and a written response issued to the employee within 14 calendar days from the
Supervisor or designee’s receipt of the denial. If, as the result o f a decision to deny the
use o f compensatory time as requested, the employee still has more than 120 hours o f
compensatory time as o f each December 31st, then the Town will pay for that excess
time, provided that the employee has made a good faith effort to request, schedule and
use this time as contemplated by this Agreement.
(b) Nothing contained in this Agreement will be construed as in any way
restricting the Town’s right to take any actions required by the provisions o f the federal
Fair Labor Standards Act, and the cases and regulations interpreting it, subject to the
Town’s duty to bargain, if any, with the CSEA regarding those actions.
22.2 All Town employees asked to report or remain on duty during a weather 1
emergency when normal Town services are suspended will receive compensatory time at
the straight time rate for all hours actually worked during their normal shift.
SEC. 23. HEALTH INSURANCE AND HOSPITALIZATION
23.1 There will be a six month waiting eligibility period for inclusion into the Town of
Southold Employees Health Benefit Plan from the employee’s date o f hire. Effective
January 1,2015, or as soomafter as can be implemented by the Town, the New York
State Health Insurance Plan (NYSHIP) and the Island Group, the Town o f Southold
Employees Health Benefit Plan will be terminated and health insurance and
hospitalization will be provided to each employee pursuant to the NYSHff/Empire Plan.
There will be a six month waiting period (or a shorter period if required by law) for
enrollment by new employees in the NYSHIP from the employee’s date o f hire.”
23.2 The Town will continue to pay its 100% premium contribution towards the cost of
medical and hospitalization benefits in accordance with the terms and conditions as set
forth in the Town o f Southold Employees Health Benefit Plan “Description Booklet”
dated-MayJL9-89.-except_as to the identity o f the administrator. Any employee hired after
January 15,2008 will contribute 5% of the premium cost toward medical and
hospitalization benefits. Effective January 1,2015, or as soon after as the change to the
NYSHIP can be implemented by the Town, the NYSHIP and the Island Group, this
paragraph will be deleted.

11

12/1/15

Any employee hired on or before January 15,2008 will contribute 5% o f the
premium cost towards medical and hospitalization benefits. Effective December 31,
2012, if the parties have not fully ratified and approved a successor agreement to the one
due to expire on December 31,2012, these employees’ 5% contribution will remain
based on the premium cost in effect on December 31,2012, until the parties have fully
ratified a successor agreement, at which time their 5% contribution will be based on the
premium cost in effect on the day that the successor agreement is fully ratified and
approved and as may be modified thereafter, subject to any different agreement being
reached by the parties. This provision does not alter in any way the health insurance
contribution contract provision in effect for employees hired after January 15, 2008.
Effective January 1,2015, or as soon after as the change to the NYSHIP can be
implemented by the Town, the NYSHIP and the Island Group, this paragraph w ill be '
deleted.
'
Effective January 1,2015, or as soon after as the change to the NYSHIP can be
implemented by the Town, the NYSHIP and the Island Group, all employees will
contribute 5% o f the premium cost towards medical and hospitalization benefits.
Effective December 31; 2016, if the parties have not fully ratified and approved a
successor Agreement to the one that expired on December 31,2016, these employees’
5% contribution will remain based on the premium cost in effect on December 31,2016
until the parties have fully ratified and approved a successor Agreement, at which time
their contribution will be based on the premium cost for the NYSHIP in effect on the day
that the successor Agreement is fully ratified and approved and as may be modified
thereafter, subject to any different agreement being reached by the parties.
It is the Town’s intent to provide all employees with written notice, on or about
October 1 o f each year, of the estimated total premium cost o f the medical and
hospitalization plan and each employee’s 5% contribution amount that is anticipated to be
in effect for the following calendar year based on the employee’s current level o f
coverage. Effective January 1,2015, or as soon after as the change to the NYSHIP can
be implemented by the Town, the NYSHIP and the Island Group, this paragraph will be
deleted.
Effective February 1,2008, the Town’s medical plan benefit package will fully
and completely mirror the Empire Core Plus Enhancements Plan as it existed as o f
January 1, 2007. Effective each succeeding January 1st, the Town’s medical plan benefit
package will fully and completely mirror the Empire Core Plus Enhancements Plan as it
existed as oftlieJanuaiy:lst_Qfthe_previous_calendar year. Effective January L 2015. or
as soon after as the change to the NYSHIP can be implemented by the Town, the
NYSHIP and the Island Group, this paragraph will be deleted.----------------------------------Notwithstanding any other provisions of Section 23.2, effective February 1, 2008,
the prescription co-pays for medications for which there is no generic brand equivalent
12

12/1/15

will be equal to one-half of the difference between the co-pay required as of January 1,
2007 and January 1,2008 by the Empire Core Plus Enhancements Plan. Effective each
succeeding January 1st, the prescription co-pays will be equal to one-half o f the difference
between the co-pay required as o f January 1st o f the previous calendar year and that
January 1st by the Empire Core Plus Enhancements Plan. Effective January 1,2015, or as
soon after as the change to the NYSHIP can be implemented by the Town, the NYSHIP
and the Island Group, this paragraph will be deleted.
The Joint Labor-Management Committee will have jurisdiction over and continue
the parties’ discussions about health insurance and fringe benefit cost-containment
measures. Criteria and other matters that are not terms and conditions o f employment
will not be subject to the jurisdiction o f this committee. The committee’s discussions and
results are subject to bilateral agreement, but not to the contractual grievance and
arbitration or PERB’s impasse or fact finding procedures. Effective January 1, 2015, or
as soon after as the change to the NYSHIP can be implemented by the Town, the
NYSHIP and the Island Group, this paragraph will be deleted.
23.3 The hospitalization program may be subject to grievances only with respect to the
application of the terms of the hospitalization program to individual claim and not with
respect to the terms of the plan itself. Effective January 1, 2015, or as soon after as the
change to the NYSHIP can be implemented by the Town, the NYSHIP and the Island
Group, this paragraph will be deleted.
23.4 Employees will be eligible for individual coverage, but not family coverage, if
they are eligible for coverage under another Town employee’s Town health insurance
plan. The employee may reinstate family coverage in the event o f an emergency causing
the loss o f the other person’s Town health insurance, consistent with the rules and
regulations of the Town’s health insurance plan and applicable laws and regulations.
Effective January 15,2008, employees will not be eligible to be covered under the
Town’s health insurance plan, if they are eligible for coverage under another Town
' employee’s Town health insurance plan. The employee may reinstate coverage in the
event o f an emergency causing the loss o f the other person’s Town health insurance,
consistent with the rules and regulations o f the Town’s health insurance plan and
applicable laws and regulations.
At retirement, an employee who would otherwise be eligible for retiree health
insurance but for the operation o f this provision will continue to be ineligible for retiree
health insurance. However, during retirement, the former employee may reinstate his/her
own individual health insurance coverage (or family coverage if the employee has_____1
dependents as defined in the plan) in the event o f an emergency causing the loss o f the
other person’s Town health insurance, consistent with the rules and regulations o f the
Town’s health insurance plan and applicable laws and regulations.
13

12/ 1/15

23.5 Health Insurance Declination Bonus. Employees may opt out of the Town’s
health insurance program in whole or in part for a full year by completing the appropriate
form furnished by the Town. An employee opting out o f the Town’s health insurance
program in whole or in part will be paid 50% o f the premium savings, provided the
employee maintains the employee’s waiver (remains out) for a full year. Payments will
be subject to all usual payroll deductions and will be made on or about December 15 of
each year.
Employees electing to waive coverage must do so by filing their forms no later
than November 30th in any year, with the provisions o f this section taking effect on the
next January 1st. Once a waiver form has been filed with the Town, the waiver will
continue to be in effect from year to year thereafter until the employee elects to reenroll,
and the employee will be entitled to the applicable payment for waiver for each full year
his or her waiver is in effect. Employees will continue to be notified if the application to
decline insurance is incomplete or insufficient.
It is understood that once an employee has waived coverage for a particular year,
the employee may not reinstate coverage for that year except in the event o f an
emergency causing the loss o f insurance through another source and consistent with the
rules and regulations o f the Town’s flexible spending plan and applicable laws and
regulations. Emergency will include loss o f employment or termination o f insurance for
a spouse whose employer had provided the alternative insurance. Emergency will not
include the change o f any alternative insurance from a noncontributory to a contributory
plan or the voluntary declination o f the spouse o f insurance offered by the spouse’s
employer.
An employee may reinstate coverage not more than 30 days prior to retirement,
consistent with the rules and regulations o f the Town’s health insurance plan, by written
request to the Town comptroller. In the event the employee re-enters the health.insurance
plan 30 or fewer days prior to retirement, the decimation payment will be prorated and
adjusted accordingly. Any monies then owed to the Town will be deducted from the
employee’s remaining paycheck(s) and/or cash payments the employee may be eligible
for at the time o f retirement. I f these payments are insufficient to meet the employee’s
actual repayment obligations, the employee will be deemed to have consented to
recoupment based on terms and conditions to be set by the Town at the time o f
recoupment.
-— ------------------- i m

i i l —v j ± - U U . Y . b i a . ^ U - L U i - U

j

m

a u w

i j j

11 * p i.? i j

i ^ i^ _ li m

Town in writing no later than November 30lhto be effective the succeeding fiscal year.
This deadline will not apply to emergency reinstatement o f insurance as provided for in
the above paragraph, but the reinstatement will be subject to whatever requirements or
deadlines are imposed by the Town’s program. I f reinstatement occurs during a waived
year due to emergency, the employee will repay, pro rata, any amount already forwarded
14

12/1/15

to the employee in return for the waiver by payroll deduction.
- Effective for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2015, or as soon after as
the change to the NYSHIP can be implemented by the Town, the NYSHIP and the
Island Group, an Employee will be eligible for the health insurance declination bonus if
he/she: (a) has submitted to the Town documentation showing that he/she has health
insurance coverage other than through the NYSHIP; and (b) opts out o f the NYSHIP for
the period January 1 through December 31. An Employee who experiences a qualifying
event as defined by Internal Revenue Code Section 125 and who has submitted to the
Town adequate documentation o f that event may enroll in the NYSHIP within the 12month period, and the Employee will repay, pro-rata, any amount already forwarded to
the Employee in return for the waiver, by payroll deduction.
The CSEA acknowledges that the Town will implement NYSHIP Policy 122r3
unless and until it is finally vacated or set aside by a court or other adjudicatory body. In
that event, the preexisting terms and conditions of employment affected by NYSHIP
Policy 122r3 will be reinstated as soon as is permitted by applicable laws, rules and
regulations. In addition, in that event, employees will once again be eligible for the
health insurance declination bonus, in the same amount and manner as was in existence
immediately preceding January 1, 2015. Nothing contained in this paragraph will be
construed as waiving the rights o f the Town, CSEA or employees or bargaining unitrepresented retirees to commence or join any litigation challenging NYSHIP Policy
122r3 (other than litigation challenging the validity of this Agreement).
23.6 Retiree Health Insurance. Notwithstanding any contract provision or practice to
the contrary, an employee will be eligible for retiree health insurance provided that the
employee has been covered by the Town’s health insurance plan for at least 10
consecutive years and was employed by the Town on the last date immediately prior to
retirement into the New York State Employees Retirement System.
It is understood that an employee who is covered by another Town employee’s
health insurance plan and therefore not eligible for health insurance pursuant to Section
23.4 or who opts out o f health insurance coverage pursuant to Section 23.5 will be
considered a “covered employee under the Town’s health insurance plan” for purposes o f
determining eligibility for retiree health insurance, provided that all other eligibility
requirements have been met.
23.7—'Elexible-Spendins-Plan.-An-Intemal-Revenue-CQde-§-l-25-flexible-spending-plan
related to the health insurance declination and employee contributions toward the
premium cost of health insurance only has been implemented by the Town. It is-----------understood that participation in the flexible spending plan is voluntary and that before the
plan is utilized by a particular unit member, the member will first agree in writing to
indemnify and save the Town harmless against any and all claims and/or liabilities,

15

12/1/15

including attorneys’ fees, that may arise out of or be reason o f action taken or not taken
by the Town for the purpose of complying with this Section.
SEC. 24. EMPLOYEE BENEFIT FUND
24.1 The Town will make payments to the CSEA Employee Benefit Fund for the
benefit o f full-time employees.
The Town will pay 100% o f the premiums for the benefits provided by the former
CSEA Benefit Fund Package 7 Plan for each full-time employee.
24.2 CSEA represents that the CSEA Employee Benefit Fund is a legally constituted
entity; that the entity may legally receive funds paid to it by the Town for the benefit o f
the employees o f the Town; and that the employees o f the Town are eligible to participate
in the benefits provided by the entity. CSEA also represents that it will obtain and
provide to the Town the assurance from the Trustees o f the Benefit Fund as will satisfy
the representations set forth in the preceding paragraph hereof.
24.3 It is understood and agreed by and between the parties that the Town assumes no
liability or responsibility for the disposition of the funds paid by it to the CSEA Benefit
Fund after the same are paid to the fund pursuant to the provisions o f this Section. N or
does the Town assume any liability or responsibility whatsoever for the acts or omissions
o f the CSEA Benefit Fund in the administration o f its affairs, against all o f which the
CSEA does hereby hold the Town harmless.
SEC. 25. RETIREMENT BENEFITS
25.1 Subject to the applicable provisions o f law, the Town will provide to Tier 1 and 2
employees a noncontributory “Improved Career Retirement Plan” in accordance with and
subject to the provisions o f Section 75-1 o f the Retirement and Social Security Law and
to pay the entire cost to the New York State Employees Retirement System.
25.2 Subj ect to the applicable provisions o f the law, the Town will provide to Tier 3
and Tier 4 employees a retirement plan in accordance with the New York State
Retirement and Social Security Law.
25.3 Unused sick leave will be applied as additional service credit upon retirement o f
an-employee-in-accordance~with-the-prov-isions-o£Section-4-lXo£the-RetiremenLand_____
Social Security Law.
SEC. 26. DUES
26.1

Dues deduction will be made uniformly and consistently by the Town on each
16

12/1/15

payroll period and promptly paid over to the Treasurer of CSEA.
26.2 The Town will continue to make deductions from the salary o f each employee
who has authorized them in writing until authorized in writing by the employee to
discontinue,, change, or amend the deductions.
26.3 Any employee authorization to discontinue dues deductions will be in duplicate
signed by the employee and submitted to the Supervisor, who will promptly mail one
copy to the Treasurer o f CSEA.
26.4 The Town assumes no liability or responsibilily for the disposition o f dues
deductions after they are paid over to the Treasurer o f CSEA.
SEC. 27. SALARIES
27.1

For all full-time employees hired on or before June 8,1999:

Effective January 1,2013, for employees who are on the payroll as o f October 24,
2014 steps entry level through five, as well as the hourly and salaried rates, will be
increased by 1%.
Effective January 1, 2014, for employees who are on the payroll as o f October 24,
2014, steps entry level through five, as well as the hourly and salaried rates, will be
increased by 1.25%.
Effective within 30 calendar days o f October 24,2014, all full-time employees
who are on the payroll as o f October 24,2014 will receive a one-time, off-the-salaryschedule, non-recurring cash bonus of $276, minus applicable taxes and withholdings,
and all part-time employees who are on the payroll as o f October 24,2014 will receive a
one-time, off-the-salaiy-schedule, non-recurring cash bonus o f $67, minus applicable
taxes and withholdings.
Effective January 1, 2015, steps entry level through five, as well as the hourly and
salaried rates, will be increased by 2%.
Effective January 1,2016, steps entry level through five, as well as the hourly and
salaried rates, will be increased by 2%.
27.2

For all full-time employees hired after June 8,1999:

Effective January 1, 2013, for employees who are on the payroll as o f October 24,
2014, steps entry level through five, as well as the hourly and salaried rates, will be
increased by 1%.

17

12/1/15

Effective January 1,2014, for employees who are on the payroll as o f October 24,
2014, steps entry level through five, as well as the hourly and salaried rates, will be
increased by 1.25%.
Effective within 30 calendar days o f October 24, 2014, all full-time employees
who are on the payroll as o f October 24,2014 will receive a one-time, off-the-salaryschedule, non-recurring cash bonus o f $276, minus applicable taxes and withholdings,
and all part-time employees who are on the payroll as o f October 24,2014 will receive a
one-time, off-the-salaiy-schedule, non-recurring cash bonus o f $67, minus applicable
taxes and withholdings.
Effective January 1,2015, steps entry level through five, as well as the hourly and
salaried rates, will be increased by 2%.
Effective January 1, 2016, steps entry level through five, as well as the hourly and
salaried rates, will be increased by 2%.
27.3 An employee who is promoted will be placed on the step in the new position that
will enable the employee to have an increase equal to at least 5% o f the employees’ rate
before promotion. In no event will any increase exceed Step 5 o f the new position.
27.4 The Town will prepare a salary schedule of employees as provided herein and the
same will be annexed hereto.
27.5 Employees assigned to work as “Acting Foreman” for more than three consecutive
days will be paid foreman’s pay.
27.6 All leave credits except personal leave will become effective the first pay period in
the month o f the employee’s anniversary date.
27.7 When promoted, or when granted an extended leave o f absence when not on the
top step when leave commences, the employee will be placed on the Section 27.2 salary
schedule.
27.8 If the parties have not fully ratified and approved a successor Agreement to the
one that expires on December 31,2016, employees will remain on the same step in effect
on December 31,2016 until the parties have fully ratified and approved a successor
AgreemenVat-which-time-they-will-move-to-the-step-to-which-they-would-have-otherwise
moved had the steps not been frozen, subject to a different agreement being reached by
the parties;--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18

12/1/15

SEC. 28. RECALL
28.1 Employees who are required to report to work due to floods, storms or other
emergency will be deemed for all purposes to have commenced work when notified to
report for work. When possible, the employees will be given a period o f 45 minutes
within which to report to work.
28.2 The employees, when required to work, will receive a minimum o f four hours ’
compensation at their regular salary scale.
SEC. 29. OVERTIME
29.1 Employees who are required to work in excess o f eight hours in any one day will
be compensated at the rate o f one and one-half times the normal rate o f salary or wages,
or at the option of the employee will be given compensatory time off at the same rate.
subject to law. The provisions o f this paragraph will hot, however, apply to work
performed on any holiday set forth in this Agreement.
29.2 Full-time employees who are required to work during the hours between 7:30 AM
and 4:00 PM (7:00 AM and 3:30 PM in the Highway Department and Department o f
Public Works) on any holiday set forth in this Agreement will receive compensation at
the regular rate o f salary or wages in addition to receiving the regular salary or wages for
the holiday and will also be given compensatory time off with pay equal to the time
worked on that holiday. I f any employee is required to work on any such holiday
between 4:00 PM and 7:30 AM (3:30 PM and 7:00 AM in the Highway Department and
Department of Public Works), the employee will be compensated for hours worked at
double the rate of salary or wages.
29.3 Section 29.2 will not be applicable to Public Safety Dispatchers and Bay
Constables. In the event that a Public Safety Dispatcher or Bay Constable is required to
work on a Holiday set forth in Section 20.1 that he/she was not scheduled to work as part
o f his/her normal work schedule, he/she will receive compensation as follows:
a.
Time and one half the employee’s regular hourly salary rate for the number of
hours actually worked; plus
b.
Straight time at the employee’s regular hourly salary rate for the number o f
hours actually worked during the 8 a.m. to 4 p .m. work shift or double the employee’s
regular hourly salary .rate for the number o f hours actually worked during either the 4
p.m. to 12 a.m. or 12 a.m. to 8 a.m. work shifts.-------------------------------------------------c.
Public Safety Dispatchers and Bay Constables will not accrue any
compensatory time for working on a Holiday as set forth above.
19

12/1/15

In the event that a Public Safety Dispatcher or Bay Constable works on a Holiday
set forth in Section 20.1 that he/she was scheduled to work as part o f his/her normal work
schedule, he/she will receive compensation as follows:
a. Straight time at the employee’s regular hourly salary rate for the number o f
hours actually worked; plus
b. Straight time at the employee’s regular hourly salary rate for the number o f
hours actually worked during the 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. work shift or double the employee’s
regular hourly salary rate for the number of hours actually worked during either the 4
p.m. to 12 a.m. or 12 a.m. to 8 a.m. work shifts; plus
c. Public Safety Dispatchers and Bay Constables will not accrue any
compensatory time for working on a Holiday as set forth above.
29.4 On or about the 10th o f each month, the Department Head o f every department of
the Town will post in a conspicuous place within the department a list containing the
names and the number of hours o f overtime worked by each employee o f the department
during the preceding month.
SEC. 30. LONGEVITY
30.1 Full-time employees will receive additional non-cumulative compensation
(applied to the straight-time base rate o f pay) based upon length o f service in the Town as
follows:
a. Employees with at least 10 years but fewer than 15 years o f service will receive
a salary increase of 5%.
—
b. Employees with at least 15 years but fewer than 20 years o f service will receive
a salary increase of 6%.
c. Employees with 20 years but fewer than 25 years o f service w ill receive a
salary increase o f 7%.
d. Employees with 25 years o f service or more will receive a salary increase o f
8% .
e.
Additional compensation as provided in this section will commence on the first
day o f the month in which an employee becomes eligible.----------------------------------------

20

12/1/15

SEC. 31. SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL
31.1 A shift differential of $1,100 per year will be granted to each Public Safely
Dispatcher who works three shifts around the clock on a regularly scheduled basis.
31.2 A shift differential of $300 per year will be granted to each Public Safely
Dispatcher who works two rotating shifts on a regularly scheduled basis.
31.3 The above shift differentials will apply as well to any custodian working the night
shift. If more than one custodian rotates onto the night shift the shift differential will be
prorated between those employees. A shift differential o f $300 per year will be granted
to each custodian working the rotating night shift.
31.4 A shift differential of $300 per year will be granted to each full-time B ay
Constable.
SE C 32. MILEAGE ALLOWANCE
32.1 Employees who will be required to use their private automobile in the
performance of official Town business will be compensated at a rate to be set by the
Town Board upon the presentation o f a voucher to the Town Board.
SEC. 33. LICENSES
33.1 Employees required to have a Suffolk County Electrician’s License for
employment with the Town will have the fee paid by the Town up to $100 per year.
33.2 The Town will reimburse the cost of the CDL license fee and renewal fee, to any
employee whose job duties require the possession o f a valid CDL. The request for
reimbursement must be submitted, with proof o f payment, within 30 days o f licensing.
SEC. 34. HOURS OF WORK
The normal work week of all full-time employees will be as follows:
34.1 Clerical employees will work seven hours per day with one hour for lunch, five
days per week (Monday through Friday) for a total o f 3 5 hours per week. The Town has
the_optionto_regularly_schedulexlericaLemployees_betweerL8:0_0_AMLandA:0CLPM_on
any day Monday to Friday, but without an increase in weekly hours. Employee
qualifications, being equal, the choice o f hours will be given on a seniority basis. Five
days’ notice will be given for the change in the regular schedule.
34.2

Building Inspectors will work seven hours per day (8:00 AM to 4:00 PM) with one
21

12/1/15

hour for lunch, five days per week (Monday through Friday) for a total o f 35 hours per
week.
34.3 Highway Department and Public Works employees will work eight hours per day
(7:00 AM to 3:30 PM) with one-half hour lunch, five days per week (Monday through
Friday) for a total of 40 hours per week.
' 34.4 Public Safety Dispatchers will work eight hour rotating shifts with one-half hour
for lunch, for a total of 37.5 hours per week. Upon request by the Town, the parties will
meet to continue their negotiations over the Town’s proposal to implement fixed tours o f
duty.
34.5 Full-time Human Resources Department employees may work one o f the
following shifts now utilized: 5:30 AM to 1:00 PM, 8:00 AM to 3:00 PM , or 9:00 AM to
4:00 PM, based upon the needs o f that department. Effective as soon as the Town
implements time clocks in the Department, the work day will be increased by one hour to
eight hours per day including the current one hour for lunch, with the additional time to
be scheduled by the Department contiguous to the starting and/or ending times o f the
existing shifts.
34.6 Employees assigned to work the Collection Center will work 10 hours per day,
6:45 AM to 5:15 PM, four days per week (with one-half hour for lunch), for a total o f 40
hours per week. Collection Center employees hired after July 1,1996 m ay be scheduled
to work a five day workweek at the discretion of the department head. Effective October
24, 2014, any Collection Center employee may be scheduled to work a five day
workweek at the discretion o f the department head. The Town will provide an employee
with at least 30 calendar days’ written notice prior to implementing a change in the
employee’s workweek. Any employee required to eat lunch on the site w ill be given a
paid lunch period.
34.7 Bay Constables and Maintenance employees in Building and Grounds will work
eight hours per day with one-half hour for lunch, for a total o f 40 hours per week.
34.8 Part-time employees will be required to work at times and on schedules as their
services may be required by the head of the department in which employed, provided that
the schedules will conform to the rules o f the Suffolk County Civil Service Department
and do not infringe upon the work schedules o f the full-time employees.
34.9 The Town may close the Collection Center if it so elects in order to meet its
operational objectives.----------------------------------------------------------------------------------34.10 Effective October 24,2014, a full-time employee and Department Head, upon
their mutual written consent, as well as the written approval o f the Town Supervisor and
22

12/1/15

CSEA President or their designees, may flex the employee’s work hours within the
employee’s defined workweek, provided that the impact upon the Town is cost-neutral.
I f any party to the agreement withdraws consent, then, within 30 calendar days o f the
Town receiving or issuing written notice of the withdrawal, the employee’s work hours
will revert to those worked prior to the implementation of the flex schedule or to those in
another existing shift.
SEC. 35. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
35.1 “GRIEVANCE” means any dispute between the employee and/or group o f
employees, and the Town, with respect only to the meaning or interpretation o f a specific
provision o f this Agreement. It will not include disciplinary proceedings or any other
matters that are reviewable under administrative procedures established by laws or the
rules of the Suffolk County Civil Department
35.2 All grievances o f employees involving the interpretation o f this Agreement will be
resolved in accordance with the following procedure:
Step 1(a). Within 10 working days after an employee knows or should have
known o f an occurrence that allegedly violates the contract with respect to that employee,
the employee may submit a grievance in writing to his/her immediate supervisor. The
immediate supervisor will issue a written reply to the grievance within 10 working days
o f its receipt. The failure of the Town at Step 1 to respond within the contractually
prescribed timelines will permit the employee to proceed to Step 2.
Step 1(b). Within 15 working days after the CSEA President knows or should
have known of an occurrence that allegedly violates the contract with respect to a
similarly affected group o f employees, the CSEA President may submit a grievance in
writing to the employees’ Department Head, or to the Town Supervisor’s office if the
similarly affected group o f employees are from more than one Town Department.' The
Department Head or Town Supervisor ordesignee will issue a written reply to the
grievance within 15 working days o f its receipt. The failure o f the Town to respond
within the contractually prescribed timelines will permit the CSEA to proceed to Step 2.
Step 2. I f the employee and/or CSEA President in the event o f a group grievance
is not satisfied with the reply, within 10 working days o f receipt o f the reply, the
employee may appeal the decision to the Grievance Board made up o f two designees of
the-Supervisor,-one_ofwhoniwilLnomxally-be_the-DepartmentHead,_and-tW-OJiiemhers
from the CSEA, who will normally be the President and his/her designated
representative. The Grievance Board will meet to either: (a) consider the grievance-------within 20 working days of its receipt, in which case the Grievance Board will issue a
written reply o f its decision within 20 working days after the meeting to the grievant,
CSEA President and the Town Attorney; or (b) if there is more than one grievance before
23

12/1/15

the Grievance Board and they concern similar issues and facts, the Board by majority
approval will notify the grievant(s) o f its decision to hear the grievances as a single
consolidated grievance limited to those currently before it. Once consolidated, the
grievances will remain consolidated for all further purposes until the grievance is finally
resolved. The Grievance Board’s decision will be made in writing and indicate the names
o f the grievant(s) to be included into the consolidated grievance within 20 working days
of its receipt, with copies sent to the grievants, the CSEA President and the Town
Attorney. The Grievance Board will then meet within 10 working days to consider the
grievance. The Grievance Board will issue a written decision within 20 working days o f
the meeting. In both situations, the failure of the Town at Step 2 to respond within the
contractually prescribed timelines will permit the CSEA to proceed to Step 3, and the
failure o f the employee(s) to appeal within the contractually prescribed timelines will
result in the dismissal o f the grievance(s).
Step 3. I f the CSEA is not satisfied with the Step 2 answer, the CSEA grievant
may, within 30 working days, notify the Town Clerk in writing that it is requesting a
hearing before an independent advisory arbitrator selected pursuant to the rules o f the
New York State Public Employment Relations Board, whose advisory
recommendation(s) will be forwarded to the Town Board and CSEA Unit President
within 20 working days following the Step 3 hearing.. The arbitrator will be without
power or authority to make any recommendation(s) that would require the commission o f
ah act prohibited by law or is in contradiction o f or adds to, subtracts from or otherwise
modifies any o f the terms of this Agreement. The failure o f the CSEA to comply with
and appeal within the contractually prescribed procedures and timelines will result in the
CSEA’s written consent to the Town’s application for a stay of arbitration and/or
dismissal o f the grievance. The cost for the arbitrator will be borne equally by the
parties.
Step 4. The Town Board will consider the recommendation(s) o f the advisory
arbitrator at the next scheduled Board meeting and will make a final and binding decision
within 30 days following the meeting and communicate the decision in writing to the
CSEA Unit President.
SEC. 36. CSEA RIGHTS
36.1 There will be a Labor/Management Committee composed o f six members, three o f
whom will be selected by the CSEA, the Superintendent o f Highways, and two nonbargaining-unit-Town-employees-selected-by-the-To-wn-Board.—The-Committee_wilLmeet.
upon the written request of either party for the purpose of discussing working conditions
and other matters as affect the Town and its employees. The Committee will meet within
20 days o f receipt of written request by either party. Any decision made by this
committee will not be binding upon either party until ratified or approved by the CSEA
Unit and the Town Board. This Committee will be established as o f January 1st o f each
24

12/1/15

year and each party will submit names of its members to the other party.
36.2 Criteria and other matters that are not terms and conditions o f employment will
not be subject to the jurisdiction o f this committee. The committee’s discussions and
results are subject to bilateral agreement, but not to the contractual grievance and
arbitration or PERB’s impasse or fact finding procedures.
36.3 It is contemplated by the parties that, notwithstanding the starting wages set forth
in the attached Salary Schedules, it may be necessary from time to time to employ
persons at a starting wage above the amount set forth in the Schedules. In that event, it is
agreed by the parties that a Committee to consist o f five members will be established to
authorize the employment. The committee will consist o f the Department Head o f the
department in which the person is to be employed; two members to be selected by the
CSEA; and two members to be selected by the Town Board.
36.4 The Town agrees to provide a bulletin board at a convenient location for the
posting o f notices relative to the business and affairs o f the CSEA.
36.5 The officers and members of the CSEA will have the right to use Town buildings,
when available, for meetings o f its members and committees, provided that the use does
not interfere with the use by the Town for regular Town business.
36.6' Officers o f the CSEA will, when possible, be given priority over other employees
in the scheduling of vacation time.
36.7 Officers and authorized representatives of the CSEA will be entitled to a leave o f
absence with pay to attend CSEA conferences and authorized meetings, provided that no
more than two employees o f the Town, nor more than one employee from each
department o f the Town, will be absent at the same time, and further provided that the
total numbers o f days o f absence o f all employees for these purposes will not exceed 17
days in any calendar year.
36.8 Employees who will be assigned to the duties o f resolving employee disputes and
grievances arising during the work day be authorized time off with pay not to exceed
one-half hour with respect to each incident.
36.9 The Town will establish an e-mail account on the Town’s server for the purpose o f
the CSEA President or designee sending or receiving external e-mail regarding official
CSEA business only. All related costs will be incurred by the CSEA. The CSEA agrees
to indemnify and save the Town harmless against any and all claims and/or liabilities,----including attorneys’ fees that may arise out of or be reason o f action taken or not taken by
the CSEA pursuant to the use o f the e-mail account.

25

12/1/15

36.10 The Town will provide unit members with a voluntary payroll deduction option
for the AFSCME-CSEA PEOPLE (Public Employees Organized to Promote Legislative
Equality) payroll deduction at no cost to the Town. Prior to availing him/herself o f the
payroll deduction, the unit member must execute an agreement, prepared by the Town,
pursuant to which the employee will agree to indemnify and save and hold harmless the
Town and any of its employees, representatives and/or officers (collectively,
“employees”) against any and all claims, demands, suits or other forms o f liability that
' may arise out of or by reason o f any action taken or not taken by the Town on any o f its
employees for the purpose o f complying with this provision.
SEC. 37. AMENDMENTS
37.1 Any changes or amendments to this Agreement will not become effective unless
the same are in writing and signed by the parties.
SEC 38. NO STRIKE PLEDGE
38.1 The CSEA affirms that it does not assert the right to strike against any government
nor to assist or participate in such strike, or to impose any obligation to conduct, assist or
participate in a strike.
SEC. 39. LEGISLATIVE APPROVAL
39.1 IT IS AGREED BY AND BETWEEN THE PARTIES THAT ANY
PROVISIONS OF THIS AGREEMENT REQUIRING LEGISLATIVE ACTION TO
PERMIT ITS IMPLEMENTATION BY AMENDMENT OF LAW OR PROVIDING
THE ADDITIONAL FUND THEREFOR, SHALL NOT BECOME EFFECTIVE
UNTIL THE APPROPRIATE LEGISLATIVE BODY HAS GIVEN APPROVAL.
39.2 It is agreed by and between the parties that any provision o f this Agreement
requiring approval by federal authorities will not become effective until approval has
been granted.
SEC. 40: TERMINATION BENEFITS
40.1 In the event that the employment o f any employee is terminated by reason of
retirement, resignation or other cause, all benefits provided herein will be prorated up to
the-date-of-termination,
40.2 In the event o f death all time and leave accrued by employees will be paid to the
legal estate, or, subject to applicable laws, written designee, less any time owed to the
Town, as if the employee would have received the remuneration upon retirement,
resignation or other cause, all benefits herein will be prorated up to the date o f death.

26

12/1/15

SEC 41. WAIVER-ZIPPER
41.1 The Town and the C SEA, for the life of this Agreement, each voluntarily and
unqualifiedly agree that the other will not be obligated to negotiate collectively with
respect to any subject or matter referred to or covered in this Agreement. It is agreed that
salaries and benefits already agreed upon cannot be modified or amended except by
mutual agreement. •This will not be construed to apply to negotiations for future
collectively negotiated agreements between the parties.
SEC. 42. SEVERABILITY
42.1 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, if one or more o f the
provisions o f this contract is found to be illegal, all other provisions are to remain in full
force and effect.
SEC. 43. PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHERS
43.1 The relief Dispatcher is to be the least senior full-time dispatcher, unless a more
senior Dispatcher volunteers for the relief assignment.
43.2

Pubiic Safety Dispatchers will not be required to perform matron duties.

43.3 The Town has the discretion to deny a switch o f tour o f duty. Each switch o f tour
o f duty must be approved in writing prior to the actual switch. The dates/tours o f each
switch must be specified at the time o f the request.
SEC. 44. PAYROLL CHECKS
44.1

.
|

Payroll checks are to be delivered to employees in sealed envelopes.

44.2 Effective January 1,2015,. employees will participate in direct deposit o f
paychecks and provide relevant bank account information to the Town. The Town will
provide access to electronic and paper paystubs in accordance with applicable law. An
employee who does not have a bank account as o f the date of October 24, 2014 will open
one by January 1,2015, even if solely for the purpose o f participating in direct deposit o f
paychecks.

______________ SEC. 45. EMPLOYEE TRAINING______________________________________________
!___________ i

45.1 Insofar as practicable, employee seniority will be considered by supervision when
training opportunities become available.

ii
I

27

12/1/15

SEC. 46. TIME CLOCKS
46.1 The Town will have the unfettered right to install time clocks to be utilized by all
employees.
^ 46.2 The Town and the CSEA agree that any problems that may arise pertaining to the
use o f the time clocks will be dealt with in the Labor-Management Committee forum.
SEC. 47. EMPLOYEE LEAVE REQUESTS
47.1 Employee requests to utilize leave entitlements will be responded to by their
immediate supervisor within five calendar days., or prior to the date o f the requested
leave, whichever is sooner.
SEC. 48. HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT
48.1 Except in emergency situations, employees will be given at least 48 hours’ notice
o f the cancellation o f special volunteer work assignments that would alter their existing
work schedules.
48.2 The in-Town/out-of-Town status o f Highway employees will only be revealed on
time-off request slips between November 15 and April 15 o f any given year. This recall
information will in no way be used as a basis for approving or denying the time.
48.3 During an emergency call-out, the Highway Superintendent will not unreasonably
withhold his/her consent to the employees’ use o f the Town Recreation Center during
designated rest periods.
SEC. 49. EMPLOYEE DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING
49.1 Department o f Transportation regulations with regard to drug and alcohol testing
o f employees utilizing municipal vehicles and equipment will be implemented and
enforced. All employees will be subject to random drug and alcohol testing pursuant to
the same rules and regulations in effect for CDL holders.
SEC. 50. DISABILITY INSURANCE
5.0J__ The_IowrLwilLparticipate^inthe_New_York_StateJDisability_Insurance_Plan,____
subject to the Plan’s Rules and Regulations.
SEC. 51. HAZMAT DUTIES
51.1

If the CSEA has reason to believe that the Town is not in compliance with PESH

28

12/1/15

requirements regarding HazMat staffing, it will so notify the Supervisor’s Office
immediately, providing time, date, situation and any other detail necessary for the Town
to investigate the claim.
SEC. 52. LEAVE FO R CIV IL SERVICE EXAMINATION
52.1 Employees may request to utilize one personal or vacation day per year for the
purpose o f taking a Civil Service Promotional Exam. These requests will not be
unreasonably denied except when unusual circumstances exist including, but not limited
to, situations when the granting o f a request will detrimentally impact the staffing o f a
department.
SEC. 53. EVALUATIONS
53.1 Effective January 1,2015, the following Performance Appraisal process will be
implemented:
1. Performance Appraisals will be used to provide employees with an
assessment of their performance over the prior year, suggestions for areas where
performance can be improved, establish performance goals for the coming year,
evaluate eligibility for promotions, salary reclassifications, and may be used for
background evidence for any disciplinary action. .
2. Performance Appraisals will be conducted on an annual basis by the
employee’s Department Head. Department Heads will be evaluated by the
Supervisor or his/her designee.
3. Performance Appraisals will be completed during the first quarter of
each calendar year.

4. The Town Board or designee will notify CSEA and employees about
the performance criteria upon which employees are evaluated.
5. All employees will be evaluated on the same performance criteria
unless the Department Head determines, in his/her sole discretion, that a particular
criterionismotapplicableToTheemployee’sjob-duties:-----------------------------------------6. All employees will have the opportunity to review and discuss their
Performance Appraisal with the Department Head. Employees will also have the
right to comment on the Performance Appraisal in writing during the discussion
29

within 15 working days o f the discussion.' All employees will be required to sign
the Performance Appraisal at the conclusion o f the discussion. The signature will
confirm only that the employee received, read and revised the appraisal with the
Department Head.
7. All completed Performance Appraisals and timely replies will be
stapled together and placed in the employee’s personnel file.
8. The agreed upon Performance Appraisal form will be attached to the
Agreement. The Town Supervisor and CSEA Unit President may agree in writing
to amend the Performance Appraisal form.
SEC. 54. TERM O F AGREEM ENT
54.1 Except where otherwise provided, this Agreement and all o f the terms and
conditions hereof will become effective on January 1,2013, and will continue in full
force through December 31,2016.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands and seals this
o f December, 2015.
TOW NOFSOUTHOLD

C.SJE.A. INC., LOCAL 100
AFSCME, AFL-CIO, SO U IH O LD
UNIT 8785

Thomas M. Skabry
President

Southold Town Supervisor

30

day

I

!l

S

i
i

Appendix A
Salary Structure January 1, 2013
Title_____________ ;_______________

Entry Level

1

2

_____3
27.6659
27.6659
29.1779
53,494.97
55,711.38
67,933.17
61,334.30
61,645.53
46,368.40
48,032.52
49,975.79
57.630.10
57,205.61
38,782.76
88,073.67
63.494.11
62,815.74
72,360.57

Laborer
Scale Operator
Maintenance Mechanic II
Custodial Worker l
Custodial Worker II
Building Inspector
Building Permits Examiner
Senior Assessment Assistant
Clerk (Spanish Speaking)
Clerk-Typist
Senior Clerk-Typist
Senior Account Clerk
Secretary
Home Health Aide
Principal Planner
Recreation Supervisor
Secretarial Assistant
Engineering Inspector

I

Appendix A
January 1, 2013
Page 1 of 1

Appendix B
Salary Structure January 1, 2014
Title____________________________

Entry Level

1

2

_____3

4____

5
28.0118
28.0118
29.5426
54,163.66
56.407.77
68,782.34
62,100.98
62,416.10
46,948.00
48.632.93
50,600.48
58,,350.48
57,920.68
39,267.55
89,174.59
64.287.78
63.600.94
73,265.08

Laborer
Scale Operator
Maintenance Mechanic II
Custodial Worker I
Custodial Worker II
Building Inspector
Building Permits Examiner
Senior Assessment Assistant
Clerk (Spanish Speaking)
Clerk-Typist
Senior Clerk-Typist
Senior Account Clerk
Secretary
Home Health Aide
Principal Planner
Recreation Supervisor
Secretarial Assistant
Engineering Inspector

Appendix B
January 1, 2014
Page 1 of 1

Appendix C
Salary Structure January 1, 2015
Title____________________________

Entry Level

1

Laborer
Scale Operator
Maintenance Mechanic II
Custodial Worker I
Custodial Worker II
Building Inspector
Building Permits Examiner
Senior Assessment Assistant
Clerk (Spanish Speaking)
Clerk-Typist
Senior Clerk-Typist
Senior Account Clerk
Secretary
Home Health Aide
Principal Planner
Recreation Supervisor
Secretarial Assistant
Engineering Inspector

2

_____3
28.5720
28.5720
30.1335
55.246.93
57.535.93
70,157.98
63,343.00
67,664.43
47,886.96
49,605.59
51.612.49
59.517.49
59,079.09
40,052.90
90,958.08
65,573.54
64,872.95
74,730.38

Appendix C
January 1, 2015
Page 1 of 1

Appendix D
Salary Structure January 1, 2016
Title

_________________________

Entry Level

1

2

_____ 3
29.1434
29.1434
30.7361
56,351.87
58,686.65
71,561.14
64,609.86
69,017.72
48.844.70
50.597.70
52,644.74
60,707.84
60,260.68
40,853.96
92,777.24
66,885.01
66,170.41
76,224.99

Laborer
Scale Operator
Maintenance Mechanic II
Custodial Worker I
Custodial Worker II
Building Inspector
Building Permits Examiner
Senior Assessment Assistant
Clerk (Spanish Speaking)
Clerk-Typist
Senior Clerk-Typist
Senior Account Clerk
Secretary
Home Health Aide
Principal Planner
Recreation Supervisor
Secretarial Assistant
Engineering Inspector

Appendix D
January 1, 2016
Page 1 of 1

Appendix E
Salary Structure January 1, 2013
Title

Entry Level

20.3589
20.3589
20.3589
23.3643
23.8999
24.5844
21.4004
24.8076
21.4004
26.1763
27.8764
26.1763
26.1763
27.8764
27.8764
27.8764
31.1846
20.3589
24.2241
25.4352
31,923.26
44,259.66
52,990.29
38,615.70
36,310.70
50,303.82
39,379.76
41,116.11
42,939.27
49,618.75
55,976.75
52,036.90
55,014.75
57,860.04
44,259.66
46,958.21
52,036.90
44,259.66
46,240.00'
36,124.29
j ( ,yju .o i
Clerk " ' . " ' " "
34,041.18
Clerk (Spanish Speaking)^ ------------------------ ----------- 34,735.65
Senior Clerk
35,510.59
Principal Clerk
37,105.56
Clerk-Typist
36,124.29
Senior Clerk-Typist
37,697.86
Laborer
Scale Operator
Driver/Messenger
AEO
HEO
CEO
Maintenance Mechanic II
Maintenance Mechanic III
Auto Mechanic 1& II
Auto Mechanic III
Auto Mechanic IV
Diesel Mechanic
Crew Labor Leader
Highway Labor Crew Leader
Parks Maintenance Crew Leader
Town Maintenance Crew Leader
Sanitation Site Crew Leader
Driver/TCO/School Crossing Guard
Groundskeeper II
Groundskeeper III
Assistant Cook
Administrative Assistant
Senior Administrative Assistant
Adult Day Care Supervisor
Cook
Senior Cook
Custodial Worker 1
Custodial Worker II
Custodial Worker III
Bay Constable
Senior Bay Constable
Building Inspector
Senior Building Inspector
Principal Building Inspector
Building Permits Coordinator
Building Permits Examiner
Ordinance Inspector
Assessment Assistant
Senior Assessment Assistant
Assessment Clerk

1

2

22.0257
22.6923
22.6923
22.0257
22.0257
22.6923
25.6978
25.0311
25.5667
26.2334
26.9178
26.2511
23.7338
23.0671
27.1410
26.4743
23.0671
23.7338
28.5098
27.8432
30.2098
29.5432
27.8432
28.5098
28.5098
27.8432.
30.2098
29.5432
29.5432
30.2098
29.5432
30.2098
32.8514
33.5180
22.0256
22.6923
26.5575
25.8908
27.1852
27.8853
35,395.63 36,784.57
47,732.02 49,120.97
56,462.66 57,851.61
42,088.07 43,477.01
39,783.07 41,172.02
50,734.88 51,165.93
42,852.12 44,241.07
44,588.48 45,977.42
46,411.64 47,800.58
53,091.14 54,479.85
59,449.14 60,839.03
55,509.26. 56,898.21
58,487.11
59,876.06
61,332.41
62,721.36
47,732.02 49,120.97
50,430.58 51,819.52
55,509.26 56,898.21
47,732.03 49,120.97
49,712.36 51,101.31
39,596.66 40,985.60
407007 . ( C . "■'4Z,oU4.yo
37,513.55 38,902.50
38,208:02 " 39,596.97
38,982.95 40,371.90
40,577.92 41,966.87
39,596.66 40,985.60
41,170.22 42,559.17

Appendix E
January 1, 2013
Page 1 of 3

3

4

23.5928
24.2595
23.5928
24.2595
24.2595
23.5928
26.5982
27.2649
27.1339
27.8006
27.8183
28.4850
24.6343
25.3010
28.0414
28.7081
25.3010
24.6343
29.4103
30.0770
31.1103
31.7771
30.0770
29.4103
29.4103
30.0770
31.1103
31.7771
31.1103
31.7771
31.1102
31.7770
34.4185
35.0852
23.5928
24.2595
27.4579
28.1246
28.8308
29.5308
38,659.65 40,048.60
50,996.05 52,384.99
59,726.73 61,115.65
45,352.09 46,741.04
43,047.09 44*436.04
51,596.99 52,028.04
46,116.15 47,505.09
47,852.50 49,241.45
49,675.66
51,064.60
56,355.39 57,744.11
62,713.39 64,102.11
58,773.28 60,162.23
61,751.13 63,140.08
64,596.43 65,985.38
50,996.05 . 52,384.99
53,694.60 55,083.55
58,773.28 60,162.23
50,996.05 52,385.00
52,976.39 54,365.33
42,860.68 44,249.63
HD
f / —4 / ,0 / y .w
40,777.57 42,166.52
41,472.04 42,860.99
42,246.98 43,635.92
43,841.95 45,230.89
42,860.68 44,249.63
44,434.25 45,823.19

5
25.9278
25.9278
25.9278
28.9332
29.4688
30.1532
26.9692
30.3764
26.9692
31.7452
33.4453
31.7452
31.7452
33.4453
33.4453
33.4453
36.7535
25.9277
29.7929
31.2820
43,520.96
55,857.36
64,588.03
50,213.40
47,908.41
52,459.10
50,977.46
52,713.81
54,536.97
65,297.98
72,689.58
63,634.60
66,612.45
69,457.75
55,857.36
58,555,91
63,634.60
55,857.36
57,837.70
47,721.99
oO.TUo.Oo
45,638.88
46,333.35"
47,108.29
48,703.26
47,721.99
49,295.56

Appendix E
Salary Structure January 1, 2013
Title
Stenographer
Justice Court Clerk
Senior Justice Court Clerk
Justice Court Cashier
Account Clerk
Senior Account Clerk
Account Clerk Typist
Senior Account Clerk Typist
Data Control Supervisor
Data Entry Operator
Data Processing Equipment Operator
Director of Code Enforcement
Exempt Secretary (to ZB A)
Secretary
Home Health Aide
Mini Bus Driver
Neighborhood Aide
Planner Trainee
Planner
Senior Planner
Principal Planner
Senior Environmental Planner
Public Safety Dispatcher
Public Safety Dispatcher II
Public Safety Dispatcher III
Records Management Assistant
Recreation Program Coordinator
Recreation Supervisor
Secretarial Assistant
Asst. Senior Citizen Site Manager
Senior Citizen Program Supervisor
Senior Citizen Site Manager
Senior Citizen Program Director
Engineering Inspector
Senior Citizen Aide II
Site Plan Reviewer
Technical Coordinator II
Town Investigator
Environmental Technician
Food Service Worker
Head Clerk
Senior Site Plan Reviewer
Special Projects Coordinator
Caseworker
Justice Court Clerk (Spanish Speaking)
Zoning Inspector
Civil Engineer

Entry Level

1

2

3

4

5

38,243.44 41,715.80 43,104.75 44,979.83 46,368.77 49.841.14
38,243.44 41,715.80 43,104.75 44,979.83 46,368.77 49.841.14
40,030.61
43,676.59 45,134.99 47,089.93 48,548.32
52.138.75
34,041.18 37,513.55 38,902.49 40,777.57 42,166.52
45,638.88
41,422.13 44,894.50 46,283.44 48,158.52 49,547.47
53,019.83
44,600.84 48,073.20 49,462.15 51,337.23 52,726.17
56.198.54
43,430.73 47,076.72 48,535.11
50,497.00 51,955.39
55.573.60
45,602.26 49,430.55 50,961.86 53,021.84 54,553.15
58,352.26
50,744.98 54,217.34 55,606.29 57,481.36 58,870.31
62.342.68
36,598.73 40,071.10 41,460.04 43,335.12 44,724.07
48.196.43
37,805.50 41,451.49 42,909.88 44,864.82 46,323.21
49,913.64
56,437.45 59,909.82 61,298.76 63,173.84 64,562.79
68.035.15
44,247.66 47,720.02 49,108.97 50,984.04 52,372.99
55.845.36
44,247.66 47,720.02 49,108.97 50,984.04 52,372.99
55.845.36
29,413.68 32,886.05 34,275.00 36,150.07 37,539.02 41,011.38
31,126.81
34,599.19 35,987.91
37,862.27 39,252.16 42.724.55
32,293.00 35,765.36 37,154.31
39,029.39 40,418.33 43.890.70
44,990.48 48,462.86 49,851.58 51,727.11
53,115.83
56.588.21
55,212.43 58,684.81
60,073.53 61,949.07 63,337.78 66.810.17
63,550.62 67,023.00 68,411.72 70,287.25 71,675.97
75.148.36
65,479.45 68,951.81
70,340.76 72,215.84 73,604.78
77.077.15
63,752.63 67,224.99 68,613.94 70,489.02 71,877,96
75.350.33
49,218.86 52,122.84 55,026.81
57,930.79 60,834.77 63.738.76
52,202.90 55,106.88 58,010.86 60,914.83 63,818.81
66,722.80
53,970.41
56,874.39 59,778.36 62,682.34 65,586.32 68,490.31
55,311.58 58,783.94 60,172.90 62,047.97 63,436.92 66,909.29
25,296.08 28,768.45 30,157.39 32,032.47 33,421.42 36,893.78
48,121.30 51,593.67 52,982.62 54,857.69 56,246.64 59,719.00
47,533.74 51,006.10 52,395.05 54,270.13 55,659.07 59.131.44
26,627.03 30,099.39 31,488.34 33,363.42 34,752.36 38,224.73
32,293.00 35,765.36 37,154.31
39,029.39 40,418.33 43.890.70
57,288.07 60,760.43 62,149.38 64,024.46 65,413.40 68.885.77
60,089.98 63,562.34 64,951.29 66,826.37 88,215.31
71.687.68
55,866.12 59,338.48 60,727.43 62,602.51
63,991.45 67,463.82
37,712.89 39,101.84 42,574.20
30,976.50 34,448.87 35,837.81
43,453.82 46,926.18 48,315.13 50,190.21
55,051.52
51,579.15
76,916.48 80,388.84 81,777.79 83,652.86 85,041.81
88.514.18
50,141.54 53,613.90
55,002.85 56,877.93 58,266.87 61,739.24
63,752.63 67,224.99 68,613.94 70,489.02 71,877.96 75.350.33
28,312.28 31,784.64 33,173.59 35,048.67 36,437.61
39,909.98
44,259:66 - 47;732:02~-497120:97” -507996:05-” 52:384:99” -557857:36
54,638.74 58,111.10 59,500.05 61,375.13 62,764.07 66.236.44
--------70,430.01
73,902.38 75,291.33 77,166.41
78,555.35
82.027.71
50,303.82
50,734.88 51,165.93 51,596.99 52,028.04 52,459.10
38,243.43 41,715.80 43,104.75 44,979.82 46,368.78 49,841.14
52,036.24 55,509.27
56,898.20 58,773.28 60,162.12 63.634.60
73,528.00 77,152.93
78,603.27 80,560.95 82,010.37 85.636.22
Appendix E
January 1, 2013
Page 2 of 3

Appendix E
Salary Structure January 1, 2013

I

Title__________________________

Entry Level

1

2

3

4

5

Town Engineer
GIS Technician III
Code Enforcement Officer
Administrative Aide
Justice Court Director
Case Manager (Spanish Speaking)
Stormwater Manager
Network and Systems Specialist I

84,032.00
80,762.30
47,953.53
48,624.98
80,800.00
50,303.82
77,204.40
81,966.48

88,175.02
84,408.29
51,426.55
52,097.35
85,200.87
50,734.88
81,010.57
85,438.84

89,832.43
85,866.68
52,815.49
53,486.29
86,961.22
51,165.93
82,533.43
86,827.79

92,069.58
90,865.51
54,690.57
55,361.38
89,337.70
51,596.99
84,589.00
88,702.87

93,726.99
89,293.91
56,079.41
56,750.32
91,098.04
52,028.04
86,110.89
90,091.81

97,870.01
92,939.88
59,551.88
60,222.69
95,498.91
52,459.10
89,918.04
93,564.18

Appendix E
January 1, 2013
Page 3 of 3

Appendix F
Salary Structure January 1, 2014
Title
Laborer
Scale Operator
Driver/Messenger
AEO
HEO
CEO
Maintenance Mechanic II
Maintenance Mechanic III
Auto Mechanic 1& II
Auto Mechanic III
Auto Mechanic IV
Diesel Mechanic
Crew Labor Leader
Highway Labor Crew Leader
Parks Maintenance Crew Leader
Town Maintenance Crew Leader
Sanitation Site Crew Leader
Driver/TCO/School Crossing Guard
Groundskeeper II
Groundskeeper III
Assistant Cook
Administrative Assistant
Senior Administrative Assistant
Adult Day Care Supervisor
Cook
Senior Cook
Custodial Worker 1
Custodial Worker II
Custodial Worker III
Bay Constable
Senior Bay Constable
Building Inspector
Senior Building Inspector
Principal Building Inspector
Building Permits Coordinator
Building Permits Examiner
Ordinance Inspector
Assessment Assistant
Senior Assessment Assistant
Assessment Clerk

Entry Level
20.6134
20.6134
20.6134
23.6564
24.1987
24.8917
21.6679
25.1177
21.6679
26.5035
28.2248
26.5035
26.5035
28.2248
28.2248
28.2249
31.5744
20.6134
24.5269
25.7531
32,322.30
44,812.90
53,652.67
39,098.40
36,764.59
50,932.62
39,872.01
41,630.06
43,476.01
50,238.99
56,676.46
52,687.36
55,702.43
58,583.30
44,812.90
47,545.19
52,687.36
44,812.91
46,818.00
36,575.85

Clerk
34,466,70
Clerk (Spanish Speaking)---------------------------- ----------- 35,169.85
Senior Clerk
35,954.47
Principal Clerk
37,569.38
Clerk-Typist
36,575.85
Senior Clerk-Typist
38,169.08

1
22.3010
22.3010
22.3010
25.3440
25.8863
26.5793
23.3555
26.8052
23.3555
28.1912
29.9125
28.1912
28.1912
29.9125
- 29.9125
29.9125
33.2620
22.3010
26.2144
27.5251
35,838.07
48,328.67
57,168.45
42,614.17
40,280.36
51,369.06
43,387.78
45,145.83
46,991.78
53,754.78
60,192.25
56,203.13
59,218.20
62,099.07
48,328.67
51,060.96
56,203.13
48,328.68
50,333.77
40,091,62
37,982.47
38,685.62
39,470.24
41,085.15
40,091.62
41,684.85

Appendix F
January 1, 2014
Page 1 of 3

2

3

4

5

22.9760
22.9760
22.9760
26.0190
26.5613
27.2543
24.0305
27.4802
24.0305
28.8661
30.5874
28.8661
28.8661
30.5874
30.5874
30.5874
33.9370
22.9760
26.8895
28.2338
37,244.38
49,734.98
58,574.75
44,020.48
41,686.67
51,805.51
44,794.08
46,552.14
48,398.09
55,160.85
61,599.52
57,609.43
60,624.51
63,505.37
49,734.98
52,467.27
57,609.43
49,734.99
51,740.08
41,497.92

23.8877
23.8877
23.8877
26.9307
27.4730
28.1660
24.9422
28.3920
24.9422
29.7779
31.4991
29.7779
29.7779
31.4991
31.4991
31.4991
34.8487
23.8877
27.8012
29.1912
39,142.89
51,633.50
60,473.31
45,918.99
43,585.18
52,241.95
46,692.60
48,450.66
50,296.60
57,059.83
63,497.31
59,507.95
62,523.02
65,403.89
51,633.50
54,365.78
59,507.95
51,633.50
53,638.59
43,396.44

24.5628
24.5628
24.5628
27.6057
28.1481
28.8410
25.6172
29.0670
25.6172
30.4529
32.1743
30.4529
30.4529
32.1743
32.1743
32.1742
35.5238
24.5627
28.4762
29.8999
40,549.20
53,039.80 .
61,879.59
47,325.30
44,991.49
52,678.39
48,098.91
49,856.96
51,702.91
58,465.91
64,903.38
60,914.26
63,929.33
66,810.20
53,039.80
55,772.09
60,914.26
53,039.81
55,044.90
44,802.75

26.2519
26.2519
26.2519
29.2949
29.8372
30.5301
27,3064
30.7561
27.3064
32.1420
33.8634
32.1420
32.1420
33.8634
33.8634
33.8634
37.2129
26.2518
30.1653
31.6731
44,064.97
56,555,57
65,395.38
50,841.07
48,507.26
53,114.84
51,614.68
53,372.73
55,218.68
66,114.21
73,598.20
64,430.03
67,445.10
70,325.97
56,555.57
59,287.86
64,430.03
56,555.58
58,560.67
48,318.52

AC

AQ

C n VO A

39,388.78
40,091.93
40,876.55
42,491.45
41,497.92
43,091.16

O f l7

VH

41,287.29
41,990.44
42,775.06
44,389.97
43,396.44
44,989.68

0 7 C

A f\

42,693.60
43,396.75
44,181.37
45,796.28
44,802.75
46,395.98

A A

46,209.37
46,912.52
47,697.14
49,312.05
48,318.52
49,911.75

Appendix F
Salary Structure January 1, 2014
Title
Stenographer
Justice Court Clerk
Senior Justice Court Clerk
Justice Court Cashier
Account Clerk
Senior Account Clerk
Account Clerk Typist
Senior Account Clerk Typist
Data Control Supervisor
Data Entry Operator
Data Processing Equipment Operator
Director of Code Enforcement
Exempt Secretary (to ZBA)
Secretary
Home Health Aide
Mini Bus Driver
Neighborhood Aide
Planner Trainee
Planner
Senior Planner
Principal Planner
Senior Environmental Planner
Public Safety Dispatcher
Public Safety Dispatcher II
Public Safety Dispatcher III
Records Management Assistant
Recreation Program Coordinator
Recreation Supervisor
Secretarial Assistant
Asst. Senior Citizen Site Manager
Senior Citizen Program Supervisor
Senior Citizen Site Manager
Senior Citizen Program Director
Engineering Inspector
Senior Citizen Aide II
Site Plan Reviewer
Technical Coordinator II
Town Investigator
Environmental Technician
Food Service Worker
HtJcuJ Olci K
Senior Site Plan Reviewer
Special Projects Coordinator
Caseworker
Justice Court Clerk (Spanish Speaking)
Zoning Inspector
Civil Engineer

Entry Level

1

2

3

4

5

50,464.15
38,721.48 42,237.25 43,643.56 45,542.07 46,948.38
50,464.15
38,721.48 42,237.25 43,643.56 45,542.07 46,948.38
52,790.48
40,530.99 44,222.55 45,699.17 47,678.55 49,155.17
34,466.70 37,982.47 39,388.77 41,287.29 42,693.60 46,209.37
53,682.58
41,939.91
45,455.68 46,861.99 48,760.50 50,166.81
50,080.43
51,978.94 53,385.25
56,901.02
45,158.35 48,674.12
51,128.21
52,604.83 56,268.27
43,973.62 47,665.18 49,141.80
55,235.06 59,081.67
46,172.29 50,048.43 51,598.88 53,684.61
51,379.29 54,895.06 56,301.37 58,199.88 59,606.19 63,121.96
45,283.12 48,798.89
37,056.21 40,571.98 41,978.29 43,876.81
50,537.56
38,278.07 41,969.63 43,446.25 45,425.63 46,902.25
65,369.82 68,885.59
57,142.92 60,658.69 62,065.00 63,963.51
56,543.42
44,800.75 48,316.52 49,722.83 51,621.35 53,027.65
44,800.75 48,316.52. 49,722.83 51,621.35 53,027.65 56,543.42
29,781.36 33,297.13 34,703.43 36,601.95 38,008.26 41,524.03
31,515.89 35,031.68 36,437.76 38,335.55 39,742.82 43,258.60
37,618.74 39,517.25 40,923.56 44,439.33
32,696.66 36,212.43
45,552.86 49,068.64 50,474.72 52,373.70 53,779.78 57,295.57
67,645.29
55,902.59 59,418.37 60,824.45 62,723.43 64,129.51
71,165.85
72,571.92
64,345.00 67,860.79 69,266.87
76,087.71
71,220.02 73,118.54 74,524.84 78,040.61
66,297.94 69,813.71
69,471.61
71,370.13 72,776.44 76,292.21
64,549.54 68,065.31
49,834.09 52,774,37 55,714.65 58,654.92 61,595.20 64,535.49
52,855.44 55,795.72 58,735.99 61,676.27 64,616.55 67,556.84
54,645.04 57,585.32 60,525.59 63,465.87 66,406.15 69,346.44
56,002.97 59,518.74 60,925.06 62,823.57 64,229.89 67,745.66
30,534.36 32,432.88 33,839.19
37,354.95
25,612.28 29,128.05
55,543.41
56,949.72
60,465.49
48,722.82 52,238.59 53,644.90
59,870.58
48,127.91
51,643.68 53,049.99 54,948.50 56,354.81
38,702.54
26,959.87 30,475.64 31,881.94 33,780,46 35,186.77
32,696.66 36,212.43 37,618.74 39,517.25 40,923.56 44,439.33
58,004.17 61,519.94 62,926.25 64,824.76 66,231.07 69,746.84
72,583.77
60,841.10 64,356.87 65,763.18 67,661.69 69,068.00
61,486.52 63,385.04 64,791.35 68,307.12
56,564.44 60,080.21
34,879.48 36,285.79 38,184.30 39,590.61
43,106.38
31,363.71
50,817.59
52,223.89
55,739.66
43,996.99 47,512.76 48,919.07
84,698.53 86,104.83
89,620.60
77,877.93 81,393.70 . 82,800.01
54,284.08 55,690.39 57,588.90 58,995.21
62,510.98
50,768.31
71,370.13 72,776.44
69,471.61
64,549.54 68,065.31
76,292.21
35,486,78
36,893.08 40,408.85
28,666.18 32,181.95 33,588.26
44,o12.9U,■ 40,0^0.07 ~49;734t98~" ol.boo^U'"'■■oOiUoy.'oU""'“ bb;oo5.5Y'
55,321.72 58,837.49 ~ 60,243.80 62,142.32 63,548.62
67,064.39
76,232.47 78,130.99 79,537.29 .83,053.06
— 71,310.39 74,826.16
52,241.95 52,678.39
51,805.51
50,932.62 51,369.06
53,114.84
43,643.56 45,542.07 46,948.39
38,721.47 42,237.25
50,464.15
57,609.43
59,507.95 60,914.15 64,430.03
52,686.69 56,203.13
81,567.97 83,035.50
74,447.10 78,117.34 79,585.81
86,706.68
Appendix F
January 1, 2014
Page 2 of 3

Appendix F
Salary Structure January 1, 2014
Title__________________________

Entry Level

1

2

3

4

5

Town Engineer
GIS Technician III
Code Enforcement Officer
Administrative Aide
Justice Court Director
Case Manager (Spanish Speaking)
Stormwater Manager
Network and Systems Specialist I

85,082.40
81,771.83
48,552.95
49,232.79
81,810.00
50,932.62
78,169.46
82,991.06

89,277.21
85,463.39
52,069.39
52,748.56
86,265.88
51,369.06
82,023.21
86,506.82

90,955.34
86,940.01
53,475.68
54,154.87
88,048.24
51,805.51
83,565.10
87,913.14

93,220.45
92,001.33
55,374.20
56,053.40
90,454.42
52,241.95
85,646.37
89,811.65

94,898.58
90,410,08
56,780.40
57,459.70
92,236.77
52,678.39
87,187.28
91,217.96

99,093.39
94,101.63
60,296.28
60,975.48
96,692.65
53,114.84
91,042.01
94,733.73

Appendix F
January 1, 2014
Page 3 of 3

Appendix G
Salary Structure January 1, 2015
Title

Entry Level

Laborer
Scale Operator
Driver/Messenger
AEO
HEO
CEO
Maintenance Mechanic II
Maintenance Mechanic III
Auto Mechanic 1& II
Auto Mechanic III
Auto Mechanic IV
Diesel Mechanic
Crew Labor Leader
Highway Labor Crew Leader
Parks Maintenance Crew Leader
Town Maintenance Crew Leader
Sanitation Site Crew Leader
Driver/TCO/School Crossing Guard
Groundskeeper II
Groundskeeper III
Assistant Cook
Administrative Assistant
Senior Administrative Assistant
Adult Day Care Supervisor
Cook
Senior Cook
Custodial Worker 1
Custodial Worker II
Custodial Worker III
Bay Constable
Senior Bay Constable
Building Inspector
Senior Building Inspector
Principal Building Inspector
Building Permits Coordinator
Building Permits Examiner
Ordinance Inspector
Assessment Assistant
Senior Assessment Assistant
Assessment Clerk
SentorAssessmenLCIerk----------------------------Clerk
Clerk (Spanish Speaking)
Senior Clerk
Principal Clerk
Clerk-Typist
Senior Clerk-Typist

21.0256
21.0256
21.0256
24.1295
24.6827
25.3896
22.1012
25.6200
22.1013
27.0336
28.7893
27.0336
27.0336
28.7893
28.7893
28.7894
32.2059
21.0256
25.0174
26.2682
32,968.75
45,709.16
54,725.72
39,880.37
37,499.88
51,951.27
40,669.45
42,462.66
44,345.53
51,243.77
57,809.99
53,741.10
56,816.48
59,754.96
45,709.16
48,496.09
53,741.10
45,709.17
47,754,36
37,307.36
39,172.73
35,156.03
35,873.25
36,673.56
38,320.76
37,307.36
38,932.46

1

2

3

4

25.0540
24.3655
22.7470
23.4355
25.0540
24.3655
23.4355
22.7470
25.0540
22.7470
23.4355
24.3655
27.4693
28.1579
25.8509
26.5394
28.0225
28.7110
26.4040
27.0925
29.4178
28.7293
27.1108
27.7994
25.4411
26.1296
24.5111
23.8226
28.9598
29.6483
27.3413
28.0299
26.1296
23.8226
24.5111
25.4411
31.0620
28.7550
29.4435
30.3734
31.1992
32.1291
32.8178
30.5107
31.0620
29.4435
30.3734
28.7550
31.0620
. 28.7550
29.4435
30.3734
32.1291
32.8178
31.1992
30.5107
32.1291
32.8178
31.1992
30.5107
32.8177
32.1291
31.1992
30.5107
35.5457
36.2342
33.9272
34.6158
25.0540
24.3654
23.4355
22.7470
28.3572
29.0457
26.7387
27.4272
30.4979
29.7750
28.0756
28.7985
41,360.19
36,554.83 37,989.27 39,925.75
54,100.60
49,295.25
50,729.68 52,666.17
59,746.25 61,682.78 63,117.18
58,311.82
43,466.45 44,900.89 46,837.37 48,271.81
41,085.97 42,520.40 44,456.89 45,891.32
53,731.96
52,396.44 52,841.62 53,286.79
47,626.45
49,060.89
45,689.97
44,255.53
50,854,10
46,048.75 47,483.18 49,419.67
52,736.97
47,931.62 49,366.05 51,302.54
59,635.23
54,829.87
56,264.07 58,201.03
66,201.45
62,831.51
64,767.25
61,396.10
62,132.54
57,327.19 58,761.62 60,698.11
65,207.92
60,402.56 61,837.00 63,773.48
63,341.05 64,775.48 66,711.97 68,146.40
54,100.60
50,729.68 52,666.17
49,295.25
55,453.10
56,887.53
53,516.61
52,082.18
62,132.54
58,761.62 60,698.11
57,327.19
54,100.61
50,729.69 52,666.17
49,295.25
54,711.36
56,145.80
52,774.88
51,340.44
42,327.88 44,264.37 45,698.80
40,893.45
41,689.77 - 44;206t8 2 - -467723785- 49,240.90
38,742.12 40,176.55 42,113.04 ‘ 43,547.47
39,459.33 ■ 40 893.77 42,830.25 44,264.69
41,694.08 43,630.57 45,065.00
40,259.65
43,341.28 45,277.77 46,712.20
41,906.85
40,893.45 42,327.88 44,264.37 45,698.80
42,518.55 43,952.98 45,889.47 47,323.90

Appendix G
January 1, 2015
Page 1 of 3

5
26.7769
26.7769
26.7769
29.8808
30.4339
31.1407
27.8525
31.3712
27.8525
32.7849
34.5406
32.7849
32.7849
34.5406
34.5406
34.5407
37.9571
26.7769
30.7686
32.3065
44,946.27
57,686.69
66,703.29
51,857,89
49,477.41
54,177.13
52,646.97
54,440.19
56,323.06
67,436.49
75,070.17
65,718.63
68,794.00
71,732.49
57,686.69
60,473.62
65,718.63
57,686.69
59,731.88
49,284.89
51,749.12
47,133.56
47,850.77
48,651.09
50,298.29
49,284.89
50,909.99

Appendix G
Salary Structure January 1, 2015
1

2

Title

Entry Level

Stenographer
Justice Court Clerk
Senior Justice Court Clerk
Justice Court Cashier
Account Clerk
Senior Account Clerk
Account Clerk Typist
Senior Account Clerk Typist
Data Control Supervisor
Data Entry Operator
Data Processing Equipment Operator
Director of Code Enforcement
Exempt Secretary (to ZBA)
Secretary
Home Health Aide
Mini Bus Driver
Neighborhood Aide
Planner Trainee
Planner
Senior Planner
Principal Planner
Senior Environmental Planner
Public Safety Dispatcher
Public Safety Dispatcher II
Public Safety Dispatcher III
Records Management Assistant
Recreation Program Coordinator
Recreation Supervisor
Secretarial Assistant
Asst. Senior Citizen Site Manager
Senior Citizen Program Supervisor
Senior Citizen Site Manager
Senior Citizen Program Director
Engineering Inspector
Senior Citizen Aide II
Site Plan Reviewer
Technical Coordinator II
Town Investigator
Environmental Technician
Food Service Worker

39,495.91 43,081.99 44,516.43
43,081.99 44,516.43
39,495.91
45,107.00 46,613.16
41,341.61
40,176.55
35,156.03 38,742.11
47,799.22
46,364.79
42,778.71
46,061.52 49,647.60 51,082.04
44,853.09 48,618.48 50,124.64
47,095.74 51,049.40 52,630.86
52,406.87 55,992.96 57,427.39
37,797.34 41,383.42 42,817.86
39,043.63 42,809.02 44,315.18
58,285.78 61,871,86 63,306.30
45,696.77 49,282.85 50,717.29
45,696.77 49,282.85 50,717.29
30,376.98 33,963.07 35,397.50
35,732.32 37,166.52
32,146.21
33,350.59 36,936.68 38,371.11
50,050.02 51,484.22
46,463.91
57,020.64 60,606.74 62,040.94
70,652.20
65,631.90 69,218.01
67,623.90 71,209.99 72,644.42
65,840.53 69,426.61
70,861.05
50,830.78 53,829.86 56,828.94
53,912.55 56,911.63 59,910.71
55,737.94 58,737.02 61,736.10
57,123.03 60,709.12 62,143.56
26,124.53 29,710.61
31,145.05
49,697.28 53,283.36 54,717.80
49,090.47 52,676.55 54,110.99
27,499.06 31,085.15 32,519.58
33,350.59 36,936.68 38,371.11
59,164.25 62,750.34 64,184.77
62,057.92 : 65,644.01
67,078.44
57,695.73 61,281.82 62,716.25
31,990.98 35,577.07 37,011.50
44,876.93 48,463.02 49,897.45
79,435.49 83,021.58 84,456.01
51,783.67 55,369.76 56,804.19
65,840.53 69,426.61
70,861.05
29,239.51
34,260.02
32,825.59
40, f uy. i o —49t295t25-— 50r729:6856,428.16 60,014.24 61,448.68
72,735.60 76,322.68 77,757.12
51,951.27 52,396.44 52,841.62
39,495.90 43,081.99 44,516.43
53,740.43 57,327.20
58,761.61
75,936.04 79,679.69. 81,177.53

Senior Site Plan Reviewer
Special Projects Coordinator---------------------------Caseworker
Justice Court Clerk (Spanish Speaking)
Zoning Inspector
Civil Engineer

Appendix G
January 1, 2015
Page 2 of 3

3

4

5

46,452.91
46,452.91 '
48,632.12
42,113.03
49,735.71
53,018.52
52,150.77
54,758.31
59,363.88
44,754.34
46,334.14
65,242.78
52,653.77
52,653.77
37,333.99
39,102.26
40,307.60
53,421.17
63,977.90
72,589.16
74,580.91
72,797.53
59,828.02
62,909.80
64,735.19
64,080.04
33,081.53
56,654.28
56,047.47
34,456.07
40,307.60
66,121.26
69,014.93
64,652.74
38,947.99
51,833.94
86,392.50
58,740.68
72,797.53
36,196.51
OjC.OOO. I [
63,385.16
79,693.61
53,286.79
46,452.91
60,698.11
83,199.32

47,887.35
47,887.35
50,138.28
43,547.47
51,170.15
54,452.96
53,656.93
56,339.76
60,798.31
46,188.78
47,840.30
66,677.22
54,088.21
54,088.21
38,768.42
40,537.67
41,742.03
54,855.37
65,412.10
74,023.36
76,015.34
74,231.97
62,827.11
65,908.88
67,734.27
65,514.48
34,515.97
58,088.72
57,481.91
35,890.50
41,742.03
67,555.69
70,449.36
66,087.17
40,382.42
53,268.37
87,826.93
60,175.11
74,231.97
37,630.94

51,473.43
51,473.43
53,846.29
47,133.55
54,756.23
58,039.04
57,393.63
60,263.30
64,384.40
49,774.86
51,548.31
70,263.30
57,674.29
57,674.29
42,354.51
44,123.78
45,328.12
58,441.48
68,998.20
77,609.47
791601.43
. 77,818.05
65,826.20
68,907.97
70,733.36
69,100.57
38,102.05
61,674.80
61,067.99
39,476.59
45,328.12
71,141.78
74,035.45
69,673.26
43,968.51
56,854.46
91,413.02
63,761.20
77,818.05
41,217.03

64,819.60
31,128.04
53,731.96
47,887.35
62,132.43
84,696.21

68,405.68
84,714.12
54,177.13
51,473.43
65,718.63
88,440.81

Appendix G
Salary Structure January 1, 2015
Title

Entry Level

1

2

3

4

5

Town Engineer
GIS Technician III
Code Enforcement Officer
Administrative Aide
Justice Court Director
Case Manager (Spanish Speaking)
Stormwater Manager
Network and Systems Specialist 1

86,784.05
83,407.26
49,524.01
50,217.44
83,446.20
51,951.27
79,732.84
84,650.88

91,062.75
87,172.66
53,110.77
53,803.53
87,991.20
52,396.44
83,663.67
88,236.96

92,774.44
88,678.81
54,545.19
55,237.96
89,809.20
52,841.62
85,236.40
89,671.40

95,084.86
93,841.35
56,481.69
57,174.47
92,263.51
53,286.79
87,359.29
91,607.89

96,796.55
92,218.28
57,916.01
58,608.90
94,081.50
53,731.96
88,931.02
93,042.31

101,075.25
95,983.66
61,502.21
62,194.99
98,626.50
54,177.13
92,862.85
96,628.40

Appendix G
January 1, 2015
Page 3 of 3

Appendix H
Salary Structure January 1, 2016
Title

Entry Level

1

2

3

23.9042
24.8528
23.2020
Laborer
23.9042
24.8528
23.2020
Scale Operator
23.9042
23.2020
24.8528
Driver/Messenger
27.0702
26.3679
28.0187
AEO
26.9321
27.6344
28.5829
HEO
27.6531
' 28.3554
29.3039
CEO
24.2990
25.0013
Maintenance Mechanic II
25.9499
28.5904
27.8882
29.5390
Maintenance Mechanic III
24.2990
25.0013
25.9499
Auto Mechanic 1& II
Auto Mechanic III
29.3301
30.0323
30.9809
Auto Mechanic IV
31.1209
31.8231
32.7717
Diesel Mechanic
29.3301
30.0323
30.9809
30.9809
Crew Labor Leader
29.3301
30.0323
Highway Labor Crew Leader
31.1209
31.8231
32.7717
Parks Maintenance Crew Leader
31.1209
31.8231
32.7717
Town Maintenance Crew Leader
31.1210
31.8232
32.7717
Sanitation Site Crew Leader
34.6058
35.3081
36.2566
Driver/TCO/School Crossing Guard
23.2019
23.9042
24.8528
Groundskeeper II
27.2735
27.9758
28.9243
Groundskeeper III
29.3745
30.3705
28.6371
Assistant Cook
37,285.93 38,749.05 40,724.27
Administrative Assistant
50,281.15 51,744.27 53,719.49
Senior Administrative Assistant
59,478.05 60,941.17 62,916.43
Adult Day Care Supervisor
44,335.78 45,798.90 47,774.12
45,346.02
Cook
41,907.69 43,370.81
Senior Cook
54,352.53
53,444.37 53,898.45
Custodial Worker 1
45,140.64 46,603.76 48,578.98
Custodial Worker II
46,969.72 48,432.85
50,408.06
Custodial Worker III
50,353.37
52,328.59
48,890.25
Bay Constable
59,365.05
55,926.47 57,389.35
Senior Bay Constable
62,624.02 64,088.14 66,062.60
Building Inspector
58,473.73 59,936.86 61,912.07
Senior Building Inspector
61,610.62 63,073.74 65,048.95
Principal Building Inspector
64,607.87 66,070.99 68,046.21
Building Permits Coordinator
50,281.15 51,744.27 53,719.49
Building Permits Examiner
53,123.82 54,586,95 56,562.16
Ordinance Inspector
58,473.73 59,936.86 61,912.07
Assessment Assistant
53,719.50
50,281.16 51,744.28
Senior Assessment Assistant
55,805.59
52,367.25 53,830.37
Assessment Clerk
41,711.32 43,174.44 45,149.66
q q ncc in
-4-2t 52-3t5 6 - —45TQ90r95— —47-658-33Clerk
......................................
35 859.15 39,516.96 40,980.08 42,955.30
Cierk (Spanish Speaking)
------ -------------------- 35.590.71
40,248.52 41,711.64 43,686.86
Senior Clerk
37,407.03 41,064.84 42,527.96 44,503.18
Principal Clerk
46,183.32
39,087.18 42,744.99 44,208.11
Clerk-Typist
45,149.66
43,174.44
38,053.51
41,711.32
Senior Clerk-Typist
43,368.92 44,832.04 46,807.26
39,711.11
21.4462
21.4462
21.4462
24.6121
25.1763
25.8974
22.5433
26.1324
22.5433
27.5743
29.3651
27.5743
27.5743
29.3651
29.3651
29.3651
32.8500
21.4462
25.5177
26.7935
33,628.12
46,623.34
55,820.24
40,677.97
38,249.88
52,990.30
41,482.84
43,311.92
45,232.44
52,268.64
58,966.19
54,815.93
57,952.81
60,950.06
46,623.34
49,466.02
54,815.93
46,623.35
48,709.44
38,053.51

Appendix H
January 1, 2016
Page 1 of 3

4

5

25.5551
25.5551
25.5551
28.7210
29.2852
30.0062
26.6522
30.2413
26.6522
31.6832
33.4741
31.6832
31.6832
33:4741
33.4741
33.4741
36.9589
25.5550
29.6266
31.1079
42,187.39
55,182.61
64,379.53
49,237.24
46,809.15
54,806.60
50,042.10
51,871.19
53,791.71
60,827.93
67,525,48
63,375.19
66,512.08
69,509.33
55,182.61
58,025.28
63,375.19
55,182.62
57,268.71
46,612.78

27.3124
27.3124
27.3124
30.4784
31.0426
31.7636
28.4095
31.9986
28.4095
33.4406
35.2314
33.4406
33.4406
35.2314
35.2314
35.2315
38.7163
27.3124
31.3840
32.9526
45,845.20
58,840.42
68,037.35
52,895.05
50,466.95
55,260.68
53,699.91
55,528.99
57,449.52
68,785.22
76,571.57
67,033.00
70,169.88
73,167.14
58,840.42
61,683.09
67,033.00
58,840.43
60,926.52
50,270.59

cn ooc t o

C O 70/1 4 4

44,418.42
45,149.98
45,966.30
47,646.45
46,612.78
48,270.38

48,076.23'
48,807.79
49,624.11
51,304.25
50,270.59
51,928.19

Appendix H
Salary Structure January 1, 2016
Title

Entry Level

1

2

3

4

5

Stenographer
Justice Court Clerk
Senior Justice Court Clerk
Justice Court Cashier
Account Clerk
Senior Account Clerk
Account Clerk Typist
Senior Account Clerk Typist
Data Control Supervisor
Data Entry Operator
Data Processing Equipment Operator
Director of Code Enforcement
Exempt Secretary (to ZBA)
Secretary
Home Health Aide
Mini Bus Driver
Neighborhood Aide
Planner Trainee
Planner
Senior Planner
Principal Planner
Senior Environmental Planner
Public Safety Dispatcher
Public Safety Dispatcher II
Public Safety Dispatcher III
Records Management Assistant
Recreation Program Coordinator
Recreation Supervisor
Secretarial Assistant
Asst. Senior Citizen Site Manager
Senior Citizen Program Supervisor
Senior Citizen Site Manager
Senior Citizen Program Director
Engineering Inspector
Senior Citizen Aide II
Site Plan Reviewer
Technical Coordinator II
Town Investigator
Environmental Technician
Food Service Worker

40,285.83
40,285.83
42,168.44
35,859.15
43,634.28
46,982.75
45,750.15
48,037.65
53,455.01
38,553.29
39,824.51
59,451.49
46,610.70
46,610.70
30,984.52
■ 32,789.14
34,017.61
47,393.19
58,161.05
66,944.54
68,976.38
67,157.34
51,847.39
54,990.80
56,852.70
58,265.49
26,647.02
50,691.22
50,072.28
28,049.05
34,017.61
60,347.54
63,299.08
58,849.65
32,630.80
45,774.47
81,024.20
52,819.35
67,157.34
29,824.30

43,943.63
43,943.63
46,009.14
39,516.96
47,292.09
50,640.55
49,590.85
52,070.39
57,112.82
42,211.09
43,665.20
63,109.30
50,268.51
50,268.51
34,642.33
36,446.96
37,675.41
51,051.02
61,818.88
70,602.37
72,634.19
70,815.14
54,906.46
58,049.86
59,911.76
61,923.30
30,304.83
54,349.03
53,730.08
31,706.85
37,675.41
64,005.35
66,956.89
62,507.45
36,288.61
49,432.28
84,682,01
56,477.15
70,815.14
33,482.10

45,406.76
45,406.76
47,545.42
40,980.08
48,755.21
52,103.68
•51,127.13
53,683.48
58,575.94
43,674.22
45,201.48
64,572.42
51,731.63
51,731.63
36,105.45
37,909.85
39,138.53
52,513.90
63,281.76
72,065.25
74,097.31
72,278.27
57,965.52
61,108.93
62,970.83
63,386.43
31,767.95
55,812.15
55,193.21
33,169.98
39,138.53
65,468.47
68,420.01
63,970.58
37,751.73
50,895.40
86,145.13
57,940.28
72,278.27
34,945.23
O I, /4^.4: /
62,677.65
79,312.27
53,898.45
45,406.76
59,936.85
82,801.08

47,381.97
47,381.97
49,604.76
42,955.30
50,730.43
54,078.89
53,193.79
55,853.47
60,551.16
45,649.43
47,260.83
66,547.64
53,706.85
53,706.85
38,080.67
39,884.30
41,113.75
54,489.60
65,257.46
74,040.95
76,072.52
74,253.48
61,024.58
64,167.99
66,029.89
65,361.64
33,743.17
57,787.37
57,168.42
35,145.19
41,113.75
67,443.68
70,395.23
65,945.79
39,726.95
52,870.62
88,120.35
59,915.49
74,253.48
36,920.44
oo, f i
64,652.87
81,287.48
54,352.53
47,381.97
61,912.07
84,863.31

48,845.10
48,845.10
51,141.04
44,418.42
52,193.55
55,542.02
54,730.07
57,466.56
62,014.28
47,112.55
48,797.11
68,010.76
55,169.97
55,169.97
39,543.79
41,348.43
42,576.87
55,952.48
66,720.34
75,503.83
77,535.65
75,716.61
64,083.65
67,227.06
69,088.95
66,824.77
35,206.29
59,250.49
58,631.54
36,608.31
42,576.87
68,906.81
71,858.35
67,408.92
41,190.07
54,333.74
89,583.47
61,378.62
75,716.61
38,383.56
00, I 0^.0 1
66,115.99
82,750.60
54,806.60
48,845.10
63,375.08
86,390.14

52,502.90
52,502.90
54,923.22
48,076.23
55,851.35
59,199.82
58,541.50
61,468.56
65,672.09
50,770.36
52,579.28
71,668.57
58,827.78
58,827.78
43,201.60
45,006.25
46,234.68
59,610,31
70,378.16
79,1-61.65
81,193.45
79,374.41
67,142.72
70,286.13
72,148.03
70,482.58
38,864.10
62,908.30
62,289.35
40,266.12
46,234.68
72,564.61
75,516.16
71,066.72
44,847.88
57,991.55
93,241.28
65,036.42
79,374.41
42,041.37

AG

G O O

GA

Senior Site Plan Reviewer................
57,556.72
Special Projects Coordinator-------------------------- ------- 74,191.33
Caseworker
52,990.29
Justice Court Clerk (Spanish Speaking)
■40,285.82
Zoning Inspector
54,815.24
Civil Engineer
77,454.76

61,214.53
77,849.14
53,444.37
43,943.63
58,473.74
81,273.28

Appendix H
January 1, 2016
Page 2 of 3

69,773.80
86,408.41
55,260.68
52,502.90
67,033.00
90,209.63

Appendix H
Salary Structure January 1, 2016
Title

Entry Level

' 1

2

3

4

5

Town Engineer
GIS Technician III
Code Enforcement Officer
Administrative Aide
Justice Court Director
Case Manager (Spanish Speaking)
Stormwater Manager
Network and Systems Specialist 1

88,519.73
85,075.41
50,514.49
51,221.79
85,115.12
52,990.29
81,327.50
86,343.90

92,884.01
88,916.11
54,172.99
54,879.60
89,751.03
53,444.37
85,336.94
90,001.70

94,629.93
90,452.38
55,636.10
56,342.72
91,605.39
53,898.45
86,941.13
91,464.83

96,986.56
95,718.18
57,611.32
58,317.96
94,108.78
54,352.53
89,106.48
93,440.04

98,732.48
94,062.65
59,074.33
59,781.08
95,963.13
54,806.60
90,709.65
94,903.16

103,096.76
97,903.33
62,732.25
63,438.89
100,599.03
55,260.68
94,720.11
98,560.97

Appendix H
January 1,2016
Page 3 of 3

Part Time Rates

I

Hourly Rates
Effective Date
1/1/2014
1/1/2015

1/1/2016

18.31

15.27
18.54

18.91

15.88
19.29

21.01

21.27

21.70

22.13

13.05

13.21

. 13.48

13.75

Clerk Typist
Court Attendant

13.92

14.09

14.37

16.62

16.83

17.17

14.66
17.51

Court Officer

28.86

29.22

30,40

Title

1/1/2013

Account Clerk

15.08

Assistant Cook
Bay Constable
Clerk

Custodial Worker 1

13.76

13.93

29.80
14.21

Fire Marshall

28.04

28.39

28.96

29.53

Food Service Worker

14.24

14.42

14.71

Detention Attendant
Guard

16.62

16.83

14.12

14.30

17.17
14.58

15.00
17.51

Home Health Aide

14.24

14.42

13.40

13.57

14.71
13.84

15.00

Kitchen Aide

14.49

14.87
14.12

Maintenance Mechanic 1

17.60

17.82

18.18

18.54

Mini Bus Driver

17.10

Scale Operator
Senior Citizen Aide II .

15.75
15.81

17.31
15.94

17.66
16.26
16.32

18.01
16.59
16.65

Senior Planner
Public Safety Dispatcher

29.16
16.62

30.11

30.72

Legal Secretary
Tax Receiver Clerk

20.84

17.51
21.95

16.73

16.00
29.52
16.83

17.17

21.10
16.93

21.52
17.27
17.27
28.96

Tax Cashier

16.73

16.93

Electrical Inspector

28.04
16.73

28.39
16.93

14.62
28.44

14.81

17.27
15.10

28.79

29.37

Principal Clerk
Senior Clerk Typist
li

15.57

Land Management Specialist II

17.62
17.62
29.53
17.62
15.41
29.95

Salaried Rates

i
Highway Labor Crew Leader

11,861.59
18,741.06

12,009.86
18,975.32

12,250.06

Constable Fishers Island
Recreation Program Coordinator (hired before June 9, 1999

34,388.17

34,818.02

Recreation Program Coordinator -- Entry Level
Recreation Program Coordinator - Step 1
Recreation Program Coordinator - Step 2

25,296.08

35,514.38
26,124.52

Recreation Program Coordinator — Step 3
Recreation Program Coordinator -- Step 4________________
Recreation Program Coordinator - Step 5

Part Time Rates

25,612.28

29,710.61
30,534.36 31,145.04
32,432.88 33,081.-54
33,421.42 _ 33,839.18... 3^,515.97
36,893.79 37,354.96 38,102.06
28,768.45
30,157.39
32,032.47

29,128.05

19,354.82

12,495.06
19,741.92
36,224.67
26,647.01
30,304.82
31,767.94
33,743.17.
_35,206.29_
38,864.10

i
!

ii
i;

i
