COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
TOWNSHIP OF WHITE LAKE
AND

INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FIRE
FIGHTERS LOCAL 5295

CONTRACT EXTENSION
JANUARY 1, 2022 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2026

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE

CONTENTS

I .
II .
III ..
IV ..
V ..
VI ..

PURPOSE & DEFINITIONS
RECOGNITION
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
UNION SECURITY AND CHECK-OFF
UNION ACTIVITIES
OTHER AGREEMENTS &
ORGANIZATIONS
GRIEVANCE & ARBITRATION
SENIORITY
LAY-OFF, RECALL & TRANSFER
GENERAL CONDITIONS
MAINTENANCE OF CONDITIONS
GENERAL WAGE PROVISIONS
NO STRIKE - NO LOCKOUT
WORK SCHEDULE
OVERTIME
HOLIDAYS
PENSION
MEDICAL INSURANCE
VACATION
LIFE INSURANCE
SICK LEAVE
NON-DUTY DISABILITY MAXIMUM
FUNERAL LEAVE
PERSONAL TIME OFF
COURT APPEARANCE
OFF DUTY RUNS
RADIOS
RANK
NEW HIRE VACANT CAREER
FIREFIGHTER POSITIONS
CLOTHING ALLOWANCE
EDUCATION
PROMOTIONS
FOOD ALLOWANCE

VII ..
VIII .
IX ..
X .
XI 
XII ..
XIII .
XIV .
XV 
XVI ..
XVII .
XVIII 
XIX ..
XX 
XXI ..
XXII……………..
XXIII .
XXIV 
XXV 
XXVI.
XXVII 
XXVIII..
XXVIX…………..
XXX .
XXXI 
XXXII 
XXXIII .......

2

PAGE NO
4
5
5
8
11
13
13
17
19
19
23
24
25
26
26
27
28
29
36
37
38
42
42
43
43
44
45
45
47
48
49
52
55

XXXIV .
XXXV .
XXXVI ..
XXXVII.

RATIFICATION
55
SAVINGS CLAUSE
56
COMPLIANCE WITH THE LAW
56
DURATION
56
WAGE SCHEDULES
Attachment
ALS LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING Attachment

3

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
AGREEMENT made and entered into this 19th day of January 2021,
between WHITE LAKE TOWNSHIP, hereinafter called the “Township”, and the
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FIREFIGHTERS, LOCAL 5295,
hereinafter called the “Union.”
WITNESSETH:
That the parties hereto, in consideration of the mutual covenants and
agreements hereinafter contained, do hereby agree as follows:

ARTICLE I
Section 1. Purpose:

The parties hereto entered into this Agreement

pursuant to the authority of Act 336 of the Public Acts of 1947, as amended, to
incorporate understandings previously reached and other matters into a formal
contract; to promote harmonious relations between the Township and the Union,
in the best interests of the community; to improve the public fire fighting service;
and to provide an orderly and equitable means of resolving future differences
between the parties.
Section 2. Definitions:
“Township” shall include the elected or appointed representatives of the
Township of White Lake, Michigan.
“Union” shall include the officers or representatives of the Union.
4

“Day” shall, except as contract indicates otherwise, means a twenty-four
(24) hour consecutive tour of duty.
Whenever the singular number is used, it shall include the plural.

ARTICLE II - RECOGNITION
The Employer recognizes the Union as an exclusive representative of all
full-time firefighters of the White Lake Township Fire Department for the purpose
of collective bargaining with respect to rates of pay, wages, hours of employment
and other terms and conditions of employment subject to and in accordance with
the provisions of Act 336 of the Public Acts of 1947, as amended, but excluding
all elected officials and appointees, fire chief, and other Employees of the
Township.

ARTICLE III - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
1.

The Union recognizes the right of the Township to operate and

manage its affairs in all respects in accordance with its responsibilities. It is
understood and agreed that the Township has all the customary and usual rights,
powers, functions, and authority of management except as those rights, powers,
functions, and authority are specifically abridged or modified by this Agreement.
2.

The Union recognizes the exclusive right of the Township to

establish reasonable work rules, determine reasonable schedules of work,
determine and establish methods, processes and procedures by which such work is
5

performed as well as set work standards. The Township also reserves the right to
make work assignments in emergency situations.
3.

The Township has the right to schedule overtime work as required.

4.

The Township reserves the right to discipline or discharge for cause.

5.

The Township reserves the right in accordance with Article IX,

LAY-OFF, to lay-off for lack of work or funds, or the occurrence of conditions
beyond the control of the Township or where such continuation of work would be
wasteful and unproductive.
6.

No policies or procedures covered in this Agreement shall be

construed as being delegated to others or reducing or abridging any of the
following authority conferred on Township Officials:
(a)

The responsibility of the Township Supervisor as executive officer

for enforcing the laws of the State and Township Ordinances; recommending an
annual budget of appropriations and the efficient performance of all executive
departments among other executive responsibilities defined by State Law.
(b)

The responsibility of the Township Board as the legislative body for

the enactment of ordinances, the appropriation of money and the determination of
the Township budget among other legislative responsibilities defined by State
Law.

6

(c)

The

responsibility

of

the

Civil

Service

Commission

for

administering a merit system of employment, adopting rules and regulations and
exercising other personnel responsibilities as defined by State Law.
(d)

The responsibility of the Township Board and the Civil Service

Commission in establishing and amending a classification of position plan, a
compensation plan, an insurance and disability plan and retirement plan.
(e)

The responsibilities of the Township in determining the functions

and organization of the respective departments or divisions.
(f)

The responsibilities of Department Heads and/or Township Board

governed by State Law, ordinances, and Civil Service rules: (a) to hire, assign,
transfer, and promote Employees to positions within the Department; (b) to
suspend, demote, discharge or take other disciplinary action against Employees;
(c) to relieve Employees from duties because of lack of work or lack of funds; (d)
to determine the methods, means and personnel necessary for departmental or
agency operations; (e) to control departmental or agency budget; (f) to take
whatever actions are necessary in situations of emergency to perform the functions
of the department.
(g)

The responsibilities to administer pay and fringe benefit plans, to

provide the necessary surveys, research, rules, regulations, resolutions, and
ordinances for this purpose, subject to the authority of the departments and the
Township Board.
7

(h)

The responsibility for administering State and Ordinance provisions

relating to the Pension Plan, the Insurance Plan and the Disability Plan.
(i)

Eligible members of the Fire Department as well as qualified outside

applicants will be eligible to apply for the position of Fire Chief. Promotions to the
rank of Fire Chief shall then be made according to the Fire Provisions of Act 78
with the appointing authority making the selection from the top five (5) finalists.

ARTICLE IV - UNION SECURITY AND CHECK-OFF
1.

The Employer agrees to deduct the union membership dues, each pay, from

the pay of those Employees who individually request in writing that such deductions be
made. The amounts to be deducted shall be certified with an itemized statement to the
Employer by the Treasurer of the Union, fifteen (15) days prior to the payroll period for
which such deductions are to be made. The aggregate deduction for all employees shall
be remitted together with an itemized statement to the

International Association of

Firefighters, Local 5295 within fifteen (15) days after any payroll period of the current
succeeding month for which deductions are made. This authorization shall be irrevocable
during the term of this Agreement.

8

2.

Authorization of Payroll Deduction:

By: _____________________________________________________
LAST NAME
FIRST NAME
MIDDLE

To: _____________________________________________________
EMPLOYER
DEPARTMENT

Effective Date: ____________________________________________

I hereby request and authorize you to deduct from my earnings,
once each pay, an amount established by the Union as monthly
dues. The amount deducted shall be paid to the International
Association of Firefighters, Local 5295.
This authorization shall be irrevocable during the term of this
Agreement.
3.

Union Security Clause: Each Employee who, on the effective date

of this Agreement, is a member of the Union, shall, as a condition of employment,
maintain his membership in the Union. Each Employee hired on or after the
execution of this Agreement shall, as a condition of employment, become a
member of the Union thirty (30) days after his hiring date or the effective date of
this Agreement, whichever is later, and maintain membership in the Union.
Employees who fail to comply with this requirement shall be discharged by the
Employer within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice to the Employer
from the Union.

Probationary employees, however, shall not be entitled to

representation by the Union in disciplinary matters or in the event of discharge

9

during the probationary period shall not exceed three hundred sixty-five (365)
days from the date of hire.
4.

An exception to the above condition, however, shall recognize that

any Employee may exercise his choice of the following alternate conditions. In
lieu of Union membership, any Employee shall pay to the Union a monthly service
charge equal to the current monthly dues assessment. This contribution is to be
construed as a donation toward the administrative cost of the Agreement.
Employees who fail to comply with this condition shall be discharged within thirty
(30) days after receipt of written notice of such default delivered to the Employer
by the Union. Provided further, however, this requirement only applies to those
Employees within the classification noted in Article II.
5.

Neither the Union nor its members will intimidate or coerce any

Employee with respect to his right to work or in respect to Union activity or
membership.
6.

In cases where a deduction is made that duplicates a payment that an

Employee has already made to the Union or where a deduction is not in
conformity with the provisions of the Union Constitution and By-Laws, refunds to
the Employee will be made by the Union.
7.

The Township shall not be liable to the Union by reason of the

requirements of this Agreement for the remittance payment of any sum other than
that constituting actual deductions from wages earned by Employees. The Union
10

will protect and save harmless the Township from any and all claims, demands,
suits, and other forms of liability by reason of action taken, or not taken, by the
Township for the purpose of complying with this Article of the Agreement.

ARTICLE V - UNION ACTIVITIES
1.

Employees and their union representatives shall have the right to

join the Union, to engage in lawful concerted activities for the purposes of
collective negotiations or bargaining or other mutual aid and protection, to express
or communicate any view, grievance, complaint or opinion related to the condition
or compensation of public employment of their betterment, all free from any and
all restraint, interference, coercion, discrimination or reprisal, and so long as the
same is not designed to and does not interfere with the full, faithful, and proper
performance of the duties of employment.
2.

Officers and other representatives of the Union shall be afforded

reasonable time during regular working hours, without loss of pay, to fulfill their
Union responsibilities, including negotiations with the Township, processing of
grievances, and administration and enforcement of this Agreement.
3.

The Union shall be provided suitable bulletin boards, including at

least one at each fire station, for the posting of Union notices or other materials.
Such boards shall be identified with the name of the Union and the Union may
designate persons responsible therefore. All notices shall be restricted to:
11

(a)

Notices of Union recreational and social affairs;

(b)

Notices of Union elections;

(c)

Notices of Union appointments and results of Union elections;

(d)

Notices of Union meetings;

(e)

Other notices of bona fide Union affairs which are not political or

libelous in nature.
4.

The Union may schedule meetings on fire department property,

insofar as such meetings are not disruptive of the duties of the employees or the
efficient operation of the department. Full-time, on duty, career personnel at fire
stations other than the main station shall not be permitted to attend such scheduled
meetings without express permission from the chief.
5.

The Union, in contract negotiations, may be represented by

employees in the bargaining unit, not to exceed three (3). In addition, the Union
may be represented in contract negotiations by an Association non-employee
representative.
6.

Policy or changes in policy or General Orders by the Township or

Fire Department Administration shall be in writing and posted on bulletin board(s)
at least fourteen (14) days prior to becoming effective, except that General Orders
or policies relating to safety, health, or Township liability questions may be issued
to be effective immediately.

12

ARTICLE VI - OTHER AGREEMENTS AND ORGANIZATIONS
1.

The Township shall not enter into any Agreements with its

employees individually or collectively or with any other organization which in any
way conflicts with the provisions hereof.
2.

Employees may belong to other organizations, but not as a condition

of employment with the Township, nor may such other organizations represent
any Employee with respect to wages, hours, or conditions of employment or in
derogation of the exclusive bargaining agency of this Union.

ARTICLE VII - GRIEVANCE & ARBITRATION
1.

A grievance of an Employee or the Union shall be a claim either that

a specified provision of this Agreement has been violated by the Employer to their
detriment or disadvantage, or that the Employer has applied or specified provision
of this Agreement erroneously, arbitrarily or unfairly or that the Employer has
violated past practice or department rules.
2.

The determination of a grievance which affects other Employees in a

like manner shall be applied to such other Employees in the same manner as the
aggrieved Employee. A grievance shall not be accepted after thirty (30) days of
its initial occurrence.
3.

A grievance may be filed by the Union on matters affecting its rights

or privileges.
13

4.

Any grievance arising under the terms of this Agreement must be

handled under the following procedures:
Step 1:

An Employee having a grievance will first request a

meeting with the Chief to discuss the issue informally. If the grievance cannot be
resolved, it shall then be reduced to writing and submitted to the Chief within five
(5) days for a written response, which shall be returned to the Union within five
(5) days.
Step 2:

Any grievance not settled in Step 1 shall, at the option

of the Union, be submitted to a conference and/or hearing between an official or
officials of the Union and the Township Supervisor. Such conference and/or
hearing is to be initiated by an informal written memorandum setting out the
grievance and section of agreement in question and filed with the Township
Supervisor within five (5) days after receiving the Chief’s written decision. The
Township Supervisor or his/her designee will set a conference and/or hearing
within ten (10) days of receipt of written charges and shall render a written
decision within ten (10) days of conclusion of such conference and/or hearing,
excluding Saturday, Sunday, and holidays.
Step 3:

Full Discovery Meeting. If the Step 2 conference did

not resolve the grievance, then the Association President may request a formal
meeting with the Township Supervisor or his/her designee within ten (10) days of
receiving the answer from the Township Supervisor or his/her designee in writing
14

at Step 2. This meeting will be set up within twenty (20) days of the request. This
meeting is referred to as a full discovery by all parties.
A.

The parties agree that all evidence, exhibits, witness

statements, and work records shall be shared at this meeting and any information
at this meeting shall not only be shared, but all parties agree that information not
presented at this meeting cannot be presented at arbitration.
B.

The parties shall try at this meeting to stipulate to the facts,

the issues, the evidence, the witnesses, the language in the contract, controlling the
position each is to take.
C.

What cannot be mutually stipulated will be listed by each

party as a difference.

The intent of this clause is to make sure both sides

understand the full case before going to arbitration, and to prevent surprises either
in witnesses, evidence, or positions.
D.

The parties agree that in a discipline matter or issues of

arbitrability, the employer shall present its case first, and in all other cases, the
Association shall present their case first.
E.

The parties shall summarize their full position in writing to

the other side within fifteen (15) days after Step 3.
Step 4:

Arbitration. If the Union is not satisfied with the disposition

of the grievance at Step 3, then within twenty (20) working days from the date of
the Step 3 meetings, the grievance may be submitted to arbitration.
15

A.

Arbitration shall be invoked by written notice from the

President of the local Union or his/her designee to the other party of intention to
arbitrate.

The party desiring arbitration shall refer the matter to the Federal

Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS) for the selection of an impartial
arbitrator.
B.

Each party shall be responsible for the expenses of the

witnesses that they call.
C.

The arbitrator shall not have the power to add or subtract or to

modify any of the terms of this Agreement or any Agreements made
supplementary hereto, nor to establish or change any wage rate.
D.

The fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be paid by the

losing party; and, the arbitrator, as one of the requests for every arbitration, will be
asked to designate the winner and the loser.
E.

Any decision handed down by the impartial arbitrator shall be

final and binding on all parties – Employer, employees, and Union.
5.

If the parties fail to select an Arbitrator, one will be selected under

the rules of the American Arbitration Association or the Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service.
6.

Any Agreement reached by the Union and Employer is final and

binding and cannot be changed by any individual.

16

7.

The time limits specified in this Agreement shall not include

Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays. Grievances not referred to a higher level by the
Union within the time limits shall be considered withdrawn without prejudice.
8.

The arbitrator shall have no jurisdiction to hear matters reserved for

the jurisdiction of the Civil Service Commission. Employees shall have the right
to pursue disciplinary action, excluding oral and written reprimands, to arbitration
in lieu of Civil Service. The employee shall make the election of remedies at the
time the grievance would be filed and the selection is final.
9.

The time schedules as set out in the above steps may be extended by

mutual agreement of the parties.

ARTICLE VIII - SENIORITY
1.

New Employees may acquire seniority by working twelve (12)

continuous months, in which event the Employee’s seniority will date back to the
date of hire as a full time firefighter into the department. When the Employee
acquires seniority, his name shall be placed on the seniority list in the order of his
seniority date. For all new Firefighters hired as of August 1, 2005 there will be a
one-year probationary period.
2.

An up-to-date seniority list will be furnished to the Union Chairman

every six (6) months.
3.

An Employee shall lose his seniority for the following reasons:
17

(a)

If the Employee resigns or retires;

(b)

If the Employee is discharged and not reinstated;

(c)

If the Employee is absent from work for three (3) working

days without properly notifying the Employer, except where his failure to return to
work is covered by his sickness or accident and proof of such cause is provided;
(d)

If the Employee does not return to work at the end of an

approved leave, except where his failure to return to work is covered by his
sickness or accident and proof of such cause is provided;
(e)

If the Employee fails to return to work within three (3) days

when recalled from lay-off.
(f)

If an employee fails to return to work after (2) years on

Worker’s Compensation.
4.

It is further agreed that for purposes of vacation and longevity only

the following seniority dates shall apply.
5.

The credit for volunteer time herein given and the seniority dates

above stipulated only apply for vacation and longevity and shall not apply for
pension, lay-off, promotions, or anything else pertaining to fringe benefits set forth
elsewhere in the contract and the seniority provisions pertaining to date of hire
shall govern in all other situations.

18

ARTICLE IX - LAY-OFF, RECALL & TRANSFER
1.

If and when it becomes necessary for the Employer to reduce the

number of Employees in the work force, the Employee with the least seniority,
based upon capability of performing available jobs, shall be laid off first and the
first one laid off shall be the last one recalled. Seniority shall not be the only
determining factor in lay-off, recall and transfer within the department.
2.

In making transfer assignments, lay-offs, and recalls, consideration

will be given to fitness for the assigned duties, responsibilities, and seniority.
Employees shall have the right to discuss with the Fire Chief the basis for such
assignments. The decision of the Fire Chief in the matter of transfer assignments
shall be final and not subject to a grievance procedure, except to the extent that the
notification and review procedure outlined herein is not followed.
3.

The Chairman or Steward shall be notified of said lay-off or transfer

by the Employer.
4.

Promotions shall be made as outlined in Act 78 except as noted in

the Management Rights Clause for the position of Fire Chief.

ARTICLE X - GENERAL CONDITIONS
1.

The Union shall be notified in advance of anticipated permanent

major changes in working conditions which may result in changes in health or
safety conditions.
19

2.

The provisions of this Agreement shall be applied equally and

without favoritism to all Employees in the bargaining unit. There shall be no
discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race, color, creed, national origin,
political affiliation or handicap. The Union shall share equally with the Employer
the responsibility of applying this provision of the Agreement, except as provided
in Act 78.
3.

The re-employment rights of Employees

and probationary

Employees who are veterans will be limited by applicable laws and regulations.
4.

When any position not listed on the wage schedule is filled or

established, the Township may designate a job classification and rate structure for
the position.
5.

In the event the Union does not agree that the classification, rate, or

structure is proper, the Union shall have the right to submit the issues as a
grievance. If not settled within thirty (30) days, it will be moved to Step 3 of the
grievance procedure.
6.

An Employee assigned by the Employer to a higher classification

shall receive the compensation for that higher position for every day they are
assigned to that higher position for approved and planned absences due to illness,
injury or other absences, excluding vacations. In cases of unplanned absences, the
higher compensation will be given after 3 consecutive working days in the higher
position. Members performing duties of a higher position due to illness, injury or
20

lack of individuals in the position or other absences of less than three (3)
consecutive working days, furloughs, or other short-term vacancies, shall not be
considered as working out of classification.
7.

The Township and the Union have agreed to a Letter regarding the

handling of Part Time Firefighters.
8.

All new hires will enter the Department with the classification of

Firefighter.
9.

Captain On-Call Coverage
(a.)

On-Call Captain’s coverage will be assigned when the senior

Sergeant is acting as shift commander, in the event the actual shift commander is
off duty, and the senior Sergeant is acting in the Captain’s absence.
(b.)

Coverage times are weekdays from 1900-0700 hours and

weekends and holidays from 0700-0700.
(c.)

Captain’s On-Call compensation is 1.5 hours straight time for

12-hour shifts and 3 hours of straight time for 24-hour shifts.
(d.)

10.

SOG 5113 will detail the coverage.

POLICY REGARDING ON-THE-JOB INJURY
A.

The Township of White Lake will continue to pay the

difference between worker’s compensation and base pay to each employee
qualifying under this section up to a maximum of one (1) year.
21

B.

In the event of a disputed worker’s compensation claim, the

Township will pay the difference between worker’s compensation and base pay
for the period, if any, that the claim is settled or recognized as compensable under
worker’s compensation, subject to the provisions of Section A above.
C.

Worker’s Compensation: An employee who is off because of

an on-duty accident, injury or illness and is receiving Worker’s Compensation will
lose their healthcare or seniority after two (2) years except that their seniority and
health insurance will continue if they have made an application for a disability
retirement within the two (2) year period and have cooperated and provided timely
information as requested by MERS. Until a final disposition is made regarding
that request, and as long as the employee meets the obligation above, their
seniority and healthcare will continue.
The employee will not lose seniority in any instance where the employee’s
application for disability retirement is denied and the employee subsequently
returns to work.
11.

Light Duty

Duty Related Injuries: A light duty position may be established at the sole
discretion of the Township. The determination as to whether to assign an
individual will be at the discretion of the Township subject to medical approval.
An individual so assigned shall be placed on a 40-hour work week by working
either five, eight (8) hour shifts or four, ten (10) hour shifts Monday through
22

Friday only. The option shall be the choice of the Employee. The parties have
agreed to a guideline implementing this change.
12.

Fire prevention employees may be placed on a 4-day 10-hour work

day schedule at the discretion of the Fire Chief. Such schedule shall not increase
an employee’s leave time accrual.

Non-Duty Related Injuries: A member having received medical clearance from
their physician may be eligible to a light duty assignment, which shall be approved
at the discretion of the Fire Chief and continue while light duty work is available.
While an Employee is on light duty, he/she shall work a 40 hour per week
assignment, the following shall prevail:

The Employee's hourly rate of pay shall be adjusted for a 40-hour week rather than
a 56-hour week equal to that of the Fire Marshall. Leave time shall be taken in 8hour increments. PTO shall be used with no conversion; time accrual will be at 40hour rate.

ARTICLE XI - MAINTENANCE OF CONDITIONS
Wages, hours, and conditions of employment legally in effect at the
execution of this Agreement shall, except as improved herein, be maintained
during the term of this Agreement.
23

ARTICLE XII - GENERAL WAGE PROVISION
1.

Job title and wage rates for Employees covered by this Agreement
are listed in Schedule “A” which is attached hereto and made a part
hereof. They reflect the following Agreement for the years of this
Contract.

2.

A new wage scale (see wage attachment) is effective the first payroll
after ratification by the Township Board of Trustees.
a. The Fire Marshal base wage shall increase 4% upon
implementation of the paramedic program.

In the event the

Township extends beyond the initial two (2) year period the Fire
Marshal will be provided with a 2% increase.
b. All ALS members assigned to the ALS certified program,
regardless of rank, shall receive premium pay equal to 4% of
wage.
c. In the event the Township extends this program beyond the two
(2) year initial period, as provided in the Letter of Undestanding,
a 2% increase on the paramedic premium pay shall occur.
2.

Wages:
a)
Effective January 1, 2022 3% increase
b)

Effective January 1, 2023 2.5% increase

c)

Effective January 1, 2024 3% increase
24

d)

Effective January 1, 2025 2.5% increase

e)

Effective January 1, 2026 3% increase

Hazard Pay: A one-time payment of $750.00 if ratified by the Unit on or before
12.3.21.
3.

Bi-weekly payroll period to end on Friday at 12:00 midnight.

Payroll checks to be issued on the Wednesday immediately following the end of
the payroll period. Pay vouchers for the pay period, including overtime, holiday
pay, etc., will be accepted by the Clerk’s Office until 9:00 a.m. on the Monday
following the end of the payroll period.

ARTICLE XIII - NO STRIKE - NO LOCKOUT
1.

Under no circumstances will the Union cause, authorize, or permit

its members to cause, nor will any member of the bargaining unit take part in any
strike, sit-down, stay-in, slow-down, or any violation of any State Law. In the
event of a work stoppage or other curtailment, the Union shall immediately
instruct the involved Employees in writing that their conduct is in violation of the
contract and all such persons shall immediately cease the offending conduct.
2.

Any Employee who violates this Section will be subject to discharge

by the Employer.

25

ARTICLE XIV - WORK SCHEDULE
A work schedule showing the Employee’s shifts, work days and hours shall
be posted in the Department at all times, and shall be prescribed by Act 125,
Public Acts of 1925, as amended.

ARTICLE XV - OVERTIME
1.

Overtime pay shall be paid to all members of the bargaining unit

who are employed as full-time firefighters for work in excess of their regular
scheduled work day (24 consecutive hours) or work week (average of 56 hours per
calendar week), only when such overtime work has been previously authorized by
the Chief. Such overtime shall be paid at one and one-half (1 ½) times the
Employee’s prevailing hourly rate.

For the purposes of this Agreement, the

Employee’s prevailing hourly rate shall be deemed to be the annual salary for such
Employee, divided by 2,912 hours.
2.

Employee shall work his regularly scheduled shift per calendar year.

No employee shall work more than two (2) shifts in a row except in case of an
emergency. All overtime shall be at the rate of one and one-half (1 ½) times the
Employee’s prevailing hourly rate.
3.

FLSA time will not be accrued for leave time from regular (56 hour)

duty extending beyond 30 days.
26

ARTICLE XVI - HOLIDAYS
1.

All full-time Employees will be entitled to the following fourteen

(14) holidays off with pay at straight time:

May, Last Monday - Memorial Day
July 4th - Independence Day
September, First Monday - Labor Day
October 12 - Columbus Day
November 11 - Veteran’s Day
November 4th Thursday - Thanksgiving Day
November 4th, Friday - Day after Thanksgiving
December 24th - Christmas Eve
December 25th - Christmas Day
December 31st - New Year’s Eve
January 1st - New Year’s Day
Martin Luther King’s Birthday
February 3rd Monday - Washington’s Birthday
Good Friday
2.

In order to be eligible for holiday pay, the Employee must report to

work if he is scheduled the calendar day prior to the holiday and after the holiday,
except that if an Employee is on a scheduled day off, personal leave day, duty
disabled day, sick leave approved by the Fire Chief, approved FLSA time or
approved vacation, he will be paid for the holiday.
3.

The total amount of pay due for the holiday pay shall be paid to a

full-time fireman in two (2) equal installments during the year, the second pay
after the seventh (7th) holiday.
27

ARTICLE XVII - PENSION
1.

The pension plan as established by Municipal Employee Retirement

System (M.E.R.S.) identified as Benefit B-4, F-55, and Rs-50, FAC-3, shall be
provided by the Township to all members hired before January 1, 2010. All
accumulated, non-voluntary funds of the previous retirement program shall be
“rolled over” into M.E.R.S.
2.

All members of the Bargaining Unit shall pay 5% of their gross

wages for the M.E.R.S. Plan. The Employer shall pay all sums required by
M.E.R.S. for this plan in excess of the employees 5% contribution. All
maintenance, expense and costs of the pension plan shall be paid by the Township.
3.

New Hire Pensions – For all members hired after January 1, 2010,

the Defined Benefit Plan above will be replaced with a Defined Benefit Plan
which is based upon a 2.25% multiplier with base salary only, no other fold-ins
and it is based upon an F-55 with 25 years of service with the Township.
For members hired after January 1, 2010, the employer shall contribute 2%
of base wages into the employee’s MERS 457 (b) plan, organized under IRC 457
(b). This payment shall only apply to those employees on this Tier 2 pension. The
employee shall be required to contribute 2% into this account to participate in the
program.

28

4.

(A)

Members shall be allowed to purchase no more than five (5)

years of prior service as a Career Fire Fighter or military service at their cost as
determined by MERS for purposes of eligibility for retirement under the pension
system only.
(B)

Any time purchased by a member for pension purposes will

not count toward eligibility for retiree healthcare.

ARTICLE XVIII - MEDICAL INSURANCE
1.

The Township shall provide two health insurance plans.

BCN HMO
BCN $500

BCBSM PPO
Simply Blue 250/EHIM
Wrap Plan

Deductible
Co-Pay
Co-insurance
Drug Rx
Co-insurance max

$500/$1000
$20
100%
$10/$30/$60/$80
$0.00

$250/$500
$20
80%
$10/$40/$80
$1,500.00

Employee
Contributions:

BCN HMO S: $25 2-Person: $37 Family: $50
SB 250: S: $50.00 2-Person $75.00 Family: $100

(i)

The Township will have the right to self-insure the insurance under
this Article if the coverage is equivalent or better.

29

(ii)

Members of the group will contribute according to the selected plan
as described above per month, taken out bi-weekly (pre-tax) for the
first 24 annual pays.
Payment under this provision will begin when the new plans can be put
into place in 2022.
• Payment under this provision will not continue into
retirement.

The Township may self-insure or change insurance carriers for all
insurance if the coverage is equivalent or better.
2.

Healthcare

A.

The Township shall comply with all provisions of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act [Public Law 111-148 of the
111th Congress, 42 U.S.C. 18001] and as such Health Insurance
Plans may be
subject to change in order to remain in
compliance with same and avoid penalties.

B.

The Township may reopen the Collective Bargaining Agreement
to address the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act issues.

C.

Members of this bargaining unit will not be subject to the
election made by the Township Board based upon its options
under PA 152 for the duration of this contract.

3.

The Township will provide a dental program for all full-time

Employees, one policy per family, which provides one hundred percent (100%) of
treatment cost for preventative, diagnostic (except radiographs) and Emergency
30

Palliative (Class I) services and seventy-five percent (75%) of the balance of Class
II benefits paid by the dental carrier and fifty percent (50%) of treatment costs
paid by Delta on Class III benefits. The Township shall upgrade the dental plan to
include Class IV, Orthodontic, fifty percent (50%), with a One Thousand and
00/100 ($1,000) Dollar lifetime maximum per eligible person to age nineteen (19).
There will be a $50 per person first dollar deductible with a maximum of
$150 per family.
The maximum annual benefit for Class I and Class II benefits per person
per contract year will be increased to $1,000.00.
4.

The Township will provide optical benefits for all full-time

employees and their dependents, equal to coverage currently in effect for general
employees of the Township on January 1, 1994.
5.

The Township shall pay (in accordance with this Article) hospital

and surgical insurance premiums for all full-time Employees who are partially or
fully incapacitated as a result of an on-the-job duty related accident and/or injury.
This provision shall only apply to any injury or accident which is duty related.
This coverage shall terminate in the event an Employee accepts employment
elsewhere or upon his or her death.
6.

The Township agrees, in the event of the death of an Employee, it

will continue hospital and surgical insurance benefits for the family for one (1)
year and fifty percent (50%) of the premium for the second year, provided the
31

surviving spouse has not remarried or has not obtained benefits from other
employment.
7.

The following will apply to members of the bargaining unit who are

eligible to receive health insurance benefits under the Township’s medical plan.

32

(a)

The Township will pay a $2,400.00 cash per year incentive to eligible

employees who elect to decline the Township’s medical plan during the entire year. The
payment will be paid to eligible employees in December of each year. Employees who
decline coverage during the year will receive the sum of $200.00 per month payable in
December of each year for each full month they did not have coverage. If a member’s
spouse or dependent is also an employee of the township, they are not eligible for the opt
out incentive, as they are insured under the Township’s medical plan.
(b)

Employees will be eligible to decline coverage consistent with the criteria

established by the Township and Blue Cross Blue Shield.
(c)

Employees will be able to re-enroll in the Township’s medical plan when

they are covered under health insurance from another source and lose that coverage as
soon as they are allowed under the applicable Blue Cross/Blue Shield Policy.
(d)

When an employee makes a decision to re-enroll in the Township medical

plan which is not caused by the loss of health insurance from another source, or another
qualifying event, that employee cannot re-enroll until the next annual enrollment period.
(e)

RETIREE HEALTH INSURANCE:

For periods prior to January 1, 2010: For members who have retired from the Township
after 7-1-98 and were hired before January 1, 2010 after meeting the age and service
requirements for a regular pension, the Township agrees to provide single person
coverage under the Township’s medical plan offered to employees of the bargaining unit.
33

Should the medical plan not be available to a retiree, the Township agreed to provide an
eligible individual above with BCBS Community Blues Option 2 single person coverage
with the same level of benefits provided under the traditional coverage alternative
available to active members of the bargaining unit.
(b) Effective for eligible retirees who retire after January 29, 2010, and
were hired before January 29, 2010, the Township will provide to eligible retirees and
their spouse at the time of retirement only, the two person BCBS Community Blues
Option 2 health coverage.
The parties recognize that members who retire and are eligible for benefits
under this provision may have their benefits and insurance changed during their
retirement to reflect that of active employees.
Any subsequent improvements regarding single person coverage for active
members will be granted to members who retired with a regular service pension under
this provision.
Any reduction in the single person coverage for active members may, at the
Township’s sole discretion and option, also result in the same reduction for retired
members.
(c.)

A retiree and/or spouse who is eligible for Medicare, must enroll in

Medicare to receive the benefits noted above. The coverage in (a) and (b) will be

34

secondary to any Medicare or Medicaid coverage and will not be provided if the
individual is receiving, or is eligible to receive, health care benefits elsewhere.
(d.)

In the event the Employer no longer provides health care insurance

to active members of the bargaining unit, retirees shall remain at their current level of
benefits in effect at the time of cancellation.
(e.)

For all members hired after January 1, 2010, retiree health insurance

will be eliminated. These members will be provided with a Health Care Savings Program
or other similar vehicle as determined by the Township with a contribution of 3.5 % base
pay from the employer and 3% employee contribution with a 7 year vesting on the
Employer’s portion of the HCSP.
(f.)

Where a current employee who is eligible for Township retiree

health care retires and is also eligible, or becomes eligible, for other healthcare benefits
through subsequent employment, the retired employee must acquire the other coverage
and the Township shall not then be obligated for retiree healthcare only during the
subsequent employment provided:

1.

The benefits under the other coverage must be substantially comparable to
those provided by the Township and also include two (2) person coverage
(spouse or eligible dependent of record at time of retirement); “The
‘substantially comparable’ standard necessarily includes the extent to which

35

the retired employee may be responsible for premium costs and deductibles
under the other coverage.

2.

The retired employee shall be eligible to re-enroll in the Township’s
medical plan if the other coverage is lost as soon as they are allowed by
applicable Blue Cross/Blue Shield policy or the retiree is no longer eligible
to be covered by healthcare elsewhere.

ARTICLE XIX - VACATION
1.

Effective for calendar year 2021 members of the bargaining unit shall

begin to accrue leave time on their employee anniversary date and not on the calendar
year. Vacation time for 2021 shall be pro-rated.
2.

Full-time Employees will be eligible for vacation with pay for weeks or

days in accordance with the length of service, attained by the employee anniversary date,
as indicated on the following chart:

At Least

Days

Hours

6 Mo. to 1 yr.
1 yr. to 5 yrs.
5 yrs. to 10 yrs.
10 yrs. to 15 yrs.
15 yrs. to 20 yrs.
20 to 25 yrs
25 yrs and over

2 days
6 days
7 days
8 days
10 days
11 days
12 days

48 hrs.
144 hrs.
168 hrs.
192 hrs.
240 hrs.
264 hrs.
288 hrs.
36

3.

Vacations may be taken any time on or after January 1st, and prior to the

following December 31st.

Vacation must be arranged by the individual with his

department head with at least thirty (30) days notice preceding the beginning date of the
vacation. All employee vacation time must be approved by the Department Head prior to
that date of vacation. Unused vacation time is not compensable and may not be carried
over from year to year.
4.

Seniority shall have preference on all vacation requests.

5.

No more than two personnel per shift will be scheduled for vacation at any

one time. Personnel shall not be bumped from approved vacation. Should a member
select a vacation day based upon seniority where another member requests that day, the
vacation day cannot be canceled unless approved by the Fire Chief due to an extenuating
circumstance.
One Sergeant or higher rank will be maintained on duty each day and the two
personnel on approved scheduled vacation are not intended to be the direct cause of
overtime.
ARTICLE XX - LIFE INSURANCE
The Employer shall provide for all full-time firemen, life insurance in the amount
of Fifty Thousand and 00/100 ($50,000) Dollars, with an accidental death double
indemnity provision.

37

ARTICLE XXI - SICK LEAVE
1.

For purposes of this section, “Sick Leave Day” shall mean a twenty-four

(24) hour duty day.
2.

Sick time shall be earned at the rate of sixteen (16) hours per month

annually. No sick days may be used in the first ninety (90) days of employment. Sick
days may be accumulated from year to year.
3.

Employees may accumulate a maximum of 1,456 sick hours. After 1,456

hours of sick leave is accumulated, each employee will receive payment once annually
for the amount of sick leave necessary to return the accumulated sick leave to 1,456
hours.

4.

Provided should members of the bargaining unit, upon the date of this

agreement have in excess of 1,456 hours. They shall be permitted to sell not more than
100 hours, per contract year to equalize to the level herein referenced.

5.

Upon separation from service, an employee who has 1,456 hours shall be

paid unused accumulated sick leave, provided however this amount shall never exceed
100 hours (100).

The rate of payment shall be based upon the regular annual salary of the employee at the
time of separation. If an employee is separated upon the termination of a leave of
38

absence, the rate of payment shall be based upon the employee’s regular annual salary
which he was receiving at the beginning of his leave of absence. Any Sick Leave sold
according to the above provisions shall not count towards an employee’s Final Average
Compensation (FAC).

6.

For forty-hour employees they shall earn at 8 hours a month to a maximum

of seven hundred (700) sick hours. After five hundred (500) hours of sick time are
accumulated, each employee will receive payment once annually.
(a.)

Provided said members of the bargaining unit, upon the date of this

agreement have in excess of 500 hours; they shall be permitted to sell not more than 100
hours per contract year.
(b.)

Upon separation from service, an employee who has 500 hours shall

be paid unused accumulated sick leave, provided however this amount shall not exceed
four hundred (400) hours.
7.

The Township shall provide a long-term disability program, which shall be

provided to bargaining unit members at 60% wage loss available after a member is off for
6 months and shall not exceed 18 months.
(a)

Employees on long term sick leave in excess of thirty (30) days shall not earn sick

leave and personal time.
(b)

Pension credit shall cease to accrue after 12 months.
39

8.

A minimum of four (4) hours sick time must be used at any one time.

9.

Sick leave may be used only with the permission of his Supervisor.

10.

The Supervisor shall be responsible for reviewing Employee’s requests for

sick leave and determining their validity. He shall refuse to allow use of sick leave when,
in his Judgment, there is insufficient evidence to support the Employee’s claim or where
he believes that the Employee has not exercised reasonable effort to promptly notify the
department of his absence.
11.

Employees should notify their department head that they will be unable to

work at least one (1) hour before their normal work day begins.
12.

Employees must submit their “Request for Approval of Extended Sick

Leave” forms to their department head, in writing, as soon as possible after sick leave
usage. These forms shall be forwarded to the Supervisor for review.
13.

Sick leave shall not be granted for a period of more than three (3)

successive work days unless the Employee submits a statement from his physician, to the
Supervisor, that the sick leave is necessary.
14.

Sick leave may not be used before it is earned.

15.

Sick leave may be used at any time after it is earned.

16.

Sick leave may be used for the following purposes:

40

(a)

Acute personal sickness or incapacity over which the Employee has

no reasonable control. (Note: Sick leave shall be taken in connection with leaves of
absence for pregnancy).
(b)

Absence from work because of exposure to a contagious disease,

which, according to public health standards, would constitute a danger to the health of
others by the Employee’s attendance at work.
(c)

Employees whose earned sick days have been used up and whose

sick leave extends beyond thirty (30) consecutive work days, shall be eligible for shortterm or long- term disability.
(i) The member may be eligible to receive a weekly payment of
$450.00 through a short-term disability benefit provided by the
township. The employee must use any combination sick, personal,
and vacation time to cover the first thirty (30) days of disability.

(ii) Sick Leaves that extend beyond (6) months are eligible for long
term disability. The township will provide a long-term disability
policy for members who are on sick leave greater than 6 months, not
to exceed eighteen (18) months.

41

XXII – NON-DUTY DISABILITY MAXIMUM
If an employee has not returned after 1 year, they will be subject to an evaluation by a
Medical Evaluator selected by the Township. The Evaluator will determine whether the
Employee has a reasonable likelihood to return to work within the next 6-month period.
If the Evaluator makes the determination that the Employee has a reasonable likelihood
of returning to employment within the next 6-month period, the Employee will be eligible
to receive an additional 6 months to return. If the Evaluator determines that there is not a
reasonable likelihood of the Employee returning to work in the next 6-month period, the
Employee will lose their seniority. If the employee has a medical evaluation which is
different than that provided above, the parties agree that the determining factor will be
the current Chief Medical Staff or a physician of appropriate to their illness or injury or
his or her designee to resolve the dispute between the two medical evaluators. Their
decision will be final.

ARTICLE XXIII - FUNERAL LEAVE
When death occurs in an Employee’s immediate family, (spouse, parent, parent of
a current spouse, son, daughter, stepchildren, brother, sister, grandchild, grandparent,
spouse’s grandparents, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, or daughter-in-law), the
Employee, on request will be excused with pay for three (3) days, through the day of the
42

funeral. One (1) additional day (the next calendar day following the day of the funeral)
will be allowed for travel time to return from a funeral located two hundred fifty (250)
miles or more from the Township.

ARTICLE XXIV - PERSONAL TIME OFF

1.

Effective January 1, 2009, Bargaining Unit Members shall be credited with

104 Hours of Personal Leave time to be utilized by December 31st of that year.
Utilization shall be as follows; two (2) members shall be allowed to utilize P.T.O. at the
same time with approval of the Fire Chief and not to cause an overtime situation. All time
shall be utilized within the year it is earned, with no carry-over into the next year. In the
event that all P.T.O. is not used in the year in which it was earned, there shall be a payout at year end for the unused days, up to a maximum of four (4) days.

ARTICLE XXV - COURT APPEARANCE
1.

All full-time Employees required to appear in Court, either Circuit, District,

or Municipal, outside of his regular duty hours or which shall occur while said Employee

43

is off duty shall be compensated at the following rate of time according to the following
schedule:
0 to 2 hours

Two hours minimum at time and one-half (1 ½)

2 to 8 hours

Time worked at the rate of time and one-half (1 ½)

2.

The above provision shall not apply in any case of a civil nature unless

requested or required by the Township.

ARTICLE XXVI - OFF DUTY RUNS
1.

Full-time Employees who voluntarily respond to a fire run while off-duty

shall be paid the sum of one and one-half (1 ½) times their base rate for a minimum of
one hour and time and one-half (1 ½) for each authorized hour thereafter. Off duty runs
shall be paid in the pay period following the period in which it is earned.
2.

Off Duty Runs as follows:
Voluntary off-duty run response will be restricted to:
●
●
●

Fire Alarms (Not including automatic alarms and those called in by a
monitoring company)
Mutual Aid Calls
Any time additional manpower is needed and called for by the fire
chief or the shift commander.

Voluntary off-duty medical runs are excluded for career fire department personnel
unless called for by the fire chief or shift commander.
44

ARTICLE XXVI - RADIOS
It is agreed that all full-time Employees shall have the right to install and use twoway radios at their own personal expense to monitor fire, band, and local government
bands of White Lake Township only.

ARTICLE XXVII - RANK
A.

No part-time firefighter may be allowed to perform any shift work duties
under this agreement while a member of the bargaining unit is laid off. In
the event there is a scheduled shift and a vacancy occurs because of a call
off and the shift is to be filled, it shall be offered to members of the
bargaining unit first.

In the event there is scheduled leave time, the Department shall be permitted to
use Part Time staff to cover that shift.

B.

Before Part Time Firefighter may work shift work, they must first obtain
the following certifications: FFI, FF2, Basic EMT or MFR

C.

The Township shall be able to schedule Part Time Firefighters at its
discretion to cover shifts within the limitations as referred to in section A.
All other restrictions and sections shall be deleted from the CBA.
45

D.

Must work with supervision of a career FF at all times.

E.

It is not the intention of this agreement to reduce the number of career fulltime firefighters. As a result, a part-time firefighter cannot replace a career
firefighter vacancy created due to permanent separation by a member of the
bargaining unit. The parties acknowledge that where a career firefighter has
retired, quit or otherwise separated, there will be a period of time which
occurs prior to the position being filled through the Act 78 Civil Service
Commission.

F.

Part-time firefighters cannot trade shifts with career firefighters.

G.

Part-time firefighters work schedules shall be posted 14 days in advance
indicating what days and shifts and who is working.

H.

Call offs must be made no later than one hour before the start of shift.

I.

When the part-time firefighters sign up for a shift, they are expected to
work.

J.

Cannot work more than fifty-six (56) hours in a 2-week pay period.

K.

For those part-time firefighters who will be scheduled to a shift and are
newly hired by the Department, there will be a 90-day orientation period
prior to working a shift.

L.

If a career firefighter provides 14 days notice or more for a scheduled day
off, which could result in overtime or at the discretion of Fire Chief needs
46

to be filed, it will first be offered to members of this bargaining unit any
time off requests received less than 14 days in advance can be filled with
part time employees. Should an employee call off, as set forth herein the
Fire Chief shall at his discretion fill the opening with a part time employee
or a career firefighter. The Parties agree that should there be a shift which
requires filing with less than 14 days notice and there is not at least one
full-time officer (Sgt./Capt.) working during the shift a part time employee
shall not be allowed to cover that vacancy.

XXVIII NEW HIRE – VACANT CAREER FIREFIGHTER POSITIONS
It is the intention of the Township to hire qualified career fire department

members

from its part-time staffing. Eligibility will be based on the following criteria nonprobationary member in good standing (as defined within the part-time bargaining
contract including required shift work). If a qualified candidate is not available within the
part-time ranks, the twp. reserves the right to open the position to outside candidates.
Hiring procedure:
•

All provisions outlined within public act 78, with the exception that career
positions will not be open to the public unless a qualified candidate is not available
within the part-time ranks.
47

Preference points:
•

Service credits (seniority points, 1 point per year, for every month of part-time
employment with White Lake Township for a maximum of 10 years of
seniority).

•

Workmanship Points (1-10 points, mean score averaged out amongst points
awarded from all three shift commanders and the part-time program
administrator).

Fire Department Cadet:
The fire cadet (no prior training) is a civilian position. The job description and pay
will be at the discretion of the Fire Chief.
Once the minimum fire department training standards have been satisfied, the Fire
Department cadet will be eligible for a part-time firefighter position (at the discretion of
the Fire Chief).

ARTICLE XXIX - CLOTHING ALLOWANCE
1.

Every full-time Employee shall be entitled to a combined clothing and

cleaning allowance of eight hundred and fifty dollars ($850.00) per year to be submitted
to the Township on vouchers accompanied by purchase invoice.

Any items purchased

which cost would exceed the total allowance shall be paid for by the firefighter to the
48

extent of the amount by which the total allowance is exceeded. Uniforms shall be worn
on duty only.
2.

A firefighter incurring the loss of, or damage to, his or her personal

property, such as eyeglasses or watches, while in the performance of duty, shall be
reimbursed for the replacement and/or repair of such property, in an amount up to, but
not exceeding One Hundred and 00/100 ($100) Dollars. Radios, cameras, briefcases, and
other items not worn on person are not included.
3.

A firefighter, if negligent or careless, incurring the loss of or damage to

Township property in his or her possession, shall repair or replace such property, in the
amount of the full repair or replacement.
4.

Vouchers for clothing allowance requests will not be honored unless

submitted to the Township Clerk before December 1st of the year in which the expense
was incurred.
5.

Once notice of termination of employment or retirement is provided, no

further clothing allowance will be permitted without the Fire Chief’s approval.

ARTICLE XXIX - EDUCATION
1.

The Fire Chief may require certain Employees to attend schools or classes

for the good of the department under the following terms and conditions:

49

(a)

When the length of the class dictates the need, the Employee may be

scheduled on a forty (40) hour work week;
(b)

When off-duty attendance at schools or classes is required, the

Employee will be compensated at the regular rate, plus one-half (½).
(c)

Meals, if not included with registration fees, will be reimbursed in

accordance with Township policy upon presentation of suitable receipts;
(d)

All registration and material fees will be paid by the department;

(e)

Transportation, if not provided, will be reimbursed in accordance

with Township policy;
(f)

When overnight lodging is necessary and not included in the cost of

the school or class, the Employee will be reimbursed in accordance with the Township
policy.
2.

In the event an Employee requests to attend a school or class which is not

required by the Fire Chief, he may do so upon the following terms and conditions:
(a)

The attendance at such schools or classes will be on the Employee’s

own time, except that the Fire Chief may, at his option, authorize the Employee to attend
the school or class on duty when deemed by the Fire Chief to be in the best interest of the
department. In no case will overtime be authorized for optional education.
(b)

The Employee will bear all costs associated with such classes or

schools except that the Fire Chief may, at his option, pay for in advance or reimburse the
50

Employee for some or all of the costs associated with such classes or schools. Only when
approval has been obtained from the Fire Chief in advance of such classes or schools will
the possibility of reimbursement for expenses be considered.
3.

Reimbursement for college courses will be available as follows:
(a)

Classes must be taken at an accredited college or university leading

to a degree in fire science, public safety studies, firefighter paramedic technology,
emergency medical services and fire management. It does not apply to required elective
classes or non-fire required classes, which are not required for a fire science degree.
(b)

Tuition and laboratory fees for required fire science, public safety

studies, firefighter paramedic technology, emergency medical services and fire
management classes will be paid at fifty percent (50%) of the cost to the student.
(c)

Books and other required fees will be the full responsibility of the

(d)

Incomplete classes or classes completed with a final grade less than

student.

a “C” will not qualify for reimbursement.
(e)

Reimbursement for tuition and lab fees must be approved by the fire

chief before the class is taken.
(f)

Should the employee terminate employment within 12 months after

having received tuition reimbursement from the Employer, then the employee will be
required to pay back the amount of tuition payment received in that 12-month period. No
51

reimbursement to the employer is required if the employee retires, dies, or is laid off.
This language shall serve as authorization to withhold these monies from the employee’s
final pay.

ARTICLE XXXI - PROMOTIONS
Promotions within the White Lake Township Fire Department will be
administered within the guidelines of P.A. 78 (Civil Service) except as noted for the
position of Fire Chief. In addition, the following shall also apply:
(a)

A written test prepared by a professional testing service, the

minimum passing score being seventy percent (70%);
(b)

An oral examination administered by the White Lake Civil Service

Commission, the minimum passing score being seventy percent (70%);
(c)

Seniority credit of 0.1 point for every full month of full-time

employment with the White Lake Township Fire Department not to exceed credit for ten
(10) years of service;
(d)

Final ranking of applicants will be determined by converting all

percentages to points and then adding all points to a final total. In the event of a tie, the
seniority credit will be eliminated, with the final total consisting of the written, oral, and
psychological test scores being added together.
52

(e)

The Lieutenant and Captain positions will be filled at the discretion

of the Fire Chief. Effective June 2020 the Township shall reclassify the two employees
presently holding the rank of Lt. to the rank of Captain, with no other changes in the
command structure. Nothing contained herein shall be construed so as to inhibit or
restrict any rights that the Employer has in article III, Management Rights.
(f)

The parties have agreed to alter the hiring promotional process so

that oral examinations will be conducted and scored by chief fire officers from other
Communities.

This would be done under the administration of the Civil Service

Commission.
(g)

The Union’s proposal for creating Sergeants will not result in higher

pay in this contract or future contracts and will not be used for comparison purposes in
future Act 312 Cases to justify higher wages and benefits.
(h)

The Department reserves the right to establish a position of Fire

Marshal. The Fire Marshal will be paid the annual rate of pay of a Captain and will be
considered of an equal rank. The pay rate shall be applied as follows:
(i) Probationary rate: 95% of full captain pay.
(ii) Non-Probationary rate: 100% of full captain pay.
(iii)

This 40-hour position will receive the following benefits

converted to 40-hours:
• FLSA – not eligible
53

• The employee is eligible to choose to receive Comp time in lieu of
paid overtime. Comp time cannot exceed 90 hours per calendar year.
All comp time for the month of December must be received and
approved by November 30th. Should a balance remain, it will be paid
out the first payroll in December.
• Personal – 48 hours (paid out up to 32 hours of unused personal time
at year end)
• Sick time – 8 hours per month
• Every 240 hours of banked sick time converts to 96 hours of sick
time in 40-hour position.
• Vacation –
5 – 10 years – 17 days
10 – 15 years – 19 days
15 – 20 years – 23 days
20 ears or more – 25 days
• Holidays: 14 holidays off with pay. If required to work on the
holiday, they receive time and a half for hours worked on the holiday
in addition to regular pay. There is no holiday payout.
(i)

The Township also reserves the right to create new assignments for

Fire Inspector, at its discretion. Individuals in this assignment will receive a supplemental
2% payment over their regular hourly wage. They would work their regular shift, but they
54

would be tasked with doing inspections as assigned by the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal. It
is understood that emergency runs take priority over inspections. The Inspector
assignment would be for at least one year and potential candidates would need to be a
State Certified Fire Inspector.
(j.) The Township reserves the right to establish a Deputy Chief position.
In this event, the parties agree to negotiate wages.

ARTICLE XXXII - FOOD ALLOWANCE
All full-time firefighters on active duty (i.e., working twenty-four (24) hour shifts)
shall be entitled to a food allowance of one hundred and sixty-two and 50/100 to be paid
each quarter. No food allowance shall be paid to a full-time firefighter if on medical
leave and/or workmen’s compensation.
Effective upon ratification of the 2022-2025 contract, food allowance will be
increased to two hundred and twelve and 50/100 ($212.50) to be paid each quarter.

ARTICLE XXXIII - RATIFICATION
The Union acknowledges that the Employees of the bargaining unit upon the
recommendation made by the officers of the Union ratified this Agreement on
January 19, 2021.
55

ARTICLE XXXIV - SAVINGS CLAUSE
If any article or section of this Agreement or any appendix or supplements hereto
should be held invalid by operation of law or by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or
if compliance with or enforcement of any article or section should be restrained by such
tribunal, the remainder of this Agreement shall not be affected thereby, and the parties
shall enter into immediate collective bargaining negotiations for the purpose of arriving
at a mutually satisfactory replacement for such article or section.

ARTICLE XXXV - COMPLIANCE WITH THE LAW
It is agreed in the event there shall be enacted any applicable Federal or State
legislation or regulation by an administrative body now in existence or hereafter created
such legislation or regulation which is at variance with the terms of this Agreement, then
such legislation or regulation shall to that extent be deemed to modify the provisions of
this Agreement.

ARTICLE XXXVI - DURATION
1.

This Agreement shall remain in full force and effect from its ratification, to

midnight, December 31,2026. The Union shall submit a written request for contract
extension not less than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date. If the Township is so
notified, this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect and be effective during the
56

period of negotiations and until notice of termination of this Agreement is provided
to the other party, in the manner set forth in the following paragraph.
All Parties agree that negotiations on a new Collective Bargaining Agreement will
begin no later than July 1,2026.
2. In the event that either party desires to terminate this Agreement, written
notice must be given to the other party no less than ten (10) days prior to the desired
termination date which shall not be before the anniversary date set forth in the preceding
paragraph.

3. It is agreed and understood that the provisions contained herein shall remain
in full force and effect so long as they are not in violation of applicable statutes and
ordinances and remain within the jurisdiction of the Township.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this Agreement the day and
date first above written.

TM^

WITNES SED BY: /WHITE LAK^ TjDWSHI
Ofe^. M
^J^lejLc
s, M
^^^-C oAjL^.
CJ^JiA^.

By:

Catherine Derocher; HR IVtanager

John Holland; Fire Chief
International Association o^Firefighters,

Local 5295
By: ^-^
sojaiNfflifea^

y

yles Pfep
Andrew NIorelli
57

PROPOSED WAGES IAFF - T.A.
ENGINEER/SGT
PARAMEDIC

ENGINEER/SGT LIEUTENANT
EMT
PARAMEDIC

LIEUTENANT
EMT

* FIRE MARSHAL

CAPTAIN
PARAMEDIC

CAPTAIN
EMT

NEW WAGE SCALE -FF

PARAMEDIC WAGES (4%)

EMT WAGES (0%)

START
1 YR
2 YR
3 YR
4 YR
5 YR

START
1 YR
2 YR
3 YR
4 YR
5 YR

$
$
$
$
$
$

56,741
60,712
64,960
69,509
76,607
80,438

START
1 YR
2 YR
3 YR
4 YR
5 YR

$
$
$
$
$
$

54,559
58,377
62,462
66,836
73,661
77,344

$

86,068 $

82,758 $

92,093 $

88,551 $

98,540 $

98,540 $

94,750

2024 (3%)

START
1 YR
2 YR
3 YR
4 YR
5 YR

$
$
$
$
$
$

58,444
62,533
66,909
71,595
78,906
82,851

START
1 YR
2 YR
3 YR
4 YR
5 YR

$
$
$
$
$
$

56,196
60,128
64,336
68,841
75,871
79,664

$

88,650 $

85,241 $

94,856 $

91,208 $

101,496 $

101,496 $

97,592

2025 (2.5%)

START
1 YR
2 YR
3 YR
4 YR
5 YR

$
$
$
$
$
$

59,905
64,097
68,582
73,385
80,878
84,922

START
1 YR
2 YR
3 YR
4 YR
5 YR

$
$
$
$
$
$

57,601
61,632
65,944
70,562
77,768
81,656

$

90,867 $

87,372 $

97,227 $

93,488 $

104,033 $

104,033 $

100,032

2026 (3%)

START
1 YR
2 YR
3 YR
4 YR
5 YR

$
$
$
$
$
$

62,900
67,302
72,011
77,054
84,922
89,168

START
1 YR
2 YR
3 YR
4 YR
5 YR

$
$
$
$
$
$

59,329
63,480
67,923
72,679
80,101
84,106

$

95,410 $

89,993 $

102,089 $

96,293 $

109,235 $

109,235 $

103,033

$
$
$
$
$
$

54,559
58,377
62,462
66,836
73,661
77,344

1/1/2026 Additional 2% included for Paramedics.

IAFF Wages 2023-2026 TA 9 27 23 FINAL.xlsx

LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
WHEREAS, White Lake Township (hereinafter, "Township") and the International Association of Fire
Fighters, Local 5295 (hereinafter, "Union"), are Parties to a Collective Bargaining Agreement; and;
WHEREAS, the Township and the Union have discussed the possibility of implementing an Advanced

Life Support ("ALS") Program; and,
WHEREAS, the Parties have discussed a proposal to implement a temporary system ofALS Support for
a two (2) year period as provided by the "Bennet Bill" and,
WHEREAS, the Township and the Union have met to discuss the implementation of the ALS Program
and wish to memorialize the terms of this Agreement as set forth herein.
NOW THEREFORE in consideration of the mutual covenants contained in this Agreement; the Township and
the Union agree as follows:
1. The White Lake Township and fhe Fire Fighters Association agree to comply with the terms and conditions
ofMCLA 333.1101 kaown as the "Public Health Code", as amended, and the requirements of the Oakland
County Emergency Medical Services Medical Control Board as to qualifications, which are hereby
incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herem.
The Township and the Union agree fhat the initial duration of the ALS Program shall be for a period of two
(2) years. During which time the Township shall be able to manage its response deployment. The two (2)
year duration period shall commence on
2. All members presently licensed as a Paramedic will be required to maintain their State of Michigan
Paramedic license.

3. All members assigned to the ALS certified program, regardless of rank, shall receive premium pay equal
to:
1. Paramedic: 4% of wage
The parties agree that in the event fhe Township extends this program beyond the tsvo (2) year initial period,
as provided herein a 2% increase on the paramedic premium pay shall occur.
4. The Township shall pay the cost of tuition, books, and supplies necessary to maintain State of Michigan
Paramedic licensure/cerdfication

5. The parties agree that one member shall assume the role of EMS Instructor Coordinator (1C). This
"assignment" will be considered an added duty and shall be compensated with an additional 2%. This position
shall be for the duration of the ALS Program.

6. The parties agree that. aU new hires after 7/1/2023 shall be ALS paramedic certified at fhe time of hire.
However, the Township shall have the right to hire ALS: paramedics certified withm two years of the date of
hire. This may be extended beyond two years at the discretion of the Fire Chief,
7. Inflie event a member receives payment fcwards their certification, and they leave fhe department in less flian
two years the meinbeir shall be required to pay the Townsbip the value of the course.

8. The Township shall have the right to extend this program beyond the mitial two (2) year term at its discretion.

WHITE LAKE TOWNSHIP

By

'Q/^y

Date:

^

IAEF LOCAL 5295

By:.

•z^-^

By: ft?fcc^Lc^tOf A_x? oAj^c—^

Date: Qlz^t'Zs-vz^

By: ^^^

Date: 3 \^

ate: -"^-/^^^S
77T7~

By;

^te: ^B/J^//^

Date:
