REGULAR TOWNSHIP MEETING
MUNICIPAL BUILDING

March 4, 2014
DELRAN, NJ

CALL TO ORDER

SALUTE TO THE FLAG

Sunshine Statement: Be advised that proper notice has been given by the
Township Council in accordance with the sunshine law in the following manner.
Notice advertised in the Burlington County Times and Camden Courier Post on
December 26, 2013 and posted on the bulletin board on the same date.
ROLL CALL: Ms. Pangia, Mrs. Kolodi, Mr. Morrow and Mr. Catrambone were present.
Mr. Schwartz was absent.
ALSO, PRESENT: Mr. Long, Solicitor, Mr. Hatcher, Administrator and Ms. Eggers, Municipal
Clerk.
PRESENTATION OF CITIZEN OF THE YEAR
The Delran Business Association announced the Citizen of the Year award as James
Bauer.
APPROVAL OF MINUTES
Mr. Morrow made a motion seconded by Mrs. Kolodi to approve the minutes of January
28, 2014 and February 4, 2014.
There being no questions, the roll was called.
Ms. Pangia, Mrs. Kolodi, Mr. Morrow and Mr. Catrambone and voted aye.
Ayes: 4
Nays: None
Motion Approved
ORDINANCES ON SECOND READING
TOWNSHIP OF DELRAN
ORDINANCE 2014-1

AN ORDINANCE TO EXCEED THE MUNICIPAL BUDGET APPROPRIATION LIMITS
AND TO ESTABLISH A CAP BANK (N.J.S.A. 4OA: 4-45.14)
WHEREAS, the Local Government Cap Law, N.J.S. 40A: 4-45.1 et seq.,
provides that in the preparation of its annual budget, a municipality shall limit any

increase in said budget up to .5% unless authorized by ordinance to increase it to 3.5%
over the previous year’s final appropriations, subject to certain exceptions; and,
WHEREAS, N.J.S.A. 40A: 4-45.15a provides that a municipality may, when
authorized by ordinance, appropriate the difference between the amount of its actual
final appropriation and the 3.5% percentage rate as an exception to its final
appropriations in either of the next two succeeding years; and,
WHEREAS, the Township Council of the Township of Delran in the County of
Burlington finds it advisable and necessary to increase its CY 2014 budget by up to
3.5% over the previous year’s final appropriations, in the interest of promoting the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens; and,
WHEREAS, the Township Council hereby determines that a 3% increase in the
budget for said year, amounting to $348,947.67 in excess of the increase in final
appropriations otherwise permitted by the Local Government Cap Law, is advisable and
necessary; and,
WHEREAS, the Township Council hereby determines, that any amount
authorized hereinabove that is not appropriated as part of the final budget shall be
retained as an exception to final appropriation in either of the next two succeeding
years.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED, by the Township Council of the
Township of Delran, in the County of Burlington, a majority of the full authorized
membership of this governing body affirmatively concurring, that, in the CY 2014 budget
year, the final appropriations of Township of Delran shall, in accordance with this
ordinance and N.J.S.A. 40A: 4-45.14, be increased by 3%, amounting to $348,947.67,
and that the CY 2014 municipal budget for the Township of Delran be approved and
adopted in accordance with this ordinance; and,
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, that any that any amount authorized hereinabove
that is not appropriated as part of the final budget shall be retained as an exception to
final appropriation in either of the next two succeeding years; and,
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, that a certified copy of this ordinance as
introduced be filed with the Director of the Division of Local Government Services within
5 days of introduction; and,
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, that a certified copy of this ordinance upon
adoption, with the recorded vote included thereon, be filed with said Director within 5
days after such adoption.
Mr. Morrow made a motion to open the meeting to the public, seconded by Ms. Pangia.
All were in favor, motion approved.

There were no comments.
Mrs. Kolodi made a motion to close the public portion, seconded by Mr. Morrow. All
were in favor, motion approved.
Mrs. Kolodi made a motion, seconded by Ms. Pangia to adopt the ordinance on second
reading.
There being no questions, the roll was called.
Ms. Pangia, Mrs. Kolodi, Mr. Morrow and Mr. Catrambone voted aye.
Ayes: 4
Nays: None
Motion Approved
TOWNSHIP OF DELRAN, NEW JERSEY
ORDINANCE NO. 2014-2
ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF DELRAN, COUNTY
OF BURLINGTON, NEW JERSEY, CANCELLING CERTAIN
FUNDED APPROPRIATION BALANCES HERETOFORE
PROVIDED
FOR
CAPITAL
PROJECTS
AND
REAPPROPRIATING SUCH FUNDED APPROPRIATION
BALANCES FOR OTHER CAPITAL PROJECTS
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Council of the Township of Delran, County of
Burlington, New Jersey ("Township") (not less than two-thirds of all the members thereof
affirmatively concurring), pursuant to the provisions of the Local Bond Law, Chapter 169 of
the Laws of 1960 of the State of New Jersey, as amended and supplemented ("Local
Bond Law"), as follows:
Section 1. The following appropriation remaining as a funded balance in Bond
Ordinance 2012-4, duly adopted by the Township Council on June 26, 2012, is hereby
cancelled:
Bond
Ordinance Section
7(C)

Amount of Funded
Appropriation to be Cancelled

Original Improvement

$50,000

Reconstruction of Roads

Section 2. The sum of $50,000, which represents the funded appropriation
cancelled in Section 1 hereof, is hereby reappropriated from Bond Ordinance 2012-4 for the

purpose of completion of sidewalk construction and installation on Fairview Street from U.S.
Route 130 to the Township of Riverside border, together with the acquisition of all materials
and equipment and completion of all work necessary therefor or related thereto, and as
more particularly described in the plans on file with the Township Administrator.
Section 3. The remaining funded and unfunded appropriation balances as
authorized by Bond Ordinance 2012-4, if any, shall be unaffected by this ordinance and shall
remain available for the uses set forth therein.
Section 4. The average period of usefulness of the purpose referred to in Section
2 hereof, is within the limitations of the Local Bond Law and, according to the reasonable
life thereof, is not less than 10 years.

Section 5. The Capital Budget is hereby amended to conform with the provisions
of this ordinance to the extent of any inconsistency therewith, and the resolution
promulgated by the Local Finance Board showing full detail of the amended Capital Budget
and Capital Program as approved by the Director of the Division of Local Government
Services, is on file with the City Clerk and available for inspection.
Section 6. The improvements authorized hereby are not current expenses and
are general improvements that the Township may lawfully make. No part of the cost of the
improvements authorized hereby has been or shall be specially assessed on any property
specially benefited thereby.
Section 7. All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
Section 8. This ordinance shall take effect twenty (20) days after the first
publication thereof after final passage.
Mr. Morrow made a motion to open the meeting to the public, seconded by Ms. Pangia.
All were in favor, motion approved.
There were no comments.
Mrs. Kolodi made a motion to close the public portion, seconded by Mr. Morrow. All
were in favor, motion approved.
Mr. Morrow made a motion, seconded by Ms. Pangia to adopt the ordinance on second
reading.
There being no questions, the roll was called.
Ms. Pangia, Mrs. Kolodi, Mr. Morrow and Mr. Catrambone voted aye.
Ayes: 4

Nays: None
Motion Approved
TOWNSHIP OF DELRAN
ORDINANCE 2014-3
ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF DELRAN AMENDING CHAPTER 150 OF THE
TOWNSHIP CODE TO ADD A SEASONAL FEE FOR FARMERS MARKET
VENDORS

WHEREAS, the Mayor and Township Council of Delran Township (the
“Township”) recognize the potential benefits to residents of the Township that a
seasonal farmers market can bring and desire to continue this event in 2014; and
WHEREAS, in order to revise the fees collected from farmers market vendors,
the mayor and Township Council recognize the need to amend the Township’s Fee
Ordinance
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, by the Mayor and Township Council of
Delran Township as follows:
SECTION 1: §150-3 entitled “Township Clerk” shall be amended to revise the
Farmers Market fee to now read as follows:
Type of Service, License, or Permit

Fee

Farmers Market vendor fee, Full Season (11 weeks)

$150.00

Farmers Market vendor fee, Half Season (6 weeks)

$90.00

Farmers Market vendor fee, One-Week only

$20.00

Fee for Electricity, Full Season (11 weeks)

$55.00

Fee for Electricity, Half Season (6 weeks)

$30.00

Fee for Electricity, One-Week only

$5.00

SECTION 2. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent or in
conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed as to said inconsistencies and conflict.
SECTION 3. Severability. If any section, part of any section, or clause or
phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
decision shall not effect the remaining provisions of this ordinance. The governing body
of the Township of Delran declares that it would have passed the ordinance and each
section and subsection thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the
subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared unconstitutional or invalid.
SECTION 4. Effective Date. The ordinance shall take effect immediately upon
passage and publication according to law.
Mrs. Kolodi made a motion to open the meeting to the public, seconded by Mr. Morrow.
All were in favor, motion approved.
Dolores Cannone, 910 Hubbs Street, asked if the Township is concerned that placing a
fee on the vendors that they may not attend.
Ms. Pangia reported that last year we charged $100.00, which was under the going rate
for markets in the area. This makes the fee comparable to the others and also adds a
fee for the use of the generator.
Mr. Morrow made a motion to close the public portion, seconded by Mrs. Kolodi. All
were in favor, motion approved.
Mr. Morrow made a motion, seconded by Mrs. Kolodi to adopt the ordinance on second
reading.
There being no questions, the roll was called.
Ms. Pangia, Mrs. Kolodi, Mr. Morrow and Mr. Catrambone voted aye.
Ayes: 4
Nays: None
Motion Approved
TOWNSHIP OF DELRAN
ORDINANCE 2014-4
AN ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH SALARIES FOR VARIOUS EMPLOYEES OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF DELRAN, COUNTY OF BURLINGTON, STATE OF NEW JERSEY AND
REGULATING THE MANNER OF PAYMENT OF SAME.
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Council of the Township of Delran in the
County of Burlington and State of New Jersey that:

SECTION I. ANNUAL SALARIES
A. The following designated Township Employees shall receive annual salaries
set herein for each position as determined by the Mayor of the Township of Delran.
These annual salaries are paid on a biweekly basis.
POLICE OFFICERS/DETECTIVES
Year

Academy

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Step 6

Step 7

Recruit
2012

$32,269

$40,735

$49,201

$57,667

$66,133

$74,599

$79,890

$85,064

2013

$32,914

$41,550

$50,185

$58,820

$67,456

$76,091

$81,488

$86,765

2014

$33,572

$42,381

$47,505

$52,629

$57,758

$62,877

$68,001

$73,125

2015

$34,243

$43,229

$48,455

$53,682

$58,908

$64,135

$69,361

$74,588

Year
2014
2015

Step 8
$78,249
$79,814

Step 9
$83,373
$85,040

Step 10
$88,500
$90,270

SERGEANTS

STEP 1

STEP 2

Beginning January 1, 2012

$90,441

$93,615

Beginning January 1, 2013

$92,250

$95,487

Beginning January 1, 2014

$94,095

$97,397

Beginning January 1, 2015

$95,977

$99,345

Section II Repeal - All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances inconsistent with the
terms of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of their inconsistency.
Section III Adoption - This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its final
adoption and publication according to law. This Ordinance is retroactive to January 1,
2012 for those employees currently employed at the time of the adoption of this ordinance.
Mr. Morrow made a motion to open the meeting to the public, seconded by Ms. Pangia.
All were in favor, motion approved.

Bill Pfeffer, 43 Chester Avenue, asked if this police contract is completed.
Mr. Hatcher stated that we have an agreement but we are working on some language
changes.
Mr. Pfeffer asked if there was an increase negotiated in the contract for employees to
contribute towards their health benefits.
Mr. Hatcher stated that the increase is covered by state regulations.
Mr. Pfeffer stated that he understands that but the Township also has the ability to
negotiate a contribution which would help save the taxpayers a tremendous amount of
money. The employees in Delran are only paying a contribution of 1.5%.
Mr. Hatcher stated that it is based on a formula but most employees are paying
approximately 25% of the total cost of their health insurance. It is all based on the
employee’s salary and type of health insurance.
There were no other questions or comments.
Mr. Morrow made a motion to close the public portion, seconded by Mrs. Kolodi. All
were in favor, motion approved.
Mrs. Kolodi made a motion, seconded by Ms. Pangia to adopt the ordinance on second
reading.
There being no questions, the roll was called.
Ms. Pangia, Mrs. Kolodi, Mr. Morrow and Mr. Catrambone voted aye.
Ayes: 4
Nays: None
Motion Approved
TOWNSHIP OF DELRAN
ORDINANCE 2014-5
ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF DELRAN AMENDING THE SEWERAGE
RULES AND REGULATIONS TO ADJUST THE SEWER CONNECTION FEES
WHEREAS, Delran Township (the “Township”) is publishing Notice of proposed
adjustments to its Connection Fee Rate Schedule and of the time and place of the public
hearing thereon in two newspapers of general circulation in the area serviced by the
Township and has mailed said Notice to the clerk of each municipality serviced by the
Township in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:14B-23; and

WHEREAS, the Township is conducting a public hearing on the proposed
adjustments on March 4, 2014, at 7:00 p.m., at the Municipal Building, 900 Chester
Avenue, Delran, New Jersey 08075 as indicated in the publication of Notice; and
WHEREAS, the Township is providing evidence at the hearing to show that the
proposed adjustments are necessary and reasonable; and
WHEREAS, the Township is providing the opportunity for cross-examination of
persons offering such evidence at the public hearing; and
WHEREAS, the Township ordered that a transcript of the hearing be made and a
copy thereof be available upon request to any interested party at a reasonable fee; and
WHEREAS, the Township is considering the proposed adjustments, as well as all
evidence presented through direct and cross-examination, as well as all comments made
by those members of the public in attendance at the aforesaid public hearing, as well as
any written comments that may have been received; and
WHEREAS, the Township, once satisfied from all of the evidence and comments
presented that the proposed adjustments are in accordance with law and are reasonable
and necessary, plans to adopt the proposed adjustments.
Section 1.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, this 4th day of March, 2014, that the
proposed adjustments to the Connection Fee Rate Schedule, as attached to this
Ordinance, be and the same are hereby approved and adopted by the Township.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the revised Connection Fee Rate Schedule
shall become effective immediately.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the provisions of the Sewerage Rules and
Regulations pertaining to the time or times when and the place or places where such
charges shall be due and payable be and the same are hereby incorporated herein by
reference and remain unchanged by this Ordinance.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that all other provisions of the Sewerage Rules
and Regulations, except where modified by this Ordinance, remain in full force and
effect.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that a copy of the Connection Fee Rate Schedule
in effect shall at all times be kept on file at the office of the Township and shall at all
reasonable times be open to public inspection.
SECTION 2. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent or in
conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed as to said inconsistencies and conflict.
SECTION 3. Severability. If any section, part of any section, or clause or
phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
decision shall not effect the remaining provisions of this ordinance. The governing body
of the Township of Delran declares that it would have passed the ordinance and each

section and subsection thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the
subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared unconstitutional or invalid.
SECTION 4. Effective Date. The ordinance shall take effect immediately upon
passage and publication according to law.
CONNECTION FEE RATE SCHEDULE
CATEGORY ONE – LOCAL RESIDENTIAL CONNECTIONS
- Single Family Detached Dwelling Units
- Three Bedroom Attached Dwelling Units
- Two Bedroom Attached Dwelling Units
- Zero and One Bedroom Attached Dwelling Units

$6,095.20
$6,095.20
$4,571.40
$3,352.36

CATEGORY TWO – RESIDENTIAL CONNECTIONS FOR PUBLIC HOUSING
AUTHORITIES AND NON-PROFIT AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECTS PURSUANT
TO N.J.S.A. 40:14A-8.3
Connection fees to public housing authorities and non-profit organizations building
affordable housing projects that consist of new connections to the system are to be
computed by providing a 50% reduction in the connection fee established in this Rate
Schedule.
Connection fees to public housing authorities and non-profit organizations building
affordable housing projects that consist of replacement units for demolished or
refurbished units, and for which a connection fee was previously paid, are to be computed
by charging the lesser of a.) the reduced rate of 50% of the connection fee established in
this Rate Schedule, or b.) the connection fee established in this Rate Schedule, minus a
credit in the amount of a connection fee previously paid for the housing units being
replaced, provided the public housing authority and non-profit organization can establish
the connection fee previously paid. If the amount of the previous connection fee cannot
be established, the reduced rate of 50% of the connection fee established in this Rate
Schedule shall apply.
CATEGORY THREE– RESIDENTIAL CONNECTIONS IN OTHER MUNICIPALITIES
- Single Family Detached Dwelling Units
$12,190.41
- Three Bedroom Attached Dwelling Units
$12,190.41
- Two Bedroom Attached Dwelling Units
$ 9,142.80
- Zero and One Bedroom Attached Dwelling Units
$ 6,704.72
CATEGORY FOUR – CONNECTIONS OTHER THAN RESIDENTIAL
All classes of users other than Residential shall pay a connection fee based upon
their estimated average daily sewage flow as estimated by the Township Engineer. The
charge per gallon per day of flow will be $20.32. In no case shall the connection fee be
less than the fee for a Single-Family Residential Unit. An additional connection fee can
be assessed upon any expansion by a user who has previously paid an initial
connection fee. Said fee will be calculated as set forth above.

CATEGORY FIVE – CONNECTIONS OTHER THAN RESIDENTIAL IN OTHER
MUNICIPALITIES
All classes of users other than Residential, which are not located in the
Township, shall pay a connection fee based upon their estimated average daily sewage
flow as estimated by the Township Engineer. The charge per gallon per day of flow will
be $40.64. In no case shall the connection fee be less than the fee for a Single-Family
Residential Unit. An additional connection fee can be assessed upon any expansion by
a user who has previously paid an initial connection fee. Said fee will be calculated as
set forth above.
Mr. Morrow made a motion to open the meeting to the public, seconded by Mrs. Kolodi.
All were in favor, motion approved.
Mr. Long stated that after the witness is finished giving his testimony the public will have
an opportunity to ask questions of the witness or of Council. After that Council will close
the public portion and act on the ordinance.
Mr. Long asked Ms. Eggers if prior to establishing the reasonableness of the fees, did
the Department publish a notice of this public hearing, including the proposed rate
adjustments, at least twenty days prior to tonight’s meeting in two newspapers?
Ms. Eggers stated yes.
Mr. Long asked in which newspapers?
Ms. Eggers stated that the notice was published in both the Courier Post and Burlington
County Times on February 11, 2014.
Mr. Long asked that in addition to the notices published in the paper, did we serve
notice to the adjoining municipalities.
Ms. Eggers stated yes, we sent notice to the Townships of Moorestown, Riverside and
Cinnaminson on February 6, 2014.
Mr. Long called on Mr. Kiel for the following testimony.
Q. For the record, please state your name and who you work for?
A. Timothy Kiel, I work Bowman & Company. I am the auditor for the Township. I am a
CPA and an RMA.
Q. Mr. Long asked if that includes the Sewer Department?
A. Mr. Kiel stated yes, he is also the Auditor for the Sewer Department.
Q. Mr. Long asked if he is familiar with the operations of the Sewer Department?

A. Mr. Kiel stated yes, he has conducted the audit for several years at the Township.
Q. Mr. Long asked if he is familiar with the proposed changes ti the Connection Fee
Rate Schedule?
A. Mr. Kiel stated yes.
Q. Mr. Long asked if he examined them in accordance with N.J.A.C. 40:14B-22?
A. Mr. Kiel stated yes he did examine them in accordance with N.J.A.C. 40:14B-22.
The connection fee was last examined in 2010 when it was still under the Delran
Sewerage Authority. The connection fee requires the utility to calculate a total book
value of the utility including building and infrastructure. You then take that value and
divide it by the average water usage of each user.
Q. Mr. Long asked if he prepared something called the “Connection Fee Rate
Schedule”?
A. Mr. Kiel stated that yes they did.
Q. Mr. Long asked if he reviewed that document?
A. Mr. Kiel stated yes he did.
Q. Mr. Long asked if he finds the document to be accurate?
A. Mr. Kiel stated yes he does.
Q. Mr. Long asked if Mr. Kiel is familiar with the annual budget of Delran Township?
A. Mr. Kiel stated yes.
Q. Mr. Long asked if he is familiar with the Sewer Utility portion with the budget?
A. Mr. Kiel stated yes. The budget includes estimated revenues and expense for the
utility. The expenses are based off on expertise of the administration based off of prior
years. The revenues are based off of the users, times the rates and the connection
fees.
Q. Mr. Long asked if the Township’s budget, which includes the Sewer Department, was
submitted?
A. Mr. Kiel stated yes.
Q. Mr. Long asked where is was submitted?

A. Mr. Kiel stated that it was submitted to the State of New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs.
Q. Mr. Long asked if he understands that the proposed changes are a decrease in the
connection rates?
A. Mr. Kiel stated yes.
Q. Mr. Long asked him to explain why there would be a decrease?
A. Mr. Kiel stated that as he explained the connection fees are based on a state
mandated formula. You take the total book value of the utility and divide it by the
average water usage for the average home. Every year that changes, residents are
using less water than they did the last time the connection fee was calculated. It could
also increase the next time they are reviewed.
Q. Mr. Long asked that based on his professional experience and based on his
calculations, are the decrease warranted.
A. Mr. Kiel stated yes they are.
Mr. Long stated that he has no further questions for Mr. Kiel.
Mr. Catrambone asked if anyone from the public has any questions or statements
regarding this ordinance.
There were no public comments.
Mr. Morrow made a motion to close the public portion, seconded by Ms. Pangia. All
were in favor, motion approved.
Mr. Morrow made a motion, seconded by Mrs. Kolodi to adopt the ordinance on second
reading.
There being no questions, the roll was called.
Ms. Pangia, Mrs. Kolodi, Mr. Morrow and Mr. Catrambone voted aye.
Ayes: 4
Nays: None
Motion Approved

RESOLUTIONS
TOWNSHIP OF DELRAN
RESOLUTION 2014-32
RESOLUTION TO INTRODUCE THE CY 2014 MUNICIPAL BUDGET
WHEREAS, the following statements of revenues and appropriations shall constitute
the Municipal Budget for the year 2014; and
WHEREAS, said budget be published in the Burlington County Times in the issue of
March 18, 2014; and
WHEREAS, a public hearing on the budget and tax resolution will be held at the
Municipal Building on April 1, 2014 at 7:00 P.M., at which time and place objections to
said budget and tax resolution for the CY 2014 Municipal Budget may be presented.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, that the Governing Body of the Township of
Delran does here by approve the introduction of the 2014 Municipal Budget.
Mr. Morrow made a motion, seconded by Ms. Pangia to adopt the Resolution 2014-32.
There being no questions, the roll was called.
Ms. Pangia, Mrs. Kolodi, Mr. Morrow and Mr. Catrambone and voted aye.
Ayes: 4
Nays: None
Motion Approved
Mr. Hatcher reported that we will have a public hearing on the budget on April 1,
2014 but for everyone in attendance tonight the proposed budget calls for no tax
increase. The tax rate will remain the same as last year. We are utilizing the same
amount of surplus as last year. The total budget is $15,735,453, which is a reduction of
$153,475 over last year’s budget. The Sewer Utility budget also calls for no rate
increase. The total budget is $3,030,000, which is a reduction $326,000 over last year.
We will provide additional information on the township website leading up to the public
hearing.

TOWNSHIP OF DELRAN
RESOLUTION 2014-33

BE IT RESOLVED by the Township Council of the Township of Delran, that
Jeffrey S. Hatcher is hereby authorized and directed to sign Authorization for Aerial
Mosquito Control for the Burlington Health Department- Division of Mosquito Control.
Mr. Morrow made a motion, seconded by Ms. Pangia to adopt the Resolution 2014-33.
There being no questions, the roll was called.
Ms. Pangia, Mrs. Kolodi, Mr. Morrow and Mr. Catrambone and voted aye.
Ayes: 4
Nays: None
Motion Approved
MOTIONS
Mr. Kolodi made a motion authorizing the payment of bills including all purchases made under the
Cooperative Purchasing Agreement. The motion was seconded by Mr. Morrow.
There being no questions, the roll was called.
Ms. Pangia, Mrs. Kolodi, Mr. Morrow and Mr. Catrambone voted aye.
Ayes: 4
Nays: None
Motion Approved
Mr. Morrow made a motion, seconded by Mrs. Kolodi to accept the report of the Tax Collector,
CFO and the Township Clerk.
There being no questions, the roll was called.
Ms. Pangia, Mrs. Kolodi, Mr. Morrow and Mr. Catrambone voted aye.
Ayes: 4
Nays: None
Motion Approved
Mr. Morrow made a motion granting the mercantile licenses listed below. The motion was
seconded by Ms. Pangia.
1. B&J Pets & Aquariums, 2702 Cindel Drive, Unit 6
2. North Atlantic Alliance, 209 A-2 Carriage Lane

3. Open Rd Motors, 207 A-1 Carriage Lane
4. Sanchez Motors, 150 A Carriage Lane
There being no questions, the roll was called.
Ms. Pangia, Mrs. Kolodi, Mr. Morrow and Mr. Catrambone voted aye.
Ayes: 4
Nays: None
Motion Approved
REPORTS
Ms. Eggers – No report.
Mr. Hatcher – Mr. Hatcher reported that on February 6th, we attended the Burlington
County JIF safety kick-off, which is an annual banquet. We were awarded with a $1,900
safety incentive grant. We were one of five towns recognized for having an accredited
police department, which saves us money on our insurance premium. The Burlington
County JIF ranked second in the state for loss time injuries, there are fourteen JIF’s in the
state.
Mr. Long – No report.
Mr. Bauer – Mr. Bauer, Fire Commissioner, thanked everyone for the Citizen of the Year
award and he accepts the award on behalf of all the first responders.
Mr. Bauer thanked the residents for coming out and supporting the Fire District Election.
The voter count was 528. Of the 528, only 72 residents voted no for the fire truck. The
budget was also approved. Mr. Bauer thanked Public Works for keeping up with the
parking lot and walkways on Election Day due to the weather.
There have been no major incidences in Delran within the last month. Willingboro’s ladder
truck did go out of service, so for the next two weeks the ladder truck out of the Bridgeboro
Station will be responding on structure calls. The rescue truck and the foam unit out of
the Chester Avenue Station did respond to the PSE&G building fire in Burlington City.
Homeland Security showed up on site which made it an interesting event because they
were in charge.
Ms. Pangia – Ms. Pangia reported that due to the snow we had to postpone the
Mammogram Van but they will be back on April 22nd and May 22nd.
The Red Cross Blood Drive will be held on May 9th.
The Farmers’ Market is on target to open on June 17th and will run through the end of
August.

Ms. Pangia thanked the Public Works and Sewer Departments for plowing. So many
residents have reached out and expressed how pleased they are. Compared to the other
towns we really stand out.
Ms. Pangia congratulated Mr. Bauer for being named Citizen of the Year and on his reelection.
Mrs. Kolodi – Ms. Kolodi stated that Public Works continues to impress her. Most of the
calls she has received are from residents praising the department.
Mrs. Kolodi reported that she received a call from the High School and the Community
Service Program is looking to work with the town. They have a lot of students that may
be willing to shovel snow and she is hoping we can work out a program for next year.
Mrs. Kolodi congratulated Mr. Bauer on being named Citizen of the Year. We could not
be more proud of the choice. We will also be honoring Mr. Bauer at Delran Day.
Mr. Morrow – Mr. Morrow stated that some residents might have noticed that the
Seabra’s supermarket on Fairview Street has closed. The shopping center is now under
new ownership. The new owner will be doing some reconstruction and he will keep on
top of the improvements to the center.
Mr. Morrow stated that he is happy we were able to get the money re-appropriated for the
Fairview Street sidewalk project. If all goes well, we should be able to begin the project
sometime in the summer.
Finally, he would like to thank the Police Department and the Detectives for their work on
the recent bank robberies and armed robberies along Route 130. They do a tremendous
job for the community.
Mr. Catrambone – Mr. Catrambone congratulated Mr. Bauer on being named Delran’s
first Citizen of the Year. He thanked Mrs. Kolodi, who came up with the idea, and the
Delran Business Association for taking over the project and bringing it to fruition.
Mr. Catrambone thanked Public Works and the individuals from the Sewer Department
that pitched in to help with the plowing during the snow storms. He continues to hear
positive things from the residents.
Finally, the new addition of the Delran Digest will be mailed with the sewer bills. He
thanked Ms. Pangia for spearheading the project.
Mr. Paris – Mr. Paris congratulated Mr. Bauer on his re-election and the being named
Citizen of the Year. He stated that Mr. Bauer does a fantastic job and is truly appreciated.
Mr. Paris stated that Public Works has been working very hard during the recent storms.
Today, we heard on the news that most schools were on a two hour delay because of

road conditions and Delran was able to open on time. The Public Works does a fantastic
job making sure that the roads are safe for the residents.
Mr. Paris stated that the police have been very active. Many towns have been faced with
recent robberies. The Police Department is doing a fantastic job.
Mr. Paris reported that this is the seventh year that he has participated in the budget in
Delran. We work very hard keeping the taxes stable in town. This year there is no
increase, which is fantastic. We are looking at increasing the road program up to
$1,000,000 to try and stay on top of the road conditions. We also increase the line item
for pothole repairs. We had to step back on the Community Park this year, but we
allocated $150,000 on top of the $95,000 grant we received from the County. The
department heads continue to do a fantastic job. We will continue to look at shared
services with surrounding communities to help keep taxes down.
PUBLIC PORTION
Mrs. Kolodi made a motion, seconded by Ms. Pangia to open the meeting to the public
for any questions. All were in favor, the motion was approved.
Harry Etsell, 8 River Drive, stated that he has been watching for the improvements to start
at the Stewart Avenue outfall and nothing has happened. He asked Council where we
are at with the project.
Mr. Hatcher stated that we are waiting for the weather break and the materials to be
delivered. Once that happens, we expect the project to take place quickly.
Mr. Catrambone stated that the deadline for completion is April 14th.
Mr. Etsell reported that the water level is beginning to rise again and there is a lot of debris
in the creek.
Mr. Morrow stated that trees are falling in from the banks.
Bill Pfeffer, 43 Chester Avenue, stated that he would like to address the bond for the
improvements to the Sewer Plant. He believes that there were three projects that were
to be completed. The bond is for $2,479,000 and he believes the accounting, engineering
and legal fees are $495,000. He asked if Eagle Construction was awarded the contract.
Mr. Catrambone stated yes they were awarded the contract.
Mr. Pfeffer asked if the contract was awarded for $1,555,000.
Mr. Catrambone stated that he does not have the number in front of him but believes that
is the amount.

Mr. Pfeffer stated that we have $924,000 left over in the bond and he asked where that
money is going.
Mr. Hatcher stated that we will not borrow the money.
authorized.

The money has only been

Mr. Catrambone stated that once we receive the bid we know what money is needed and
then we would borrow the funds.
Mr. Pfeffer stated that we had an engineering study done and the engineer gave you a cost
estimate on the project. Then we approved a bond for $2,479,000 based on that estimate.
We received a bid for $1,555,000 which was pretty good. He does not understand why
Council would not receive the bids before we authorize the bond.
Mr. Hatcher stated that legally we have to have a bond in place before we authorize the
bid. We have to have the funding authorization in place.
Mr. Pfeffer stated that he does not understand why the Engineer’s estimate was so far off.
Mr. Pfeffer asked where we are with the bond for the improvement to the berm at river front.
Mr. Catrambone stated that the first step is the Stewart Avenue outfall.
Mr. Morrow stated that we are waiting on the Shore Line Protection grant which would help
us address some of the issues. As far as the berm, we have not got into the details of the
size, how high or what materials would be used to construct the berm.
Mr. Pfeffer asked what we are waiting for.
Mr. Morrow stated that we cannot just do whatever we want along the berm. We are waiting
for the grants to come through to help with the funding.
Mr. Pfeffer asked if we have contacted to DEP to see if we could raise the berm.
Mr. Morrow stated that we cannot do the project until the grant money comes through.
Mr. Pfeffer asked why the Township cannot fund the project.
Mr. Morrow stated that we do not have the money to finance a project that size.
Mr. Pfeffer stated that we had money for the Fairview Street sidewalks.
Mr. Morrow stated that we received a state grant for $200,000 for that project. Mr. Morrow
stated that thirteen meetings have gone by since Mr. Pfeffer has attended. The residents
in that area have been attending and each meeting and are here tonight. They have been
on top of the time frame and they know what is going on. No one knows the details of what

it would take to improve the berm. In some areas the river bank is gone, so before we start
placing blame, why don’t we look at the positive things we are doing in the area.
Mr. Pfeffer stated that the Township has not done a study on constructing a berm.
Residents are pumping out day and night.
Mr. Catrambone stated that we are approaching this project one step at a time. We
addressed what we felt was the most important first step and that was the outfall at Stewart
Avenue. We will see how that affects the remainder of the project and then take the next
step.
Mr. Pfeffer stated that the water is going to come up over the berm and the flood out the
properties and you have done nothing to help the residents.
Mr. Pfeffer stated that he understands we had a problem with the Swedes Lake outfall. The
flapper valve could not be installed because the pipe was rotted out.
Mr. Morrow stated that he valve was installed.
Mr. Pfeffer stated that a proper study was not completed to see that the pipe was rotted
and the Township is now appropriating another $115,000 to get the project completed.
Mr. Catrambone stated that we did replace the flapper valve and once we got into the
project is when we were able to inspect the pipe. The contractor and the Engineer realized
it was going to take more of an effort than we had originally hoped. For right now, the
flapper valve has been replaced but there are other issues that need to be addressed.
Mr. Pfeffer stated that the valve was installed over a rusted out old pipe.
Mr. Pfeffer addressed the storm drain at Alden Avenue and Lake Street. The Engineer
reported at a meeting that the drain is connected to the storm sewer that drains to the
river and that the Township could remove it from the grant application. Mr. Pfeffer stated
that the storm drain at Alden Avenue and Lake Street goes absolutely nowhere. A
contractor was hired to bust up the concrete at the bottom and dig it out and back fill it
with dirt. He stated that there are two drain on the other side of the street that empty into
that storm drain. He feels that the storm drain should be connected. All that contaminated
water is going into the ground.
Mr. Catrambone stated that storm water is not contaminated water.
Mr. Hatcher stated that the water previously drained to a private property owner’s lake
and years ago they asked the Township to remove the connection so basically there was
a dead end. The Engineer recommended that we break up the bottom of the drain to
allow additional water into the ground. He believes that Engineer came back and
indicated that the drain is connected to the river because we were looking at getting a
cost estimate for that connection. He can have this reconfirmed by the Engineer.

Mr. Pfeffer stated that the water in the drain will continue to find underground streams
and make new streams and that is why residents in Riverside Park now have water
coming up through their basements, himself included.
Mr. Catrambone stated that we will pass this information onto the Engineer to see if the
leaking storm drains are affecting the water table in the area.
Mr. Pfeffer asked when the last time the Public Works Department inspected the storm
drain system in Riverside Park by a camera or any other means.
Mr. Hatcher stated that we performed some inspections last year using the Sewer
Department camera. They did run into a blockage along Stewart Avenue.
Mr. Pfeffer asked if they are going to continue.
Mr. Hatcher stated that they went as far as they could at the time but he will get an update.
Mr. Pfeffer stated that he discovered a duck bill at the end of the pipe at Norman Avenue
and he is concerned that if there are any blockages in the drains that the duck bill will not
work properly. He would like to see Council get moving on the having the berm raised.
It is at a critical level.
Richard Grockenberger, 84 Alden Avenue, asked if they are notified when there is a spill
at the Sewer Plant.
Mr. Hatcher stated yes.
Mr. Grockenberger asked if they were notified within the last week.
Mr. Hatcher stated no.
Mr. Grockenberger stated that he has some pictures where it came out of the big tanks
and it looks like mud.
Mr. Hatcher stated that he will get an update.
Mr. Grockenberger asked if the Township has had any complaints about traffic coming
onto Chester Avenue from the bank and gym.
Mr. Paris stated that he has seen the traffic backing up but it is a County road.
Mr. Grockenberger asked if they are supposed to cross the double yellow line.
Mr. Catrambone stated that if they are trying to make a left from the bank they have to
cross the line.

Mr. Grockenberger stated that we also have an issue at L&M bakery. We may need to
ask the County to reduce the speed in that area.
Mr. Catrambone stated that we could ask the County for a traffic study.
Tom Lyons, 292 Tenby Chase Drive, spoke to Council about the infestation of Canadian
Geese on the Tenby Chase fields. He asked if the Township would consider investing
in the dog silhouettes. Mr. Lyons looked online and the cost is $137.50 for three. He
feels it would do and good job at taking care of the problem.
Mr. Catrambone stated that we talked about this issue at the work session based on his
e-mail. We had two concerns. First, that they would be stolen. Second, that we would
have additional requests to place them in other areas.
Mr. Lyons stated that anything that they would do would be appreciated.
Mr. Morrow stated that maybe we can reach out to the Boy Scouts to see if they could
make some.
Joan Kerstetter, 10 River Drive, asked Council if there is an ordinance that requires
residents to shovel their walks after a storm. There are a lot of abandoned homes in the
area that may be bank owned.
Mr. Catrambone stated that there is an ordinance. He asked that she provided them with
the addresses and they will follow up.
Mrs. Kerstetter stated that there is also a house that had their cable and telephone wires
knocked down by a branch several weeks ago and they are still there.
Mr. Paris stated that if that happens she needs to call Mr. Hatcher with the address.
Mr. Catrambone reminded everyone that if you are using a snow blower please do not
blow the snow into the street.
Mr. Morrow made a motion to close the meeting to the public, seconded by Mrs. Kolodi.
All were in favor, the motion was approved.
Mrs. Kolodi made a motion, seconded by Ms. Pangia to adjourn the meeting. All were in
favor, the meeting adjourned.
Submitted,
Jamey Eggers
Municipal Clerk
