Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB

STATE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS BOARD
State of Ohio
In the matter of Conciliation between:
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
FIREFIGHTERS, LOCAL 4286,
Employee Organization,
and
DEERFIELD TOWNSHIP, WARREN
COUNTY, OHIO,
Public Employer.

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)

SERB No. 2013-MED-10-1321
Hearing: April 24, 2014
Date of Award:
May 30, 2014

CONCILIATION AWARD

Before Mitchell B. Goldberg, SERB Appointed Conciliator
Appearances:
For the Association:
Andrew Register,
Andrew Burwinkel,
Matt Young,
Christian Elliott,
Jon Harvey,

President, Local 4284
Vice President, Local 4284
Trustee
Treasurer
OAPFF Vice President

For the Township:
Thomas Swope,
Bill Becker,
Lois McKnight,
Matt Clark,
Douglas Wehmeyer,
Chris Elsele,

Law Director
Administration
Assistant Administrator
Director of Administrative Services
Battalion Chief
Chief

I. Introduction and Background.
This is a conciliation proceeding conducted under Chapter 4117 of the Ohio Revised Code, the
Ohio Public Sector Labor Relations law. The State Employment Relations Board (“SERB”) appointed
the undersigned as the Conciliator of this public employment labor dispute in accordance with Section
1

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB
4117.14 (D)(1) on April 4, 2014. The Employer is an Ohio township in Warren County, north of
Cincinnati, with a population of approximately 36,000. It employs 98 persons in the Fire Department.
There are 31 members in the bargaining unit represented by the Association. The unit consists of
firefighter/EMT/Paramedics, Lieutenants, Captains, Fire Inspectors, and a Mechanic. It employs about
58 part-time firefighters, many of which are employed with other fire departments on a full-time basis.
Part-timers are employed throughout the ranks. The Department is not subject to a civil service
system.
The parties participated in collective bargaining to reach a successor collective bargaining
agreement (“CBA”) to replace the CBA that expired by its terms on December 31, 2013. They have
resolved 24 out of a total of 26 issues or proposals through negotiations, mediation and fact finding,
leaving only 2 issues that are presented in this conciliation proceeding. These same 2 issues were
submitted to fact finding before Fact Finder William C. Heekin, who issued his Fact Finding Report on
March 14, 2014.
II. Unresolved Issues.
( 1) Promotional Eligibility List
Both the Fact Finder and this Conciliator were confronted with a threshold legal issue involving
the Association's proposal to include a new article within the CBA for the exclusive inclusion of fulltime firefighters/paramedics on a Promotional Eligibility List to fill vacancies in the lieutenants and
captains ranks. The expired CBA contained no negotiated promotional eligibility process for filling
these vacancies. Instead, the CBA contained a management rights clause that reserved to the Employer
the right to promote employees of its choosing into these ranks. The Employer historically has filled
vacancies from both its full-time and part-time workforces. Its relies upon its reserved management
right to promote in Article 3 and its statutory right under Section 4117.08 (C) that makes bargaining
over promotions a permissive subject of bargaining, and not a mandatory bargaining subject. It has
2

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB
never agreed to bargain over this subject at the table, and it has never subjected itself to any agreement
to abide by civil service laws that contain promotional processes. Instead, it has historically acted
unilaterally with regard to this subject, and it has no desire to act otherwise. It believes that Ohio legal
authorities protect its right to act unilaterally with regards to its promotion decisions – it has never
agreed to act otherwise, or permitted itself to negotiate over this subject so as convert the subject from
a permissive subject into a mandatory subject. It asserted its status quo position before the Fact Finder
and now before the Conciliator.
The Union believes that Ohio law requires the Employer to negotiate over the promotion issue
and its proposal because promotions are an integral part and element of wages, hours and terms and
conditions of employment, the underlying principle for the establishment of the collective bargaining
process in Ohio's public sector labor relations laws. It adjusted its proposal to reduce the eligibility
requirement of full-time firefighters from 5 years as proposed in fact finding to 3 years, thereby
increasing the number of eligible employees in the Department's selection pool. It believes the
Employer must bargain over this issue, and that its proposal, which was substantially recommended by
the Fact Finder, is fairer and more reasonable than the Employer's status quo position that permits it to
fill promotional vacancies from both part-time and full-time ranks at its complete discretion. The
Employer's position is at odds internally with its police unit, and the other nearby comparable fire
department CBAs.
The Legal Issue
Arbitrator Heekin decided to make a conditional recommendation as a Fact Finder for the
purpose of serving what he believed was his “central function of issuing recommendations in order to
assist [the parties]in the resolution of a labor dispute.” He went on to state”
Indeed the undersigned has never before while acting as a fact finder
been asked to make a legal determination. Therefore, and while
greatly emphasizing that other avenues are specifically provided for
under the ORC Chapter 4117 as to resolving questions of law under
3

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB
the State Employment Relations Act, no legal determination finding
will be made in this matter.
I do not take issue with Fact Finder Heekin's reasoning in deciding to make recommendations as
a Fact Finder. His hope was to bring the parties together by accepting what he believed was a
reasonable compromise on the mechanics of the promotional process, the acceptance of which would
remove the legal issue and avoid what could be a long and arduous litigation road through SERB and
the courts. I believe my situation as a conciliator involves different concerns once the Fact Finding
Report is rejected. My mission is to make a final and binding decision on the disputed issues; either to
accept the Union's amended proposal as written, or to permit the Department to retain its arguable right
to make unilateral promotion decisions based upon its legal right not to bargain over what it believes is
a permissive subject, one that it has chosen never to bargain over. Accordingly, I believe I must review,
analyze and navigate through the submitted legal authorities to decide which of the submitted proposals
should be subject to a final and binding conciliation award.
The History of Mandatory and Permissive Bargaining Subjects
The history of what subjects the parties must bargain over during their negotiations, and the
subjects that they may instead merely choose to bargain over, finds its origin in the private sector, in the
federal collective bargaining law.1 Section 8(d) of the Labor Act requires the parties to bargain in good
faith “with respect to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment, or the negotiation
of an agreement.” Some provisions may lawfully be incorporated in a labor contract, but are
nonetheless outside the area of wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment. These socalled “permissive” subjects may be proposed by either party at the table, but the proponent may not
insist on its position to the point of impasse or as a condition of reaching an agreement. The other
party may decline to discuss the issue altogether without violating the law. Mandatory subjects

1 The principles have been developed by the NLRB and the courts in three stages, the Wagner Act or National Labor
Relations Act of 1935, the Taft-Hartley Act or Labor-Management Relations Act of 1947, and the Landrum-Griffin Act
or Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959.

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB
5
characteristically deal with the working relationship of the employees to the employer; permissive
subjects fall for the most part into two groups. The first group are those that deal with the relationship
of the employer to third persons, and are normally regarded as within the prerogative of management.
The second group are those that deal with the relationship between the union and the employees in the
bargaining unit, and are normally regarded as within the internal control of the union. The union
commits an unfair labor practice when it insists to impasse that the employer agree to a subject that
does not touch the employer-employee relationship or regulate a “condition of employment.” The
Employer violates the law when it insists to impasse upon a subject that touches upon the unionemployee relationship. The “permissive” idea, however, means that the parties in any negotiation
could by voluntary agreement expand their bargaining subjects beyond those that are considered
mandatory. These subjects may be incorporated in an agreement if both parties wish.2
Ohio Law – The Statute
There are a number of practical differences between the private sector labor law and the law for
public sector collective bargaining that were considered by the Legislature when it drafted and passed
Chapter 4117. First, there was already in existence state civil service laws that provided remedies for
public employees that covered many of the same areas that would be addressed and covered in
collective bargaining agreements. Public employers could adopt civil service laws for its employees,
those represented and those non-represented. Bargaining could take place over which, if any, civil
service provisions should be included in the CBA. The CBA could substitute a grievance/arbitration
procedure for civil service laws and remedies. Secondly, public sector bargaining could involve both
rank and file employees and supervisors. The notion that private sector manufacturing companies
would have union represented supervisors and managers would be an anathema in the realm of private

2 Basic Text on Labor Law Unionization and Collective Bargaining, Robert A. Gorman, West Publishing Co., pp. 523-29
(1976).

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB
sector bargaining. This anathema would include the notion that the decision to hire and
6
promote supervisors from the rank and file would restrict management in any manner. Most managers
and supervisors are at-will employees who serve at the pleasure of higher-up managers.
The legislature decided to address the subjects of mandatory and permissive bargaining by
focusing on the public sector workplace and its differentiating characteristics instead of relying upon
the general principle of looking merely at the relationship between the employer and third person nonbargaining unit employees . Section 4117.08 (A) states that bargaining is to cover all matters
pertaining to wages, hours, or terms and other conditions of employment and the continuation,
modification, or deletion of an existing provision of a CBA, except as otherwise specified in this
section. Section (B) specifically addresses civil service promotional matters such as examinations,
rating, eligible lists, and appointments as subjects that are not appropriate subjects for collective
bargaining. The statute appears to rule out bargaining over these issues.
Section (C) clarifies the matter further. It lists what all labor law specialists consider to be
reserved management rights both in the public and private sector, rights that may permissively be
bargained away or restricted if the parties decide to do so. Included in this broad range of reserved
management rights is the right of the public employer to promote its employees as set forth in Section
(C) (5). This right should be reconciled with management's right to adopt a civil service system that
otherwise restricts its right to decide who to promote and delegates that function to a third-party system
that ultimately makes the final decision. Without such a civil service system in place, Section (C)(5) is
operative as being an exclusive management right, not subject to collective bargaining unless the public
employer chooses to include that subject in collective bargaining. I conclude that a rational reading of
this statute means that a public employer such as the Township, who has not enacted or delegated away
its promotional decisions to a third-party civil service system, and who has reserved its unilateral right
to make promotional decisions, would not be forced to bargain over this issue the same as if it was a

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB
mandatory subject of bargaining. This promotional subject could, however, somehow by law, rule or
7
regulation be converted from its permissive nature into a mandatory subject. The next step is to decide
whether this has occurred in the cases that have been submitted for review.
The Supreme Court, in DeVennish v. City of Columbus, 57 Ohio St.3d 163 (1991), was
confronted with the issue of whether Section (B) and its civil service language prevents the parties from
bargaining over promotional matters and eligibility lists. It reconciled Section (B) with the City's CBA
that contained a promotion system by finding that (B) restricts the parties from bargaining over original
appointments when employees are not represented by a union, as opposed to promotional matters that
arise later. It found that all post-hire promotional matters are “appropriate” subjects for bargaining
because these issues pertain to and directly “affect and pertain to wages, hours or terms and other
conditions of employment.” I find that the Court did nothing more in this case than remove post-hire
promotional issues from the restricted civil service language in (B). All post-hire promotional issues are
appropriate subjects for bargaining, and not otherwise restricted under (B). One must then apply
Section (C) (5) to find whether promotional matters are both appropriate and permissive subjects under
the management rights umbrella. Public employers may choose to bargain over those issues, but they
are not forced to do so because the promotional issues are identified as being permissive rather than
mandatory subjects. The three types of bargaining were clearly delineated; (1) prohibited bargaining
subjects (pre-hire civil service matters); (2) appropriate subjects, those that pertain to and directly affect
wages, hours and conditions that may be permissively or voluntarily bargained under (C)(5) such as
post-hire promotional eligibility lists, and (3) those that pertain to and directly affect wages, hours and
conditions and must be bargained, either because they directly affect wages, hours and conditions from
the outset, or they later became constructively mandatory because the public employer agreed to
include those formerly permissive issues in bargaining and they thereafter effectively became
mandatory subjects.

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB
The facts in this record are clear. There is no civil service issue in play, and the Township has
8
never agreed to bargain over its unilaterally established CBA management right to decide upon
promotion issues. One must look further for authorities that mandate bargaining over promotional
issues.
The Supreme Court decided another case involving the subject of permissive bargaining in
1991. City of Cincinnati v. Ohio Council 8, AFSCME, 61 Ohio St. 3d 658 held that a CBA negotiated
under Chapter 4117 prevailed over a conflicting provision of the City home rule charter. It discussed
the federal labor law background for distinguishing between illegal subjects, mandatory subjects and
permissive subjects. It held that 4117 prevails over conflicting charter law or other law except as
specifically provided in the 4117 exceptions. Once a City decides to enter into a CBA, that agreement
trumps any conflicting charter provision. The case does not add much to our discussion over the
critical issue of whether promotional issues are now legally mandatory subjects regardless of whether
the public employer never agreed to relinquish its unilateral right to make those decisions in
accordance with Section 4117.08 (C)(5). I agree with the Court's language that regardless of whether a
subject is considered mandatory or permissive, once a party voluntarily chooses to bargain over a
permissive subject, that subject becomes mandatory for all practical purposes. The evidence here,
however, is that the Township at all times has refused to bargain over promotional issues.
This was not true in the Salem Fire Fighters, Local 283, IAFF SERB decision (2009-02 – ULP
Hearing). The facts are closer to the the instant facts in the sense that no reasonable person would
argue that a minimum manning proposal is unrelated to terms and conditions of employment. It relied
upon its previous Youngstown 1995 decision that established standards for determining whether a
subject was mandatory or permissive. I stated above that an agreement to bargain over a permissive
subject converts it to a mandatory subject “for all practical purposes,” but Youngstown refined this
analysis by stating that the permissive subject is not transformed into a mandatory subject after it is

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB
included into a CBA. Instead, it is enforced like a mandatory subject, but its continuation depends
9
upon the contract terms. Again, Salem is unlike our case. The City agreed to minimum manning and
then sought to modify or delete it in a later CBA. This Township, as stated above, has never agreed to
bargain over the permissive subject of promotions.
The Hancock County Court of Appeals decision in City of Findlay v. Findlay Civil Service
Commission, 91-LW-4513 (3rd (1991) relies upon DeVennish. The CBA incorporated the civil service
rules into the CBA, as amended by specific contract language. The rules, therefore, and the subjects
therein became in play and subject to negotiations. This Township has not incorporated the civil
service system into a CBA.
Ryther v. City of Gahanna, 2005-Ohio-2670 (10th Dist. Ct. App.) involved a similar conflict
between applicable civil service rules and conflicting CBA language. The subject of promotions was in
play as a permissive subject as was the application of civil service rules. The Franklin County
appellate court held that the issue was controlled by the CBA and was subject to the grievance
procedure. Here, management has reserved the subject of promotions and has not relinquished its right
either through a civil service process or by CBA provisions.
City of Akron v. SERB, 1998 SERB 4-49 (CP, Summit, 8-12-98) is another court case finding
that Civil Service Rules on promotions are primary determinants of salary and working conditions.
Changes to those rules requires collective bargaining. The key to this decision is the Court's statement
that:
The City did not have a duty to bargain the adoption by the
Commission of the proposed rules primarily addressing
promotions . . .. Once the rule revisions were adopted and
became effective, they immediately applied to all nonbargaining unit employees and to bargaining unit employees
whose exclusive representative did not request bargaining.
This case supports the Township's position that having a CBA that provides it with unilateral

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB
discretion on promotional issues, without adopting a civil service system, means that it does not have a
10
duty to bargain over promotional issues.
In re City of Cincinnati, SERB 2005-006 (9-8-2005) is a ULP case charging the City with an
unfair labor practice in refusing to bargain over the procedure for promoting assistant chiefs. At first
blush, there appears to be language in the decision supporting the Association's contention that
notwithstanding the (C)(5) language characterizing promotional issues as being permissive subjects,
one must apply the Youngstown standards and analysis to determine if the subject should be considered
mandatory or permissive. Promotion issues impact upon wages, hours and employment conditions.
Therefore, according to the Association, the subject should be treated as a mandatory subject and a
refusal to bargain over promotional issues would constitute a ULP. However, upon closer reading, I
find that this case is merely another Akron type case. The Agency found that the parties had a
“longstanding [practice] use of the procedure set forth in the state civil service law.” It found that after
applying the Youngstown three-prong analysis “that, on balance, the promotional process for Assistant
Police Chiefs is a mandatory subject of bargaining.” But, this finding is based upon the fact that
promotional issues were put in play by the parties when they had a longstanding agreement to abide by
the civil service process. Their CBA did not address the precise issue, but because they used civil
service procedures, the issues affected wages, hours and working conditions and thus the issues were
relegated to the mandatory subjects of bargaining. It is now certain from reading all of this law that if
public employers and organizations choose to have promotional issues determined by civil service
systems or by collective bargaining agreements, they must bargain over any changes that are proposed.
The case, however, should not be interpreted to apply to public employers like this Township, who has
never relegated promotional decisions to civil service system or to collective bargaining, and who has
continued to reserve these decisions as part of its management rights, thereby never converting the
issue from a permissive subject into a mandatory subject.

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB
There are well worn statutory and contract interpretation principles that apply here. All of the
11
words used in the statute should be interpreted to have meaning, and the words that might be
interpreted to be contradictory or ambiguous should be reconciled to resolve the contradiction or
ambiguity if the language can be read to do so. 4117.08 contains three distinct concepts regarding
collective bargaining subjects. The first is contained in (A). This is the mandatory requirement that
“all” matters pertaining to wages, hours, or terms and other conditions of employment and changes or
additions to existing CBAs “are” subject to collective bargaining, “except as otherwise specified.” The
second concept addresses the “appropriate” or “not-appropriate” matters. Section (B) defines one of
those issues as being civil service examinations, rating, eligible lists and appointments. This has been
defined by case law as only applying to original appointments or pre-hire matters, and not to the same
items that are regulated after the hires. Specifically, CBAs or civil service issues regarding these posthire matters are now mandatory subjects and are deemed appropriate for bargaining. The third
category involves permissive subjects listed in (C) that are reserved management rights that may be
bargained on a voluntary basis. They are also appropriate subjects if the parties wish them to be by
voluntarily agreeing to negotiate over these identified working conditions. They are appropriate
permissive subjects as opposed to non-appropriate prohibited subjects.
Decision and Award: Based upon the above analysis, I find that the Township's proposal should
control and that the Association's proposal should not be accepted. So long as the Township has no
civil service system in place, and continuously insists upon its right not to bargain over promotional
decisions, and otherwise reserves its right not to do so under the existing or expired CBA, it may
continue to refuse to bargain over this issue. The language in the expired CBA shall remain unchanged.
(2) Article 40 – Working Out of Classification
The CBA currently provides for higher pay when any employee works for 2 hours or more in
the position of a higher paid classification. The pay for this work is the pay rate of the higher

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB
classification for the number of hours worked in that classification. The Association proposes new
12
language to cover pay for an acting lieutenant or captain when there is a vacancy on the shift. Only one
acting officer is permitted per shift. The Association is concerned about the selection process to fill the
vacancy. If there is a current lieutenant promotional list, the highest ranked career firefighter, or a fulltime firefighter would receive the pay grade for the shift. If no promotional list exists, the Battalion
Chief would make the selection, but the firefighter filling the spot would be a full-time firefighter from
the bargaining unit.
There was little discussion or time devoted to this issue at the hearing. The Fact Finder did not
recommend acceptance of the Association's proposal. I agree generally with the Association's proposal.
It appears reasonable. However, if I choose the precise Association proposal I must accept it
completely, including language that I believe is not appropriate considering that I did not accept the
Association's promotion proposal. I am concerned that including language in the CBA that states “if
there is a current Lieutenant promotional list” may create a later dispute between the parties as to
whether the existence of a promotional list is now a subject of bargaining. The Township's clear intent
is to reserve its right to maintain its organizational structure, direct employees, transfer, assign and
promote its employees. Article 40 as it now stands relinquishes management's right with respect to its
specific terms; that working out of classification for two or more hours brings the higher pay. But, it
contains no language modifying management's right to select the person for the job. I am rejecting the
Association's proposal because this issue should be bargained between the parties on the basis of the
Township agreeing to relinquish its managerial rights on this subject. The obligation to bargain should
not be triggered by conciliator awarded language that arguably opens the door on the promotional
selection subject without the Township's clear intention to do so.
Decision and Award: The Association's proposed change and addition to Article 40 language is not
accepted. The CBA shall remain unchanged.

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB
Date of Award: May 30, 2014
13

___________________________________
/s/ Mitchell B. Goldberg, Conciliator

CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
The above Award was served upon the following parties by electronic mail on the 30th day of
May, 2014:
Jon D. Harvey, jharvey3@woh.rr.com
Thomas A. Swope, Tswope@fbtlaw.com
SERB: MED@serb.state.oh.us

_____________________________
/s/ Mitchell B. Goldberg

Fri, 30 May 2014 09:24:23 AM - SERB

14
