CBA WD

Page 1 of 1

REGISTER OF WAGE DETERMINATION UNDER
THE SERVICE CONTRACT ACT
By direction of the Secretary
of Labor

| U.S. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
|EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS ADMINISTRATION
| WAGE AND HOUR DIVISION
|
WASHINGTON D.C. 20210
|
|
|
| Wage Determination No.: CBA-2005-2729
Diane Koplewski
Division of
|
Revision No.: 8
Director
Wage Determinations| Date Of Last Revision: 1/19/2018
_______________________________________|_______________________________________
State: Pennsylvania
Area: Allegheny
_______________________________________________________________________________

Employed on contract for Employed on U.S. Department of Energy, National Energy Technology
Laboratory contract for Site Security Services.
Collective Bargaining Agreement between contractor: Boutchantharaj Corporation dba DFW
Security Protec, and union: Local United S, effective 2/1/2016 through 1/31/2019 and amended on
1/19/2018.
In accordance with Section 2(a) and 4(c) of the Service Contract Act, as amended, employees
employed by the contractor(s) in performing services covered by the Collective Bargaining
Agreement(s) are to be paid wage rates and fringe benefits set forth in the current collective
bargaining agreement and modified extension agreement(s).

https://www.wdol.gov/DisplayT4CWD.aspx?WDNo=CBA-2005-2729

1/30/2019

Agreement
By and Between
DFW Security Protective Force
and
The United Government Security Officers of America
International Union
and its
Local 09

Effective – January 20, 2016 – January 31, 2019

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1
Preamble
ARTICLE 2
Union Recognition
ARTICLE 3
Union Security
ARTICLE 4
Dues Check-Off and Authorization
ARTICLE 5
No Strikes, No Lock-Outs
ARTICLE 6
Management Rights
ARTICLE 7
Hours of Work and Overtime
ARTICLE 8
Probation / New Hires
ARTICLE 9
Union Representation
ARTICLE 10 Clothing and Equipment
ARTICLE 11 Safety
ARTICLE 12 Bargaining Unit Work
ARTICLE 13 Reduction in Force
ARTICLE 14 Seniority
ARTICLE 15 Grievance & Arbitration Procedure
ARTICLE 16 Non-Discrimination
ARTICLE 17 Vacation
ARTICLE 18 Holidays
ARTICLE 19 Personal Days / Sick Days
ARTICLE 20 Leave of Absence
ARTICLE 21 Funeral / Bereavement Leave
ARTICLE 22 Jury Duty
ARTICLE 23 Discipline
ARTICLE 24 Wages
ARTICLE 25 Health and Welfare Benefits
ARTICLE 26 General
ARTICLE 27 Voluntary Quits
ARTICLE 28 Separability and Savings
ARTICLE 29 Duration
Signed and Agreed

2
2
3
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
9
10
10
10
11
13
13
15
16
17
17
18
18
20
20
22
23
24
24
25

1|Page

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

ARTICLE 1
PREAMBLE
THIS AGREEMENT has been entered into on January 20, 2016 between DFW Security Protective
Force (DFW) hereinafter referred to as the "Company", and The United Government Security
Officers of America International Union (UGSOA) and its Local 09, hereinafter collectively
referred to as the "Union".
The Company and Union (the "parties") acknowledge that, during the negotiations which
resulted in this Agreement, each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and
proposals with the respect to any subject or matter not removed by law from the area of
collective bargaining, and that the understanding and agreements arrived at by the parties, after
exercise of that right and opportunity, are set forth in this Agreement. It is the intent and purpose
of this Agreement to assure sound and mutually beneficial industrial and economic relationships
between the parties hereto, to provide an orderly and peaceful means of conducting negotiations
and resolving any misunderstandings or grievances and to set forth herein the basic Agreement
between the parties covering rates of pay, wages, hours of work and other conditions of
employment.
The Union, the Company and all Employees are bound by and hereby pledge their cooperation
in observing all provisions of this Agreement consistent with applicable State and Federal Law.
Both parties recognize the principle of a fair day's work for a fair day's pay. The Union
acknowledges that the Company's operations at National Energy Technology Laboratory –
Pittsburgh, PA are pursuant to a U.S. government contract and nothing negotiated herein shall
be construed to place the Company in violation of such contract. Any ambiguity in the language
in this Agreement shall be construed to the fullest extent possible to make this Agreement
consistent with the contract and the Company's obligation to its agreements to provide high
quality security services, recognizing that security procedures are subject to change in response
to or anticipation of world, national or local events and/or circumstances.
No changes, modifications, additions or other agreements will take effect until and unless a
specific written addendum or side-letter is signed by all parties and attached permanently to this
document. All matters within the scope of bargaining have been negotiated and agreed upon in
this document. The terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement represent the full and
complete understanding and commitment between the Company and the Union.

ARTICLE 2
UNION RECOGNITION
The Company recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive agent for the purpose of collective
bargaining for all full-time and part-time security guards who perform guard duties as defined in
Section 9(b)(3) of the National Labor Relations Act, as amended, at the Department of Energy’s

2|Page

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

626 Cochran’s Mill Road, Pittsburgh, PA. Facility; excluding all office, clerical, professional
employees, and Supervisors as defined in the Act, and all other employees, (Case 06-RC-141498).

ARTICLE 3
UNION SECURITY
It is mutually agreed that as a condition of employment, all employees covered by this Agreement
shall become members of the Union after the 30th day following the actual beginning of such
employment, or the effective date of this Agreement, whichever is the later; and that thereafter
as a requisite of continued employment such employees including those presently members of
the Union, shall remain members in good standing in the Union.
The Union agrees to accept as a member upon application and without discrimination any new
employee who may be hired by the Company for employment within the bargaining unit.

ARTICLE 4
DUES CHECK-OFF AND AUTHORIZATION FORM
SECTION 1: The Check-off Authorization Card is to be executed and furnished to the Company by
the Union and the employees shall be the official Union AUTHORIZATION FOR CHECK-OFF OF
DUES.
SECTION 2: All sums collected in accordance with such signed authorization cards shall be
remitted by the Company to the International Union Office not later than the fifteenth (15th) of
the month subsequent to the month in which such sums were deducted by the Company. Union
authorization cards must be submitted prior to the fifteenth (15th) of the month proceeding the
date that deductions are to be made for all employees.
SECTION 3: The Company shall furnish, with the monthly check, a list of those employees for
whom deductions have been made.
SECTION 4: The Union accepts full responsibility for the authenticity for each Check-off card
submitted by it to the Company, and any authorization which are incomplete or in error shall be
disregarded by the Company, and shall be returned to the Union for correction. The Union agrees
that, upon receipt of proper proof, it will refund to the employees any deduction erroneously or
illegally withheld from an employee's earnings by the Company which has been transmitted to
the Union by the Company within 90 (ninety) days of remittance. The Union further agrees to
indemnify the Company and hold it harmless against any loss and all claims, suits or other forms
of liability which may arise as a result of the Employer's compliance with the Union membership
or check off' Articles for amounts deducted from wages as herein provided.
SECTION 5: No deductions of Union dues will be made from the wages of any employee who has
not executed a check-off form or who is not in pay status. Collections of any back dues owed at
the time of starting deductions for any employee, and collection of dues missed because the
3|Page

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

employee's earnings were not sufficient to cover payment of dues for a particular pay period, will
be the responsibility of the Union, and will not be the subject of payroll deductions.
Deduction of membership dues shall be made in a flat sum provided there is a balance in the
paycheck sufficient to cover the amount after all other deductions authorized by the employee,
or required by law, have been satisfied. In the event of termination of employment, the
obligation of the Company to collect dues shall not extend beyond the pay period in which the
employee's last day of work occurs.

ARTICLE 5
NO STRIKES, NO LOCK-OUTS
SECTION 1: Both the Company and the Union agree that continuity of operations is of utmost
importance to the Company's operations. It is further understood and acknowledged that it is
the intention of the parties that all claims, disputes, or grievances arising under this Agreement
be resolved by resort to the grievance and arbitration procedures provided herein. The Union
agrees that during the term of this Agreement, there shall be no cessation of work, whether by
strike, walkout, lockout, sick-out, mass absenteeism, boycott, picketing, or other interference
with or curtailment of production of any kind, including sympathy strikes, and that the Union will
not cause or permit employees to cause, nor will any member of the Union take part in, any
strikes, including a sympathy strike, slowdown, stoppage of work, planned inefficiency or any
other curtailment of work or restriction or interference with the Company's or Government's
operations for any reason whatsoever. Nor will the Union authorize or sanction the same. It shall
be a violation of this Agreement, and it shall be cause for immediate discharge, in the event an
employee refuses to enter upon any property involved in any labor dispute involving other
employee organizations, or refuses to go through or work behind any picket lines involving other
employee organizations at the Employer's place or places of business.
SECTION 2: The Company shall not cause, permit or engage in the lock-out of Employees.
SECTION 3: The Union shall exert reasonable efforts to prevent any violation of Section 1 of this
Article and, if such action does occur, to exert reasonable efforts to terminate it.
SECTION 4: The Union and the Company agree to take all steps possible to ensure that
Government property is properly secured and protected in the event of labor disputes involving
other Employee organizations at the facilities covered by this Agreement.
SECTION 5: Upon hearing of any unauthorized strike, slowdown, stoppage of work, planned
inefficiency or any curtailment of work or restriction or interference with the operation of the
Company, the Union shall take affirmative action to avert or bring such activity to a prompt
termination. During the term of this Agreement, a refusal by an employee or employees to cross
a strike line at the employees' regular place of employment, established by any other labor
organization or established by any other group, shall constitute a violation of this Article.
4|Page

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

SECTION 6: Any employee who violates the proscriptions of this provision will be immediately
discharged. Furthermore, it is agreed and understood that in addition to other remedies, the
provisions of this Article may be judicially enforced including specific performance by way of
injunctive relief.

ARTICLE 6
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
SECTION 1: Subject to such limitations as may be imposed by this Agreement and applicable
statute, the Company retains the sole and exclusive right to manage its business and to direct the
working force, including but not limited to the rights, in accordance with its judgment and
discretion; to reprimand, suspend, discharge, or otherwise discipline employees for just cause;
to determine the number of employees to be employed; to hire employees, determine their
qualifications and assign and direct their work; to promote, demote, transfer, layoff, recall to
work, and rehire employees, the right to schedule work, to determine shifts, to establish and
change schedules, to set and establish standards of performance, to assign work and working
hours to Employees, to determine the amount and location of work, to determine the type of
services performed, to establish reasonable quality and performance standards, to determine
the most efficient means of providing service, to require every Employee to comply with normal,
reasonable operating procedures, to formulate and enforce reasonable Company rules and
regulations that are equitably applied, to maintain the efficiency of operations; to judge skill,
ability and physical fitness in a reasonable, nondiscriminatory manner, to control and regulate
the use of all equipment and other property of the Employer and/or the Government ; provided
however, that with respect to any action that results in a change in established work rules,
existing hours of work or the size of work force, the Company shall give reasonable prior written
notice; to increase Security levels as needed and avoid overtime; to expand, reduce, alter,
combine, transfer, assign, or cease any job, department, operation, or service; to determine the
number, location and operation of departments, divisions, and all other units of the Company;
to issue, amend and revise policies, rules, regulations, procedures and practices not expressly
addressed in this Agreement; and to take whatever action is necessary or advisable to determine,
manage and fulfill the mission of the Company and to direct the Company's employees. Further,
the Employer may have its supervisors or managers perform Bargaining Unit work in accordance
with Article 12 of this Agreement. The Employer explicitly retains any and all rights that are not
covered by this Agreement.
SECTION 2: Management shall retain the exclusive right to discharge any employee who has been
denied access to the premises by any government agency or who has not maintained the
necessary security clearance, certificate, or license required by the State, Department or
Company.
SECTION 3: Failure to Exercise Rights. The Company's failure to exercise any right, prerogative,
or function hereby reserved to it, or the Company's exercise of any such right, prerogative, or
function in a particular way, shall not be considered a waiver of the Company's right to exercise
such right, prerogative, or function or preclude it from exercising the same in some other way
5|Page

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

not in conflict with the express provisions of this Agreement. This statement of management
rights, which remains unimpaired by this Agreement, is not intended to exclude others, which
are not mentioned herein. The above rights of Management are not all-inclusive, but indicate the
type of matters or rights which belong to, and are inherent to, the Company.
SECTION 4: It is recognized and acknowledged that the Company is in the business of providing
a service to the Government, its customers and the public. It is therefore essential and expected
that all employees will act in a professional, courteous manner and will be held accountable for
their duties, functions and job requirements. Except for those matters specifically addressed in
the Agreement, the Company reserves the sole and exclusive authority to draft, issue,
implement, revise, enforce and withdraw reasonable rules of conduct and reasonable regulations
as the Company deems necessary. The Company will provide copies of such rules and regulations,
and any changes thereto, to the Union, prior to implementation when practical.
SECTION 5: If any of the above rights have been expressly abridged by a specific provision of this
Agreement, the specific provision of this Agreement shall apply.

ARTICLE 7
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME
SECTION 1: For the purposes of this Agreement, employees who work less than thirty-two (32)
hours per week (based on an annual averaging of worked hours) are considered part-time
employees. Those employees who work thirty-two (32) hours per week or greater, are
considered full-time employees.
SECTION 2: Workweek. The regular work week for all employees shall be eight (8) hours per day,
five (5) days per week, for a total of forty (40) hours per week. The Company week begins on
Monday at 0700 and ends on Monday at 0659. It is agreed that work will be performed as
scheduled and accepted to meet the Statement of Work for the contract.
SECTION 3: All hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours per week shall be paid for at the rate
of time and one-half (1.5) at the employee's base hourly salary. Only actual time worked by an
employee will be included in calculating overtime compensation. In the event of an emergency,
employees may be required to work overtime.
SECTION 4: The Company will attempt to distribute overtime equally among bargaining Unit
personnel provided such personnel have the requisite skill and ability to perform the work
needed. In the event all qualified employees reject the request to perform overtime, the
overtime shall be performed by the least senior qualified employee with the least amount of
overtime hours worked within the classification.
SECTION 5: The Company shall have the right to schedule working hours or working days and to
make revisions in such schedule to meet its needs or those of the government. Shifts will be bid
6|Page

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

based on seniority, with consideration being made in regards to rank (ie. Lieutenant, Sergeant,
officer), with the most senior of each rank bidding first for their respective available shifts.
SECTION 6: Employees shall be permitted to switch shifts upon mutual agreement if such written
requests are approved by the Site Supervisor with one (1) week notice and such changes occur
within a single week so as not to create overtime. Company approval in such matters shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
SECTION 7: Call in Pay. Any employee who is called-in on any of his or her normal days off shall
receive a minimum of four (4) hours of work, or be paid for the difference, if any, between the
actual time worked and four (4) hours pay, if sent home.
SECTION 8: Employees who are calling out of work should do so four (4) hours prior to the start
of his/her shift. The Security Officer on duty will then contact the Security supervisor.
SECTION 9: Mandatory Call-in work will be distributed by seniority with part-time employees first
who will not incur overtime. If overtime is unavoidable, than call-ins will be offered by highest
seniority on down, regardless of full or part time status.

ARTICLE 8
Probation/New Hires
SECTION 1: The Company may discharge probationary employees for any reason at its sole
discretion without resort to the grievance and arbitration procedures. At any time during the
probationary period, the Company shall retain the sole right to suspend, discipline and discharge
employees for any reason, no reason, even a mistaken reason. All other provisions of this
Agreement are applicable to probationary employees. However, no employee shall be
discharged in violation of any Federal or State Statute.
SECTION 2: An Employee shall be considered a probationary employee for their first ninety (90)
days starting with their first day earning wages from the Company.
SECTION 3: Once the probationary period has been completed, the employee shall gain seniority
status and his/her seniority date shall revert back to the first day the employee earned wages
from the Company for employment at this site.
SECTION 4: Part-time employees shall be promoted to full-time status based on their site
seniority.
SECTION 5: In hiring of employees, the Company will notify the Union or alternate Steward within
five (5) working days after the date of hire.
SECTION 6: The purpose of the probationary period is to provide for the evaluation of an
Employee over a period of ninety (90) days. Should that period be interrupted for more than
7|Page

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

thirty (30) consecutive working days, the probationary period shall be extended to compensate
for that absence. The Employee will be notified of this extension and the reasons for it.

ARTICLE 9
UNION REPRESENTATION
SECTION 1: The Union's duly authorized agent or representative, provided they have the
clearance or facility authorization to enter, shall have the right to visit the premises of the
Company at the U. S. Department of Energy National Energy Technology Laboratory at
reasonable intervals and at a reasonable times during work hours for the purposes of discussing
grievances with the Union or alternate Steward or the Company. Upon such visits, the Union's
representative shall first report to the Company or its duly authorized agent for this purpose. The
Union’s business representative shall not engage in any activities, which interfere with the work
of any employee covered by this Agreement. While on the premises, the Business Representative
or any duly authorized Union representative shall only be allowed to meet with bargaining unit
employees or members of management of the Company for the purpose of ascertaining whether
or not this Agreement is being observed by the parties hereto or for assisting in the adjustment
of grievances. Any meetings can only take place in non-work areas, during non-work time. There
shall be no Union business and solicitation on behalf of the Union during an employee’s working
time except in accordance with the grievance/arbitration procedures or when pre-approved by
the Company.
SECTION 2: The Company shall permit the Union or alternate Steward a reasonable amount of
time to handle Union business, provided the steward advised the Company supervisor of the time
Union business starts and finishes. The Union will furnish the Company the names of all Stewards.
Within twenty (20) calendar days of the execution of this Agreement, the Union shall furnish to
the Company, in writing, the names of each of the Union's designated stewards. Changes to these
assignments shall be provided by the Union to the Company, in writing at least twenty (20)
calendar days of such change becoming effective.
SECTION 3: Upon request of the Union to the Company, the Company will, on reasonable notice,
and so far as the needs of its business permit, allow up to two (2) employees time off, without
loss of seniority but without pay, to attend business or committee meetings or conventions of
the Union or affiliate. Exceptions to the foregoing may be made by mutual agreement.
SECTION 4: The Company agrees to permit the Union to use designated Company bulletin boards
for posting notices dealing with official union business. Postings shall be restricted to A) Notices
of Union recreational and social affairs, B) Notices of Union elections, C) Notices of Union
appointments and results of Union elections, D) Notices of Union meetings, or E) Other notices
concerning Union affairs, which are not political or controversial in nature. The Union
acknowledges that it is a Government facility and permission may need to be granted by the
Government for use in their buildings outside of the Company’s control.

8|Page

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

SECTION 5: The union shall have the right to speak to the new hires the first week of orientation
or training period and the Company will facilitate the Union by allowing time to speak for at least
thirty (30) minutes.

ARTICLE 10
CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT
SECTION 1: A uniform policy enacted by the Company will control the uniform and appearance
standards. Should the Company require employees to wear specific attire, they will provide such
attire to the employees. Attire will be replaced in accordance with the Statement of Work.
Employees will inspect uniforms and equipment regularly. All clothing and equipment will be
maintained and in good repair.
SECTION 2: Excessively worn, torn or damaged clothing or equipment will be reported to a
Security Supervisor for replacement. The condition of uniforms and equipment can be assessed
and determined by Security Supervisors, and replacements required at their discretion. Wear due
to negligence or damage deemed intentional will result in the employee being responsible for all
costs associated with replacement or repair.
SECTION 3: Long-sleeved or Short-sleeved shirts may be worn at the discretion of the officer.
Shirts shall be worn as intended, no rolled- up sleeves, or modifications of any uniform article are
allowed. Only navy T-shirt’s are to be worn. Any clothing article that was not issued by the
Company must be approved by the Company prior to wearing.
SECTION 4: All uniforms and equipment shall be returned to the Company within fifteen (15)
business days from employee's termination. The Company is to withhold three hundred and fifty
dollars ($350.00) if uniforms and equipment are not returned within that timeframe.

ARTICLE 11
SAFETY
SECTION 1: In order to provide safety control for protection to the life and health of employees
and prevention of damage to property, supplies and equipment, the Company and the
employees shall comply with all applicable safety requirements established by the Company or
as outlined in any site policies.
SECTION 2: The Company shall comply with any and every applicable statute, federal and state,
and with any such rules and regulations as may be promulgated thereunder, that govern the
conditions of health and safety in the place of work of its Employees. The Company may
promulgate and enforce any such rules and regulations as it may deem appropriate from time to
time to provide for the safety of its Employees and to ensure compliance with any such statute
or with the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder and agrees to notify the Union a
minimum of five (5) days prior to their implementation, when possible.
9|Page

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

SECTION 3: All work-related injuries shall be reported to the appropriate administrator
immediately upon their occurrence in accordance with the procedures in effect with the
Company.
SECTION 4: An Employee not returned to work by the decision of the Occupation Health Unit
(OHU) or being transported via ambulance because of being seriously injured during working
hours and requiring immediate medical attention shall receive the rest of the day off without loss
of pay for that day.

ARTICLE 12
BARGAINING UNIT WORK
Supervisors, management and other non-bargaining unit members, excluding probationary
members, shall not perform bargaining unit work except in the event of training, emergencies,
or if sufficient qualified bargaining unit employees are not available to perform the work.

ARTICLE 13
REDUCTION IN FORCE
SECTION 1: In the event that it becomes necessary to reduce the work force, the last person hired
shall be the first laid off, and if the working force thereafter is increased, the employees shall be
recalled in the reverse order in which they were laid off.
SECTION 2: When an employee is discharged or laid off, he or she shall be paid by check for any
wages and benefit time owed at his or her next regular pay period, check will be mailed by
registered or certified letter to his or her last known address, at his or her next scheduled payday.
SECTION 3: When the Company recalls laid-off employees, it will attempt to contact the
employee by telephone, contact the Union by telephone, and shall mail a registered or certified
letter or telegram to the employee's last known address. The employee may be required to
respond and be available for work within four (4) days of the above procedure. All employees are
required to keep the Company informed of their current address and telephone number.

ARTICLE 14
SENIORITY
SECTION 1: The term "seniority" shall mean the length of continuous service of an employee.
Seniority is based upon length of service at a specific site. Seniority at one site will not influence
the established line of seniority at another Department of Energy site. Classification seniority
shall be utilized for purpose of days off, layoff, and recall, subject to the employee's skill and
ability to perform the work required.

10 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

SECTION 2: The Union President shall be entitled to super seniority at the facility area, for
purpose of layoff and recall, provided they have the requisite training and/or qualifications to
perform the available work.
SECTION 3: Seniority shall be lost for the following reasons:
1. Resignation, voluntary termination or otherwise leaving employment with or without
proper notice.
2. Discharge for just cause
3. Layoffs in excess of two (2) full years
4. Failure to return to work within four (4) days after notice of recall sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or telegram to the employees last address on record
with the Company.
5. Failure to report to work for three (3) or more consecutive working days without
making notification to the Company.
6. Continuous illness or disability for a period of time in excess of one (1) year. Upon the
return of any employee who has been ill for a protracted period within the one year
period, and prior to returning to actual work, the Company shall have the right to
require a medical examination of the employee to determine whether or not the
employee may return to work in a safe and healthy manner (see Article 19 Section
2.2).
SECTION 4: Seniority shall not accrue until an employee has completed their ninety (90) day
probationary period. At which time, the Officers seniority shall revert back to date of hire.
SECTION 5: Should an employee request a change in schedule, preference for such assignment
shall be made on the basis of seniority when such work becomes available. Vacancies within a
classification shall be posted for bidding by classification seniority, provided the employee has
the required qualifications and/or training to perform the available work.

ARTICLE 15
GRIEVANCE & ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
SECTION 1: For the purpose of this Agreement, the word "grievance" means any dispute between
the Company and the Union, or between the Company and any employee as to the meaning,
application, or interpretation of the terms of this Agreement or the challenge of any disciplinary
action taken against a non-probationary employee. Probationary employees shall not have any
rights under the grievance procedure.
11 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

SECTION 2: In order to be processed, all grievances must be presented at the first step within
fifteen (15) business days after the date of the occurrence-giving rise to the grievance. In the case
of discharge, suspension or layoff the grievance shall be commenced at Step 2 of this procedure,
and the written grievance shall be presented to the Site Commander or his/her designee within
ten (10) business days after the date giving rise to the grievance.
SECTION 3:
Step 1: The grievance shall be present to the Site Captain, no later than fifteen (15) business days
from the occurrence giving rise to the grievance, be reduced to writing on a Union grievance form
setting forth the facts in detail, and specifying the Article and Section/Paragraph allegedly
violated, and signed by the Union. The grievant, a Union representative (if requested by the
grievant) and the Company’s representative (or his/her designee) shall meet to discuss the
grievance within five (5) business days. The Company representative shall give a written decision
to the grievant and to the Union within ten (10) business days after receipt of the grievance.
Step 2: If the grievance is not resolved at Step 1, the Union will notify the Company within ten
(10) business days after receipt of the Step 1 written decision. The Union and the Company’s
Project Manager or designated personnel will meet or conference call within ten (10) business
days after notification. The Project Manager (or his/her designee) will meet with the grievant,
the Union representative, and the charging supervisor to discuss the grievance. The Company’s
Project Manager (or his/her designee) shall give a written decision to the grievant and to the
Union within ten (10) business days after the conference call/meeting.
SECTION 4: If the grievance is not resolved in Step 2, it will be reviewed by the UGSOA
International Union President or his/her designee and the Company’s Contract Manager (or
his/her designee who shall not have previously considered the grievance at Step 1 or Step 2)
within fifteen (15) business days of the Step 2 denial. A meeting or telephonic review between
the above referenced parties may be held by mutual agreement.
SECTION 5: In any particular case, any time limit specification may be extended by mutual
agreement between the Company and the Union, in writing.

ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
SECTION 6: Grievances which have been processed in accordance with the requirements of
Article 15 Grievance Procedure and which remain unsettled may be processed to arbitration in
accordance with the following procedures and limitations.
SECTION 7: The Union, within ten (10) business days after the rejection of the grievance by the
Company’s Contract Manager or his/her designee, will in writing, notify the Company’s Contract
Manager or his/her designee of its intent to invoke arbitration; and the Company and the Union
will jointly attempt to agree upon the selection of a neutral arbitrator to hear the case. Should
the parties fail to agree upon the selection of an arbitrator, the Union will request the Federal
12 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

Mediation and Conciliation Service to supply a list of seven (7) arbitrators to hear the case. A copy
of this request will be sent to the Company. This request will be made within five (5) business
days after the failure of the parties to agree upon an arbitrator. An arbitrator will be selected
from the list supplied by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service by the parties alternately
striking from the list until one name remains, and this individual will be the arbitrator to hear the
case.
SECTION 8: The arbitrator may examine the witness or witnesses of each party. Each party shall
have the right to cross-examine the witness or witnesses of the other party.
SECTION 9: The decision of the arbitrator shall be submitted, in writing, and shall be final and
binding on all parties to this Agreement. Unless written authority is given, the decision shall be
made within thirty (30) days following the close of the hearing. Each party hereto shall bear the
expense of preparing and presenting its own case. The cost and all expenses of the arbitrator
shall be borne equally by the parties.
SECTION 10: The arbitrator's authority shall be limited to finding a direct violation of the express
purpose of this Agreement’s provision or provisions in question rather than an implied or indirect
purpose. The arbitrator cannot modify, amend, add to, detract from or alter the provisions of this
Agreement.
SECTION 11: Any grievance shall be considered null and void if not filed and processed by the
Union, or the employee represented by the Union, in strict accordance with the procedure and
time limitations set forth above. In any particular case, any time limit specification may be
extended by mutual agreement between the Company and the Union, in writing.

ARTICLE 16
NON-DISCRIMINATION
The Company and the Union agree that they shall each comply with all federal, state, and local
(where applicable) laws and neither the Company nor the Union shall discriminate against, or in
favor of, any employee on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, age, non-jobrelated disability, or veteran's status, as required by law.

ARTICLE 17
VACATION
SECTION 1: Employees shall be entitled to paid vacation in accordance with the following
schedule. Part-time employees shall be entitled to pro-rated vacation hours based on years of
service and the number of hours actually worked in the previous year.
Service Completed
After 1 Year
After 5 Years

Vacation Earned
2 Weeks (80 hours)
3 Weeks (120 hours)
13 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

After 10 Years
After 15 Years
After 25 Years

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

4 Weeks (160 hours)
5 Weeks (200 hours)
6 Weeks (240 hours)

SECTION 2: Employees will earn vacation on their anniversary dates in accordance with the
schedule above. Vacation pay shall be earned following the employee's anniversary date and
payable before the next anniversary date. There shall be no carry-over of vacation from year to
year. In the event any employee will lose his or her vested unused vacation time under the no
carry-over rule, the employee will receive pay at their normal base hourly rate in lieu of the
vested unused vacation. Employees may cash–out any unused vacation at any time during the
year. Employees shall be compensated for vacation at their straight time rate of pay in effect at
the time the vacation leave is taken. Vacation leave shall not be deemed hours of work for the
purposes of computing over-time. Vacation leave shall be paid by the Company in accordance
with its normally scheduled payroll dates.
SECTION 3: Active Duty Military Employees deployed on active military duty in excess of 90
consecutive days will not be subject to the loss of any vacation time vested while on active duty
or prior to deployment. Such vacation time will be made available to use for 12 months after the
employee returns from active duty.
SECTION 4: Length of service shall be consistent with seniority and measured from time of
employment at the site. This includes all service with the present Company and predecessor
Companies in the performance of similar work at the U.S. Department of Energy National Energy
Technology Laboratory, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
SECTION 5: Vacation Scheduling
In order to ensure distribution of vacation time, it is agreed that the following procedure will be
used:
1. The Vacation selection process will start with the most senior employee and work through
the seniority list with each employee selecting 50% of their vacation time off prior to
moving down the list.
2. Changes in vacation schedule must be approved and submitted to the Company for
approval two (2) weeks prior to the scheduled vacation.
3. It is agreed that employees will be restricted from selecting a day that has already been
allocated to another employee on the same shift, when cancellations occur.
4. In the event that a vacation cancellation occurs, the Company agrees to post the canceled
days so other employees can bid them. Days will be assigned on a first come first serve
basis.
14 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

5. Employees will be restricted from trading scheduled vacation days to ensure strict
accordance to Seniority.
6. Finalized Vacation schedules will be posted for review.
SECTION 7: The Company will schedule one (1) personnel off per shift on vacation.
SECTION 8: When staffing permits, the Company will endeavor to approve additional vacation
requests.

ARTICLE 18
HOLIDAYS
SECTION 1: During the term of this Agreement, the following ten (10) holidays will be recognized
on their actual date, not observed date:
New Year's
Memorial Day
Martin Luther King Jr.
Columbus Day
Thanksgiving Day

Presidents Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Veterans Day
Christmas Day (December 25th)

SECTION 2: Any holiday declared by Presidential Proclamation, that specifically includes
contractors and the services they provide, and is funded by the government, will be observed as
specified in the proclamation.
SECTION 3: In order for an employee to qualify for a paid holiday, the employee must have
worked his/her regularly scheduled work day immediately preceding the holiday and the
employee's regularly scheduled work day immediately following the holiday, unless the
employee is off for approved leave.
SECTION 4: Employees who work on a Holiday shall receive time and one half (1 ½) hours of pay,
at the employee’s respective pay rate, for all hours of work, in addition to the eight (8) hours
Holiday pay.
SECTION 5: Full-time employees who are not scheduled to work on the Holiday will be paid eight
(8) hours of pay at the employee’s respective pay rate.
SECTION 6: An eligible part-time employee who is not required to work on a holiday shall be paid
a proration of the full time holiday benefit based upon his or her total hours worked for the
previous week multiplied by 0.2.
SECTION 7: Hours which an employee does not work but for which he or she is compensated
under this Article shall not be considered hours worked for the purposes of computing overtime.
15 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

ARTICLE 19
PERSONAL DAYS/ SICK DAYS
SECTION 1:
1. All employees will earn 0.032 hours of sick/personal time for every one (1) hour paid, to
a maximum of fifty-six (56) hours per year.
2. Employees taking personal sick days are required to arrange personal/sick leave with
their supervisor prior to taking the time off or utilize the normal call-off procedures if the
time off was not authorized in advance. Accrued but unused sick/personal time shall be
paid to the employee in the pay period following the employee’s anniversary date or they
may choose to carry a maximum of twenty-four (24) hours over to the following year.
3. Employees shall be compensated for personal/sick days at their straight-time rate of pay
in effect at the time the personal/sick leave is taken. Personal/sick leave shall not be
deemed hours of work for the purposes of computing overtime. The Company may
require that employees taking leave under this Article, not take it in less than four (4) hour
increments.
4. If an Employee retires or becomes separated from the Company prior to the end of their
anniversary year, that Employee shall be entitled to receive a dollar amount equal to
100% of accrued unused Sick/Personal time. Upon the death of an Employee, the
Employee's estate is eligible to receive a dollar amount equal to 100% of unused
Sick/Personal time.
SECTION 2:
1. Sick leave shall be granted to an Employee under the following conditions.
a. When an Employee cannot perform his/her duties because he or she is
incapacitated by personal illness or injury;
b. When the spouse or domestic partner, child or parent of either Employee or
his/her spouse or domestic partner or a relative living in the immediate household
of an Employee, is seriously ill or needs to attend appointments with health care
professionals ;
c. To keep appointments with health care professionals. The Employee will make
every effort to provide at least five (5) working days’ notice of such appointment.
2. The Company may require that an Employee, wishing to return to work after an absence
of more than three (3) consecutive working days because of illness or injury, be examined
by a physician designated by the Company and/or by a physician of the Employee's
choosing. If the Company requires the Employee to be examined by a physician, the
16 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

Company shall assume the cost of such examinations. The results of such examination(s)
must attest to the fitness of such Employee to return to his/her regularly assigned duties.
3. Notification of absences under this Article must be given to the designated representative
of the Company at least two (2) hours prior to the beginning of the scheduled tour of
duty. In extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the Employee, the above
notification period may be waived.
4. Sick/Personal leave credits earned by an Employee following a return to duty after a leave
without pay or absence without pay shall not be applied to such period of previous
absence.

ARTICLE 20
LEAVE OF ABSENCE
A leave-of-absence without pay, for reasonable cause, as determined by the Company, may be
granted for a period of up to thirty (30) days, with written approval to the employee's Supervisor
submitted at least thirty (30) days in advance, if possible, of expected date of the leave of
absence, providing the employee can be spared from his regularly assigned job duties without
undue strain on Company personnel or resources.
Such leave-of-absences may be extended for good cause upon written approval of the Company.
Employees who are away for a period longer than the term of their leave of absence shall be
considered to have voluntarily terminated their employment with the Company.
Employees shall not receive Holiday pay for any Holiday which falls during the period they are on
leave without pay. Employees on leave of absence without pay, which extends beyond thirty (30)
calendar days, shall not receive any accruals or benefits for the period of time that they are out
on leave.

ARTICLE 21
FUNERAL/BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
SECTION 1: The Company will grant employees leave up to three (3) calendar days between the
death and the burial / memorial service of an immediate family member. Bereavement pay will
not be used for the purposes of computing overtime and will be paid at the employee's straighttime pay rate at the time the leave was taken.
SECTION 2: Immediate family is defined as Mother, Father, Mother-in-Law, Father-in-Law,
Sibling, Brother-in-Law, and Sister in Law, Grandparents, Legal Guardian, Husband, Wife,
Daughter, Son, or Grandchildren.
SECTION 3: The leave of absence must be taken during the period of time between the date of
death and the day following the burial or other memorial service. Bereavement leave is to be
17 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

taken in consecutive days of the death or day of the funeral and may not be split or postponed
without prior approval from the Company.
SECTION 4: In order to receive bereavement leave pay, a death notice or other satisfactory proof
of death must be submitted to the Company. The employee must also furnish satisfactory proof
of the employee's relationship with the deceased. The employee must notify and advise his/her
immediate Supervisor that he/she will be unable to attend work because of the death as soon as
possible.
SECTION 5: A day's pay shall be defined as eight (8) hours of pay at the employee's straight-time
rate of pay and bereavement pay will not be used for the purposes of computing overtime.

ARTICLE 22
JURY DUTY
SECTION 1: An employee who has completed his or her probationary period and who is requested
to serve jury duty shall be compensated by the Company in the amount of the difference between
his or her regular days’ pay less the amount received in juror’s fees for up to a maximum of ten
(10) days.
SECTION 2: Whenever an employee is temporarily excused from jury duty by the court on his or
her scheduled workday, he or she shall promptly advise their supervisor and stand ready to report
for work if requested by the Company.
SECTION 3: The receipt of a subpoena and/or the notice to report for jury duty must be
immediately submitted to the appropriate supervisor and the Company may request that the
employee be excused or exempted from such jury duty if, in the opinion of the Company, the
employee's services are essential at the time of the proposed jury duty.
SECTION 4: No court leave shall be granted when the Employee is the defendant or is engaged in
personal litigation, unless such litigation arises out of the proper and legitimate performance of
his/her assigned responsibilities.

ARTICLE 23
DISCIPLINE
SECTION 1: No employee, after completion of his or her probationary period, shall be disciplined
without just cause. It is agreed by the parties that in instances when (i) an employee is removed
from working under the Contract by the government or at the direction of the government, (ii)
the employee’s authority to work as a security guard under the contract is otherwise removed,
suspended, denied or terminated by the government, or (iii) the employee no longer satisfies the
government qualifications for his or her position, the employee may be terminated under this
Agreement. Discipline and discharge action taken as a result of government’s direction will not
be subject to progressive discipline.
18 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

Should a non-probationary employee wish to contest a dismissal solely made by the Company
(i.e., not due to an action or request of the government or as otherwise provided herein), a
written notice thereof shall be given to the Company within ten (10) business days of the
dismissal, in which event the issue shall thereafter be submitted to, and determined under the
Grievance Procedure (Article 15) commencing with Step 2, as provided in this Agreement.
The Company’s policy and procedures will be consistent with the DOE/NETL on disciplinary
action.
SECTION 2: All reprimands and discharge notices shall be in writing. Copies of the reprimand or
discharge notice shall be given to the employee reprimanded and to the shop steward. Each
reprimand shall be canceled after twelve (12) months.
SECTION 3: Subject to the foregoing, discipline shall be applied in accordance with “Acceptable
and Unacceptable Conduct” following the progressive discipline process:
1. Minor Offense.
a. With respect to a first offense, the employee will be given a documented verbal
warning.
b. With respect to a second offense within twelve (12) months, the employee will be
given a written warning.
c. With respect to a third offense within twelve (12) months, the employee may be
subject to discipline up to suspension without pay for a period of one (1) to three
(3) days off the schedule.
d. With respect to any further offense within twelve (12) months, the employee may
be subject to discipline up to termination at the sole discretion of the Employer.
e. Disciplinary action will be escalated to the next level for offenses occurring within
a twelve (12) month period of time. If no further offenses occur during a period
of twelve (12) months, any future disciplinary action will begin at the first level
which is a documented warning.
f. Discipline and/or discharge action taken in responses to egregious offenses that is
determined to lead directly or indirectly to or is a direct or indirect cause of
breaches of security will not be subject to progressive discipline.
2. Major Offense. Up to Immediate Discharge. Infractions included, but not limited to,
include theft, drug/alcohol violation, inattentiveness and willful DOE/NETL policy
violations.
19 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

SECTION 4: Just Cause. No employee shall be discharged or disciplined without just cause, and
discipline and discharge matters shall be subject to the grievance and arbitration procedures
contained in Article 15 of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 24
WAGES
Current:
Lieutenant:
Sergeant:
Guard II:
New Hires:

$20.53
$19.76
$18.77
$14.00

The Company agrees to pay the employees in accordance with the following for the life of this
Agreement. The parties agree that the below wages are a minimum and a wage re-opener may
be elected by the Union, approximately sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of the wage
adjustment period.

Lieutenant
Sergeant
Guard II
New Hire

Effective
February 1, 2016
$21.04
(2.50%)
$20.25
(2.50%)
$19.24
(2.50%)
$14.35
(2.50%)

Effective
February 1, 2017
$21.41
(1.75%)
$20.61
(1.75%)
$19.58
(1.75%)
$14.60
(1.75%)

Effective
February 1, 2018
$21.79
(1.75%)
$20.97
(1.75%)
$19.92
(1.75%)
$14.86
(1.75%)

All bargaining unit employees who work any hours between 1500 and 0700 shall receive a $0.50
premium for hours worked between those times.
All training time will be paid at the normal hourly rate and will be used in the calculation of
overtime, if applicable.

ARTICLE 25
HEALTH AND WELFARE BENEFITS
SECTION 1: For the purpose of purchasing benefits, the Company shall contribute to the
Employee the Health and Welfare amount specified below, per hour for all hours paid, not to
exceed forty (40) hours in any one week to each and every Employee covered by this Agreement
(not to exceed 2080 hours annually).

20 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

The Company will request a rate adjustment of the following, in consideration of the extended
negotiations that resulted in this CBA. Once funded by the Government, the Company will
reimburse the affected employees.
“The Company is submitting a request for equitable adjustment for the Health & Welfare (H&W)
rate for the period of 02/01/15 to 01/31/16. The requested adjustment effective 2/1/2015 to
06/29/15 from $3.83 to $4.02, in accordance with the Department of Labor (DOL) minimum
Health and Welfare Fringe Benefits rate during that period and from $4.02 to $4.27 from
06/30/15 to 01/31/16, in accordance with the DOL minimum Health and Welfare Fringe Benefits
rate effective during that period.”
For the duration of this CBA, the Company agrees to re-open the Health and Welfare rate sixty
(60) to ninety (90) days prior to the renewal of the Company’s contract if the DOL minimum
Health and Welfare Fringe Benefits rate increases above the below table.
The request will be as follows: “The Company is submitting a request for equitable adjustment
for the Health & Welfare (H&W) rate for the period of XX/XX/XX to XX/XX/XX. The requested
adjustment effective XX/XX/XX to XX/XX/XX from $X.XX to $X.XX, in accordance with the
Department of Labor (DOL) minimum Health and Welfare Fringe Benefits rate effective during
that period.” Once approved and funded by the Government, the Company will reimburse the
affected employees for the applicable period.
Effective
February 1, 2016
$4.39

Effective
February 1, 2017
$4.53

Effective
February 1, 2018
$4.67

SECTION 2: Employees must choose one of the following options each year during the open
enrolment timeframe. The Company must notify the Union prior to any plan or requirement
changes thirty (30) days prior to any such changes, when possible.
Option #1: The Employee chooses and enrolls in one of the Company offered health plans. Any
residual Health and Welfare funds not used to purchase benefits shall be paid in cash in the
Employee’s paycheck. If the Employee elects benefit levels that exceed the total Health and
Welfare funds earned, the excess cost will be paid by the Employee in the form of a payroll
deduction.
Option #2: The Employee chooses to waive all or part of the Company offered benefits and
receive cash-in-lieu-of.
SECTION 3: In the case of the Employee waiving the Company provided health coverage (Option
2), the Employee must demonstrate active participation in another bona-fide group medical
coverage once per year (during the open enrolment period or otherwise specified by the
government). This shall be done by providing a letter from the Insurer on Insurance Company
letterhead to confirm an active policy for the Employee.
21 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

In the case the Employee lapses or changes coverage, the Employee must notify the Company of
the change and provide the above proof of coverage for the new policy within thirty (30) days, if
possible.

ARTICLE 26
GENERAL
SECTION 1: DRUG & ALCOHOL
1. The Company will enforce its drug and alcohol policy that may require for preemployment testing as well as testing during employment. The employee consent to and
compliance with such policy as a condition for employment. Continued employment is
based on the successful passing of drug tests.
2. The Company and the Union recognize that, in the security business, the use of controlled
substances or alcohol, which cause intoxication or impairment on-the-job, poses risks to
the parties, the affected employee, his/her co-workers and the public. An employee
cannot perform his/her work effectively if he/she is under the influence of illegal drugs or
alcohol. While the parties have no intention of intruding into the private lives of the
employees, the parties expect employees to report for work in a condition enabling the
full and safe performance of all required duties. The use of controlled substances and
alcohol is strictly prohibited during the eight (8) hours immediately before the start of
employee's shift. The parties recognize that an employee's involvement with drugs
and/or alcohol, whether on or off the job, can have an impact on the Company's ability
to meet the Government's expectation of a drug and alcohol free work environment.
Accordingly, compliance with the Company's Drug and Alcohol Policy is a condition of
employment/continued employment. Violation of the policy subjects an employee to
immediate termination pursuant to the terms of this Agreement.
3. Use of Prescription & Other OTC Drugs. Any employee using prescription medications or
other medications that may affect or impair coordination or judgment must notify their
supervisor before reporting to work and provide a doctor's statement that the employee
is fit to perform the duties of the job, if requested.
SECTION 2: ARREST AGREEMENT – The Company is a government contractor providing security
services who is bound by its Government contract and other Government and Company security
and/or clearance requirements. As such, employees will comply with the provisions of DFWs’
Arrest Agreement. Employees are required to notify their Site Commander/Project Manager
within twenty-four (24) hours of an arrest.
SECTION 3: GOVERNMENT REQUIREMENTS
1. The parties recognize that they are providing a service to the United States Government.
Therefore, the administration of the terms of this Agreement is subject to the written
directives of the Government. The client may supersede any understanding regarding
22 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

post assignments, hours, shifts, credentials, qualifications, or any other Government
directive not mentioned herein.
2. Notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement, to the extent the Government requires
compliance with specific procedures, (e.g., security clearances, medical, examinations,
weapon proficiency testing, uniforms/appearance standards, staffing determinations,
assignments, work rules, and drug testing), or with the requirements of the Service
Contract Act, the Company will be permitted to adhere to those requirements without
recourse from the Union or any employee against the Company. However, it is agreed
that the Company and the Union will meet and bargain over the impacts and effects of
any such change.
3. The Company agrees to provide the Union with a copy of such Government Directives
upon request.
4. The Union agrees to cooperate with the Company in all matters required by the United
States Government in writing, and the Union recognizes that the terms and conditions of
the Agreement are subject to certain sovereign priorities, which the United States
Government may exercise. The Union agrees that any actions taken by the Company
pursuant to a requirement of the United States Government shall not constitute a breach
of this Agreement. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent institution of
any change prior to discussion with the Union where the United States Government
requires immediate change. If the Government directs that a specific employee be
removed from the premises and/or discharged or disciplined, any such action may be
undertaken by the Company and shall not be subject to the grievance or arbitration
procedure of this contract, upon separation of employment. The Company will, however,
meet and confer with the Union concerning the effects of any such change. Should an
appeal of any such government directive be successful, the Company agrees to reinstate
the affective employee without loss of seniority or benefits.
5. The Union recognizes that the Company has certain obligations in its contract with the
Government pertaining to security and agrees that nothing in this Agreement is intended
to place the Company in violation of its security agreement with the Government.

ARTICLE 27
VOLUNTARY QUITS
An employee shall be deemed to have voluntarily quit employment with the Company, and the
separation of the employee from the Company will not be subject to grievance, mediation and
arbitration procedures of this Agreement, if:
1. An employee who takes medical leave fails to notify the Company within two (2) days
after he or she is able to return to work.
23 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

1/20/16 – 1/31/19

2. The employee becomes ineligible to work on the Company's contract because he or she
has failed to successfully complete training, testing and other qualifications mandated by
the Government in its contracts with the Company, except due to no fault of the Officer
(canceled classes, acts of God, disability, etc).
3. The employee fails to report to work within forty-eight (48) hours after the expiration of
an approved leave period without contacting the Company and providing verifiable
evidence of their inability to return as scheduled.
4. The employee fails to respond within four (4) days of receiving a notice of recall (see
Article 13 Section 3).

ARTICLE 28
SEPARABILITY AND SAVINGS
If any Article or section of this Agreement or any Riders or Attachments thereto should be held
invalid by operation of law or by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or if compliance with or
enforcement of any Article or Section should be restrained by such tribunal pending a final
determination as to its validity, the remainder of this Agreement and of any Rider thereof, or the
application of such Article or Section to persons or circumstances other than those as to which it
has been held invalid, or as to which compliance with or enforcement of or compliance with has
been restrained as above set forth, the Company and the Union agree to enter into collective
bargaining negotiations, upon the request of the Union or the Company, for the purpose of
arriving at a mutually satisfactory replacement for such Article or Section during the period of
invalidity or restraint. If the Parties do not agree on a mutually satisfactory replacement, either
Party shall be permitted all legal or economic recourse in support of its demands,
notwithstanding any provisions of this Agreement to the contrary.

ARTICLE 29
DURATION
This Agreement becomes effective January 20, 2016 and shall continue in full force and effect
until Midnight January 31, 2019 and from year to year thereafter, unless either party receives
written notice from the other party, not less than sixty (60) days, nor more than one-hundredeighty (180), immediately prior to the expiration date, of its intention to amend, modify or
terminate this Agreement. However, in the event the Company shall cease to operate security at
the facility, this contract will continue in full force and effect until it is modified or changed by
the successor parties.
This Agreement contains the entire understanding, undertaking and agreement of the Company
and the Union, and finally determines all matters of collective bargaining for this term. Changes
to this Agreement, whether by addition, waiver, deletion, amendment or modification, must be
reduced to writing and executed by both the Company and the Union.
24 | P a g e

UGSOA Local 9 CBA

tl20/t6-tlsttte

In witness whereof, the parties have caused their representatives
to sign this Agreement as full
acknowledgment of their intention to be bound by the Agreement;
For: DFW Security protective Force

Fon UGSOA International Union

Title

For; DFW Security Protective Force

Fon UGSOA Local 9

Signature

signature

Title

Date

Date

Title

For: UGSOA local 9

Signature

Date

Title

25 lPag*
