Village of Owego
Financial Restructuring
Board Report
Comprehensive
Review
for Local Governments

Financial Restructuring Board
for Local Governments
June 2016

Village of Owego

Table of Contents
Table of Contents ............................................................................................................. 2
Overview ........................................................................................................................... 3
Background ...................................................................................................................... 3
Fiscal Eligibility and Stress ................................................................................................. 3
Demographic and Socioeconomic Profile ........................................................................... 4
Organization and Finances ............................................................................................. 5
Organizational Profile ......................................................................................................... 5
Budget Profile .................................................................................................................... 7
Findings and Recommendations .................................................................................. 10
Shared Services............................................................................................................... 10
Village Dissolution ............................................................................................................ 15
Economic Development ................................................................................................... 19
Fiscal Performance and Accountability ............................................................................ 21
Conclusion and Next Steps ........................................................................................... 22
Appendix A – Letter and Resolution from Village of Owego....................................... 23
Appendix B – Resolution Approving the Village of Owego ........................................ 25
Appendix C - Summary of Government Reorganization Process .............................. 29

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

2

Village of Owego
Overview
The Village of Owego is a large Upstate village in Tioga County. With a population of 3,896 at
the 2010 Census, it is the 140th most populous village in New York State and the 2nd most
populous village in Tioga County. 2013 expenditures of $5.4 million were the 137th most of
villages in the State and most of villages in the County.
The Village is governed by a Mayor and six Village Trustees, who are elected by ward for twoyear staggered terms. Other elected officials include the Village Clerk-Treasurer and the Village
Justice.
The Village Board adopted and the Mayor concurred with a resolution requesting a
Comprehensive Review by the Financial Restructuring Board (see Appendix A). On February
24, 2015, the Financial Restructuring Board approved this request for a Comprehensive Review
with Resolution No. 2015-10 (see Appendix B).
This Comprehensive Review first gives some background on the Village's fiscal eligibility and
demographic profile. It then provides information on the organization and finances of the Village.
Finally, it presents the Comprehensive Review's findings and recommendations.

Background
Fiscal Eligibility and Stress
The Village of Owego was not automatically considered a Fiscally Eligible Municipality for Board
services and assistance because it had not submitted to the Office of the State Comptroller
(OSC) all of the information necessary to calculate its Average Full Value Property Tax Rate
and Average Fund Balance Percentage as of when OSC calculated these eligibility measures.
Upon written confirmation that the Village had subsequently reported this information, the Board
deemed the Village a Fiscally Eligible Municipality.
The Village would have been automatically considered a Fiscally Eligible Municipality because
its Average Full Value Property Tax Rate (2009-2013) of $13.68 per $1,000 is above $7.055 per
$1,000 – 75th percentile for all municipalities. This is the 34th highest for villages.
The Village’s Average Fund Balance Percentage (2009-2013) of 15.49 percent would have
been the 75th lowest for villages but is still above the five percent threshold.
Average Full Value Property Tax Rate
$20.00
Automatically Eligible Above $7.055

50%
39.09%

40%

$13.68

$15.00

Average Fund Balance Percentage

30%
$10.00
$5.43
$5.00

15.49%

20%
10%
0%

$0.00
Owego

All Villages (Median)

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

Automatically Eligible Below 5%

Owego

All Villages (Median)

3

Village of Owego

OSC’s Fiscal Stress Monitoring System did not give the Village a Fiscal Rating or an
Environmental Rating for 2014 or 2015 because the Village did not file all necessary information
in a timely manner.

Demographic and Socioeconomic Profile
The Village’s population fell by 0.4 percent from 2000 to
2010 to 3,896. This decrease is less than the 1.1 percent
population loss experienced by the typical village over that
same time period.
The Village of Owego’s median household income in 2014
was $44,655, which is less than the typical village’s median
household income of $52,633.

Population Change
2000: 3,911
0.4%

2010: 3,896

The Village’s median home value of $97,100 is less than
the median home value of the typical village of $130,750.
Its property value per capita of $35,746 in 2014 is less than the property value per capita of the
typical village of $49,236.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

4

Village of Owego
Organization and Finances
Organizational Profile
The Village of Owego is governed by a Mayor and six Village Trustees. The Mayor is elected to
a two-year term, which expires April 2018. The Trustees are elected by ward to two-year terms,
three of which expire April 2018 and three of which expire April 2017. The Village ClerkTreasurer has a two-year term, which expires April 2018. The Village Justice has a four-year
term, which expires April 2018. The Village is one of only a dozen villages that still operates with
its own charter, similar to a city; most villages operate under Village Law.
According to the organizational chart provided by the
Village, there are several departments: The ClerkTreasurer Department, the Department of Public
Works, the Police Department and the Fire
Department. There are 24 full-time employees, in
addition to various part-time and seasonal employees.
The largest department is Public Works, which
includes ten of the full-time employees. The
Department of Public Works is responsible for code
enforcement, street maintenance, parks and cemetery
maintenance, the Village pool, and vehicle repairs for
all departments. The Police Department is the next
largest, with nine full-time employees. The Fire
Department has two full-time employees (paid EMT
positions) in addition to its volunteer firefighters, and
the Clerk-Treasurer's office has three full-time
employees and a part-time bookkeeper.

Village of Owego Full-Time
Employees

Fire
2
8%

Clerk
3
13%

Public
Works
10
42%

Police
9
38%

Certain Village employees are covered by collective bargaining agreements. The Owego Police
Benevolent Association (PBA) represents six employees in the Police Department. The Village
recently agreed to terms with its police bargaining unit on a new contract. The most recent
contract expired on July 31, 2013. This new agreement covers the period from 8/1/2013 –
7/31/2017 and carries salary raises ranging from 1.5 percent - 2.25 percent in each of the four
years of the deal. Under the new agreement, covered employees would still contribute 20
percent of their health insurance premium, however there is now a tiered biweekly pay
deduction (instead of a flat contribution for all covered PBA employees) which ranges from $31
to $118 depending on single to family coverage.
The Civil Service Employees Association (CSEA) represents 15 employees across 6
departments. The CSEA contract covers August 1, 2011 through July 31, 2016. It included
salary increases of 1 percent in 2011, 1.25 percent in 2012, 1.75 percent in 2013, 2 percent in
2014, and 2 percent in 2015. Covered employees contribute 15 percent of their health insurance
premium or a tiered biweekly pay deduction which ranges from $31 to $111 depending on single
to family coverage.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

5

Village of Owego

Village of Owego Labor Contracts
Union
Owego PBA
CSEA Local
1000, AFSCME,
AFL-CIO

% Salary Increases

Contract
Status

Contract
Expiration

Current

07/31/2017

2011
2.5

2012
3.0

2013 2014 2015
1.5
1.75 2.00

Current

07/31/2016

1.0

1.25

1.75

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

2.0

2.0

2016
2.25
-

6

Village of Owego
Budget Profile
The Village's Fiscal Year 2015 all funds budget (General Fund and Sewer Fund) is estimated to
total just under $4.49 million; $3.36 million of which is for the General Fund. This is a 0.7
percent increase from the 2014 all funds adjusted budget of $4.46 million. For the General
Fund, the largest spending category in the 2015 budget is for the Public Works Department (38
percent of General Fund expenditures).

2015 Village of Owego Expenditures

Public Works
$1,282K
Sewer Fund
$1,131K
25%

General Fund
$3,359K
75%

Fire Department
$614K

Clerk - Treasurer
$359K
Police Department
$931K

Other
$172K

The largest 2015 all funds revenue sources
for the village are property taxes (46.8
percent) and Sewer Fund revenues (25.2
percent. Real property tax revenues increase
by 1.5 percent from 2014 to 2015.
The Village has no significant outstanding
General Fund supported debt, as it paid the
last installment for two fire trucks in the 2015
fiscal year. The main debt of the Village lies
within the Sewer Fund. Within the past two
years, the Village issued a $4 million interest
free loan through the State’s Environmental
Facilities Corporation (EFC) for the needed
improvements. Expected debt service for
the remaining 28 years is approximately
$175,000 per year.

2015 Village of Owego Revenues
Gifts &
Donations
$185K
Fire
Protection
$167K
Sales Tax
$280K

All Other
$819K

Sewer
Fund
$1,131K

Property
Tax
$2,100K

The Village’s Fiscal Year 2016 budget relies on a flat $2.1 million tax levy and a $97,000
appropriation from its fund balance. The adopted General Fund budget of $3.33 million is nearly
identical to the 2015 adopted budget.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

7

Village of Owego
Overall Village Fiscal Context
While the Village seems to have adopted a status quo budget for 2016, there are some items
that could be a cause for concern in upcoming years.

Ambulance Memorial Fund
Approximately 15 years ago, the Village was bequeathed a $2 million memorial fund, the “Sweet
Memorial Fund,” with the stipulation that the endowment be used for healthcare-related
expenses. Accordingly, the Village has chosen to use portions of the fund annually to support
the Village’s paid ambulance operation, which is a part of the volunteer Fire Department. The
Village typically uses $140,000 in support of the operation.
After the 2016 appropriation of $145,000, the fund will only be able to support two to three more
years before it is depleted. Once the funds are exhausted, the Village taxpayers will have to
support the ambulance expenses in full or eliminate/reduce the service. Based on the current
tax levy, this would be a seven percent tax increase, which would be on top of any other
demands on the levy.

Fire Protection Revenues
For many years, the Village and the Town of Owego have contracted on an annual basis for the
Village’s volunteer Fire Department to supply emergency services to portions of the Town.
Recently, the Town’s volunteer fire district has been expanding its services through additional
volunteers and the construction of a new facility just across the Village border.
With this additional service from the fire district, the Town has reduced its support of the Village
operation. In 2013, the Village received $234,000 from the Town. In 2016, the Village is only
expecting $45,000. These funds offset a significant portion of the Village Fire Department’s
$600,000 in annual costs. The absence of these funds is a leading reason for the use of
$97,000 in fund balance in fiscal year 2016, which is not a sustainable solution.

Fund Balance Trend and Usage
While the 2012 General Fund balance stood at over $780,000 (17 percent of expenditures), the
balance precipitously decreased to $385,000 by the end of 2013 (9 percent of expenditures).
Since then, Village appropriation of General Fund fund balance moderated for each of 2014 and
2015 budgets, requiring $60,000 for each year.
The 2015 budget was assisted through the receipt of a one-time Blue Cross health care
escrow/reserve refund of $300,000 due to the Village changing plans in accordance with the
Federal Affordable Care Act requirements.
With this refund, the Village earmarked half of it for necessary expenses and upgrades to its
cemetery. The remaining $150,000 was used to obviate the need for 2015 fund balance usage
and supplied the necessary $97,000 of fund balance for the 2016 adopted Budget.
The Village estimates it is maintaining approximately $300,000 in undesignated fund balance
aside from the fiscal year 2016 appropriation, which equates to roughly 8.5 percent of General

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

8

Village of Owego
Fund expenditures. The Village cannot count on another one-time receipt of funds. If future
budgets require $100,000 in fund balance annually, the Village’s reserve will be exhausted in a
few short years.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

9

Village of Owego
Findings and Recommendations
After a thorough review of the Village’s operations, the Board identifies findings and
recommendations in the following areas: shared services, dissolution, economic development,
and fiscal performance and accountability.

Shared Services
Regional Government Context
As of the 2010 Census, Tioga County
had a population of 51,125 and ranked
42nd most populous county out of the
57 counties outside of New York City.
With a land area of 518.6 square miles,
it is the 42nd largest county. With a
population density of 99 residents per
square mile, it is the 35th most densely
populated county.
The County is governed by a ninemember County Legislature, which
elects a Chair. Other elected County
officials include: the Treasurer, the
Sheriff, the District Attorney, the Clerk,
and four Coroners. As of 2014, the
County had total expenditures of $78
million, which is the 52nd highest for all
counties, and total expenditures per
capita of $1,524, which is the 52nd
highest for all counties.
Within the County, there are 9 towns, 6
villages, 9 fire districts, 6 school
districts, and approximately 20 town
special districts and other entities.
The Village of Owego is the county seat. It is completely within the Town of Owego, which is
located in the southeast corner of the County.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

10

Village of Owego
Survey of Shared Services
A survey was conducted by the Village to gather information on the general functions of the
Village and neighboring municipalities to ascertain duplication of services and potential areas for
further consolidation. The Village was asked to briefly describe current shared service
arrangements in each service/functional area and to identify any obstacles or opportunities for
additional shared services.
Below is the summary of the results identifying which services are provided by each municipal
entity.

Index of Municipal Services Provided
Service / Function
Police
Dispatch / E-911
Fire
Ambulance / EMS
Tax Collection/Treasurer
Tax Bill Printing
Tax Foreclosure
Assessing
Personnel / HR / Civil Service
Payroll / Time & Attendance
Purchasing
Budget / Finance
Code Enforcement
Building / Zoning / Planning
Park Maintenance
Animal Control
Plowing
Paving / Street Maintenance
Lighting / Traffic Controls
Sanitation / Garbage
Water
Wastewater / Sewer

Village of
Owego
X

Town of
Owego

X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

Tioga
County
X
X
X

Owego Apalachin
School District

X
X
X

X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X

X
X

X

X
X

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

X
X

11

Village of Owego
Shared Services Actions and Opportunities
A local government’s primary responsibility is to deliver services for the benefit and well-being of
its residents. As the above chart aptly displays, there is ample duplication of services among the
Village of Owego and neighboring municipalities.
If the Village of Owego is to address impending future financial stress, it must maximize
available savings from pursuing and implementing a new shared services plan with its
governmental partners. An effective plan will not only enable the Village to reduce its cost
structure going forward, but should also help partnering governments reduce their costs as well.
The Board analysis of municipal services provided by the Village of Owego and its neighboring
municipalities identified several areas of overlap. The Board facilitated a group discussion with
the Village, Town, and County to help begin to identify additional shared service actions that
could be initiated among the governments. Some of the most promising opportunities for shared
services include the following:

Fire Department/Emergency Services
The Village’s Fire Department includes five fire companies (Susquehanna Hose Co. #1, Wave
Hose Co. #2, Croton Hose Co. #3, Hiawatha Engine Co. #4, and Ahwaga Ladder Co. #5) at four
fire stations with approximately 300 volunteers. At present, the Department serves 64 square
miles, including the entire Village of Owego and portions of the Towns of Owego, Nichols, and
Tioga.
The Fire Department also operates an ambulance service. While the fire rescue staff are
volunteers, the two ambulance staff are paid. In total, the Village expends just over $600,000
annually for the Fire Department and ambulance service. This Department is predominantly
funded through general Village revenues (property tax). As recently as fiscal year ending 2013,
the Village received $234,000 in fire protection revenue, mostly from the Town of Owego as
compensation for the Village Fire Department providing primary emergency coverage for a
portion of the Town.
The contract for Village fire and emergency services expired July 31, 2015. In 2014, the Town of
Owego Fire District began work on a new, multi-bay fire station for $1.1 million, and recruited
additional volunteers. This allowed the Town to cut back or eliminate the need for Village
coverage, thereby saving on the fire protection fees the Town pays to the Village. Accordingly,
in the Village’s total fire protection revenue in the 2016 adopted budget is down to $45,000.
This loss of revenue is temporarily mitigated by the fact that the Village has finished paying debt
service on two fire trucks, relieving debt expenses of $150,000 from the 2016 budget. However,
this loss of contractual revenue creates a recurring, perpetual problem for the Village.
As a means to reduce expenses and keep property tax increases in check, Village residents
should contemplate the option of reversing the roles by potentially disbanding the Fire
Department and contracting with the Town Fire District. It makes little sense having two fullyfunded and functioning neighboring departments/districts where one might be able to serve the
entire community. Moreover, the Village’s fire chief has publicly stated that fire companies

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

12

Village of Owego
should be looking to share services rather than expanding and, in a sense, competing among
each other.
Fearing for its future and desiring to secure its fiscal footing, the Village Fire Department has
explored the possibilities of creating its own fire district, rather than operating as a department
under the Village. Migrating to a fire district would give the present Department control over its
operation, with the ability to elect its own board of commissioners and more importantly the
ability to set its own tax levy. While this new district’s levy would be subject to the State’s tax
cap, the Board of Commissioners could vote to override the cap.
While the Department may not have the legal ability to change to a district, Village residents and
taxpayers should still be leery of the creation of a new fire district rather than a department
under the full control of the Village administration. Village taxpayers should strive to achieve
effective, reliable emergency service at the most reasonable cost. The proliferation of fire
districts, rather than a reversal of course and an expansion of shared services, is likely not in
the best interest of Village taxpayers in the long run.

Police Consolidation/Department Dissolution
Second only to the Village’s Department of Public Works in terms of staff size and annual
expenditures, the Village spends approximately $930,000 annually for its Police Department.
The Department consists of nine full-time employees and provides 24-hour, 7-day coverage and
service.
The Village of Owego is the County seat for Tioga County, and thus, the Village is also home to
many county-based departments, including the County Sheriff’s Department. The Sheriff’s
Department has a total full-time equivalent staff of 44 and provides countywide road patrol as
part of its duties. The Department spends approximately $4.7 million annually.
The concept of departmental dissolution was broached several years ago and, today, remains a
contested topic among Village residents. In a shared service discussion with the Village and
County representation, the County showed a willingness to consider a proposal.
In order to dissolve the Department, however, village voters would have to approve the measure
in a process governed by current law. Prior to this step, Village and County government officials,
as well as all of the affected residents, would need to work through a detailed plan regarding
coverage/service and the associated costs – including compensation to the County. The
presumption is that, while the Village is spending well over $900,000 per year for police service,
an equivalent amount of coverage and service could be supplied by the County for a lower
annual cost, given the economies of scale and benefits of managing a larger department.
Recommendation: The Board recommends that the Village, in conjunction with its governmental
neighbors, develop and implement a shared services plan that will lower the annual cost of
providing specific services and address the inherent duplication of services via multigovernmental jurisdictions. If the Village agrees to abide by and implement this
recommendation, the Board may, in its sole discretion, award a grant to assist the Village and
its neighboring governments with implementing such shared services plan. The specific
structure and conditions of such grant, which would be developed in consultation with the
Village, and any other aspects of such grant would be subject to an affirmative vote of a majority
of the total members of the Board.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

13

Village of Owego
Local Government Efficiency Grant Program
The State also offers competitive grants through the Local Government Efficiency Grant
program (LGEG) to local governments for planning or implementing a local government
efficiency project, including sharing services, functional consolidation, and regional service
delivery. The maximum grant for an implementation project is $200,000 per municipality/$1
million per grant. The maximum grant for a planning project is $12,500 per municipality/
$100,000 per grant. Planning projects require a 50 percent local match and implementation
projects require a 10 percent local match. If a planning project is later implemented, the local
match for implementation is offset by the amount of the local match for the planning project.
LGEG is administered by the Department of State. More information on grant requirements and
how to apply is available at https://www.dos.ny.gov/lg/lge/index.html.

Transformational Municipal Restructuring Grants
On February 2, 2016 the Department of State released the Request for Applications for the
Municipal Restructuring Fund (MRF) – a new $25 million program to assist local government
and school officials with developing transformative projects that will lead to property tax
reductions for New Yorkers. The MRF is a grant program with a continuous recruitment process
and projects submitted through the program will be ranked as they are received based upon
established criteria until funding is exhausted. Projects will be ranked by metrics that include
potential impact across local governments, effect across service delivery areas and municipal
functions, and potential for long-term property tax savings.
The Village should consider evaluating internal opportunities for consolidation or partner with
surrounding communities for the purpose of filing an application for this grant funding. More
information on MRF grant requirements and how to apply is available at
http://www.dos.ny.gov/funding/rfa-15-mrf-27/index.html.

Municipal Consolidation Competition
To further encourage local government consolidation, New York State created a new $20 million
Municipal Consolidation Competition in the FY 2017 Enacted State Budget to empower counties
and other local governments to pursue opportunities for consolidation, shared services, and
other changes that permanently reduce the property tax burden. This competition is designed to
bring forth aspirational consolidation ideas that will change the structure of local government.
The Village should consider partnering with Tioga County in order to craft an application for this
funding that outlines a transformative change in the structure of their local governments or
service delivery methods.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

14

Village of Owego
Village Dissolution
In the absence of any significant or meaningful shared service or departmental dissolution, the
Board finds that the Village administration and residents should consider dissolution as an
option to address the taxes imposed solely on the Village residents. Dissolution represents a
viable option for a village experiencing fiscal stress. The State offers resources to plan and
implement a village dissolution. In addition, residents will annually benefit from an additional tax
credit provided after village dissolution. The Board recognizes that, given the absence of a
police function at the Town level, the issue of police protection will be a focal point for the topic
of Village dissolution.

Town and Village of Owego
The Town of Owego is governed by a Supervisor and four other members of the Town Board.
Other elected officials include: the Superintendent of Highways, Clerk, and two Justices.
The Village is the only village within
the Town of Owego. The Village
includes nearly 20 percent of the
Town’s population but only 2
percent of the Town’s land area.
The full value of the property in the
Village as of 2014 is 13 percent of
the full value of the property in the
Town.

Population
Area (sq. miles)
Full Value

Village of
Owego

Town of
Owego

3,896
2.5
$139M

19,883
104.2
$1,036M

Both the Village and the Town lost population from 2000 to 2010, with the Town having a larger
drop. The median household income, median home value, and property value per capital are
higher in the Town than the Village. The Village has a higher child poverty rate than the Town.

Population Change (2000-2010)
Median Household Income (2014)
Median Home Value (2014)
Property Value Per Capita (2014)
Child Poverty Rate (2010)
Change in Child Poverty Rate (2000-2010)

Village of
Owego

Town of
Owego

-0.4%
$44,655
$97,100
$35,746
10.4%
N/A

-2.4%
$69,777
$134,300
$52,088
7.5%
-1.2%

The Village’s 2013 total expenditures of $5.4 million were about half of the Town’s 2013 total
expenditures of $11.0 million. The Village’s biggest areas of spending are public safety,
employee benefits, and sanitation. The Town’s biggest areas of spending are transportation,
sanitation, and employee benefits.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

15

Village of Owego

General Government
Public Safety
Transportation
Culture and Recreation
Utilities
Sanitation
Employee Benefits
Debt Service
Other
Total

Village of Owego
2013 Expenditures
$ in 000s
%
654
12.1
1,389
25.6
498
9.2
517
9.5
0
0.0
831
15.3
931
17.2
257
4.7
348
6.4
5,425
100.0

Town of Owego
2013 Expenditures
$ in 000s
%
1,009
9.1
80
0.7
4,069
36.9
1,037
9.4
840
7.6
1,772
16.0
1,639
14.8
588
5.3
8
0.1
11,042
100.0

Dissolution Grants and Incentives
State law provides two options for initiating the dissolution process – a resolution of a village
board or a petition by village electors. Appendix C contains a summary of the reorganization
process prepared by the Department of State.
If either the Village board or its electors would like to pursue dissolution, the State offers
assistance with the planning and implementing of dissolution through the Citizens
Reorganization Empowerment Grant program. The State also offers annual incentive aid
through the Citizens Empowerment Tax Credit program.

Citizens Reorganization Empowerment Grants
The Citizen Re-Organization Empowerment Grant program (CREG) provides assistance to
municipalities for the costs associated with studies, plans, and implementation efforts related to
local government re-organization activities, including dissolution and consolidation.
These as-of-right grants provide funding of up to $100,000 for local governments to cover costs
associated with planning and implementing local government re-organization activities.
Expedited assistance is given to local governments that have received a citizen petition for
consolidation or dissolution.
Services that grant proceeds may be used towards include:


Re-Organization Planning: A re-organization plan or agreement provides the blueprint
for the disposition of a local government’s property, services, and obligations. To
develop such a plan or agreement, local government leaders and citizens need to have
a full understanding of the current services and responsibilities of the local government.
Developing consolidation agreements or dissolution plans require considerable data
gathering, analysis, and discussion. A re-organization plan will form the foundation for a
consolidation agreement or dissolution plan.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

16

Village of Owego


Expedited Re-Organization Assistance: When the electors of a local government have
filed a petition that requires a referendum on the question of local government reorganization, such local government is eligible for expedited re-organization assistance
to cover costs associated with the development and dissemination of information to the
electors prior to the required referendum. If the referendum is approved, the project will
lead to a re-organization plan which provides the blueprint for the disposition of a local
government entity’s property, services, and obligations.



Re-Organization Implementation: If it is determined that re-organization is in the best
interest of the local government entity, the implementation of the dissolution plan or
consolidation agreement will proceed. The complexity of a re-organization
implementation is often dependent on the complexity of the local government entity and
the consolidation agreement or dissolution plan. Implementation may need to include
legal services, capital improvements, transitional personnel and other necessary items
related to re-organization implementation.

CREG is administered by the Department of State. More information on grant requirements and
how to apply is available at http://www.dos.ny.gov/funding.

Citizen Empowerment Tax Credit
If the Village of Owego dissolves, the State will pay additional annual assistance to the Town of
Owego through the Citizens Empowerment Tax Credit (CETC). For cities, towns, or villages that
consolidate or dissolve, these tax credits provide an annual aid bonus to the surviving
municipality equal to 15 percent of the newly combined local government’s tax levy. At least 70
percent of such amount must be used for direct relief to property taxpayers. Currently, eleven
towns and their residents are benefitting by nearly $1.4 million annually for ten village
dissolutions.
A sample calculation of what the CETC could be for the Town and Village of Owego follows:
Sample Calculation of CETC
Village of Owego Tax Levy (2014)
Town of Owego Tax Levy (2014)
Combined Levy
15% of Combined Levy

$2,069,000
$2,720,000
$4,789,000
$718,000

The actual amount of CETC will be determined by the Division of Budget by calculating fifteen
percent of the combined amount of real property taxes levied by the Village and Town in the
local fiscal year before the local fiscal year in which the dissolution occurred. For example, if the
Village dissolved on December 31, 2016 (village fiscal year 2017 and town fiscal year 2016),
CETC would be based on the amount levied by the Village in fiscal year 2016 and by the Town
in fiscal year 2015.
The Town would start receiving the CETC in the State fiscal year following the State fiscal year
in which the dissolution occurs. For example, if the Village dissolved on December 31, 2016,
this would be in State fiscal year 2017 (which begins April 1, 2016). CETC would be paid in
September 2017 (State fiscal year 2018). It is important to note that CETC would be in addition

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

17

Village of Owego
to existing Aid and Incentives for Municipalities (AIM) funding. After dissolution, the Town would
receive CETC as well as both the Town's and Village's AIM funding.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

18

Village of Owego

Economic Development
FY 2017 Enacted State Budget Actions Will Assist the Village's Economic
Development Climate
The FY 2017 Enacted State Budget agreement included a number of initiatives that will grow
the economy within the Village of Owego and the surrounding Southern Tier. This includes
supporting locally-driven priorities for economic development and bolstering some of the State’s
most vital forms of infrastructure. Investments include:


Authorizing Upstate Revitalization Initiative Grants: This competition replicated the
successful Buffalo Billion initiative to help further Upstate New York’s economic
recovery. Projects focused on strengthening critical infrastructure, revitalizing
communities, bolstering workforce development, growing tourism, and improving quality
of life. In December 2015, the Southern Tier was awarded $117 million for 100 economic
development projects. In addition to this funding, the Southern Tier won one of the Best
Plan awards worth $500 million over five years.



Funding a Sixth Round of REDC funding: Round VI of the Regional Council initiative will
include $750 million to be split competitively among each of the State’s ten regions.

State Water Infrastructure Improvement Act
The Water Infrastructure Improvement Act of 2015 provides grants to municipalities for critical
drinking water and wastewater system improvements. The FY 2017 Enacted State Budget
increases the Act’s funding from the $200 million approved in 2015, to $400 million total. Grants
provided through the Act will help local governments advance approximately $2 billion in local
drinking water and wastewater infrastructure investments while creating an estimated 33,000
construction jobs.
The Village of Owego should contact the Environmental Facilities Corporation to inquire about
funding.

New Transportation Capital Program
The FY 2017 Enacted State Budget included $21.1 billion for capital improvement of highways,
bridges, rail, aviation infrastructure, non-Metropolitan Transportation Authority transit, and
Department of Transportation facilities throughout the State. This includes the launch of three
new initiatives: BRIDGE NY, PAVE NY, and the Extreme Weather Infrastructure Hardening
Program.


The BRIDGE NY program will provide $1 billion to replace, rehabilitate and maintain
State and local bridges over a five year period.



The PAVE NY program will provide $1 billion to State and local paving projects over a
five year period and will be distributed according to the Consolidated Local Street and

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

19

Village of Owego
Highway Improvement Program (CHIPs) formula. The Village of Owego will receive
$19,509 in State Fiscal Year 2017 as part of this program.


The Extreme Weather Infrastructure Hardening Program will provide $500 million to
further improve conditions on State and local roads and bridges, as well as provide
resiliency to roadways that are particularly susceptible to weather events.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

20

Village of Owego
Fiscal Performance and Accountability
Multi-Year Financial Plans
Multi-year financial plans can be an important tool for local government leaders. These plans
project a local government's revenues and expenditures for a number of years into the future
based on reasonable assumptions. This allows local officials to not only see the current fiscal
situation but also see the fiscal situation over the next few years. This empowers local officials
in two ways.
First, it enables local officials to avoid creating future problems with a current action. For
example, using a one-time revenue source to fund an ongoing program would not show an
impact in the current year, but could have a significant impact in future years, when the one-time
revenue source is no longer available.
It also empowers local officials to address future problems today. As projected revenues seldom
exceed projected expenditures, local officials can start to make decisions today to address outyear gaps. By proactively addressing future issues, the impact to the local government, its
residents, its taxpayers, and its workforce can be lessened.
OSC has developed an extensive set of resources for local governments on multi-year financial
planning. This includes a tutorial, a guide, and a template, which are all available on OSC's
website http://www.osc.state.ny.us/localgov/planbudget/index.htm. These are designed to make
it as easy as possible for local governments to develop multi-year financial plans.
The Village of Owego does not currently have a multi-year financial plan. As noted earlier, the
Village has been regularly appropriating fund balance to close budget gaps – a practice that is
not sustainable over the long-term. To prepare for how to address future budget gaps without
the use of fund balance as well as for the reasons outlined above, the Board finds that the
Village should develop a multi-year financial plan.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

21

Village of Owego
Conclusion and Next Steps
The Board recommends that the Village, in conjunction with its governmental neighbors,
develop and implement a shared services plan that will lower the annual cost of providing
specific services and address the inherent duplication of services via multi-governmental
jurisdictions. If the Village agrees to abide by and implement this recommendation, the Board
may, in its sole discretion, award a grant to assist the Village and its neighboring governments
with implementing such shared services plan.
The specific structure and conditions of such grant, which would be developed in consultation
with the Village, and any other aspects of such grant would be subject to an affirmative vote of a
majority of the total members of the Board.
To the extent the Village Board or Village residents need assistance as they consider shared
services, dissolution, or other efficiencies, the State offers resources to plan and implement
these actions. Staff at the Department of State is available to provide additional information on
the process and available resources.

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

22

Village of Owego
Appendix A – Letter and Resolution from Village of Owego

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

23

Village of Owego

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

24

Village of Owego
Appendix B – Resolution Approving the Village of Owego

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

25

Village of Owego

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

26

Village of Owego

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

27

Village of Owego

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

28

Village of Owego
Appendix C - Summary of Government Reorganization
Process

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

29

Village of Owego

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

30

Village of Owego

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

31

Village of Owego

Financial Restructuring Board for Local Governments

32
