SOMERVILLE MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION VOTE TO APPROVE NEW CONTRACT | City of Somerville
Skip to main content
A
A
A
Follow Somerville City on Facebook
Follow Somerville City on Bluesky
Follow Somerville City on Instagram
Somerville City TV
Accessibility Services Division
311
311 Service Center
Subscribe to our newsletter
Mayor Jake Wilson
Enter your keywords
navbar toggler
Home
For Residents
Snow Policies & Preparedness
Moving to Somerville: A New Resident's Guide
Parking Department
Trash, Recycling & Yard Waste
Get Involved: Be Somerville!
Schools
Voting Information
Sign Up For Alerts
Contact Us
For Businesses
Starting a Business
Licenses & Permits
Inspections
Planning Division
Get Help With Your Business
Economic Development
Vendors (Bids & RFPs)
Upcoming Procurements
Services
A-Z List
Department List
Address Lookup: Services, Ward & Polling Info
Licenses and Permits
Citizen Self Serve: Lookup Tax and Water Bills
Make a Service Request (311)
Sign Up For Emergency Alerts
Government
Your Government
All Departments & Boards
Elections & Voting
Mayor
City Council
City Council Meetings
City Ordinances
Agendas, Minutes, & More
Employee Directory
Payments
Pay Online
Parking Tickets & Permits
Excise Tax
Real Estate Tax
Personal Property Tax
Library Fees
Non-Criminal Tickets
Scholarship Donations
Vital Records (Birth, Marriage, Domestic Partnership, Death)
Water & Sewer Bills
Meetings & Events
View Calendar
Agendas, Minutes, & More
Watch City Council Meetings
Search
Enter your keywords
Follow Somerville City on Facebook
Follow Somerville City on Bluesky
Follow Somerville City on Instagram
Somerville City TV
Accessibility Services Division
311
311 Service Center
Subscribe to our newsletter
Home
Somerville City Updates
🌐 Translate Language ▶
English Español Português Kreyòl Ayisyen नेपाली 简体中文 繁體中文 Türkçe العربية
Please note:
This is an old news story provided for archival purposes. For
the latest updates, visit somervillema.gov/news
SOMERVILLE MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION VOTE TO APPROVE NEW CONTRACT
Agreements Cover Multi-Year Period, Approves Retroactive Wage Increases to 2010
SOMERVILLE - Mayor Joseph A. Curtatone announced today that the membership of three bargaining units, A, B and D comprising the Somerville Municipal Employees Association (SMEA) voted last week to approve new labor contracts extending through 2016.  On January 24, 2013, members of the SMEA and Mayor Curtatone approved six separate collective bargaining agreements that cover a six-year term, from 2010 to 2016, and ratified the agreement after a vote of 177 in favor and 11 opposed. The agreement approves a 14 percent wage increase retroactively from 2010 through 2016.
"We have been working hard to come to an agreement that is in the best interests of the City and of the union membership, and I want to thank Ed Halloran and his members for successfully negotiating a contract that we believe reflects those interests," said Mayor Curtatone.  "Our City employees are dedicated, hard-working and diligent, and I am glad to be able, along with Bob Collins in our Legal Department and Bill Roche and his team in Personnel, to finally reach an amicable solution for all involved."
"This was a tribute to all efforts on both sides of the table. I would like to thank the Mayor and his staff for making the agreement a reality," said Ed Halloran, SMEA President.  "We appreciate everyone's hard work and diligence during these negotiations and look forward to working together in the future. I would also thank the Aldermen for their support during the negotiations. I realize they were eager to see this contract ratified."
For each unit of the union, A, B and D, two agreements were reached, one retroactively covering the time period from July 1, 2010 through June 30 2013, with the second agreement extending through the fiscal year ending June 30, 2016. The agreement also reforms overtime pay and health insurance matters, gives snow removal crews a guaranteed six hour rest within a 24-hour period during snow emergencies, and allows for annual wage increases. The contract also implements routine labor management communication meetings to improve city-wide labor efficiencies. The new agreement also settles the majority of pending legal action between the SMEA and the City of Somerville.
"The City hopes that with the conclusion of these negotiations and the establishment of regular labor-management committee meetings we can, together, build a model of cooperation for our future," said the City's Chief Labor Counsel, Robert Collins. "In this agreement, we continue our trend of positive dealings municipal unions and I commend SMEA leadership for their commitment to working in good faith and mutual respect to craft labor agreements that provide good value to workers and the City."
Feedback
Please submit website feedback using this form . Be sure to include:
A description of the issue (if any)
A link to the affected pages
Thank you for your feedback!
About
Accessibility
Contact Us
Disclaimer
For Vendors
Jobs
Press
Public Records
For TTY/Hearing Impaired (only)
Download Mobile Apps
311Somerville on the Apple App Store
311Somerville on the Google Play Store
Sign up for City eNews
Enter your email
Connect With Us
Follow Somerville City on Facebook
Follow Somerville City on Bluesky
Follow Somerville City on Instagram
Follow Somerville City on YouTube
Accessibility Services Division
311
311 Service Center
Subscribe to our newsletter
© 2014 - 2026 City of Somerville
