Georgia.gov
Skip to main content
An official website of the State of Georgia.
How you know
English
Organizations
Search Close
The .gov means it’s official.
Local, state, and federal government websites often end in .gov. State of Georgia government websites and email systems use “georgia.gov” or “ga.gov” at the end of the address. Before sharing sensitive or personal information, make sure you’re on an official state website.
Still not sure?
Call 1-800-GEORGIA to verify that a website is an official website of the State of Georgia.
Loading…
Search Close
Menu
Main navigation
Services A-Z
How-To Guides
Your Government
Contact Us
Header Utility Narrow
Search this site
Enter your keywords
Popular searches
Mission Statement
Organization of the office
History
Meeting Requests
Key Staff
Duties of the Office
Event Requests
Contact
That Text Is Not From Us
We'll never request payment or info through unsolicited text
Welcome to Georgia.gov
Your starting place for living, growing, and thriving in the Peach State.
Services A-Z
Top-Accessed Services
SNAP Benefits
Driving and Vehicles
Taxes and Refunds
Register a Business
Birth and Death Certificates
Find an Offender
Moving to Georgia Checklist
New residents will interact with several state agencies in their first 30 days in Georgia.
Get Started
Remembering Jimmy Carter, 1924-2024
The 39th president of the United States, our 76th governor and a state senator, Jimmy Carter lived a lifetime of visionary service, guided by an abiding faith. The loss of the Plains native is deeply felt here at home and around the world.
Explore Carter’s legacy
2026 Georgia Runoff Elections
Results from Georgia's June 16 runoff elections are now available. The General Election will be held on November 3.
View Results
Prepare for Hurricane Season
Hurricanes can bring high winds, heavy rain, flooding, and power outages across Georgia. Learn how to make a plan, build a Ready kit, and stay safe before, during, and after a storm.
Get Prepared
America 250 License Plate
A new standard-issue license plate is available to commemorate the 250th anniversary of the Revolutionary War. This new license plate will remain available for issuance through 2030. Choose the license plate when titling and registering your vehicle, or exchange your current plate by visiting your local tag office. Standard fees apply.
Get the new design
Georgia Surplus Tax Refund
Eligible Georgia taxpayers may qualify for a surplus tax refund of up to $500. Check your eligibility, estimate your refund amount, and track your refund status online.
Find out if you're eligible
Featured Guides
Assistance and Benefits Programs Driving, Vehicles, and Licensing Recreation and Licensing Starting a Business
All Guides
Georgia.gov
Facebook page for Georgia.gov
X (Twitter) page for Georgia.gov
How can we help?
We are here to connect you to information and answer questions about Georgia state government.
Georgia Call Center
1-800-GEORGIA
(1-800-436-7442)
contact online
Send a Message
hours
Monday to Friday
08:00 a.m. - 05:00 p.m.
Eastern Time Zone
State of Georgia
State Organizations
Elected Officials
State Jobs
© Georgia.gov
Accessibility
Privacy/Security
Website powered by GovHub
Human Trafficking Notice
Georgia Web Analytics
