Staff Resources - Potsdam Central School District Skip to content
Calendar
Contact Us
Directions
News
Search
Staff Resources
Student Registration
Home
About Us
Academics
Athletics
Board of Education
Departments & Services
Lawrence Avenue Elementary School
A. A. Kingston Middle School
Potsdam High School
Home
About Us
Academics
Athletics
Board of Education
Departments & Services
Lawrence Avenue Elementary School
A. A. Kingston Middle School
Potsdam High School
Calendar
Contact Us
Directions
News
Home » About Us » Employment » Staff Resources
Staff Resources
Contracts
Administration Contract (2025 – 2030)
CSEA Contract (2024 – 2029)
Potsdam Teachers’ Association Contract (2025 – 2030)
Human Resources
Employee Handbook
Internal Forms (on Google Drive)
PCS Job Descriptions
Professional Development
At Potsdam Central School District, we continually strive to offer innovative, diverse, and challenging learning experiences for our students in a safe, respectful environment. We are committed to preparing and empowering our students to lead fulfilled lives as compassionate, productive, and engaged citizens. To this end, we provide our educators with the support, resources, and guidance to successfully address the academic, social, emotional, and developmental needs of our school community.
Frontline Education
Mentoring Program for Teachers
Ongoing Professional Development for Staff
Potsdam Teacher Center
SafeSchools Vector Solutions (Required Annual Training)
STEPS – Evaluation Resources
Professional Development Plan 2026-2027
About Us Links
Employment
Policies, Procedures & Annual Notifications
School-to-Home Communication
Student Registration
Volunteering
2024-25 Capital Project
2025-26 District-Wide Safety Plan
2026-27 District-Wide Safety Plan
District Office
Superintendent: Jerry Griffin
Phone: (315) 265-2000 x 36733
District Clerk: Davida M. Martin
Phone: (315) 265-2000 x 36733
Fax: (315) 265-2048
AV/Tech Helpdesk
Make a request to the AV/Tech Helpdesk.
Potsdam Educational Opportunities Fund (PEOF)
The Potsdam Educational Opportunities Fund (PEOF) represents concerned parents and others who have joined to provide Potsdam CSD educators with resources to enhance learning experiences reaching beyond the scope of the school curriculum.
Operating under the auspices of the Northern New York Community Foundation, the PEOF raises money and grants funds to PCS teachers, staff and students for the enhancement of their work with students, on the basis of competitive proposals.
The PEOF Advisory Committee, representing a broad cross-section of parents, community leaders, and concerned citizens, is working in close collaboration with PCS teachers and administrators to develop a strong and ongoing system of support for the most creative and successful initiatives that can be provided to Potsdam students.
Potsdam Educational Opportunities Fund Request For Proposals 2025-26
Learn more about the Potsdam Educational Opportunities Fund (PEOF) .
Inspire, prepare, and empower our students to lead fulfilled lives as compassionate, productive and engaged citizens.
District Office
29 Leroy Street
Potsdam, NY 13676
Phone: (315) 265-2000
Fax: (315) 265-2048
Superintendent:
Jerry Griffin
Featured Links
Code of Conduct
DASA: Dignity for All Students Act
Data Privacy/Ed Law 2D
Employment
P2 Food Market
School Meals
Technology
Say Something Anonymous Reporting System
SAY SOMETHING
Anonymous Reporting System
Connect
Facebook
Parent Square
SchoolTool
This website is maintained by the Potsdam Central School District Communications Office . It is the goal of the Potsdam Central School District that this website is accessible to all users. View our accessibility statement . The district is not responsible for facts or opinions contained on any linked site. Some links and features on this site require the Adobe Acrobat Reader to view. Visit the Adobe website to download the free Acrobat Reader. This website was produced by Capital Region BOCES Engagement & Development Services, Albany, NY.
Copyright © 2026. All rights reserved.
