Bid Postings • Festus, MO • CivicEngage
Skip to Main Content
Create a Website Account - Manage notification subscriptions, save form progress and more.
Website Sign In
Government
Departments
Residents
Business
How Do I...
Search
Home
Bid Postings
Bid Title: Pay Plan Consultant
Category: Administration Request for Proposals
Status: Closed
Description:
The City of Festus is accepting proposals from qualified firms to provide pay plan consulting services. All proposers must review the Scope of Services and Project Description as described in this document to ensure their ability to perform as indicated. The deadline for submitting your proposal is Thursday, November 1st at 2:00 p.m. Central Time. Proposals can be mailed to 711 West Main Street, Festus, MO 63028 or emailed to . Email delivery is preferred.
All proposals submitted shall be subject to acceptance or rejection and the City of Festus specifically reserves the right to accept or reject any or all proposals, to waive any technicalities and formalities in the proposal process and select a proposal in part or in any manner deemed to be in the best interest of the City. All questions should be directed to City Administrator Greg Camp at .
PURPOSE/OBJECTIVE
The purpose of this “Request for Proposals” is to obtain the services of a qualified firm to provide assistance with a comprehensive review of the City’s employee pay plan. The City will review all proposals and conduct interviews with select firms before making a final selection.
SCOPE OF SERVICES
Assist with the identification of other organizations to serve as a compensation benchmark.
Survey the benchmark organizations to obtain their compensation data.
Develop a new compensation matrix with grades and ranges based upon the benchmark data and internal equity.
Assist with updating or developing job descriptions for each job.
Analyze each job to determine its proper status as exempt or non-exempt from overtime pay.
Recommend preferred practices to assist the City establish an employee performance evaluation process.
Assist in the development of a process to determine when long-term or returning part-time employees receive pay increases.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
To the best of our knowledge the City has never conducted a formal comprehensive review of its employee pay plan. With the exception of the Police Department there are no formal “steps” – the City has mostly implemented across the board cost of living increases, most recently an across the board $1.00 per hour increase ($1.50 for union represented police; Chief, Captain and Administrative positions are exempt, and received $1.00 per hour increase) but there were previous years when there were no increases at all. We are open to discussing a more performance based plan with ranges, minimums and maximums, but there are concerns about how well such an approach would work in practice.
The majority of our job descriptions have not been reviewed or updated in a long time. There are some jobs without job descriptions. There are jobs that exist on our pay matrix that are not currently filled. Some of these jobs can be eliminated while others may be needed in the future and will need an updated job description.
The selection of the benchmark organizations may be controversial. There will be concerns about comparability, especially when it comes to budget size, population and level of service from the organization. It is important that the elected officials accept the list of benchmark organizations, so we envision a committee comprised of some of them along with the City Administrator will work with the consultant to identify the benchmarks. It is likely these meeting will need to be held in the evenings.
Discussions about job descriptions, internal equity, policies and evaluations will be held with the City’s management team. These meetings can take place during normal business hours. The consultant will also be expected to be a part of meetings with employees to explain the process, discuss the results and answer their questions.
Our pay matrix has grades for part-time employees. Some of the part-time positions are permanent, with the same person holding the position for a number of years. Other part-time positions are more seasonal, but the same person may return for multiple seasons. There is no consistency when, or if, part-time employees are given pay increases.
Our Police Department is unionized and we are just finishing year two of a three year contract. The only positions not covered by the contract are the Police Chief, the Captain and the Administrative Assistants. The current climate for law enforcement in Jefferson County has put more financial pressure on the department with the passage of law enforcement taxes in St. Louis County and Jefferson County.
QUALIFICATIONS
Please provide a summary description of your firm and your experience serving as a compensation consultant. If you have worked with municipal clients in the past, please make sure to indicate that in your proposal.
PRICING
Your fee should be a lump sum or a not to exceed amount. If you have specific payments terms, please include those with your proposal.
WORK AUTHORIZATION AND DOCUMENTATION
Effective January 1, 2009, pursuant to 285.530 RSMo, for any bid/proposal in excess of $5,000, the company must affirm its enrollment and participation in a federal work authorization program with respect to the employees proposed to work in connection with the services requested herein by:
Upon contract award, providing documentation affirming the company’s enrollment and participation in a federal work authorization program (see below) with respect to the employees proposed to work in connection with the services requested herein.
E-Verify is an example of a federal work authorization program. Acceptable enrollment and participation documentation consists of the E-Verify Memorandum of Understanding (MOU): 1) a valid, completed page identifying the bidder and 2) a valid signature page completed and signed by the bidder, the Social Security Administration, and the Department of Homeland Security – Verification Division.
INSURANCE AND LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY
INSURANCE: The Contractor shall obtain and maintain such insurance from an insurance company satisfactory to Owner and authorized to write casualty insurance in the State of Missouri as will protect himself, his subcontractors and the Owner from claims for bodily injury, death or property damage which may arise from any and all operations and under this Contract. Any such insurance policy shall name the Owner as an additional named insured. The Contractor shall not commence work under this contract until he has obtained all insurance required under this paragraph and shall have filed the certificate of insurance or the certified copy of the insurance policy with the Owner. Each insurance policy shall contain a clause providing that it shall not be cancelled by the insurance company without thirty (30) days written notice to the Owner of an intention to cancel. The amounts of such insurance shall be as indicated below:
(This certificate of insurance shall indicate the City of Festus as additional insured and contain the appropriate signed endorsements as required by the City.)
(1) Workmen’s Compensation and Employer’s Liability Insurance:
Workmen’s Compensation and Employer’s Liability Insurance shall be secured and maintained as required by State where the work is located.
(2) Public Liability, Bodily Injury, and Property Damage:
Injury or death of one person - $1,000,000
Injury to more than one person in a single accident - $2,000,000
Property Damage - $1,000,000
(3) Automobile and Truck Public Liability, Bodily Injury, and Property Damage:
Injury or death of one person - $1,000,000
Injury to more than one person in a single accident - $2,000,000
Property Damage - $1,000,000
(4) If the contractor maintains higher limits than the minimums required above, the City requires and shall be entitled to coverage for the higher limits maintained by the contractor.
(5) If the City determines appropriate a certificate of insurance must be filed with the City providing builders risk insurance for the proposed project.
INDEMNITY: The Contractor shall indemnify and save harmless City and its officers and agents and employees from and against all losses and all claims, demands, payments, suits, actions, recoveries and judgments of every nature or act of the Contractor, his agents or employees, in the execution of the work or in the guarding of it.
No provision of this agreement shall constitute a waiver of the City’s right to assert a defense basis on sovereign immunity, official immunity of any other immunity available under law.
Publication Date/Time:
10/1/2018 9:00 AM
Closing Date/Time:
11/1/2018 2:00 PM
Submittal Information:
via USPS or E-Mail (preferred)
Bid Opening Information:
11/1/2018 @ 2PM
Contact Person:
All questions should be directed to City Administrator Greg Camp at gcamp@cityofestus.org.
Qualifications:
Please provide a summary description of your firm and your experience serving as a compensation consultant. If you have worked with municipal clients in the past, please make sure to indicate that in your proposal.
Special Requirements:
Effective January 1, 2009, pursuant to 285.530 RSMo, for any bid/proposal in excess of $5,000, the company must affirm its enrollment and participation in a federal work authorization program with respect to the employees proposed to work in connection with the services requested herein by:
Upon contract award, providing documentation affirming the company’s enrollment and participation in a federal work authorization program (see below) with respect to the employees proposed to work in connection with the services requested herein.
E-Verify is an example of a federal work authorization program. Acceptable enrollment and participation documentation consists of the E-Verify Memorandum of Understanding (MOU): 1) a valid, completed page identifying the bidder and 2) a valid signature page completed and signed by the bidder, the Social Security Administration, and the Department of Homeland Security – Verification Division.
INSURANCE AND LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY
INSURANCE: The Contractor shall obtain and maintain such insurance from an insurance company satisfactory to Owner and authorized to write casualty insurance in the State of Missouri as will protect himself, his subcontractors and the Owner from claims for bodily injury, death or property damage which may arise from any and all operations and under this Contract. Any such insurance policy shall name the Owner as an additional named insured. The Contractor shall not commence work under this contract until he has obtained all insurance required under this paragraph and shall have filed the certificate of insurance or the certified copy of the insurance policy with the Owner. Each insurance policy shall contain a clause providing that it shall not be cancelled by the insurance company without thirty (30) days written notice to the Owner of an intention to cancel. The amounts of such insurance shall be as indicated below:
(This certificate of insurance shall indicate the City of Festus as additional insured and contain the appropriate signed endorsements as required by the City.)
(1) Workmen’s Compensation and Employer’s Liability Insurance:
Workmen’s Compensation and Employer’s Liability Insurance shall be secured and maintained as required by State where the work is located.
(2) Public Liability, Bodily Injury, and Property Damage:
Injury or death of one person - $1,000,000
Injury to more than one person in a single accident - $2,000,000
Property Damage - $1,000,000
(3) Automobile and Truck Public Liability, Bodily Injury, and Property Damage:
Injury or death of one person - $1,000,000
Injury to more than one person in a single accident - $2,000,000
Property Damage - $1,000,000
(4) If the contractor maintains higher limits than the minimums required above, the City requires and shall be entitled to coverage for the higher limits maintained by the contractor.
(5) If the City determines appropriate a certificate of insurance must be filed with the City providing builders risk insurance for the proposed project.
Return To Main Bid Postings Page
Live Edit
Around town
Online Payments
Applications
Forms
Agendas & Minutes
Facility Rental
Contact Us
711 W Main Street
Festus, MO 63028
Phone: 636-937-4694
Fax: 636-937-2140
Hours:
Monday - Friday
8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m.
Quick Numbers
City Council
Festivals & Events
Fire Department
Laws, Codes & Maps
Police Department
Projects
/QuickLinks.aspx
Helpful Links
Everbridge Notifications
Festus Public Library
KJFF 1400 Radio
Leader Publications
Mississippi River Level
/QuickLinks.aspx
Site Links
Home
Site Map
Contact Us
Accessibility
Employee Portal
/QuickLinks.aspx
Government Websites by CivicPlus®
Loading
Loading
Do Not Show Again Close
[]
