NYS PERB Contract Collection – Metadata Header
This contract is provided by the Martin P. Catherwood Library, ILR School,
Cornell University. The information provided is for noncommercial educational use only.
Some variations from the original paper document may have occurred during the
digitization process, and some appendices or tables may be absent. Subsequent
changes, revisions, and corrections may apply to this document.
For more information about the PERB Contract Collection, see
http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/perbcontracts/
Or contact us:
Catherwood Library, Ives Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
607-254-5370 ilrref@cornell.edu

Contract Database Metadata Elements
Title: Rome City School District and Aides, Teaching Assistants, Monitors and
Cafeteria Employees Negotiating Unit, CSEA, Local 1000, AFSCME, AFL-CIO
(2005)
Employer Name: Rome City School District
Union: Aides, Teaching Assistants, Monitors and Cafeteria Employees Negotiating
Unit, CSEA, AFSCME, AFL-CIO
Local: 1000
Effective Date: 07/01/05
Expiration Date: 06/30/08
PERB ID Number: 6058
Unit Size: 285
Number of Pages: 42

For additional research information and assistance, please visit the Research page of
the Catherwood website - http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/library/research/
For additional information on the ILR School - http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/

ROME CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT
AIDES/ TEACHING ASSISTANTS,
MONITORS AND CAFETERIA UNIT

RECEIVED
IAN 1 6 2007
NYS pUBUC EMPLOYMENT
RElATlONS BOARD

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE

TITLE

PAGE

Preamble

1

Recognition
Negotiating Procedures
Article I

Employee Rights

Article I1

Overtime

Article III

New Employees

Article IV

Holidays

Article V

Grievance and Dispute Procedures

Article VI

Travel Compensation

Article VII

Deposits and Deductions

Article VIII

Leave of Absence

Article IX

Seniority

Article X

Personal Leave

Article XI

Sick Leave
Sick Leave Bank Forms

Article XII

Health Insurance
Declination Form

Article XUI

Retirement

Article XIV

Leave for Association Business

Article XV

Transfers

Article XVI

Jury Duty

Article XVII

Miscellaneous Provisions
(9

TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Continued)
ARTICLE

TITLE

PAGE

Article IVIII

Salaries

24-27

Article XTX

No Strike

27

Article XX

Support of Exclusive Aides,
Teaching Assistants, Monitors
and Cafeteria Unit
Representative

28

Article XXI

Professional Development
Reimbursement

Article XXll

Management Rights
Professional Development
Reimbursement Request Form

Article XXIII

Duration of Agreement

Appendix A

Uniform Voucher

Appendix B

Salary Schedule: 2005-2008

..

-11-

ROME CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT AIDES, TEACHING ASSISTANTS,
MONITORS AND CAFETERIA UNIT
CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION
ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT

In order to effectuate the provisions of Chapter 392 of the Laws of 1967 (the Public
Employees' Fair Employment Act), to encourage and increase effective and harmonious
working relationships between the Superintendent of Schools and the Aides, Teaching
Assistants, Monitors and Cafeteria employees represented by the Rome City School
District Civil Service Employees' Association (hereinafter referred to as the
"Association").

RECOGNITION
The Board of Education of the Rome City School District hereby recognizes the Aides,
Teaching Assistants, Monitors and Cafeteria Unit of the Civil Service Employees'
Association) Inc. as the exclusive representative for the Aides, Teaching Assistants,
Monitors and Cafeteria Employees Negotiating Unit of the Rome City School District.

NEGOTIATING P R O C E D W S

Agreements between public employers and employee organization: Any written agreement .
between a public employer and an employee organization determining the terms and conditions
of employment of public employees shall contain the following notice in type not smaller than
the largest type used elsewhere in such agreement:

"IT IS AGREED BY AND BETWEEN THE PARTIES THAT ANY PROVISION OF
THIS AGREEMENT REQUIRING LEGISLATIVE ACTION TO PERMIT ITS
IMPLEMENTATION BY AMENDMENT OF LAW OR BY PROVIDING THE
ADDITIONAL FUNDS THEREFOR, SHALL NOT BECOME EFFECTlW UNTIL
THE APPROPRIATE LEGISLATIVE BODY HAS GIVEN APPROVAL."

ARTICLE I
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

.

A.

The Superintendent hereby agrees that every employee shall have the right to
fieely organize, join and support the Association for the purpose of engaging in
collective bargaining or negotiation and other lawful concerted activities for
mutual aid and protection.

B.

Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny or restrict to any employee
rights helshe may have had under the Civil Service Laws.

C.

The Superintendent agrees to honor all reasonable requests for public information
which is readily available and will help the Association fulfill its functions as
exclusive representative of the Aides, Teaching Assistants, Monitors and
Cafeteria employees.

All employees shall be given copies of evaluations made and signed by hidher
principal or supervisor. The evaluation form shall provide for the employee's
signature as acknowledging receipt of said evaluation and shall be signed by the
employee. The acknowledgment shall indicate that the employee's signature does
not necessarily indicate agreement with the substance of the report and the
employee shall have the right to reply in writing to any portion of the report. Both
the signed evaluation and the employee's reply, if any, shall become a part of the
employee's personnel file.

ARTICLE I1

A.

Weekly overtime shall apply consistent with applicable law. Overtime must be
authorized in writing by immediate supervisor.

B.

Compensatory time may be taken instead of overtime pay by the mutual
agreement between the employee and the immediate supervisor within the limits
of the law. Calculation of compensatory time shall be equivalent to the
calculation of cash overtime as defined in (A) above.

C.

Overtime will be based on hours worked in excess of 40 hours in a work
week, compensated leave days will not be credited as time worked for the purpose of
overtime.

D.

Call back time shall be earned on an hourly basis computed upon the number of
hours the employee is working in the school plus one-half (112) hour additional.

E.

Bargaining unit members shall be compensated at the applicable straight or
overtime rate for all time spent in attendance at facultylstaff meetings which are
held before or after the employee's regularly-scheduled hours, when such
attendance is mandated by the employee's supervisor. Employees shall be
informed of such meetings at least three (3) working days prior to the meeting.
Occasionally, emergency meetings may require shorter notice.

F.

When an employee is scheduled to work on a day helshe normally has off, the
employee shall be compensated at one and one-half times (1 112) times hidher
normal rate of pay for all hours worked.

ARTICLE I11

NEW EMPLOYEES

A.

New employees will be informed, in writing, of all benefits available to them at
the beginning of their employment, i.e. status, title, salary, sick leave, vacation,
etc.

B.

The Superintendent will notify the President of the Association, within fifteen
(15) days, of all new employees hired, their position, step, titles, and salary or
hourly pay.

C.

Upon the request of the Unit President, the District will make available, monthly,
a list of all unit employees.

ARTICLE IV

A.

HOLIDAYS
TEN MONTH SALARZED PERSONNEL EXCEPT TEACHING ASSISTANTS:
REMEDIAL. TEACHING ASSISTANTS, SPECIAL EDUCATION. TEACHER
AIDE: LIBRARY AND COOK MANAGERS:

School conference days will be unpaid holidays. However, if required to work,
compensation will be at the regular rate.

ARTICLE V
GRIEVANCE AND DISPUTE PROCEDURES

The Superintendent of the Rome City School District and the Aides, Teaching Assistants,
Monitors and Cafeteria Unit in compliance with Article 16 of the General Municipal Law
(Chapter 554 of the Laws of 1962) regarding the establishment of grievance procedures
for public employees, does hereby establish and adopt the following procedures for the
orderly settlement of grievances of members of the staff of the Rome City School District
to be effective immediately.
A.

Basic Princi~les
1.

A grievance is an alleged violation concerning the interpretation, application, or
claimed violation of specific terms and conditions of condition of this cbntract.

2.

It is the intent of these procedures to provide for the orderly settlement of
differences in a fair and equitable manner. The resolution of a grievance at the
earliest possible stage is encouraged.

3.

An employee shall have the right to present grievances in accordance with
these procedures, free from coercion, interferences, restraint, discrimination or
reprisal.

4.

An employee shall have the right to be represented at any stage of the procedures
by a person or persons of hisher own choice.

5.

Each party to a grievance shall have access at reasonable times to all
written statements and records pertaining to such case.

6.

All hearings shall be confidential if mutually agreed.

7.

It shall be the responsibility of the Superintendent of Schools to take such
steps as may be necessary to give force and effect to these procedures. Each
administrator shall have the responsibility to consider promptly each grievance
presented to hidher and make a determination within the authority delegated to
himher within the time specified in these procedures.

8.

The function of these procedures is to assure equitable and proper treatment under
the terms and conditions of this contract.They are not designed to be used for
changing such rules or establishing new ones. Moreover, it is hoped that these
procedures will encourage all personnel to express their feelings freely in the
interests of the welfare of the School District. Any dispute arising concerning the
interpretation or application of the terms and conditions of this contract or the
rights claimed to exist therein shall be processed in accordance with the following
procedures which apply to grievances as well.

ARTICLE V

(Continued)
B.

Procedures
1.

Informal Stage
The aggrieved individual shall orally present hisher grievance within ten
(10) working days of the time helshe knew of such event. The immediate
supervisor shall orally and informally discuss the grievance with the
aggrieved individual. The immediate supervisor shall render hisher
determination to the aggrieved individual within five (5) working days
after the grievance has been presented to himiher. If such grievance is not
satisfactorilyresolved at this stage, the aggrieved individual may proceed
to the formal stage.

2.

Formal Stage
a.

Within ten (10) working days after a determination has been made
at the preceding stage, the aggrieved individual may make a written
request to the Superintendent of Schools or hisher designee, for
review and determination. A copy of the request will be sent to the
immediate supenisor.

b.

The Superintendent or lusher designee shall immediately notify
the aggrieved individual, immediate supervisor and any other
administrator previously rendering a determination in the case to
submit written statements to hindher within ten (10) working days
setting forth the specific nature of the grievance, the facts relating
thereto, and the determination(s) previously rendered.

c.

If such is requested in the written statement of either party pursuant
to paragraph (B), the Superintendent of Schools or designee shall
notify all parties concerned in the case of the time and place when
an informal hearing will be held, where such parties may appear
and present oral and written statements supplementing their
position in the case. Such hearing shall be held within ten (10)
working days of receipt of the written statements pursuant to
paragraph (B).

d.

The Superintendent of Schools or hisher designee shall render
hisher determination within ten (10) working days after the written
statements pursuant to paragraph (B) have been presented to
him/her.

ARTICLE V
(Continued)
B.

Procedures (continued)
2.

C.

Formal Stage (continued)
e.

If the grievance is not satisfactorily resolved at this stage, the
aggrieved individual may proceed to arbitration.

f.

Two or more grievances shall not be consolidated for arbitration
without the express consent of both parties.

Appellate Stage
1.

Within ten (10) working days after a determination has been made at the
preceding stage, the aggrieved individual or the Association may initiate
arbitration by giving written notice to the District and filing a demand with the
American Arbitration Association (AAA). The proceeding will thereafter be
governed by the AAA's Voluntary Labor Arbitration Rules.

2.

The expenses of arbitration, exclusive of attorney's fees, shall be borne by
the losing party.

3.

In the event that a dispute arises in which the Superintendent or the Board
alleges that the terms of this Agreement have been violated by an employee, a
group of employees or the Association, the Board may, in its discretion, initiate a
grievance with the employee, the group of employees, or the Association, as the
case may be, or the Board may, in its discretion, pursue any other available
remedy. The Board may elect to initiate arbitration by giving written notice to the
Association and filing a demand with the AAA. The proceeding will thereafter be
governed by the AAA's Voluntary Arbitration Rules.

4.

The arbitrator shall have no power to add to, subtract from or modify any of the
conditions or provisions of this Agreement.

GRIEVANCE FORM
Date:
Employee's Name:
Building:

Title:

Nature of Grievance:

Settlement Desired:

SIGNED:

SIGNED:
Employee

For the Association

ADMINISTRATIVE REPLY:

DATE:

SIGNED:
Supervisor

............................
Fill out in Triplicate and Distribute to:
1. Supervisor
2. Association President
3. Employee

ARTICLE VI
TRAVEL COMPENSATION

Unit employees who are required to use their personal car for School business will be paid
mileage at the I.R.S. rate in effect as of July 1 of each school year. School business shall include
those employees traveling between their assigned schools on the same day.

ARTICLE VII
DEPOSITS AND DEDUCTIONS
A,

Direct deposit banks shall be limited to those with ten (10) or more District employees
participating.

B.

Payroll deductions will be made as permitted by the regulations of the Comptroller of the
Sate of New York unless prevented by the mechanical inability of the District to comply
therewith.

C.

The Aides, Teaching Assistants, Monitors and Cafeteria Unit of the Oneida County
Educational Local 869 of the Civil Service Employees' Association, Inc., shall have the
right to membership dues deduction, upon the presentation of dues deduction
authorization cards signed by individual employees. Such dues shall be remitted to the
Civil Service Employees' Association, Inc., Capital Station, Box 7125, Albany, New
York 12224, on a payroll period basis.

ARTICLE MI1
LEAVE OF ABSENCE

A.

An unpaid leave of absence of up to twelve (12) months' duration may be granted to any

employee who has been employed by the District for a period of six (6)months or more,
upon application and subject to the approval of the Superintendent. Leaves of absence of
up to twenty-four (24) months may be granted such employees upon application, subject
to the approval of the Superintendent and the rules and regulations of the Oneida County
Civil Service Commission.

B.

An employee returning from leave shall be placed to their rate of pay which from which
he or she went on leave, and be returned to hisher former position or equivalent if still in
existence and whenever possible.

ARTICLE IX
SENIORITY

A.

The following provisions apply to the layoff and recall and, to the extent set forth in "2"
below, lateral transfer and promotions, of non-competitive and labor class employees,
solely.
1.

Seniority shall be defined as the length of continuous service within the
bargaining unit from the first date of probationary appointment in the Unit,
subject to the other provisions of this Article and to the requirements of Civil
Service Law and Regulations. Department seniority shall be defined as length of
continuous service within the Department from the first date of probationary
appointment in that Department.

2.

Subject to the requirements of the Civil Service Law, seniority, ability and
qualifications shall be the factors considered in layoff and recall and in lateral
transfer or promotion of unit members. Ability and qualifications being relatively
equal, seniority shall prevail. Department seniority shall receive preference over
Unit seniority for lateral transfer and promotion.

3.

In the case of job abolishment, reduction-in-force, layoff and recall, the following
procedure shall prevail:
a.

The employee involved shall have the right to replace the least senior
employee, within the same title, if qualified.

b.

If an employee cannot replace anyone within hisher title because of lack
of seniority, helshe may replace the least senior employee in another title,
if qualified.

c.

Employees shall be recalled in reverse order of layoff.

d.

The district shall give two weeks written notice prior to any layoff.

e.

For the purpose of layoff, and&xo in the event that the seniority of two
bargaining unit members is equal and such employees have the same date
of hire, the tie will be broken in the following descending order:
1)

Date of original appointment to a position within the District;

2)

Education relevant to the position of layoff;

3)

Alphabetical order of last name.

ARTICLE IX
(Continued)

B.

1.

Whenever any vacant or new position shall occur in the Unit, the
Superintendent shall publicize same by giving written notice of such
position to the President of the Association and a copy sent to each
building for posting. This notice shall set forth a description of
qualifications for the position, including duties, salary and the procedures
for interview, which shall be afforded each member of the Unit upon
request. No position shall be filled except on a temporary basis until such
position shall have been posted for at least five (5) working days prior to
the last day on which applications will be accepted. Notification of final
appointment shall be sent to the Association President with salary.

2.

All openings for summer school positions, including special education
positions, will be advertised in the same manner as provided for vacant or
new positions.

C.

Seniority shall not accrue during an approved, unpaid leave of absence, but the
employee shall be restored to hisher former job or its equivalent at the end of the
leave period.

D.

Departmental seniority lists will be provided to the Civil Service Employees'
Association every May 1st.

E.

An employee shall lose all seniority rights if:
1.

HeIShe voluntarily quits the service of the District.

2.

HeIShe is discharged unless reinstated under the Grievance Procedure.

3.

(1) If an employee has been unemployed by the District for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months, unless on authorized
leave of absence.
(2) It is also provided that the loss of time during a period for which an
employee receives Worker's Compensation arising from an injury
in the service of the District shall not be counted against himher
for the purpose of this sub-paragraph.

ARTICLE IX
(Continued)
E.

(Continued)
4.

(1) Fails to return, after being laid off by the District, to work within
fifteen (15) working days, after receipt of notice that work is
available.
(2) Notifies the District within forty-eight (48) hours after such notice
is received that helshe intends to return to work, and does not
return.

5.

Fails,, without giving' sufficient excuse to the District, to report for work on
the first day following the expiration of a leave of absence.

F.

The seniority of full-time Licensed Teaching Assistant's shall be covered by
Section 2510 of the Education Law.

G.

The Executive Committee as defined as the President, Vice President, Secretary,
Treasurer (maximum of one individual per title) will be granted super seniority as it
relates to layoffs only.

ARTICLE X
PERSONAL LEAVE

At the beginning of each fiscal year, three (3) days personal leave shall be credited to
each employee. While reasons for personal leave need not be given, it is understood that
such a leave shall not be used for vacation purposes. If it is determined that an employee
used personal leave for vacation, it shall result in the loss of pay. If any or all of these
days are not used, they shall be added to the accumulated sick leave of the employee.
Those employees hired on or after July 1,2002 must have worked for six months in the
District to be eligible for (3) personal leave days. Leave time will be awarded
retroactively at the end of the six months.
2.

An employee planning to use a personal leave day or days shall notify hisher principal or
supervisor at least three (3) days in advance under optimum conditions, but at l&t one
(I) day in advance, except in cases of extreme emergency.

3.

Personal Leave shall not be used as a means to extend holiday time.

ARTICLE XI
SICK LEAVE

A.

At the beginning of each fiscal year the employee shall be credited with fifieen (15) days
sick leave allowance for ten (10) month salaried personnel and ten (10) days sick leave
for annualized employees (former hourly employees), except first year employees who
shall accrue sick leave at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) days per month for salaried
employees, and one (I) day per month for annualized employees (former hourly
employees) upon their normally scheduled workday.

B.

The accrued maximum sick time shall be one hundred sixty-five (165) days for salaried
employees and one hundred (100) days for annualized employees (former hourly
employees) with the consideration of payment for unused sick leave days upon retirement
in accordance with the laws in effect at the time of retirement.

C.

At or prior to September of each school year the Board shall notify each employee in
writing of hisher accumulated sick leave.

D.

Employees who have exhausted their sick leave may apply to the Superintendent of
Schools for an advance against hture sick leave accumulation.
1. All bargaining unit members out for (4) four or more days due to personal illness are
required to have a doctor's note to return to work.

E,

Bereavement leave time shall be deducted fiom sick leave.

F.

1. There shall be a Sick Leave Bank for the purpose of making available, under the terms
and conditions set forth in this Section, additional sick leave to employees who have
exhausted current and accumulated sick leave, are unable to return to work because of
prolonged serious illness or injury, and have no other source of income protection andlor
accident and health insurance which would provide an income equal to the employee's
salary.
2. Any employee who has completed at least one year of service with the District (said
year of service to commence with the date of the first day of actual work in the District)
shall be eligible to contribute two (2) days of accumulated sick leave to the Bank. Said
contribution shall be made by written notification to the Sick Leave Bank Committee by
not later than November 1 or within 60 days after the first anniversary date of the
employees first day of service to the District.
3. Employees who do not so contribute to the h d i n g of the Sick Leave Bank shall not be
eligible to participate in the benefits of said Bank. Membership in the Sick Leave Banlc
will begin on the date of receipt of the application by the Sick Leave Bank Committee. In
the event that an employee does not apply for membership in the Sick Leave Bank within
the time fiame as outlined above, said Employee will be prohibited form joining the Sick
Leave Bank until the next school year.
16

ARTICLE XI
SICK LEAVE
(continued)

4. Contributions to the Bank by employees may be made as necessary during any
Bank year .The bank may be replenished by additional contributions by eligible
employees said contributions to be made by written notification to the Committee.

5. The Sick Leave Bank shall be administered by a Committee consisting of three (3)
members appointed by the President of the Association and one (1) member appointed by
the Superintendent who shall be mutually acceptable to both parties. The Committee
shall maintain a current inventory of available sick bank days and make determination
regarding all application to use said available days. In no event, however, shall any
decision of the Committee be considered to be a proper subject to be processed under
Article V, Grievance and dispute procedures of the Agreement and the decisions of the
Committee shall be specifically excluded fiom the provision of that Article.
6. For the purpose of this Article, the term "serious illness or injury" shall be defined as
one which is generally regarded as such by the medical profession. Applications for use
of additional sick leave days shall be accompanied by written confirmation/verification
fiom the applicant's attending physician and the anticipated date of recovery and return to
work. Such application must be made at least ten (10) working days in advance of
anticipated need. The committee may waive the ten (10) day period in the event of
emergency. The decision of this Committee is h a 1 and binding and not subject to the
grievance procedure.

7. Eligible employees may submit a request to use the Sick Leave bank once each school
year. An employee may be granted a maximum of forty- five (45) days fiom the bank for
any eligible illness or injury. It is not intended to cover absences of a single day, or
several days, where there is no serious or prolonged illness or injury or where no bona
fide economic hardship exists.

8. Applications should be accompanied by written confirmation/verification fiom the
applicant's attending physician and anticipated date of recovery and return to work. The
Committee has the right to request additional medical information if needed.
9. If an employee is receiving any District-sponsored Disability or Worker's
Compensation Insurance benefit, the dollar amount per day for which the employee is
eligible shall be forwarded to the District. The dollar amount shall be converted to a
fiaction of the person's regular daily pay and the Bank shall be charged one (1) less this
fiaction. Any person failing to comply with the above shall be deemed ineligible to use
days fiom the Sick Leave Bank.

DATE

SICK BANK DONATION LETTER
TO THE SICK BANK COMMITTEE:
1,

,WISH TO BECOME A MEMBER

OF THE SICK BANK. I WOULD LIKE TO DONATE

DAYS FOR THE SCHOOL

YEAR, WHICH WILL BE DEDUCTED FROM MY SICK DAYS ACCOUNT. I KNOW
THAT BY BECOMING A MEMBER, I CAN APPLY FOR THE SICK BANK IF NEEDED.

THANK- YOU
NAME:
SCHOOL:
HOURS PER I DAY:
PLEASE SUBMIT TO:

ROSALIE! OLIVER.. ..... STALEY CAFE

BY NOVEMBER lST.ANY FORM NOT COMPLETELY FILLED OUT WILL BE
SENT BACK TO THE MEMBER WHICH MAY PUT YOU PAST THE NOV.1ST
DEADLINE
THANK- YOU
THE SICK BANK COMMITTEE

DATE
SICK BANK REQUEST FORM

1,

AM REQUESTING

DAYS

FROM THE SICK BANK. AS OF THE ABOVE DATE I HAVE
SICKPERSONAL DAYS OF MY OWN. ATTACHED YOU WILL FIND A LETTER FROM

MY DOCTOR EXPLAINING: MY ILLNESS / SURGERY, AND HOW LONG I WILL BE
OUT OF WORK.
THANK-YOU
NAME:
SCHOOL:
POSITION:
HOURS PERIDAY:
PLEAS SUBMIT TO: ROSALIE OLIVER.. .. STALEY CAFE.. ..
PLEASE NOTE: ANY FORM NOT COMPLETELY FILLED OUT IN FULL WILL BE SENT
BACK TO THE MEMBER, WHICH MAY PUT THE MEMBER UNDER THE 10 DAY
PRIOR NOTICE. (SEE SICK BANK SECTION OF THE 2005-2008 CONTRACT)

TO BE FILLED OUT BY THE SICK BANK COMMITTEE
DENIED:
(THE COMMITTEE FELT THAT YOUR ILLNESS / SURGERY DID NOT
QUALIFY UNDER OUR GUIDELINES)
APPROVED:
DAYS.

(YOUR REQUESTED DAYS WILL BE APPLIED TO YOUR SICK
THANK-YOU
THE SICK BANK COMMITTEE

ARTICLE X11
HEALTH INSURANCE
A.

The District shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the cost for an employee's
hospitalization insurance and seventy percent (70%) of the cost for an employee's
dependents' hospitalization insurance. Members who retire during the term of this
contract shall continue to receive this benefit. The parties agree to a change in the
Prescription Drug Co-payment amount, effective July 1,2005, the union agrees that the
co-pay obligation for prescription drugs will be $10.00 co-pay for generic name drugs
and a $20.00 co-pay for preferred brand prescriptions and $30.00 co-pay for non
preferred as required.
The District shall make available to bargaining unit members in 1991-92 an Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) 125 Plan as long as such plan is allowable under the Internal
Revenue Service Rules and Regulations. Participation in the 125 Plan shall be limited to
payroll deduction for employee premium contributions and dependent care.
Effective 7/1/93 there shall be a prohibition on dual family coverage for two (2) married
persons employed by the District who would otherwise be entitled to such coverage. In
addition, two (2) married persons without dependents shall be limited to two (2)
individual plans.
The parties agree that the IRS 125 Plan shall be amended to add the option of an unreimbursed medical expense account. Any employee electing this option shall be
responsible for payment of the resulting administrative costs.
Those employees hired after October 1, 1999 will be responsible for paying ten (10%) of
the cost of the individual coverage or thirty percent (30%) of family coverage, depending
on their coverage needs.

B.

The District shall have the right to change health insurance carriers or pursue a
plan of self insurance provided that the benefits being offered by the new
insurance carrier andlor plan of self insurance shall be equal to or better than those
being realized at the time of change and provided that there being no lapse of
coverage for pre-existing conditions by virtue of restrictions concerning employee
eligibility.

ARTICLE XI1
HEALTH INSURANCE

(continued)
B.

(continued)

In the event the District considers an alternative health coverage plan, it agrees to
convene a committee to study such plan and agrees to include C.S.E.A. representation on
such committee.
The C.S.E.A. has the right to request and receive from the plan administrator information
concerning the costs, utilization, and operation of the negotiated health care program.
C.

The Board shall provide for paid health insurance for any retiree who has completed at
least ten (10) consecutive years of service, retires and receives or if ineligible to
participate, would otherwise qualify for benefits from either the NYSERS or TRS, during
the term of this contract. The rate of the Board's contribution shall be the same as that in
effect during the employee's last year of employment.

D.

In cases where manied couples are employed by the District, the spouse with individual
coverage may elect to waive the same on an annual basis in return for a lump-sum
payment of $1,000 minus taxes and other applicable withholding. Said waiver shall be on
a form to be provided. At the end of each employment year, the waiver will automatically
continue unless withdrawn by signing up for a renewal of coverage in the appropriate
District office.
A married person employed by the District may elect to waive coverage on an annual
basis for a consideration of $1,000.00 as previously described.

An employee whose marital or personal status is subject to change may elect to withdraw
the waiver on other than an annual basis with a prorata adjustment of the $1,000.00 rate.
Additionally, an employee currently covered under the District's health insurance plan
may opt to withdraw from the plan under the same provisions outlined above.

ROME CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT
112 East Thomas Street
Rome, New York 13440
Telephone (315) 334- 7400

Individual Medical Coverape Declination Form
I hereby exercise my option to decline my individual medical coverage provided by the Rome
City School District.
I request that I be covered as a dependent on the insurance of my spouse. (see below)
I understand that by declining my medical coverage, I will receive a $1,000 stipend (minus taxes
and other applicable withholdings) no later than one month following the filing of this form with
the Health Insurance Office.
I understand that this agreement shall remain in force in succeeding years unless I choose to
terminate this declination.
I understand that, because at all times, I remain covered by a group plan in this District, there will
be no question of medical eligibility or pre-existing conditions raised when my status under this
waiver changes.
I understand that if I choose to terminate this declination, I must do so no later than June 15' of
the preceding plan year.
I understand that as a new employee hired after June 15th this election must be made within one
week after the date of notification by the District.
I understand that if the election is made after June 15th, the $1,000 payment will be prorated
based on the number of months remaining in the plan year following the election.
Declining Employee Signature

Date

Print Employee Name Here

Spouse's Name

Date

Spouse's Insurance Plan

Employee Social Security Number
Note:
Upon execution of this agreement, the employee designated to h d dependent coverage must
inform the Health Insurance office of this change imrnediatelv.

ARTICLE XI11
RETIREMENT
A.

Retirement benefits shall include the 1150th- 75i-non-contributory plan (career)
which is enjoyed by the New York State Employees.

B.

Health Insurance for retirees shall be governed by Article XII (A).

C.

The District shall subscribe to Section 41J of the New York State Retirement
and Social Security Law allowing application (by the employee) of unused sick
leave as additional service credit upon retirement.

D.

1.

Upon retirement or disability causing retirement, any employee who is not
covered by Section 41j of the New York State Retirement and Social Security
Law and who has served at least ten (10) years in the Rome Public Schools will
be granted tenninal pay added to his or her h a 1 year's salary.

2.

An employee qualifjmg under paragraph (1) shall be paid an amount equal of
11400 of his or her final year's salary times 113 of his or her accumulated unused
sick days.

3.

Each employee qualifying under paragraph (1) must submit a formal letter of
retirement at least one semester (six months) prior to the actual retirement. Where
unusual circumstances exist, the six-month notification requirement may be
waived at the discretion of the Superintendent.

4.

In the case of death, money owed to the individual under this provision will be
paid to the same beneficiary as stipulated on the New York State Retirement Plan
unless otherwise stipulated by the individual.

ARTICLE X W
LEAVE FOR ASSOCIATION BUSINESS

A.

The Association President or his/her designee shall have up to three (3) days per
year to attend C.S.E.A. meetings with no loss of pay or deduction from personal
leave.

ARTICLE XV

TRANSFERS
A.

When involuntary transfers are necessary, the transfer will be made only after a meeting
with the employees and the supervisor. Notice of such transfers shall be given to the
President of the Association.

B.

Whenever any teaching assistant positions shall become vacant between the end of the
school year and the beginning of the succeeding school year, the Superintendent shall
publicize the same by giving written, first-class notification to the Association President
and posting at the Board of Education Office. Teaching Assistants will be allowed to be
interviewed for transfer to vacant positions which occur. Selection of the successful
candidate will be made upon the conclusion of the interview process, appointment of the
successful candidate to the vacant position will be made at the start of the following
school year or earlier at the districts options.

C.

An employee who desires a change in grade andlor assignment, or who desires to transfer

to another building, shall file directly with the office of the Deputy Superintendent an
application for voluntary transfer at such time as the vacancy which they seek is posted.
Such applications will be held in active status for one year. Employees may also submit
a request to be considered for any vacancies that may occur during the summer.
D.

Request for transfer shall be as follows:

1.

A request by an employee who had previously been transferred involuntarily shall
be given first consideration.

2.

An employee declared in excess in one school shall have preference in filling a

vacancy in a comparable position in another school.

ARTICLE XVI
JURY DUTY

A.

Jury Duty Leaves will not be charged but compensation for jury service is to be returned
to the District, exclusive of expenses for an employee to receive compensation for such
days from the District.

ARTICLE XVII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

A.

This Agreement shall constitute the full and complete commitments between both parties
and may be altered, changed, added to, deleted from or modified only through the
voluntary, mutual cansent of the parties in a written and signed amendment to this
Agreement.

B.

This Agreement shall supercede any rules, regulations or practices of the Superintendent
which shall be contrary to or inconsistent with its terms except that any item or items
contrary to law shall be null and void. The provisions of this Agreement shall be
incorporated into and be considered part of the established policies of the Superintendent.

C.

Any individual arrangement, agreement, or contract between the Superintendent and an
individual employee shall be subject to and consistent with the terms and conditions of
this Agreement.

D.

Copies of this Agreement shall be printed at the expense of the Board and shall be given
to all members of this Association now employed, within one month of the
signing of the contract.

E.

All full-time teaching assistants shall receive a one-half (112) hour unpaid lunch period.

F.

The district agrees to create the title of "disciplinary aide." This title shall replace the
previous title of disciplinary attendant and discipline monitor. In recognition of the
specific needs of disciphary aides and the requirements placed on these employees, the
parties agree to the following:
1.

Disciplinary aides shall work an eight-hour normal workday.

ARTICLE XVII

(Continued)
F.

2.

The work year for disciplinary aides shall be equal to the approved school
calendar for teachers.

3.

Whenever practicable and consistent with the District's program needs, the
District will schedule training during Superintendent's Conference Days. Said
training shall include but not limited to SKIP training, CPR and First Aid and any
and all training by law. Should an employee be assigned to said training, said
employee shall receive paid time for training.

ARTICLE XVII

SALARIES
In the event that a school, after opening for the school day, is closed due to weather
conditions or some emergency condition, the annualized employees (former hourly
employees) at that school who have reported for work on that day but are sent home
due to the closing of the school shall be paid for the hours they have actually worked
that day or for three (3) hours of work, whichever is greater.

A.

B.

1.

When a Cook-Manager is absent, the person performing the duties of the CookManager will receive an additional $1.50 per hour to hisher current rate of pay.

2.

Cook-Managers serving a satellite school will receive one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each school served.

3.

In the event of promotion, the employee promoted will be credited with
probationary time served in that classification. Promotion is defined as
advancement from a position which has a lower starting base salary rate than the
position to which helshe is ascending. This comparison is based on an equivalent
work year (month) and workweek (hours). When an employee is promoted to a
new title, the new salary will be at the new hire rate for the position, or will
receive their current rate of pay, plus $500 whichever is greater, plus all stipends
where due.

4.

The School District will arrange for physicals when required for continued
employment.

ARTICLE XVIll
(Continued)
B.

(Continued)
5.

Cook-Managers, Cooks, Assistant Cooks and Food Service personnel will each be
provided two aprons by the District at the beginning of every school year. Such
aprons and shoes with non-skid soles must be worn at all times while on duty. It
shall be the responsibility of each employee to launder and maintain in good
repair his or her aprons. No shorts or sleeveless shirts or blouses may be worn.
.
Dress blue jeans will be allowed. Additionally, each such employee shall be
entitled to an allowance of thirty dollars ($30.00) per year for the purchase of
shoes with skid-resistant soles, as characterized by the manufacturer, upon
presentation to the School Lunch Manager of the article and a completed Uniform
Voucher, a sample form which is incorporated herein by reference.

6.

Extra Duty Rates for Cafeteria employees shall be computed as follows: time and
one-half the employee's regular rate of pay for weekday evenings and Saturdays;
double time the employee's regular rate of pay on Sundays.
The work year for Library Aides shall be equal to the approved school calendar
for teachers. The Library Aides' workday will be scheduled at the District's
discretion. Five and one-half (5.5) or six (6) hours shall constitute the normal
workday and a salary schedule shall be established for each. This shall not,
however, constitute a guaranteed workday or workweek. The District shall
publish, at least annually, a list designating which schools' Library Aides shall
work five and one-half or six hours, respectively, provided, however, that the list
may be amended at the District's discretion. Library Aides working more than six
or less than five and one-half hours shall have their salaries adjusted pro-rata.

2.

The work year for Teaching Assistants shall be equal to the approved school
calendar for teachers. The salaries of all Teaching Assistants who work less than
the formal instructional day (6 hours) will be prorated in proportion to the hours
worked.

ARTICLE XVIII
(Continued)
1.

The following is the agreed method of distribution: (exclusive of increment or
Longevity):
1. Effective July 1,2005 grant all bargaining unit members an across-the-board
wage increase of 4.5% of their total 2004-2005 salary.
2. Effective July 1,2006 grant all bargaining unit members an across-the-board
wage increase of 4.5% of their total 2005-2006 salary.
3. Effective July 1,2007 grant all bargaining unit members an across-the-board
wage increase of 3.5% of their total 2006-2007 salary.
4. Effective 7/1/05, the parties agree to eliminate all reference to a wage
schedule. It is agreed that bargaining unit members who are currently on
schedule will be removed from the schedule and will be placed on a flat rate
system. The flat rate will be the individual's 04-05 rate. It is agreed that all
bargaining unit members will be on the flat rate system. The flat rate of pay
for new hirers effective 7/1/05 will be equivalent to the 04-05 starting rate for
the position and will be adjusted by the agreed upon contractual increases
beginning 7/l /O6.
5. Members working in the food service & monitor group their annualized
amount will be based on the number of full days in which school is in
session and students report. Individuals will be paid for actual hours of work
on days in which students are not in session for a full day.
Effective July 1, 1997: Bargaining unit employees who have completed twenty
(20) full years of continuous service in the bargaining unit shall be entitled to a
longevity stipend of $200 annually, commencing on July 1 following the
completion of such years of service. The longevity stipend will be paid in the last
pay period of June in a separate check.
*Note: Notwithstanding the aforementioned, effective June 2002, longevity
stipends, which were previously paid in September, shall be paid the last pay period
in June

2)

Effective July 1, 1997: Bargaining unit employees who have completed twenty-five
(25) full years of continuous service in the bargaining unit shall be entitled to an
additional longevity stipend of $250 annually, commencing on July 1 following the
completion of such years of service. The longevity stipend will be paid in the last
pay period of June in a separate check.

Article XVIII
(continued)
F.

In the event that a Teacher Assistant or Aide is required to substitute for a teacher,
said employee shall receive, in addition to hisher normal rate of pay $2.00 an hour
stipend for all hours worked as a substitute.

G.

Per diem substitutes who are not on the District's preferred eligibility list working in
excess of twenty (20) consecutive days in a single given position (same individual) will,
as of the twenty-first day, be entitled to the base rate of the position within the unit,
retroactive without fringe benefits. Food Service Workers and Cooks are required to
work twenty consecutive days but not necessarily for the same individual.

ARTICLE XIX

NO STRIKE
It is agreed that there shall be no strikes, slow downs, picketing, stoppages of work or walkouts
by the Association or its members during the life of this Agreement, and neither the Association
nor its members shall encourage, cause, instigate or condone any such action.

ARTICLE XX
SUPPORT OF EXCLUSIVE AIDES. TEACHING ASSISTANTS,
MONITORS AND CAFETERIA UNIT REPRESENTIVE
A.

Effective July 1, 1988, all members of the bargaining unit who are newly employed for
the 1988-89 school year and thereafter and who do not join the Association, shall pay to
the Association a service charge as a contribution towards the cost of administration of
this Agreement and the representation of such employees. The amount of such service
charge shall be equivalent to the dues required of members of the Association. The
service fee shall commence thirty (30) accumulated school days after employment, and
shall be deducted by the District subject to the provisions of the applicable law, from
each employee's paycheck in equal installments beginning with the first paycheck after
the thirty (30) school days have been compensated.

B.

Present employees who are members of C.S.E.A. as of July 1, 1988 will either remain a
dues paying member or pay agency fee.

C.

In the event that the District incurs any liability for damage, litigation expenses, or any
other expenses whatsoever in connection with the agency fee deduction, the Association
agrees to indemnify the District and hold it harmless for such expenses.

D

The Association certifies that it has created a legal refund procedure for agency fee
payers who object to illegal expenditures, and that it has procedures dealing with such
fees and with agency fee payers in a lawful manner.

ARTICLE XXI
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT REIMBURSEMENT

A.

Teaching Assistants and Library Aides shall receive one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
additional salary credit upon receipt of an Associate's Degree. The Teacher Assistant or
Library Aide must provide an official transcript showing successful completion of the
requirements for an Associate's Degree. Upon receipt of such documentation, salary
adjustments will be effective on the first pay period of the following September or
January.

B.

Full-time employees who have successfully completed hisher probationary status are
encouraged to enroll in courses of education relevant to hisher position and job duties
with the District subject to the following terms and conditions:
An educational reimbursement form must be completed and submitted for
written approval by the Deputy Superintendent.
Courses must be specifically job related and taken to improve on-the-job
performance.
Requests will be approved when the education or training is considered to be job
related and budgeted funds are available.
Employees who are matriculated students may submit courses which are not job
related but required for completion of a job-related degree. Proof of matriculation
must accompany request.
Receipt(s) for tuition (fees, books) must be submitted along with a statement from
the educational institution acknowledging successful completion of the approved
courses of study.
No one employee may take more than one class/course per year
Students earning a grade of "A" or "B" will be reimbursed up to $200 per year for
the course.
Students earning a grade of "C" will be reimbursed up to $100 per year for the
course.
There will be no reimbursement for a grade less than "C".
The course or class taken must be given by a NYS Education Department
accredited institution.
No course is to be taken during normal working hours

ARTICLE XXI
PROFSSIONAL DEVELOPMENT REIMBURSEMENT
(continued)
12.

Course approval or denial is a non-grievable issue.

13.

Employee receiving educational assistance must agree to remain employed by the
District for one year following completion of the course or reimburse the District
for the amount of the educational assistance received.

The parties agree that Section B of this article is done on a trial basis and will remain in
effect for only the duration of thls agreement.

ARTICLE XXII

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Except as expressly limited by other provisions of this Agreement, all of the authority, rights,
and responsibilities possessed by the District are retained by it, including, but not limited to, the
right to determine the mission, purposes, objectives and policies of the District; to determine the
facilities, methods, means and number of personnel required for conduct of District programs;
the selection, recruitment, hiring, appraisal, training, retention, promotion, assignment or transfer
of employees pursuant to law; to direct, deploy and utilize the work force; to establish the
specifications for each class of positions and to classify or reclassify and to allocate or reallocate
new or existing positions in accordance with law; and to discipline or discharge employees in
accordance with law and the provisions of this Agreement.

Rome City School District
Professional Development Reimbursement Request Form
Applicant:

Date of Request:

Position and location:
Name and Address of Educational Institution:
Date Course begins:
Course Title

Date Course ends:
Course Number

Date of Matriculation (if applicable):

Credit hours
Degree program (if applicable)

Tuition: $
Fees: $
Books: $
(Course information must be attached to request form with receipts when submitted)
This course will assist me in my employment with the Rome City School district because:

Agreement for Educational Assistance

I have read and understand Article XXI of the contract referencing "Professional Development
Reimbursement."
I understand that I am to submit the transcript of the course grade at the completion of the course
to Deputy Superintendent.
Employee Signature:

Date:

.......................................
For office use:
Approved

Disapproved
Director of Human Resources / Athletics

Date of Action

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Grade Transcript of

submitted on

Forwarded to Accounts Payable on

ARTICLE XXIll
DURATION OF AGREEMENT

This Agreement shall be in effect from July 1,2005 through June 30,2008.

Superintendent's Representative

Dated this

dk

day of ,&i %td!!<

,2005

APPENDIX A

UNIFORM VOUCHER
City School District
of
Rome, New York

NAME:
ADDRESS :
DATE:

I

ITEM PURCHASED:

I

AMOUNT: $

I hereby certify that the above articles and receipts were presented and approved.

SCHOOL LUNCH MANAGER

1,

,hereby certify that the described articles

have been purchased and that the charges represent true charges.

EMPLOYEE
DATE

-

--

SALARY AND WAGE SCHEDULE
CSEA AIDES, ASSISTANTS, MONITORS, CAFETERIA UNIT
2005 2008

-

-

NEW HIRE SCHEDULE
1 200445 1 200546 1 200607 / 200708 1
0
POSITION
RATE
RATE
I

- -

~-

COOK MANAGER
COOK
ASSISTANT COOK
FOOD SERVICE
MONITOR
LIFEGUARD '
TEACH ASST./TEACH AlDElCA (6 HOURS)
TEACH ASST.TTEACH AlDElCA (8 HOURS)

$
$
$
$
$

$

$13,102
10.80$
10.09 $
8.58 $
8.58 $
$
10,148 $
13,531 $

I

I

I

I

LIFEGUARDS ARE A 6.5 HOUR CERTIFIED / POSITION.
1

$13,102 $
10.80$
10.09 $
8.58 $
8.58 $
8.58 $
10,148 $
13,531 $

i
I

I

I

1

13,692
11.29
10.54
8.97
8.97
8.97
10,605
14,140

$
$
$
$
$

14,171
11.68
10.91
9.28 1

9
.
2
8
'
$
$
$

9.28
10,976
14,635

I

I

I

I

I

" ALL EMPLOYEES ON PAYROLL PRIOR TO JULY 1,2005, ARE LISTED IN A MEMORANDUM OF

AGREEMENT HOUSED IN HUMAN RESOURCES OFFICE, PAYROLL OFFICE AND WITH UNION
OFFICIALS.
*ALL STIPENDS WILL BE APPLIED TO ABOVE RATES AS APPLICABLE
I

I
