19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
19th REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION, AND GOAL SETTING SESSION – July
25, 2017
GOAL SETTING SESSION – July 25, 2017
Mayor R. E. Bruchey, II called this Goal Setting Session of the Mayor and City Council
to order at 10:15 a.m. on Tuesday, July 25, 2017, at the Department of Community and
Economic Development conference room, 14 N. Potomac Street, Hagerstown, Maryland.
Present with the Mayor were Councilmember K. B. Aleshire, P. D. Corderman, E. Keller,
L. C. Metzner, and D. F. Munson, City Administrator Valerie Means, all City Department
Heads except Director of Utilities Michael Spiker, and City Clerk D. K. Spickler.
Opening Remarks
Mayor Bruchey mentioned the challenges the City of Hagerstown faces include the
budget and labor contracts. He has developed a set of goals that are both short and long
term.
High Level Overview of Documents
Ms. Means thanked the Mayor and City Council for meeting in this format to discuss
their goals and priorities. This time for strategic planning is of utmost importance for the
purposes of guiding future financial planning and budgeting, operating decisions and
project/program priorities. The outcome will be most beneficial to staff if the Mayor and
Council establish a clear, focused strategic plan that sets forth their priorities and goals in
a manner that gives direction to staff concerning service levels and service priorities. To
do this, Ms. Means recommends that the Mayor and Council consider their individual
priorities in the larger perspective of the current and future service needs of the
residential and business community of Hagerstown. This can be done by thinking in
terms of their vision for Hagerstown’s future as well as thinking about all the
accomplishments and the status of current projects such as the items in the Community’s
City Center Plan and the current departmental goals and work plan. The goals and
priorities from the past administration can form a great starting point. Core focus areas
from this include public safety, innovative government, neighborhood vitality and
housing, public facilities and infrastructure, economic development, and active, healthy
living and quality of life for the City’s residents.
The Mayor and Council will face choices as they proceed with the planning process.
These choices will affect residents, businesses, property owners, as well as City
personnel. These groups will feel impacts whether through taxes and fees, reductions or
increases in certain services areas, the condition of facilities, infrastructure and streets, or
the amount and quality of services provided. The planning time will be best spent and
most beneficial to all those affected by using it to evaluate the value and cost of the
City’s services and programs, how the City utilizes the resources it has and whether there
are new ways to provide those services and programs.

1

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
Included in the meeting packet are the goals and priorities from the past
administration, the most recent update on the Community’s City Center plan, and an
updated listing of current projects and their status by department.
An adopted plan will provide all stakeholders a clear picture and consistent message
of this administration’s vision, priorities and work plan to make Hagerstown the best it
can be. The adopted plan will empower the senior leadership team and their staff, and the
boards and commissions to operate effectively and efficiently if all understand the
direction of the Mayor and Council.
Review of Current Vision and Mission Statement
The current Vision and Mission Statements are as follows:
Vision: A diverse, business-friendly, and sustainable community with clean, safe
and strong neighborhoods.
Mission: Providing the most efficient and highest quality services as the
municipal location of choice for all customers.
Councilmember Corderman suggested including providing cost effective services.
Councilmember Munson thinks both statements are comprehensive.
It was the general consensus to keep the Vision and Mission Statements as they are.
There was some discussion about the core values and that these values remain the
same through administrations. Councilmember Keller stated the Mayor and Council’s
goals should be established before the core values are stated.
Individual Mayor and City Councilmember Goals
Mayor Bruchey presented his goals and priorities to the group. His goals are:
1. Revenue Enhancement – tax structure for rental properties; coordinate with
Washington County for a tax setoff for fire and other duplicated
departments, work to increase the Hotel/Motel allocation provided to the
City.
2. Cost savings – comprehensive review of departments compared to
comparable cities, reduction of properties owned by the City.
3. Projects – work with State and Federal partners to help create a Detox center
in the community, Invite representatives of the Doleman Black History
Museum to a work session to discuss opportunities for partnering with them,
West Antietam Street parking deck, indoor soccer facility
4. Public Safety – create a zero tolerance policy
Staff has been gathering information about a two-tiered tax rate. A few Maryland
municipalities have this type of tax rate.
2

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
Mayor Bruchey noted there are about 9,000 rental properties. Legislation has been
passed to address rental properties and the number of calls for service for the Hagerstown
Police Department generated from rentals. A two-tiered tax rate would be fairer for all
property owners.
Councilmember Metzner is concerned that properties that have never had a call for
service would be penalized simply because it is a rental property.
Mayor Bruchey pointed out that rental properties are a business.
Councilmember Munson is concerned this type of tax rate would cause people to
disinvest in Hagerstown. Mayor Bruchey mentioned it may have the reverse effect.
Landlords may improve their rental practices.
Councilmember Metzner stated revenues are going to have to be raised, or there will
be cuts in other areas. The only way to effectively impact the budget without increasing
revenue is through personnel costs. The two options are to raise the tax rate and
potentially alienate everyone, or raise the rate for one class of property and not the others.
Mayor Bruchey then discussed his thoughts for the tax set off. He pointed out the City
does not fund schools, courts, or the jail, but it provides all the other services to its
citizens. He wondered how the Commissioners now view the set off and what their intent
is in the future.
Councilmember Metzner noted if the Mayor achieves this goal, it will go to the
taxpayers. In order to raise revenue for the City, there would have to be a Council
willing to raise the City tax rate to compensate for any tax-set off provided by the County
Commissioners.
Mayor Bruchey stated it could be viewed as a way to raise revenue for the citizens.
The Hagerstown Police Department responds to 120,000 calls each year. Revenue to
support the police department has been reduced from the State and there isn’t assistance
provided by other law enforcement agencies to cover the calls on the periphery of
Hagerstown.
Ms. Means stated when she started with the City she believed that the entity who
actually provides the service should be paid. This type of system would have to be done
jointly with the County Commissioners and the Sheriff’s Department.
Councilmember Metzner suggested this as a topic for a Washington County Municipal
League meeting. The real issue is the fire department. For decades Hagerstown has been
the only municipality in Washington County with a paid fire department. There is no
reimbursement for any of the calls made outside the City limits. There have been
assurances over the years that the County would take care of this problem but nothing has
happened. The Mayor and Council have to start taking a more proactive role in the fire
and rescue provider issue and force the issue to a discussion. Councilmember Aleshire
serves on the Emergency Services Advisory Council and is a voice for the City.
3

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
Councilmember Keller stated the City has to take the lead and bring this issue to the
public’s attention.
Mayor Bruchey stated the City should be reimbursed in some form because it is does
not rely on the County to provide building/permit inspections like other municipalities
do. The City should also be compensated by the State of Maryland for providing
inspections by the City Fire Marshall’s office.
Councilmember Metzner thinks inspections completed by City staff are timelier for
customers than comparable services from either the State or the County. He stated
timeliness and efficiency are some of the reasons the City maintains a paid fire
department. Citizens need to be aware of the issues faced by the City in providing a paid
fire service. Washington County does not have a homogenous economic status.
Mayor Bruchey stated the City of Hagerstown is to receive a portion of the
hotel/motel tax; however, the amount does not match what was agreed to originally.
The revenue was to be a per capita amount based on population, which would have
provided approximately $ 180,000.00 to the City. The formula was revised and the
actual distribution was $ 16,000.00 to the City. Hagerstown deserves a larger distribution
for holding significant events such as Blues Fest, Augustoberfest, and the new Cultural
Trail. Michelle Hepburn, Director of Finance, noted that the amount is not a flat
percentage; there is a specific amount that stays with the County.
Kathleen Maher, Director of Planning and Code Administration, stated the County
keeps a large portion of the tax for tourism, not economic development.
Mayor Bruchey stated he understands the necessity of trips to promote economic
development, if they are successful with funding for a project at Ft. Ritchie.
Councilmember Metzner stated the City would be happy with the revenue for
hotel/motel tax that is generated within the City limits.
Councilmember Keller suggested discussing this at a joint meeting with the County
Commissioners. Councilmember Metzner recommended the conversation start at the
staff level. He hopes a number of the goals discussed today include cooperation with the
County. It may be better to ask the County to stay involved in the downtown projects,
such as the Urban Improvement Project.
Mayor Bruchey suggested the discussions between County and City staff also include
collaboration of ways to save costs and/or raise revenue. He pointed out one of his goals
is cost savings. He suggested a comprehensive review of departments compared to
comparable cities. He also included reduction of properties owned by the City that are
not utilized for City business, for example, homeownership properties. The national
police to citizen ratio is 1/500. The City’s police force ratio is 1/444.
Chief Brito pointed out that different cities have different needs. The City of
Hagerstown’s higher ratio is in line with the issues they have to deal with. He is
4

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
confident the 112 sworn personnel can provide the needed service to Hagerstown
residents.
Ms. Means informed the group that staff is reviewing property management as a
whole, which includes the City owned properties, to determine a plan to address the nonsustainability of property management.
Councilmember Munson is concerned that a multiple tiered tax rate for rental
properties will negatively impact homeowners who have limited rental properties. He
stated it would be ideal if the City and County pursued this idea together, which would
remove disincentives for people to move out of the City.
Mayor Bruchey believes more people will leave the City if tax rates continue to rise
for all taxpayers. With a specific tax for rental properties (which are businesses)
landlords may be more willing to treat them as such.
Another goal mentioned by Mayor Bruchey is to work with the State and Federal
authorities to create a detox center in the community. Help has to be available for people
who are struggling with addiction. Every city in the country is facing this problem.
Councilmember Keller has talked with many people about a center and has made some
progress. The Mayor and City Council need to be the ones to help create it.
Councilmember Keller stated people need to understand the problem and those in the
community need to see the Mayor and City Council are doing something about it. She
suggested a link on the City’s website to resources available for people wanting help to
end their addiction.
Mayor Bruchey recommended inviting representatives of the Doleman Black Heritage
Museum (DBHM) to a Work Session to discuss opportunities for partnering with them to
bring an African American museum to the core of Hagerstown. Ms. Means indicated
there have been multiple discussions about options.
Mayor Bruchey would like to move forward with a parking deck on W. Antietam
Street. Ms. Means and Eric Deike, Director of Public Works, stated a deck is included in
the Capital Improvement Project Projections in 2020.
Councilmember Keller asked if another deck is needed, since there is parking
available in other locations downtown.
Mayor Bruchey stated the Summit Avenue, Jonathan Street, W. Washington Street
area will never be redeveloped without a parking deck in that vicinity.
Councilmember Corderman suggested considering a parking deck if that area
redevelops.
Councilmember Aleshire noted there are a large amount of parking areas downtown
that the City does not own and does not have access to for public parking. He stated the
A & E Parking Deck is 50 spaces over-allotted. This is before the major redevelopment
5

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
that is planned. The most expensive place to park in the City is the lot near District Court
(which the City does not own). The City of Frederick has 7 decks and other parking lots.
Officials in Frederick clearly say in order to redevelop a downtown there needs to be
strategically placed decks. Frederick started a new deck as soon as one was paid off.
When the Hamilton Hotel is redeveloped, there will be a shortage of parking available.
His thought is to either build additional public parking or gain access to the private lots.
Councilmember Metzner wondered if there is full support of a third parking deck
within the elected body. People are willing to pay for parking if it is where they want to
be. The City is flush with privately owned parking spaces. It is time for the City to talk
to the owners of these spaces to make the spaces available. He agrees major partners will
not participate in redevelopment without major parking access. He noted there is not
adequate parking for either District Court or Circuit Court.
Councilmember Corderman stated District Court has been discussing expansion for
many years. Maybe their expansion will include additional parking. He wondered if
development happens before or after a parking deck is built.
Mayor Bruchey stated there were businesses willing to be part of the stadium project
because of the parking plans. There is an opportunity for an indoor soccer facility and the
Mayor and Council need to look at how to make that happen.
Councilmember Aleshire stated the facility should not be limited to soccer. There are
several different sports played at indoor facilities. The sports plex in Frederick,
Maryland is used 16 hours per day. At least three local groups have looked at locations
in the community. Hundreds of families travel out of the community each week to indoor
facilities. The stadium site or the Eastern Boulevard/Cannon Avenue area could be ideal
locations in Hagerstown. He does not intend the City being the owner or operator of such
a facility, but rather the provider of the property. Activity in that area may spur
redevelopment of the former hospital property or the Venice Inn property.
Councilmember Keller thinks involving the Convention and Visitors Bureau in
discussions about a facility would be helpful.
Councilmember Metzner stated another property to look at is the golf course. The
City continually subsidizes the course which serves mostly adult patrons. Perhaps the
land could be used in a different manner.
Councilmember Aleshire stated there may be deed restrictions on the property.
Councilmember Keller stated if amenities are underperforming, marketing should be
evaluated. Rodney Tissue, City Engineer, informed the group that the course is marketed
more now than before.
Councilmember Metzner asked for information about the players who use the golf
course. He would be more supportive if most users were City residents. Mr. Tissue will
provide this information. Mr. Tissue mentioned the course is in great shape; however, it
requires a significant subsidy.
6

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
Fire Chief Steve Lohr wondered if the former hospital site, the Supreme Block
property, or property on Mill Street would be possibilities for an indoor sports facility. It
was noted they may be large enough, but the City does not own any of these properties.
Mayor Bruchey has discussed his goal of a Zero Tolerance Policy with Police Chief
Victor Brito.
The group took a break from noon to 12:30 p.m.
The meeting reconvened at 12:35 p.m.
Developing Common Goals
Mayor Bruchey opened the floor to each Councilmember to share their goals.
Councilmember Aleshire thinks it would be beneficial to hear what priorities the
individual departments have first and then determine if those priorities match the Mayor
and Council’s.
Community and Economic Development
Jill Thompson, Department of Community and Economic Development Director,
reported the department has been moving forward with the 8 Catalyst Projects identified
in the Community’s City Center 10 Year Plan. The plan delivers the message to
prospective investors that the City has vision. There are many active volunteers in City
programs, such as Main Street and the Neighborhoods First. Volunteers are an important
component of special events and festivals. She feels that a majority of the event
resources should be focused on providing free events to encourage people to visit
downtown.
Mayor Bruchey mentioned there are opportunities to partner with businesses and
organizations on free events.
Ms. Thompson informed the group that the Federal money provided through the
Community and Development Block Grant program is used to strengthen the City’s
neighborhoods and homeownership.
Mayor Bruchey stated he would like to see programs developed that help citizens and
encourage homeownership.
Councilmember Keller informed the group that the Homestore had funding left over
for down payment assistance.
Councilmember Aleshire stated one of his goals is to expand downtown events. When
there is an event downtown, potential diners may have difficulty finding space in a
restaurant. He believes more restaurant owners would consider downtown, except the
buildings require extensive work. Any assistance from Economic Development would be
appreciated.
7

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
Ms. Thompson indicated there is grant assistance available for restaurants, with the
majority going toward improvements.
Councilmember Aleshire does not think retail will make a comeback, given the
popularity of on-line purchasing. He thinks the City’s focus should be on the restaurant
niche.
Mr. Thompson pointed out additional residences will create a 24/7 feeling in
downtown.
Councilmember Corderman suggested using the funding set aside for the Class A
office space for programs like First Third now. The office space development could be
funded later.
Finance
Michelle Hepburn, Director of Finance, stated the Finance Department works with all
departments and customer service is an important component of this organization. The
transparency module is available on the City’s website. Staff is looking to make it more
user friendly. Short and long term strategic goals are needed to guide development of the
budget so the Mayor and Council’s goals are adequately funded. During the drafting of
the budget, staff tries their best to be cognizant of the resources, which are predominantly
taxpayer money. The City owns many properties and she believes a review of Property
Management will provide direction for the future of this fund. The resources are not
available to invest in the needed repairs for these properties. She stated a quarterly
review of budget reports would provide time to review all aspects of the budget, rather
than waiting until budget preparation time.
Councilmember Aleshire agrees properties in the Property Management fund should
be reviewed. He does not think working with the County on a multi-tier tax rate would
be productive, since the County is not a charter government and cannot set tax rates in the
same manner as the City. He would hope that a multi-tier rate would provide the
capability to reduce the property tax rate for owner occupied properties. The decreasing
tax base has to be reversed. He suggested using the Maryland definition of residential
property and Delegate Maggie MacIntosh’s recommendations for turning it around.
Councilmember Aleshire stated he does not think the County Commissioners will
provide additional revenue to the City. The Commissioners will point out they’ve
provided $ 60 million toward downtown projects during the last 10 years. Assistance
would not be in the form of cash.
Mayor Bruchey stated the City can’t afford to have properties continually removed
from the tax rolls.
Councilmember Corderman suggested providing incentives to encourage interest in
the properties that are for sale through the City. He suggested either giving them away or
selling them for a low price. There should be conditions on their use. He stated the tax
rate is important for long term sustainability of the neighborhoods. He hopes the next
8

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
budget will not include a tax rate increase. He suggested the City complete a customer
service survey to highlight weaknesses and strengths. He suggested the pre-annexation
agreements be revised to state that annexation occurs when the service is connected.
Kathleen Maher, Director of Planning and Code Administration, stated incentives
possibly could be provided for strategic properties or prime annexation areas.
Public Works
Eric Deike, Director of Public Works, stated short term goals for Public Works
include sustainability and working as efficiently as possible. Public Works staff provides
maintenance of streets, signals, buildings, and vehicles. When a street or building is
added, revenue is not increased to maintain it. When properties are offered to the City,
increased maintenance responsibilities should be considered. If there isn’t an exit
strategy for the property, the City should consider what benefit there is to owning it.
With fewer staff, customer service and efficiency is crucial. Staff is looking at ways
to improve services.
Councilmember Corderman asked Mr. Deike for his opinion of whether or not a third
parking deck is needed before or after development occurs. Mr. Deike indicated the
parking study completed in 2012 showed that parking would be needed if certain things
happened. It is the usual understanding that additional parking is constructed during the
project. The A & E Deck is oversold because the Award Beauty School purchased a
large number of passes, which keeps the revenue up. The study also noted that a large
percentage of the parking is privately owned.
Jill Thompson, Director of Department of Community and Economic Development,
believes the demand for a third deck will come after construction begins on the Class A
office space on the Central Parking Lot.
Councilmember Aleshire pointed out that the development at the Hamilton Hotel
property, the Professional Arts Building, and the former Susquehanna Bank property is
going to occur. Work should begin soon on the deck to accommodate this development.
Mr. Deike stated each space costs between $ 18,000 to $ 20,000 (construction and
maintenance). Justification for a deck has to be based on potential new customers. He
pointed out the deck could be built by an entity other than the City.
Councilmember Metzner thinks many of the churches with privately owned parking
spaces would be happy with income for use of the spaces through the week. He asked for
information about how many spaces are available compared to the spaces that would be
available in a third parking deck.
Councilmember Munson asked how long it will be before the University Deck needs
to be replaced. Mr. Deike stated it was updated recently and is in good condition.

9

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
Councilmember Aleshire noted a third parking deck has not been part of the Urban
Improvement Project, even though parking will be needed. He wants the City to be ready
with a solution.
Councilmember Metzner stated all areas are worth considering, including those that
might not involve high rise parking facilities.
Parks and Engineering
Rodney Tissue, City Engineer, stated it is becoming more obvious during the meetings
regarding the UIP that the intent is for the City to maintain and oversee the plaza. He
noted the question of whether or not the City is going to be a part, financially, in the
Professional Court project. Councilmember Aleshire feels the City will be, if the area
annexes into the City.
The Parks Division has been working on a strategic plan which includes cost recovery
information and a marketing plan. Recommendations will likely include changing the
train museum facility to a more family oriented amenity. Standard operating procedures
for parks are being developed.
Mr. Tissue has been meeting with representatives of Congregation B’nai Abraham to
discuss Thomas Kennedy Park.
A request for proposals was released for a new contract for solid waste. The RFP asks
contractors to include additional options, which were discussed previously with the
Mayor and City Council. The options include an electronic recycling event, two
dumpster events, and alley pick up.
Councilmember Metzner noticed there are trash cans every few feet on the beach and
boardwalk in Ocean City. He doesn’t think Hagerstown will solve the trash problem
through legislation.
Councilmember Corderman had previously suggested looking at a leash law for the
interior areas of City Park. Mr. Tissue noted the City is under the Washington County
Animal Control ordinance.
Councilmember Aleshire suggested looking at a way to address the amount of time
between when utility work is being done in the street (for example Columbia Gas lines)
and when the roadway is repaved. Mr. Tissue informed the group that the amount of
work being done on Summit Avenue will require the contractor to mill and pave the
street.
Planning and Code Administration
Kathleen Maher, Director of Planning and Code Administration, stated the update to
the Comprehensive Plan is a priority for the department. A joint meeting between the
Mayor and City Council and the Planning Commission will likely be held in September.
10

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
Paul Fulk, Inspections Technology Specialist, has been researching all jurisdictions
that have rental licensing and comparing their regulations with the City’s. He has found
that some jurisdictions include extended stay hotel rooms as residential rental units. Staff
will be providing an update of the program at an August, 2017 Work Session.
Staff has been meeting with staff at Washington County to discuss the non-bidded tax
properties and how to keep them moving through the process to get them back on the tax
rolls. Scott Nicewarner, Director of Technology and Support Services, noted 28
properties on the Washington County tax sale list received no bids. Of those 28, 26 are
located within the City limits. Most are blighted. Councilmember Aleshire stated there
needs to be a strategy to have the derelict properties removed. One option may be to
deed some of the properties to the adjacent property owners. The cost of the demolition
has to be considered while discussing the options. Councilmember Aleshire has
recommended setting aside a penny on the tax rate every year that goes toward
demolition costs.
Legislation is pending to address some of the foreclosed properties, also known as
Zombie properties.
Councilmember Aleshire’s housing driven goals are to reduce the level of derelict
properties that exist in the City’s housing stock and limiting the boarding style of
housing. These two situations have an increasingly negative impact on neighborhoods.
If this is not addressed, people will continue to move out of Hagerstown. Ms. Means
wondered how information about boarding style residences can be obtained. Ms. Maher
noted if the rental licensing inspection was changed from “at turnover” to a specific time
frame, it would allow staff to be inside the residencies and observe these things.
Councilmember Aleshire stated it has to be a goal of the City to make the connection
between operations and activities of the non-profits and agencies that are aware of or
contribute to that decline. The rental licensing and inspection regulations have to apply
to all properties that are used as residential uses, such as the W House.
Fire Chief Steven Lohr noted several of the most recent fires have occurred at these
types of homes.
Councilmember Corderman mentioned the Mayor and City Council continually
receive questions about the Hagerstown Housing Authority project planned at Cedar
Lawn. He believes the definition of townhouses should be amended in the Land
Management Code, specifically because of the Cedar Lawn development. Ms. Maher
indicated that project is already in the permitting process so an amended definition would
not affect it.
Police Department
Police Chief Victor Brito has changed the recruitment model because the department
has lost so many officers in the last five years. He thinks HPD is competitive in this
region. There are currently 105 sworn officers, with positions for up to 112. He
anticipates being at 112 sworn officers by October. Background checks for candidates
11

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
are completed internally. HPD is looking for people who want to stay with the
Department. He is looking at a model that is more robust and will increase diversity in
the ranks. The Department exceeds the State standards for training/development. Body
cameras are important for this community. Eventually, all sworn personnel will have
body cameras. Technology is available that when a Taser is turned on, it buffers to the
body camera of anyone within 30 feet and turns them on.
The closure rate on major crimes for HPD is well above the national average.
Councilmember Corderman asked if there have been noticeable improvements in
recruitment. Chief Brito stated the recruitment manager is involved with every phase of
the process and can address the question. Councilmember Corderman wondered if some
of the City owned properties could be given to the recruits as an incentive. Michelle
Hepburn, Director of Finance, mentioned there is a housing allowance incentive available
for employees. Renovation of the existing properties would be costly. Chief Brito will
explore housing options as an incentive for recruits.
Fire Department
Fire Chief Steven Lohr is pleased with the progress on capital improvement funding
and closing labor gaps within the Fire Department. The operations budget needs to be
addressed. He asked for the Council’s help in issues with the County’s fire and rescue
system. Councilmember Aleshire serves on the ESAP committee. A draft report has
been completed and there is already a revolt from volunteers throughout the County
about the findings. The City’s facilities were taken to task in the report, with a
recommendation to close the First Hose Station. There was no reason for the group to
review that station. A decision needs to be made about a 5 engine model or a 4 engine
model. He could live with a 4 engine model; however, response times may increase
slightly.
Mayor Bruchey asked what the average response time is for the fire department.
Chief Lohr stated each community establishes its own standard. An urban area is
typically 6 minutes. Hagerstown’s response time is just under 7 minutes, which is based
on staff’s timing estimates.
Councilmember Aleshire pointed out the City has a fire system it can’t afford and the
County has a system that it can’t maintain with volunteers. During tax set off
discussions, fire wasn’t included because the volunteer system was in place. Now that
the volunteer system is failing, the City fire department is called to assist on calls
throughout Washington County. He has not seen the draft report mentioned by Chief
Lohr, even though he is a member of the Council. Volunteer companies are paying
people to moonlight to make up staff shortages. He wondered if it is appropriate to have
City firefighters volunteering in other areas. He is concerned there will be a liability
question at some point. The City is paying more for 5 fire/ems stations than the County
is paying for 20 stations.
Councilmember Metzner stated this is the most important issue discussed today. He
believes the City is in violation of federal law with the wages paid to firefighters. He
12

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
stated it is time to go to a 4 engine model. The simple fix to the fire and rescue problems
is to follow federal law.
Mayor Bruchey wondered if the City will run 30 calls outside the City limits when the
volunteer system collapses. Councilmember Metzner stated the City should work with
Chief Lohr to determine how to respond to that occurrence. The solution is a County
wide paid system. Councilmember Metzner stated if coverage isn’t available, the Chief
should make the determination if City units go to other stations.
Chief Lohr will ask the volunteers to submit a plan for rescuing the volunteer system
in the City. If they can’t, he will provide a plan. He would not recommend transferring
the City fire department operations to the County under the current government structure.
Councilmember Aleshire stated the tax set off should include fire services until there
is the type of system in place that the County’s residents need.
Chief Lohr pointed out no community has a police tax. Police services are funded as a
service in the budget. He thinks the fire service should be the same.
Chief Lohr is concerned about the possibility of burn-out from the continuation of
work hours doing similar duties.
Mayor Bruchey supports a 4 engine City.
Chief Lohr will be discussing making the Bowman Avenue training facility part of the
County facilities with County Administrator Rob Slocum. He suggested looking at ways
to incentivize sprinkler systems in the older buildings in Hagerstown. The UIP is a
complex project and the Fire Department has pledged to do everything they can to help it
move forward. There is a question about a sprinkler system in the theatre. He doesn’t
want anyone to think they don’t support the project, but they won’t trade life safety
regulations for approval.
Set Next Meeting Date, Time, and Location
Mayor Bruchey suggested the next goal setting meeting be held on a Saturday.
Councilmember Keller suggested holding a public meeting at the library and give the
public a chance to talk to the elected body. She also suggested inviting people to speak at
the next meeting. Ms. Means noted this meeting has been open to the public.
The goal setting session was adjourned at 3:00 p.m.
WORK SESSION – July 25, 2017
In the Mayor’s temporary absence at the beginning of the meeting, Councilmember L. C.
Metzner called this Work Session of the Mayor and City Council to order at 6:34 p.m. on
Tuesday, July 25, 2017, in the Council Chamber at City Hall. Present with the Mayor
13

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
were Councilmember K. B. Aleshire, P. D. Corderman, E. Keller, L. C. Metzner, and D.
F. Munson, City Administrator Valerie Means, and City Clerk D. K. Spickler.
IBEW Local 307 Labor Contract
Scott Nicewarner, Director of Technology, Communications and Support Services,
and Nathan Fridinger, Electric Operations Manager, were present to discuss a tentative
agreement with the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW) Local 307.
This collective bargaining agreement has been ratified by the union-s membership on
July 24, 2017.
The major terms of the agreement are summarized below:
1. Term: Five years from July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2022 with a reopener
limited to wages to be effective for years 4 and 5 of the contract.
2. Lineworker Position Classification Change: A new Lineworker classification
will be created out of the current Lineworker classification to allow for formal
designation of work team leads primarily related to a 2-man crew situation.
The wage table adjustment creates a new Step 15 pay scale. There are no
additional positions being created.
3. Wages: Members continue to receive steps effective the first pay period
following their anniversary date. Members will receive a 2% cost of living
adjustment effective the first pay period after July 24, 2017, July 1, 2018, and
July 1, 2019. The final two years of wage adjustments will be determined
through a wage reopener.
4. Healthcare: The union agreed to reduce the defined contribution stipend from
$400/mo. To $ 350/mo. As agreed to and recommended by the health care
committee. The union also agreed to remove existing language that froze
health premiums in order to allow enhancement of under 65 retiree preventive
services.
5. Holidays: The City agreed to pay employees 2x regular rate of pay for all
hours worked if they are called in for unscheduled overtime or are on-call
Independence Day or Christmas Day when those days land on a Saturday.
The cost of the 2.0% wage increase to base wages for FY18 is $ 31,623.81, all of
which is budgeted and expended for out of the Electric Enterprise Fund. The full threeyear wage impact is $ 96,781.50.
It was the general consensus to formally approve the collective bargaining agreement
with IBEW during the Regular Session following the Work Session.
There being no further business for the Work Session, on a motion duly made,
seconded, and passed, the meeting was adjourned at 6:39 p.m.
19th REGULAR SESSION – July 25, 2017
Mayor R. E. Bruchey, II called this 19th Session of the Mayor and City Council to
order at 7:00 p.m. Tuesday, July 25, 2017, in the Council Chamber at City Hall.
Present with the Mayor were Councilmembers K. B. Aleshire, P. D. Corderman, E.
14

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
Keller, L. C. Metzner, and D. F. Munson, City Administrator Valerie Means, City
Attorney Jason Morton, and City Clerk D. K. Spickler.
The invocation was offered by Councilmember Kristin B. Aleshire. The Pledge of
Allegiance was then recited.
Mayor Bruchey announced the Rules of Procedure for this meeting will be followed as
adopted December 20, 2016. It was announced that the use of cell phones during
meetings is restricted and that all correspondence for distribution to elected officials
should be provided to the City Clerk and should include a copy for the City Clerk for
inclusion in the official record.
The next scheduled meetings are: Work Sessions beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Tuesday,
August 8, 2017, Tuesday, August 15, 2017, and Tuesday, August 22, 2017, and the
Regular Session on Tuesday, August 29, 2017 at 7:00 p.m. There is no meeting on
Tuesday, August 1, 2017.
APPOINTMENTS
On a motion duly made by Councilmember L. C. Metzner and seconded by
Councilmember D. F. Munson, the Mayor and City Council unanimously agreed by voice
vote to appoint the following people to the Hagerstown Housing Authority:
Howard “Gene” Bowers, Term to Expire August 30, 2020
Rosalind Martin, Term to Expire August 30, 2022
On a motion duly made by Councilmember L. C. Metzner and seconded by
Councilmember D. F. Munson, the Mayor and City Council unanimously agreed by voice
vote to appoint Leslie Allen to the Historic District Commission, with a term to expire
August 27, 2020.
On a motion duly made by Councilmember L. C. Metzner and seconded by
Councilmember D. F. Munson, the Mayor and City Council unanimously agreed by voice
vote to appoint Rabbi Ariel Plost to the City Ethics Commission, with a term to expire
September 1, 2022.
CITIZEN COMMENTS
Marvin Lohr, 1135 Sunnyside Drive, Hagerstown, Maryland, asked what is being
done about the trash downtown. Mayor Bruchey noted the situation has improved. The
Requests for Proposals for Refuse and Recycling Collection has been issued. The request
includes pricing for an option to collect weekly pickups from the alleys downtown.
Mr. Lohr has not been able to talk to anyone about his suggestion for a commercial
sales tax. He has mentioned this suggestion at previous Mayor and Council meetings.
Hagerstown needs to have some special appeal to attract visitors. He would not go to any
restaurant downtown. He encouraged the Mayor and Council to be bold and think about
new ideas for downtown.
15

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
James Devine, P. O. Box 2217, Hagerstown, Maryland, suggested allowing veterans
to park free of charge when they are picked up to travel to the VA medical center. He
asked Mayor Bruchey if he supports the speed camera ordinance. Mayor Bruchey stated
he does support the program, but does not support the hours of operation. Mr. Devine
stated additional cameras are needed on Maryland Avenue at South Hagerstown High
School and at the Technical High School on Oak Ridge Drive. There should be cameras
in the empty boxes. Mr. Devine expressed his opinion about the current president and
government.
Joseph Quesenberry, Faith Chapel, 14 S. Potomac Street, Hagerstown, Maryland,
stated members of Faith Chapel are concerned about the nation’s leadership and current
state of the nation. He believes prayers for Hagerstown are starting to be answered.
Hagerstown is a city in pain.
Jason Physioc, no fixed address, expressed his concern about the debris in the bike
lanes and the safety of bicyclists. He appreciates the Cultural Trail. He wondered how
he could start an exotic bird business downtown.
Vishal Mehta, Jerry’s Sports Bar, Public Square, Hagerstown, Maryland, stated Jerry’s
has been open for three months. He knows the City has big plans for making downtown
better. He is concerned that events seem to be focused on one specific area. He would
like to see events that have a positive impact on the restaurants. Main Street has been
helpful to him.
Mayor Bruchey suggested that both Mr. Physioc and Mr. Mehta speak with Jill Frick
Thompson, Director of Community and Economic Development, about their concerns
and questions.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR COMMENTS
Valerie Means, City Administrator, reminded everyone that National Night Out is
being held on Tuesday, August 1, 2017 from 5:30 p.m. to 8:30 p.m. at Fairgrounds Park.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL COMMENTS
Councilmember K. B. Aleshire asked that the IBEW contract vote be moved to the
beginning of New Business.
Councilmember P. D. Corderman hopes the Mayor’s comments answered some of
Mr. Lohr’s questions. He has heard that events seem to exclude some of the businesses.
Councilmember E. Keller often hears people say downtown is dying. She does not
believe this is the case, given the number of restaurants and cultural options downtown.
She encouraged people to visit downtown.
Councilmember L. C. Metzner thanked everyone for the productive goal setting retreat
held earlier today. He stated many retail establishments have closed in many places,
mostly due to on-line shopping. Downtown has improved significantly since the 1970’s
16

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
– 1980’s. A huge investment of $ 40 million is being planned for downtown. This
project will spark additional investment and downtown will thrive.
Councilmember D. F. Munson stated the Hagerstown Municipal Band is hosting the
Hagerstown government next week.
Mayor R. E. Bruchey, II thanked staff for their cooperation and input today during the
goal setting retreat. A second retreat will be held soon.
MINUTES
On a motion duly made by Councilmember D. F. Munson and seconded by
Councilmember L. C. Metzner, the Mayor and City Council unanimously agreed by
voice vote to approve the minutes, as presented, for the Mayor and Council meetings held
on June 6, 2017, June 13, 2017, and June 20, 2017.
CONSENT AGENDA
On a motion duly made by Councilmember L. C. Metzner and seconded by
Councilmember D. F. Munson, the Consent Agenda was approved as follows:
A. Information Technology and Support Services:
1.. Annual Intellitime Software Maintenance Agreement – Intellitime Systems
Corporation (Santa Ana, CA) $ 53,692.98
2. Annual MUNIS Software Maintenance Agreement – Tyler Technologies, Inc.
(Dallas, TX) $ 199,680.34
B. Parks and Engineering:
1. Purchase of Mower for Golf Course – Finch Services, Inc. (Westminster, MD)
$ 29,995.00
2. Design of Reconstruction of Pangborn Park Lake – Frederick Seibert &
Associates, Inc. (Hagerstown, MD) $ 36,800.00
C. Police Department:
1. Annual Software Maintenance Agreement for HPD Police Mobile and RMS –
Keystone Public Safety, Inc. (Maple Shade, NJ) $ 83,940.00
D. Utilities:
1. Light: Purchase of 2017 Ford Explorer – Keystone Ford (Chambersburg, PA)
$ 27,801.00
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
A. Approval of an Ordinance: To Amend the City Code by adding Chapter 37:
Police and Fire Department Binding Interest Arbitration
Action:

Councilmember L. C. Metzner made a motion to approve an ordinance to
amend the City Code pursuant to the Charter Amendment passed by voters
17

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
at the General Election on November 8, 2016 to add Chapter 37, Police
and Fire Department Binding Interest Arbitration to set forth the
procedures for implementing binding interest arbitration when the City
and a defined negotiating union have reached an impasse during contract
negotiations. Councilmember D. F. Munson seconded the motion.
Motion passed 4-1 with Councilmember K. B. Aleshire voting No.
NEW BUSINESS
L. Approval of IBEW Labor Contract
Action:

On a motion duly made by Councilmember E. Keller and seconded by
Councilmember L. C. Metzner, the Mayor and City Council unanimously
agreed by voice vote to approve a collective bargaining agreement
between the City of Hagerstown and the International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers Local 307. This agreement shall run for a period of
five years, commencing on July 26, 2017 through June 30, 2022.

A. Approval of a Resolution: Memorandum of Understanding for Tactical
Emergency Medical Support to the Washington County Special Response Team
(TEMS)
Action:

On a motion duly made by Councilmember K. B. Aleshire and seconded
by Councilmember L. C. Metzner, the Mayor and City Council
unanimously agreed by voice vote to approve a resolution approving a
Memorandum of Understanding for Tactical Emergency Medical Support
to the Washington County Special Response Team. The member agencies
intend to continue to assign tactical medics to the Washington County
SRT in order to provide medical support, if needed.

B. Approval of a Resolution: Addendum to Purchase Agreement for Sale of 4353 W. Washington Street
Action:

On a motion duly made by Councilmember K. B. Aleshire and seconded
by Councilmember D. F. Munson, the Mayor and City Council
unanimously agreed by voice vote to approve a resolution authorizing an
addendum to the purchase agreement for sale of property located at 43-53
West Washington Street. The City-owned property is currently under
contract to be sold to Hager 5, LLC. The addendum will extend the
settlement deadline from July 31, 2017 to October 31, 2017.

C. Approval of a Resolution: Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for a Safe
Routes to School Grant
Action:

On a motion duly made by Councilmember K. B. Aleshire and seconded
by Councilmember L. C. Metzner, the Mayor and City Council
18

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
unanimously agreed by voice vote to approve a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) for the acceptance of a grant in the amount of
$ 440,000 for the installation of sidewalks along Haven Road and
modifications to improve handicap-accessibility to the nearby traffic
signal at Pennsylvania Avenue and Fairview Road. The City’s match is
$ 108,900 taken from State Aid funds. Project will provide for fully
accessible crosswalks and pedestrian signals for school students and the
public in general.
D. Approval of a Resolution: Residential Lease Agreement for 38 N. Potomac
Street, Apt #3
Action:

On a motion duly made by Councilmember L. C. Metzner and seconded
by Councilmember D. F. Munson, the Mayor and City Council
unanimously agreed by voice vote to approve a resolution authoring the
execution of a residential lease agreement at the City of Hagerstown
property located at 38 North Potomac Street in Hagerstown Maryland.
The lease will be between the City of Hagerstown and Anthony P. Jones,
Jr. and shall be in effect from August 1, 2017 to July 31, 2018.

E. Approval of a Resolution: Residential Lease Agreement for 38 North
Potomac Street, Apt. #4
Action:

On a motion duly made by Councilmember D. F. Munson and seconded
by Councilmember L. C. Metzner, the Mayor and City Council
unanimously agreed by voice vote to approve a resolution authorizing the
execution of a residential lease agreement at the City of Hagerstown
property located at 38 North Potomac Street in Hagerstown, Maryland.
The lease will be between the City of Hagerstown and Matthew Hast and
shall be in effect from August 1, 2017 to July 31, 2018.

F. Approval of a Resolution: Lease Agreement for a Portion of the Property
Known as BuroBox located at 60 West Washington Street
Action:

On a motion duly made by Councilmember K. B. Aleshire and seconded
by Councilmember L. C. Metzner, the Mayor and City Council
unanimously agreed by voice vote to approve a resolution authorizing the
execution of a leas agreement for a portion of the City of Hagerstown
property known as BuroBox located at 60 West Washington Street in
Hagerstown, Maryland. The lease will be between the City of Hagerstown
and OAR Travel, LLC and shall be in effect from August 1, 2017 to July
31, 2018.

19

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
G. Approval of Contract to Furnish and Install a Parking Access and Revenue
Control System for Both Parking Decks – HUB Parking Technology (Warrendale,
PA) $ 280,744.00
Action:

On a motion duly made by Councilmember L. C. Metnzer and seconded
by Councilmember D. F. Munson, the Mayor and City Council
unanimously agreed by voice vote to approve a contract to replace the
parking Access and Revnue Control Systems (PARCS) for both parking
decks in the amount of $ 280,744.00. Staff is authorized to spend up to
$ 294,780.00 to cover contingency items for this project The contract will
be awarded to HUB Parking Technology of Warrendale, PA.

H. Acceptance of a Grant from the Chesapeake Bay Trust
Action:

On a motion duly made by Councilmember L. C. Metzner and seconded
by Councilmember D. F. Munson, the Mayor and City Council
unanimously agreed by voice vote to authorize acceptance of a Green
Streets, Green Jobs, Green Towns grant in the amount of $ 48,424 from
the Chesapeake Bay Trust. This grant, along with matching funds from
the City’s Capital Improvement Project budget, will be used to construct
traffic calming and stormwater management facilities at two locations
along Belview Avenue.

I. Approval of Contract for Alley Reconstruction – Phase II – Concrete Central,
LLC (Hagerstown, MD) $ 322,045.00
Action:

On a motion duly made by Councilmember D. F. Munson and seconded
by Councilmember L. C. Metzner, the Mayor and City Council
unanimously agreed by voice vote to approve of a contract with Concrete
Central, LLC of Hagerstown, Maryland in the amount of $ 322,045.00 for
the reconstruction of nine public alleys. Funding for the project is General
Fund Bonds.

J. Approval of Liability and Property Insurance for Fiscal 2018 – Local
Government Insurance Trust (Hanover, MD) $ 406,556.00
Action:

On a motion duly made by Councilmember L. C. Metzner and seconded
by Councilmember E. Keller, the Mayor and City Council unanimously
agreed by voice vote to approve the Fiscal 2018 renewal of insurance
coverage with the Local Government Insurance Trust (LGIT) for liability,
auto and property insurance in the amount of $ 406,556.00.

K. Approval of Transfer of Fire Department Air Horns to First Hagerstown
Hose Company Museum of Firefighting History
Action:

On a motion duly made by Councilmember K. B. Aleshire and seconded
by Councilmember D. F. Munson, the Mayor and City Council
unanimously agreed by voice vote to approve the Hagerstown Fire
20

19TH REGULAR SESSION, WORK SESSION AND GOAL SETTING SESSION
JULY 25,
2017 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND
Department to transfer two emergency warning air horns that were once
attached to City buildings to the First Hagerstown Hose Company
Museum of Firefighting History, 31 South Potomac Street. The air horns
would complement the Game Well Fire System that the museum has on
display. The horns were activated by an outside fire alarm box that
connected to a telegraph system that transmitted through City Hall. The
Gamewell system was used until 2005.
There being no further business to come before the Mayor and City Council, on a
motion duly made, seconded and passed, the meeting was adjourned at 7:49 p.m.
Respectfully submitted,
Original signed by D. K. Spickler
Donna K. Spickler
City Clerk

Approved: August 29, 2017

21
