CONTRACT BETWEEN
THE TOWN OF EAST HARTFORD
AND
LOCAL 1548
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
FIRE FIGHTERS, AFL-CIO
FOR THE PERIOD JULY 1, 2019 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2022

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE VII: Holidays
ARTICLE VIII: Overtime
ARTICLE IX: Acting Officers and Promotions
ARTICLE X: Vacations
ARTICLE XI: Sick Leave
ARTICLE XII; Injury Leave
ARTICLE XIII: Special Leave
ARTICLE -371V- Funeral Leave
ARTICLE XV: Uniform Allowance
'ARTICLE XVI: Insurance
ARTICLE XVII: Leave of Absence Without Pay
ARTICLE XVIII: Seniority and Reduction in
Force ARTICLE XIX: Probationary Period
ARTICLE XX: Employee Wellness program
ARTICLE XXI: Health and Safety
ARTICLE Vol Emergency Medical Service
ARTICLE XXIII: Miscellaneous
TICLE XXIV: Savings Clause
ARTICLE XXV: Wages and Longevity
ARTICLE XXVI: Duration
ARTICLE XXVII: Apparatus Operators
.APPENDIX Az Salary.Schedule
APPENDIX B
APPENDIX C: Dr.'s Own Letterhead
APPENDIX D: EH Firefighters Medical Plan
APPENDIX E: EH`Triple Option Dental Han
APPENDIX F: Health Benefit Opt-Out Form

13
16
8
20
22
23
28
28
30
3
33
34
38
40 .......
40
40
41
45
46
47
55

APPENDIX H: Heat Stress & Wind Chill Indexes
APPENDIX I: Substance Abuse Policy
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT

57
59
65

Page 3 of 65

The following contract, effective as of the first day of July 2019, by and between, respectively,
the Town of East Hartford, hereinafter referred to as the "Town" and Local 1548, International
Association of Fire Fighters, hereinafter referred to as the "Union", is designed to maintain and
promote a harmonious relationship between the Town of East Hartford and such of its employees
who are within the provisions of this contract, in order that more efficient and progressive public
service be rendered.
ARTICLE I
Recognition
The Town hereby recognizes the Union as the exclusive representative and bargaining agent for
this bargaining unit consisting of all uniformed positions within the East Hartford Fire
Department, except those of Chief and Assistant Chiefs. The provisions of this Agreement shall
be applied equally to all employees in the bargaining unit without discrimination because of age,
sex, marital status, race, color, creed, national origin, political affiliation or union membership.
ARTICLE II
Union Security
SECTION 1
Employees in the collective bargaining unit may, from the signing of this Agreement, or within
thirty (30) days from the date of employment by the Town, become and remain members of the
Union in good standing in accordance with the Constitution and By-Laws of the Union.
SECTION 2
The Town shall deduct Union dues from the earned wages of each Union member, in such amount
as determined by the Union as the regular weekly dues uniformly required as a condition of
retaining membership therein, upon the receipt of an employee's voluntary authorization card. The
sum which represents such weekly Union dues deduction shall be certified to the Town as
constituting such by the duly authorized financial officer of the Union. If the sum once certified is
changed, the amount deducted from the earnings of an employee who has authorized such
deduction shall not be increased or decreased until thirty (30) days written notice of such change
has been received by the Town from the duly authorized financial officer of the Union.
Deductions provided for herein shall be remitted to the duly authorized financial officer of the
Union not later than one (1) week following the end of each month in which the deduction is
made. Each month, the Town will simultaneously furnish the duly authorized financial officer of
the Union with a list of the employees for whom Union dues deductions have been made.
The Town's obligation to make such deductions shall terminate automatically upon termination of
the employee who signed the authorization, written voluntary request of the employee, or upon
his/her transfer to a job not covered by this Agreement, except that deductions shall be resumed if
an employee terminated by layoff is rehired, with seniority rights, during the life of the contract
then in existence.
Page 4 of 65

The Union agrees that it will indemnify and save the Town harmless from any and all liability,
claim, responsibility, damage, or suit which may arise out of any action taken by the Town in
accordance with the terms of this Article or in reliance upon the authorization described herein,
in an amount not to exceed the sum received by the Union on account of the deductions made
from the earnings of such employee or employees.
ARTICLE III
Bulletin Boards
No material shall be posted except notices of meetings and elections, results of elections, changes
in Union By-Laws, notices of employee social occasions and similar Union notices, letters and
memoranda. All material shall be signed by an officer of the Union.
ARTICLE IV
Grievance Procedure
SECTION 1
No bargaining unit employee shall be removed, dismissed, discharged, suspended, fined, or
reduced in rank except for just cause. Should any employee or group of employees feel aggrieved
concerning disciplinary action, wages, hours or conditions of employment as agreed to
hereunder, all of which wages, hours and conditions are controlled by this contract, adjustment
shall be as follows:
A. The Union shall submit such grievance, in writing, to the Chief of the Fire Department,
within thirty (30) days of the incident giving rise to the grievance, setting forth the nature
of the grievance, including specific reference to the clause or clauses of the contract which
the Union believes have been violated. Within seven (7) days after the Chief receives such
grievance, he/she shall arrange to and shall meet with the representatives of the Union for
the purpose of adjusting or resolving such grievance.
B. If such grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of the Union by the Chief, within
seven (7) days after such meeting, the Union may present such grievance, in writing,
within seven (7) days thereafter to the Human Resources Director. Within ten (10) days
after said Human Resources Director receives such grievance, the Human Resources
Director shall arrange to and shall meet with the Union in an attempt to resolve said
grievance.

.
1. If such grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of the Union by the Human
Resources Director within seven (7) days after such meeting, the Union may,
within ten (10) days thereafter, submit the dispute to arbitration by the
Connecticut State Board of Mediation and Arbitration. Said Board shall hear and
act on such dispute in accordance with its rules and render a decision which shall
Page 5 of 65

be final and binding on all parties. In the event such dispute involves disciplinary
action the Board of Mediation and Arbitration will have the power to uphold the
action of the Town or to rescind or modify such action, and such powers shall
include, but shall not be limited to the right to reinstate a suspended or discharged
employee, with full back pay.
2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, either the Union or the Town may substitute the
American Arbitration Association (AAA) for the Connecticut State Board of
Mediation and Arbitration for administration of any grievance under the rules of
the AAA, subject to the same time limits as stated above. The costs of
arbitration shall be divided equally between the Town and the Union. No more
than three (3) arbitration cases, in aggregate, shall be referred to the AAA
during any contract year (July 1 - June 30). If the Union chooses to refer a
dispute to the AAA, it shall substitute the AAA for the State Board of Mediation
and Arbitration within the above time limit. If the Town chooses to refer a
dispute to the AAA it shall do so in writing within ten (10) days from receipt of
written notice that the dispute has been submitted to arbitration before the State
Board of Mediation and Arbitration.
D. In cases of employee suspension, such suspension may be without pay for up to one (1)
week (four (4) work days for those covered by Section I of Article VI, or four (4) work
days for those covered by Section 2 of Article VI) before a hearing.
E. Nothing contained herein shall prevent any employee from presenting his/her own
grievance and representing himself/herself. However, only the Union may proceed to
arbitration.
F. Time limits provided for herein may be extended by written agreement of the parties.
G. As used herein, "days" shall mean calendar days. If, however, the final day of a time
period falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the time period shall automatically be
extended to the next day.

Page 6 of 65

ARTICLE V
Union Business Leave
SECTION 1
The four (4) members of the Union Negotiating Committee shall be granted leave from duty,
with full pay, for all meetings between the Town and the Union for the purpose of negotiating the
terms of a contract, when such meetings take place at a time during which such members are
scheduled to be on duty.
SECTION 2
The four (4) members of the Union Grievance Committee shall be granted leave from duty, with
full pay, for all meetings between the Town and the Union for the purpose of processing
grievances, when such meetings take place at a time during which such members are scheduled
to be on duty.
SECTION 3
Such officers and members of the Union, as may be designated by the Union, shall be granted
twenty (20) days' leave from duty with full pay, for Union business such as attending labor
conventions and educational conferences.
ARTICLE VI
Work Week
SECTION 1
The work week for all employees except those assigned to the Fire Marshal's Division, the
Apparatus Repair Division, the Fire Alarm Division, the EMS Division, the Training Division,
Emergency Management, Special Administrative Assignments, or Light duty shall be an average
of not more than forty-two (42) hours per week computed over a period of one fiscal year.
Personnel shall work a twenty four hour shift followed by 72 hours off. Each 24 hour shift shall
be comprised of a ten hour day tour to commence at 0700 hours and to conclude at 1700 hours
linked to a fourteen hour night tour which shall commence at 1700 hours and conclude at 0700
hours following day. All leave shall be taken in 24 hour blocks of time except as specified.
The following leave may be granted for a day tour or a night tour:
1. Vacation days
2. Earned Days (for perfect attendance)
3. Special Leave
4. Educational Leave
5. Personal/ Sick Leave
6. Sick Leave specific to the care of a family member

Page 7 of 65

This schedule may be modified to meet the requirements of the Department by mutual agreement
between Local 1548 and the Chief of Department.
SECTION 2
The work week of all employees who are not covered under Section 1 of this Article shall be
thirty-five (35) hours per week, Personnel shall rotate on a weekly basis between Monday
through Thursday from 0730 hrs to 1700 hrs with a 45 minute lunch break and Tuesday through
Friday from 0730 hrs to 1700 hrs with a 45 minute lunch break. This schedule may be modified
to meet the requirements of the Department by mutual agreement between Local 1548 and the
Chief of Department.
SECTION 3
The procedures concerning group changes, which were in effect at the time this Agreement was
negotiated, shall continue. The Chief or his/her designee and representatives of the Union shall
meet for the purpose of reducing the group change procedure to writing.
SECTION 4
A. All temporary positions not covered under Section 1 of this Article will be covered under
Section 2 of this article.
B. Temporary Positions shall be created and assigned as follows:
Whenever the Town determines that a new temporary position is required, the Fire Chief
shall identify the duties, responsibilities, and pay grade for that position.
All temporary positions, for which there is no active eligibility list, shall be offered to the
most qualified person. Qualification is determined by a review of the individual's
qualifications, including education, training, relevant experience, and certification, in
comparison to the minimum qualifications contained within the job description. In the
event of two persons with equivalent qualification, the senior most person shall be
selected for the position.
Temporary positions shall be for a period not less than 90 days, nor more than 365 days
from date of assignment. Temporary positions may be extended up to an additional 180
days, if agreed upon by the Fire Chief, member filling the temporary position, and Local
1548.

Page 8 of 65

ARTICLE VII
Holidays
SECTION 1
In each fiscal year, each employee shall receive holiday pay for twelve (12) holidays. Each day
of the holiday pay for each employee shall be computed by multiplying his/her regular hourly
rate by twelve (12) hours. Holiday pay shall be paid on or about September 1 of each fiscal year.
The twelVe (12) holidays are:
Independence Day
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day

New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
Presidents' Day
Good Friday
Easter
Memorial Day

SECTION 2
In the event of an unforeseen national state holiday of mourning, and it is declared as such and is
in fact celebrated by the Town, each employee shall receive an additional day of holiday pay.
ARTICLE VIII
Overtime
SECTION 1
Whenever an employee works in excess of his/her regularly assigned work week or work
schedule, as provided for in Article VI, in addition to any other benefits to which he/she may be
entitled, he/she shall be paid for such overtime work at time and one half* the hourly rate which
he/she receives for his/her regularly assigned duty, multiplied by twelve (12) hours if such
employee works the full ten (10) hour day tour or a full fourteen (14) hour night tour of such
work, or multiplied by four (4) hours or the actual number of hours worked, whichever is greater,
if such employee works less than a full tour of such work or is ordered to and does report for
overtime work.
* See Memorandum of Agreement re Minimum Manning
SECTION 2
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1 of this Article, any employee who is required to
work in excess of his/her regularly assigned work week or work schedule, as provided for in
Article VI will be paid the applicable overtime rate for all time worked in excess of his/her work
schedule.

Page 9 of 65

SECTION 3
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1 of this Article, any employee who is required to
work in excess of his/her regularly assigned work week or work schedule, as provided for in
Article VI, because he/she has been ordered to and performs work in connection with a multiple
alarm fire, or in the event of an emergency condition, such as, but not limited to 'such conditions
as flooding, civil disturbance, severe and/or unusual weather conditions, or any other emergency
declared by the Mayor or his/her designee, shall be paid for such overtime work at one and one
quarter (1 1/4) times the hourly rate which he/she receives for his/her regularly assigned duty,
multiplied by twelve (12) hours, if such employee works a full ten (10) hour day tour or a full
fourteen (14) hour night tour of such work, or multiplied by four (4) hours or the actual number
of such hours worked, whichever is greater, if such employee works less than a full tour of such
work or is ordered to and does report for overtime work.
SECTION 4
A. The overtime lists (with the exception of the Emergency List) shall consist of those
employees who volunteer in writing. Newly hired employees shall have thirty (30) days
from date of hire within which to volunteer, in writing, to have his/her name added to
such list(s). The names of employees on the overtime lists shall be placed thereon in
order of their seniority.
B. Regular Overtime Lists
There shall be two (2) separate lists for overtime which is needed to bring a company up
to minimum manpower strength for the full shift:
1. Deputy Chiefs, Captains and Lieutenants,
2. Firefighters, Firefighter/Paramedics, Apparatus Operators.
C. Whenever overtime is required to bring a firefighting shift up to minimum manpower
strength, it shall be rotated among the qualified employees whose names appear on the
appropriate Regular or Four-Hour overtime lists.
D. If an employee works an overtime assignment or refuses to work such an overtime
assignment, his/her name shall be placed at the bottom of the rotating overtime list. If an
employee is unable to work such overtime because he is on sick leave or injury leave, his
name shall be placed at the bottom of the rotating overtime list only after he has
completed the period of sick or injury leave and has had the same number of
opportunities to work he would have had if he was not sick or injured, to a maximum of
ten (10) such opportunities. Any employee who has reported off sick is ineligible for
overtime during the next shift and thereafter until he/she reports back for duty.

Page 10 of 65

E. If no employee on the appropriate roster accepts an overtime assignment, the employee
standing highest on the applicable rotating roster shall be ordered to work such
assignment.
F. The officer in charge of the shift on which such overtime work is to take place shall
administer the provisions of this section. The lists and procedures outlined in this Section
may be modified by mutual agreement between the Chief and the Union in order to better
meet departmental needs.
G. Members working in Temporary Position or Acting Assignment, upon returning to their
previous permanent job assignment, shall have their proper position in each overtime list
determined in the following manner:
1. The total salary compensation (including base pay and any overtime worked)
for the time period where the member was in the Temporary or Acting
Assignment will be compared to a similarly situated member in his permanent
classification. For the purpose of this section, similarly situated shall be
defined as same job class, step, and having worked an average number of
overtime shifts for the period.
2. The difference in compensation will be translated into an equivalent number
of overtime shifts 'behind.' Under no circumstance will the member coming
from the Temporary or Acting Assignment be placed ahead (in number of
overtime hours worked) of those in his job class.
SECTION 5
No employees who are covered by Section 1 of Article VI of this Agreement shall work more
than five (5) consecutive tours of duty. An employee who has worked the maximum consecutive
tours permitted by this Section shall not be ordered to work overtime unless there is a state of
emergency declared by the Mayor necessitating the presence of all personnel.
SECTION 6
Whenever any private person or organization is required to, or shall seek the services of
employees of the Fire Department for extra duty assignments, the Chief or his designated
representative shall hire the requested number of employees being requested from the extra duty
overtime list.
A. The extra duty list shall consist of those employees who volunteer in writing to have their
names added to such list by April 15, 2004. Newly hired employees shall have thirty (30)
days from date of hire to volunteer, in writing, to have their names added to such list. The
names on the extra duty overtime list shall be placed in the order of department seniority.
Employees who wish to be added to such list after April 15, 2004, may do so in writing to
the Chief or his/her designee at any time, but shall be placed at the end of said list and
averaged into the rotating order for hiring purposes. On January 1 and July 1 of each
Page 11 of 65

calendar year, the order of all names on the extra duty overtime list shall be adjusted to
reflect department seniority.
B. Employees may at any time request in writing to the Chief or his/her designee that their
name be removed from the extra duty overtime list. These employees may also request in
writing to the Chief or his/her designee that their name be placed back on to the extra
duty overtime list. Such names shall be place back on to the extra duty overtime list two
times per calendar year, on either January 1 or July 1 but only after a minimum period of
six months has passed since they were removed from the extra duty overtime list. These
names shall be placed on to the extra duty overtime list in order of department seniority
and averaged into the rotating order for hiring purposes.
C. All employees covered under this Collective Bargaining Agreement shall be eligible for
placement on the extra duty overtime list. Employees shall be assigned and restricted to
duties at specific events and/or occupancies based on their current position, job
description,,and/or rank except in the case of ancillary service employees who may work
off the extra duty overtime list in a position of lower labor grade or different job
description. Ancillary service employees may not be placed in line firefighter or line
officer positions, whose duties are suppression. Ancillary service employees may be hired
for such positions as fire prevention, fire watch, dual role fire prevention/ EMS positions,
and other similar job assignments.
D. Employees working extra duty shall be compensated at the following overtime rates:
1. Firefighters, Firefighter/Paramedics, and Apparatus Operators.
a. Grade 66
2. Lieutenants, Captains, and Deputy Chiefs.
a. Grade 69, Step 2 when working in a capacity other than event/incident
operations commander.
b. Grade 72, Step 3 for Captains and Deputy Chiefs working as
the event/incident operations commander.
3. Fire Equipment Mechanic, Fire Alarm Mechanic, Fire Inspectors, Master
Mechanic, Superintendent of Alarms, Fire Marshall, Chief Medical Officer,
Assistant Medical Officer, Emergency Manager, Chief Training Officer, and
any new position(s) created in the ancillary services which are similar in labor
grade and/or position.
a. Grade 66 when operating in a capacity which is less than their regular
job assignment or position.

Page 12 of 65

b. Grade 69, Step 2 when working in the capacity of their regular job
assignment or a supervisory position relevant to their position.
E. Employees hired for extra duty assignment shall be paid for such assignment at the
appropriate overtime rate, multiplied by four (4) hours, or the actual number of hours of
such overtime, whichever is greater.
F. If no employee volunteers for extra fire duty, assignments will be made by the Chief to
those off duty from the rotating extra fire duty list.

ARTICLE IX
Acting Officers and Promotions
SECTION 1- ACTING OFFICERS
Whenever any employee is required to work (act) in a higher classification than his/her regular
classification, such employee shall receive, in pay, the difference between their regular rate of
pay and Step 1 of the higher classification in which he/she serves in this acting capacity except as
provided herein. Employees who are acting will receive only the next higher rate of pay. Service
in an "acting" capacity shall not count towards seniority if and when an employee is permanently
appointed to such higher rank, nor will it count toward eligibility for step increase, time in grade
for purposes of eligibility for promotional exams, nor for any purpose whatsoever.
A. Whenever a Lieutenant is required to work (act) as a Captain, such employee must
work in the same acting position for seven (7) consecutive calendar days before
beginning to receive acting pay.
B. Whenever the Assistant Medical Officer, Assistant Master Mechanic, Assistant
Alarms Superintendent, or Deputy Fire Marshal is required to work (act) in a higher
classification within their Division, such employee must work in the acting position for a
seven (7) consecutive calendar days before beginning to receive acting pay.
SECTION 2
A. Whenever an employee is absent from duty for any reason or has separated from service
and such absence (1) causes another employee or employees to act in a higher capacity,
with or without additional compensation, and (2) there is an existing eligibility list for the
rank or ranks being filled in by an employee working in an acting capacity, then on the
thirty-first (31) day of such absence or separation from service, the employee standing
highest on the existing eligibility list for the rank in which acting in a higher capacity is
being worked shall be temporarily appointed to act in such capacity until the need for
such work in an acting capacity no longer exists.
B. Whenever an employee is absent from duty for any reason or has separated from service
and such absence (1) causes another employee or employees to act in a
Page 13 of 65

higher capacity, with or without additional compensation, and (2) there is no existing
eligibility list for the rank or ranks being filled in by an employee working in an acting
capacity, then on the ninety-first day of such absence or separation from service, such
position shall be offered to the senior most qualified person from the immediately
subordinate rank.
C. If the employer can reasonably determine that such absence will last more than ninetyone (91) days, then the employer may appoint said highest eligible employee any time
after the first day of absence.
D. Temporarily appointed employees shall begin receiving the higher rate of pay upon
appointment.
SECTION 3
A. All promotional examinations and promotional appointments shall be in accordance with
the Town of East Hartford Personnel Rules and Merit System in effect on the date of the
Departmental promotional examination announcement.
B. Effective on ratification of the Agreement, promotion exams shall be held with regularity
in order to establish and maintain active promotional eligibility lists. Promotional
examinations shall be held no less frequently than provided for herein below, absent the
extension of the existing eligibility list by the Fire Chief, or mutual agreement between
the Fire Chief and Union based on anticipated vacancies:
1. Apparatus Operator: No less frequently than every other year;
2. Lieutenant: No less frequently than every other year;
3. Captain: No less frequently than every three (3) years;
4. Deputy Chief: No less frequently than every three (3) years;
5. Deputy Fire Marshal, Assistant Medical Officer, Assistant Superintendent of
Alarms and Assistant Master Mechanic: No less frequently than every four (4)
years;
6. Master Mechanic, Superintendent of Alarms, Fire Marshal and Fire Captain of
Emergency Management: No less frequently than every four (4) years.

Page 14 of 65

ARTICLE X
Vacations
SECTION 1
In each calendar year, each employee who has or will have six (6) months but less than one (1)
year of Town service on December 31st of such calendar year shall receive one (1) week of
vacation leave with pay. Each employee who has or will have one (1) but less than five (5) years
of Town service on December 31st of such calendar year shall receive two (2) weeks of vacation
leave with pay. Each employee who has or will have five (5) but less than ten (10) years of Town
service on December 31st of such calendar year shall receive three (3) weeks of vacation leave
with pay.
Each employee who has or will have ten (10) but less than sixteen (16) years of Town service on
December 31st of such calendar year shall receive four (4) weeks of vacation leave with pay.
Each employee who has or will have sixteen (16) or more years of Town service on December
31st of such calendar year shall receive one (1) additional day of vacation leave with pay. Each
employee who has or will have seventeen (17) or more years of Town service on December 31st
of such calendar year shall receive two (2) additional days of vacation leave with pay. Each
employee who has or will have eighteen (18) or more years of Town service on December 31st of
such calendar year shall receive three (3) additional days of vacation leave with pay. Each
employee who has or will have nineteen (19) or more years of Town service on December 31st of
such calendar year shall receive four (4) additional days of vacation leave with pay. Each
employee who has or will have twenty (20) or more years of Town service on December 31st of
such calendar year shall receive five (5) additional days of vacation leave with pay.
SECTION 2
A. Employees may take their vacation leave at any time during the calendar year except that
the Chief may limit the number of employees who may be on vacation simultaneously to
eleven (11). The distribution of the eleven (11) positions shall be three (3) officers, four
(4) apparatus operators, and four (4) firefighter or firefighter/paramedics. The shift
commander shall hold the rank of deputy chief, acting deputy chief, or captain. An acting
captain shall not be eligible to serve as a shift commander.
B. In the event of a conflict concerning a choice of vacations, preference shall be given on
the basis of seniority in grade, except that no employee who is entitled to more than two
weeks of vacation leave may select such additional vacation leave until all employees
who are entitled to two weeks of vacation leave shall have chosen same. No employee
shall take individual days of vacation leave in such a manner as to conflict with another
employee's choice of a full week of vacation leave. Each week of vacation leave shall
begin on Monday and run for seven (7) consecutive days.

Page 15 of 65

SECTION 3
All vacation leave may be taken as individual days off. For the purpose of this Section, a week of
vacation leave shall mean four (4) tours of duty for those employees who are covered by Section
1 of Article VI of this Agreement and shall mean four (4) tours of duty for those employees who
are covered under Section 2 of Article VI of this Agreement. All applicable provisions of this
Article shall apply to this Section as well.
SECTION 4
Each employee may carry forward up to two (2) weeks of unused vacation leave. Such leave
shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of Section 2 of this Article. Carryover of
vacation under this Section shall require thirty (30) days notice in writing to the Chief or the
Deputy Chief.
SECTION 5
If any employee is entitled to vacation leave at the time of his/her separation from the Fire
Department, or his/her death, such employee, or his/her dependent survivors, as the case may be,
shall receive one (1) day of pay for each day or days of such vacation leave.
ARTICLE XI
Sick Leave
SECTION 1
Each employee shall be entitled to one and one fourth (1 1/4) working days of sick leave, with
pay, for each month of service which shall accumulate indefinitely. One 24 hour shift each year
may be defined as Personal/Sick Leave to be used at the employee's sole discretion. Use of
Personal/Sick Leave shall not break a period of "Perfect Attendance" as defined in Section 2 of
Article XI.
SECTION 2
The term "perfect attendance" shall mean no time taken for sick leave, unauthorized leave or
authorized leave without pay. Employees shall earn one (1) day for perfect attendance for each
of the following periods:
January 1
April 1
July 1
October 1

thru
thru
thru
thru

March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31

Earned days must be taken within an eight (8) month period.

Page 16 of 65

SECTION 3
If an employee has unused sick leave at the time of his/her retirement, he/she shall receive one
day of pay for each day of unused sick leave up to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) )
days. In the event of an employee's death, his/her spouse and/or dependent children shall receive,
on the basis of the employee's current wages, full compensation for any of the employee's unused
accumulation of sick leave up to a maximum of ninety (90) days. Employees hired on/after July
1, 2017 will not receive any payout of sick leave upon retirement.
SECTION 4
A. Sick leave may be used by employees for the recovery from illness, injury, exposure to
disease, or to permit the absence of the employee for up to 24 hours to care for a member
of the employee's immediate family. Immediate family shall mean, and include, mother,
father, mother-in-law, father-in-law, spouse, child, sister, brother, grandparent,
grandchild, and any family member that is domiciled in the employee's household.
B. Use of sick leave to care for a family member shall be limited to six tours.
SECTION 5
No employee will be eligible for sick leave during any period which he/she is eligible for and
collecting Workers' Compensation from an employer other than the Town of East Hartford.
SECTION 6
A. A medical certification signed by a licensed physician, or other practitioner whose
method of healing is recognized by the State authorities, may be required for a period of
more than two (2) consecutive working days, or as supporting evidence when sick leave
is requested during a period when an employee is on accrued vacation leave, or any
other type of leave, or when an employee's attendance shows frequent or habitual
absence because of claimed sickness. Medical certification shall be provided on a
prescribed form. See Appendix C.
B. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this contract, the Chief will periodically review
the attendance patterns of employees. If the review of any employee's record discloses
individual events of illness which total six (6) or more days during any twelve (12) month
period, or a proportional number if the review period is less than twelve (12) months, the
Chief may discuss such attendance pattern with the employee and advise him or her
through consultation. The failure to improve his or her attendance prior to the end of the
next review period may lead to disciplinary action.

Page 17 of 65

SECTION 7
The Town may provide a physician or nurse to make any necessary examinations or
investigations of any alleged abuses of sick leave. The cost of such examination or investigation
shall be paid by the Town.
ARTICLE XII
Injury Leave
SECTION 1
Each employee who is injured or disabled in the performance of his/her duties shall be entitled to
injury leave, with full pay, from the date of injury until such time as he/she is able to return to
duty or reaches maximum medical improvement, whichever comes first, and in no event for more
than eighteen (18) months from the date of injury. Such injury leave may be extended to a
maximum of an additional six (6) months upon receipt by the Town of the written opinion of the
employee's physician, prior to expiration of the initial 18 month period, that the injured employee
will be capable of resuming his/her duties within such extended six (6) month period. In those
cases wherein the disabled employee may receive damages or awards through litigation or
settlement against third parties, such employees will reimburse the Town for that portion of such
damages or awards which compensated him/her for the salary to which he/she was entitled
during such leave. The Corporation Counsel is authorized to negotiate anything less than the full
amount of such reimbursement subject to approval by the Town Council.
SECTION 2
The Town shall pay the hospital, medical and drug expense for each employee who is injured or
disabled in the performance of duty, provided that he/she reports such injury or disability to
his/her superior officer as soon as he/she becomes aware that such injury or disability was
suffered in the line of duty and, further provided that he/she reports same within one (1) year of
the date of the injury or disability, and further provided that he/she establishes, through proper
evidence and witnesses, that such injury or disability was suffered in the performance of his/her
duty.
SECTION 3
A. Notwithstanding any provisions of Section 2 of this Article to the contrary, any condition
of impairment of health caused by hypertension or heart disease resulting in total or
partial disability to an employee hired before July 1, 1996 shall be presumed to have been
suffered in the performance of his/her duties.
B. Any employee who is hired on or after July 1, 1996 shall be subject to the provisions of
C.G.S. §7-433c, as it may be amended from time to time.

Page 18 of 65

SECTION 4
No employee shall engage in any activity of an emergency nature which is known to have
caused heart and hypertension problems as covered under Section 7-433c of the Connecticut
General Statutes. This provision shall not apply to activity in the employ of, or for the benefit of
the Town.
SECTION 5
Light Duty Work Program
A. There shall be established a Light Duty Work Program within the East Hartford Fire
Depaanient to accommodate the temporary partial physical disabilities of Department
personnel, arising from both work related and non-work related illnesses, injuries or
medical condition.
B. Whenever any employee presents a doctor's certificate indicating the employee is fit for
light duty, the Fire Chief or his designee shall determine:
1.

That the employee's skills and abilities and medical condition are
appropriate to the light duty job to which he/she has been assigned.

2.

An employee who has been released to light duty shall report for light duty
on the day of his/her next regularly scheduled shift. Should the employee's
next regular shift fall on a Saturday or Sunday he/she shall report for light
duty on Monday.

3.

Light duty assignments shall be be thirty-five (35) hours per week.
Personnel shall rotate on a weekly basis between Monday through
Thursday from 0730 hrs to 1700 hrs with a 45 minute lunch break and
Tuesday through Friday from 0730 hrs to 1700 hrs with a 45 minute lunch
break. This schedule may be modified to meet the requirements of the
Department by mutual agreement between Local 1548 and the Chief of
Department. Employees on light duty assignments will be excused from
duty for reasonable periods of time for doctor's appointments and physical
therapy.

4.

In the case of work related injuries, that the illness injury or medical
condition is expected to continue for no more than eighteen (18) months
from the date of injury. However, a light duty assignment may be extended
up to a maximum of an additional six (6) months upon receipt by the
Town of the written opinion of the employee's physician, prior to the
expiration of the initial eighteen (18) month period, that the injured
employee will be capable of resuming his/her duties within such extended
six (6) month period; and

Page 19 of 65

In the case of non-work related injuries, that the illness, injury or medical condition is
expected to continue for no more than six (6) months from the date of injury. However, a
light duty assignment may be extended up to a maximum of an additional eighteen (18)
months upon receipt by the Town of the written opinion of a physician chosen by the
Town, prior to the expiration of the initial six (6) month period that the injured employee
will be capable of resuming his/her duties within such extended eighteen (18) month
period. Employees with non-work related injuries will submit to independent medical
examinations, at the expense of the Town, whenever the Chief in his or her discretion,
deems such an independent medical examination (or series of examinations) to be
reasonable and appropriate.
It shall be the responsibility of the employee to secure the doctor's certificate stating the
information detailed above, except when an independent medical examination is required.
C. Employees participating in the Light Duty Work Program shall assist in non-fire
suppression duties that contribute in a meaningful and identifiable way to the function
and mission of the East Hartford Fire Department. No employee shall be required to
perform menial or degrading work in the Light Duty Program.
D. Upon receiving medical certification that he/she is fit for duty, the employee shall be
returned to the position and unit to which the employee had been assigned prior to the
onset of his/her temporary disability, subject to reassignment and/or promotion.
ARTICLE XIII
Special Leave
SECTION 1
Each employee shall be granted special leave, with pay, for any day or days on which he/she is
able to secure another employee to work in his/her place provided:
A. Such substitution does not impose any additional costs on the Town;
B. Such substitution does not cause the Company to be without a qualified employee to fill
each of its positions;
C. The officer in charge of his/her assigned shift shall be notified in writing on an approved
form or electronically at least 24 hours in advance;
D. In each calendar month, no employee shall exchange more than two (2) day tours of
special leave, excluding weekends and holidays, except if being used for educational
purposes - proof may be required.. If one or more additional days are requested, they may
be granted only with approval of the Chief or the Assistant Chief;
E. Neither the Department nor the Town is held responsible for enforcing any agreements
made between employees.
Page 20 of 65

SECTION 2
Family Medical Leave
The Town will comply with all the terms of the Federal Family Medical Leave Acts. These terms
include but are not limited to the following:
A. Under circumstances described below, employees will be eligible for up to 12 weeks of
paid or unpaid family and medical leave in a twelve-month period. Pursuant to Federal
Law, employees may choose, or employers may require the employee to use, accrued
paid leave to cover some or all of the FMLA leave taken. In addition, employees may
choose, or employers may require, the substitution of accrued paid vacation or accrued
paid personal leave for any of the situations covered by FMLA.
B. Events which qualify employees for such leave are:
Birth or adoption of a child or placement of a child in the employee's home for foster
care.
A serious health condition, as defined by FMLA, of the employee, employee's
spouse, employee's parent or child.
C. To qualify for FMLA leave, employees requesting such leave must explain the reason for
the leave in writing to their department head so that the Town can determine if FMLAqualified leave will be granted.
D. The Town may require medical certification to document the reason for the leave,where
provided by law.
E. The Town will notify the employee in writing before the leave begins that the leave has
been designated as FMLA leave and will be deducted from the allowable maximum.
F. During the period of FMLA-qualified leave, the employee shall retain health benefits at
the same level as before the leave. The Town will continue to pay the premiums as before
the leave. Any employee contributions to health insurance shall be made directly to the
Town by the employee.
G. Employee may be required to provide a "fitness for duty" certification upon return to
work.
ARTICLE XIV
Funeral Leave
Each employee shall be granted leave, with pay, in the event of a death in his/her immediate
family. Such leave shall start on the day of death and continue through and include the day of the
burial, unless an additional day is necessary for travel, subject to approval by the Chief or
designee. In no event shall such leave be less than three (3) tours commencing with the day of
Page 21 of 65

death. For purposes of this Article, the term "immediate family" shall mean and include the
following: mother, father, mother-in-law, father-in-law, wife, child, sister, brother, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, grandparent, grandchild, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, step-son, step-daughter,
and any relative who is domiciled in the employee's household.
ARTICLE XV
Uniform Allowance
SECTION 1
The Town shall provide employees with dress uniforms to include:
1 pair of Dress Gloves
1 Long-Sleeved Dress Uniform Shirt
1 Uniform tie
1 Class A Dress Uniform Blouse
1 Dress Uniform Winter Jacket
1 Pair of Dress Uniform Slacks
1 Pair of Dress Uniform Shoes
1 Dress Uniform Hat and Hat Badge
2 Dress Uniform Badges
2 Sets of Dress Uniform Collar Insignia
The Chief shall determine when the change of seasonal uniforms will occur. The Chief may make
bi-annual inspections of dress uniforms.
SECTION 2
The Town shall continue to provide each employee with his/her own protective clothing which is
of good quality and in good condition. Such personal protective equipment shall be appropriate
for the conditions under which employees are expected to operate during emergency situations.
All clothing shall meet or exceed the NFPA and/or OSHA standards. This equipment shall include
the following:
1 New York style helmet
1 Set of complete turnout gear
1 Pair of Structural Firefighting gloves
1 Pair of Structural Firefighting boots
1 Nomex Hood
1 SCBA Mask
SECTION 3
A. The Town shall provide work uniforms to each employee. Issued uniforms shall be solely
and exclusively utilized when on-duty.

Page 22 of 65

B. Issued uniforms shall be selected based upon a combination of OSHA compliance, NFPA
guidance, wearability, appearance, and economic considerations. Such uniforms shall
conform to the department uniform policy (DP-2001) in effect as of January 15th, 2008.
C. The Fire Chief, with input from the Joint Labor/Management Health and Safety
Committee, shall have the ultimate and final decision on selection and purchase of
uniforms.
D. At the discretion of the Fire Chief or his/her designee, the Town of East Hartford shall
pay for the cleaning and or repair of the employee's Class A uniform.
ARTICLE XVI
Insurance
SECTION 1
The Town shall provide and pay for the following insurance for all employees and their enrolled
dependents:
A.
Effective July 1, 2014, a High Deductible Health Plan (HDHP) with Health Savings
Account (HSA) ($1,500/$3,000 — 100%/80%) and full service prescription drug coverage
as described in Appendix D through June 30, 2020.
1. Any employee currently receiving Veterans benefits causing him or her to
become ineligible to have contributions made to an HSA, shall remain in the
non-high deductible PPO and shall pay the same employee premium share
contribution as the HDHP premium share contribution for the PPO. Employees
currently receiving Veterans benefits may also elect to enroll in the HDHP,
however, they should be aware of the timing of the HSA contributions to avoid
potential tax penalties.
2. The Town will annually deposit an additional $250 toward the deductible for
participating in its voluntary health screening program. Completion of the
voluntary health screening program means the employee shall annually have
their primary care physician complete the Preventative Health Attestation as
Appendix G certifying that they have had medical screenings appropriate for
their age. Employees will be required to submit said form as proof of
completion.
3. The Triple Option Dental Plan, as described in Appendix E with the duration of
coverage for non-spouse dependents to age nineteen (19) or to age twenty three
(23) if the dependent is enrolled as a full-time student in an accredited school
or university.
4. Vision Care Endorsement for employee and eligible dependents, as described
in Appendix D.
Page 23 of 65

B. Effective July 1, 2020, the medical and vision coverage provided through the Northwest
Fire Fighter's Trust (NWFFT) as described in this Article. The current coverage provided by
the NWFFT plan is attached as Appendix D of this agreement. The parties agree that the
NWFFT alone has the authority to change the terms of coverage for this plan.
1.
The NWFFT Health Plan design is currently an HDHP-HSA with
deductible parameters of $2,000/$4,000. All other NWFFT Health plan
perimeters are as defined in summary benefits coverage. The NWFFT plan offers
a vision plan as part of the overall medical benefits plan and is included in the
medical plan rates.
2.
At no time will the Town pay an additional contribution to the NWFFT
premium if the Trust premium is more than the Town's HDHP allocation rate of
similar benefits. The allocation rate used in this calculation is based upon a plan
design of equal value ($2,000/$4,000 deductible and Rx copayments as outlined
in Appendix A).
3.
The Town will annually deposit an additional $250 in the employee's HSA
for participating in its voluntary health screening program. Completion of the
voluntary health screening program means the employee shall annually have their
primary care physician complete the Preventive Health Attestation as appendix G
certifying that they have had medical screenings appropriate for their age.
Employees will be required to submit said form as proof of completion.
4.
The Triple Option Dental Plan, as described in Appendix E with the
duration of coverage for non-spouse dependents to age nineteen (19) or to age
twenty-three (23) if enrolled as a full-time student in an accredited school or
university.
5.
Any employee currently receiving Veterans benefits causing him or her to
become ineligible to have contributions made to an HSA, shall be eligible to
enroll in the NWFFT POS plan option. The employee shall pay the same
premium share contribution as the NWFFT HDHP and the Town will pay the
difference in premiums between the NWFFT HDHP and POS plans. Employees
currently receiving Veterans benefits may also elect to enroll in the NWFFT
HDHP, however, they should be aware of the timing of any HSA contributions to
avoid potential tax penalties.
C. All members of the bargaining unit who elect insurance coverage under Sections A and B
(as applicable) above (health, prescription drug and vision) will contribute toward the cost of
such insurance benefits on a weekly pre tax basis for each year of the contract as described
below:
Effective July 1, 2020, each employee enrolled and covered under section B shall contribute 11%
of the NWFFT premium charged to the Town through weekly payroll deductions on a pretax
Page 24 of 65

(IRS Code §125) basis. The NWFFT premium is only for the cost of the benefit plan and does
not include any additional costs associated with HSA contributions or preventive health
screenings. The Town Dental plan contribution will be based upon a 10% annual contribution.
Effective July 1, 2021 each employee enrolled in the NWFFT shall contribute 11% of the
NWFFT premium charged to the Town. The NWFFT premium is only for the cost of the benefit
plan and does not include any additional costs associated with HSA contributions or preventive
health screenings. The Town Dental plan contribution will be based upon a 10% annual
contribution.
The payroll deductions specified above shall be implemented pursuant to a Section 125
pre-tax wage deduction plan in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code (and in accordance with any amendments to said provisions) so long as
said provisions allow for such a plan. Said plan will be designed to permit exclusion from taxable
income of the employees' share of health insurance premiums for those employees who complete
and sign the appropriate wage deduction form. The Town shall incur no obligation to engage in
any form of impact bargaining in the event that a change in law reduces or eliminates the taxexempt status of the employee insurance premium contributions. Neither the Union nor any
employee covered by this Agreement shall make any claim or demand nor maintain any action
against the Town or any of its members or agents for taxes, penalties, interest or other costs or
loss arising from the use of the wage deduction form or from a change in law that may reduce or
eliminate the employee's tax benefits to be derived from this plan. Further, the parties agree that
the health insurance benefits and the administration of those benefits shall continue to be
governed by the collective bargaining agreement and the carrier's insurance plan.
D.
The Town of East Hartford will implement a Program called the "Health Benefit Opt-Out
Incentive Program." This plan will offer employees a financial incentive to drop Townsponsored health insurance (excluding Dental) if they have or can get health benefits through
another plan.
1. The payments to be made to employees who drop their Town-sponsored health
insurance plan (Blue Cross & Blue Shield or any HMO), excluding Dental,
will be as follows:
Coverage Type

Payment
Amount

Individual

$1,250

Individual plus one
dependent

$1,500

Individual plus two
or more dependents

$1,750

Page 25 of 65

No payment will be made for a reduction in the number of dependents. The
employee's entire contract must be canceled by the employee to qualify for
payment.
2. One-quarter of the above amounts ($312.50, $375, $437.50 respectively) will
be paid at the end of the fiscal quarter for which the plan is canceled. Prorated
payments will be made if an employee's plan is canceled partway through a
quarter.
3. Employees wishing to take advantage of this option will fill out the change
form provided by their plan and the "Health Benefit Opt-Out Form," attached
as Appendix F, and will provide written evidence of health insurance coverage
by another plan.
4. Current employees who are eligible but are not now on a Town-sponsored
insurance plan will be qualified for this incentive upon presentation of proof of
coverage by another health insurance plan.
5. New employees who are eligible for Town coverage upon employment but
choose not to enroll will be eligible for this incentive upon presentation of
written evidence of health insurance coverage by another plan. Prorated
payments will be made to new employees if they begin employment partway
through a quarter.
Employees who opt-out of their Town-sponsored plan and then fmd that the other source of
coverage is no longer available may re-enroll in a Town plan subject to the rules of that plan.
Employees can enroll in the Town's medical plan only at the first of each month.
E.
The Town shall provide and pay for a fifty thousand dollar ($50,000.00) life insurance
policy for each employee, with Accidental Death and Dismemberment coverage in the principal
sum of sixty thousand dollars ($60,000); converted to a $15,000.00 retiree life insurance benefit
on retirement separation.
SECTION 2
A. The Town shall provide and pay for the insurance benefits listed at Section 1, paragraphs
A or B (as applicable) of this Article for all employees upon retirement. The premium
cost sharing provisions contained in Section 1, paragraph F do not apply to retirees
insurance. The PPO will be replaced with the HDHP for all employees retiring on or after
July 1, 2017. The deductible will be $1500 single, $3000 family. The Town will not
contribute any portion of the annual plan deductible or offer the wellness incentive.
Employees separating service through retirement after July 1, 2017 but prior to July 1,
2020 shall be provided the HDHP with HSA ($1,500/$3,000 — 100%/80%) insurance
benefits herein Section 1.A.

Page 26 of 65

Employees who enter or entered the DROP on or after July I, 2017 but prior to July 1,
2020 and who separate service after July I, 2020 shall have the option at their time of
separationtorevertto,andparticipateintheHDHPplanwithHSA($1,500/$3,000—100%/80%)insurancebenefitshereinSection1.A.ortoremain
withtheNWFFHDHPHSA($2,000/$4,000—100%/80%)hereinSection1.B.
Employees retiring and separating service or entering the DROP on or after July 1, 2020
will have the NWFF HDHP HSA ($2,000/$4,000 — 100%/80%) insurance benefits
herein Section 1.B. and the Town will not contribute any portion of the annual plan
deductible or offer the wellness incentive.
B. For retired employees age 65 and over, who are eligible for Medicare Parts A and B,
Medicare Supplemental coverage shall be provided in place of the foregoing coverage.
C. All employees hired after September 1, 2013 shall contribute seventeen hundred dollars
($1,700.00) annually through weekly payroll deductions to the Town's Other Post
Employment Benefit Trust on a pre-tax basis (IRS Code §125). Effective July 1, 2017,
employees hired prior to September 1, 2013 shall contribute seven hundred dollars ($700)
annually through weekly payroll deductions to the Town's OPEB trust on a pre-tax basis
(IRS Code §125).
SECTION 3
The Town shall provide and pay for the insurance benefits, as described in Section 2 above, for
the retired employee's spouse, under the following circumstances:
A. Coverage is only effective for the spouse of an employee retiring on or after January 1,
1983. Such coverage will not be provided to the spouse of a presently retired employee.
B. The retired employee must attain age 60 before his/her spouse will be eligible for this
coverage.
C. If the retired employee remarries, the new spouse will not be eligible for this coverage.
D. The term "spouse" shall mean the retired employee's spouse who shall have been married
and living with the employee as his/her wife/husband at the time of his/her retirement.
When the retired employee dies, all coverage to his/her spouse shall cease, unless such
spouse elects to continue this coverage by the deduction of 100% of the monthly
premium from his/her pension check.
E. In order for this coverage to be effective, the retired employee must pay to the Town 50%
of the monthly premium, as determined by the Town or the NWFFT premium charged to
the Town whichever is applicable. Employees retiring on/after July 1, 2025 must pay 75%
of the NWFFT premium charged to the Town. This premium shall be deducted from the
retired employee's monthly pension check. If such monthly deduction is not made

Page 27 of 65 •

continuously from his/her pension check, commencing with his/her 60th birthday, all
coverage to the spouse shall cease and shall not be reinstated.
F. For those employees who retire before July 1, 2025, the Town will pay 100% of the
premium for Parts A & B Medicare Supplemental coverage for the spouse. For employees
who retire on or after July 1, 2025, coverage to the spouse will cease when the spouse
becomes eligible for Medicare.
SECTION 4
The Town reserves the option to change insurance carriers from time to time, but not more than
once in any calendar year, through competitive bidding, for all insurance benefits; however
covered services shall not be reduced by any such change, and there shall be no loss of coverage
due, to pre-existing conditions. Any substitute insurance plan shall have a high quality network,
defined as one of the three (3) largest networks in the service area.
ARTICLE XVII
Leave of Absence Without Pay
The Town may grant a leave of absence without pay, benefits, seniority, or pension accrual, to any
employee, upon his/her request, for a period not to exceed one (1) year, providing such leave may
not be taken for the purpose of seeking other employment. Upon expiration of an approved leave
of absence, or earlier if so requested by the employee, he/she shall be reinstated in the position
held at the time leave was granted.
ARTICLE XVIII
Seniority and Reduction in Force
SECTION 1
Seniority shall be by classification and shall consist of the relative length of accumulated service
of each employee in his/her respective classification. For the purpose of this Section,
Classification shall mean and include the following:
A. Firefighter/Paramedic, Firefighter, Apparatus Operator
B. Fire Lieutenant
C. Fire Captain
D. Deputy Chief
An employee's length of service shall not be reduced by time lost due to sick or injury leave.

Page 28 of 65

SECTION 2
Layoff and Recall
In the event that the Town deems layoffs to be necessary, the following procedures shall apply.
Any reduction in force shall not reflect discredit on the service of any affected employee.
A. Order of Layoff
1.

Temporary employees shall be laid off before probationary employees.

2.

Probationary employees shall be laid off before regular employees.

3.

Among regular (non-probationary) full time employees, the following job
classifications shall be established for purposes of layoff:
a. Deputy Chief
b. Captain
c. Lieutenant
d. Apparatus Operator
e. Firefighter
f. Firefighter/Paramedic
g. Chief Training Officer
h. Chief Medical Officer
i. Assistant Medical Officer
j. Fire Marshal
k. Deputy Fire Marshal
1. Master Mechanic
m. Assistant Master Mechanic
n. Alarm Superintendent
o. Assistant Superintendent of Alarms
p. Emergency Management Captain

4.

Should it become necessary to eliminate a position in any of the foregoing
classifications, the least senior firefighter or firefighter/paramedic will be affected
by the elimination of the position within his/her classification. The least senior
firefighter or firefighter/paramedic in which the elimination takes place shall be
entitled to "bump" the least senior firefighter or firefighter/paramedic
most recently held by such employee.
The least senior firefighter or
firefighter/paramedic so affected shall be entitled to bump the least senior
firefighter or firefighter/paramedic most recently held by such employee and this
bumping procedure shall continue until the least senior firefighter or
firefighter/paramedic is laid off.
Seniority within the previously held
classification shall include time served in the classification from which the
demotion is made.

Page 29 of 65

5. Notwithstanding anything in this Article to the contrary, no employee shall "bump"
into a promotional position or pay increase as a result of this procedure.
B. Recall
The name of any employee who is laid off by operation of this procedure shall be placed
on a recall list for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date on which his/her layoff
occurred. Similarly, the names of all employees who were reduced in rank as a result of
this procedure shall remain on a re-promotion list for a period of eighteen (18) months.
Upon the creation of a new position or a promotional position, offers of employment
shall be extended to the employees whose names appear on the recall or re-promotion
list, in order of seniority, before offering any such position to any person from the
eligibility list. Refusal to accept an offer of re-employment or re-promotion within five
(5) calendar days, or to report to work within thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of a
written offer of re-employment, or re-promotion, as the case may be, sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the employee, shall result in
removal of the name of such employee from the recall or re-promotion list.
ARTICLE XIX
Probationary Period
SECTION 1
To enable the Chief of the Fire Department to exercise sound discretion in the filling of positions
within the Fire Department, no appointment shall be deemed final and permanent until after the
expiration of a period of probationary service.
A. The probationary period shall commence on the date of hire. The probationary period
shall continue for not less than one year. Should the probationary period include
attendance at the Connecticut Fire Academy Recruit Firefighter Program, or equivalent,
it shall continue for a period of time not less than one year after graduation from that
program.
B. During the probationary period, the Chief of the Fire Department may terminate the
employment of such employee, if, during this period, upon observation and consideration
of his/her performance and duty, he/she shall deem him/her unfit for such appointment.
The dismissal of a probationary employee during probationary period shall not be subject
to the grievance procedure. Nothing contained herein shall be used to deny any employee
any rights or any benefits to which he/she may be entitled under the pension provisions of
the Retirement Act covering employees of the Fire Department.
SECTION 2
To enable the Chief of the Fire Department to exercise sound discretion in the filling of positions
within the Fire Department, no promotional appointment into a position above the rank of

Page 30 of 65

Firefighter or Firefighter/Paramedic shall be deemed final until after the expiration of a period of
one year's probationary service.
A. For those individuals that possess all Job Qualifications and Licensing Requirements at
the time of appointment, the period of one year's probationary service shall begin on the
date of appointment to the promotional position.
B. For those individuals that do not possess all Job Qualifications and Licensing
Requirements at the time of appointment, the period of one year's probationary service
shall end one year from the date the individual appointed to the promotional position
satisfies all Job Qualifications and Licensing Requirements of the position.
ARTICLE XX
Employee Wellness Program
SECTION 1
Each employee shall participate in the wellness program. The wellness program shall consist of
the following program elements: Annual Medical Physical examination as described in Section 4;
Creation and Maintenance of a Program to address physical fitness as described in Section 7;
Creation and Maintenance of a Program to address behavioral health as described in Section 8;
and Creation and Maintenance of a program to assist injured members to return to duty as
described in Section 9;
SECTION 2
Each employee shall be required to undergo such physical examinations as are or may be
required by Federal and/or Connecticut State laws or regulation.
SECTION 3
Entry Level candidates shall be required to undergo an entry-level medical physical prior to offer
of employment. Said medical physical will be based upon the Entry Level Candidate sections of
NFPA Standard 1582 or its equivalent.
SECTION 4
All members of the organization shall be required to undergo a medical physical each year. This
medical physical will based on the 'incumbent' portions of the National Fire Protection
Association Standard 1582 or its equivalent. The medical physical will be provided by the Town
at no cost to the employee and:
1.

Be conducted by an Board Certified Occupational Health Physician.

Page 31 of 65

2.

Include blood work, spirometry, a physical exam, vision and hearing testing,
aerobic capacity testing and such other components as dictated by the applicable
portions of the standard.

3.

Included testing for the Hepatitis B anti-body each year.

4.

Include testing for the Hepatitis C anti-body once every five (5) years.

SECTION 5
Tobacco use by members covered by the Wellness Program is prohibited. For the purposes of
this section, tobacco is defined as any product consisting of, in whole or in part, tobacco or any
by-product of tobacco. Tobacco products include, but are not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe
tobacco, smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, and other similar products. Tobacco usage
prescribed by a physician licensed by the State of Connecticut may be approved
SECTION 6
Members participating in the Capital Region Hazardous Materials Team as described in the
MOA dated May 21, 2010 shall have blood screening conducted for exposure to heavy metals.
Such testing shall occur upon member entry to the team, separation from the team, and postoperation at any incident where the heavy metals were present, exposure occurred, and members
of the team operated.
SECTION 7
A. Members participating in the wellness program shall have access to physical fitness
facilities, including but not limited to aerobic, flexibility, and strength training
equipment, while on duty.
B. To ensure proper usage of the equipment described in Section 7 (A), the department will
select and maintain a cadre of Peer Fitness Trainers as defined in NFPA Standard 1583
(or WFI) or equivalent.
SECTION 8
A. Members participating in the wellness program shall have access to behavioral
health resources.
B. To enable the program, the department will select and maintain a Peer Counseling Team.
SECTION 9
Members who suffer an off-duty injury or illness that:


Results in lost work time greater than 30 days, and/or,
Page 32 of 65

 Results in surgical intervention resulting in lost work time,
Shall not return to full duty until cleared for such duty by the department's occupational health
physician. In the event of conflict in medical opinion of the department's occupational health
physician and the member's treating physician, the opinion of the department physician shall
prevail. Should this result in extended leave, or Light Duty eligibility, the member will be carried
on Special Leave until such time as they receive approval for full duty or non-service connected
disability retirement. Such leave shall not exceed 365 calendar days.
ARTICLE XXI
Health and Safety
SECTION 1
There shall be a Safety Committee consisting of three members: one member appointed by the
Union, one member appointed by the Town, and one representative of the Town's Workers'
Compensation Administrator. The Town and the Union shall notify each other of the Committee
appointees and reserve the right to remove and replace their appointees.
SECTION 2
The Safety Committee shall meet at times mutually agreed, provided that there shall be up to four
(4) meetings each year held at the request of either the Town or the Union. The Union's
representative on the Committee shall be released from duty without loss of base pay for the
purpose of attending any Committee meeting which takes place during his/her regularly assigned
work time.
SECTION 3
The Safety Committee shall discuss safety issues and may formulate recommendations for
preventive or corrective action on safety matters. Any Committee recommendation shall be
forwarded to the Chief, the Personnel Director and the Mayor. The Committee shall establish
guidelines as to the length of time required for the Town's response to its recommendations
which shall take into consideration such factors as whether acceptance would require the
purchase of additional equipment, appropriations to the Department, or approval by any person or
body other than Town administration.
SECTION 4
Physical Examinations
A. The Town will conduct the physicals at St. Francis Occupational Health with a physician
provided by the Town during an employee's working hours. The Chief or his designee
will schedule the appointments.

Page 33 of 65

B. If any follow-up examination is required after an individual has been examined by the
Town's physician, the Town will bear the expense, and will select the physician to
conduct the follow-up.

ARTICLE XXII
Emergency Medical Service
SECTION 1
A. All employees render BLS medical aid and assistance to the ill and injured by job
description and receive compensation for such services in their base salary.
Effective July 1, 2006, employees in grades 65, 66, and other personnel who provide
paramedic level training and possess a paramedic license and medical control from the
East Hartford Fire Depaithaent Sponsor Hospital and provide such service to the Town,
shall be paid a yearly stipend the first pay period in December. The stipend for providing
such care shall begin in year one (1) at 0.5% of top step firefighter pay and continue to
increase by 0.5% of top step firefighter pay each year through the completion of year
thirty (30).
1. No licensed paramedic with medical control currently providing paramedic level
care with East Hartford Fire Department shall receive less of a stipend than he or
she would have received under the terms of the previous labor agreement.
2. Licensed paramedics who re-enter the system shall begin accumulating additional
years of service immediately upon receiving medical control from the East
Hartford Fire Department Sponsor Hospital.
3. Licensed paramedics who re-enter the system shall not receive credit for the
intervening years between their separation and subsequent re-entry.
4. For the purposes of calculating years of service only, a licensed paramedic with
medical control from the East Hartford Fire Department Sponsor Hospital who
provides advanced life support for any portion of a year between their
anniversary date and their next anniversary date shall have their service pro-rated
for the time served. In no case will credit be less than a six (6) month period.
5. Licensed paramedics with medical control from the East Hartford Fire
Department Sponsor Hospital who have completed their required years of service
may voluntarily separate from the paramedic program. This separation is only
permitted biannually on June 30 and December 31 regardless of the date the
member entered the program.
6. Licensed paramedics with medical control from the East Hartford Fire
Depaitment Sponsor Hospital who have completed their required years of service
Page 34 of 65

may, with approval of the fire chief, voluntarily re-enter the paramedic program.
This is only permitted biannually on June 30 and December 31.
7. Members voluntarily re-entering the paramedic program must have, at the time of
their re-entry, all license and certifications required of current members in the
paramedic program. Personnel lacking said certification or licensure shall not be
re-admitted to the program.
8. Members voluntarily re-entering the paramedic program after a separation of
more than 24 months, and without demonstration of active paramedic service
(with any agency) during the intervening period, shall be precepted in
accordance with the requirements set forth by the sponsor hospital or regional
medical authority.
9. The department reserves the right to involuntarily separate, for cause, a practicing
paramedic who has met their contractual obligation from the program.
10.Licensed paramedics who exit the system on June 30th shall receive half of their
annual stipend.
11.Licensed paramedics, who exit the system on December 3151, shall receive the full
annual stipend.
B. Employees who are licensed paramedics with medical control from the East Hartford
Fire Department Sponsor Hospital for less than six (6) months of the calendar year shall
receive one-half of the amounts specified above for that year; employees who are
licensed paramedics with medical control from the East Hartford Fire Department
Sponsor Hospital for six months or more of the calendar year shall receive the full
amount specified above for that year. These stipends shall be payable on the first pay
period in December. Employees who are licensed as paramedics and have medical
control from the East Hartford Fire Department Sponsor Hospital shall be paid in
accordance with Article VIII, Section 1, whenever they are required to attend training
courses to maintain their license.
SECTION 2
Certification
A. All firefighters hired between August 26, 1987 and June 30, 1996 shall be required to
hold their EMT-P license and to maintain that license for six (6) licensing periods (of one
year duration) following appointment. Any such firefighter/paramedic who loses his/her
license or fails to maintain it for the requisite period shall be discharged, and the
discharge shall be considered non-disciplinary.
B. All firefighters hired on or after July 1, 1996, shall be required to hold, at a minimum,
EMT-Basic certification and to maintain that certification thereafter.

Page 35 of 65

C. All firefighter/paramedics hired prior to January 1, 2002, who hold paramedic license at
the time of appointment and who provide such service, shall be required to maintain that
license and medical control from the East Hartford Fire Department Sponsor Hospital for
six (6) licensing periods (of one year duration) following appointment. All
firefighter/paramedics hired on or after January 1, 2002 who hold a paramedic license at
the time of appointment and who provide such service shall be required to maintain that
license and medical control from the East Hartford Fire Department Sponsor Hospital for
ten (10) licensing periods (of one year duration) following appointment. Any such
firefighter/paramedic who loses his/her license or fails to maintain it for the requisite
period shall be discharged, and the discharge shall be considered non-disciplinary.
The Department maintains the right and prerogative to implement changes in the EMT's
skill set based on changes with the nationally recognized training curriculum and/or to
skills approved for or extended to a specific EMS certification group by State, Regional,
or Local EMS entities.
D. Employees with a paramedic license and medical control from the East Hartford Fire
Department Sponsor Hospital shall constitute no less than thirty-three percent (33%) of
the total budgeted positions for employees covered by Article VI, Section 1. If the
number of employees with paramedic licensing drops below the minimum percentage
expressed herein, no applicant without a paramedic license will be hired until the
minimum paramedic percentage level is restored.
E. If, during the period that a firefighter/paramedic is required to maintain a paramedic
license and medical control from the East Hartford Fire Department Sponsor Hospital
he/she does not satisfy re-licensing requirements and/or fails to maintain medical control,
he/she shall be provided a period of time not to exceed six (6) months to regain a
paramedic license and/or medical control. The period of time from loss or license and/or
medical control shall be added to the period the firefighter is required to hold a
paramedic license. The Town shall not bear any costs associated with an employee's
effort to regain his/her paramedic license and/or medical control.
F. All current employees who were not required to possess paramedic license and medical
control from the East Hartford Fire Department Sponsor Hospital at the time of
appointment and who elect to seek their paramedic license and medical control following
appointment, provided prior approval is granted by the Chief of the Department, shall be
required to make a commitment to maintain their paramedic license and medical control
for a minimum of two (2) licensing periods (of one year duration each).
G. All employees who participate in training for EMT certification must make a good faith
effort to pass examinations and to meet all other requirements. All employees who
possess their paramedic license and who participate in Department sponsored training to
maintain their license shall perform the duties of a paramedic during the remainder of
their licensing period.

 Page 36 of 65

H. For employees who obtain their paramedic license and medical control subsequent to
initial employment (in accordance with Section F hereof):
1. If the employee, as certified by a licensed physician or other practitioner whose
method of healing is recognized by State authorities, becomes medically
disqualified from providing paramedic level care, he/she shall be relieved of
his/her commitment for the period of medical disqualification and shall receive
pro rata payments under Section I for that calendar year and each calendar year
thereafter during the period of medical disqualification.
2. If the employee fails to keep the required commitment for reason(s) other than
medical disqualification, he/she shall receive no payment pursuant to Section 1 in
that calendar year and may be subject to disciplinary action as a result of his/her
failure to maintain certification.
I. For employees who were required to possess a paramedic license upon initial employment
(in accordance with Sections A, C and D hereof):
1. If the employee, as certified by a licensed physician or other practitioner whose
method of healing is recognized by State authorities, becomes medically
disqualified from providing paramedic level care, he/she shall be relieved of
his/her commitment for the period of medical disqualification and shall receive no
pro rata payments under Section 1 for that calendar year and each calendar year
thereafter during the period of medical disqualification.
2. If the employee fails to keep the required commitment for reason(s) other than
medical disqualification, he/she shall receive no payment pursuant to Section 1 in
that calendar year and may be subject to disciplinary action as a result of his/her
failure to maintain certification.
J. Any employee who holds an EMT-P license and decides not to re-license after completing
his/her minimum commitment to maintain licensing, shall give one hundred twenty (120)
days notice of his/her decision to the Chief.
K. For purposes of this Article the terms "certification" and "license" shall be interchangeable
where the context so requires.
L. Any member who holds a State of Connecticut Paramedic license but provides only BLS
care while performing his duties in the Department shall be given no less than 24 hours of
continuing medical education over a three (3) year period.
M. For any employee not receiving a stipend pursuant to Article XXII, Section 1.A. and
those employees in their first or second year of service, the Town shall annually
contribute towards or reimburse employees for the cost of EMS certification and/or
licensing renewal fees, up to $175 per employee, for all employees certified or licensed
as an EMT or EMT-P recognized by the State of Connecticut. Reimbursement shall be
Page 37 of 65

paid during the first pay period in December of the employee's cost of such renewal
disbursed in a fair and equitable manner taking into consideration the renewal fees cost
and the total number of members being reimbursed that calendar year.
SECTION 3
Precepting
A Precepting program shall be established and maintained by the Department. Those employees
who are assigned precepting duties (preceptors) shall receive a stipend of seven tenths of one
percen of the current top step Firefighter rate of pay for each tour in which precepting is
performed.
ARTICLE XXIII
Miscellaneous
SECTION 1
No employee shall be required to stand watch after 10:00 p.m.
SECTION 2
The officer in charge shall apportion all work among subordinates as equitably as practicable.
SECTION 3
All promotions shall be made through a merit system.
SECTION 4
A. A budget of $20,000 shall be established from which the Town shall contribute toward
necessary books and tuition to bargaining unit members who participate in and
successfully complete certification courses, seminars, or conferences in Fire, EMS, and/or
other related subjects at a recognized school or college, which courses or subjects are
designed to increase the employee's proficiency in his/her present or future assignment
within the Fire Department, subject to prior approval by the Chief.
B. A budget of $20,000 shall be established from which the Town shall contribute toward
necessary books and tuition to bargaining unit members who participate in and receive a
grade of C or better in courses in Fire Technology, Fire Administration, EMS and other
related subjects at an accredited school or college, which courses or subjects are designed
to increase the employee's proficiency in his/her present or future assignment within the
Fire Department, subject to prior approval by the Chief.
C. Only employees who were enrolled in degree programs in the above referenced areas
prior to July 1, 1989 and who continue in such program after the effective date of this
Page 38 of 65

contract shall continue, when scheduled to work, to receive leave with pay to attend
such classes, provided prior approval is granted by the Chief of the Department, which
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any change in program or failure to
participate continuously (each term) will disqualify current participants from this
grandfather provision. The Town and the Union shall mutually develop a list of
participants who are eligible for this grandfather provision. The Department shall also
grant leave with pay for attending courses when attendance is required by the
Department.
D. Any employee who has been compensated under this Section shall remain in the Fire
Department's employment for five (5) years after completion of the course or reimburse
the Town any monies expended under this Section. However, no such reimbursement shall
be required in the case of retirement at a time when the retiree is eligible for current
retirement benefits pursuant to the Town of East Hartford pension plan.
SECTION 5
At the sole discretion of the Fire Chief, employees in Salary Grades 67, 68, 69, 71, and 72 may be
issued and required to carry a department issued phone. Department phones, if issued, shall be
worn on a 24-hour per day basis while both on duty and off duty. Employees will respond
promptly to phone calls and messages when required. Fire Department issued phones may be
used for personal matters within the limits of service provided and any plan or level of service
restriction.
SECTION 6
All employees shall be furnished with an identification card, which is the property of the Town.
SECTION 7
The depai __ fluent shall not schedule Fire or EMS related training on any holiday covered under
Article VII, section 1 of this agreement. Training hours shall be conducted Monday thru Friday
between the hours of 0800 and 1600 and on Saturday between the hours of 0900 and 1300. Any
alterations must be accomplished with the consent of both the Union and the Chief of the
Department. Outdoor training shall not occur when the Heat Stress Index (as displayed in
Appendix H) is above 90 degrees Fahrenheit or the Wind Chill Index (as displayed in Appendix
H) is below 25 degrees Fahrenheit. The National Weather Service shall be used to obtain the
current temperature, humidity and wind chill.
SECTION 8
Fire Officers in salary grades 68, 69, and 72 shall be permitted twenty four (24) hours of
Educational Leave with pay annually to attend training classes, seminars, conferences or other
educational programs and offerings that take place when an employee is scheduled for duty
provided prior approval is granted by the Chief or his designee. At the discretion of the Chief,
additional hours of educational leave may be granted.
Page 39 of 65

Employees in salary grades 67 and 71 shall be granted thirty two (32) hours of Educational Leave
with pay annually to attend training classes, seminars, conferences or other educational programs
and offerings provided prior approval is granted by the Chief or his designee. At the discretion of
the Chief, additional hours of educational leave may be granted.
SECTION 9
Upon signing a successor agreement to this contract, the Town shall provide each member of the
bargaining unit with a digital copy of this contract in PDF format and a digital copy of this
contract (in an editable format compatible with Microsoft Word) to the Union president for the
purpose of future negotiation.
ARTICLE XXIV
Savings Clause
SECTION 1
The Town retains all rights it had prior to the signing of this contract, except such rights as are
specifically relinquished or abridged by this contract.
SECTION 2
All rights, privileges, and job benefits enjoyed by employees prior to the effective date of this
contract, which are not specifically provided for or abridged in this contract, are hereby protected
by this contract.
ARTICLE XXV
Wages and Longevity
The wages for all employees shall be as set forth in Appendix A attached hereto.
ARTICLE XXVI
Duration
A. The duration of this contract shall extend from July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2022 as it
applies to all items of the contract. Either party wishing to terminate, amend, or modify such
contract must so notify the other party, in writing, no more than one hundred eighty (180) nor
less than one hundred fifty (150) days prior to such expiration date.
B. Within twenty (20) days of the receipt of such notification by either party, a conference shall
be held between the Town and the Union Negotiating Committee for the purpose of such
amendment, modification or termination.

Page 40 of 65

ARTICLE XXVII
Apparatus Operators
The Town will maintain 40 Apparatus Operator positions for eight pieces of apparatus.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused their names to be signed this 12th day of
November, 2019.

TOWN OF EAST HARTFORD

LOCAL #1548, INTERNATIONAL
ASSOCIATI N OF FIREFIGHTERS,
AFL CIO

Marcia A. Leclerc
or

Matt Flo
President

go
Director of Hu an Resources

Robert Draghi
Vice President

Chief ___ John Oates
For the Town

Joel Cusf
Secretary

eite /Set:
Sandra L. Franklin
Benefits Administrator

Page 41 of 65

APPENDIX A
SALARY SCHEDULE
July 1, 2019 - June 30, 2022
GRADE
65 - Firefighter, Firefighter/Paramedic*

7/1/2019
7/1/2020
7/1/2021

Increase Step 1
2.00% 61,977
2.00% 63,217
1.25% 64,007

Step 2
65,321
66,627
67,460

Step 3
68,672
70,045
70,921

Step 4
72,027
73,468
74,386

Step 5
75,357
76,864
77,825

* Subject to Recruit Rate, as described below.
66 - Apparatus Operator

7/1/2019
7/1/2020
7/1/2021

Increase Step 1
2.00% 78,368
2.00% 79,935
1.25% 80,934

67 - Assistant Master Mechanic, Assistant Superintendant of Fire Alarms, Deputy Fire
Marshal, Assistant Medical Officer
7/1/2019
7/1/2020
7/1/2021

Increase
2.00%
2.00%
1.25%

Step 1
83,809
85,485
86,554

Step 2
86,156
87,879
88,977

Increase Step 1
2.00% 83,759
2.00% 85,434
1.25% 86,502

Step 2
87,009
88,749
89,858

68 - Lieutenant

7/1/2019
7/1/2020
7/1/2021

69 - Captain
7/1/2019
7/1/2020
7/1/2021

Increase
2.00%
2.00%
1.25%

Step 1
90,418
92,226
93,379

Step 2
93,975
95,854
97,052

Page 42 of 65

71 — Master Mechanic, Superintendent of Fire Alarms, Fire Marshal, Chief
Medical Officer, Chief Training Officer
Increase
7/1/2019
2.00%
7/1/2020
2.00%
7/1/2021
1.25%

Step 1
90,417
92,225
93,378

Step 2
93,975
95,854
97,052

Step 3
99,678
101,672
102,943

72 - Deputy Chief
Increase Step 1 Step 2
7/1/2019
2.00% 97,653 101,416
7/1/2020
2.00% 99,606 103,444
7/1/2021
1.25% 100,851 104,7373

Step 3
105,393
107,501
108,845

NOTE:
Subject to the Recruit Rate, as described below, each Firefighter or Firefighter/Paramedic who
has less than six (6) months of service in his/her classification and each employee in the
remaining classifications who has less than one (1) year of service in his/her classification shall
be paid at Step 1 of the salary range of his/her classification. Each Firefighter or
Firefighter/Paramedic who has six (6) months but less than one (1) year of service, and each
Lieutenant, Captain, Deputy Chief, Chief Medical Officer and Chief Training Officer who has
one (1) but less than two (2) years of service in the classification, and each employee in the
remaining classifications who has one (1) or more years of service in his/her classification shall
be paid at Step 2 of the salary range of his/her classification.
Each Firefighter or Firefighter/Paramedic who has one (1) but less than two (2) years of service
and each Deputy Chief, Chief Medical Officer and Chief Training Officer who has two (2) or
more years of service in his/her classification shall be paid at Step 3 of the salary range for his/her
classification.
Each Firefighter or Firefighter/Paramedic who has two (2) but less than three (3) years of service
in his/her classification shall be paid at Step 4 of the salary range of his/her classification. Each
Firefighter or Firefighter/Paramedic who has three (3) or more years of service shall be paid at
Step 5 of the salary range for his/her classification.
Recruit Rate
All Firefighters and Firefighter/Paramedics shall be hired at a Recruit Rate which shall be at an
annual rate that is $2,500.00 less than Step 1, and shall move to Step 1 upon completion of the
recruit training period and assignment to firefighting or firefighter/paramedic duties.
The change in the salary schedule from Grade 70 to Grade 71, shall not apply to those employees
serving as Assistant Master Mechanic, Assistant Superintendent of Fire Alarm or Deputy Fire
Marshal as of July 1, 2001.
Page 43 of 65

If an employee serving as Assistant Master Mechanic, Assistant Superintendent of Fire Alarm or
Deputy Fire Marshal on July 1, 2001 is eligible and is promoted to either Master Mechanic,
Superintendent of Fire Alarm, or Fire Marshal, then upon promotion he/she shall be paid at Grade 71,
Step 3.
All rates specified in this Appendix are annual rates, and reflect the following general wage increases
during the term of this Agreement:

7/1/2019
7/1/2020
7/1/2021

Two percent (2.00%)
Two percent (2.00%)
One percent and one quarter percent (1.25%)

Page 44 of 65

APPENDIX B

THI S P A GE I N TE N TIO NAL LY LE F T B LA N K

Page 45 of 65

APPENDIX C
Dr.'s Own Letterhead

TO:

Chief, Fire Depariruent
Town of East Hartford

FROM:
DATE:

As a physician duly licensed by the State of
I hereby certify that

was unable to (name of employee)

work during the continuous period from
(date)
to

as a result of being afflicted with (date)
during which period he/she was under my care. (cause of illness)

I also certify that said employee can return to duty with no restrictions on
(date)

Signature of Physician

Page 46 of 65

APPENDIX D
EAST HARTFORD FIRE FIGHTERS
MEDICAL INSURANCE PLAN
SCHEDULE OF BENEFITS
July 1, 2019- LUMENOS HEALTH SAVINGS ACCOUNT
This schedule generally describes the benefits available for Covered Services under this Summary
Booklet. For a more detailed explanation of benefits provided, you should refer to the appropriate
section of the Summary Booklet. This Schedule of Benefits is subject to all the terms, conditions,
and limitations set forth in this Summary Booklet.
COVERED: SERVICE
Covered Person Plan Year
Deductible
Covered Person Coinsurance
Covered Person Plan Year Outof-Pocket Limit
* Applies to Prescription Drug
Copayments
Lifetime Maximum

IN-NETWORK SERVICES
-OF-NETWORK' R CES
$1,500 single *
$3,000family **
Not Applicable

20%

$1,500 single***
$3,000 family****

$4,000 single***
$8,000 family****

Unlimited

Unlimited

*Single Deductible —The Deductible must be satisfied before any Covered Services are paid by the Plan
except for Preventive Services which are not subject to the Deductible.
**Family Deductible — The family Deductible must be satisfied before any Covered Services are paid by
the plan except for Preventive Services which are not subject to the Deductible. The family Deductible may
be satisfied by one Covered Person or all members of the family collectively.
***Single Out-of-Pocket Limit — Once the Member Out-of-Pocket Limit is satisfied, no additional
Coinsurance will be required for the Covered Person for the remainder of the benefit period except for Out-ofNetwork Human Organ and Tissue Transplant services.
****Family Out-of-Pocket Limit — Once the family Out-of-Pocket Limit is satisfied, no additional
Coinsurance will be required for the Family for the remainder of the benefit period except for Out-of-Network
Human Organ and Tissue Transplant services.
hi-Network and Out-of-Network Out-of-Pocket Limits are separate and do not accumulate toward each other.

Page 47 of 65

PREVENTIVE SERVICES'
Well Child Care

No Cost-Share

Deductible & Coinsurance

Adult Physical Examinations

No Cost-Share

Deductible & Coinsurance

Other Preventive screenings
including but not ►imited to:
Routine gynecological care: pap smear
and pelvic exam,
Prostate screening,
Mammography screening,
colorectal cancer screening,
flexible sigmoidoscopy,
colonoscopy,
total cholesterol screening,
lipid screenings and panels,
diabetic screening

No Cost-Share

Deductible & Coinsurance

No Cost-Share

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible
Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance
Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

(See Preventive Services in the
Covered Services section for additional
information)
Immunizations and Vaccinations
(Other than those needed for travel,
see OTHER MEDICAL SERVICES
section of the Schedule of Benefits)
HOSPITAL SERVICES
All Inpatient Admissions
Specialty Hospital
100 days per Member per Calendar
Year
Outpatient Surgery
Note: See Other Medical Services
section also, for Outpatient
Surgery rendered in an ambulatory
surgical center
DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES
Diagnostic, Laboratory and X-ray
Services
High Cost Diagnostic Tests
MRI, MRA, CAT, CTA, PET, and
SPECT scans

Page 48 of 65

THERAPY SERVICES
Outpatient Rehabilitation
Outpatient rehabilitative and
restorative physical, occupational,
speech and chiropractic therapy for
up to 60 combined visits per
Calendar Year
Other Therapy Services:
Outpatient cardiac rehabilitation
therapy
Radiation therapy:
Chemotherapy for the treatment of
cancer
Electroshock Therapy
Kidney Dialysis in a Hospital or freestanding dialysis center

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible
Allergy Injections
Immunotherapy or other therapy
treatments
MED.ICAL EMERGENCY / URGENT CARESERVICES
Deductible
Emergency Room Treatment
Emergency Room Cost-Share waived
if the Member is admitted directly to
the Hospital from the emergency room

Deductible & Coinsurance

Allergy Office Visit/Testing

Deductible

Urgent Care Services

Deductible

Ambulance
Land & Air: Paid according to the
Department of Public Health
Ambulance Service Rate Schedule
PHYSICIAN
WC
Medical Office Visit

Deductible

Paid as In-Network Emergency
Room
Deductible

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

AL SERVICES

Surgical Services
Performed by a Surgeon or Physician
(Specialist) in any setting other than
an Office Visit
Non-Surgical Services of a Physician
or Surgeon
(Other than a medical office visit)
These services may include after
care or attending medical care

Page 49 of 65

MENTAL HEALTH
D SUBSTANCE ABUSE SERVICES
Deductible
Outpatient Treatment for Mental
Health Care and Substance Abuse
Care
Inpatient Hospital Services
In a Hospital or Residential Treatment
Center for Mental Health Care
Inpatient Rehabilitation Treatment
for Substance Abuse Care
In a Hospital or Substance Abuse
Treatment Facility
OTHER MEDICAL SERVICES
Outpatient Surgery
In a licensed ambulatory surgical
center (not located in a Hospital
setting) (including colonoscopy)
Note: See the Hospital Services section
also for Outpatient Surgery rendered in
a Hospital setting.
Skilled Nursing Facility
Up to 120 days per Calendar Year
Immunizations and Vaccinations for
Travel

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Page 50 of 65

Prescription Drugs:
Retail Pharmacy:
The maximum supply of a drug for
which benefits will be provided when
dispensed under any one prescription is
a 30 day supply.

Deductible & then:

Tier 1 $10 Copay per Covered Drug
Tier 2 $25 Copay per Covered Drug
Tier 3 $40 Copay per Covered Drug

Deductible & Coinsurance per
prescription

Tier 1 $10 Copay per Covered Drug
Tier 2 $25 Copay per Covered Drug
Tier 3 $40 Copay per Covered Drug

Deductible & Coinsurance per
prescription

Diabetic equipment, drugs and supplies
Specialty Pharmacy
The maximum supply of a Specialty
Drug for which benefits will be
provided when dispensed under any
one prescription is a 30 day supply.
Mail Order Prescription Drug
Program
The maximum supply of a drug for
which benefits will be provided when
dispensed under any one prescription is
a 1-90-day supply.
Diabetic drugs and supplies
Human Organ and Tissue
Transplant Services
Unlimited maximum
Home Health Care
(Including In-Home Hospice Care)

Tier 1 $10 Copay per Covered Drug
Tier 2 $50 Copay per Covered Drug
Tier 3 $80 Copay per Covered Drug

Deductible & Coinsurance per
prescription

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Nursing and therapeutic services
limited to 200 visits
In the Home Hospice Medical Social
Services under the direction of a
Physician Up to $420.
Infusion Therapy
Unlimited lifetime maximum

Page 51 of 65

Durable Medical Equipment and
Prosthetic Devices

Deductible

Deductible & 50% Coinsurance

Deductible
Deductible

Deductible & 50% Coinsurance
Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Same as Hospital Outpatient CostShare

Deductible & Coinsurance

Hearing Aid Coverage
Available for dependent children age
12 years and under
Diabetic equipment, and supplies
Ostomy Related Services
Hospice Care (inpatient)
Wig
Up to $500 maximum per Member per
Calendar Year with cancer diagnosis
Specialized Formula
Infertility Services
Please see Maternity/Family Planning
Section of this document
Office Visit
Outpatient Hospital
Inpatient Hospital
Infertility Drugs
The maximum supply of a drug for
which benefits will be provided when
dispensed under any one prescription is
30 day supply
Maternity

Deductible & Coinsurance
Same as Hospital Inpatient CostShare

Deductible & Coinsurance

Deductible

Deductible

Deductible & Coinsurance

Note: Out of Network services applicable after Deductible and Coinsurance. Covered Person is
responsible for the difference between Maximum Allowable Amount (MAA) and total charge.

Page 52 of 65

APPENDIX E
EAST HARTFORD
TRIPLE OPTION DENTAL PLAN
PPO
IN NETWORK
NO
DEDUCTIBLE

FLEX DENTAL
$50
DEDUCTIBLE*

OUT OF
NETWORK
$200
DEDUCTIBLE

Unlimited

Unlimited

Unlimited

Coinsurance

Coinsurance

Coinsurance

100%
100%

100%
100%

80%
80%

100%
100%
100%

100%
100%
100%

80%
50%
50%

100%
100%
100%

100%
100%
100%

70%
70%
70%

RESTORATIVE SERVICES
Amalgam Fillings
Resin Fillings

100%
100%

100%
100%

50%
50%

ENDODONTICS
Root Canal
Apicoectomy

100%
100%

80%
80%

50%
50%

and

100%
50%

100%
50%

50%
50%

&

50%

50%

Not Covered

BENEFIT DESCRIPTION
ANNUAL MAXIMUM
BENEFIT
PREVENTIVE SERVICES
Prophylaxis
Oral Hygiene Instruction
(Included with Oral Evaluation)
Fluoride Treatment to age 19
Sealants
Space Maintainers
DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES
Oral Evaluation
Radiographs
Pulp Vitality Test
(Included with Oral Evaluation)

ORAL SURGERY
Simple Extractions
Surgical
Extractions
Impaction
Treatment
of Fractures
Dislocations

Page 53 of 65

GENERAL SERVICES
Consultation
General Anesthesia
Emergency Treatment
PERIDONTICS
Gingival Curettage
Gingivectomy or Gingivoplasty
Osseous Surgery
Mucogingival Surgery
Management of Acute Infection and
oral lesions
PROSTHODONTICS
Dentures Full and Partial
Crowns,
Bridges, fixed
and
removable
Inlays, onlays and crowns not part of
bridge
Addition of teeth to
partial
denture to replace extracted teeth
Repair of Dentures
Orthodontia
$1,000 Lifetime maximum
Dependents covered to age 19 or to
age 23 if a full-time student

PPO
IN NETWORK
NO
DEDUCTIBLE

FLEX DENTAL
$50
DEDUCTIBLE*

60%
60%
100%

50%
50%
100%

Not Covered
Not Covered
50%

50%
50%
50%
50%
50%

50%
50%
50%
50%
50%

Not Covered
Not Covered
Not Covered
Not Covered
Not Covered

50%
50%

Not Covered
Not Covered

Not Covered
Not Covered

100%

50%

Not Covered

50%

Not Covered

Not Covered

100%

100%

Not Covered

50%

50%

Not Covered

OUT OF
NETWORK
$200
DEDUCTIBLE

*Flex Dental deductible does not apply to preventive services or sealants.
Benefits will be available for resin (synthetic) fillings on anterior or bicuspid teeth only. For resin
(synthetic) fillings on molar teeth, the member coinsurance obligation will increase. Benefits will be
provided in an amount equal to the maximum allowable (MAA) amount for an amalgam filling. The
member will be responsible for any amounts over the MAA.
This is not a legal contract. It is only a general description of the Triple Option Dental Program.

Page 54 of 65

APPENDIX F
HEALTH BENEFIT OPT-OUT FORM

Employee Name ___________________________ Date of Form Completion ______________
Department _______________________________ Effective Date of Cancellation___________

Statement of Election to Participate in Town of East Hartford
Health Benefit Opt-Out Proaram
I elect to cancel my health insurance (but not my dental insurance) with the Town
of East Hartford. The health plan that I will be covered under is offered through _
__________________________________________________ (name of company offering
program). The name of the plan providing my insurance coverage (name of
health insurance carrier) is ________________________________________ . This
plan covers: ❑ my spouse, ❑ my family, and ❑ myself (check all that apply).

Attached is documentation of my enrollment in the above plan.

In exchange for canceling my health insurance, I elect to receive a cash payment (totaling
$1250 for individual employee coverage, $1500 for employee plus one dependent
coverage, or $1750 for employee plus family coverage) to be paid in quarterly
installments in October, January, April, and July. I understand that by accepting the optout program, I am no longer covered by the Town's health insurance program. However, I
will continue to be covered by the Town's dental insurance program.

Employee Signature _________________________ Date

Witness

Date

Page 55 of 65

APPENDIX G
ATTESTATION FOR $250 WELLNESS REWARD
THE ORIGINAL FORM SHOULD BE SUBMITTED TO
Town of East Hartford, Human Resources
Attention: Sandra Franklin
740 Main Street, East Hartford CT 06108

ANNUAL ROUTINE PHYSICAL EXAM FORM
Each employee covered by a Town of East Hartford High Deductible Health Plan has been asked to
have an annual routine physical examination performed during each plan year. This routine physical
should consist of the items listed below as deemed appropriate by the employee's primary care
provider.
Once the exam is complete, please sign and date this form and return it to the patient so they may
turn it in to HR. You may also mail the form directly. Please do not fax the form — we need the
original signature. Please provide the employee with biometrical results of their exam and lab work.
They may use this information to complete an online Health Risk Assessment with Anthem.
The Routine Physical Exam Should Include the Following:
+ Preventive Physical Exam, which includes medical and family health history, assessment
of lifestyle (diet, stress, exercise, etc.) general system examination (heart, lungs, throat,
thyroid, ears, skin, joints, etc). and measurement of height and weight
+ Routine blood pressure and urine screenings
:• Cholesterol and lipid level screenings
 Blood glucose screening
+ Eye chart vision screening
 Immunizations (tetanus every ten years, others as appropriate)
+ Pelvic examination, Pap Smear, and Mammography screenings
 Prostate examination and prostate specific antigen blood test (PSA) (males only)
+ Colorectal cancer screening
You, as the health care provider will determine which one of several types of screenings is
most appropriate and at what age it should be done. I certify that I performed a routine
physical exam on Town of East Hartford Employee:

EMPLOYEE NAME

Physician's Name: _________________________________________________
Date of Physical:___________________________________________________
Physician's Signature: ___________________________________________

Page 56 of 65

APPENDIX H - WIND CHILL INDEX
TEMPERATURE °F
4 5

fr4
Ct

z

4 0

3 5

3 0

2 5

2 0

1 5

1 0

5

0

- 5

- 1 0

- 1 5

43 37 32 27 22 16

6 0 -5 -10 -15 -21

10

34 28 22 16 10 3

-9 -15 -

15

29 23 16 9 2 -5 26

20

19 12 4 -3 -10 23


8
 24

25

16 8 1 -7 -15 21

 29

30

13 6 -2 -10 -18 20

 25

35

12 4 -4 -12 -20 19

2 7 - 3 5

40

11 3 -5 -13 -21 18

-29

 37

45

10 2 -6 -14 -22

 30

 38

A

3 3

-25

-31


1
39

3
-


3
6 -44

1
49

4
-

-27

-34

 40


8
45

3
-

 51


6
53

4
-

-51

-59


5


6

5
-

6C -

6 0
-66
-71



Wind Chill
Temperature °F

DANGER

A ABOVE 25°F LITTLE DANGER FOR PROPERLY CLOTHED PERSON
B 25°F-75°F
BELOW
C 75°F

INCREASING DANGER, FLESH MAY FREEZE
GREAT DANGER, FLESH MAY FREEZE IN 30 SECONDS

Page 57 of 65

APPENDIX H - HEAT STRESS INDEX

TEMPERATURE

RELATIVE HUMIDITY
10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%
104 98 104 110 120 132
102 97 101 108 117 125
100 95
99 105 110 120 132
98 93
97 101 106 110 125
96 91
95
98 104 108 120 128
94 89
93
95 100 105 111 122
92 87
90
92
96 100 106 115
122
90 85
88
90
92
96 100 106 114 122
87
93
95 100 106 115
88 82
86
89
86 80
84
85
87
90
92
96 100 I 109
83
84 78
81
85
86
89
91
95
99
91
95
82 77
79
80
81
84
86
89
80 75
77
78
79
81
83
85
86
89
83
85
78 72
75
77
78
79
80
81
76 70
72
75
76
77
77
77
78
79
74 68
70
73
74
75
75
75
76
77
NOTE: Add 10°F when protective clothing is worn and add 10°F when
in direct sunlight.

HUMITURE °F
THREAT

DANGER

INJURY

CATERGORY
BELOW
60°

NONE

80°-90°

CAUTION

Fatigue possible if exposure is prolonged and there is physical
activity

90°-105°

EXTREME
CAUTION

Heat cramps and heat exhaustion possible if exposure is
prolonged and there is physical activity

105°-130°

DANGER

Heat cramps or exhaustion likely, heat stroke possible if
exposure is prolonged and there is physical activity

ABOVE
130°

EXTREME
DANGER

Heat stroke imminent

Little or no danger under normal circumstances

Page 58 of 65

APPENDIX I
SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY
The Town and Union have a vital interest in maintaining a safe and healthy work environment in
which all employees have the opportunity to work in a productive manner. The Town and Union
also have a commitment to its citizens, residents, visitors and the community to ensure a well
and fit workforce.
Therefore, the illegal use, possession, distribution, purchase, or sale of controlled substances is
prohibited. Violation of this policy will subject members to discipline up to and including
termination. Such discipline shall be subject to Article IV — Grievance Procedure.
Employees shall notify the Chief or Assistant Chief within three (3) days of any arrest for drug
law offense, regardless of where or when it may occur. Employees shall notify the Chief or
Assistant Chief of any arrest for alcohol violations, including loss of driving privileges, prior to
reporting for duty for the next shift after the offense or arrest occurs.
The Town and Union, by agreeing to this policy, are committed to protecting its members and to
ensure Town's interests are properly safeguarded. This policy shall be implemented a manner
that is consistent with all applicable State and Federal law.
Section 1— Employee Assistance Program (EAP)
1.
Any member who feels that he/she has developed an addition to, dependence upon, or
problem with alcohol or drugs, legal or illegal, is encouraged to seek assistance. Entrance into
EAP can occur by self-referral, recommendation, or referral by a Supervisor.
2.
Requests for assistance through "recommendation" or "Supervisor referral" will be
confidential. "Self referral" confidentiality will be maintained between the individual seeking
help and EAP.
3.

Member progress will be monitored by the Fire Chief or his/her designee.

4.
Rehabilitation, itself, is the responsibility of the member. For members enrolled in a
formal treatment program, the Town will grant rehabilitation leave through the use of
accumulated sick leave.
5.
To be eligible for continuation of employment on a rehabilitation basis, in accordance
with the language above, the member must have been employed by the Town for at least one (1)
year; must maintain at least weekly contact with the Fire Chief or her/his designee; and must
provide certification that he/she is continuously enrolled in a treatment program and actively
participating in that program.

Page 59 of 65

6.
Upon successful completion of an approved treatment program mutually acceptable to the
Fire Chief and the Union, the member will be returned to active status without reduction of pay,
grade or seniority.
Section 2 — Alcohol
1.

No alcoholic beverages will be brought into or consumed upon Fire Department premises.

2.
Drinking or being under the influence of alcoholic beverages while on duty is cause for
suspension or termination.
3.
Any member whose off-duty use of alcohol which results in an inability to perform all
duties required of said member in a satisfactory manner while on duty may be offered, at the
sole discretion of the Fire Chief or his/her designee, an opportunity to participate in EAP for
rehabilitation in lieu of disciplinary action being taken.
4.
Because possessing a valid driver's license is a condition of employment, the loss of
driving privileges imposed on a member by this or another agency due to use of alcohol shall
result in loss of ability to fulfill conditions of employment and such employee shall not be
entitled to work until driving privileges are reinstated with the following exceptions which shall
be considered as fulfilling the condition of employment as stated herein:
a.
A valid work permit issued by the State of Connecticut that allows the member
drive to and from work
b.
The employee is solely responsible for, able, and arranges for their own
transportation to and from work.
Section 3 — Prescription Drugs
1.
No prescription drug shall be brought upon Department premises by any person other than
the person for whom the drug is prescribed by a licensed medical practitioner and shall be used
only in the manner, combination and quantity prescribed. Members shall notify the Fire Chief or
his/her designee if there are any job-related restrictions in the use of the prescribed drug.
2.
Any member whose abuse of prescription drugs results in an inability to perform all duties
required of said member in a satisfactory manner may be offered, at the sole discretion of the
Fire Chief or his/her designee, an opportunity to participate in EAP for rehabilitation in lieu of
disciplinary action being taken. In the event the member refuses or rails rehabilitation,
disciplinary action for violation of this policy may be imposed.
3.
Because possessing a valid driver's license is a condition of employment, the loss of
driving privileges imposed on a member by this or another agency due to use of alcohol shall
result in loss of ability to fulfill conditions of employment and such employee shall not be
entitled to work until driving privileges are reinstated.

Page 60 of 65

4.
Because possessing a valid driver's license is a condition of employment, the loss of
driving privileges imposed on a member by this or another agency due to use of alcohol shall
result in loss of ability to fulfill conditions of employment and such employee shall not be
entitled to work until driving privileges are reinstated with the following exceptions which shall
be considered as fulfilling the condition of employment as stated herein:
a.
A valid work permit issued by the State of Connecticut that allows the member
drive to and from work
b.
The employee is solely responsible for, able, and arranges for their own
transportation to and from work.
Section 4 — Illegal Drugs
1.
The use of an illegal drug, or controlled substance, or the possession of such substance by
a member, while said member is on duty or on Department premises, is just cause for suspension
or termination.
2.
Any member whose abuse of illegal drugs results in an inability to perform all duties
required of said member in a satisfactory manner may be offered, at the sole discretion of the
Fire Chief or his/her designee, an opportunity to participate in EAP for rehabilitation in lieu of
disciplinary action being taken. In the event the member refuses or rails rehabilitation,
disciplinary action for violation of this policy may be imposed.
3.
The sale, trade or delivery of illegal drugs or controlled substances by a member, during
work hours or while on Department premises, to another person is just cause for suspension or
termination.
4.
Because possessing a valid driver's license is a condition of employment, the loss of
driving privileges imposed on a member by this or another agency due to use of alcohol shall
result in loss of ability to fulfill conditions of employment and such employee shall not be
entitled to work until driving privileges are reinstated with the following exceptions which shall
be considered as fulfilling the condition of employment as stated herein:
a.
A valid work permit issued by the State of Connecticut that allows the member
drive to and from work
b.
The employee is solely responsible for, able, and arranges for their own
transportation to and from work.
Section 5 — Testing Procedures
Testing for drugs shall be by urine testing and shall be performed by a licensed laboratory.
Testing for alcohol shall be by breathalyzer and conduct by a trained Breath Alcohol Technician

Page 61 of 65

For drug testing, the sample will be split into two parts. A member whose drug test results in a
positive report may, within forty-eight hours of receiving notification of such result, request in
writing to the Fire Chief or his/her designee that the second part of the sample be made available
for re-testing at a licensed or certified laboratory of the member's choosing and at the member's
expense. If the second test is negative, the positive test shall be null and void and the Town shall
reimburse the member for the cost of the second test.
Section 6 — Interference With or Refusal to Test
Any alteration, switching, substituting or tampering with a sample or test given under this
Appendix I by any member shall be grounds for immediate suspension and subsequent
disciplinary action which may include dismissal.
The refusal by a member to submit to a drug or alcohol test pursuant to the provisions of this
Appendix I, or to cooperate in providing information needed in connection with the testing, shall
result in the member's immediate suspension without pay and subsequent disciplinary action
which may include dismissal.
Section 7 — Rehabilitation
The opportunity for rehabilitation (rather than discipline) shall be granted once for any member
who:
1.
Voluntarily admits to alcohol or drug abuse prior to testing (this is not considered a
refusal to submit) or
2.

Tests positive for alcohol or abuse of legally prescribed drugs for the first time

The member shall use accumulated sick or vacation leave for the period of any absence for the
purpose of rehabilitation. All treatment will at the sole expense of the member, to the extent not
covered by the member's health benefits plan. As part of any rehabilitation program, the member
shall be required to undergo periodic screening for drugs or alcohol as recommended by the
Medical Review Officer (MRO). If, after testing, the member has tested positive, he/she will be
immediately suspended and will be subject to dismissal.
Section 8 — Reasonable Suspicion Procedures
The procedures of the Town in regard to members using, possessing or being under the
influence of alcohol, drugs or controlled substances while on duty are as follows:
1.
Members shall report to their places of assignment fit and able to perform their required
duties and shall not by any improper act render themselves unfit for duty.
Step 1: A supervisor who has reasonable grounds to believe that a member is under the
influence of alcohol, drugs or controlled substances, as provided for within Federal or
State law, shall immediately relieve said member from duty with pay.
Page 62 of 65

Step 2: The on-duty Shift Commander or appropriate Division Head as applicable shall
then immediately notify Fire Chief, or his/her designee.
Step 3: The reporting supervisor and the Fire Chief or his/her designee will interview the
member, and if the Supervisor and the Fire Chief, or his/her designee both being the same
who interviewed the member believe, based upon reasonable grounds herein, that the
member is under the influence of alcohol, drugs or controlled substances, then said
member will be taken by the Department its designated hospital or testing facility. The
member may request Union representation during this interview, though said request may
not be a reason to delay said interview.
Step 4: The decision to relieve the member from duty assignment shall be documented as
soon as possible. Both the supervisor and the Fire Chief or his/her designee must
document reasons and observations, such as, but not limited to, glazed eyes, smell of
alcohol, slurred speech, wobbly walk, change in attitude, aggressiveness, passed out,
change in normal appearance, etc.
Step 5: The member shall sign the appropriate release form provided by the hospital or
testing facility to perform a drug and/or alcohol test for either reasonable suspicion
testing.
1. It shall be made clear to the member before he/she signs the release form
that the results will be made available to the Fire Chief or he/she designee and
may be used in disciplinary proceedings against the member. In addition, said
results will be made available to the member.
2. If the member does not sign the release form, the member will be in
violation of the parties' Agreement and the member will be relieved from
active duty without pay and be subject to disciplinary action up to and
including termination.
Step 6: When an alcohol drug test is administered, based on reasonable suspicion, the
member will be placed on sick leave until results are available.
1. When test results are positive, the member will be relieved of duty without
pay and shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
The member may be referred to EAP in lieu of disciplinary action being taken
at the sole discretion of the Fire Chief or his/her designee.
2. The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall make the fmal determination
whether the member returns to active status or remains off duty if the outcome
of the test(s) is/are positive.
3. Rejection of treatment or failure to complete rehabilitation may be cause
for suspension or termination.
Page 63 of 65

4. Upon successful completion of treatment, the member will be returned to
active status without reduction of pay, or grade or seniority.
5. No member will be eligible for EAP more than one time except at the sole
discretion of the Fire Chief or his/her designee. Any cost for additional EAP
treatment shall be the responsibility of the member and shall not be submitted
for reimbursement through the Town. A second positive test for alcohol or
drugs shall be cause for immediate termination, except in those cases where the
Fire Chief or her/his designee authorizes the member to attend additional EAP
treatments at the member's expense, as provided for herein. Notwithstanding
any other provisions contained herein, members who have three positive test
results for alcohol or drugs shall be immediately terminated.
2.
Any supervisor who does not relieve a member, who he has knowledge of or reasonable
suspicion of being under the influence of alcohol, drugs or controlled substances will be subject
to disciplinary action.
3.
Anyone knowingly bringing false charges against a member or using these procedures for
harassment or personal reasons will be subject to disciplinary action.

Page 64 of 65

MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
WHEREAS, the Town of East Hartford, herein referred to as the "Town", and the
International Association of Firefighters, Local 1548, herein referred to as the "Union" have
negotiated a bargaining agreement covering the period from July 1, 1989 - June 30, 1992; and,
WHEREAS, both parties have reached agreement with regard to overtime and minimum
manning which amends the terms of the Agreement; and,
WHEREAS, the parties desire that these amendments last only so long as the Agreement
referenced above remains in effect; and,
WHEREAS, it is not the intention of the parties to achieve minimum manning through
layoffs;
NOW, therefore, the parties agree as follows:
1.

Article VIII of the Agreement shall be amended to delete the term time and
one-half (1 1/2) and to substitute the term time and one-quarter (1 1/4),
effective on approval of both parties.

2.

The parties agree that there shall be maintained a minimum of twenty-six
(26) members of the bargaining unit on duty at all times. The above shall not
include any employee in grade 67, grade 71 or the Emergency Manager.

3.

The Town maintains the right to reduce the manning level below twenty-six
(26), when financial circumstances so dictate, subject to one (1) exception
set forth below. The Town is to be the sole determiner of when financial
circumstances dictate the reduction; however, the Town will present to the
Union the basis for its determination. Exhaustion of the overtime account in
and out of itself will not be deemed a sufficient fmancial circumstance
justifying reduction of the work force below the above minimum.

Should the Town determine the financial circumstances require a reduction below the
above minimum, then this entire Memorandum of Agreement shall become null and void.

Page 65 of 65
