Fruita City Council Minutes

1

November 1, 2022

FRUITA CITY COUNCIL
IN PERSON AND VIRTUAL MEETING
NOVEMBER 1, 2022
7:00 P.M.
1. CALL TO ORDER AND ROLL CALL
Mayor Kincaid called the regular meeting of the Fruita City Council to order at 7:00 p.m. The meeting
was held both in person and with virtual access provided through Zoom.
Present:

Mayor Pro Tem Matthew Breman
City Councilor Jeannine Purser
City Councilor James Williams
City Councilor Ken Kreie
City Councilor Amy Miller
City Councilor Aaron Hancey

Excused Absent

(None)

City staff present:

City Manager Mike Bennett
Assistant to the City Manager Shannon Vassen
City Clerk/Finance Director Margaret Sell
Deputy City Clerk Deb Woods
Communications and Engagement Specialist Ciara DePinto
Human Resources Director Odette Brach
Parks and Recreation Director Marc Mancuso
Planning and Development Director Dan Caris
Public Works Director Kimberly Bullen
Chief of Police Dave Krouse

Also present:

Staff and students from Rim Rock Elementary School
American Legion Post 2006 Commander KJ Kline
American Legion Post 2006 Jr. Vice Commander Lou Brackett
Ben Snyder with the Greater Grand Junction Sports Commission
Members of the public (in-person and virtually)

2. MOMENT OF SILENCE AND PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
Mayor Kincaid called for a moment of silence for all faiths and beliefs to have the opportunity for a
silent prayer. He then led in the Pledge of Allegiance.
3. AGENDA – ADOPT/AMEND
Mayor Kincaid asked if there had been any changes to the agenda and Deputy City Clerk Deb Woods
noted for the record that there were no changes to the agenda, but staff did make corrections to three
typographical errors that were found in the Glade Park Pipeline Water Users Association Irrigation

Fruita City Council Minutes

2

November 1, 2022

Water Agreement (on the Consent Agenda) that did not affect the content or meaning of the agreement
in any way.


COUNCILOR PURSER MOVED TO APPROVE THE AGENDA AS PRESENTED.
COUNCILOR BREMAN SECONDED THE MOTION. THE MOTION PASSED
WITH SIX YES VOTES.

4 . PROCLAMATIONS AND PRESENTATIONS
A. FRUITA TEACHERS/STUDENTS OF THE MONTH FOR NOVEMBER 2022: RIM
ROCK ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
Mayor Kincaid read the names of the students chosen by Principal Sharon Kallus as the “Students of
the Month” along with remarks as to why they were chosen. Each student received a Certificate of
Recognition, a Fruita sticker and a day pass to the Fruita Community Center.
Mayor Kincaid also read Principal Kallus’ statement that she wanted to acknowledge and celebrate the
entire staff at Rim Rock for working so hard in the first quarter and supporting and growing all Rim
Rock’s learners and their families, as well as each other. Teacher and former City Councilor Karen
Leonhart accepted a Certificate of Recognition from the Mayor on behalf of school staff and then
photos were taken of the students and school staff as they stood up in front of the audience.
B. PROCLAMATION – VETERANS DAY PROCLAMATION TO BE ACCEPTED BY
COMMANDER KJ KLINE OF FRUITA AMERICAN LEGION POST 2006
Councilor Hancey read the Proclamation, which was accepted by Commander Kline. Mayor Kincaid
noted that Jr. Vice Commander and former City Councilor Lou Brackett was also present in the
audience in support of veterans.
5. PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Wendy Wood, 1891 J.6 Road, congratulated Councilor Aaron Hancey on being appointed to the City
Council. She thanked the entire Council for serving and quoted scripture about ruling well and how
people in the nation need better ruling. She offered her prayers for the Council, Veterans, teachers,
school staff, government officials and the upcoming mid-term elections.
There were no further comments from the public.
6. CONSENT AGENDA
A. MINUTES – A REQUEST TO APPROVE THE MINUTES OF THE OCTOBER 18,
2022 CITY COUNCIL SPECIAL MEETING
B. MINUTES – A REQUEST TO APPROVE THE MINUTES OF THE OCTOBER 18,
2022 REGULAR CITY COUNCIL MEETING

Fruita City Council Minutes

3

November 1, 2022

C. MINUTES – A REQUEST TO APPROVE THE MINUTES OF THE OCTOBER 25,
2022 COUNCIL WORKSHOP MEETING
D. LIQUOR LICENSE RENEWAL – A REQUEST TO APPROVE THE RENEWAL OF
AN OPTIONAL PREMISES – MALT, VINOUS AND SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR
LICENSE FOR ADOBE CREEK NATIONAL, LLC DBA ADOBE CREEK GOLF
COURSE LOCATED AT 876 18 ½ ROAD
E. IRRIGATION WATER AGREEMENT WITH GLADE PARK PIPELINE WATER
USERS’ ASSOCIATION (GPPWUA) – A REQUEST TO APPROVE A 5-YEAR
IRRIGATION WATER AGREEMENT RENEWAL WITH THE GPPWUA
Councilor Hancey asked what the storage issues were at Reservoir #2. City Manager Mike Bennett
explained that it is a very old issue with one of the City’s reservoirs that has a natural bank for a dam
which has sloughed. The City is required by the state to keep the water below the spillway.
Mr. Bennett added that the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) is a federal organization
that is doing some free analysis and studies on the matter to help determine how to proceed. The cost
to repair the dam was estimated at over $2 million dollars four years ago and Mr. Bennett stated that it
has been difficult to find the funding for it.
Mayor Kincaid opened the Consent Agenda to public comments. Hearing none, he referred the matter
to the City Council.


COUNCILOR KREIE MOVED TO APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
PRESENTED. COUNCILOR PURSER SECONDED THE MOTION. THE
MOTION PASSED WITH SIX YES VOTES.

7. PUBLIC HEARINGS
A. QUASI-JUDICIAL HEARINGS
1) SPECIAL EVENT LIQUOR PERMIT APPLICATION – A REQUEST TO
APPROVE A SPECIAL EVENT LIQUOR PERMIT APPLICATION FROM THE
GREATER GRAND JUNCTION SPORTS COMMISSION TO SELL BEER FOR
THE RIM ROCK MARATHON ON SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2022 FROM 8:00
AM TO 6:00 PM AT THE FRUITA COMMUNITY CENTER LOCATED AT 324
N. COULSON ST. – DEPUTY CITY CLERK DEB WOODS
STAFF’S PRESENTATION:
Deputy City Clerk Deb Woods provided staff’s presentation, which was a short review of the event
and the request for a beer garden by the Greater Grand Junction Sports Commission (GGJSC). She
noted that Fruita Chief of Police Dave Krouse reviewed the application and issued his statement that
there was nothing that would prohibit the issuance of the license being requested. Ms. Woods stated

Fruita City Council Minutes

4

November 1, 2022

that staff’s recommendation was that the Council approve the application subject to the following
conditions:
1. The entrance and exit shall be monitored closely and continuously by event staff in order to
prevent alcoholic beverages from going into or out of the area;
2. The licensee needs to be aware that they are solely responsible for control of the licensed
premises in regard to alcohol possession, consumption and adherence to state and municipal
laws; and
3. All other procedures presented by the Greater Grand Junction Sports Commission will be
followed.
Ben Snyder with the GGJSC was present in the audience as the applicant’s representative. Mr. Snyder
noted that for this event, the beer garden was proposed to be located in the backyard area of the Fruita
Community Center, which is fenced in and makes it easy to control the licensed area. He added that
the GGJSC feels that the athletes have run a marathon or half-marathon, so they have earned a beer
and the Commission was excited to offer that to them. Taking out the COVID year, this will be the 26th
running of the race. It is a fundraising event where the GGJSC donates money to the Colorado Mesa
University (CMU) track and field team, which helps out with approximately 60 volunteers for the
weekend.
Mayor Kincaid opened the public hearing. Hearing no comments from the public, he closed the public
hearing and referred the matter to the City Council.
COUNCIL MOTION:


B.

COUNCILOR PURSER MOVED TO APPROVE THE APPLICATION FOR A
SPECIAL EVENT LIQUOR PERMIT FOR THE GREATER GRAND JUNCTION
SPORTS COMMISSION TO SELL BEER FOR THE RIM ROCK MARATHON AT
THE FRUITA COMMUNITY CENTER SUBJECT TO THE CONDITIONS
STATED BY STAFF. COUNCILOR MILLER SECONDED THE MOTION. THE
MOTION PASSED WITH SIX YES VOTES.
LEGISLATIVE HEARINGS

There were no Legislative Public Hearings on the agenda.
8.

ADMINISTRATIVE AGENDA
A.

2023 BUDGET PRESENTATIONS – QUALITY OF PLACE AND COMMUNITY
WELLNESS AND PERSONNEL AND EMPLOYEE RETENTION – ASSISTANT
TO THE CITY MANAGER SHANNON VASSEN

Mr. Vassen provided staff’s 2023 Budget presentation concerning Quality of Place and Community
Wellness initiatives and projects that are contained in the Fruita Strategic Plan and in the Parks and

Fruita City Council Minutes

5

November 1, 2022

Recreation Projects budgeted for next year. In addition, he presented the proposed Budgets for the
Community Center Fund, Public Safety (Police Department) and Personnel and Employee Retention.
2023 Parks projects include:




Reed Park ($950,000 in improvements for a playground, shelter expansion, mini-pitch,
electric upgrades and irrigation)
Dog Park in South Fruita ($50,000 for fencing, clearing property, dog bag dispensers,
signage, miscellaneous amenities)
North Mulberry Street Outdoor Space ($450,000 reappropriated from 2022)

There was a discussion about the North Mulberry Street outdoor project after Councilor Williams said
he rarely sees people using it and therefore, was having a hard time getting on board with the project.
Mayor Kincaid disagreed and said he regularly sees people using the outdoor space. He pointed out
that during the community outreach, the majority of people said that they want a permanent outdoor
space. He reasoned that it would likely be used even more once the permanent features have been put
in place.
City Manager Mike Bennett clarified that the Council had given staff the direction to spend the money
to have the project designed and that phase had just wrapped up, so the project is now going to bid for
construction with a bid closing date to occur at the beginning of December.
Mayor Kincaid further argued his point that this was a matter that had been discussed by the Council
for at least ten years and because there was feedback from the community in favor of it, he didn’t
understand why this conversation was still being held.
Councilors Williams and Hancey both spoke about hearing from both sides of the issue (for and against
the project).
Mayor Kincaid requested that the City Manager send the Council members a link to the information
on the City’s website about the North Mulberry Street outdoor project including the Community Survey
results.
Mr. Bennett noted that since the time staff had received the direction from Council to pursue the design
of the project, updates have continually been added to the Weekly Information Update and have been
included in staff’s Budget updates to the Council. He added that if the bids come in too high for the
budget or if the Council chooses to change course, staff would, of course not proceed but otherwise, if
the bids were within budget, the project construction would proceed.
Assistant the City Manager Shannon Vassen mentioned that concerning the Highway 340 design
project (which is also included in the City’s Strategic Plan) did go out to bid twice and the latest cost
estimates were double the original budgeted amount of $90,000, so at the Council workshop the
previous week, the Council decided to reevaluate whether there are other trail improvement options for
which that amount of money could be used.

Fruita City Council Minutes

6

November 1, 2022

Mr. Vassen reviewed notable budget changes in the Parks and Recreation Budget including:
 Microevents ($5,000 added to the Special Events Program for about five events in addition to
the typical events held every year)
 Contracting out trash collection for all parks and trails to free up staff time
 Significant Supplies and Equipment increases (e.g., weed control costs up 100% in 2022 alone)
Highlights in Mr. Vassen’s presentation of the Community Center (FCC) Fund Budget include:





2022 visitations at the FCC are estimated to be slightly lower than the number of pre-pandemic
(2019) visitations of 185,000, but are closer to that benchmark than they were over the past
couple of years
2023 Revenues: $3.5 million (decrease of less than 1% over 2022 estimated actuals)
2023 Expenses: $4.4 million (spending some of Fund Balance on one-time Capital Projects
such as the slide that will go in and out of the building)
Capital Expenses: $1.2 million








Water slide
Solar panels
Locker room tile replacement
Resurface gym floors with the F-gear logo
Miscellaneous equipment replacement

Miscellaneous expenses and challenges:
 Utility costs
 Supplies and Equipment (e.g., bleach costs have increased by $37/barrel)
 Minimum wage increase of 10%

Highlights of the Public Safety (Police Department) Budget include:




$2.9 million budget overall includes an 8% increase in expenses
Communications Center (911 Call Center): $300,000 (county public safety sales tax dollars
will help to offset)
Capital purchases of $75,000:







One new vehicle
Taser replacements
Computers
Vests

New police officer to be included in the final draft of budget to help with service delivery and
growth

Councilor Purser asked for more detail concerning the shelter at Reed Park. Parks and Recreation
Director Marc Mancuso explained that the new shelter is going to look similar to the one at the south
Little Salt Wash Park with new restrooms that will be ADA compliant. It is going to be located closer

Fruita City Council Minutes

7

November 1, 2022

to the playground and closer to the street side. The existing shelter will stay as is and there will be also
be a shelter on the north side of Reed Park.
Councilor Hancey asked for more detail concerning the $850,000 water slide at the FCC. Mr. Mancuso
stated the original design of the FCC included the water slide. The infrastructure for the slide has
already been built into the facility and Mr. Mancuso said he is hoping that as the project goes out to
bid, it won’t be quite as high as the estimated $850,000.
Mr. Bennett further explained that when the FCC was originally built, the design included a large slide
that goes out of the building and then comes into the building on the east side of the pool area where
the swim lanes currently are except there will be a new pool where the slide ends so that it doesn’t go
into the existing pool. When the City first went into the construction phase of the FCC, the slide was
engineered out, but since then, there has been $1 million set aside that is only designated for a new
amenity for the facility.
Councilor Hancey thought $850,000 was excessive for a slide. Mr. Bennett added that nothing is cheap
at the FCC; any time anything is replaced, it is pretty expensive. Councilor Hancey asked if the
construction cost includes a new exit dug out from the building. Mr. Mancuso explained that it is all
surface-mounted, so the slide will go outside and then ends with a 20-foot runout. The architect is
going to try to design the slide so that the runout starts a little bit further outside of the building and
doesn’t impact the guards’ room or any part of that area where there isn’t much room.
Mr. Bennett recalled that there were three amenities at the FCC that were being considered as part of
the Comprehensive Plan process; one was an outdoor rock climbing wall on one side of the building
with a covered area, another was expanding from the outdoor pool area to accommodate a fenced-in
spray park and thirdly, the slide, which is something he said the community has been asking for since
the beginning and is something that can be enjoyed year-round.
Highlights of the Personnel and Employee Retention Budget presentation include:







Goal of Market-Based Pay Plan is to be competitive with Fruita’s municipal counterparts
throughout the state.
Market-based increase (percentage of how the pay for each position changed from year-to-year)
Performance-based increase to keep employees moving along the market ranges ($0 raises for
the people who need improvement, 3% for “meets expectations” and 5% for those who
“exceeded expectations”
On average, salary expenses are budgeted to increase 7.76% over the current year
Includes 10% for minimum wage employees
New positions:
 Police Officer
 Administrative Tech – City Manager’s Office and Administration
 Building Department (Chief Building Official and two building inspectors)

Councilor Breman asked if positions that are not unique to municipalities are also compared to the
private sector. Mr. Vassen responded that staff talked a lot about that with a hired consultant and there

Fruita City Council Minutes

8

November 1, 2022

is some data that was provided to staff so they could compare to those positions in the private sector,
but for the City’s purposes, staff only looked at the municipal examples because those are the biggest
competitors for employees.
Mr. Bennett stated that staff is still watching it very closely with respect to Public Works, Maintenance
and Parks workers, but in reality, when someone reaches a certain level of position at the City, the
competition really is with other municipalities. He said there may need to be some adaptations in the
future depending on how the private sector trends.
Mr. Bennett added that prior to 2019, staff spent over a year working with the Colorado Municipal
League’s (CML’s) data to update all job descriptions to make sure the right comparisons were being
made. In addition, the City of Montrose paid over $30,000 to have a consultant come in and they went
through an external study, but when the pay plan was implemented, they had a lot of issues and ended
up switching to the market-based format. Mr. Bennett said Fruita City staff learned a lot from that. He
also noted that the CML data will always be available for staff to review each year.
Mr. Vassen’s presentation also included a review of health insurance (3% increase in premiums over
2022), dental insurance (no change) and retirement benefits (budgeted to increase 6% over 2022).
Mr. Vassen mentioned a survey that went to all City staff asking them about the benefits package
offered to them. 68 responses were received and overall, the responses were very positive. Mayor
Kincaid asked if there was anything that staff reported that they were dissatisfied with. Mr. Vassen
responded that most of the City’s benefits are ranked really high, but some employees have asked for
more attention to be paid to retirement benefits. The City does give a 4.5% contribution to a 401(a)
and employees can add another 457 account where if they contribute a minimum of 1.5%, the City will
also contribute 1.5% for a total of 6%. Unfortunately, there wasn’t as much participation in it as staff
thought there might be, so discussions have been had about giving a presentation to employees about
the program during budget season. 69% of employees did report satisfaction with their health
insurance, however.
Regarding another recruiting tool, City staff were asked whether they would like to have one additional
holiday per year be either a floating holiday or a permanent holiday and it was nearly unanimous that
the permanent holiday was the preferred choice. Permanent holidays that were options were either 1)
Juneteenth or 2) Martin Luther King, Jr. Day in place of Good Friday each year. The decision was
made to recommend to City Council that the one additional holiday be Juneteenth (due to that month
not having other holidays).
There was also discussion about how City employees are compensated after they have attended night
meetings (such as City Council) as well as the difficulties of staffing seasonal Parks workers between
spring and fall. To help with the latter, there will be a conversion in 2023 of a seasonal position (40hour weeks for less than six months of the year) to a permanent part-time position (year-round).
Councilor Hancey said he felt like the City’s stated goal of being “the employer of choice” should be
amended to “an ideal employer” or “a desirable employer” because the former sounded like the City
was in competition with local businesses. Mr. Vassen noted that in the Strategic Plan, it reads as: “be
an employer of choice.” Councilor Hancey was satisfied with that.

Fruita City Council Minutes

9

November 1, 2022

Councilor Hancey asked for clarification on why it seemed like staff wasn’t justifying a budget that
hadn’t been completely spent the previous year and therefore, was not subsequently reduced. Mr.
Vassen responded that staff did the estimated actuals in October in preparation of the draft budget and
would continue to update that information. He agreed that there are some things, whether due to staffing
issues or something else, that staff has just not been able to accomplish in 2022 such as the funding
that was set aside for Landscaping Supplies and Open Space. Due to trail flooding issues, staff wasn’t
able to use that money for that, so the funds will be moved over to fund trails maintenance in some
other areas. Mr. Vassen said it just depends on the specific line item Councilor Hancey was referring
to, but added that staff could get updated actuals to the Council towards the end of the year as the
money gets spent down.
Mr. Bennett added that when staff begins the budget process, they go line by line with each department
in determining where they currently are in the year and where they expect to be at the end of the year.
He explained that it could be a case of having the wrong accounting code for a certain line item such
as Supplies versus a very specific equipment line item and staff has to straighten those out. Some of
the other issues staff runs into include spending a lot of a line item amount at a different time of year
such as the end of the year versus at the beginning of the year when things are bought in bulk.
Mr. Bennett said there are times when, as Mr. Vassen had mentioned, certain things weren’t able to be
completed due to some circumstance during the year, and in some cases, staff actually does reduce the
budgeted amount if is something that is definitely not in line with the trends over a number of years.
He concluded that staff definitely does have a process to avoid “fluffing” any particular line items and
that there are reasons for certain line items to not be reduced. Mr. Vassen said a great example of
something coming in under budget is when the Community Development Department went out to bid
for online development review software. $75,000 was set aside for it, but the actual cost came out to
be $30,000 because they got competitive bids that had some good discounts attached.
Councilor Hancey asked if daycare at the FCC is open to the whole community. Mr. Bennett described
the FCC program called “Rec Rats” where the kids go to a play area while the adult(s) either work out
or leave to go do something else for a period of two hours maximum. He continued that there is another
program during the summer and school holidays called “Dinomites” where people register like they
would for a summer camp where the kids have a lot of activities and it operates on a “first come, first
served” basis until it is full. Councilor Hancey noted that there is a significant need for daycare in the
valley. He pointed out that local hospitals in our area are doing a great job with providing daycare.
Councilor Hancey also asked if the Council would be seeing more of a high-level summary of the
budget instead of the budgets for each section of each department. Mr. Vassen said that the final budget
will contain an “All Funds Summary” and that he had been working on it, but it wasn’t completed yet.
Councilor Hancey said he wanted to ensure that the budget was clear and transparent for citizens and
includes justifications for any special impacts. He also requested that the budget contain non-capital
expenditures versus just capital expenditures. Mr. Vassen noted that in addition to the “All Funds
Summary,” there will be a Glossary of Terms.
Councilor Kreie began a discussion about the holidays for City employees and said that he thought
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day and Juneteenth should be added and Good Friday removed. Councilor
Breman wholeheartedly agreed with that, saying he thinks those more align with the values of the City

Fruita City Council Minutes

10

November 1, 2022

and would be a better use of a person’s floating holiday. Councilor Kreie added that it is more
consistent across governments, as well.
Mayor Kincaid asked where Christmas would fall, since that is a religious holiday, too. Councilor
Breman said that of all of the holidays, he would assume probably 96% of America celebrates
Christmas versus Good Friday, which would be a much smaller percentage. Councilor Purser agreed
that Christmas is more standard across the board, although she didn’t actually have a personal opinion
on it. Mayor Kincaid said that Mr. Bennett had stated that staff really likes Good Friday just because
of where it falls and that should be what matters, what the City’s employees want. Mr. Bennett said
that actually, there would be be a mixture of opinions among staff and that if it does change, there will
be people who are sad to lose Good Friday, but it would be nice to align with other organizations
throughout the valley so that all are closed at the same time. He suggested that the Council make a
decision that considers the alignment and said that it wasn’t as if staff had been surveyed and there
were results to point to.
Councilor Hancey asked that the City’s Building Department (Inspections) also be considered because
aligning with other organizations throughout the valley makes is easier so that everybody knows when
everyone else is shut down. Councilor Miller agreed. Councilor Williams asked if the Council had to
get rid of one holiday to add two more. Mr. Bennett stated that staff had budgeted for one additional
holiday only, although it wasn’t set in concrete. Councilor Hancey pointed out that the City of Fruita
is equal to Mesa County and the City of Grand Junction with having a total of eleven holidays but if
the Council added one, Fruita would have an advantage over them in terms of employee benefits.


COUNCILOR KREIE MOVED TO ADD JUNETEENTH AND MARTIN LUTHER
KING, JR. DAY AS CITY OF FRUITA MUNICIPAL HOLIDAYS AND THAT
GOOD FRIDAY BE DROPPED AS A MUNICIPAL HOLIDAY. COUNCILOR
BREMAN SECONDED THE MOTION. THE MOTION PASSED WITH SIX YES
VOTES.

Mayor Kincaid mentioned that a Council member was interested in having a bigger-screened Council
iPad in order to make Planning Department documents such as maps easier to zoom in on and see.
Mayor Kincaid pointed out that the current Council iPads have been in use for six or seven years.
Councilor Hancey stated that his was the 12.9-inch iPad Pro and that it’s much easier to use. Mr.
Bennett stated that staff would look into pricing. Councilor Hancey asked that staff look into the
option for having cellular on the iPads versus not having it.
9. CITY MANAGER’S REPORT
City Manager Mike Bennett reported the following:



He and Councilor Williams would be at Suds Brothers at 5:30 the following evening for
“Beer or Root Beer with the City Manager.”
He requested that Council members RSVP with him via email if they were planning on
attending the City Holiday Party on December 3rd at Adobe Creek Golf Course. There will
be a dinner, employee awards and a “Casino Night.”

Fruita City Council Minutes




11

November 1, 2022

Staff had just learned from CDOT that they would be working on some erosion below the
bridges where I-70 crosses both the Big and Little Salt Washes. It is a five month-long
project and unfortunately, it will close the Little Salt Wash Trail heading towards the south.
The only way to re-route the project and still accomplish the fix is utilizing the bridge on
Highway 340 going over I-70. The project will start in the next few weeks. It will not close
the Riverfront Trail heading to the Kokopelli section of the trail (east/west). Councilor
Breman requested that A-frame signs be put up for people who might try to utilize the trail.
Mr. Bennett confirmed that staff would look into it.
Mr. Bennett asked Planning and Development Director Dan Caris to give the Council a
quick update on how his presentation to the Homebuilders Association went the previous
week.

10. COUNCIL REPORTS AND ACTIONS
A.

BUILDING SERVICES
COMMISSIONERS

LETTER

TO

MESA

COUNTY

BOARD

OF

Mr. Caris said that at his meeting with Homebuilders Association (HBA), he opened up his presentation
with three topics: 1) what Fruita is doing, 2) what Fruita is not doing, and 3) when Fruita is going to
do it. He also let them know that staff is soliciting for a Building Official and have received
applications from about four or five candidates. There will be an advisory panel that will participate
in the interviews as well as the City’s internal panel. The advisory panel will be made up of the
following people:
1. Brad Keller with FCI Constructors, who is also a Board Member of the Western
Colorado Contractors Association
2. Charlie Gechter with BOA Builders who was the developer of many subdivisions
in Fruita
3. Patrick Hummel with Chamberlain Architects, with whom the City has completed
a number of projects in Fruita and was on the Fruita Planning Commission for two
years
4. Kayla Brown, Executive Director of the Fruita Area Chamber of Commerce
5. Dave Krouse, Chief of Police for the City of Fruita
6. Troy Holder, Fire Marshal at Lower Valley Fire Protection District
Mr. Caris said he would be meeting with the group to partition out the interviews so that technical
questions reside with the technical experts and the question of whether an applicant will be a good fit
will be up to internal staff. City staff to participate include those in the Planning and Development
Department, the City’s Neighborhood Services Coordinator, Matt Carson, City Manager Mike Bennett,
City Engineer Sam Atkins and Human Resources Director Odette Brach. Mr. Caris stated that staff
has no plans of implementing a new fee schedule and will adopt the same Codes that Mesa County has
in order to create consistency across the valley. He added that the meeting with the HBA really helped

Fruita City Council Minutes

12

November 1, 2022

to quell a lot of misunderstandings and anxiety that stakeholders previously had. Mr. Caris suspects
that subsequent requests for the information will also come once the transition process to the in-house
Building Department has begun.
Councilor Miller noted that she has an AMGD (Grand Junction Area Realtor Association) meeting on
Thursday and she knew the question was going to come up, so she asked Mr. Caris if he could give her
some bullet point FAQs like those he presented at the HBA meeting. Mr. Bennett said that staff would
get those talking points out to the entire Council and Mayor.
Mr. Caris said it was his opinion that there was a receptiveness to the fact that Fruita is stepping up to
the challenge and that the City will earn a lot of credibility if staff does a good job. Alternatively, he
feels Fruita will be critiqued heavily if the process is not executed appropriately.
Councilor Hancey asked if the concerns of the community that were brought up to the Council the
previous week were resolved. Mr. Bennett stated that the President of the Board was there at the HBA
meeting, but Mr. Davis, who had called every one of the City Council members, was not in attendance.
Mr. Caris noted that Chronos Builders does not currently have a position on the Board of Directors and
therefore, was not in attendance. Mr. Bennett said that’s what was nice about the meeting; it was
focused on the fact that the City is moving forward as well as the importance of everyone working
together.
Councilor Breman said he received multiple calls from one individual and because the meeting at the
HBA was recorded, he wondered if he could tell the caller to contact them to get access to the audio of
the meeting to get all the details. Both Mr. Caris and Mr. Bennett said they didn’t know what procedures
the HBA may have. Mayor Kincaid said he thought that was the purpose of the bulleted talking points
that staff was going to forward to the Council. He added that he liked how the letter to the Mesa County
Board of Commissioners addresses why the City is bringing a Building Department in-house, which is
to commit to the Strategic Plan and make Fruita a better place for the community.
Councilor Hancey requested that staff include the people who contacted Council members the previous
week in the letter that is going to be emailed to the County Commissioners from the City of Fruita. Mr.
Bennett said staff could do that and will also ask that the HBA send it to their full membership.
Councilor Hancey asked staff to reply to directly to Garrett and not indirectly through the organizations.
Mr. Caris pointed out that there are thousands of subcontractors and the best way to get the letter out
is through the memberships. Councilor Breman said that the Council didn’t get calls from the
subcontractors; it was two or three individuals and as a City Councilor, he wants to respond directly to
those people to ensure that they see the letter. Mr. Caris said the HBA is charged with doing things
that are in the best interest of the members.
Councilor Williams said he felt like the HBA previously felt that they weren’t being included, but now
they do. He commended Mr. Caris for meeting with them and giving his presentation.
Councilor Miller said she thought the letter was very well written.


COUNCILOR BREMAN MOVED TO APPROVE THE LETTER AS WRITTEN.
COUNCILOR MILLER SECONDED THE MOTION.

Fruita City Council Minutes

13

November 1, 2022

Councilor Kreie asked if a distribution list should be included in the motion. Mayor Kincaid requested
that the Mesa County Building Department be copied in. Councilor Miller said she would be sharing
it with several governmental committees. Mr. Bennett explained that staff wants to send the letter to
the County Commissioners and their staff first and then will start sending it to all the other stakeholders.

B.

THE MOTION PASSED WITH SIX YES VOTES.
COUNCIL REPORTS AND ACTIONS

COUNCILOR KEN KREIE
Ken reported that the Grand Valley Regional Transportation Commission (GVRTC) will be meeting
on Monday, November 7th, but he has federal jury duty the whole month of November, so although he
was planning to make the meeting, he may not be able to. He added that the GVRTC is aware of that.
COUNCILOR JEANNINE PURSER
Jeannine reported that the Downtown Advisory Board (DAB) will be implementing “81521
Thursdays” starting as soon as they can. Any businesses that want to participate will have their choice
of doing so either during the day or in the night to offer a discount or whatever they want to do. The
businesses will need to let Communications and Engagement Specialist Ciara DePinto know of the
date on which they will participate, and she will do all the Public Relations work for them. Those
businesses who do participate will get a poster to put in their window advertising “81521 Thursdays.”
The DAB is very excited about the program.
Jeannine also reported that she will have her first Arts and Culture Board meeting the following week.
She noted that she missed the Livability Commission meeting due to marching band activities, but the
season is now over for that, so she will be able to start attending the meetings again.
COUNCILOR AMY MILLER
Amy reported that both of her meetings were not until the following week, but that she did drop off
some boxes for the Historic Preservation Board, who is moving all their stuff to switch rooms at the
Civic Center.
Amy noted that the Fruita Wildcat Football Team will be going to playoffs against Central High School
the coming weekend and invited the other Council members to join in on Saturday at 1:00 or 11:30 for
tailgating.
COUNCILOR MATTHEW BREMAN
Matthew said he didn’t really have anything of substance to report on for either the Fruita Area
Chamber of Commerce or the Grand Junction Economic Partnership (GJEP). He said he did remind
GJEP that Fruita has land, so as they are talking to people, there is opportunity.

Fruita City Council Minutes

14

November 1, 2022

MAYOR JOEL KINCAID
Joel reported that he attended the Police Commission meeting and received their monthly reports. He
said he thought it would be good to have Chief Dave Krouse give the Council an update and present
all the numbers for the year at an upcoming workshop meeting.
11. ADJOURN
With no further business before the Council, Mayor Kincaid adjourned the meeting at 9:30 p.m.
Respectfully submitted,

Debra Woods
Deputy City Clerk
City of Fruita
