Re: CBA Request
Jamie Doran <doranj@bangorschools.org>
Tue 6/8/2021 3:19 PM
To: Elwell, Abigail <AbigailElwell@mackinac.org>

Good Afternoon,
The bargaining agreement that is on our website is the current one for our teachers, it expires
6/30/21. The USW signed an extension of their agreement until 2022.
Thank you,
Jamie

On Tue, Jun 8, 2021 at 3:13 PM Elwell, Abigail <AbigailElwell@mackinac.org> wrote:

Good afternoon Jamie,
My name is Abigail Elwell, and I work on behalf of the Mackinac Center for Public Policy. We are
updating our database of all the school district collective bargaining agreements in Michigan, and it
appears the CBA for teachers posted on your website has expired; however, the website indicates that
the agreement was extended until 2021. Could you attach or point me to the current collective
bargaining agreement for teachers? Or, perhaps, a letter of agreement confirming the extension?
Similarly, it appears that the CBA for bus drivers expired in 2020. Could you direct me towards the
updated CBA for your bus drivers? We appreciate your assistance.
Thank you for everything you do for education. I hope you have a wonderful summer day.
Sincerely,
Abbee Elwell
Education Policy Intern

140 W. Main St., PO Box 568
Midland, MI 48640
abigailelwell@mackinac.org

--

Jamie Doran, Ed.S.
Director of Human Resources
District Compliance Officer/Title IX Coordinator
McKinney Vento and Foster Care Liaison
Notary Public
Bangor Township Schools
989-684-8121 ext. 1217
Disclaimer - This email and any files transmitted with it are confidential and contain privileged or copyright information. You must not present this
message to another party without gaining permission from the sender. If you are not the intended recipient you must not copy, distribute or use this email
or the information contained in it for any purpose other than to notify us. If you have received this message in error, please notify the sender immediately,
and delete this email from your system.

Disclaimer - This email and any files transmitted with it are confidential and contain privileged or copyright information.
You must not present this message to another party without gaining permission from the sender. If you are not the
intended recipient you must not copy, distribute or use this email or the information contained in it for any purpose
other than to notify us. If you have received this message in error, please notify the sender immediately, and delete
this email from your system. We do not guarantee that this material is free from viruses or any other defects although
due care has been taken to minimize the risk.
