NEGOTIATED AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE

METROPOLITAN
ALLIANCE OF POLICE
WEST DUNDEE POLICE
CHAPTER # 153

AND

THE VILLAGE OF WEST DUNDEE
5-1-2023 THROUGH 4-30-2026

Table of Contents
ARTICLE I RECOGNITION

Section 1.1
Section 1.2
Section 1.3
Section 1.4
Section 1.5

1

Recognition
Probationary Period
Fair Representation
Gender
Chapter Officers

1
1
1
1
2

ARTICLE II MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

2

Section 2.1

Management Rights

2

ARTICLE III LAYOFF

3

Section 3.1
Section 3 .2

3
3

Layoff
Recall

ARTICLE IV NO STRIKE CLAUSE

Section 4.1
Section 4.2
Section 4.3
Section 4.4

No Strike Clause
No Lockout
Judicial Restraint
Discipline of Strikers

3

3
4
4
4

ARTICLE V COMPENSATION, OVERTIME AND HOURS OF WORK

4

Section 5.1
Compensation
Normal Work Hours
Section 5.2
Section 5.3
Days Off
Section 5.4
Call Back
Section 5.5
Overtime
Section 5.6
Court Time
Work Breaks
Section 5.7
Section 5.8
Shift Selection/Assignment to Permanent Shift
Section 5.9
Meetings
Section 5.10 Officer In Charge Compensation Section 5.11 Compensatory Time
Section 5.12 Lateral Hires

4
5
5
5
5
7
7
7
8
8
8
9

ARTICLE VI UNION SECURITY AND DUES CHECK-OFF

Section 6.1
Section 6.2
Section 6.3
Section 6.4
Section 6.5

Dues Deductions
Indemnity
Revocation of Dues
Bulletin Boards
Labor-Management Meetings

9

9
9
9
9
9

ARTICLE VII VACATION

10

Section 7 .1
Section 7.2
Section 7.3
Section 7.4
Section 7. 5

10
10
12
12
12

Eligibility and Allowance~
Scheduling
Accrual Schedule
Accumulation
Village Emergency

ARTICLE VIII HOLIDAY AND PERSONAL TIME

Section 8.1
Section 8.2
Section 8.3

Holidays
Holiday Pay
Holiday Scheduling

ARTICLE IX LEAVE OF ABSENCE

Section 9.1
Section 9.2
Section 9.3
Section 9.4
Section 9.5
Section 9.6
Section 9.7
Section 9.8
Section 9.9
Section 9 .10
Section 9.11

Absence from Work
Sick Leave
Sick Leave Accrual and Usage
Sick Leave Incentive
Conversion of Sick Time Incentive at Retirement
Funeral Leave
General Leave of Absence
Military Leave
Jury Duty
Maternity/Paternity Leave
Paid Leave for All Workers Act

ARTICLE X EDUCATION BENEFITS

Section 10.1
Section 10.2
Section 10.3
Section 10.4
Section 10.5

On-Duty Training
Scheduling of On-Duty Training
Educational Reimbursement
Travel and Meeting Expense Allowances
Probationary Police Officers and Reimbursement of Training Costs

ARTICLE XI GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Section 11.2 Fees and Expenses of Arbitration
Section 11.3 Forms
Section 11.4 General Rules
Section 11.5 Notice of Union Representation
ARTICLE XII NON-DISCRIMINATION

Section 12.1 Non-Discrimination
Section 12.2 Chapter Activity
ARTICLE xm DISCIPLINE

12

12
12
13
13

13
13
14
14
14
15
16
16
16
16
17
17

17
17
17
17
18
19

21
21
21
22
22

22
22
22

Section 13.1 Procedure of Discipline
Section 13 .2 Jurisdiction of Police and Fire Commission
Section 13.3 Use of Reprimands and Discipline
Section 13.4 · Personnel Files

22
23
23
23

ARTICLE XIV INVESTIGATIONS CONCERNING OFFICERS

23

Section 14.1 Right to Investigate
Section 14.2 Right to Representation
Section 14.3 Global Positioning Units/Body Worn Cameras/Surveillance of Employees
ARTICLE XV HEALTH INSURANCE, DENTAL, AND LIFE INSURANCE

Section 15 .1
Section 15 .2
Section 15.3
Section 15.4

Health Insurance
Life Insurance
Continuation of Benefit
Waiver of Health and/or Dental Insurance

23
23
24
24

24
26
26
26

ARTICLE XVI UNIFORM BENEFITS

Section 16.1 Benefits
Section 16.2 Damage to Uniforms or Property
Section 16.3 Vests
ARTICLE XVII OFF DUTY EMPLOYMENT

Section 17.1 Employment Outside Department
Section 17.2 Extra Duty Details
ARTICLE XVIII SENIORITY

Section 18.1
Section 18.2
Section 18.3
Section 18.4

Seniority
Determination of Seniority
Maintenance of Seniority List
Forfeiture of Seniority

ARTICLE XIX SAVINGS CLAUSE

Section 19 .1

Savings Clause

ARTICLE XX ENTIRE AGREEMENT

Section 20.1 Entire Agreement
Section 20.2 Ratification and Amendment
ARTICLE XXI LIGHT DUTY

Section 21.1

Work Schedule for Light Duty

ARTICLE XXII SPECIALIST POSITIONS COMPENSATION

Section 22.1

Specialty Pay

ARTICLE XXIII GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 23 .1
Section 23.2
Section 23.3
Section 23 .4
Section 23.5
Section 23.6
Section 23.7
Section 23 .8
Section 23.9

Immunization and Inoculations
Killed in Line of Duty Benefit
Medical Evaluations
Fitness Examinations
Employee Fitness
Residency
Solicitation
Drug and Alcohol Testing
Part Time Officers

ARTICLE XXIV ,TERMINATION

Section 24.1

26

26
27
27
27

27
27
27

27
28
28
28
28

28
29

29
29
29

29
29

29
30

30
30
30
30
31
31
31
32
32
32

Termination

32

APPENDIX B SENIORITY LIST -UPDATED 5/30/23

34

PREAMBLE

This Agreement entered into by the Village of West Dundee, Kane County, Illinois, hereinafter
referred to as "the Employer," and the Metropolitan Alliance of Police West Dundee Police
Chapter# 153, hereinafter referred to as ''the Chapter," is intended to promote harmonious and
mutually beneficial relations between the Employer and the Chapter, and is set forth herein the
basic and full agreement between the parties concerning rates of pay, wages and other conditions
of employment for full-time police officers and probationary police officers with the rank of
Sergeant and below of the Village of West Dundee, as defined herein below and hereinafter
referred to as "Officers" or "employees", or when the context requires a singular noun, as
"Officer" or "employee".
ARTICLE I
RECOGNITION

Section 1.1

Recognition

Pursuant to an election and certification by the Illinois Labor Relations Board under Case No. SRC-01-079 dated April 26, 2002, and the certification issued thereon to the Chapter by the State
of Illinois Labor Relations Board, the Employer recognizes the Chapter as the exclusive
bargaining agent for the purpose of establishing wages, hours, and other conditions of
employment for all sworn full-time, and probationary officers with a rank of Sergeant and below
within the police department of the Village of West Dundee, as described above, excluding all
other persons employed by the Village of West Dundee. None of the provisions of this
Agreement shall be construed to require either the Employer or the Chapter to violate any
Federal or State Laws. The Chapter recognizes the Village's right to employ and utilize auxiliary
or part-time police officers to the extent allowed by law. In the event any provisions hereof or
hereinafter stated shall conflict with any such law, such provision shall be modified to the extent
necessary to conform to said laws.

Section 1.2

Probationary Period

As established by the Village's Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, the probationary period
for Officers is twelve (12) months in duration from the date of graduation from the Academy, or
if no Academy training is required, twelve (12) months from the date of employment. Nothing
herein shall be construed to modify the Commission's authority to set or modify probationary
periods. During the probationary period, an officer is subject to discipline, including discharge,
without cause and with no recourse to the grievance procedure or any other forum. It is further
agreed that probationary officers shall be entitled to all other rights, privileges, and benefits
conferred by this agreement except as previously stated, or as otherwise provided in this
Agreement.

Section 1.3

Fair Representation

The Union recognizes its responsibility as bargaining agent and agrees fairly to represent all
employees in the bargaining unit, whether or not they are members of the Union.

Section 1.4

Gender

5

Wherever the male gender is used in this Agreement, it shall be construed to include both males
and females equally.

Section 1.5

Chapter Officers

For purposes of this Agreement, the term "Chapter Officers" shall refer to the Chapter's duly
elected President, Vice-President, and Treasurer. Within five (5) business days of the election of
new Chapter Officer(s), the Union will notify the Chief of Police.

ARTICLE II
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Section 11.1

Management Rights

Except as specifically limited by the express provisions of this Agreement, the Village retains all
traditional rights to manage and direct the affairs of the Village in all of its various aspects and to
manage and direct its employees, including but not limited to the right to make and implement
decisions with respect to the following matters without having to negotiate over such decisions
or the effects of such decisions: to establish, plan, direct, control and determine the budget and
all the operations, services, policies and missions of the Village; to supervise and direct the
working forces; to establish the qualifications for employment and job positions and to employ
employees; to determine examination criteria and techniques and to conduct examinations; to
schedule and assign work, to assign, transfer and reassign employees; to establish specialty
positions and select personnel to fill them; to establish work, performance and productivity
standards and, from time to time, to change those standards; to assign overtime; to purchase or
contract out for goods and services; to determine the methods, means, organization and number
of personnel by which such operations and services shall be made or purchased; to make, alter
and enforce reasonable rules, regulations, orders, policies and procedures; to evaluate, promote
or demote employees; to establish reasonable physical and mental standards for employees; to
determine whether work and/or services are to be provided by employees covered by this
Agreement (including which employees) or by other employees or persons not covered by this
Agreement; to discipline, suspend and discharge non-probationary employees for just cause
(probationary employees without cause); to change or eliminate existing methods, equipment or
facilities or introduce new ones; to determine policies affecting the training of employees, to
determine training needs and assign employees to training; to determine work hours (shift hours),
to establish, change, add to or reduce the number of hours, shifts, tours of duty and schedules to
be worked; to adopt, change or modify work rules; to determine internal investigation
procedures; to do all things expressly granted and reserved exclusively to the Village under
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5 ILCS 315/4 or as modified; to take and all actions as may be
necessary to carry out the mission of the Village and the Police Department in the event of civil
emergency as may be declared by the Village President, Police Chief, or their authorized
designees, which may include, but not be limited to, riots, civil disorders, tornado conditions,
floods or other catastrophes. In the event of such emergency action, the provisions of this
Agreement, other than compensations provisions, may suspended, if necessary, provided that all
provisions of the Agreement shall be immediately reinstated once the local disaster or emergency
condition ceases to exist; and to carry out the mission of the Village.

ARTICLE III

6

LAYOFF
Section 111.1 Layoff

Where there is an impending layoff with respect to the employees in the bargaining unit, the
Village shall inform the Chapter in writing no later than thirty (30) days prior to such layoff,
except in the event of an emergency or unanticipated business need in which case as much notice
to the Union as practical will be provided by the Village. The Village will provide the Chapter
with the names of all employees to be laid off prior to the layoff. Part-Time officers shall be laid
off first, followed by full-time probationary employees and then full-time employees of the
bargaining unit. Full-time employees shall be laid off in order of inverse seniority. No part time
employees will be utilized by the Village while a full-time employee is on layoff status.
No employee will be hired to perform those duties normally performed by an employee while
any employee is on layoff status.
Any employee who has been laid off shall be placed on the appropriate reinstatement list and
shall be recalled on the basis of seniority in the police department.
Section 111.2 Recall

Employees who are laid off shall be placed on a recall list for a period of one (1) year. If there is
a recall, employees who are still on the recall list, and qualified to return to work as a police
officer, shall be called in the inverse order of their layoff. The employees who are eligible for
recall shall be given twenty-one (21) calendar days' notice ofrecall. Notice ofrecall shall be sent
to the employee by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, with a copy to the
Chapter. The employee must notify the Chief of Police or his designee of his intention to return
to work within seven (7) days after receiving notice of recall. The Village shall be deemed to
have fulfilled its obligation by mailing the recall notice by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, to the mailing address last provided by the employee, it being the obligation
and responsibility of the employee to provide the Chief of Police or his designee with his latest
mailing address. If an employee fails to timely respond to the recall notice his name shall be
removed from the recall list.
ARTICLE IV
NO STRIKE CLAUSE
Section IV.I No Strike Clause

Neither the Chapter nor any officers, agents or employees will instigate, promote, sponsor,
engage in or condone any strike, sympathy strike, secondary boycott, slowdown, speed-up, sitdown, concerted stoppage of work, concerted refusal to perform overtime, concerted, abnormal
or unapproved enforcement procedures or policies or work to the rule situation, mass
resignations, mass absenteeism, picketing of any Village building, facility or work site, or
picketing which in any way results in the interruption or disruption of the operations of the
Village, regardless of the reason for so doing. Each employee who holds the position of officer or
steward of the Chapter occupies a position of special trust and responsibility in maintaining and
bringing about compliance with the provisions of this Article. In addition, in the event of a

7

violation of this Section of this Article, the Chapter agrees to inform its members of their
obligations under this Agreement and to direct them to return to work.
Section IV.2 No Lockout

The Village will not lock out any employees during the term of this Agreement as a result of a
labor dispute with the Chapter.
Section IV.3 Judicial Restraint

Nothing contained herein shall preclude the Village or the Chapter from obtaining judicial
restraint and damages in the event the other party violates this Article.
Section Iv.4 Discipline of Strikers

Any employee who violates the provisions of Section 4.1 of this Article may be subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including discharge, and to statutory penalties. Any action taken by
the Employer against any employee who participates in any action prohibited by Section 4.1
above shall not be considered as a violation of this Agreement and shall not be subject to the
provisions of the grievance procedure. The failure to confer a penalty in any instance is not a
waiver of such right in any other instance, nor is it a precedent.
ARTICLEV
COMPENSAT~ON, OVERTIME AND HOURS OF WORK
Section V.1

Compensation

Compensation of covered employees shall be paid according to Appendix A attached hereto and
by-reference incorporated herein.
Employees will be placed in Step 1 upon hire or promotion. Covered employees shall be placed
in the wage scale pursuant to their respective years of service.
Wage increases ("step" and annual wage scale increases) shall occur for all eligible employees
on May 1, at the start of the Village fiscal year, provided the employee receives a satisfactory
annual performance evaluation. Should a covered employee be denied a May 1 wage increase
due to an unsatisfactory evaluation, said officer shall be eligible for a mid-year performance
evaluation to determine if he/she should receive the appropriate increase if and when the
employee's performance improves to a satisfactory level and the date upon which the increase is
effective.
Patrol officers and sergeants will receive general wage increases on May 1 of each year. Patrol
Officers and sergeants will receive step raises on May 1 of each year, provided the officer or
sergeant has completed at least nine (9) months of service, in grade, on that date; if not, the
Patrol Officer or Sergeant will receive his step raise upon their completion of nine (9) months of
service. All subsequent step increases shall be on May 1 of each year, as set forth above. New
employees may be hired at a step higher than step 1 with prior police academy training and/or
experience. The Village has the ability to accelerate an employee's movement through the steps
if warranted by exceptional performance.

8

Section V.2

Normal Work Hours

Any time worked in excess of 84 hours in a two-week pay period shall constitute overtime and
shall be paid at the rate of one and one-half (1 ½) times the employees' current rate of pay. The
eighty-four (84) hour pay periods and elimination of the Kelly Day practice will remain in effect
during the term of this Agreement.
The Village will provide the Union at least sixty (60) days of prior notice before making any
changes to the normal 12-hour workday and/or normal pay period of 84 hours so that parties can
meet to discuss such changes, if requested during that 60-day period.

Section V.3

Days Off

Consideration for days off (i.e. comp time, personal days, and floating holidays) will first go to
the requests of individual Employees in conjunction with approved vacation, then by seniority,
provided specific requests are made no later than ten (10) days prior to the start of the affected
shift. Requests for specific days off submitted later than ten (10) days prior to the start of the
shift will not enjoy the priority of seniority. All requests for days off are subject to the manpower
requirements of the Department.

Section V.4

Call Back

If an employee is called into work for non-scheduled activities (such as investigations, patrol
duties, evidence work, or the like), the employee shall be compensated for the actual hours
worked, but not less than three hours. However, the three-hour minimum shall not apply if the
commencement of the call back period is within three hours of the employee's regularly
scheduled shift.

Section V.5

Overtime

All covered employees are eligible for overtime compensation pursuant to the Fair Labor
Standards Act ("FLSA") as amended by this Agreement. By agreement of the Parties, the FLSA
work cycle provisions set forth in the FLSA regulations at Title 29, Section 553.230b (also
known as "Section 7(k)") will apply. The only hours which will not be counted as hours worked
are hours the employee has been excused for sick time.
When any officer is held over for more than fifteen (15) minutes beyond his regularly scheduled
work hours in a pay cycle, he shall be paid at a rate of one and one-half (1 and 1/2) times his
regularly hourly rate of pay for all hours in excess of a regular number of work hours in a pay
cycle, with such pay received in fifteen (15) minute segments. Eight minutes shall be rounded up
to fifteen minutes while seven minutes shall be rounded down. Overtime compensation shall be
paid on the same date as the regular wages for the pay period. All compensated time shall be
considered time worked under this provision.
(a)

Voluntary Overtime
In the event a hire back is needed to cover a shift due to a shortage in staffing, the
open shift shall be offered to an officer with the same rank on the shift that is
vacant prior to officers of another rank (i.e., open sergeant shift is first offered to

9

sergeants before patrol and open patrol shift is first offered to other patrol officers
before offering the patrol shift to a sergeant).
(b)

Mandatory Overtime
In order to meet minimum shift requirements, when all efforts to fill a shift
voluntarily have been exhausted, the following procedure will be used to fill the
required hours:
(i)

Scheduling vacancies will be filled with at notice of at least two
schedule pages out from the current schedule page. For the
purposes of this Section 5.S(b) only, a "schedule page" is referring
to the physical schedule page which encompasses 28 days/two pay
periods.

(ii)

The order in which officers will be forced back will begin with the
officer having the least amount of banked overtime hours for the
budget year and continue in ascending order. This method is to
give the officer forced back as much notice as possible, alleviate
the. potential for officer burnout, and in the spirit of fairness to
even the workload of overtime required by any given shifts needs.

(iii)

An effort will be made to fill daytime hours (0600-1800) with a
day shift officer, and nighttime (1800-0600) hours with a night
shift officer.

(iv)

Investigations and School Resource Officer will be last resort, if all
other attempts to fill the shift have been exhausted.

(v)

An officer will not be forced back if they are already scheduled off
using benefit time during the shift needing coverage, or if they are
off using benefit time on the workday prior to, or after the shift
needing coverage.

(vi)

The force back list may also be used for late notice shift shortages
caused by sickness or injury. If the current shift requires a
specialty position officer acting in a patrol function to be pulled
from the patrol shift (Detective/SWAT/SRO), causing the shift to
fall below minimums, this force back procedure will be used to fill
the shift vacancy created.

(vii)

This procedure may also be utilized to maintain necessary. staffing
levels as deemed appropriate by management or special events in
the Village.

(viii)

Section V.6

Nothing in this Section shall supersede or minimize/limit the rights
of the Village pursuant to Sections 2.1 Management Rights, or 7.5
Village Emergency as set forth earlier in this Agreement.

Court Time

Any employee who is required to appear in court on behalf of the Village on off-duty hours shall
be compensated for a minimum of three (3) hours pay at the officer's applicable straight or
overtime rate of pay, depending upon the circumstances, unless the time extends to his/her
regular work shift, in which case the employee will be compensated only for the actual time
worked outside his/her regular shift. The minimum compensation for court appearances shall be
three (3) hours. The Village may provide a department vehicle if one is available. If no vehicle is
available, the Village will pay mileage at the applicable IRS rate, only to the extent that the
personal vehicle mileage exceeds that of the round-trip mileage from the affected officer's home
to the police department.

Section V.7

Work Breaks

All employees covered by this agreement will be entitled to a thirty (30) minute paid meal period
and two fifteen (15) minute paid breaks each shift. Breaks may be taken at the discretion of the
supervisor, for reasonable intervals, at reasonable times, and with such other units as the
supervisor may deem reasonable. The supervisor shall ensure that adequate coverage exists at all
times during break periods. The break period is considered on-duty time, and personnel are
considered to be available for any assignment during any break period, including all routine calls
within their beat or other beats when applicable.

Section V.8

Shift Selection/Assignment to Permanent Shift

An Employee shall be permitted to exchange shifts with another Employee subject to the
approval of the Chief of Police or his designee. Employees shall be permitted to exchange shifts
provided:
1.

The change does not result in additional overtime compensation being paid to any of the
Employees involved in the shift change.

2.

The Employee changing shifts will forfeit seniority for vacation picks only on the new
shift.

3.

For employees with five (5) years of seniority or more as of October 1 of the year in
which assignments are being made for patrol positions for the following year on each of
the shifts such assignments shall be done by seniority. Prior to the making of the
remaining patrol shift assignments for the following year, employees with less than five
(5) years of seniority as of October 1 may submit a written request to the Chief or
designee setting forth their preference for a given shift, together with the reasons for
making the request. While any such requests shall be considered (including the relative
seniority of the officers making such requests) by the Chief or designee, the final right to
make the remaining shift assignments shall be retained by the Chief in order to ensure
that the overall needs of the Department are met. Such assignments shall not be made for
arbitrary capricious or discriminatory reasons.

11

4.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Chief or designee shall have the right to transfer
officers after they have selected or have been permanently assigned to a shift under this
Section 5.8 in order to meet the operational needs of the Department (i.e., loss of an
employee filling a specialty position, retirement, resignation, injury or other long-term
leave, etc.) It is understood that where an officer is transferred to another shift due to
departmental needs, the department shall make necessary efforts to effect reassignment
of such officer back to his/her former shift as soon as operationally practicable.

Section V.9

Meetings

Any Employee required to be at a departmental meeting during off hours shall be compensated
for actual time attending said meeting with a minimum of two hours (2) of compensation, unless
the time extends to his/her regular work shift, in which case the employee will be compensated
only for the actual time worked outside his/her regular shift.
Section V.10 Officer In Charge Compensation In the event that no sergeant or sworn supervisor is on duty, a police officer shall be designated
by the Chief of Police or his designee to serve as the Officer in Charge (OIC).
The designated OIC shall earn an additional two dollars ($2.00) per hour while serving the OIC.
No member of the bargaining unit who is in an acting capacity shall have any authority to
respond to any grievances being processed in accordance with this Agreement, nor to take any
action or make any statement, agreement, settlement or representation which shall place any duty
or obligation on the Village or Police Department while acting under this Section. The Chief of
Police or his designee shall determine when an officer will be assigned as an OIC in accordance
with this Section.
Section V.11 Compensatory Time
In lieu of overtime pay, an employee may earn compensatory time at a rate equal to one and onehalf (1 ½) hours for each overtime hour worked. No more than eighty (80) hours of
compensatory time may be carried over from year to year.
Compensatory time shall be granted at such times and in such time blocks as are mutually agreed
upon by the employee and his/her supervisor, when requests are received with sufficient notice
and provided it is not unduly disruptive to the business operations. Requests for compensatory
time must be made at least one (1) day in advance, unless approved by the Employee's
supervisor. Officers at their discretion request a cash payment of all or part of their accumulated
compensatory time through the payroll system not more than once per fiscal year.
The Chief or the Chiefs designee will not unreasonably withhold permission for the utilization
of compensatory time off.
Upon termination of employment, an employee shall be paid all accumulated compensatory time
at the Employee's then current rate of pay. Additionally, in the first pay period in May, the
Village will cash out compensatory time banks to be within the cap levels referenced above at the
rates in effect as of April 30 that year.

12

Section V.12 Lateral Hires

All lateral hires (officers hired off the lateral hire list) will start with no seniority. Lateral hires
will complete a 12-month probation period. At the Employer's discretion, lateral hires may
begin at salary up to (and including) step 6.
ARTICLE VI
UNION SECURITY AND DUES CHECK-OFF
Section VI.1 Dues Deductions

Upon receipt of proper written authorization from an employee, the Employer shall deduct each
month's Chapter dues in the amount certified by the Treasurer of the Chapter from the pay of all
employees covered by this Agreement who, in writing, authorize such deductions. Such money
shall be submitted to the Metropolitan Alliance of Police within fifteen (15) days after the
deductions have been made.
Section VI.2 Indemnity

The Metropolitan Alliance of Police shall indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its elected
representatives, administrators, agents and officers from and against any and all claims,
demands, actions, complaints, suits or other forms of liability (monetary or otherwise) that arise
out of or by reason of any action taken or not taken by the Village for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this Article, or in reliance on any written checkoff authorization furnished
under any of such provisions, provided that the Village does not initiate or prosecute such action.
Section VI.3 Revocation of Dues

A Chapter member desiring to revoke the dues checkoff may do so by written notice to the
Employer at any time upon thirty (30) days' notice.
Section VI.4 Bulletin Boards

The Village shall provide the Chapter with designated space on a bulletin board, for posting of
Chapter announcements, seniority roster, and other items of legitimate Chapter business that are
non-inflammatory and non-political in nature. The Chief of Police or his designee may remove
posted items which he reasonably believes to be inflammatory or political in nature.
Section VI.5 Labor-Management Meetings

The Chapter and the Employer agree that, in the interest of efficient management and
harmonious employee relations, meetings will be held between no more than two (2) Chapter
representatives and responsible representatives of the Employer. The Village in its sole discretion
shall determine its representatives at such meetings. Such meetings will be held at least twice
annually, and additional meetings will be held if mutually agreed between the Chapter and the
Employer. Such meetings may be requested by either party at least seven (7) days in advance by
delivering a written request to the other for a "labor-management meeting" and providing the
agenda for such meeting. Such meetings, times and locations shall be limited to:
(a)

discussion on the implementation and general administration of the Agreement;

13

(b)

sharing of general information of interest to the parties; and

(c)

safety issues.

It is expressly understood and agreed that such meetings shall be exclusive of the grievance
procedure. Specific grievances being processed under the grievance procedure shall not be
considered at "labor-management meetings," nor shall negotiations for the purpose of altering
any or all of the terms of this Agreement be carried out at such meetings.
Attendance at labor-management meetings shall be voluntary on the employee's part. Attendance
shall not interfere with required duty time and attendance, if during duty time, is permitted only
upon prior approval of the Chief or designee.

ARTICLE VII
VACATION
Section VII.I Eligibility and Allowances

All employees shall be eligible for paid vacation time after the completion of six months of
continuous full-time employment.
Section VII.2 Scheduling

Beginning January 8, 2024 and continuing for one year only unless extended by mutual
agreement (the "Pilot Period"), employees shall be awarded vacation time by the Village in
accordance with Police Department manpower requirements, and on the basis of their seniority.
Sign-up for annual vacations will begin on October 15th of each year. Prior to sign-ups, an
annual work schedule shall be posted by October 15 of each year. Dates will be selected in
increments of no more than two (2) weeks at a time (except for vacations including Christmas or
New Year's, which will be selected one (1) week at a time). Two duty days may be added before
the beginning of and/or after the end of the two-week period for reasons deemed acceptable and
approved by the Chief or designee.
As used in this Section 7.2, a "week" means the period from Monday to Sunday. A "duty day"
means a 12-hour period for those who are regularly scheduled to work 12-hour shifts or 8 hours
per day for those who are regularly scheduled to work 8-hour shifts.
Vacation selections will be assigned according to seniority by rank, with the most senior
employee within rank being assigned the first date. Employees may not sign-up prior to their
assigned date unless all employees ahead of them have either signed up or waived their selection.
Employees who miss their sign-up date may sign-up at their earliest opportunity, however, no
bumping will be allowed. Employees not selecting their vacation during the sign-up period may
still request vacation at any time, however, no bumping will be allowed. No vacation days may
be taken without prior notice to and approval of the Chief of Police.
Earned vacation days may be taken at any time during the calendar year in which they are earned
following the completion of an employee's first 6 months of employment. Subject to the
approval of the Chief or his designee, a maximum of fifty (50) hours may be carried over to the
following calendar year but the employee must use the vacation days by May 1st, or the vacation
14

days carried over shall be lost. If an employee does not work the entire time to earn the vacation
days after he/she has taken them, the employee shall repay the Village for those vacation days
not earned. Subject to Chief's approval, Employees may take two (2) vacations, earned in
different years, back-to-back. Employees eligible for more than two weeks of vacation may, at
their option and with the approval the Chief or his designee, take one (1) week in daily
increments. All other weeks due must be taken in weekly increments, except with prior approval
of the Chief or designee when it is consistent with operational needs and does not result in
overtime expense.
Further, employees will be allowed to use their regularly scheduled days off before and after
scheduled/approved vacation weeks if approved in advance by the Chief or designee and
provided it is consistent with operational needs.
Vacations selected during the initial bid period shall have priority over all other leave time and
training. Vacations taken in week-long intervals will be allowed to include the officer's regular
days off, occurring immediately before and after such vacation.
The following days/events will be staffed in accordance with staffing minimums as determined
by management (based on the normal additional normal staffing levels used on Saturdays).
Those officers regularly scheduled for the following events will have the responsibility of finding
his/her replacement for said shift if the scheduled officer wishes to use any benefit time by
trading shifts within said pay period as to not unnecessarily incur more overtime.
Big Wheel Race
St Patrick's Fireworks (Night Shift only)
Intelligentsia Bike Race
Halloween (Night Shift Only)
New Year's Eve (Night Shift Only)
Up to two (2) additional days as deemed appropriate by the Chief for unusual or extraordinary
activities in the Village. Heritage Fest will be scheduled per past practice with schedule changes
and does not count toward the two exceptions referenced in the prior sentence.
Should the Chief of Police or his designee require additional staffing for said events, an overtime
request will be put out in advance for those who wish to volunteer to work said event. In the
event no officer picks up the openings requested, the Chief of Police or his designee will utilize
the force back language outline in Section 5.5 Section (b).
The Chief may grant an exception to these events when paid time off benefits (including
compensatory time) may be used by a covered officer provided a replacement officer is available
and agrees to work the requested day off.
The Parties agree to revisit this issue in or around September 2024 to determine if it should
continue or revert to prior CBA language and practices beyond the Pilot Period.

15

Section VII.3 Accrual Schedule

Vacation leave shall be earned during the employment year at the following rates:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

1st partial year of employment: Accrual rate of 6.67 hours for each full month
On January 1st of your 1st year of service through 5th years of service: 80 hours
On January 1st of your 6th year of service through 13th year of service: 120 hours
On January 1st of your 14th year of service: 160 hours
On January 1st of your 20th year of service 168 hours
On January 1st of your 23rd year of service: 176 hours
On January 1st of your 24th year of service: 184 hours
On January 1st of your 25th year of service or more: 200 hours

In the event of separation from employment with the Village, vacation hours will be paid out on
a pro-rata earned basis.
Section VII.4 Accumulation

Vacation credit shall not be accumulated during any layoff period, nor shall vacation credit be
accumulated during an unpaid leave of absence.
Section VII.5 Village Emergency

In case of an emergency, the Village Manager or Police Chief may cancel and reschedule any or
all approved vacation leaves in advance of their being taken, and/or recall any employee from
vacation in progress.
ARTICLE VIII
HOLIDAY AND PERSONAL TIME
Section VIII.I

Holidays

Effective January 8, 2024, the paid holiday system in effect is replaced with Section 8.2.
Section VIII.2

Holiday Pay

Effective January 8, 2024 the paid time off provisions related to Holidays referenced in Article
VIII of the predecessor collective bargaining agreement are no longer applicable. Instead, the
affected employees receive an additional payment equal to 4% of their annualized base salary to
compensate those employees when they work on holidays. This "Holiday Payment" will be paid
by the Employer in a separate payroll check during the last payroll period of November and
computed based on the base salary in effect at that time. Employees who have provided timely
written notice to the Finance Department prior to November 1 may have their annual Holiday
Payment deposited into their deferred compensation account. For partial years worked, the
Holiday Payment will be computed based on the number of completed full months actually
worked (computed based on a 1112th per month basis).
Section VIII.3

Holiday Scheduling

16

(a)

Time off requests on a holiday will be treated the same as any other calendar day
of the year, however, staffing minimums will mirror those of a Saturday.

(a)

Employees may use paid time off benefits (including compensatory time)
provided a replacement non-probationary officer approved by the Chief of Police
or designee is available and agrees to work Christmas, Thanksgiving, and 4th of
July by trading shifts within said pay period as to not unnecessarily incur more
overtime.

(b)

The remaining holidays (Easter, Labor Day, Memorial Day, and New Years Day)
will not require the officer to find a replacement and need only request the benefit
time off as any other day per section 7.2 (scheduling)..-

(c)

The burden of providing a replacement officer, for compensatory time use or a
shift trade rest with the employee requesting the time off, at the time the request is
made.
ARTICLE IX
LEAVE OF ABSENCE

Section IX.1 Absence from Work
All absences from work must be reported to the Supervisor in charge at least two (2) hours prior
to assigned working shift. A late report of illness may be accepted and approved by the Chief.

Section IX.2 Sick Leave
Sick leave with pay is provided as a benefit in recognition that people do contract various
illnesses from time-to-time, that their financial resources may be diminished in such instances, if
pay is discontinued, and that it may not be in their best interest or health or the health of fellow
employees for them to work while sick. Any covered officer on sick leave shall take whatever
steps are medically necessary to remedy his or her condition and shall not engage in social or
commercial pursuits, except that previously approved non-law enforcement employment is
allowed, while on sick leave due to his/her own medical condition.
The Chief of Police may require any covered employee to submit written physician v~rification
of treatment and that the employee is fit to return to work for any absence from work for illness
of three (3) consecutive workdays or more. The Chief of Police may also require such
verification at any time he reasonably believes that an abuse of sick leave is taking or has taken
place.
An employee shall be entitled to sick leave due to any of the following:
(a)

Personal illness or physical injury;

(b)

Quarantine of an employee by a physician;

(c)

Illness or injury of an immediate family member of the employee (an immediate
family member shall be a spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, mother-in-law and

17

father-in- law, or domestic partner (as defined in Section 9.5), when that person
resides with the employee, or it can be shown that the employee's presence is
necessary);
(d)

Any purpose within the guidelines of the Family Medical Leave Act;

(e)

Where an employee is unable to schedule a medical or dental appointment outside
normal working hours, he/she may utilize a minimum of two (2) hours sick leave
for such purpose, subject to the approval of the Chief of Police.

Section IX.3 Sick Leave Accrual and Usage

The sick leave benefit shall be accrued at a rate of ninety-six (96) hours per year, with a
maximum earned amount of 1100 hours. All employees covered by this agreement shall retain all
current accrued but unused sick leave. Sick pay shall begin to accrue after six completed
calendar months of employment. Sick time may be used in increments of at least two (2) hours.
Employees may transfer credit of earned sick days to another employee with the approval of a
committee comprised of two persons designated by the Union (from members of the bargaining
unit) and one person designated by the Village. The committee may grant a transfer request only
if the following criteria have been met:
(a)

the affected employee has exhausted all of his own sick leave;

(b)

the affected employee has a serious illness as determined by the committee;

(c)

the total of donated hours to any affected employee shall not exceed 320 hours in
any calendar year; and,

(d)

any transferring employee has not donated more than forty (40) sick leave hours
in any calendar year, and will not, after such transfer, be left with less than 240
hours of accrued sick leave.

Section IX.4 Sick Leave Incentive

Each January, the village will buy back from covered employees all unused sick leave in excess
of 1100 hours which had been accrued and earned at the end of the prior calendar year at fifty
percent (50%) of the covered officer's straight time hourly rate of pay.
Any Police Employee who retires from employment with the West Dundee Police Department
with a minimum of 20 years in good standing shall receive compensation in an amount fifty
percent (50%) of all accrued earned unused sick leave, payable at the hourly rate in effect on the
last day of the employee's work for the Village. This sick leave compensation may be received in
cash, or, at the option of the employee, may be placed in a Retiree Health Savings Account to be
created and maintained by the Village for the purpose of paying for health insurance premiums
or qualified medical expenses after retirement.
Section IX.5 Conversion of Sick Time Incentive at Retirement

18

In lieu of the payments specified in Section 9.4, any employee covered under the terms of this
Agreement who retires from employment with the Village after having been so employed for a
minimum of 20 years in a sworn police position, upon the request of the employee and with the
approval of the Chief of Police, may use the employee's accrued sick leave benefit, at a buyback
rate of 50%, to advance the date upon which the employee must be physically present
performing police responsibilities on behalf of the Village. During the advancement period,
which may not exceed six months, the employee will not be required to perform work on behalf
of the Village except as may be necessary to provide testimony in any criminal proceeding but
will be paid at the regular hourly rate in effect at the commencement of the advancement period.
Employees electing to utilize this option will not receive any further benefit under section 9.4,
and will not receive, during the advancement period, any other benefits provided in this
Agreement, including, but not limited to, vacation benefits as set forth in Article VII, holiday and
personal day benefits as set forth in Article VIII, education benefits as set forth in Article X,
health insurance benefits as set forth in Article XV, uniform benefits as set forth in Article XVI,
and specialty pay as set forth in Article XXII.

Section IX.6 Funeral Leave
Any employee covered by this Agreement shall be entitled to paid funeral leave upon the death
of a member of the employee's family as outlined below. The Employee must notify his/her
immediate on-duty supervisor as soon as possible prior to taking any time off for funeral leave.
Employee spouse / domestic partner

3 days

Child (natural, adopted, or step)

3 days

Mother, father, sister, brother, mother-in-law, father-in-law

3 days

Sister-in-law/ Brother-in-law

2days

Aunt, Uncle, Grandparent (of employee or spouse)

1 day

Any other household member of
Employee residing in household for a minimum of
90 days prior to death not listed above

1 day

In the event of the death of a spouse, domestic partner, child or parent, the Employee may use up
to two (2) of his accrued sick days to extend the funeral leave with approval of the Chief or his
designee.
For the purpose of this section, a domestic partner is defined as a person of the same sex who has
resided in the employee's household and has financial and emotional interdependence with the
employee, consistent with that of a married couple, or civil union partnership for a period of oneyear and continues to maintain that arrangement.
The Village agrees to comply with the Illinois Family Bereavement Leave Act.

19

Section IX. 7 General Leave of Absence
Any leave of absence for any purpose other than those covered in this Article is subject to Fire
and Police Commission mles, and to the approval of the Village Manager, according to Village
Policy. Any unauthorized absence from work may be cause for disciplinary action.
Section IX.8 Military Leave
The Village of West Dundee will comply with all applicable State and Federal laws concerning
military leave.
Section IX.9 Jury Duty
Police Officers are granted regular compensation for their regular work days when serving on
jury duty. Any compensation received as a result of serving on Jury Duty shall be signed over to
the Village of West Dundee. A police officer assigned to a shift other than the midnight shift that
is called for jury duty on a scheduled work day, but is not selected for service on a jury, shall, if
more than three (3) hours are remaining on his/her tour of duty, report for duty within one (1)
hour of being released from jury duty. A police officer will be paid his/her regular compensation
for such service provided that he/she reports for duty as set forth herein. Should an officer fail to
report for duty as specified herein, he shall be paid his/her regular compensation only for those
regularly scheduled duty hours during which he was required to appear at the location specified
for jury duty.
Section IX.to Maternity/Paternity Leave
A pregnant employee may work up until the birth of the baby as long as she has her physician's
permission and as long as her condition does not interfere with her work. This permission must
a) be in writing stating the anticipated date of beginning leave; b) must indicate the employee's
ability to perform assigned duties and any medical restrictions upon the employee's activities,
and c ), be filed with Chief of Police. After the first trimester, a pregnant employee must submit
such written permission indicating that the employee is medically able to continue to work, after
each appointment with her physician.
A pregnant Employee will utilize, in the following order, available leave time while absent prior
to, during or after the birth of her child: unused personal days, accrued vacation, accrued
compensatory time and accrued sick leave. An employee will be eligible for a leave without pay,
as specified in the Family and Medical Leave Act, after the previously listed time is exhausted.
However, the maximum length of leave time, including accrued paid leave time and leave
pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act, shall not exceed twelve (12) weeks.
An employee may utilize accrued paid leave time for paternity leave before, during or after the
birth of the employee's child, for the purpose of assisting or caring for his child, children or his
spouse, (if she is incapacitated for maternity reasons), up to a maximum of four (4) weeks.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit an employee's rights under the federal Family
and Medical Leave Act. The Village also will provide reasonable accommodations for
employees who are pregnant or have a medical condition related to pregnancy or childbirth

20

provided it does not pose an undue hardship to the operations.
accommodation will be considered on a case-by-case basis.

Requests for reasonable

Section IX.11 Paid Leave for All Workers Act

The Parties agree and acknowledge that the paid time off benefits referenced in this Agreement
satisfy any amounts set forth in the Illinois Paid Leave for All Workers' Act, 820 ILCS 192.
Therefore, the Parties agree to exercise their right to waive any provisions of that Act as allowed
pursuant to Section 192/IS(n) of the Act, when applicable and if applicable during the term of
this Agreement.
ARTICLEX
EDUCATION BENEFITS
Section X.1

On-Duty Training

Police Employees attending training sessions away from the Police Department shall either be
offered transportation to and from the training location, if available, or shall be paid the
prevailing rate mileage allowance for the use of their own vehicle. An employee who attends a
police-related seminar, upon the direction of the Chief, on his own time will receive one (1) hour
pay for each hour spent in said seminar.
Section X.2

Scheduling of On-Duty Training

Employees assigned to training shall be given as much notice as practicable, through posting of
shift schedules and/or individual notices or memoranda to the affected employees.
Section X.3

Educational Reimbursement

The Village will make reimbursement for college tuition, required books or class materials
for accredited courses directly related to the employee's position with the Village, (or
necessary prerequisites for a program of study related to the employee's position with the
Village), as set forth below:
Grade of A - 90% reimbursement Grade of B - 80% reimbursement Grade of C - 75%
reimbursement
Employees who seek reimbursement for a particular course must, prior to enrolling in said
course, obtain the approval of the Chief that the course is eligible for reimbursement, and
provide any information or documentation necessary to verify that the course is eligible for
reimbursement. Tuition reimbursement pursuant to this section shall not exceed $2000 per year
or $8000 lifetime per officer.
Section X.4

Travel and Meeting Expense Allowances

The Village shall, upon the Chief's approval, reimburse Police Employees for professional
approved conferences and training classes/seminars lasting five (5) or more hours, including
meals and lodging for such training and/or seminars.

21

A Police Employee wishing to attend a conference or gathering at his expense must receive a
specific approval of the Chief of Police to be away from his or her regular duties.
Any Police Employee attending any conference, meeting, seminar or convention and being
reimbursed by the Village is to submit paid receipts for reimbursable expenses. The Village
Treasurer will not reimburse expenses which are not documented, or which are unreasonable.
Section X.5

Probationary Police Officers and Reimbursement of Training Costs

(a)

Satisfactory completion of twelve (12) months of probationary employment,
following graduation from the police academy, is required of all probationary
police officers before a regular appointment to said position is made.

(b)

Within the first twelve (12) months of employment, each probationary police
officer who has not already done so must attend and satisfactorily complete a
Basic Law Enforcement course of instruction, of which the content, duration, and
criteria for receiving a final passing grade must and shall be approved and
certified by the Illinois Local Governmental Police Officers Training Board. The
cost of the employee's participation in that course includes training, uniforms,
tuition and travel or other expenses paid by the Village on behalf of the employee
for this purpose. The Village will pay that amount on behalf of the probationary
police officer, and that payment shall be considered a "Loan Amount" to the
probationary police officer which must be repaid by the employee at the time of
resignation if the employee's employment with the Department ends before
completion of twenty-four (24) months of service, and subject to the remaining
terms of this Section 10.5.

(c)

The employee may be required to enter into a repayment agreement to reflect the
employee's receipt of the Loan Amount pursuant to this Section 10.5 and
applicable law. The Union agrees to cooperate with the Village in the event it
becomes necessary to collect any remaining portion of the Loan Amount from the
affected employee.

(d)

Each probationary police officer who has not already done so must, as soon as is
practically possible following initial appointment, successfully complete the
mandatory course of instruction of firearms use and proficiency, as well as the
mandatory physical fitness proficiency standards tests. Said courses are those
which are approved and certified by the same training board mentioned above.

(e)

In the event that the probationary police officer chooses to leave the employment
of the Village of West Dundee Police Department prior to completing a total of
twenty four (24) months of service with the Village, he or she will reimburse the
Village 100% of the Loan Amount advanced for the officer's attendance at the
Basic Law Enforcement, the firearms courses and physical fitness tests (tuition,
travel and incidental expenses, excluding any reimbursement the Village may
receive), equipment, specialized training and uniforms costs and related expenses
incurred by the Village on behalf of the officer.

22

(f)

Should a probationary police officer resign after six (6) months of service but
before completion of twenty-four (24) months of service, he/she will repay the
full Loan Amount (as defined earlier)at a prorated amount of the costs described
in paragraph B of this Section, with a credit of I/24th of the total amount for each
month of service.

(g)

In the event that the probationary police officer, has his or her probationary period
extended, or is granted a leave of absence during the period covered by this
Agreement, the period set forth in this Section shall be extended accordingly.

(h)

No repayment of the Loan Amount is due if the employment relationship ends
because of an undisputed disability of employee (which cannot be reasonably
accommodated), layoff, or failure to satisfy the probation period (through no fault
of the employee when the employee makes a good faith effort to comply). no
repayment of the Loan Amount will be required.

(i)

The full and complete repayment of the Loan Amount will be deducted from the
employee's final paycheck (even if it exceeds 15% of the amount of the final
check) and the remaining balance of the Loan Amount will be paid to the Village
by the Employee within thirty (30) days after the undersigned has left the
employment of the Village. The Village reserves the right to pursue attorney fees
and court costs incurred in the enforcement of this Section. Further, the parties
agree and acknowledge that the Village may notify any prospective employer of
the employee's repayment obligation unless this Loan repayment obligation is
paid in full and in a timely manner.

ARTICLE XI
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
It is mutually desirable and hereby agreed that all grievances shall be handled in accordance with
the following steps. For the purposes of this Agreement, a grievance is any dispute or difference
of opinion raised by an employee or the Chapter against the Employer involving the meaning,
interpretation or application of the provisions of this Agreement. The parties agree that the
discipline of written reprimands shall be subject to the jurisdiction to the grievance procedure.
The parties agree that disciplinary suspensions shall not be subject to the grievance procedure.
Any time period provided for under the steps in the grievance procedure may be extended or
contracted by mutual agreement.
STEP ONE: The employee, with or without a Chapter representative, may take up a
grievance with the employee's immediate supervisor by filing said grievance in writing
within ten (10) calendar days of its occurrence or of the date on which the affected
employee became aware of the occurrence. The supervisor shall then attempt to adjust the
matter and shall respond in writing within ten (10) calendar days after such discussion. If
the grievance is adjusted at Step One, the supervisor shall notify the Chief and Chapter
representative in writing within ten (10) days thereafter the nature of the·grievance and its
resolution.

23

STEP TWO: If not adjusted in Step One, the grievance shall be presented in writing by
the grievant to a command officer designated by the Chief of Police within ten (10)
calendar days following the receipt of the supervisor's answer in Step One. The command
officer shall attempt to adjust the grievance as soon as possible, and therefore will
schedule a meeting with the employee, his immediate supervisor or Shift Commander,
and Chapter Representative within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the grievance
from the grievant. The command officer shall render a written decision, based on the
supplied information during the meeting, and shall deliver said decision to the grievant
within ten (10) calendar days of the meeting.
STEP THREE: If not adjusted in Step Two, the grievance shall be presented in writing by
the grievant to the Chief of Police within ten (10) calendar days following the receipt of
the command officer's answer in Step Two. The Chief of Police shall attempt to adjust
the grievance as soon as possible, and therefore will schedule a meeting with the
employee, his immediate supervisor or Shift Commander, and Chapter Representative
within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the grievance from the Chapter following
Step Two. The Chief of Police shall then render a written decision, based on the supplied
information during the meeting, and shall deliver said decision to the grievant, within ten
(10) calendar days of the meeting. Written communication can replace a meeting between
the Chief of Police and the employee involved in the grievance if the parties mutually
agree. Such communication must be presented to the Chapter Representative to be
forwarded to the Chief of Police.
STEP FOUR: If the grievance is not adjusted in Step Three, the grievance shall be
submitted by the grievant in writing to the Village Manager or his designated
representative within five (5) calendar days of the receipt from the Chief of Police his
response in Step 3. A meeting shall be held at a mutually agreeable time and place and
participants shall discuss the grievance and hopefully come to an equitable solution. If a
grievance is settled as a result of such meeting, the settlement shall be reduced to writing
and signed by the parties. If no settlement is reached, the Village Manager, or his
designated representative, shall give the grievant the Employer's answer in writing within
ten (10) calendar days following their meeting.
STEP FIVE:
(a)

If the Chapter is not satisfied with the decision of the Village Manager, the
Chapter may appeal the grievance to arbitration by notifying the Village Manager
in writing within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the Village Manager's
response in Step 4. Grievances will not be submitted for arbitration unless it is
sponsored or backed by the Chapter. Within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of
such request the Chapter and the Village shall jointly submit the dispute to the
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS). If the Federal Mediation
and Conciliation Services is unavailable or unable to hear this dispute then the
parties shall jointly submit the dispute to the American Arbitration Association
and shall request a panel of five (5) arbitrators, with a business office in Illinois. If
agreement cannot be reached in the selection of an arbitration service, the choice
shall be determined by a coin toss. Each party retains the right to reject one panel

24

in its entirety and request that a new panel be submitted. Both the Village and the
Chapter shall have the right to strike two (2) names from the panel. The order of
alternate striking shall be determined by a coin toss, with the losing party striking
the first and third names. The person remaining shall be the arbitrator. The
arbitrator shall fix the time and place of the hearing which shall be as soon as
possible after his selection subject to the reasonable availability of Chapter and
Village representatives.
The Arbitrator shall be notified of his selection and shall be requested to set a
time and place for the hearing subject to the availability of Chapter and Village
representatives.
The Village and Chapter shall have the right to request the Arbitrator to require
the presence of witnesses or documents. Both parties may retain the right to
employ legal counsel.
(b)

The power of the arbitrator shall be limited to the interpretation and application of
the written terms of this Agreement. In no event may the terms and provisions of
the Agreement be deleted, modified, or amended by the arbitrator. He shall
consider and decide only the specific issue raised by the grievance as originally
submitted in writing to the Village and shall have no authority to make his
decision on any issue not so submitted to him. The arbitrator shall submit in
writing his decision within thirty (30) calendar days following close of the hearing
or submission of briefs by the parties, whichever is later, unless the parties agree
to an extension. In the event the arbitrator finds a violation of the Agreement, he
shall determine an appropriate remedy. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final
and binding on the parties. No decision or remedy of the arbitrator shall be
retroactive beyond the period specified in Step 1 of this grievance procedure.
In the case of a grievance concerning an error in scheduling where the grievance
is upheld, the Village will compensate the employee affected for money lost
because of said error in scheduling.

Section XI.2 Fees and Expenses of Arbitration
The fee and expenses of the arbitrator and the cost of the written transcript, if requested by both
parties, shall be divided equally between the Village and the Chapter provided, however, that
each party shall fully bear the expense of preparing and presenting its own case including the
costs of witnesses and other persons (not employed by the Village) it requires to attend the
arbitration. Should only one party request a transcript, that party shall pay for the cost of the
transcript.
Section XI.3 Forms
The MAP Grievance form that is included as Appendix E will be the designated for to use for the
filing of grievances.
Section XI.4 General Rules

25

(a)

Any decision not appealed by the employee, or the Chapter as provided within the
time limits specified in each step shall be considered settled on the basis of the
latest decision and shall not be subject to further appeal. Any grievance not
answered within the time limits specified in each step may be appealed to the next
step. However, time limits at each step may be extended by mutual written
agreement of the Chapter and the Village.

(b)

No matter or action shall be treated as a grievance unless a grievance is filed in
accordance with this Article.

Section XI.5 Notice of Union Representation

The Chapter shall certify to the Village the names of those employees who are designated as
representatives (stewards) for each shift and the Investigations Division. These employees shall
be the only employees authorized to function as representatives/stewards on each respective shift
and division, other than Chapter Officers who are assigned to the respective shifts or Division.

ARTICLE XII
NON-DISCRIMINATION
Section XII.1 Non-Discrimination

In accordance with applicable law both the Village and the Chapter agree not to discriminate
against any employee covered by this Agreement in a manner which would violate federal or
state laws on the basis of race, sex, creed, religion, color, marital status, age, national origin,
political affiliation and/or beliefs, mental and/or physical handicaps, or union membership.
A violation of Section 12.1 shall be subject to the grievance procedure up and through Step 3
but shall not be subject to arbitration under the grievance procedure.
Section XII.2 Chapter Activity

The Village and Chapter agree that no employee shall be discriminated against, intimidated,
restrained or coerced in the exercise of any rights granted by law or by this Agreement, or on
account of membership or non-membership in, the Chapter.

ARTICLE XIII
DISCIPLINE
Section XIII.1

Procedure of Discipline

If the Village has reason to discipline an employee, it will make every appropriate effort to do so
in a manner that will not unduly embarrass the employee before other fellow employees or
members of the public.
In order to maintain public confidence in and ensure the absolute integrity of the West Dundee
Police Department, all complaints regarding an employee's alleged improper behavior or
wrongdoing will be investigated, regardless of the source of the complaint. All initial complaints
will be taken by any member of the West Dundee Police Department, who will make a written
record of the complaint and report it to the appropriate supervisor, according to West Dundee

26

Police Department policy. Covered employees shall be notified promptly when the Chief of
Police has determined that an internal investigation has been completed. No employee will be
disciplined based solely upon a single anonymous, unverified allegation of wrongdoing.
Section XIII.2

Jurisdiction of Police and Fire Commission

Disciplinary action and/or termination are subject to the jurisdiction of the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners according to the applicable State law. Notice of disciplinary action which
does not come before the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be provided in writing to
the employee. Nothing in this article, however, shall be construed in such a manner as to make
the reprimand, suspension or discharge of a probationary employee the subject of a hearing
before the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, or part of the Grievance Procedure. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to extend the jurisdiction of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners.
Section XIII.3

Use of Reprimands and Discipline

If, from the date of an officer's receipt of a written reprimand, the officer has not received an
additional reprimand or discipline for the same or substantially similar offense during the
following twenty-four (24) months, said written reprimand shall not be utilized by the Village
against the affected officer for disciplinary purpose, however, the exception to this would be a
substantiated formal complaint resulting in a written reprimand dealing with excessive force or
harassment which could be utilized by the Village indefinitely. If, from the date of an officer's
receipt of an oral reprimand, the officer has not received an additional reprimand or discipline for
the same or substantially similar offense during the following twelve (12) months, said oral
reprimand shall not be utilized by the Village against the affected officer for disciplinary
purposes.
Section XIII.4

Personnel Files

The City agrees to abide by the lawful requirements of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, 820 ILCS
40/.01 et seq. The Employer's personnel and disciplinary history files relating to any employee
shall be open and available for inspection by the affected employee during regular business hours
with seven (7) working days' notice.
ARTICLE XIV
INVESTIGATIONS CONCERNING OFFICERS
Section XIV.1 Right to Investigate

The Village agrees to abide by the lawful requirements of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, 50
ILCS 725/1 et seq.
Section XIv.2 Right to Representation

All employees covered by this Agreement who are requested to submit to an interview in which
allegations of misconduct might result in discipline in which the employee being interviewed is
alleged to have committed some act of misconduct which might be subject to discipline, shall be
entitled to representation. Said employee shall be entitled to be represented by a Union
representative employed by the West Dundee Police Department. The parties recognize that a

27

representative present during such an interview does not have the right to present evidence or
argument on behalf of the affected employee, and that neither the affected employee nor the
representative may interrupt or interfere with the interview except to the extent allowed by state
law. Interviews shall be scheduled at times and places mutually agreeable between the parties,
and neither party shall conduct themselves so as to unduly delay the completion of any requested
interview.
Employees required to submit to an interrogation shall be entitled to all rights accorded under the
Uniform Police Officers Disciplinary Act, 50 ILCS 725/1 et seq.
Section XIY.3 Global Positioning Units/Body Worn Cameras/Surveillance of Employees

Global Positioning Satellite Units may be used by the Village for legitimate law enforcement and
public safety purposes, including evidence in any disciplinary investigation or disciplinary
hearing against any member, provided that stored GPS data may not be used as the sole source to
initiate any investigation, but may be used as a supplemental investigative tool following the
initiation of an investigation. If the Employer is in possession or control of relevant surveillance
(video, photographic, audio, GPS, or other recorded surveillance) of an employee, prior to the
employee submitting to Interrogation, as defined in Section 2(c) of the Uniform Peace Officers'
Disciplinary Act (50 ILCS 725/2(c)), regarding the subject matter observed in the surveillance,
the Employer will give the employee notice of the existence of said surveillance material(s). The
Employer's notice will be included along with other information required in the written notice
required by the Uniform Peace Officers' Disciplinary Act.
The Employer will allow the employee and Union a reasonable opportunity to observe the
employee's own surveillance video (with a member of management present) prior to the
employee's Interrogation during a Formal Investigation conducted pursuant to UPODA, subject
to any applicable restrictions, requirements and provisions as set forth in the Illinois Body Worn
Camera Act. Provided, however, the Employer reserves the right to decline an employee's
request to review his own surveillance video prior to their Interrogation when there are unique
circumstances involved in the alleged misconduct that could influence the outcome of the
investigation if viewed in advance by the officer. Any determination about whether the Employer
has a right to deny access to the employee's own video (if any) will be made on a case-by-case
basis with consideration of all of the circumstances involved. If there is a dispute about any
admission or confession obtained from an Interrogation where such notice and opportunity to
view the employee's own BWC video in advance may be challenged by the Union in an
arbitration hearing (and within the discretion of the trier of fact).
The Union and the Village agree to the West Dundee Police Department Policy governing the
Use of Body Worn Cameras. The Village agrees not to modify the policy without negotiating
with the Chapter first over the contents of the policy to the extent that the change involves a
mandatory subject of bargaining as construed by law.
ARTICLE XV
HEALTH INSURANCE, DENTAL, AND LIFE INSURANCE
Section XV.1 Health Insurance

28

The Village shall continue to make health and dental insurance available to all employees
covered by this agreement same or relatively similar to the coverage which is currently in effect.
The Village's right to change insurers, plans and employee contributions is subject to the
restrictions set forth below. Employees covered by this agreement shall contribute to the
premium cost of health and dental insurance at the same rate of all other employees of the
Village per the following guidelines:
Following the first payroll period after the ratification of this agreement:
Coverage Type
Per Payroll Deduction Amount of the Premium
PPO, HMO, RSA-Single Coverage
10%
PPO, HMO, RSA- Employee and Child(ren)
20%
PPO, HMO, RSA- Employee and Spouse
20%
PPO, HMO, RSA- Full Family
20%
Total Cost of Insurance
HMO
PPO
H.S.A.
Sim!le(10%)
Employee&
Child(ren)
(20%)
Employee&
Spouse (20%)
Full Family
(20%)

$8,209.44
$15,576.0
0
$15,877.0
8
$
23,243.76

Employee Contributions per
Pay Period
HMO
PPO
H.S.A.

Annual Employee Contributions
HMO
PPO
H.S.A.

$11,952.84

$11,908.20

$31.57

$ 45.97

$ 45.80

$ 820.82

$1,195.22

$1,190.80

$22,678.56

$22 247.92

$ 119.82

$174.45

$171.14

$ 3.115.32

$ 4 535.70

$4,449.64

$23,116.68

$22,629.64

$ 122.13

$177.82

$174.07

$3,175.38

$4,623.32

$4.525.82

$33,842.16

$31,969.24

$178.80

260.32

$245.92

$4 648.80

$ 6 768.32

$6,393.92

The Village will continue to make a contribution into employees' RSA Accounts based on the
cost differential between the PPO Plan and the RSA Plan. In no instances will contributions
from the Village exceed $1,500 for Single Coverage and $2,500 for all other Coverage types. If
the total costs of the RSA Coverages (including the base Village contribution amounts) exceed
the total costs of the PPO Plan, the Village's contribution will be adjusted downward to equalize
the net costs of the PPO and RSA Plans.
RSA contributions will be based on the annual July 1 renewal date and the Village's
contributions will be made into the employees' accounts on July 1 and December 1 of each year.
Payments will be made in 50% equal installments. New employees hired mid-year and joining
the RSA Plan will be required to wait until the next installment date to receive their
contributions. Employees terminating mid-year will not be required to repay the Village for any
contributions already received.
For the program years and the three subsequent program years, the Village will contribute an
increase based on the prior year's program of 5%. If the Village is unable to obtain similar
coverages for 5% or less, the Village is committed to working with representatives of this unit as
well as representatives from other Departments to discuss possible changes in coverages,
insurers, or programs. The Village will present these options for a vote by all Village employees
to determine employee preferences. The votes of employees covered by this agreement will be
combined with those of other Village employees, and the resulting outcome will be the

29

determining factor for any changes made to the health insurance plan and amounts of employee
contributions.
Section XV.2 Life Insurance

The Village shall supply each Employee with term life insurance with a face amount equal to
$50,000.00.
Section XV.3 Continuation of Benefit

When an employee is killed in the line of duty, the Village will provide health coverage benefits
as set forth in 820 ILCS 320/10.
Section XV.4 Waiver of Health and/or Dental Insurance

A police officer eligible for health and dental coverage through the Village insurance may waive
such coverage in accordance with this Section. Police officers who waive health insurance, or
health and dental insurance coverage through the Village in accordance with this Section will
receive a "waiver payment" as provided in this Section of $1,000. Prior to making a waiver of
health insurance, the police officer must show proof of health insurance coverage from another
source. Dental insurance may be waived without proof of other dental insurance coverage. The
''waiver payment" will be made by separate check after the close of the insurance year during
which such coverage has been waived.
ARTICLE XVI
UNIFORM BENEFITS
Section XVI.lBenefits

Employees starting employment with the Police Department shall be equipped with required
uniforms and equipment by the Village in accordance with the list described in APPENDIX C
which is attached hereto and part of hereof. Equipment and uniforms issued to employees will
be returned to the Village upon their separation of service with the Village. Upon ratification of
this agreement, the Village agrees to authorize Ray O'Herron as a vendor for equipment for the
department.
All covered employees shall be entitled to uniform and equipment replacement pursuant to the
existing "quartermaster" system. Covered employees are entitled to up to $700.00 in
expenditures per fiscal year for uniforms and equipment items under the quartermaster system.
Officers assigned to plainclothes duty shall be entitled to reimbursement up to $700.00 per year
for the purchase of clothing or equipment appropriate to the affected officer's duty assignment.
Officers will also .be authorized to utilize the equipment and uniform allowance for range fees
(up to $50 per fiscal year) and dry cleaning of uniforms (up to $100 per fiscal year), subject to
submittal of receipts during the last 2 weeks of January and July each year. Reimbursements at
this time will be limited to receipts dated within the previous 6 months.
Officers assigned to a specialty position such as KCART, SWAT, and Major Crimes Task Force,
may request reimbursement above and beyond the $700 by submitting a written request to the
Chief of Police (or his designee ). Approval will be based on the uniform needs of the specialty
position as weHas sufficient funding available in the operational budget.
30

Section XVI.2Damage to Uniforms or Property

Any issued uniform or issued equipment damaged in the line of duty or during training, where
the damage is not a result of the negligence of the Police Employee involved, shall be repaired or
replaced by the Village at its expense. Damage or destruction of eyeglasses or contact lenses,
occurring on duty, shall be replaced or repaired by the Village at its expense, up to a maximum of
$250. Damage or destruction to watches, occurring on duty, shall be repaired or replaced by the
Village at its expense up to a maximum of $50.00. Affected employees must provide receipts for
repair or replacement of items pursuant to this Section. Payment pursuant to this Section shall
not include reimbursement for eye examinations required prior to the replacement of eyeglasses
or contact lenses.
Section XVI.3Vests

The Village agrees to provide each covered employee a protective vest, at the Village's expense.
The Village agrees to replace said vest after five (5) years of continuous use (or pursuant to the
manufacturer's recommendation), at no cost to the Employee. The Chief of Police reserves the
right to approve the vendors for replacement vests. The Chief of Police reserves the right to
promulgate rules and regulations relating to the use and wearing of vests pursuant to this Section.
ARTICLE XVII
OFF DUTY EMPLOYMENT
Section XVII.1

Employment Outside Department

The Chief of Police may restrict off duty employment in the best interest of department
operations. Patrol Employees may be allowed to engage in off duty employment, subject to the
prior written approval of the Chief of Police or his designee, which shall not be unreasonably
denied.
Section XVII.2

Extra Duty Details

When the Department posts an extra duty detail, it will be filled by Employees on a first come
first serve basis. Any requests of the Police Department for extra duty details will be forwarded
to the Chapter Representative and the Chief of Police. Any Employee who accepts an extra duty
assignment and later rejects or declines it is responsible for finding a replacement. Failure to do
so will result in an Employee being ineligible for extra duty assignments for six (6) months. Any
employee who works an extra duty detail shall be paid one and one-half (1 ½) times the
employee's current hourly rate of pay for all hours worked on the detail.
ARTICLE XVIII
SENIORITY
Section XVIII.1

Seniority

Unless stated otherwise in this Agreement, seniority for the purpose of this Agreement shall be
defined as an employee's length of continuous full-time service with the Village since the
employee's last date of hire. Within each rank, length of continuous service in that rank since
appointment to the rank shall determine relative seniority between members of that rank, rather
than the employee's total service with the Village.

31

Section XVIII.2

Determination of Seniority

Seniority shall be determined by Police Employees length of service within as described in
Section 18.1. Time spent in the armed forces or on military leave of absence, time absent from
work on family medical leave, sick leave, and time absent from work due to work-related duty
disability, not on disability pension, shall be included. Time absent from duty when on
suspension, when absent without authorization or for any other purpose shall not be included.
Section XVIII.3

Maintenance of Seniority List

A current and up-to-date seniority list showing the names and length of service of each Police
Employee shall be maintained for inspection by members and shall be updated on an annual
basis. This list is contained in Appendix B which is attached hereto and made part hereof.
Section XVIII.4

Forfeiture of Seniority

An employee shall forfeit his seniority rights upon separation from service due to dismissal,
layoff or retirement. Accumulated seniority rights shall be reinstated provided that any employee
who has a break in service of more than one year must successfully complete a retraining
program prescribed and approved by the Chief of Police at the Village's expense, and only under
the following conditions:
(a)

An employee retires due to disability and is later certified by the Police Pension
Board to be capable of resuming his duties and is returned to work by the Chief of
Police; or

(b)

An employee is dismissed and later reinstated by a court of competent
jurisdiction; or

(c)

An employee is separated due to a layoff or reduction in force and is later
reinstated under conditions provided in the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
ARTICLE XIX
SAVINGS CLAUSE

Section XIX.1 Savings Clause

In the event any Article, Section or portion of this Agreement should be held invalid and
unenforceable by any board, agency or court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall apply
only to the specific Article, Section or portion thereof specifically specified in the board, court or
agency decision; and upon issuance of such a decision, the Village and the Chapter agree to
notify one another and to immediately begin negotiations on a substitute for the invalidated
Article, Section or portion thereof.
ARTICLE XX
ENTIRE AGREEMENT
Section XX.1 Entire Agreement

32

This Agreement constitutes the complete and entire Agreement between the parties and
concludes collective bargaining between the parties for its term. This Agreement supersedes and
cancels all prior practices and agreements, whether written or oral, which conflict with the
express terms of this Agreement. If a past practice is not addressed in this Agreement, it may be
changed by the Employer as provided in the management rights clause, Article II. The parties
acknowledge that during the negotiations which resulted in this Agreement, each had the
unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with respect to any subject or
matter not removed by law or ordinance from the area of collective bargaining, and that the
understanding and agreements arrived at by the parties after the exercise of that right and
opportunity are set forth in this Agreement.
Section XX.2 Ratification and Amendment

This Agreement shall become effective when ratified by the Village Board and the Chapter and
signed by authorized representatives thereof and may be amended or modified during its term
only with mutual written consent of both parties.
No benefits terms or other conditions of employment shall be considered to be retroactive unless
specifically provided in this collective bargaining agreement.
ARTICLE XX]
LIGHT DUTY
Section XXI.1 Work Schedule for Light Duty

Any Employee who is injured or is otherwise unable to perform his full-time duty will be
allowed, with a written physician's approval, the opportunity to work existing and available light
duty, subject to the Chiefs approval and in accordance with the needs of the Department, and
according to the applica,ble departmental policy . Light duty shall consist of those tasks assigned
by the Chief of Police. When more than one employee seeks a light-duty assignment, preference
for such assignment may be given to an employee who was injured in the line of duty over
another whose inability to perform regular duties did not arise from the performance of his
duties. Nothing in this section shall be construed to create an obligation on the Village to create
or designate work which might be considered to be "light duty." The Village and the Chapter
agree that there shall be no pyramiding of benefits of light duty assignments with workmen's
compensation or other disability benefits.
ARTICLE XXII
SPECIALIST POSITIONS COMPENSATION
Section XXII.1

Specialty Pay

Specialist positions are not to be construed as rank, but rather are job assignments which involve
additional duties and responsibilities over and above those for police employees generally and
for which an employee receives compensation in addition to the salary attached to his rank. The
compensation for specialist positions shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
(SWAT/Mobile Field Force):

$1,500.00 per year, to be paid in equal installments on May
0 I and November OI of each year.

33

Field Training Officer:

One hour of pay at straight time for each occurrence
(defined as five (5) hours or more per any one shift),
effective upon execution of this Agreement.

Detective

$1000.00 per year, to be paid in two equal installments on
May 1 and November 1 of each year. This will be
increased to $2,000 per year beginning on May 1, 2024.

•

Payments will be computed on a pro-rate basis for a
partial year (based on the previous six months)
served in this capacity.

ARTICLE XXIII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section XXIII.1

Immunization and Inoculations

The Employer agrees to pay all expenses for inoculation or immunization shots for the employee
and for members of an employee's family when such becomes necessary as a result of said
employee's exposure to contagious diseases where said employee has been exposed to said
disease in the line of duty.
Section XXID.2

Killed in Line of Duty Benefit

The Employer agrees to reimburse up to $15,000.00 to the immediate family of any police
employee who is killed in the line of duty. This reimbursement is an expression of financial
support to the family to offset funeral and burial expenses of the employee.
Section XXID.3

Medical Evaluations

Prior to participation in the annual employee fitness test, employees will be encouraged to
undergo annual medical screening and evaluation to ensure the employee's medical capacity to
undergo the physical fitness tests without undue risk. The medical screening and evaluation will
be conducted by a physician of the employee's own choosing and will be paid for by the
employee's health insurance as provided for in the Village's hospitalization plan. Since the test is
not mandatory, payment of any cost not covered by the insurance plan will be the responsibility
of the Employee.
Section XXID.4

Fitness Examinations

If there is any question concerning an employee's fitness for duty, or fitness to return to duty
after an absence, the Village may require that the employee have an examination by a qualified
and licensed physician or other appropriate medical professional selected and paid by the
Village. Such an examination shall be required for any employee who has been performing other
than his regular duties or has been on administrative leave following a "critical incident," (e.g.,
officer-involved shooting).

34

A dispute related to disciplinary action arising out of this Section 23 .4 may be the basis a
grievance pursuant to the Grievance Procedure referenced in this Agreement at Article XI.
Section XXIII.5

Employee Fitness

Participation in fitness tests will be voluntary. An employee desiring to take the fitness test must
sign a waiver of claims against the Village arising from participation in the test. Those
employees who take the POWER (Peace Officers Evaluation Report) test and pass shall receive
$300.00. Those employees who pass and meet standards at one age category younger (decade)
shall receive $400. Those employees who pass and meet standards two age categories younger
(only applicable to 40 and over age categories) shall receive $500. There will be no pyramiding
of payments in a calendar year and the maximum compensation per calendar year cannot exceed
$500.
Section XXIII.6

Residency

The parties recognize that the West Dundee Board of Fire and Police Commissioners have
currently established a residency limit of 35 miles from the Village of West Dundee. The parties
agree that, should the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners act to reduce the current
residency limit for current members of the bargaining unit, the Chapter may reopen negotiations
over the issue of residency requirements for bargaining pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois
Public Labor Relations Act.
Section XXIII. 7

So.licita.tio

While the Village acknowledges that bargaining unit employees may conduct solicitation of West
Dundee merchants, residents or citizens, the bargaining unit agrees that no bargaining unit
employee will solicit any person or entity for contributions on behalf of the West Dundee Police
Department or the Village of West Dundee.
Bargaining unit members agree that the Village name, shield or insignia, communication
systems, supplies and materials will not be used for solicitation purposes. Solicitation for the
benefit of the collective bargaining representative by bargaining unit employees may not be done
on work time or in a work uniform. The bargaining unit employees agree that they will not use
the words "Village of West Dundee Police Department" in their name or describe themselves as
representing the "Village of West Dundee." Bargaining unit members shall have the right to
explain to the public, if necessary, that they are members of an organization providing collective
bargaining, legal defense and other benefits to all patrol-rank and sergeant police officers
employed by the Village.
The foregoing shall not be construed as a prohibition of lawful solicitation efforts by bargaining
unit members directed to the general public. Each party hereto agrees that they will comply with
all applicable laws regarding solicitation.
This Section 23.7 does not apply to the solicitation efforts of the Metropolitan Alliance of Police
or any of its agents who are not bargaining unit employees.
Section XXIII.8

Drug and Alcohol Testing

35

The parties agree to employee drug and alcohol testing procedures as set forth in Appendix D,
attached hereto and incorporated as part of this Agreement.
Section XXIII.9

Part Time Officers

Until such time that the Village employs nineteen full-time police officers in bargaining unit
positions, the Village shall be allowed to employ a maximum of five part-time officers. When the
Village employs nineteen or more full-time police officers in bargaining unit positions, the
Village may employ more than five part-time officers, provided that the annual number of hours
worked by the part-time officers does not exceed 20% of the regular scheduled hours for the fulltime bargaining unit officers.
Any part-time officers hired must be trained as full-time officers in state academies
or must be trained pursuant to ILCS 705/8.2 and successfully complete the Department Field
Training Program. The use of part-time officers will be subject to department policy as
determined by the Village. The Village agrees to meet with the Union for the purposes of
discussing such policy.
ARTICLE XXIV
TERMINATION
Section XXIY.1

Termination

This Agreement shall be effective as of the day after it is executed by both parties and shall
remain in force and effect until April 30, 2026. It shall be automatically renewed from year to
year thereafter unless either party shall notify the other in writing at least sixty (60) days prior to
the anniversary date and not earlier than one hundred twenty (120) days that it desires to modify
this Agreement. In the event that such notice is given, negotiations shall begin no later than sixty
(60) days prior to the anniversary date. In the event that either party desires to terminate this
Agreement, then the benefits as described herein shall remain in full force and effect with no
diminution up to and until a new collective bargaining agreement shall be executed, and the party
wishing to terminate shall give notice at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date hereof
and not earlier than one hundred twenty (120) days.
Executed this / t/J;,,,day of/JOv!t-t&ll, 2023, after receiving official approval by the Village
President and Village board and ratification by the Chapter's membership.
Metropolitan Alliance of Police, West
Dundee Chapter # 153

Village of West Dundee, Illinois

IL~Keith George
President M.A.P.

Christopher Nelson
President Village of West Dundee

~Ir

Y ~ r , ill geClerk

ident Chapter #153

36

APPENDIX A
SALARY SCHEDULE

Charts below reflect existing pay levels as of April 30, 2023 (Converted to 2184 hours a
year), with a 3.75% increase on May 1, 2023, a 3.25% increase on May 1, 2024, and a 3%
increase on May 1, 2025. These annual salaries reflect 2184 hours worked annually.
Police
Officer

Hire/Step

Current

Step2

Step3

Step4

Step 5

Step6

Step7

Steps

68,456

72,712

76,989

81,265

85,543

89,775

94,074

98,352

2023-2024

71,023

76,193

81,362

86,532

91,701

96,871

102,04
0

N/A

2024-2025

73,331

78,669

84,006

89,344

94,681

100,019

105,35
7

N/A

2025-2026

75,531

81,029

86,527

92,024

97,522

103,020

108,51
7

N/A

Step 5

Step6

116,575

120,340

1

Sergeant

Hire/Step

1

Step2

Step3

Step4

Current

101,493

105,258

109,045

112,808

2023-2024

105,299

110,187

115,076

119,964

124,853

N/A

2024-2025

108,721

113,769

118,816

123,863

128,910

N/A

2025-2026

111,983

117,182

122,380

127,579

132,778

N/A

37

APPENDIXB
SENIORITY LIST-UPDATED 5/30/23

Date of Hire

Name
Rank
James Breon
Kyle Ficek
Lauren Rickett
Scott Rose
Michael Hicks
Katherine McCarthy
Michael Slager
Paul Shipley
Blake Fallon
Jason Highland
Mark Self
Drew Morgan
Dayne Frederick
Amanda Gaston
Selena Rodriguez
Anthony Garcia

9/15/2003
9/7/2004
9/30/2019
8/17/1998
4/30/2001
12/17/2001
1/6/2014
11/23/2015
8/21/2017
7/16/2018
9/10/2018
8/16/2021
9/6/2022
11/14/2022
4/17/2023
7/24/2023

Sergeant
Sergeant
Sergeant
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol
Patrol

38

APPENDIXC
ISSUED EQUIPMENT
The following equipment will be issued by the Village to employees starting on the West Dundee
Police Department.
2 badges
5 long sleeve uniform shirts
5 short sleeve uniform shirts
5 pairs uniform trousers
1 pair black uniform shoes or boots
2 uniform hats (winter/summer)
3 ties
1 tie bar
3 name plates
1 uniform leather or Gortexjacket
1 Lightweight jacket
1 raincoat and hat cover Gun belt
Holster
Handcuffs and handcuff case Keepers
Magazine pouch Flashlight
Flashlight holder
Key holder
Reflective traffic vest
Metal ticket book cover
Pepper Spray and Carrier Duty Bag
Writing Implements
Rifle Accessories (upon certification)
Officers shall be allowed to purchase other equipment that would be needed or useful in the
execution of the officer's duties with approval of the Chief of Police.

39

APPENDIXD
DRUG TESTING
I.

SCOPE

This order applies to all sworn employees of the West Dundee Police Department. The tests will
be administered under the Substance Abuse Management Safety & Health Administration's
(S.AM.S.H.A.), formerly N.I.D.A., custody collection standards.
II.

DEFINITIONS

Employees: All full-time, sworn employees of the West Dundee Police Department.
Health Services: Services will be provided by a vendor that was mutually agreed upon by the
Village of West Dundee and the Metropolitan Alliance of Police. The current services (which
may be subject to change, provided both parties are in agreement) are provided by:
A.

Northwestern Medicine Hospital, McHenry, IL (specimen collection)

B.
Laboratories (specimen screening) -Provided through Northwestern Medicine
Hospital's vendor
Drugs: "Drugs", for the purposes of this policy, do not include use by prescription or other uses
authorized by both state and federal law. The possession or use of the below listed controlled
substances without a prescription is unlawful:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Amphetamines, e.g., Dexadrine, speed, ice, crank, uppers
Barbiturates, e.g., downers, seconal, Nembutal, amyta
Benzodiazepines, e.g., dalmane, Librium, valium
Marijuana metabolites
Methaqualone, e.g., Quaaludes
Phencyclidine, e.g., PCP, angel dust
Ecstasy (MONA)
Cocaine metabolites
Methadone
Opiate metabolites
Propoxyphene

The initial testing levels for ng/ml levels shall be as defined by S.A.M.S.H.A.
Medical Review Officer {MRO): Designated by Health Services. Positive tests will be reviewed
by the MRO at Health Services for final determination of results. This determination will be
communicated directly from the MRO to the Chief of Police.
Before a positive test is reported to the employer, the hospital or lab will have the results
reviewed by the MRO who will verify the existence of a valid prescription or conflict that might

40

result in a false positive. If the MRO determines that there is a valid reason for a false positive,
the results will be reported to the employer as a negative and final.
Use: A positive result, which is verified by the MRO review and confirmation and indicates the
presence of the drug, its metabolites or a masking agent as indicated in the initial concentration
levels.
Department: West Dundee Police
Department Village: Village of West Dundee
I.

POLICY

The work place will be free from the manufacture, distribution, possession and use of drugs and
the abuse of controlled substances. The Department will meet the requirements of the Drug Free
Work Place Act.
II.

TESTING

Effective upon the execution of this Agreement, an employee who has been involved in a vehicle
accident may be required to submit to a drug test as set forth herein as well as a blood alcohol
test.
On a periodic basis, but no more than two (2) times per calendar quarter, an employee will be
randomly tested. Up to, but no more than eight (8), employees will be drug tested from the
random draw within the calendar year. The employee(s) for the random drug testing will be
chosen by the medical facility. The facility will contact the Chief of Police or his designee who
will contact each randomly drawn employee while he/she is on duty to advise them of the test.
Employees will submit to the test immediately upon notice from the Chief of Police or his
designee. Employees will be allowed to take the test in civilian clothing. If an employee chooses
to wear civilian clothes during the testing, he/she must have the change of clothes available at the
station. Employees will not be allowed to delay the process to obtain clothing or to change
anywhere other than the police station.
Usual and accepted practices for the collection and preservation of urine samples shall be
followed. A similar amount of the sample shall be set aside and preserved for later testing if
requested by the employee or the Chief of Police. All samples shall be preserved in accordance
with Section 40.99 of Subpart F, Drug Testing Laboratories, of Part 40, Procedures for
Transportation Workplace Drug and Alcohol Testing Program, Effective August 1,2001,which
provides for the extension of preservation of the split sample.
If a test is positive, the reserved sample shall be held according to the policy and procedures set
forth by the laboratory. The methods employed in the collection of samples for testing shall be
reasonable and provide for security of the sample and its protection from adulteration.
Reasonable attention shall be given (I) to an employee s need for privacy during the collection of
the urine sample, (2) that the testing is done in an appropriate setting and (3) to ensure that the
integrity of the test sample is not compromised. The Chapter will be provided with an annual list

41

of patrol officers and non-patrol officers tested in the random drug tests (e.g., 5-1-02: Non-Patrol
Officer, 6-1 Patrol Officer).
Nothing in this policy shall be construed to limit the authority of the Chief of Police or his
designee to require a non-random drug or alcohol test for cause.
III.

VIOLATION OF DRUG/ALCOHOL POLICY

The finding of an employee's use, sale, possession, purchase or delivery of illegal drugs at any
time, on or off the job, while employed by the Village (except as required in the line of duty),
abuse of prescribed drugs, failure to report to supervisors any known adverse side effects of
medication or prescription drugs that the employee may be taking, consumption or possession of
alcohol while on duty (except as required in the line of duty), or who is found to test positive for
an illegal drug, or whose test indicates the abuse of a prescription drug, or who is found to have
been under the influence of alcohol while on duty (defined as a blood alcohol level at or more
than .02%) shall be cause for discipline, including termination. NOTE: The foregoing standard
shall not preclude the Village from attempting to show that test results below a .02% blood
alcohol level demonstrate that the employee was or would be unable to properly perform his/her
job duties, but the Village shall bear the burden of proof in such cases.
The Village recognizes that there may be situations in which an employee tests positive for legal
drugs or alcohol, but disciplinary action would not be in the interests of the employee or the
Village and, instead, the employee may be placed on rehabilitation.
Any failure to submit to a drug test during random testing may result in Departmental discipline.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to waive any employee's (excluding probationary
employees) right to be heard on matters of discipline before the Village's Board of Police and
Fire Commissioners.
Representatives of the Union and Management shall observe the selection process at NIMC prior
to the implementation of this policy.
If an employee is assigned to the North Central Narcotics Task Force or similar task force and a
random drug testing policy exists for that task force, the employee shall be tested in accordance
with that policy. If no drug testing policy exists, he/she will be tested in accordance with this
policy. In any event, upon return to duty with the Department after having served on a task force,
a drug test shall occur within thirty (30) days. That test shall not be included in the count of
permissible quarterly and yearly random tests as set forth above.
Employees shall be informed of this policy prior to assignment and acceptance to the Task Force.

IV.

REHABILITATION

Should the Village elect not to seek the termination of an employee who has tested positive for
legal drugs or alcohol, participation in and successful completion of the Village Employee
Assistance Program (EAP} or other program approved by the employee's current health provider
is mandatory.

42

V.

A.

During participation in the EAP program, the employee will be placed on FMLA
leave and will be required to utilize his/her benefit hours in the following order:
sick time, vacation time, comp time, floating holidays. Once the employee has
exhausted all of his/her benefit hours, he/she will go on unpaid leave until cleared
from the program.

B.

Once approved to return to work by the case manager of the EAP or other
program, the employee may be tested up to twelve (12) times during the twentyfour (24) months following the employee's return to work.

C.

Employees will be responsible for the entire cost of the treatment program and
follow-up random drug testing costs not covered by their insurance.

D.

Refusal to participate in the EAP or other approved program may result in
disciplinary action up to termination

VOLUNTARY REQUESTS FOR ASSISTANCE

The Chief of Police shall take no adverse employment action against an employee who
voluntarily, with prior notice to the Village, seeks and satisfactorily participates in treatment,
counseling or other support for an alcohol or drug abuse or dependency problem. The Chief of
Police may require the employee to be evaluated by a substance abuse professional to determine
fitness to return to duty or assignment.
For the purpose of this section, voluntary treatment, counseling or other support means help
sought by an employee prior to an observation by a member of the Department of facts giving
rise to a reasonable suspicion, prior to any misconduct on or off duty which causes his/her to
come to the attention of a law enforcement agency or an internal inquiry by the Department, and
prior to any random drug test or other test as specified in Article IV herein.
The Village may make available through its EAP a means by which an employee may obtain
referrals and treatment.
Voluntary requests for assistance will be handled in a confidential manner. Any employee who
voluntarily seeks assistance with problems related to prescribed drugs or alcohol shall not be
subject to any disciplinary action by reason of such request for assistance, as long as the request
for assistance was made prior to any notification of a random drug test or a test is requested by
the Chief of Police, or his designee based upon a reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use.
VI

CONFIDENTIALITY

All tests are held in confidence in accordance with privacy laws. They will be stored in the
Village's Human Resources Director's files, separate from regular personnel files.
IX:

UPDATES

This policy will be updated as necessary upon agreement by both parties.

43

POLICY VIOLATIONS
Violations of this policy may subject employees to disciplinary action up to and including
termination.
OFFICER INVOLVED SHOOTINGS
The Village and the Union agree to follow West Dundee Police Department Policy 305 regarding
officer involved shootings. Both parties agree that the policy will not be revised without
negotiations with the chapter.
MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER:
The Employer agrees that it will not take adverse employment action against an employee based
solely on the lawful possession or consumption of cannabis or cannabis infused products by
individuals who reside in the employee's primary household where no other Policy violation
occurred.

44

APPENDIX E
GRIEVANCE FORM
Page 1

METROPOLITAN ALLIANCE OF POLICE
Dept: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Chap#_ _

GRIEVANCE REPORT

Grievance#
' • .'. \· .Grieiiant(s)orMAPchapteriep"MUS:T,Sigrii
J·,•·. i:, . · ·•·F•'•,·•·. •; Grievaric:'ei"·ci. ,}:ifl.: .

J·

Grievant's Name: Last, First Ml:

Star#:

Incident Date:

Contract Article and Section Violated:

Date/Time Step l lnltlated:

Shift Assignment:

Supervisor:

Presented To:

Grievant's Signature:

MAP chapter Rep. Signature:

>••1

k~§l'. ::: ::: :::::: :::::: ::: ::: ::::::::: ::: ::: ::: ::: ::: ::: ::: ::: ::: ::: ::: ::: ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: ::::::::: ::::::::::::::::
[:j~,i'1g
See attached for additional information
>'flE;,):', Employer's Step l response and reasons therefore:
⇒: ;~•·,·, ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

)pit: ; --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------immediate supervisor's signature:
Response given to:

REASONS,:FORADVANCINGGRIEVANCE•.

STEP':t •

See attached for additional information
Grlevant's signature:
Presented to:

Date/Time Step 2 initiated:

Employer designee's response and reasons therefore:

Employer designee's signature
Response given to:

METROPOLITAN ALLIANCE OF POLICE

45

Dept: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Chapter# _ _

GRIEVANCE REPORT
Page 2

Grievance#

See attached for additional informliiil,n
Grievant's Signature:
Presented To:
Employer Designee's Response and Reasons Therefore:

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::l:~~~~~~~:~~e~~~~~~~t~~~:::::::::::::::::::::::
Employer Designee's Signature:
Response Given To:

--------------------------------------------.------------------------------[---------------------------------------------Date/Time
of Response:
------------------------------------------------------------.---------------- ---------------------------------------------See attached for additional infor
Grievant's Signature:

n

Date/Time:

- - - • - - • - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - • - • - - • - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - -- - -J-cti~pte~

P;:e;ide~t ~-;. -ciesis~ee sii~it~re ~ ------- -oateir1~~-=- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

"""'~-4------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------Chapter president or designee signature:

46

MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT

This Memorandum of Agreement ("MOA'') is entered into on the date indicated below by
and between the Village of West Dundee, Illinois and its Police Department (the "Village") and
the Metropolitan Alliance of Police, Chapter #153 ("Union"). The Village and the Union are
collectively referred to as the "Parties". The Parties mutually agree to the following:
1. The Village and the Union entered into a collective bargaining agreement covering
the period from May 1, 2023 to April 30, 2026 (the "CBA").
2. During negotiations that resulted in the CBA, the Parties reached a mutual
agreement that included certain revisions to the language referenced in the
predecessor agreement at Sections 8.1 related to "Holidays" and at Section 8.2
related to "Holiday Pay".
3. After the CBA was ratified and executed by authorized representatives of the
Parties, a scrivener's error in Section 8.1 was detected which resulted in the
inadvertent removal of the reference to "floating holidays". The Parties agree that
the reference to floating holidays should have remained in effect (status quo) and
incorporated into the final CBA that was executed by the Parties.
4. To correct this error, the Parties mutually agree that the following language will be
returned to Section 8.1 of the CBA: "Effective January 8th, 2024, all employees
will receive 60 hours of floating holiday time, to be used at the employee's
discretion. Requests for use of the floating holidays shall not be unreasonably
denied."
5. This MOA will be in effect for the remaining term of the CBA. Neither party shall
be obligated to continue the terms of this MOA in any successor agreement.
Further, the terms of this MOA will not be considered or construed as status quo
for purposes of any future good faith bargaining between the Parties and/or interest
arbitration hearing between the Parties with respect to any dispute arising out of the
CBA or any successor agreement.
6. The individuals who sign below represent they are authorized to bind their
respective party to these terms.

Metropolitan Alliance of Police Chapter 153

Village of West Dundee Illinois and
its Police Department ~

~J4-

ol3(~gI/a '-II
