10/11/2023
1336-01
22-MED-01-0059
42261
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
AGREEMENT

BETWEEN THE

GRANVILLE EDUCATION
ASSOCIATION

AND THE

GRANVILLE EXEMPTED VILLAGE
SCHOOL DISTRICT
BOARD OF EDUCATION

JULY 1, 2022 through JUNE 30, 2025

i

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE 1

PROCEDURAL AGREEMENT………………………………………..
RECOGNITION
BARGAINING PROCEDURE

ARTICLE 2
ARTICLE 3
ARTICLE 4
ARTICLE 5
ARTICLE 6
ARTICLE 7
ARTICLE 8
ARTICLE 9
ARTICLE 10
ARTICLE 11
ARTICLE 12
ARTICLE 13
ARTICLE 14
ARTICLE 15
ARTICLE 16
ARTICLE 17
ARTICLE 18
ARTICLE 19
ARTICLE 20
ARTICLE 21
ARTICLE 22

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS………………………………………………
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE…………………………………………...
ASSOCIATION RIGHTS……………………………………………….
INDIVIDUAL CONTRACTS……………………………………………
EMPLOYMENT………………………………………………………….
COMPLAINT PROCESS…………………………..…………………..
PERSONNEL FILES……………………………………………………
SICK LEAVE…………………………………………………………….
PERSONAL LEAVE…………………………………………………….
PROFESSIONAL LEAVE……………………………………………...
OTHER LEAVE…………….……………………………………………
SABBATICAL LEAVE………………………………………………….
UNPAID LEAVE…………………………………………………………
ASSAULT LEAVE………………………………………………………
ASSOCIATION LEAVE………………………………………………...
SENIORITY………………………………………………………………
REDUCTION IN FORCE………………………………………………..
SALARY…………………………………………………………………..
SUPPLEMENTAL SALARIES…………………………………………
SUPPLEMENTAL SALARY TABLES………………………………..
SUPPLEMENTAL SALARY GROUPING…..…………………………
EXTENDED TIME CONTRACTS……………………………………………………..

ARTICLE 23
ARTICLE 24
ARTICLE 25
ARTICLE 26
ARTICLE 27
ARTICLE 28
ARTICLE 29
ARTICLE 30
ARTICLE 31
ARTICLE 32
ARTICLE 33
ARTICLE 34
ARTICLE 35
ARTICLE 36
ARTICLE 37
ARTICLE 38
ARTICLE 39
APPENDIX A

SEVERANCE PAY………………………………………………………
TRANSFERS AND VACANCIES……………………………………...
WORKING CONDITIONS………………………………………………
TUITION REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM……………………………
EVALUATION AND FAIR DISMISSAL……………………………….
STRS/SERS PICK UP…………………………………………………..
NON-DISCRIMINATION………………………………………………..
NEW EMPLOYEES……………………………………………………...
ENTRY YEAR MENTOR PROGRAM…………………………………
HOLIDAYS………………………………………………………………..
CALAMITY DAY PAY…………………………………………………..
VACATION……………………………………………………………….
TRANSPORTATION…………………………………………………….
SUPPORT STAFF DISCIPLINE……………………………………….
HIRING OF STRS OR SERS RETIREES…………………………….
PART-TIME TEACHERS………………………………………............
DURATION……………………………………………………………….
INSURANCE………………………………………………………………
A-1 MAJOR MEDICAL………………………………………………………………….

ii

1
1
1
2
3
5
7
8
9
10
11
14
15
16
17
17
19
19
20
21
23
28
32
33
37
37
38
42
47
49
53
53
53
54
54
55
55
55
60
61
62
63
66
70

A-2 DENTAL……………………………………………………………………………...
A-3 VISION……………………………………………………………………………….

APPENDIX B
APPENDIX C
APPENDIX D
APPENDIX E
APPENDIX F-1
APPENDIX F-2

FORMAL WRITTEN GRIEVANCE FORM…………………...……….
SALARY SCHEDULES…………..……………………………………..
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING – STIPEND….…………..
EVALUATION TIMELINE………….……………………………………
SICK LEAVE BANK – DONATION FORM……………….…………..
SICK LEAVE REQUEST FORM……………………………………….

iii

71
72
73
75
93
94
99
100

ARTICLE 1 – PROCEDURAL AGREEMENT
RECOGNITION
The Granville Exempted Village School District Board of Education (hereinafter "Board")
recognizes the Granville Education Association (hereinafter "Association"), an affiliated
local of the Ohio Education Association and the National Education Association, as the
exclusive bargaining representative for all full and part-time certificated/licensed and noncertificated/licensed employees (hereinafter "bargaining unit members"), including
classroom teachers, guidance personnel (including school counselors), nurses, librarians,
speech and hearing therapists, intervention specialists, physical therapists, school
psychologists, bus drivers, educational aides, special education aides, secretaries, clerical
assistants, distribution personnel, occupational therapists, occupational therapist
assistants, technology coaches, mechanics, Applications Coordinator, and theater
manager. Excluded from the unit shall be the Superintendent, Principals, other
administrative personnel, Supervisor of Special Education, Athletic Director, Systems
Administrator, auxiliary service employees (persons employed in non-public schools
within the District), non-teaching employees working out of the Central Office, substitute
employees, all management-level, supervisory and confidential employees as defined in
ORC Chapter 4117.
The Board and the Association agree that the job descriptions for all bargaining unit
member positions will not be reproduced as part of the Agreement, but shall be
considered a part of the Agreement by reference. It is the intent of the parties to
communicate changes in job descriptions prior to Board action.
All current job descriptions will be available to any staff member within the library in each
building (high school, middle school, intermediate school and elementary school) and
through the dispatcher (bus garage) as well as the Superintendent’s secretary in the
District Office as published by the Administration.
Unless otherwise specified, the term “Superintendent” in the Agreement means the
District Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee.

BARGAINING PROCEDURE
A.

Bargaining shall be conducted by Board representatives and Association
representatives. Each team will bargain in good faith and shall not exceed seven
(7) members. Either party may use professional consultants or negotiators in the
course of negotiations. Both parties pledge that their representatives will be cloaked
with the necessary powers and authority to make proposals, to make counterproposals, and to consider concessions in the course of negotiations for the purpose
of reaching an agreement.

B.

If either party seeks to terminate or modify this Agreement, a written request to
start bargaining shall be submitted not later than ninety (90) days prior to the
1

expiration of the contract by the Association President to the Superintendent or by
the Superintendent to the Association President. A mutually convenient initial
meeting date shall be set following receipt of the request.
C.

The Board's right to hire personnel and make policy for the District is recognized.
Further, it is recognized that items agreed to shall be in keeping with the statutory
authority of the Board, except as they may have been modified by this Agreement.

D.

Prior to and during bargaining, the Board and the Association agree to provide to
each other, upon written request and within a reasonable time, all regularly and
routinely prepared information concerning issues under consideration.

E.

As tentative agreement is reached on each issue, it shall be initialed by each party.
When total consensus is reached, the entire proposed agreement shall be reduced
to writing and submitted to the Association and Board for approval. Following
ratification by the Association and adoption by the Board, the Agreement shall be
binding. The Association agrees to abide by the terms of the Agreement and to take
the necessary action to advise its members of the terms of the Agreement.

F.

If the parties are unable to reach an agreement prior to thirty (30) days after the
expiration of this Agreement, either party may request mediation of the unresolved
issues. If the parties are unable to agree upon the selection of a mediator within ten
(10) days after the notice, the request shall be filed with the Federal Mediationand
Conciliation Service.

G.

The mediation process shall continue for no more than forty-five (45) days after a
mediator has been selected or assigned. If mediation does not result in an
agreement the Association has the right to proceed under ORC Section 4117.14 (D)
(2).

ARTICLE 2 - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
The Board hereby retains and reserves unto itself, all powers, rights, authority, duties
and responsibilities conferred upon and vested in it by the laws and the Constitutions of
the State of Ohio, and of the United States, including but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, the right to the executive management and administrative control of
the school system and its properties and facilities.
The exercise of the foregoing rights and responsibilities by the Board, the adoption of
policies and practices in furtherance thereof, shall be limited only by the specific terms of
this Agreement.

2

ARTICLE 3 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
A.

PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
The primary purpose of this procedure shall be to obtain at the lowest administrative
level and in the shortest period of time, equitable solutions to grievances, which may
arise from time to time. Both the Board and Association agree that grievance
proceedings shall be handled in a confidential manner.

B.

DEFINITION
A grievance is an alleged violation, misinterpretation, or misapplication of this
Agreement.

C.

GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.

An individual grievance shall be initiated by the bargaining unit member so
aggrieved.

2.

A group grievance may be initiated by the Association on an alleged violation
that affects two (2) or more bargaining unit members in like manner.

3.

An alleged violation should first be discussed informally with the appropriate
administrator prior to initiation of the grievance procedure.

4.

The Association shall be available to assist any member in preparing the proper
and complete information necessary to expedite the procedure.

5.

A grievant has the right to be accompanied at any step of the grievance process
by a representative of his/her choice, provided notification is given at least two
(2) days in advance to the appropriate administrator.

6.

Time limits given shall be considered as maximums, unless otherwise extended
by written mutual agreement.

7.

Failure of the grievant to appeal within the specified time limits shall mean the
grievant has accepted the decision reached at the level from which no appeal
is taken.

8.

Failure of the Administration to respond in the time limit stated shall mean the
grievance goes to the next level.

9.

A grievance may be initiated at Level III when it has been determined by the
immediate supervisor that the subject is not within his/her realm of
3

responsibility or control. Grievances initiated at this level must be lodged within
thirty (30) days as set forth in Level Two of Section D below.
10. Nothing contained in this procedure shall be construed as limiting the individual
rights of a member, having a complaint or problem, to discuss the matter with
members of the Administration through normal channels of communication.
11. For the purpose of this Article, a day shall be any day that the District
administrative offices are open for business including such days during the
summer recess except that no day in July shall count as a day. It is also agreed
that if, during the summer recess, the employee’s immediate supervisor (at
Level Two) or the Superintendent (at Level Three) is off work on a particular
day, that day will not count as a day.
12. No reprisal shall be made against any party involved in the use of this grievance
procedure.
13. A grievance may be withdrawn at any level without prejudice or record.
14. No record, document, or communication concerning a grievance shall be placed
in the personnel file of any participants.
D.

PROCEDURES
1.

Level One
Any employee with a grievance shall first discuss the matter with his/her
immediate supervisor.

2.

Level Two
If the discussion does not resolve the grievance, the employee may lodge a
written grievance with his/her immediate supervisor. If such grievance is not
lodged within thirty (30) days of when the grievant should have had knowledge
of the act or condition which is the basis of the grievance, the grievance shall
no longer exist. The written grievance must include:
a.

The alleged violation;

b.

The specific Section(s) of the Agreement allegedly violated;

c.

The relief sought, and;

d.

The date of filing.

The grievance shall be filed on the official grievance form (see Appendix B).
4

The immediate supervisor and the grievant shall meet and the supervisor shall
render his written decision within nine (9) days of receipt of the written
grievance.
3.

Level Three
If the grievance is not resolved at Level Two, the grievant may appeal in writing
to the Superintendent. The appeal may also be initiated if the immediate
supervisor has not responded within the time limit provided, but no appeal can
be made more than seven (7) days after the supervisor has made a written
response. The Superintendent and grievant shall meet and the Superintendent
shall render a written decision within seven (7) days of receipt of the appeal.

4.

Level Four
a.

If the grievance is not resolved at Level Three, or if the Superintendent
fails to respond within seven (7) days, it may be appealed to arbitration
upon approval of the Association Executive Board. The arbitrator shall be
selected from a list submitted by the American Arbitration Association,
according to its voluntary rules and procedures. All other procedures
relative to the hearing shall be according to the voluntary rules of the
American Arbitration Association.

b.

The arbitrator shall hold the necessary hearing promptly and issue the
decision within such times as may be agreed upon. The decision shall be
in writing and a copy sent to all parties present at the hearing. The
decision of the arbitrator shall be binding. The arbitrator shall not have
the authority to add to, subtract from, or alter any of the provisions of
this Agreement in arriving at a determination of any issue presented that
is proper within the limitation expressed herein.

c.

The arbitrator shall consider only the precise issue(s) submitted and shall
have no authority to determine any other issue(s). The costs forarbitration
shall be shared equally by the Board and Association.

ARTICLE 4 - ASSOCIATION RIGHTS
A.

1. The Association shall have the right to use school buildings without charge for
Association meetings after the teacher workday at times the custodian is
normally on duty.
2. The Association will comply with all District procedures regarding written
applications and reservations for building use. Association meetings shall not
interfere with instructional or extracurricular activities.
5

B.

1. The Association may use school equipment provided the equipment is not required
for any school business or prior activity and the Association reimbursesthe Board
for all reasonable expenses.
2.

All consumable supplies will be provided by the Association. School building
supplies will not be utilized without prior approval of the building principal.

3.

The Association assumes financial responsibility for all loss or damage to school
equipment which is caused by Association use.

C.

The Association may use the inter-school mail service and District email. All
applicable postal regulations will be adhered to. The Association will pay all actual
costs incurred by the Board if the Board is required to charge for this privilege.

D.

The Association may use designated bulletin boards in employee areas where
students are not generally present.

E.

The Treasurer shall provide the following payroll deductions for bargaining unit
members:
1.

Dues for the Association and its affiliates.
a.

Written authorization must be provided by the member. The Association
Treasurer shall submit all authorizations to the Board Treasurer prior to
October 10.

b.

Authorization will continue in succeeding years unless a written
withdrawal is given to the Board Treasurer between September 1 and
September 30. The Treasurer will notify the Association President of all
withdrawals.

c.

Any member who leaves employment before all dues are paid shall have
the remaining dues owed deducted from the last paycheck and forwarded
to the Association.

2.

Hospitalization and insurance as provided in this Agreement and authorized by
the Board and other group insurance as authorized by the members.

3.

State Teachers Retirement System (STRS) contributions and School Employees
Retirement System (SERS) contributions.

4.

Annuity and deferred compensation programs in compliance with the District
annuity plan and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations.

5.

Fund for Children and Public Education (FCPE).
6

6.

Credit Union.

7.

Members shall have direct deposit of payroll to any financial institution which
is a member of the Federal Reserve Bank Automated Clearinghouse system.

8.

Other programs as approved by the members and the Board.

F.

The Association will hold the Board and the Treasurer harmless for all Association
dues and FCPE deductions made under these provisions.

G.

The Association shall receive a copy of the Board agenda before each regular Board
meeting, a copy of the approved Board minutes, the Treasurer's approved monthly
financial report, the adopted appropriations measure, the County Auditor's amended
certificate, and the County Auditor's approved budget. These shall be sent to the
Association President.

H.

The Board shall place on the agenda of its regularly scheduled meetings a
permanent spot for the Association to briefly address the Board, if the Association
so chooses. The Association shall place on its agenda for its regularly scheduled
Executive Committee meeting a permanent spot for the Superintendent or designee
to briefly address the Association, if the Superintendent so chooses. The Association
shall provide the Superintendent with an explanation of the topic(s) it wishes to
address with the Board prior to the board meeting. Likewise, the Superintendent
shall provide the Association with an explanation of the topic(s) he wishes to address
with the Executive Committee prior to its meeting.

I.

The Association President will be provided a copy of the Board policy book.
Subsequent updates will be provided at the same time District administrators receive
them.

ARTICLE 5 - INDIVIDUAL CONTRACTS
A.

All bargaining unit members shall receive written contracts including the following
information:
1.

Name of employee;

2.

Name of school district;

3.

Type of contract;

4.

Duration of limited contracts;

5.

Salary to be paid for teachers. Salary to be paid and basis used to determine
the amount (number of hours, number of days) for support staff employees.
If the contract is longer than one (1) year, such information shall only be
7

provided for the first year.

B.

6.

Appropriate signatures and dates.

1.

Upon initial employment, a member shall be notified of his/her assignment for
the coming school year.

2. No teacher will be assigned permanently to a position for which he/she is not
properly certificated/licensed.

ARTICLE 6 - EMPLOYMENT
A.

TEACHER CONTRACTS
1.

The normal sequence of limited regular contracts shall be:
a. Upon initial employment, a one (1) year contract. (However, if a teacher is
hired during a school year, the initial contract will be for the remainder of
that school year.)
b. The second contract, a one (1) year contract.
c. The third contract, a two (2) year contract.
d. The fourth contract and thereafter, may be from three (3) to five (5) years
as requested by the bargaining unit member and ultimately determined by
the Administration and the Board.
If a teacher with less than four (4) years of District Service does not actually
work at least 120 days for any reason during a particular school year and the
teacher returns to service in the following school year, then the teacher will
remain at the same contract status in that following year. For example:
If a teacher works less than 120 days during the teacher’s initial contract
issued under a. above, then the teacher will remain at the first one-year
contract level in the following year.
If a teacher works less than 120 days during the teacher’s next contract
issued under b. above, then the teacher will remain at the second one-year
contract level in the following year.
If a teacher works less than 120 days during the first year of a two-year
contract issued under c. above, then the teacher will remain at the first year
of the two-year contract in the following year.
If a teacher works less than 120 days during the second year of a two-year
contract issued under c. above, then the teacher will remain at the second
year of the two-year contract in the following year.

2.

A teacher issued a contract of less duration than stated in paragraph A 1 above
8

shall be told the reasons, in writing, and such reasons shall be based on
evaluation.
3.

A teacher who expects to fulfill all requirements for a continuing contract must
be in the last year of his or her contract during the year in which s/he will be
considered for a continuing contract. Therefore, the teacher may request a

contract of shorter duration than stated in paragraph A 1 above. Such requestmust be
submitted in writing to the teacher’s building principal/supervisor witha copy to the
Superintendent no later than March 1 of the year prior to being considered for a
continuing contract and may be withdrawn prior to Board action. Such requests shall
be granted.

B.

4.

A teacher who satisfies the requirements of ORC Sections 3319.08 and 3319.11
is eligible for a continuing contract upon reemployment. By September 1 of
each school year, the Superintendent will email all District teachers reminding
them of the deadline for requesting consideration for a continuing contract,
attaching a copy of the statutes.

5.

A teacher must submit a written request to the teacher’s building
principal/supervisor with a copy to the Superintendent for consideration of a
continuing contract by September 15 of that school year.

SUPPORT STAFF CONTRACTS
1.

The sequence of contracts shall be:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Upon initial employment, a one (1) year limited contract. (However, if an
employee is hired during a school year, the initial contract will be for the
remainder of that school year.)
The second contract, a two (2) year limited contract.
The third contract, a two (2) year limited contract.
The fourth contract, a two (2) year limited contract.
The fifth contract, a continuing contract.

ARTICLE 7 - COMPLAINT PROCESS
A.

Excluded from this provision are situations which may amount to a violation of law, Title
IX implications are present, complaint of discrimination, those that jeopardize the health
or safety of students and/or staff, or those which shall be directed to local law
enforcement or child services. The following steps will be followed when a complaint is
filed:
Step 1: The Administration and each staff member shall make every effort to resolve
complaints concerning staff through various avenues. If an administrator receives a
complaint about a staff member from a parent/guardian, student, or community
member, the administrator shall advise the complainant of the avenues available for
9

communication to address the concern: complainant calls the staff member, the staff
member calls the complainant, or the administration facilitates a meeting between the
complainant and the staff member.
Step 2: If such communications do not lead to understanding and resolution of the
problems involved, a complainant may pursue further action by submitting a complaint
against a staff member to the member’s immediate supervisor in writing. A meeting
involving the staff member, the staff member’s immediate supervisor, and the
complainant will be arranged as soon as possible to discuss the complaint.
Step 3: If no resolution is reached, either the complainant or staff member may appeal
to the Superintendent or designee who shall attempt to resolve the problem.
Step 4: If either party is not satisfied with the disposition, they may appeal to the Board.
B.

In each of the steps above, a staff member and/or complainant may request and be
accompanied by a representative of their choosing provided notification is given by
either party to the other no less than twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting.

C.

All complaints received by a Board member or the Superintendent which may result in
action being taken against the staff member shall be referred to the employee's
immediate supervisor.

D.

In the event of an uncooperative complainant, the above procedure will still be
followed to the maximum extent possible with the further understanding that no action
will be taken against a staff member on the basis of the complaint unless its
allegations are independently corroborated by credible evidence. Anonymous
complaints or concerns against staff members that are not corroborated or confirmed
shall not be used in evaluations, discipline, decisions of assignment or placed in an
employee’s official personnel file. No staff member shall be disciplined solely on the
basis of an anonymous complaint.

E.

The filing of a complaint will not affect the treatment of the complainant’s child or
children by the staff member.

F.

Any complaints which are placed in official personnel files shall be treated in
accordance with the appropriate provisions of this Agreement. All such complaints
must be signed and dated. A copy of any such document shall be given to the staff
member(s) involved at the time they are placed in the personnel file. The staff
member shall have the opportunity to attach a written rebuttal if he/she deems it
necessary.

ARTICLE 8 - PERSONNEL FILES
A.

There shall be only one (1) official personnel file, kept in the central office and/or
stored in an electronic database. All other files kept on bargaining unit members
shall be called individual working files. All files kept on bargaining unit members shall
be open to the individual member. If official action is taken against a memberbased
10

on information in a document, the document must be in the member’s official
personnel file. This provision is not intended to require the creation of a document
that otherwise would not exist. Items can be transferred from the working file into
the official personnel file with written notification to the bargaining unit member.
B.

The Board agrees to notify each member of any records being kept on the member.
This notification will cover all personnel files - those kept by the immediate
supervisors and the Superintendent. With the following exceptions, information
being added to a member's personnel file will require notification of the member.
Exceptions include items such as data sheets, college transcripts, teaching
certificates, requests for leaves, or requests for college credit reimbursement. The
information shall be dated and the source identified. If the member disputes the
accuracy, relevance, timeliness or completeness of information maintained in the
file, the member may request that the Superintendent investigate the current status
of the information. Within a reasonable time after receiving the request, the
Superintendent must make a thorough investigation to determine if the disputed
information complies with all applicable laws. A member shall have the right to add

or rebut information, or request a hearing with the immediate supervisor or
Superintendent on any material in the member's file that the member deems incorrect or
incomplete. Any member and the member's representative shall have free access to the
member's personnel files.

C.

Each member shall have the right to examine his/her file in the presence of the
Superintendent during regular working hours. The member may be accompanied by
a representative. If the member is physically unable to examine the file, he/she may
authorize in writing a representative to make such an examination.

D.

One (1) copy of each item in the file may be obtained by the member at no cost.

E.

Each file shall contain a record of when and why the file was opened. Exceptions to
this provision are:
1.
2.
3.

F.

The filing of items
Obtaining information for required reports
Routine personnel functions.

If a member of the public makes a request to see a member's personnel file, the
Administration will inform the member and afford the member an opportunity to be
present when the file is opened and bring a representative of his/her choice. It is
understood that if the member cannot readily be contacted for this purpose, the
Administration’s obligation is met if the effort is made (by, for example, telephone,
voicemail and email).

ARTICLE 9 - SICK LEAVE
A.

Sick leave may be earned at the rate of 1.25 days per month or a total of fifteen
(15) days per year. A maximum of two hundred ten (210) days of sick leave may be
11

accumulated or transferred into the District. Notwithstanding the amendment to
ORC Section 3319.141 effected by 2011 House Bill 153 as to part-time employees,
sick leave for part-time bargaining unit members will continue to be earned and
accrued in accordance with the parties’ past practice; for example, an employee
regularly scheduled to work four (4) hours per day earns fifteen (15) four (4) hour
days of leave per year.
B.

Each bargaining unit member shall be credited with ten (10) days sick leave to be
borrowed from future accumulation if sick leave runs out, or, if as a new member,
no sick leave has been accumulated. If a member ends Board employment having
used advanced but unearned sick leave, the per diem amount of any unearned sick
leave used shall be deducted from the last pay check issued by the Board.

C.

Sick leave may be used for absence due to personal illness, pregnancy, injury,
exposure to contagious disease which could be communicated to others, and for
absence due to illness, injury, or death in the employee's immediate family.

D.

The use of accumulated sick leave for parental leave purposes will be granted at the
employee’s request, not to exceed fifteen (15) work days. Such leave is to be used
within the first forty-five (45) calendar days after the birth or adoption of a child.

E.

Accumulated sick leave may be used for maternity purposes during the six (6)
calendar weeks immediately following the birth of the employee’s child. Additional
leave will be granted with a physician’s certification of the need for additional days.
An employee who uses sick leave under this Section is not eligible for leave under
Section D of this Article.

F.

Immediate family shall include the employee's spouse, parents, child, sister, brother
and members of the immediate family. For purposes of death in the immediate
family, grandparents, grandchildren, a spouse's parents, brothers or sisters may be
included. In addition, upon advance approval of the Superintendent, sick leave may
be used for the death of another person who has established a similar relationship
to the employee. “Spouse” includes an employee’s same-sex partner if the partners
were married in a jurisdiction that permits and recognizes same-sex marriages, and
“child” includes the child of such a partner.

G.

Sick leave may be used in one-half (½) day or one (1) day increments. A quarter
(¼) day increment may be used only with approval of the bargaining unit member’s
immediate supervisor.

H.

Bargaining unit members shall file notification for the use of sick leave in accordance
with Board procedures. After three (3) consecutive days of absence, the
Administration may request medical documentation of the illness.

I.

SICK LEAVE BANK
12

The Board and Association hereby agree to establish a Sick Leave Bank on the
following basis:
1. The enrollment period shall be established between the first work day of the
school year and September 30 for each member of the bargaining unit to
voluntarily donate a maximum of (1) day of their accumulated, but unused, sick
leave days to a Sick Leave Bank. The Sick Leave Bank shall have not less than
fifty (50) days. The Sick Leave Bank shall not exceed a maximum of one (1) day
times the total number of members of the bargaining unit plus fifty (50) days.
All new bargaining unit members shall be eligible for enrollment in the Sick Leave
Bank. Members hired within the school year may enroll by donating one (1) sick
leave day to the Bank within thirty (30) days after their date of hire.
2. A committee comprised of the Superintendent, the President of the Association,
one (1) building principal chosen by the Superintendent, and one (1) Association
member chosen by the Association President, shall administer the Bank and shall
approve applications at its discretion by a majority vote.
3. Bargaining unit members who have exhausted all of their sick leave
accumulation, who have developed a serious or catastrophic illness, and who
have contributed to the Sick Leave Bank may request sick leave days from the
Bank or those as specified in Article 9 “Sick Leave.”
4. Approved bargaining unit members shall be granted up to a maximum of
twenty-five (25) days from the Bank. The Committee may grant up to an
additional twenty-five (25) days.
5. The Committee shall require bargaining unit members who have requested sick
leave days from the Bank to provide a statement from their physician describing
the nature of the illness and a prognosis relative to the members’ probable period
of absence from duty.
6. Members whose request for additional sick days and whose illness or injury is
such that their physician cannot give a probable date of return to duty and who
qualify, shall be recommended to apply for disability retirement.
7. The Sick Leave Bank shall not be used as a means for increasing retirement
compensation.
8. Days remaining in the sick leave bank at the end of the school year will be rolled
over into the next school year subject to the maximum cap appearing in
paragraph one (1) above. New employees and those who did not previously
contribute may contribute during the enrollment period in September or within
thirty (30) days of their hire date if hired during the school year. All others who
previously donated will remain covered by the sick leave bank benefit until such
time when it is necessary to reopen the enrollment period.
13

9. Should the number of days in the Sick Leave Bank decrease below fifty (50)
days, the enrollment period will be reopened for a period of fourteen (14)
calendar days regardless of the time of year and all members who wish to
remain a part of the sick leave bank will be required to contribute.
10.Donations to the Sick Leave Bank shall not disqualify a member for Incentive
Pay.
11.Bargaining unit members who would like to become a part of the Sick Leave
Bank and who do not have accumulated sick leave to contribute during the
enrollment period may still enroll by agreeing to the following:
•
•

Express intent on the contribution form stating that their
next accumulated day be donated into the bank.
In the case of someone who is repaying sick days as
provided by Section B of this Article, that individual may
donate a day prior to repayment and extend the time in
which they will repay the days they have been
forwarded.

ARTICLE 10 - PERSONAL LEAVE
A.

All bargaining unit members shall be allowed three (3) days of personal leave each
school year. Such leave shall be with pay and shall not be deducted from sick leave.
Personal leave shall only be used for personal business that can only be conducted
during the employee's work day. The Administration will respond to personal leave
requests within three (3) work days.
Bargaining unit members with hire dates after September 30 shall earn personal
leave in accordance with the following hire dates:
October 1 – December 31
January 1 – March 31
April 1 – remainder of year

2 days
1 day
0 days

B.

If a written request for personal leave is submitted to the member's immediate
supervisor as soon as possible but no later than ten (10) days in advance, except in
emergency situations, it shall be granted. If it is submitted less than ten (10) days
in advance, then a reason must be stated and the approval is subject to the
availability of a substitute. Day one (1) will begin the day after the request is
submitted to the immediate supervisor.

C.

Personal leave will be approved for three (3) consecutive days if requested.
However, personal leave may not be used on the workday immediately preceding
or following a holiday or vacation, unless approved by the immediate supervisor
under one of the exceptions identified in Section E of this Article.
14

D.

No more than ten percent (10%) of bargaining unit members regularly assigned to
a building or department (whichever applies) may take personal leave on a particular
day, unless approved by the immediate supervisor under one of the exceptions
identified in Section E of this Article. For this purpose, a teacher regularly assigned
to more than one building will be considered a member of the building in which the
teacher has a regular classroom or, if the teacher has no regular classroom or has
multiple classrooms, the building in which he/she spends a majority of his/her work
time.

E.

Personal leave will not normally be taken during the first seven (7) or last seven (7)
school days of the year. In addition, personal leave may not be used on Central

Day or on a teacher-in-service day. Exceptions to this shall be: attendance at a wedding,
attendance at graduation ceremonies, transportation of immediate family to and from
college, or military service.

F.

Personal leave may not be used in less than one-half (½) day increments.

ARTICLE 11 - PROFESSIONAL LEAVE
A.

Full-time bargaining unit members may be granted professional leave to attend
meetings or clinics, make curriculum visitations, serve on accrediting teams, or for
similar reasons.

B.

A written request for professional leave shall be made in advance to the member's
immediate supervisor for approval at least five (5) days in advance. The request
shall include the date, purpose, and estimated expenses.

C.

Approved leaves shall be with pay. The approval will indicate what expenses, if any,
are to be paid from the Board funds.

D.

PROFESSIONAL LEAVE AND PRACTICE COMMITTEES
1.

Each building in the District where bargaining unit members are employed shall
have a Professional Leave Committee. The committee consists of team leaders,
the principal and the Assistant Superintendent.

2.

The Board shall appropriate money annually for professional leave. Funding for
professional leave will be two hundred dollars ($200) times the number offull
time teachers. Such money shall be divided to each building on a per capitabasis.

3.

The Building Professional Leave Committee will be responsible for
administering professional leave money in a manner it prescribes. The cost of
substitutes shall not be deducted from funds designated for professional leave.
15

4.

The Committee shall develop written guidelines for the use of and
reimbursement for professional leave. Such guidelines shall be distributed to
all members within the building by September 15 of each year.

5.

At least twenty-five percent (25%) of each building allocation shall be set
aside for administrative assignment.

6.

Allocation of monies for coaches clinics shall, as in the past, be the
responsibility of the athletic department.

7.

Members shall be reimbursed within fifteen (15) days from the date of
submission of required information.

8.

The District will convene, each year in June, a Professional Practice Committee
composed of a minimum of one (1) Team Leader from each building and two
(2) or more administrators. This Committee will review proposed professional
development and initiative(s) to be implemented during the school year. The
Committee will discuss and attempt in good faith to reach a consensus on the
adoption and implementation of initiatives and professional development
strategies. Immediately following the June meeting, the Team Leader
representatives of the committee will share with their respective buildings the
results of the discussion. Building Team Leaders will meet regularly during the
school year to review the implementation. The Administration has the right to
implement initiatives andstrategies if consensus cannot be achieved.

ARTICLE 12 – OTHER LEAVE
A. Military Leave: A bargaining unit member is entitled to military leave in accordance with
applicable law.
B. Religious Leave
1. A teacher may be absent, with pay, on a day identified through established
tradition and doctrine by a duly constituted religious body as a religious
holiday, provided the religious body has established that in order to properly
observe such day, no work should be performed on the day and provided the
employee is an active member of the religious body (for example, Yom Kippur,
Eid-al-Fitr) and if such religious holidays occur on a scheduled work day.
2. Requests for such absence shall be made in writing to the building principal
at least ten (10) school days prior to the holiday. Where the holiday occurs
less than ten (10) school days after the beginning of the school year, the
request shall be submitted on or before the end of the second work day of
the school year.
3. Such absence shall not exceed two (2) days during a school year.
16

ARTICLE 13 - SABBATICAL LEAVE
To encourage certificated/licensed personnel to continue their professional growth, the
Board may grant a leave with part-pay for professional study or travel. When granted,
the following conditions shall apply:
A.

A plan for professional growth must accompany the request, and evidence that the
plan was followed must be presented following the absence.

B.

Sabbatical leave shall be for one (1) or two (2) semesters only. The employee will
notify the administration of the employee’s intent to return by November 1 for a 2nd
semester return or by March 15 for a 1st semester return.

C.

Only one (1) such leave may be granted for each five (5) years of District service.
Three (3) continuous years of service are required prior to application.

D.

The maximum part salary shall be the difference between the employee's expected
salary plus benefits and the salary plus benefits of the replacement(s).

E.

To be eligible for part payment of salary, the employee must return to Board
employment for at least one (1) year, unless the employee has twenty-five (25)
years of teaching experience.

F.

No more than five percent (5%) of the teaching staff may be granted sabbatical
leave simultaneously.

G.

No leave will be granted to an individual for a second time if other employees have
filed a request for sabbatical leave.

H.

Employees granted sabbatical leave shall continue on the employee roster and shall
receive all insurance benefits provided by the Board.

I.

Experience credit shall accrue during sabbatical leave.

ARTICLE 14 - UNPAID LEAVE
A.

A full-time bargaining unit member may, at the sole discretion of the Board and only
with Board approval, be granted an unpaid leave of absence. A written application
shall be made to the Superintendent stating the purpose of the leave, the
approximate beginning and ending dates of the requested leave, and a signed
statement regarding the need for or desirability of the leave.

B.

The following conditions shall apply to any leave granted under this Article.
1.

Unpaid leave shall normally be in school-year blocks or semester blocks
17

C.

2.

Requests for leave must be submitted at least sixty (60) calendar days in
advance, if possible.

3.

Experience credit will not accrue during an unpaid leave of absence.

4.

Employees on leave under these provisions may continue to receive Boardprovided insurance benefits by paying the Board's share of the cost. Employees
granted leave following pregnancy will receive hospitalization, surgical and
major medical benefits in the same manner as other employees for the first
two (2) months post-partum. These benefits may be continued for the duration
of the leave if the employee pays the Board's share of the cost.

5.

Any use of leave for a purpose other than stated in the approved application
may be grounds for termination of the employee's contract.

6.

Members returning from leave shall be granted the appropriate contract status.
The member is required to notify the Superintendent, not later than May 1 of
his/her intent to return.

CHILD CARE LEAVE
A member may request and shall be granted a child care leave of absence without
pay on the conditions set forth below:
1.

The leave shall be for a period of up to twelve (12) consecutive months
immediately following the birth, adoption, or foster placement of a child with
the employee. If the employee has used sick leave under Article 9, Section D

or E of this Agreement, such leave will commence immediately following the use of
such leave. A non-12-month employee must return to work from suchleave at the
beginning of a grading period, unless otherwise mutually agreed.

2.

As determined by physician and member, the leave shall be extended for one
(1) additional school year upon request of the member to the Board.

3.

Subsequent to the termination of leave, application for reinstatement may be
made by the member at any time during the school year and the member may
be reinstated by mutual agreement. The employee will notify the administration
of the employee’s intent to return 120 days prior to the stated return date.

4.

Upon return from child care leave, the member shall be entitled to the
appropriate contract status.

5.

Where the group policy permits, a member on leave may continue to participate
in those benefits which are provided other members by payment of the group
rate for such benefits.
18

6.

The same provisions for child care leave will be granted to a member who
adopts or fosters a child.

D.

A short term leave of normally not longer than five (5) days duration may be granted
by the Superintendent for unusual and extenuating circumstances. The conditions
in Section B, 1 and 2 of this Article are not applicable to short term leave.

E.

Nothing in this Agreement shall waive the Board's responsibility to abide by all
provisions of The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993.

ARTICLE 15 - ASSAULT LEAVE
A.

Assault leave shall be granted to a bargaining unit member who is absent due to
physical disability resulting from an assault which occurs in the course of Board
employment. The assaulted member shall be eligible for and receive full pay and
fringe benefits during the period of such absence, and such leave shall not be
charged against either sick leave or personal leave. The maximum number of assault
leave days shall be thirty (30) days per year and such days shall be non- cumulative.

B.

A member granted assault leave must furnish to the Board a signed statement on
forms prescribed by the Board to justify the use of assault leave, identifying the
assailant, if known, and documenting the fact that the member has reported the
assault and the name of the assailant to the appropriate authorities for necessary

action against the assailant. If medical attention is required, the member shall furnish a
certificate from a licensed physician stating the nature of the disability andits duration before
assault leave will be approved for payment. Falsification of eithera signed statement or a
physician's certificate is grounds for suspension or termination of employment in accordance
with this Agreement and applicable provisions of the ORC.

ARTICLE 16 - ASSOCIATION LEAVE
Representatives of the Association, with the approval of their Local President and the
Superintendent, may be excused to attend Association meetings. Notification of such
attendance will be made to the Superintendent at least three (3) days prior to the date
of the Association meeting. There shall be a maximum of ten (10) days of Association leave
per school year to be used from September through May. Such leave days shall be noncumulative. Association leave, when granted, will incur no loss of salary. The Board will
not pay any expenses related to suchattendance, except that the Board will assume the
cost of substitutes. Association leave may not be used in increments of less than onequarter (¼) day. Additionally, the Superintendent, in his sole discretion, may grant an
additional four (4) days of Association leave per year.

19

ARTICLE 17 - SENIORITY
1.

a. Seniority shall be defined as length of continuous service in the District from
the member's most recent date of hire as a bargaining member, whether
full- or part-time.
b. It is mutually understood that if a driver in the Transportation Department
who is without a current Class B CDL subsequently attains a Class B CDL, the
driver at that point will be treated as a new bus driver for purposes of this
Article.

2.

Seniority shall continue to accrue during the time members are on approved leaves
of absence and during the time members are on the recall list.

3.

Seniority will be broken when a member resigns, retires, is non-renewed or
terminated for cause. If a member's contract is non-renewed and the member is
subsequently rehired prior to the first work day of the succeeding school year,
there shall not be a break in seniority.

4.

Time spent in a non-bargaining unit position shall not constitute a break in
seniority, but such time will not be counted in computing seniority.

5.

Not later than October 15 of each school year, the Superintendent shall provide the
Association with a list showing the seniority of each bargaining unit member.

Separate lists shall be prepared for the support staff members and certified/licensed
members

a.

The seniority lists shall be prepared according to certification/classification
and shall state each member's most recent date of hire and the type of
contract held (limited or continuing).

b.

The following classifications shall be recognized for support staff
members:
i.

Bus Drivers;

ii.

Secretaries;

iii.

Mechanics;

iv.

Educational Aides;

v.

Special Education Aides;

vi.

Technology Aides;
20

vii. Non-State Certified Nurses;
viii. Theater Manager.
c.

Each member shall have a period of thirty (30) days after posting of the
seniority lists in which to advise the Superintendent in writing of any
inaccuracies which affect his/her seniority. Said lists will be sent by email
to all bargaining unit members. The Superintendent shall investigate all
reported inaccuracies and make such adjustments as may be in order and
provide copies of the updated lists immediately.

d.

A tie in seniority shall occur when two (2) or more members have the
same amount of seniority credit as determined by the seniority list. Ties
will be broken by the following method to determine the most senior
member:
i.

The member with the earliest date of Board action to employ; then

ii.

The member having signed and returned the contract at the earliest
date; then

iii.

By the flip of a coin.

ARTICLE 18 - REDUCTION IN FORCE
A.

The following provisions shall apply when the Board determines it necessary to
reduce the number of bargaining unit members under ORC Sections 3319.17 and/or
3319.172. The Board shall not be required to fill vacancies created by members who
resign, retire or who are laid off.
The Board will notify the Association President, in writing, of the reasons, number
of positions, and the areas/grade levels/classifications/positions to be reduced
fourteen (14) days prior to any meeting when the Board will consider a reduction in
force, and will notify the Association President no later than thirty (30) days prior to
implementation of any reduction in force.
As soon as possible after notification, a meeting shall be scheduled between
representatives of the Association and the Superintendent to review the appropriate
data. The Association shall be given the opportunity to present its recommendation
to the Board. Such recommendation shall only be advisory in nature and shall in no
way limit the Board's right to implement a reduction in force in accordance with this
Agreement.

B.

The Superintendent shall prepare a formal list indicating the specific position(s) to
be abolished. This statement shall be prepared prior to implementation of the
reduction in force.
21

C.

Reductions shall first be made by utilizing resignations and retirements.

D.

If further reductions are made, they shall be accomplished by the Board suspending
contracts based on the recommendation of the Superintendent, which
recommendation will be in accordance with the requirements of ORC Section
3319.17 as to teaching members and in accordance with the requirements of ORC
Section 3319.172 as to support staff members.

E.

The recommendation as to teaching members shall give preference to members on
continuing contracts and the recommendation as to support staff members shall give
preference to members on continuing contracts.

F.

For purposes of RIF for teaching members, the final holistic evaluation ratings of
Accomplished and Skilled shall be considered comparable through June 30, 2021.

G.

As to support staff members, continuing contract status and system-wide seniority
shall be the basis of any reduction in force. As to teaching members, the provisions
of ORC Section 3319.17 shall control.

H.

A member whose contract is suspended shall be given written notification, by either
hand delivery or certified mail return receipt requested, that his/her employment

will be suspended and the reason for suspension. This notification shall occur withinten (10)
days after Board action implementing the reduction in force.

I.

Members whose contracts are suspended will be given preferential consideration as
substitutes in accordance with law.

J.

A support staff member who is removed under these provisions shall have the right
to transfer (“-bump”) to another classification if a vacancy exists there or if an
individual with lesser seniority in the District is employed in that area. No support
staff member shall have the right to "bump" into another classification unless the
member is currently qualified for the position. A teaching member may bump an
individual in another area of licensure/certification who has less seniority in the
District only if and to the extent permitted by ORC Section 3319.17. There shall be
no bumping between teachers and support staff members.

K.

Teachers removed under these provisions shall be recalled for vacant positions for
which they are certificated/licensed in the reverse order of their removal, provided
the teacher has remained current in that area of certification/licensure by teaching
or by additional course work within such area. Support staff members shall be
recalled for vacant positions for which they are qualified in the reverse order of their
removal. Such right shall be granted for thirty-six (36) months following the
suspension.

L.

Members on the recall list shall have their insurance coverage paid by the Board for
22

the first three (3) months of the reduction in force. Members may thereafter
continue medical and life insurance coverage at their own expense as provided by
law.
M.

When a recall of members is to be made, all qualifying members will be notified in
writing via certified mail. Any member who fails to respond within fourteen (14)
calendar days of receipt or rejects the offer will terminate recall rights. If a teacher
rejects an offer of recall because the teacher is not able to be released from his/her
teaching contract with another school district, the teacher will not lose his/her recall
rights. The recall shall be made from those who respond by using the reverse order
of removal. Recall rights may be terminated if the member fails to keep a correct
mailing address on file with the Superintendent's office.

N.

Employees new to the District shall not be employed until after members qualified
under this Article are offered the positions.

O.

Upon recall, members shall be placed in the appropriate place on the regular salary
schedule and all rights and benefits earned prior to the reduction in force shall be
reinstated.

P.

The Board agrees not to employ interns or six (6) hour certificate employees, or to
contract out bargaining unit work, if such employment may cause a reduction in
force or prevent the recall of an employee on the recall list.

Q.

Members teaching in specialty areas, including but not limited to, art, music, physical
education, speech pathology, counseling, special education, ISGI, and nurses, shall
possess a license/certificate in the specialty area.

R.

During the implementation of a reduction in force, no reassignment or transfer shall
occur that will cause a more senior member to be laid off before a less senior
member or prevent the recall of a member on the recall list.

S.

Qualifications for a bargaining unit position shall not be upgraded to prevent the
recall of a laid-off employee.

T.

It is understood for purposes of this Article that “days” means calendar days.

ARTICLE 19 - SALARY
A.

TEACHER SALARY

1. On July 1, 2022 the base teacher salary will be $40,968, computed on the indexes
contained in Appendix C of this Agreement. On July 1, 2023, the base teacher salary
will be adjusted to $42,095. On July 1, 2024, the base teacher salary will be adjusted
to $43,252. Teachers did not receive vertical step credit for Districtservice in the
2012/2013 school year.
23

All certified employees active as of May 25, 2024 will receive a $500 stipend to be
paid on June 25, 2024. The amount will be pro-rated for employees hired during
the 23-24 school year.
All certified employees active as of May 25, 2025 will receive a $500 stipend to be
paid on June 25, 2025. The amount will be pro-rated for employees hired during
the 24-25 school year.
2.

Any teacher with less than a Master’s degree and more than 12 years of service
who was precluded from receiving a longevity salary increase under the parties’
2014-17 Collective Bargaining Agreement is now eligible for longevity increases
under this Agreement, with the further understanding that such a teacher
cannot move more than one step under the Teacher Salary Schedule at any
time. The 2014-17 prohibition on receiving longevity salary increases if the
teacher has less than a Master’s degree after 12 years of service is mutually
recognized to be no longer operable.
a. To convert quarter hours to semester hours, multiply the
numberof quarter hours by two-thirds (2/3 or 0.66).
b. For salary advancement, the twenty-five (25) and forty (40) graduate
semester hours must be taken after the receipt of the Master’s degree.
c. Undergraduate semester hours may qualify for tuition
reimbursement at the discretion of the Superintendent.

3.

Every teacher holding National Board Certification shall receive a one thousand
dollar ($1,000) lump sum stipend for each year in which such certification is
maintained, payable on the last pay day in June.

4.

A School Nurse who is licensed/certified as a School Nurse by the Ohio
Department of Education and who is hired by the Board as a licensed/certified
School Nurse will continue to be compensated under the Teacher Salary
Schedules appearing in Appendix C of this Agreement.

5.

Persons hired by the Board as support staff employees who provide nursingrelated services to District students and are Health Clinic Aides will be
compensated in accordance with the Health Clinic Aide salary schedule
appearing in Appendix C of this Agreement. More specifically:
a. A Health Clinic Aide who has not earned a Bachelor’s degree will be
compensated under the appropriate “Without BA” column of the
Health Clinic Aide salary schedule;
b. A Health Clinic Aide with a Bachelor’s degree at the time of hire by
the Board will be compensated under the appropriate “With BA”
column of the Health Clinic Aide salary schedule;
24

c. A Health Clinic Aide who earns a Bachelor’s degree after being hired
by the Board will be moved from the “Without BA” column to the
appropriate “With BA” column of the attached schedule following
conferral of the degree; the timing of the move to the “With BA”
column will be implemented in accordance with the principles
appearing in the first paragraph of Article 26, Section C of this
Agreement; and
d. It is further understood that an employee hired as a Health Clinic Aide
will continue to be compensated under the Health Clinic Aide salary
schedule irrespective of whether the employee subsequently attains
licensure from the Ohio Department of Education as a SchoolNurse.
B.

SUPPORT STAFF SALARY
1.

All support staff new hires may be granted up to ten (10) years of prior work
experience for the purpose of initial placement on the salary schedule, at the
discretion of the Superintendent.

2.

Support staff shall be paid at time and one-half (1-½) for all hours worked in
excess of forty (40) hours per week and for all hours worked on Sunday, so
long as approved in advance by the member's immediate supervisor.

3.

An employee may choose to use compensatory time in lieu of overtime pay.
Compensatory time shall be granted at the rate of one and one-half (1-½) the
actual number of hours worked for all situations in paragraph B 2 above.
Compensatory time may be accumulated to a maximum of forty (40) hours.
Compensatory time usage requests shall be granted for any days school is not
in session. Compensatory time usage requests for days school is in session may
be limited to only one (1) employee per building at a time if operational needs
necessitate such a limitation.

4.

The base salaries for support staff positions shall be increased by the following
percentage (%) during the life of the contract:
Effective July 1, 2022
Effective July 1, 2023
Effective July 1, 2024

3%
2.75%
2.75%

All classified employees active as of May 25, 2023 will receive a $1,000 stipend to
be paid on June 23, 2023. The amount will be pro-rated for employees hired
during the 22-23 school year.
All classified employees active as of May 25, 2024 will receive a $1,000 stipend to
25

be paid on June 25, 2024. The amount will be pro-rated for employees hired
during the 23-24 school year.
5.

Support staff employees shall be paid in accordance with the schedules
contained in Appendix C of this Agreement.

C.

OTHER COMPENSATION

1.

The Board agrees to permit an employee to convert or cash-in any remaining
personal days in one (1) of two (2) ways:
1. All remaining days convert to sick days on a one-to-one ratio.
2. Days may be cashed in as outlined below.
Such conversion shall not cause a member’s total accumulation to exceed the
maximum number of permitted sick days. The personal day will only be
cashed-in or converted for one (1) full day unless the employee is a half-day
(1/2) employee and is eligible to receive one-half (1/2) personal day.
Reimbursement shall be at the following levels:
a. Members on the certified schedule and those on ten (10) to twelve (12)
month contracts shall be reimbursed at $100 per day of unused personal
leave.
b. All other members shall be reimbursed at $90 per day of unused
personal leave.
The District shall distribute a personal leave election form to each employee no
later than the first Friday in May annually. The form must be submitted in writing
to the Treasurer no later than May 31 or the last teacher work day, whichever is
earlier. The payment will occur in the first regular pay in June.

2.

A bargaining unit member who performs summer intervention tutoring services, who
teaches a for-credit class in a Board approved graded course of study, who performs
other student instructional work not addressed in paragraph 1 above during the
summer recess, or is a home instructor will be compensated at a rate equal to the
average per diem rate calculated on the basis of Steps 1 through 11 in the MA
column of the Teacher Salary Schedule for that school year. This per diem will be
converted to an hourly rate for work less than a full day. Thus, based on the Teacher
Salary Schedules appearing in Appendix C:
The per diem and hourly rates for the summer of 2022 are,
respectively, $333.98 and $43.09.
The per diem and hourly rates for the summer of 2023 are,
respectively, $343.16 and $44.28.
26

The per diem and hourly rates for the summer of 2024 are,
respectively, $352.60 and $45.50.
It is further understood that such summer positions will be posted and bid
under Article 24, Section B of this Agreement.
3.

Any teacher, who is a member of any Board-approved curriculum committee that
meets beyond the regular school workday or year, shall be compensated at the
following hourly rate of $20.00.

4.

Period Substitute Pay
The Administration shall make an attempt to secure substitutes for teachers or
educational aides on approved leave and/or who are absent from the building. If
unable to secure a sub, the Board shall pay $20.88 effective, 7/1/2022 $21.46
effective 7/1/2023, and $22.05 effective 7/1/2024 for each class period where a
teacher mustrelinquish his/her planning period or lunch to substitute within the
building and/or must assume the responsibility of supervising ten (10) or more
students from an absent teacher's class or educational aide’s study hall when such
students are not normally scheduled with that teacher.

5.

Autumn Conferences
For conducting autumn conferences with the parent(s) of every child, academic
grade-level teachers in grades K-5 will be eligible for an annual stipend of $100.
Documentation of the teacher’s completed conferences will be submitted to the
building principal no later than ten (10) days after the Autumn Conference
Compensation Day.

6.

IEP/Section 504 Meetings
With respect to an IEP, Section 504 or federally required meeting scheduled to start
fifteen (15) minutes or more after the end of the normal school work day for the
building affected, bargaining unit members who are required to be present will be
compensated at the curriculum committee hourly rate specified in Paragraph 3 of
Article 19, Section C of this Agreement. In addition, if an earlier scheduled IEP or
Section 504 meeting extends beyond fifteen (15) minutes after the end of the normal
work day, bargaining unit members required to be present will be compensated at
the curriculum committee hourly rate for time spent after the fifteen (15) minutes.
In paying this hourly rate, the rate will be rounded to the next higher quarter-hour
increment (for example, 20 compensated minutes will receive half the hourly rate).
It is understood that the Administration will have the final opportunity for scheduling
such a meeting. It is the teachers’ responsibility to report time on the prescribed
form to the building administrator by not later than ten (10) calendar days following
the meeting for which compensation is requested.
27

7.

If unable to secure a substitute for an absent teacher, the Board shall pay ten dollars
($10.00) per class period to an educational aide who must assume responsibility for
supervising seventeen (17) or more students from an absent teacher's class when
such students are not normally scheduled with that educational aide.

8.

Physical Examination
The Board shall reimburse drivers for one hundred per cent (100%) of the annual
medical examination performed by the Board-designated physician. The Board shall
reimburse drivers up to forty dollars ($40.00) per year for their annual medical
examination performed by a physician not designated by the Board.

9.

Extra trip pay shall start at the time the driver is required to report for duty. Should
a driver waive any portion of his/her regular route to take an extra trip, he/she shall
be paid at his/her regular rate of pay for the waived route time and at the extra trip
rate for all additional time. The trip rate shall be paid based on the hourly rate of
step one of the full-time bus driver salary schedule:
a.
b.
c.

Effective July 1, 2022 $18.01
Effective July 1, 2023 $18.50
Effective July 1, 2024 $19.01

10. A regular kindergarten route shall be guaranteed at 1.67 hours per day. The
kindergarten guaranteed time shall be in addition to the driver's normal hours per
day.

ARTICLE 20 - SUPPLEMENTAL SALARIES
A.

Salaries for supplemental duties shall be computed according to Articles 21 and 22.
Percentages indicated refer to the base salary. "Years of Experience" refers to
experience in the activity under consideration.

B.

Supplemental duties shall be defined as those duties for which a supplemental
contract is issued.

C.

The Board is not required to fill any supplemental duty position.

D.

When a new supplemental duty is created, the Superintendent shall assign the
position to the appropriate group. Prior to such assignment, the Superintendent will
consult with the individuals responsible for the activity. Such changes will be
attached as amendments to this Agreement, but shall not require or constitute a
reopening of bargaining. Any employee may suggest changes or additions to the
Administration at any time.
Furthermore, there shall be a Supplemental Salary Grouping Committee that shall
28

meet yearly, during the month of February, to evaluate supplemental salary
groupings. When there is a substantial change in the nature of the duty(ies), such
position(s) shall be reviewed by the Committee. An individual holding a supplemental
contract must request to meet with this Committee, by delivering a written request
to the Superintendent, to give evidence of why the supplemental contract should be
moved to a different group. If no requests are submitted prior to February 1st, the
Committee shall not meet. The Committee shall be composedof the Superintendent,
the Association President or his/her designee, and a bargaining unit member on a
supplemental contract agreeable to both the Superintendent and the President. Any
changes recommended by a unanimous voteof this committee shall be implemented
by the Superintendent in the following school year.
E.

All supplemental contracts are in addition to teaching contracts and shall be for the
period of the current school year (July 1 - June 30).

F.

No teacher shall be required to accept a supplemental contract, except the following
teacher positions which are listed below with corresponding supplemental contracts:

G.

1.

Head Band Director: Marching Band Director and Instrumental Music I

2.

Assistant Band Director: Assistant Marching Band Director and Instrumental
Music II

3.

Orchestra: Orchestra Performances

4.

Vocal Music HS: HS Vocal Music Performances.

5.

Vocal Music MS: MS Vocal Music Performances

6.

High School Drama: Theater Arts Producer & Director

7.

Intermediate Music: Intermediate Music Performances

8.

Elementary Music: Elementary Music Performances

9.

Robotics Design Instructor: Robotics Supplemental (Upon the hire of a new
Robotics instructor or mutually agreed upon between the current teacher and
administration. Once the position is filled by the Robotics Instructor, this
requirement comes into full effect.)

Membership in professional organizations which are required for student
participation, honors or awards, shall be paid by the Board as set forth below.
Additional memberships may be allowed in keeping with this Article.

29

ACTIVITY
Music - 3

ORGANIZATION
Ohio Music Educators Association

French - 3

National Association of Teachers of French

Latin

Ohio Classical Conference
American Classical League

Spanish

American Association of Teachers of Spanish and Portuguese

Industrial Arts

Ohio Industrial Arts Technology
Education Association
Central Ohio Industrial Arts Technology
Education Association

Newspaper

H.S. Press Club of Central Ohio

School Counselor

National Association of College Admission Counselors
Ohio Association of College Admission Counselors
College Board

Football

Ohio H.S. Football Coaches Association

Soccer

District Soccer Coaches Association
State Soccer Coaches Association
National Soccer Coaches of America

Golf

State Golf Coaches Association

Volleyball

District Volleyball Coaches Association
State Volleyball Coaches Association

Tennis

State Tennis Coaches Association

Basketball - 2

District Eleven Coaches Association
State Basketball Coaches Association

Wrestling

District Wrestling Coaches Association
State Wrestling Coaches Association

Baseball

District Baseball Coaches Association
State Baseball Coaches Association

Track - 2

State Track Coaches Association
Sports Medicine Certification
30

Softball
H.

District Softball Coaches Association
State Softball Coaches Association.

On supplemental contracts, the approximate time period during which the duty is to
be performed and the period over which payment is to be made shall be stated. If
the holder of a supplemental contract is being recommended for that supplemental
for the succeeding school year, he/she will be so notified in writing by:
1. the Board’s regular January meeting if the supplemental is for a seasonal
autumn position;
2. the Board’s regular April meeting if the supplemental is for a seasonal
winter position;
3. the Board’s regular June meeting if the supplemental is for a seasonal
spring position.
This will in no way influence the employee's ability to decline or resign a
supplemental contract which they had currently held.

I.

Granting of or non-renewal of a supplemental contract shall in no way affect a
bargaining unit member's regular teaching contract, except for the teaching
positions as listed in Section F above.

J.

A teacher's regular teaching contract shall not be non-renewed or terminated
because of poor performance in supplemental duties, except for the teaching
positions as listed in Section F above.

K.

The provisions of Article 7 (Complaint Process) shall apply to bargaining unit
members who hold supplemental contracts.

L.

All head athletic coaches shall receive a formal written evaluation each year within
thirty (30) days following the last contest of their season. The evaluation shall be
based on no less than two (2) thirty (30) minute observations - one (1) of a practice
and one (1) of an actual game by either the Principal or Athletic Director.

M.

No bargaining unit member shall be required to evaluate or make formal
recommendation on the hiring of persons for supplemental contracts.

N.

A supplemental contract that entails duties throughout the school year will be paid
at the bargaining unit member’s option in either twenty-four (24) pays, three (3)
equal installments, or a single lump sum at the conclusion of the school year. A
supplemental that entails duties for only a portion of the school year will be paid at
the bargaining unit member’s option, either in three (3) equal installments over the
course of the duties, or in a lump sum at the conclusion of the duties. Submission
of all relevant paperwork is required as a condition of payment of the last installment
or lump sum, whichever is applicable.

31

0.

Support Staff Supplementals

1.

A support staff employee approved for a supplemental position will be paid for that
supplemental position at an hourly rate. The hourly rate shall be the then-current
minimum wage in Ohio. The overtime rate of time and one-half will be paid for any
hours worked in excess of forty (40) per work week. The overtime premium rate will
be calculated based on the regular straight-time rate of the job that resulted in the
overtime – in the case of a supplemental position worked by a support staff
employee, that straight-time rate is Ohio’s minimum wage.

2.

The District will establish the maximum number of hours allocated for each
supplemental position filled by a support staff employee for the season or activity in
question. The employee must have advance District administrative approval to work
any hours in excess of the established standard for the supplemental position.

3.

A support staff employee must submit individual time sheets detailing the hours and
dates worked at the supplemental position. The building principal or athletic director
will verify and sign all time sheets. Teachers, as opposed to support staff employees,
will be paid as provided elsewhere for in this Article.

a.

As to a support staff employee’s contract for a position included in the supplemental
salary schedule appearing within Articles 21 and 22 of this Agreement, should the
employee’s total earnings for the supplemental position be lower than the scheduled
salary amount shown the Board shall then make a payment adjusting the hourly rate
for the last pay so that the total of the employee’s straight-time and overtime
earnings for the supplemental position equal the scheduled salary amount appearing
in Articles 21 and 22 for that position.

ARTICLE 21 - SUPPLEMENTAL SALARY TABLES
Salaries are computed using the BA Base salary in effect on July 1, 2022 ($40,968), July
1, 2023 ($42,095), and July 1, 2024 ($43,252).

Group
0
Years

SUPPLEMENTAL SALARY TABLE
Group
1

Group
2

Group
3

Group
4

Group
5

Group
6

Group
7

Group
8

0-4

15.0%

12.0%

9.5%

8.0%

6.5%

5.0%

4.0%

3.0%

2.5%

5-9

17.0%

15.0%

12.0%

10.5%

8.5%

6.5%

5.5%

4.5%

4.0%

10-14

20.0%

18.0%

14.5%

13.0%

10.5%

8.0%

7.0%

6.0%

5.5%

15-19

23.0%

21.0%

17.0%

15.5%

12.5%

9.5%

8.5%

7.5%

7.0%

20+

26.0%

24.0%

19.5%

18.0%

14.5%

11.0%

10.0%

9.0%

8.5%

32

EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2022
2022-2023
Step
Years
0- 4
1
5-9
2
10-14
3
15-19
4
20+
5

BA Base $40,968

40,968
Group 0 Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Group 5 Group 6 Group 7 Group 8
6,145
4,916
3,892
3,277
2,663
2,048
1,639
1,229
1,024
6,965
6,145
4,916
4,302
3,482
2,663
2,253
1,844
1,639
8,194
7,374
5,940
5,326
4,302
3,277
2,868
2,458
2,253
9,423
8,603
6,965
6,350
5,121
3,892
3,482
3,073
2,868
10,652
9,832
7,989
7,374
5,940
4,506
4,097
3,687
3,482

EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023
2023-2024
Years
Step
0- 4
1
5-9
2
10-14
3
15-19
4
20+
5

BA Base $42,095

42,095
Group 0 Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Group 5 Group 6 Group 7 Group 8
6,314
5,051
3,999
3,368
2,736
2,105
1,684
1,263
1,052
7,156
6,314
5,051
4,420
3,578
2,736
2,315
1,894
1,684
8,419
7,577
6,104
5,472
4,420
3,368
2,947
2,526
2,315
9,682
8,840
7,156
6,525
5,262
3,999
3,578
3,157
2,947
10,945
10,103
8,208
7,577
6,104
4,630
4,209
3,789
3,578

EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2024
2024-2025
Years
Step
0- 4
1
5-9
2
10-14
3
15-19
4
20+
5

BA Base $43,252

43,252
Group 0 Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Group 5 Group 6 Group 7 Group 8
6,488
5,190
4,109
3,460
2,811
2,163
1,730
1,298
1,081
7,353
6,488
5,190
4,541
3,676
2,811
2,379
1,946
1,730
8,650
7,785
6,272
5,623
4,541
3,460
3,028
2,595
2,379
9,948
9,083
7,353
6,704
5,407
4,109
3,676
3,244
3,028
11,246
10,381
8,434
7,785
6,272
4,758
4,325
3,893
3,676

ARTICLE 22 - SUPPLEMENTAL SALARY GROUPING
Group 0
Head Basketball – Boys
Head Basketball – Girls
Head Football
Marching Band Director
Theater Arts Producer & Director
Group 1
Head Soccer – Boys
Head Soccer – Girls
33

Head Volleyball
Head Cheerleading Advisor – Fall & Winter
Instrumental Music I (Concerts, contests, pep band)
Organic Garden & Land Lab Manager
Group 2
Head Baseball
Head Bowling
Head Cross Country
Head Field Hockey
Head Golf
Head Lacrosse – Boys
Head Lacrosse – Girls
Head Softball
Head Swimming – Boys
Head Swimming – Girls
Head Tennis – Boys
Head Tennis – Girls
Head Track
Head Wrestling
Instrumental Music II (Concerts, contests, pep band)
Group 3
Head Competition Cheerleading
Head Indoor Track
Asst HS Basketball – Boys (3)
Asst HS Basketball – Girls (3)
Asst HS Football (4)
Asst Marching Band Director (2)
Asst Soccer – Boys (2)
Asst Soccer – Girls (2)
Asst VB (2)
Freshman Football Coach (2)
JV Cheerleading Advisor – Fall & Winter
Musical Director (2)Steel Band
HS Robotics Club
Group 4
Asst Baseball (2)
Asst Field Hockey
Asst Golf
Asst HS Track (3)
Asst Lacrosse – Boys (2)
Asst Lacrosse – Girls (2)
Asst Softball
Asst Bowling
Asst Cross Country

34

Asst Tennis – Boys
Asst Tennis – Girls
Asst Wrestling
HS Yearbook
MS Football (4)
MS Basketball – Boys (2)
MS Basketball – Girls (2)
MS Volleyball (2)
HS Vocal Music Performances (Contests, concerts)
Group 5
Basketball Site Manager
Football Site Manager
Soccer Site Manager (1.25)
Junior Class Advisor
LPDC Chair
MS Cheerleading Advisor
MS Cross Country
MS Golf
MS Softball
MS Track – Boys (2)
MS Track – Girls (2)
MS Wrestling
MS Yearbook
Academic Team Advisor
Orchestra Performances
Piano Accompanist
Testing Coordinator
Group 6
ES Team Leader – 1
ES Team Leader – 2
ES Team Leader – 3
ES Team Leader – K
ES Fine Arts/Student Services Team Leader
French Club
Latin Club
Spanish Club
HS Applied/Fine Arts Team Leader
HS Global Language Team Leader
HS Language Arts Team Leader
HS Math Team Leader
HS Science Team Leader
HS Social Studies Team Leader
HS Student Services Team Leader
HS Student Council
IS Team Leader – 4
35

IS Team Leader – 5
IS Team Leader – 6
IS Fine Arts/Student Services Team Leader
LPDC Committee Members (3)
MS Drama
MS Fine/Applied Arts Team Leader
MS Student Services Team Leader
MS Team Leader – 7
MS Team Leader – 8
MS Student Council
MS Yearbook Pictures
Senior Class Advisor
National Honor Society Advisor
Group 7
Business Manager – Drama
HS Newspaper
HS Ski Club Advisor
Key Club Advisor
Math Counts
Mock Trial
MS Ski Club Advisor
Power of the Pen
Varsity G
Washington DC Trip
HS Science Olympiad
MS Science Olympiad
Gay Straight Alliance Advisor
Group 8
Elementary Music Performances
Freshman Class Advisor
Sophomore Class Advisor
Envirothon Club
HS FCCLA
HS Spanish Honor Society
Industrial Tech Club
IS Music Performances
IS Student Council Advisor
MS Musical Director
MS FCCLA
MS Vocal Music Performances
National Honor Society 5 Member Committee
Saturday School Monitor
MS Youth in Government
HS Youth in Government
36

EXTENDED TIME CONTRACTS
All certified employees hired on or after July 1, 1984, who are granted extended contracts
shall be compensated at their regular per diem rate. All support staff employees who are
granted extended time contracts shall be paid at their regular hourly rate, subject to the
provisions in Article 19, Section B, Paragraphs 2 and 3. The length of extended service
contracts shall be at the discretion of the Superintendent.

ARTICLE 23 - SEVERANCE PAY
Bargaining unit members shall become eligible for severance pay according to the
following provisions:
A.

Severance pay shall be a one-time (1) lump-sum payment to members who leave
the District to take disability or service retirement under any state or municipal
retirement system in Ohio.

B.

A member who has completed ten (10) or more years of service with the state, any
political subdivision, or any combination thereof, and who meets the provisions in
paragraph A above, shall be eligible for a severance payment of one-third (1/3) of
their accumulated but unused sick leave, up to a maximum payment of thirty (30)
days.

C.

A member who has completed ten (10) or more years of continuous service in the
District, and who meets the provisions in paragraph A above, shall be eligible for a
severance payment of one-third (1/3) of the one hundred twenty (120) days of
accumulated but unused sick leave, plus, one-eighth (1/8) of that portion of
accumulated but unused sick leave greater than one hundred twenty (120) days. In
no case, except as otherwise specified in Section D below, shall payment be made
for more than fifty (50) days of accumulated but unused sick leave.

D.

A member who qualifies for severance pay under Section C above will also receive
payment for:
Ten (10) days if the member retires at the end of his/her 30th year of
credited service for retirement purposes;
Eight (8) days if the member retires at the end of his/her 31st year of
credited service for retirement purposes;
Six (6) days if the member retires at the end of his/her 32nd year of
credited service for retirement purposes;
Four (4) days if the member retires at the end of his/her 33rd year of
credited service for retirement purposes;
37

Two (2) days if the member retires at the end of his/her 34th year of
credited service for retirement purposes;
E.

Payment shall be calculated according to the member's current per diem pay.

F.

Payment of severance pay shall eliminate all sick leave credit unused at the time of
payment.

G.

Should a non-retired member die, severance pay, if the member at the time of death
met the 10-year service requirement under Section B or C above, will be made to
the estate of the deceased upon written request by the executor of the estate.

ARTICLE 24 - TRANSFERS AND VACANCIES
A.

B.

General
1.

The assignment of staff and their transfer to positions, schools, and
departments shall be made by the Superintendent at his/her sole discretion.

2.

The factors which the Superintendent shall consider in making assignments or
effecting transfers of certified personnel shall include, but not be limited to,
contributions which staff members have made toward the fulfillment of the
goals and objectives of the District, and seniority.

3.

All job postings, excluding supplemental, shall include the job description.

4.

For the purposes of this Article a day is defined as any day school is in session
during the school year and any day the administrative office is open during the
summer.

Teacher-Initiated Transfers
1.

A vacancy shall exist upon the transfer of an employee that results in an
opening, upon Board action regarding the resignation, termination, nonrenewal, or leave of absence for longer than one (1) semester of a certified
employee, or the creation of a new certified position which the Board intends
to fill. Before exercising his/her transfer authority under Sections A and C of
this Article, the Superintendent will notify all teachers by District email and post
in a designated area in each building a position has come open and teachers
will be afforded two (2) work days within which to express an interest in being
considered for the position.

2.

If the Board creates a new position that, under applicable principles of labor
relations law, falls within the bargaining unit, such position will not be filled by
a temporary employee for more than thirty (30) calendar days. Should the
temporary employee subsequently be regularly employed in such new position,
38

his/her seniority will begin on the first day worked in the position. Any dispute
over whether a new position falls within or outside the bargaining unit will be
referred to the State Employment Relations Board and resolved under its
procedures.
3.

Any teacher shall have the right to request a transfer or promotion to a vacancy
in the District for which he/she is qualified. Such request shall be in writing to
the person designated on the posting generated under Paragraph 1 above.

4. A teacher who expresses an interest in a position under Paragraph 1 above will
be afforded (if requested in the expression of interest) a brief informal
conference with the appropriate building principal or Director. The
Superintendent will then exercise his/her transfer authority under Sections A
and C of this Article. Those who expressed an interest will be notified of their
status with respect to filling the position. If the Superintendent fills the vacancy
by means of transfer, thus creating a new and different vacancy, notice will be
given to teachers of the new vacancy in accordance with Paragraph 1 above.
All teachers who apply for a vacancy and remain under consideration after the
informal conference referenced in Paragraph 4 above shall be given an
opportunity to be formally interviewed before that vacancy is filled.
5. After the operation of Paragraph 4 above, the resulting vacancy will be filled in
accordance with the following principles:
a. If the vacancy occurs during the school year, the Superintendent s will not
fill the vacancy for at least five (5) days following the posting given in
accordance with Paragraph 1 above.
b. For vacancies that occur during the summer recess, between the last
teacher work day and the first teacher work day of the following year, the
Superintendent will use both the District email and phone notification
systems to notify all employees of the posted vacancy in accordance with
Paragraph 1 above.
c. For vacancies that occur within twenty (20) calendar days prior to the first
day of school the above 5-day posting window is reduced to three (3) work
days.
d. The posting window begins prior to Noon on the initial day of notice and
ends with the publicized time for the close of business on the fifth day.
6.

Before selecting a teacher not currently employed by the Board, the
Superintendent, at the request of the currently employed teacher, shall discuss
39

the decision reached including general and/or specific reasons.
7.

C.

A transfer shall be defined as a change in building and/or grade level and/or
subject area assignment.

Administration-Initiated Involuntary Transfer
1.

a. The term involuntary transfer shall mean an Administration-initiated transfer
of a teacher which has not been requested by that teacher. Teachers who
have been informed that they will be involuntarily transferredretain the right
to express an interest in other vacancies in accordance withthe provisions of
Section B above.
b. In no case shall any individual be involuntarily transferred more than twice
in ten (10) years.

D.

2.

When involuntary transfers are determined necessary by the Administration, a
personal conference shall be held with the teacher by the appropriate
administrator prior to the transfer.

3.

Any teacher affected by involuntary transfer shall have the right to request and
have a meeting with the Superintendent. Such meeting shall be held prior to
the effective date of the involuntary transfer.

4.

The reasons for such a transfer will be discussed and the teacher will have an
opportunity to express any concerns regarding the transfer at any conference
held pursuant to this Section.

5.

Teachers who are involuntarily transferred shall be notified no later than two
(2) weeks prior to the effective date of the transfer. The Administration will
make every effort to make such transfers prior to August 1 of each year. This
provision shall not apply to involuntary transfers that are necessitated because
of unexpected, unanticipated, or emergency situations.

SUPPORT STAFF PERSONNEL
1.

General
a.

A vacancy shall be any classified position which becomes vacant as the
result of a termination, resignation, death, transfer and/or the creation of
a new position which the Board intends to fill.

b.

All vacancies in support staff positions shall be filled in accordance with
the provisions of this Article.
40

c.

2.

If the Board creates a new position that, under applicable principles oflabor
relations law, falls within the bargaining unit, such position will not be filled
by a temporary employee for more than thirty (30) calendar days.Should
the temporary employee subsequently be regularly employed in such new
position, his/her seniority will begin on the first day worked in the position.
Any dispute over whether a new position falls within or outside the
bargaining unit will be referred to the State Employment Relations Board
and resolved under its procedures.

Posting
a.

When a vacancy occurs in a classification during the school year, the
Superintendent shall notify all employees through the District emailsystem
of the vacancy and not fill the vacancy for at least five (5) days. For
vacancies that occur during the employee work year, such notificationwill
occur on a scheduled work day.
For vacancies that occur during the summer recess as defined by the last
teacher work day and the first teacher work day of the following year, the
Superintendent will use both the District email and phone notification
systems to notify all employees of the posted vacancy.
The relevant supervisor will contact those individuals who express an
interest (in the manner specified in the vacancy notification) within the 5days notification period. The supervisor will then schedule and conduct an
interview.
The Transportation Supervisor will complete the following activities:
Prior to or on June 1:
i.
Provide maps of all routes for the school year.
ii. Make all drivers aware of all routes.
iii. In writing, provide notice of a meeting to be held the on the first
workday of the school year, at which time the vacant routes will be
bid and assigned or re-assigned in the new school year.
On the first workday:
i.
Conduct a meeting of all drivers (full- and part-time) immediately
following the convocation.
ii. At this meeting the vacant routes will be bid and assigned based
upon District seniority.
(a) The most senior driver will have the opportunity to select the
vacant route of his/her choice or maintain his/her current route.
(b) The selection and assignment of routes shall continue by
continuing through the seniority lists until all routes have been
assigned.
(c) If the Transportation Supervisor anticipates using one of the
41

allotted “waivers” he/she shall meet privately with the affected
employee/driver to make the individual aware of this possibility
prior to the general meeting of drivers.
b.

This procedure for filling bus route vacancies supersedes subparagraph a.
above and will only be used once during any school year. Any vacancies
occurring after the bid day will be filled by the Transportation Supervisor
and the route assigned to a new bargaining unit member. The route will
then be put up for bid at the following August bid meeting.
(a) The bus route bidding process will be
moved to the first workday of the school year. All staff will be
notified of the exact day, time and location prior to the end of
the school year.
(b) The kindergarten bus route will be a separate route and will
be put up for bid after all other routes have been bid as
detailed in Article 35.

3.

Filling of Vacancies
a.

The most senior applicant within the same classification as the vacancy
shall be awarded the position. (Seniority shall be determined in
accordance with Article 17).

b.

If there are no applicants from within the same classification as the
vacancy, interested bargaining unit members from other classifications
will be interviewed and the position shall be awarded to the most senior

applicant from a different classification who meets the qualifications onthe job
description, at the discretion of the Administration.

c.

If there are no qualified applicants for the vacancy, the Board may fill the
position with a newly hired employee.

d.

Notwithstanding the above-stated seniority preferences, with respect to
support staff vacancies, the Board may elect to exercise within a particular
school year (7/1 to 6/30) one waiver by position and/or one (1) waiver by
individual under which the vacancy in question is not awarded to the
senior applicant who otherwise meets the qualifications for the position.
It is further understood that, effective January 1, 2015, the waiver by
position may be exercised only if the applicants for the vacancy were
evaluated during the current or immediately preceding school year under
Article 27, Section C of this Agreement. The Superintendent will furnish
the Association President with written notice of any waiver exercised
under this provision.

42

ARTICLE 25 - WORKING CONDITIONS
A.

ALL BARGAINING UNIT MEMBERS
1.

Employee Meetings
Required attendance at employee meetings shall not exceed a cumulative total
of two (2) hours per month outside of the regular workday from October
through May. August and September hours are waived to allow staff to fulfill
the requirements of mandatory trainings (Public SchoolWorks or its successor).

2.

Mileage
The Board shall pay an amount per mile for authorized automobile expenses
which is equal to the per mile allowance standard utilized by the Internal
Revenue Service. If such allowance is changed by the IRS, the change will be
effective as of the first day of the first month following the effective date of the
change. Mileage expenses will only be paid for travel authorized in writing in
advance. The Board may require the submission of an expense report form.

3.

Payroll Practices
All members of the bargaining unit shall receive their salary in twenty-four (24)
equal pays. Paydays shall fall on the 10th and 25th of each month; if the 10th or
25th falls on a weekend or holiday, the immediately preceding weekday thatis
not a holiday will be used for this purpose. Prior to May 15th, a member may
request that the Board pay the member's regular summer salary in a single
lump sum. The Superintendent shall, in his/her sole discretion, approve or deny
such request prior to the end of the school year. If the Superintendent denies
the request, the denial shall be accompanied with a written explanation if
requested by the member.

4.

Court Appearances
Any employee subpoenaed or directed by the court to appear within same,
shall not have such absence deducted from any recognized leave policy. The
employee continues his/her salary while in appearance, but returns, upon
receipt, court remuneration to the Board Treasurer.

5.

Smoking
The parties agree to comply with all local laws and regulations regarding
smoking on school property and in school vehicles.

6.

PTA/PTO Meetings
43

No member shall be required to attend PTA/PTO meetings held outside their
regular work day. This prohibition does not apply to required attendance at
school functions which may be held jointly with a PTA/PTO meeting.
7.

Snow Emergency
If an employee resides in a county where a level 3 snow emergency is declared
before the employee’s normal departure time for work and the District is in
session, that employee shall be excused from reporting to work. No charge
against the employee’s sick or personal leave shall be made. The employee is
responsible for notifying the District that he/she cannot report to work.

8.

Immunization
The District shall provide free Hepatitis B immunizations to all employees who
may have contact with a student with Hepatitis B.

9.

Calendar Committee
Each year a ten (10) member calendar committee shall be appointed. The
Superintendent shall appoint five (5) members and the Association President
shall appoint five (5) members. The committee shall take into consideration
the diverse nature of the District workforce and shall make recommendations
to the Superintendent by January 31 regarding the school calendar for the next
school year. The committee is advisory only.

10. Collaboration Time
The Administration and team leaders will develop a schedule of collaboration
time to articulate to the building staff at the beginning of the year for
planning purposes. An attempt will be made to provide equitable
opportunities for both District/building initiatives and specific teacher-initiated
collaboration. An agenda for teacher-initiated collaboration must be
submitted to the building administrator for prior approval.
A K-6 study committee consisting of three (3) administrators, and seven (7)
members selected by GEA President, will convene to develop
recommendations to the Superintendent by November 1, 2022 for
implementation of scheduled Collaboration Time by the 2023-24 school year.
B.

TEACHING MEMBERS
1.

Notification of Teaching Assignment
A teacher under current contract with the Board shall be notified of his/her
assignment for the coming school year by the last day of school, provided that
44

both parties agree that changes in teaching assignment may be necessary after
the last day of school due to changes in enrollment, scheduling or other needs
of the District. Such changes will be decided by the Administration with the
understanding that they will be made on a voluntary basis when possible.
However, the Board will make every effort to make such changes prior to
August 1 of each year.
2.

Curriculum Committees
No teacher shall be assigned involuntarily outside of the regular work day to
do curriculum planning work or be assigned involuntarily outside of the regular
work day to any other Board-approved committee.

3.

School Workday
The required work day for all teachers shall not exceed seven and three-fourths
(7-¾) hours, including a thirty (30) consecutive minute duty-free lunch period.
This requirement shall not apply to required attendance at open house or
similar programs. Required attendance shall not exceed three (3) activities per
teacher per year unless the teacher is reimbursed for such attendance at
his/her regular hourly rate of pay.

4.

Length of School Year
The required work year for teachers shall not exceed one hundred eighty-four
(184)days. One-half (1/2) day of the professional development days at the
start of the school year will be for teacher-directed use.

5.

Lunch Period
Each teacher shall receive a thirty (30) consecutive minute duty-free lunch
period per day. This thirty (30) minute lunch period shall not include transition
time needed to arrive at a class, study hall, or duty on time. Appropriate
transition time for these purposes shall be in addition to the thirty (30) minute
lunch time. There shall be no restrictions as to where a teacher spends his/her
thirty (30) minute lunch period, except the teacher must notify the principal's
office when he/she leaves the school building.

6.

Class Size/Load
The Administration will review enrollment annually to analyze class size and class
load.

7.

Plan/Conference Time
Each teacher shall receive a minimum of two hundred (200) minutes of
45

plan/conference time per week. In allocating such time, each teacher will be
scheduled for not less than thirty (30) consecutive minutes per work day,
unless otherwise agreed by the affected teacher or group of teachers.
8. Grades K-6 Duties
Administrator and Team leaders will collaboratively create an equitable duty
schedule to be communicated to the rest of the staff at the beginning of the
school year.
C.

SUPPORT STAFF MEMBERS
1.

Work Day/Work Year
Support staff positions shall have the following work days/work years:
Days
Employee Position
HS Guidance Secretary
Educational Aide
Special Education Aide
Special Services Secretary
Principal’s Secretary
Principal’s Secretary
Building Secretary
Transportation Secretary
Technology Coach
Bus Mechanic
Full-Time Bus Driver
Part-Time Bus Driver
Kindergarten Bus Driver
Technology Integration
Coordinator

2.

Holidays Total Hours/

Worked

Paid

Days

Day

204
180
180
204
223
204
180
204
204
251
183
183
183
223

7
6
6
7
8
7
6
7
7
9
6
6
6
8

211
186
186
211
231
211
186
211
211
260
189
189
189
231

7.5
7.0
7.0
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
8.0
4.5
2.25
1.67
8.0

Lunch Periods
All regular employees who work five (5) or more hours per day shall be entitled
to a paid thirty (30) minute uninterrupted lunch period. There shall be no
restrictions as to where an employee spends his/her lunch period, however,
any employee leaving the building during his/her lunch period shall notify
46

his/her immediate supervisor.
3. Educational aides on approved leave who are assigned to inclusion students shall
be replaced by a substitute.
4. At the Board's discretion, Principal's Secretaries may be placed on a two hundred
four (204) day contract (two hundred eleven [211] days with seven [7] holidays)
after the current job holders retire or leave.

ARTICLE 26 - TUITION REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM
To encourage personnel to continue their professional growth, the Board will grant tuition
reimbursement to individual members as follows:
A.

The Board will annually allocate a tuition reimbursement amount equal to three
hundred seventy-five dollars ($375) multiplied by the number of full-time equivalent
(FTE) bargaining unit member (rounded down to the nearest whole FTE number) as
of October 15.

B.

Record keeping and disbursement of funds shall be the responsibility of the
Treasurer’s office. Reimbursement checks will be distributed to eligible individuals
under this Article on or before November 1 of each school year. Prior to any such
distribution, the Treasurer (or designee) and Association President will review the
proposed distribution for the purpose of minimizing in advance any inadvertent
errors in the administration of this Article.
A part-time bargaining unit member is eligible for tuition reimbursement under
Article 38 of this Agreement for up to a maximum of three (3) semester hours
annually.
Reimbursement for course work will be made upon presentation of proof of payment
and course completion with a grade of B or higher (P for pass/fail courses). Such
proofs must be submitted to the Treasurer’s office on or before September 15th.
Employees who are subjected to a RIF shall receive reimbursement for any approved
coursework in accordance with the terms of this Article.
Proof of payment can be in the form of a cancelled check, charge card receipt,
charge card statement, or cash receipt. (Course registration form cannot be used as
proof of payment.)
Proof of course completion should be in the form of a grade card OR transcript
showing course completed.
Eligibility: Courses approved must be at the graduate level and granted by an
institution recognized by the Ohio Department of Education for initial
47

certification/licensure or renewal. They also must meet one (1) or more of these
criteria:

C.

D.

1.

Course is needed to renew or upgrade certificate/license that employee holds
to keep their current assignment.

2.

Course directly relates to their teaching area or corresponds to building and/or
District goals or school improvement plans.

3.

Approved credits for support staff members may be on either the
undergraduate or graduate level and must be related to the member's work
responsibilities. The Superintendent shall make the following exceptions:
coursework for undergraduate or vocational/technical school courses that
relate to the member's area of responsibility, or course work that improves the
curriculum of the District (i.e. - computer courses, industrial arts courses, etc.).

Proof of eligibility for advancement on the salary schedule for teachers must be filed
with the Superintendent by September 15 of the school year. The teacher shall
submit a written request to the Superintendent indicating the number of graduate
hours completed and the new level on the salary schedule that has been earned.
Transcripts from all institutions from which qualifying credit hours have been
completed will be provided as proof of eligibility. Those who are eligible for
advancement on the September 15 date will be placed on the salary schedule
retroactive to the first work day of the school year. For those who complete
additional credit between September 15 and January 15 proof of eligibility must be
filed with the Superintendent no later than January 30 of that year. Those who are
eligible for advancement on the January 30 date will be placed on the salary
schedule effective February 1 of that year.
For salary advancement twenty-five (25), and forty (40) graduate semester hours
must be taken after the receipt of the Master’s degree.
Procedure for determining reimbursement amount:
1. Total up the bargaining unit member’s semester hours (changing quarter
hours into semester hours).
2.
Take each bargaining unit member’s paid receipt by course and divide by
total semester hours per that class/course.
3.
Divide total dollars available by the total semester hours to determine cost
per semester credit hour.
4.
If the cost per credit hour paid by the staff member is the same or below
the dollar amount enter the amount.
5.
Add up the remaining credit hours and repeat the process (#3) until all
funds are expended.
6.
Enter requisitions for each staff member.

E.

Unused funds will be allocated for this purpose in the following funding cycle.
48

F.

This provision shall not be utilized during a Board-approved sabbatical leave unless
so approved by the Board to be part of the sabbatical.

G.

Definition:
a.

"Full-time study" shall be as it is defined by the institution attended.

H.

Course changes may be made only after receiving the Superintendent's approval.

I.

A bargaining unit member who is not still employed by the Board as of the
reimbursement date specified in Section B of this Article will not receive
reimbursement. It being further understood, however, that this disqualification
will not apply if the employee died, became disabled, or is on layoff status
because of a reduction in force implemented under Article 18 of this Agreement.

J. A new employee who is Board-approved is eligible for tuition reimbursement under
Article 26 for coursework that is pre-approved by the District as part of their conditions
of employment.

ARTICLE 27 - EVALUATION AND FAIR DISMISSAL
A.

TEACHER EVALUATION
The Board will review the evaluation procedure and instrument for the purpose of
assessing teacher performance, or to modify the evaluation instrument at the written
request of either party.
All evaluation programs, including supplementals, instruments, and schedules at the
written request of either party shall be reviewed by a committee comprised of the
Superintendent, Assistant Superintendent, Principal(s), Association Officer(s),
Association member(s), and Board representative(s). The evaluation procedure
agreed to by this committee shall be reduced to writing and submitted to the
Association and Board for approval. If approved, such shall be the official evaluation
procedure for the District. The standing committee shall have the authority to
implement changes required by legislation.
The Association and Administration will each designate an individual to serve as an
OTES expert. These individuals will review questions related to OTES, provide
information to the Association and Administration, and serve as a resource to the
committee. The Association OTES expert will be paid a stipend of $500 per school
year.
District Policy AFC-1, titled Evaluation of Professional Staff, and District Regulation
AFC-1-R, titled Evaluation of Professional Staff, are incorporated by reference in this
49

Agreement.
1.

Evaluation criteria will be explained to teachers before formal evaluation.

2.

Procedures are outlined in Appendix E of this Agreement.

3.

The teacher shall receive a copy of all evaluation report forms which are placed
in the official personnel file, and shall have the right to attach written
comments.

4.

All electronic evaluation documents will be stored within the required

warehousing system as dictated by Ohio Revised Code.

5.

Bargaining unit members shall not be required to evaluate other members.

6.

The final summative evaluation shall be developed using the Ohio Teacher
Evaluation System (OTES) rubric. The final OTES summary document shall be
maintained in the official personnel file. All evaluation records, including the
results of observations, follow-up conferences, notes, and assistance to the staff
shall be maintained in the appropriate file. All written and electronic records
shall provide for comments of both parties involved and provisions of signature
of both parties prefaced with the following:

However, individuals may act as “experts in the field” to validate high-quality
student data sources which will not constitute evaluation or participation in the
evaluation of a bargaining unit member.

Signature or electronic signature indicates completion of evaluation process; not
necessarily agreement.

B.

7.

Certified staff not covered by OTES, or other mandated evaluation tools and
procedures will follow the procedures specified in Granville Form B or other
locally approved evaluation tool.

8.

Staff holding an initial full-year limited contract whose overall performance
rating is “Ineffective” will be automatically recommended for nonrenewal and
be given written notice of nonrenewal by June 1.

9.

Any staff member in the first three (3) years of District employment shall be
evaluated each year.

TEACHER DISMISSAL
1.

Termination
Termination of the contract of a teacher during its term shall be governed
50

exclusively by ORC Sections 3319.16 and 3319.161.
2.

C.

Non-renewal
a.

If the Superintendent intends to recommend to the Board the non-renewal
of a teacher's limited contract, the Superintendent shall notify the teacher
in writing of such intention no later than the date of the regular Board
meeting in April of the school year during which the teacher's limited
contract expires.

b.

Within ten (10) days after receiving such notice, the teacher may request,
and shall be granted, a conference with the Superintendent to discuss the
decision to recommend non-renewal; at such conference, the
Superintendent shall discuss with the teacher the reasons for the decision
to recommend non-renewal. The teacher shall have the right to bring an
Association representative to this meeting if he/she so chooses.

c.

After such conference, a teacher may appear before the Board prior to
final action on his/her contract. The teacher may request and shall be
granted the right to appear before the Board in executive session if he/she
so desires. The teacher shall have the right to bring an Association
representative to this meeting if he/she so chooses.

d.

If the Superintendent recommends that a member's contract be nonrenewed and the Board approves such recommendation, the employee
shall be notified in writing by June 1 of the year in which the limited
contract expires. Failure of the Administration to comply with the
provisions of this Agreement results in automatic re-employment of the
affected member on another limited contract or continuing contract if
eligible.

e.

Reduction of staff shall not be accomplished by non-renewal of teachers
but shall be governed solely by Article 18 of this Agreement.

SUPPORT STAFF EVALUATION
The Board will review the evaluation procedure and instrument for the purpose of
assessing member performance, or to modify the evaluation instrument at the
written request of either party. All evaluation programs, instruments, and schedules
at the request of either party shall be reviewed by a committee comprised of the
Superintendent, Principal(s), Association Officer(s), Association member(s), and the
Board representative(s). The evaluation procedure agreed to by this committee shall
be reduced to writing and submitted to the Association and the Board for
approval. If approved, such shall be the official evaluation procedure for support
staff employees.
51

1.

An annual written summative evaluation shall include the evaluation of the
member's total performance in his/her assigned position.

2.

An annual written evaluation shall be performed on each support staff
employee each school year using the Board-approved evaluation forms.

3.

Evaluations shall be based upon the immediate supervisor's personal
observation of a member's work and/or work product.

4.

All annual evaluations shall be reduced to writing, and a copy shall be given to
the member. If the member disagrees with the evaluation, he/she may submit
a written response which shall be attached to the file copy of the evaluation in
question.

5.

Following each written summative evaluation, which shall include the right to
a conference with the evaluator at the employee's request, the member shall
sign and be given a copy of the evaluation form. In no case shall the member's
signature be construed to mean that he/she necessarily agrees with the
contents of the evaluation.

6.

The evaluation system shall be uniform throughout the District.

7.

Evaluation criteria will be explained to members before formal evaluation.

8.

Members shall be given an opportunity to correct any noted deficiencies. The
Administration shall initiate with the member a written, definite plan for
improvement of each noted deficiency.

9.

Bargaining unit members shall not be required to evaluate other members.

10. In the event that an administrator other than the building principal or
immediate supervisor conducts an observation, the member involved shall be
given not less than twenty-four (24) hours advance notice.
D.

SUPPORT STAFF DISMISSAL
1.

If the Superintendent intends to recommend to the Board the non-renewal of
a member's limited contract, the Superintendent shall notify the member in
writing of such intention no later than thirty (30) days prior to the Board
meeting at which the recommendation shall be considered.

2.

The member may request, and shall be granted, a conference with the
Superintendent to discuss his/her recommendation.

3.

After such conference, the member may request, and shall be granted, the
right to appear before the Board in executive session if he/she so desires.
52

4.

E.

If the Board approves the Superintendent's recommendation to non-renew an
employee's contract, the employee shall be notified in writing by June 1 of the
year in which the limited contract expires. Failure of the Administration to
comply with the provisions of this Agreement shall result in the automatic reemployment of the member on the appropriate limited or continuing contract.

EVALUATION TIMELINES
See Appendix E

ARTICLE 28 - STRS/SERS PICK UP
A.

The Board will contribute to STRS/SERS an amount equal to each employee's
contribution to STRS/SERS in lieu of payment to such employee, and such amount
shall be treated as a mandatory salary reduction from the contract salary otherwise
payable to such employee.

B.

An Addendum to each employee's contract will state (1) that the employee's contract
salary is being restated as consisting of a cash salary component which is equal to
the amount of the employee contribution being "picked-up" by the Board on behalf
of the employee; (2) that the Board will contribute to STRS/SERS an amount equal
to the employee's required contribution to STRS/SERS for the account of each
bargaining unit employee; and (3) that sick leave, severance, vacation,
supplemental, and extended service pay which are indexed to or otherwise
determinable by reference to the employee's rate of pay shall be calculated upon
both the cash salary component and pick-up component of the employee's restated
salary. All subsequent contracts and salary notices for these affected employees
shall be conformed to include the provisions of the Addendum.

C.

Each member will be responsible for compliance with Internal Revenue Service
salary exclusion allowance regulations with respect to the "pick-up" in combination
with other tax deferred compensation plans.

D.

The "pick-up" shall be uniformly applied to all bargaining unit members.

ARTICLE 29 - NON-DISCRIMINATION
The Board and the Administration agree to administer all terms and conditions of
employment as stated in this Agreement equally to all members of the bargaining unit.

ARTICLE 30 - NEW EMPLOYEES
53

A.

The Board shall provide to the Association President the names and addresses of all
newly hired bargaining unit members upon request.

B.

All new members shall be given a copy of the appropriate evaluation forms and
procedures within thirty (30) days of their first day of work.

C.

All new members shall be given copies of all insurance benefits, plan booklets, and
insurance cards, within thirty (30) days of their first day of work, if available.

ARTICLE 31 - RESIDENT EDUCATOR MENTOR PROGRAM
The District shall participate in the Licking County Resident Educator Mentor Program and
shall follow all procedures and guidelines of the program.
Should, at any time in the future, the Licking County Program cease to exist or should
the District opt out of the County Program, a joint committee shall develop a District Level
Resident Educator Mentor Program.
The committee shall be comprised of two (2) members selected by the Association and
two (2) members selected by the Superintendent. Such program shall be reduced to
writing and submitted to the Association and Board for approval. If approved by both
parties, such program shall be incorporated herein by reference.
Independent of the Licking County Program, the District will offer newly hired teachers,
who are not resident educators, a building guide for the purpose of orienting the new
employee to District practices. The services of the guide will be provided for a period of
time not to exceed one (1) school year.

ARTICLE 32 - HOLIDAYS
A.

All support staff members shall be paid their regular rate of pay for the following
holidays:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

B.

New Year’s Day;
Martin Luther King Day;
Memorial Day;
Labor Day;
Thanksgiving Day;
Christmas Day.

All eleven (11) month employees, in addition to the holidays in A above, shall be
entitled to a paid holiday on Presidents' Day and Juneteenth. If an 11 month
employee’s work calendar ends prior to Juneteenth, they will not be eligible for a
paid holiday on Juneteenth. All twelve (12) month employees shall receive the
holidays in A above, President's Day, Juneteenth, and Independence Day.
54

C.

Employees required to work on holidays in addition to their regular holiday pay, shall
be paid one and one-half (1-½) times their regular rate of pay.

D.

Employees shall be offered holiday work based on seniority. The most senior
employee shall have the right of first refusal.

E.

If employees are required to work and all employees have declined such work, the
least senior employee in the affected job classification will be assigned.

ARTICLE 33 - CALAMITY DAY PAY
A.

All support staff employees shall be paid their appropriate rate of pay for all days or
part of a day when schools are closed owing to an epidemic, weather or other public
calamity.

B.

If required to work on a calamity day, an employee shall be paid straight time for
all hours worked in addition to their regular pay for the day.

ARTICLE 34 - VACATION
A.

Each regular eleven (11) or twelve (12) month support staff employee shall be
granted paid vacation as follows:
Days of Paid Vacation
Years of Completed Service
11 Mos.
1-9
10 - 19
20 or more

10
15
20

12 Mos.
12
18
24

B.

Members shall use vacation days during the month of July, except members may
use one (1) week at any time during the year other than the two (2) weeks before
and after the first and last days of school.

C.

Members may use vacation in one-half (½) day increments during the summer.

D.

Vacation pay shall be based on hours normally worked.

E.

Upon separation from employment, an employee shall be paid for all accumulated,
but unused, vacation leave at the employee's current rate of pay.

F.

Upon the death of an employee, the employee's spouse (or estate, if no spouse)
shall be paid all accumulated, but unused, vacation leave at the employee's most
recent rate of pay.

55

ARTICLE 35 - TRANSPORTATION
A.

REGULAR BUS ROUTES
1.

All regular bus routes (including kindergarten routes) shall be posted and filled
in accordance with Article 24 of this Agreement.

2.

Every driver, excluding unassigned drivers as defined in Paragraph 6 below,
shall have a regular scheduled run. The runs shall be guaranteed as follows:
a.
b.

3.

Full-time 4.5 hours per day;
Part-time 2.25 hours per day.

The time calculated for runs (4.5 hours and 2.25 hours) shall include:
a.
b.
c.

loading time;
thirty (30) minutes for pre-trip inspection and cleaning time;
dead head time.

If any run exceeds the guaranteed run hours on a regular basis, the Board will
either restructure the route or pay the driver for the time in excess of the
guaranteed run time.
A driver with a kindergarten route shall have the option of keeping or giving up
the kindergarten route for the next school year. The driver must notify his/her
supervisor by June 15 if he/she is opting to give up the route. All such waived
routes shall be posted in accordance with Article 24. If no driver bids for the
kindergarten route, the Board shall have the right to assign the route to the
least senior driver (full- or part-time).

B.

4.

The Board may permit drivers of handicapped routes to have the option of
taking their buses home.

5.

The District shall have the right to hire one (1) or more unassigned driver(s).
The driver(s) shall not be assigned to a regular and/or kindergarten route.
Unassigned driver(s) shall have the right to be placed on the extra trip rotation
list. The driver(s) will be used to substitute for absent drivers. When possible,
unassigned driver(s) shall be used to fill the routes of regular drivers who waive
their routes or a portion of their routes to drive extra trips. No regular route
driver may be involuntarily transferred to the position of unassigned driver. All
unassigned drivers shall be guaranteed 4.5 hours of work per day for full-time
drivers and 2.25 hours of work per day for part-time drivers.

ADDITIONAL VAN ROUTES
1. The Board and the Association agree that van routes, which take place during
56

the school day and are created for a variety of purposes, will use the following
parameters:
a) The routes will be paid on an hourly basis consistent with the driver’s current
hourly rate
b) The routes will be paid in 15 minute increments
c) The drivers will use vans for these routes
d) The operation of van routes will be limited to transportation personnel
e) Individual student aides may be required to ride in the vans with an assigned
student.
2. The routes will be posted and filled according to Article 24D – Transfers and
Vacancies: Support Staff Personnel- of this Agreement. Kindergarten routes are
not affected by this understanding.
C.

BREAKDOWN PAY
If a breakdown extends a driver's regularly scheduled work day thirty (30) minutes
or extends the hours of an extra trip thirty (30) minutes, the driver shall be
compensated for all extra time in fifteen (15) minute increments.

E.

TRANSPORTATION INSERVICE
If the inservice training for the transportation employee is not conducted by the
District, the transportation employees may attend another inservice with the
approval of the Transportation Supervisor. The employees attending the inservice
are required to submit proof of attendance at the entire workshop on the form
provided by the District.
Should the District require drivers to attend any inservice/training beyond those
required by the State or for a CDL, the drivers shall be paid their regular hourly rate
for all time spent at such inservice/training.

F.

SUBSTITUTES
When a driver is to be absent from work, the driver shall notify the Transportation
Supervisor at least two (2) hours before the driver's scheduled shift. The supervisor
shall be responsible for securing a substitute for the absent driver.

G.

Drivers shall be provided and shall keep confidential a list identifying students with
special problems that may require medical attention of which the Board is aware.

H.

Drivers shall have access to a telephone and the bus garage at all times.
57

I.

A full-time driver may voluntarily exchange his/her route with a part-time driver.
Such voluntary exchange must be reported to the Transportation Supervisor and
must be offered to part-time drivers in seniority order. The exchange can only be
made with the mutual consent of both drivers and the prior approval of the driver’s
supervisor(s).

J.

EXTRA TRIPS
1.

The Transportation Supervisor shall post and maintain an extra trip list. The
trip list shall include, in order of seniority, the names of all drivers (full- and
part-time), except that any driver in the Transportation Department who does
not have a current Class B CDL is ineligible for inclusion on the list (and will not
be assigned to an extra trip except in an emergency situation for which the
driver is legally qualified to provide coverage). All drivers shall remain on the
extra trip list unless the driver requests to have his/her name removed from
the list.

2.

A weekly trip meeting will be held at which available trips, including trips
approved for bid in the previous week, will be bid in seniority order (except as
otherwise specified in Paragraph 3 below) by drivers whose names are on the
extra trip list. Prior to noon on the workday immediately preceding the meeting,
any driver may surrender a trip that has already been assigned and that trip
will be added to the trips being bid at that week’s meeting.
A current list shall be maintained in the transportation office showing available
trips and trips already bid and assigned. Should a request form arrive in the
office following the weekly trip meeting for a trip scheduled prior to the next
meeting, the trip shall be assigned using the extra trip list, with available drivers
being contacted directly in seniority order. Available drivers will be considered
to be those drivers who do not currently hold a trip which is in conflict with the
trip being bid. A driver will have a minimum of one (1) hour to respond to the
personal contact regarding the extra trip. Should a request form arrive for a
trip scheduled within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of the request form,
such trip shall be considered an emergency. Emergency extra trips shall be
assigned in seniority order to available drivers as described above. For
emergency trips, the District shall only be required to attempt one (1) contact
with each available driver. The driver must immediately accept or decline the
trip. If there is less than two (2) hours advance notice for a trip, it may be
assigned to any available driver on the extra trip list

3.

If a driver on the extra trip list accepts an extra trip and then surrenders that
trip, the driver will be ineligible to take another extra trip at the next two (2)
weekly trip meetings following surrender of the trip. Exceptions for emergency
situations may be granted by the supervisor.
58

If, within the same school year, the driver again accepts an extra trip and then
surrenders that trip, the driver will be ineligible to take another extra trip at the
next four (4) weekly trip meetings following surrender of the trip. Exceptions
for emergency situations may be granted by the supervisor.
If, within the same school year, the driver again accepts an extra trip and then
surrenders that trip, the driver will be ineligible to take another extra trip at the
next eight (8) weekly trip meetings following surrender of the trip. Exceptions
for emergency situations may be granted by the supervisor.
If, within the same school year, the driver again accepts an extra trip and then
surrenders that trip, the driver will be ineligible to take another extra trip for
the remainder of that school year. Exceptions for emergency situations may be
granted by the supervisor.
If an extra trip changes by more than two hours or the date changes, the driver
can surrender the trip, and that driver will be eligible to bid on other trips at
subsequent trip meetings.
It is mutually recognized that the operation of this Paragraph is not disciplinary
in nature.
4.

All extra trip requests shall be filled in the order in which they are received in
the transportation office.

5.

Any time a driver accepts or declines an extra trip, that driver shall be charged
on the appropriate list. If the extra trip conflicts with the driver's regular route,
the driver shall, at his/her option, have the right to forfeit all or part of his/her
regular paid route and take the extra trip.

6.

Should the number of buses needed for extra trips on any given day exceed
the number of buses available in the District, excluding route and necessary
spare buses, the Transportation Supervisor shall have the right to deny drivers
their right to waive all or part of their regular routes.

7.

If a driver reports to the garage to drive an extra trip, and the trip is cancelled,
the driver will be paid for two (2) hours at his/her extra trip rate of pay.

8.

On extra trips where a portion of the student participants are scheduled to
return prior to the other students, the driver(s) returning early shall be selected
as follows:
a.
b.

K.

A volunteer will be solicited first, then
The least senior driver shall return first with the other driver(s)returning
in ascending seniority order.

SUMMER TRANSPORTATION
59

All student transportation services shall be assigned in the following manner during
the period from the last day of the immediately preceding school year until the first
day of the upcoming school year. This period is typically June, July and August.
All transportation services that are longer than two (2) days in duration shall be
posted according to the appropriate Articles in this Agreement and be considered
vacancies.
All transportation services of a duration of two (2) days or less during the summer
months shall be assigned according to order of seniority. This shall only apply to
those bargaining unit members who indicate a willingness to take such assignments
during the summer. The bargaining unit member shall complete a form indicating
such an interest during the last week of the school year and submit it to his/her
supervisor. The supervisor will contact any member, in seniority order, when any
transportation need arises in order for the member to accept or decline the
opportunity. The individual member shall be under no obligation to take any summer
trip. If all members who indicated an interest decline, the Transportation Supervisor
may then contact substitute employees or assign the trip as he/she seesfit. It is
mutually understood that a driver in the Transportation Department who does not
have a current Class B CDL is ineligible to take summer extra trips exceptin an
emergency situation for which the driver is legally qualified to provide coverage.
L.

The Board will notify the Association no later than six (6) months prior to its intent
to subcontract all District transportation services.
At the request of the Association, the Board and Association will meet to discuss the
proposed subcontracting. The Board will not take action on the subcontracting prior
to this meeting.
To the extent, if any, that currently unforeseeable needs to provide non-regular
transportation services arise in the future, such needs will be assessed case-by-case.
If the District believes such a need will best be handled through contracting with an
outside organization, the District’s Transportation Supervisor will, within forty-eight
(48) hours, notify the Association President of that belief and representatives of the
parties will thereupon promptly attempt to come to a mutual agreement on how to
proceed. Such notification will be through a personal or telephone contact with a
follow-up written confirmation. It is mutually recognized that, if agreement is not
achieved within fourteen (14) calendar days following such notice to the Association
President, the matter is reviewable under Article 3, Grievance Procedure. For the
duration of the 14-day period in the absence of a mutual agreement on how to
proceed, the District will assign such transportation to a substitute District employee
on any work day occurring within the period.
This is not intended to address or affect the District’s transportation agreements and
historical practice with reference to other Ohio school districts, MRDD boards, public
transportation, or parents.
60

ARTICLE 36 - SUPPORT STAFF DISCIPLINE
A.

No support staff employee who has completed one (1) year of service with the
District shall be disciplined without just cause and compliance with applicable
provisions of this Agreement.

B.

The Board has complete discretion to institute discipline at any level. However, when
practical, the Board shall consider the principles of progressive discipline andmay
follow the following sequence:
1.
2.
3.
4.

C.

No disciplinary action will be taken until the member has had a meeting with his/her
immediate supervisor. The member shall have the right to Association
representation at all such meetings. At the meeting, the member shall:
a.
b.

D.

Verbal reprimand;
Written reprimand that includes a statement of administrative expectations to
address the issue;
Suspension without pay of between one (1) to ten (10) work days duration.
Termination, which shall be governed exclusively by ORC Section 3319.081 (C).

be informed of the alleged actions leading to the proposed discipline, and
be afforded the opportunity to present a response to the charges.

All appeals of reprimands and suspensions shall follow the Grievance Procedure
included in this Agreement. Termination appeals shall be in accordance with relevant
statutory provisions.

ARTICLE 37 - HIRING OF STRS OR SERS RETIREES
A.

The Board may offer up to (fifteen) 15 years of experience to the re-employed STRS
or SERS retiree.

B.

A re-employed retiree shall receive one-year, limited contract of employment. Such
contract shall automatically terminate at the end of each school year without further

action, notice, or procedure by the District. Continued employment from contract to
contract will be solely at the discretion of the Board; however, the Board agreesnot to renew
the employment of a retiree if the contract of a non-retired employeein the teaching field
(or classification in the case of support staff) would be suspended under the reduction-inforce provisions of Article 18 of this Agreement. A re-employed retiree shall be ineligible for
a continuing contract of employment, regardless of years of service with the District.

C.

A re-employed retiree who is not eligible to participate in insurance fringe benefits
through STRS or SERS, whichever is applicable, may participate in Board-provided
insurance benefits in accordance with Appendix A of this Agreement. A retiree who
can obtain insurance benefits through the applicable retirement system is not eligible
to obtain benefits under Appendix A. Re-employed retirees shall not be eligible for
61

the insurance opt-out program.
D.

Upon re-employment, the retiree will be credited with zero (0) year’s seniority and
seniority will not accrue.

E.

A re-employed retiree will in no event qualify for fee waivers, tuition reimbursement,
severance pay or sabbatical leave under this Agreement.

F.

A re-employed retiree will not be hired if it prevents a qualified pre-retirement
employee from advancing within the discipline or being denied a voluntary transfer
for which he/she qualifies.

ARTICLE 38 - PART-TIME TEACHERS
A.

A part-time teacher is defined as one who is regularly employed for less than seven
and three-fourths (7 ¾) hours per day or for less than the regular school work week.

B.

A part-time teacher is granted sick leave and personal leave days based on time
actually worked, earned at the same rate that applies to full-time teachers.

C.

Insurance fringe benefits for a part-time teacher are granted in accordance with
Appendix A of this Agreement.

D.

A part-time teacher’s eligibility for lunch and/or planning time is governed by the
following rules:
1.

A part-time teacher required to work fewer than 130 minutes (inclusive of
planning time) in his/her regular work day is not eligible for a lunch period
but will be accorded a one-half (1/2) planning period.

2.

A part-time teacher required to work 131-219 minutes (inclusive of planning
time) in his/her regular work day is not eligible for a lunch period but will
be accorded a full planning period.

3.

A part-time teacher required to work 220 minutes or more (inclusive of
planning time) in his/her regular work day is eligible for a lunch period under
Article 25, Section B of this Agreement and will be accorded a full planning
period.

E.

A part-time teacher who, with respect to a required event or work day identified
as a teacher work day on the school calendar, is required to work more than
his/her normal day will be compensated at his/her regular hourly rate for such
required time that exceeds the normal day.

F.

A part-time teacher is eligible for tuition reimbursement under Article 26 of this
Agreement for up to a maximum of three (3) semester hours annually.
62

G.

Except as otherwise delineated in this Article, a part-time teacher will receive all
rights and benefits of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 39 – DURATION
A.

TERM OF AGREEMENT
The terms of this Agreement shall be from 12:01 a.m. July 1, 2022, through 11:59
p.m. June 30, 2025, following ratification by both parties.

B.

AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
This Agreement may be added to, deleted from or otherwise changed only by an
amendment properly signed and ratified by each party.

C.

PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PRACTICES
Should there be a conflict between this Agreement and any Board policy or practice,
the terms of this Agreement shall prevail.

D. ORC 3302.10 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
As required by ORC Section 3302.10, the provisions of Section 3302.10 are
incorporated by reference as part of this Agreement. Section 3302.10 will have no
effect on any provisions of this Agreement unless the District meets the
requirements that trigger operation of the statute and the Superintendent of Public
Instruction notifies the District that it is subject to the provisions of the statute.
Should the District enter into the provisions of Section 3302.10, the parties’ intent
is ultimately to emerge with this Agreement intact. The Board acknowledges that
the Association has not waived any right to challenge the legality of Section
3302.10, either on its face or as applied.
E.

COPIES OF THIS AGREEMENT
Within thirty (30) days of ratification by both parties, a copy of this Agreement shall
be sent to the State Employment Relations Board. The Association shall supply each
member with a copy of this Agreement and the Board shall provide each Board
member and administrator with a copy within fifty (50) days.

F.

SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Agreement or any application of this Agreement to any
employee or group of employees shall be found to be contrary to law, then such
provision or application shall not be deemed valid to the extent prohibited by law,
but all other provisions or applications shall continue in full force and effect. The
63

Agreement itself will remain in full force and effect for its duration; however, the
parties will meet within ten (10) days for the purpose of re-negotiating only the
provision(s) found to be contrary to the law.
G.

COMPLETE AGREEMENT
The parties acknowledge that during the bargaining which resulted in this
Agreement, each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and
proposals on any subject within the scope of bargaining. The understandings and
agreements arrived after the exercise of the right and opportunity are set forth
herein, and the parties agree that this Agreement constitutes the entire agreement
between them. All prior agreements, practices, rules, or regulations not contained
herein shall not be binding upon the parties.

64

2022-2025 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT

65

INSURANCE
A.

APPENDIX A

GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.

For all members of the bargaining unit, whether single or married, the Board
will purchase from a carrier licensed by the State of Ohio, insurance coverage
in the medical, dental, and vision areas with the following provisions:
a.

For the remainder of calendar 2022, the Board will continue to provide
medical coverage and benefit levels on the same terms, and with the same
employee contributions toward monthly premium cost, that were in effect
during the first half of calendar 2022.

b.

Effective January 1, 2023, medical insurance benefits provided to
insurance-eligible employees will be provided under a 2-tier HighDeductible Health Plan (HDHP) with Health Savings Account (HSA)
contributions partially funded by the Board in accordance with the
provisions below. The Board’s health insurance plan will comply with Ohio
law and cover dependents until they attain the age of 26. The employee
may choose either the lower-tier HDHP(generally designed for those who
expect relatively high usage and/or have a low tolerance for risk) or the
higher-tier HDHP (generally designedfor those who expect relatively low
usage and/or have a higher tolerancefor risk). The medical coverage and
benefit levels for the two (2) HDHPs appear in Appendix A-1 of this
Agreement. The following concepts also apply depending upon which
HDHP the employee chooses:
(1) Lower-Tier HDHP
The lower-tier HDHP has an annual deductible of $2,000 for
single in-network coverage and $4,000 for family in-network
coverage with an annual out-of-pocket maximum of $3,000 for
single in-network coverage and $6,000 for family in-network
coverage. The employee is responsible for 100% of the cost of
covered claims up to the applicable deductible and 20% of the
cost of covered claims thereafter, up to out-of-pocket maximum.
After the out-of-pocket maximum has been reached, the HDHP
covers 100% of covered claims thereafter within the insurance
year.
(2) Higher-Tier HDHP
The higher-tier HDHP has an annual deductible of $4,000 for
single in-network coverage and $8,000 for family in-network
coverage with an annual out-of-pocket maximum of $4,500 for
66

single in-network coverage and $9,000 for family in-network
coverage. (For employees who choose family coverage, it is
understood that the out-of-pocket maximum for any covered
individual is $4,500 toward the $9,000.) The employee is
responsible for 100% of the cost of covered claims up to the
applicable deductible and 20% of the cost of covered claims
thereafter, up to out-of-pocket maximum. After the out-ofpocket maximum has been reached, the HDHP covers 100% of
covered claims thereafter within the insurance year.
(3) Employee Percentage of Premium and Board HSA Contributions
Employees shall pay a percentage of the monthly premium based on
the chart below. In addition, on the first pay day of January, the
Board shall contribute into the participating employee’s HSA the
amounts listed in the chart below.
Employee
Classification/Plan
Certified
Low
Classified
Certified
High
Classified

Single
Family
Single
Family
Single
Family
Single
Family

Effective January 1, 2023
Effective January 1, 2024
Effective January 1, 2025
Employee Annual Board Employee Annual Board Employee Annual Board
Percentage
HSA
Percentage
HSA
Percentage
HSA
of Premium Contribution of Premium Contribution of Premium Contribution
8%
$0
7.5%
$0
6.75%
$0
6.75%
$0
7.5%
$0
8%
$0
5%
$0
5%
$0
5%
$0
5%
$0
5%
$0
5%
$0
5%
$1,000
5.75%
$1,000
7%
$1,000
5%
$2,000
5.75%
$2,000
7%
$2,000
5%
$2,000
5%
$2,000
5%
$2,000
5%
$4,000
5%
$4,000
5%
$4,000

(4) It is mutually understood that both HDHPs and HSA
contributions must comply at all times with applicable tax and
other laws. A function of the District’s insurance committee
identified in subparagraph e. below is to keep abreast of legal
developments and make appropriate recommendations, as
necessary, to ensure compliance with statutory and/or
regulatory requirements.
c.

If any employee elects to decline medical insurance coverage, they shall
receive a one-time cash payment of $800 for each year they decline family
coverage ($300.00 for those with individual coverage).

d.

When an employee and spouse are both employed by the Board, the
coverage shall be limited to one (1) family plan or two (2) individual plans.

e.

The District’s insurance committee will convene periodically and is charged
with the responsibility of gathering and assessing data relevant to health
insurance trends and options and how such data should affect theDistrict’s
67

health insurance plan. This Committee is empowered to make
recommendations to the Board and Association regarding the District’s
medical insurance coverages and benefit levels. Any such
recommendation that is approved by the parties will be implemented.
2. A part-time teacher or support staff employee hired after the 1987-1988
school year but prior to the 2006-2007 school year will continue to participate
in the plan on the same terms and practice that applied under the parties’
2003-2006 Agreement.
A part-time teacher or support staff employee hired on or after July 1, 2006 for
less than 50% of, respectively, the normal teacher workload or the normal daily
hours applicable to the particular support staff position may participate in the
plan at no expense to the Board. If hired for 50% or more of the normal teacher
workload or normal daily hours of the support staff position, such teacher or
support staff employee who participates in the plan shall pay a prorated share
of the Board’s contribution for the duration of this Agreement.For purposes of
this provision, it is mutually understood that “normal daily hours” for a support
staff position refers to the hours per day specified for thatposition in the Support
Salary Schedule appearing in Appendix C of this Agreement; it is further
understood, in the case of a driver, that “position” refers to a full-time driver
only.
Examples:
A .5 teacher would pay .5 of the Board’s contribution, a .75 teacher would
pay .25 of the Board’s contribution, etc.
A 3.5 hours per day educational aide would pay .5 of the Board’s
contribution, a 5.25 hours per day educational aide would pay .25 of the
Board’s contribution, etc.
A 2.25 hours per day driver would pay .5 of the Board’s contribution, a 3
hours per day driver would pay.33 of the Board’s contribution, a 4 hours
per day driver would pay .11 of the Board’s contribution, etc.
3.

The Board retains the right to send any insurance coverage out for bid in an
attempt to reduce its costs.

4.

Upon written request, the Association shall be provided a copy of the actual
contract(s) between the Board and the insurance carrier(s) and all related
information.

5.

The Board also agrees to institute and maintain a Section 125 cafeteria plan at
no cost to the members so long as permitted by law.

6.

The Board agrees to provide dental, vision, and life insurance coverage.
68

B.

POLICY HANDBOOK
All employees under this coverage shall receive a detailed certificate of insurance as
soon as possible but no later than thirty (30) days after the effective date of this
Agreement.

C.

LIFE INSURANCE
The Board shall provide a $15,000 life insurance policy for each bargaining unit
member.

D.

ALTERNATIVE INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR PAYMENTS IN LIEU
Annually prior to the start of the District’s insurance year, each employee will certify
on a form furnished by the District Treasurer whether health insurance benefits are
available to the employee through his/her spouse. The form will include notice that
an employee otherwise eligible for health insurance benefits through the Board may
voluntarily elect to decline such coverage in favor of the cash payment identified in
Section A, Paragraph 1, c, of this Appendix. After the initial certification under this
provision, the Treasurer may elect to furnish the form only to newly hired employees
in subsequent years.

69

APPENDIX A-1

70

APPENDIX A-2

71

72

APPENDIX B
GRANVILLE EDUCATION ASSOCIATION
FORMAL WRITTEN GRIEVANCE FORM

NAME OF GRIEVANT

DATE

ARTICLE(S) VIOLATED:
DATE OF ALLEGED VIOLATION:
BRIEF STATEMENT OF GRIEVANCE:

RESOLUTION SOUGHT:

DATE OF INFORMAL HEARING (LEVEL I):
DISPOSITION:

SUPERVISOR:

DATE

DATE SUBMITTED AT LEVEL II:

GRIEVANT:

DATE OF LEVEL II HEARING

73

DISPOSITION:

SUPERVISOR:

DATE

DATE SUBMITTED AT LEVEL III: _

GRIEVANT: _

DATE OF LEVEL III HEARING:
DISPOSITION:

SUPERINTENDENT:

DATE _

DATE SENT TO LEVEL V - ARBITRATION:
SIGNED FOR THE GRIEVANT
SIGNED FOR THE ASSOCIATION
TITLE

74

APPENDIX C

GRANVILLE EDUCATION ASSOCIATION
TEACHER SALARY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2022
40,968 Index
1
1.0000
2
1.0550
3
1.1100
4
1.1650
5
1.2200
6
1.2750
7
1.3300
8
1.3750
9
1.4200
10
1.4650
11
1.5100
12
1.5550
13
1.5900
14
1.5962
15
1.6023
16
1.6085
17
1.6146
18
1.6208
1.6270
19
20
1.6331
1.6393
21
22
1.6470
23
1.6547
24
1.6624
25
1.6701
26
1.6778
27
1.6886
28
1.6993
1.7101
29
30
1.7209
31
1.7317
32
1.7426
33
1.7535
34

BA
Index
40,968 1.0650
43,221 1.1200
45,475 1.1750
47,728 1.2300
49,981 1.2850
52,234 1.3400
54,488 1.3950
56,331 1.4500
58,175 1.5050
60,018 1.5600
61,862 1.6150
63,705 1.6700
65,139 1.7100
65,393 1.7162
65,643 1.7223
65,897 1.7285
66,147 1.7346
66,401 1.7408
66,655 1.7470
66,905 1.7531
67,159 1.7593
67,474 1.7670
67,790 1.7747
68,105 1.7824
68,421 1.7901
68,736 1.7978
69,179 1.8086
69,617 1.8193
70,060 1.8301
70,502 1.8409
70,944 1.8517
71,390 1.8626
71,838 1.8735

2022-2023
BA + 150 Index
MA
Index MA + 25 Index MA + 40
43,631 1.1500 47,113 1.2300 50,391 1.2800 52,439
45,884 1.2200 49,981 1.3100 53,668 1.3600 55,717
48,138 1.2900 52,849 1.3900 56,946 1.4400 58,994
50,391 1.3600 55,717 1.4700 60,223 1.5200 62,272
52,644 1.4300 58,584 1.5500 63,501 1.6000 65,549
54,897 1.5000 61,452 1.6300 66,778 1.6800 68,826
57,151 1.5700 64,320 1.7100 70,055 1.7600 72,104
59,404 1.6400 67,188 1.7900 73,333 1.8400 75,381
61,657 1.7100 70,055 1.8700 76,610 1.9200 78,659
63,910 1.7800 72,923 1.9500 79,888 2.0000 81,936
66,163 1.8500 75,791 2.0300 83,165 2.0800 85,214
68,417 1.9200 78,659 2.1100 86,443 2.1600 88,491
70,055 1.9700 80,707 2.1650 88,696 2.2150 90,744
70,309 1.9762 80,961 2.1712 88,950 2.2212 90,998
70,559 1.9823 81,211 2.1773 89,200 2.2273 91,248
70,813 1.9885 81,465 2.1835 89,454 2.2335 91,502
71,063 1.9946 81,715 2.1896 89,704 2.2396 91,752
71,317 2.0008 81,969 2.1958 89,958 2.2458 92,006
71,571 2.0070 82,223 2.2020 90,212 2.2520 92,260
71,821 2.0131 82,473 2.2081 90,462 2.2581 92,510
72,075 2.0193 82,727 2.2143 90,716 2.2643 92,764
72,391 2.0270 83,042 2.2220 91,031 2.2720 93,080
72,706 2.0347 83,358 2.2297 91,347 2.2797 93,395
73,022 2.0424 83,673 2.2374 91,662 2.2874 93,710
73,337 2.0501 83,989 2.2451 91,977 2.2951 94,026
73,652 2.0578 84,304 2.2528 92,293 2.3028 94,341
74,095 2.0686 84,747 2.2636 92,735 2.3136 94,784
74,533 2.0793 85,185 2.2743 93,174 2.3243 95,222
74,976 2.0901 85,627 2.2851 93,616 2.3351 95,665
75,418 2.1009 86,070 2.2959 94,059 2.3459 96,107
75,861 2.1117 86,512 2.3067 94,501 2.3567 96,550
76,306 2.1226 86,957 2.3176 94,946 2.3675 96,994
76,753 2.1335 87,404 2.3285 95,392 2.3784 97,441
2.1444 87,851 2.3394 95,839 2.3893 97,887

75

TEACHER SALARY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023

42,095 Index
1
1.0000
2
1.0550
3
1.1100
4
1.1650
1.2200
5
6
1.2750
7
1.3300
8
1.3750
9
1.4200
1.4650
10
11
1.5100
12
1.5550
13
1.5900
14
1.5962
1.6023
15
16
1.6085
17
1.6146
18
1.6208
19
1.6270
1.6331
20
21
1.6393
22
1.6470
23
1.6547
24
1.6624
1.6701
25
26
1.6778
27
1.6886
28
1.6993
29
1.7101
1.7209
30
31
1.7317
32
1.7426
33
1.7535
34

2023-2024
BA
Index BA + 150 Index
MA
Index MA + 25 Index
42,095 1.0650 44,831 1.1500 48,409 1.2300 51,777 1.2800
44,410 1.1200 47,146 1.2200 51,356 1.3100 55,144 1.3600
46,725 1.1750 49,461 1.2900 54,302 1.3900 58,512 1.4400
49,040 1.2300 51,777 1.3600 57,249 1.4700 61,879 1.5200
51,356 1.2850 54,092 1.4300 60,195 1.5500 65,247 1.6000
53,671 1.3400 56,407 1.5000 63,142 1.6300 68,614 1.6800
55,986 1.3950 58,722 1.5700 66,089 1.7100 71,982 1.7600
57,880 1.4500 61,037 1.6400 69,035 1.7900 75,350 1.8400
59,775 1.5050 63,353 1.7100 71,982 1.8700 78,717 1.9200
61,669 1.5600 65,668 1.7800 74,929 1.9500 82,085 2.0000
63,563 1.6150 67,983 1.8500 77,875 2.0300 85,452 2.0800
65,457 1.6700 70,298 1.9200 80,822 2.1100 88,820 2.1600
66,931 1.7100 71,982 1.9700 82,927 2.1650 91,135 2.2150
67,192 1.7162 72,243 1.9762 83,188 2.1712 91,396 2.2212
67,448 1.7223 72,500 1.9823 83,444 2.1773 91,653 2.2273
67,709 1.7285 72,761 1.9885 83,705 2.1835 91,914 2.2335
67,966 1.7346 73,018 1.9946 83,962 2.1896 92,171 2.2396
68,227 1.7408 73,279 2.0008 84,223 2.1958 92,432 2.2458
68,488 1.7470 73,539 2.0070 84,484 2.2020 92,693 2.2520
68,745 1.7531 73,796 2.0131 84,741 2.2081 92,949 2.2581
69,006 1.7593 74,057 2.0193 85,002 2.2143 93,210 2.2643
69,330 1.7670 74,381 2.0270 85,326 2.2220 93,534 2.2720
69,654 1.7747 74,706 2.0347 85,650 2.2297 93,859 2.2797
69,978 1.7824 75,030 2.0424 85,974 2.2374 94,183 2.2874
70,302 1.7901 75,354 2.0501 86,298 2.2451 94,507 2.2951
70,627 1.7978 75,678 2.0578 86,623 2.2528 94,831 2.3028
71,081 1.8086 76,133 2.0686 87,077 2.2636 95,286 2.3136
71,532 1.8193 76,583 2.0793 87,528 2.2743 95,736 2.3243
71,986 1.8301 77,038 2.0901 87,982 2.2851 96,191 2.3351
72,441 1.8409 77,492 2.1009 88,437 2.2959 96,645 2.3459
72,895 1.8517 77,947 2.1117 88,891 2.3067 97,100 2.3567
73,353 1.8626 78,404 2.1226 89,348 2.3176 97,557 2.3675
73,813 1.8735 78,864 2.1335 89,808 2.3285 98,016 2.3784
2.1444 90,267 2.3394 98,474 2.3893

76

MA + 40
53,881
57,249
60,616
63,984
67,352
70,719
74,087
77,454
80,822
84,189
87,557
90,925
93,240
93,501
93,758
94,019
94,275
94,536
94,797
95,054
95,315
95,639
95,963
96,287
96,612
96,936
97,390
97,841
98,295
98,750
99,205
99,661
100,120
100,579

TEACHER SALARY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2024

43,252 Index
1
1.0000
2
1.0550
3
1.1100
4
1.1650
1.2200
5
6
1.2750
7
1.3300
8
1.3750
9
1.4200
10
1.4650
11
1.5100
12
1.5550
13
1.5900
14
1.5962
15
1.6023
16
1.6085
17
1.6146
18
1.6208
19
1.6270
1.6331
20
21
1.6393
22
1.6470
23
1.6547
24
1.6624
25
1.6701
26
1.6778
27
1.6886
28
1.6993
29
1.7101
30
1.7209
31
1.7317
32
1.7426
33
1.7535
34

2024-2025
BA
Index BA + 150 Index
MA
43,252 1.0650 46,064 1.1500 49,740
45,631 1.1200 48,443 1.2200 52,768
48,010 1.1750 50,821 1.2900 55,796
50,389 1.2300 53,200 1.3600 58,823
52,768 1.2850 55,579 1.4300 61,851
55,147 1.3400 57,958 1.5000 64,879
57,526 1.3950 60,337 1.5700 67,906
59,472 1.4500 62,716 1.6400 70,934
61,418 1.5050 65,095 1.7100 73,961
63,365 1.5600 67,474 1.7800 76,989
65,311 1.6150 69,853 1.8500 80,017
67,257 1.6700 72,231 1.9200 83,044
68,771 1.7100 73,961 1.9700 85,207
69,039 1.7162 74,230 1.9762 85,475
69,303 1.7223 74,493 1.9823 85,739
69,571 1.7285 74,762 1.9885 86,007
69,835 1.7346 75,026 1.9946 86,271
70,103 1.7408 75,294 2.0008 86,539
70,372 1.7470 75,562 2.0070 86,807
70,635 1.7531 75,826 2.0131 87,071
70,904 1.7593 76,094 2.0193 87,339
71,237 1.7670 76,427 2.0270 87,672
71,570 1.7747 76,760 2.0347 88,006
71,903 1.7824 77,093 2.0424 88,339
72,236 1.7901 77,426 2.0501 88,672
72,569 1.7978 77,759 2.0578 89,005
73,036 1.8086 78,226 2.0686 89,472
73,499 1.8193 78,689 2.0793 89,935
73,966 1.8301 79,156 2.0901 90,402
74,433 1.8409 79,623 2.1009 90,869
74,900 1.8517 80,090 2.1117 91,336
75,370 1.8626 80,560 2.1226 91,805
75,843 1.8735 81,033 2.1335 92,277
2.1444 92,749

77

Index MA + 25 Index MA + 40
1.2300 53,200 1.2800 55,363
1.3100 56,661 1.3600 58,823
1.3900 60,121 1.4400 62,283
1.4700 63,581 1.5200 65,744
1.5500 67,041 1.6000 69,204
1.6300 70,501 1.6800 72,664
1.7100 73,961 1.7600 76,124
1.7900 77,422 1.8400 79,584
1.8700 80,882 1.9200 83,044
1.9500 84,342 2.0000 86,505
2.0300 87,802 2.0800 89,965
2.1100 91,262 2.1600 93,425
2.1650 93,641 2.2150 95,804
2.1712 93,909 2.2212 96,072
2.1773 94,173 2.2273 96,336
2.1835 94,441 2.2335 96,604
2.1896 94,705 2.2396 96,868
2.1958 94,973 2.2458 97,136
2.2020 95,242 2.2520 97,404
2.2081 95,505 2.2581 97,668
2.2143 95,774 2.2643 97,936
2.2220 96,107 2.2720 98,269
2.2297 96,440 2.2797 98,602
2.2374 96,773 2.2874 98,935
2.2451 97,106 2.2951 99,268
2.2528 97,439 2.3028 99,601
2.2636 97,906 2.3136 100,069
2.2743 98,369 2.3243 100,531
2.2851 98,836 2.3351 100,999
2.2959 99,303 2.3459 101,466
2.3067 99,770 2.3567 101,933
2.3176 100,239 2.3675 102,402
2.3285 100,711 2.3784 102,873
2.3394 101,183 2.3893 103,345

FULL TIME BUS DRIVER SALARY SCHEDULE
189 DAYS PER YEAR
4.5 HOURS PER DAY
Step
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

Base

Index
1.0000
1.0160
1.0320
1.0480
1.0640
1.0800
1.0960
1.1120
1.1280
1.1440
1.1600
1.1760
1.1920
1.2080
1.2240
1.2400
1.2560
1.2720
1.2880
1.3040
1.3202

Bus Driver
2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
15,315
15,736
16,169
15,315
15,736
16,169
15,560
15,988
16,428
15,805
16,240
16,687
16,050
16,492
16,945
16,295
16,744
17,204
16,540
16,995
17,463
16,786
17,247
17,721
17,031
17,499
17,980
17,276
17,751
18,239
17,521
18,002
18,498
17,766
18,254
18,756
18,011
18,506
19,015
18,256
18,758
19,274
18,501
19,010
19,532
18,746
19,261
19,791
18,991
19,513
20,050
19,236
19,765
20,308
19,481
20,017
20,567
19,726
20,269
20,826
19,971
20,520
21,085
20,219
20,775
21,347

78

PART TIME BUS DRIVER SALARY SCHEDULE
189 DAYS PER YEAR
2.25 HOURS PER DAY
Part-Time Bus Driver
Index 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
15,315
15,736
16,169
Base
1
0.5000
7,658
7,868
8,085
2
0.5080
7,780
7,994
8,214
3
0.5160
7,903
8,120
8,343
4
0.5240
8,025
8,246
8,473
5
0.5320
8,148
8,372
8,602
6
0.5400
8,270
8,498
8,731
7
0.5480
8,393
8,624
8,861
8
0.5560
8,515
8,749
8,990
9
0.5640
8,638
8,875
9,119
10
0.5720
8,760
9,001
9,249
11
0.5800
8,883
9,127
9,378
12
0.5880
9,005
9,253
9,507
13
0.5960
9,128
9,379
9,637
14
0.6040
9,250
9,505
9,766
15
0.6120
9,373
9,631
9,896
16
0.6200
9,495
9,757
10,025
17
0.6280
9,618
9,882
10,154
18
0.6360
9,741
10,008
10,284
19
0.6440
9,863
10,134
10,413
20
0.6520
9,986
10,260
10,542
21
0.6601
10,110
10,388
10,673

Step

79

MECHANIC SALARY SCHEDULE
260 DAYS PER YEAR
8 HOURS PER DAY
Step

Index

Base
1
1.0000
2
1.0218
3
1.0436
4
1.0654
5
1.0872
6
1.1090
7
1.1308
8
1.1526
9
1.1744
10
1.1962
11
1.2180
12
1.2398
13
1.2616
14
1.2834
15
1.3052
16
1.3270
17
1.3488
18
1.3706
19
1.3924
20
1.4142
21
1.4363

Mechanic
2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
39,232
40,311
41,420
39,232
40,311
41,420
40,087
41,190
42,323
40,943
42,069
43,226
41,798
42,947
44,128
42,653
43,826
45,031
43,509
44,705
45,934
44,364
45,584
46,837
45,219
46,463
47,740
46,074
47,341
48,643
46,930
48,220
49,546
47,785
49,099
50,449
48,640
49,978
51,352
49,495
50,856
52,255
50,351
51,735
53,158
51,206
52,614
54,061
52,061
53,493
54,964
52,916
54,372
55,867
53,772
55,250
56,770
54,627
56,129
57,673
55,482
57,008
58,576
56,351
57,900
59,493

80

EDUCATIONAL AIDE SALARY SCHEDULE
186 DAYS PER YEAR
7 HOURS PER DAY
Educational Aide
Step
Index 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
17,526
18,008
18,504
Base
1
1.0000
17,526
18,008
18,504
2
1.0210
17,894
18,386
18,892
3
1.0420
18,262
18,765
19,281
4
1.0630
18,630
19,143
19,669
5
1.0840
18,999
19,521
20,058
6
1.1050
19,367
19,899
20,446
7
1.1260
19,735
20,277
20,835
8
1.1470
20,103
20,656
21,224
9
1.1680
20,471
21,034
21,612
10
1.1890
20,839
21,412
22,001
11
1.2100
21,207
21,790
22,389
12
1.2310
21,575
22,168
22,778
13
1.2520
21,943
22,546
23,166
14
1.2730
22,311
22,925
23,555
15
1.2940
22,679
23,303
23,944
16
1.3150
23,047
23,681
24,332
17
1.3360
23,415
24,059
24,721
18
1.3570
23,783
24,437
25,109
19
1.3780
24,151
24,815
25,498
20
1.3990
24,519
25,194
25,886
21
1.4203
24,893
25,578
26,281

81

SPECIAL EDUCATION AIDE SALARY SCHEDULE
186 DAYS PER YEAR
7 HOURS PER DAY
Educational Aide
Step
Index 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
17,526
18,008
18,504
Base
1
1.0000
17,526
18,008
18,504
2
1.0210
17,894
18,386
18,892
3
1.0420
18,262
18,765
19,281
4
1.0630
18,630
19,143
19,669
5
1.0840
18,999
19,521
20,058
6
1.1050
19,367
19,899
20,446
7
1.1260
19,735
20,277
20,835
8
1.1470
20,103
20,656
21,224
9
1.1680
20,471
21,034
21,612
10
1.1890
20,839
21,412
22,001
11
1.2100
21,207
21,790
22,389
12
1.2310
21,575
22,168
22,778
13
1.2520
21,943
22,546
23,166
14
1.2730
22,311
22,925
23,555
15
1.2940
22,679
23,303
23,944
16
1.3150
23,047
23,681
24,332
17
1.3360
23,415
24,059
24,721
18
1.3570
23,783
24,437
25,109
19
1.3780
24,151
24,815
25,498
20
1.3990
24,519
25,194
25,886
21
1.4203
24,893
25,578
26,281

82

PRINCIPAL’S SECRETARY SALARY SCHEDULE
231 DAYS PER YEAR
7.5 HOURS PER DAY
231 Principal Secretary
Step
Index 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
27,126
27,872
28,639
Base
1
1.0000
27,126
27,872
28,639
2
1.0240
27,777
28,541
29,326
3
1.0480
28,428
29,210
30,013
4
1.0720
29,079
29,879
30,701
5
1.0960
29,730
30,548
31,388
6
1.1200
30,381
31,217
32,075
7
1.1440
31,032
31,886
32,763
8
1.1680
31,683
32,555
33,450
9
1.1920
32,334
33,224
34,137
10
1.2160
32,985
33,892
34,824
11
1.2400
33,636
34,561
35,512
12
1.2640
34,287
35,230
36,199
13
1.2880
34,938
35,899
36,886
14
1.3120
35,589
36,568
37,574
15
1.3360
36,240
37,237
38,261
16
1.3600
36,892
37,906
38,948
17
1.3840
37,543
38,575
39,636
18
1.4080
38,194
39,244
40,323
19
1.4320
38,845
39,913
41,010
20
1.4560
39,496
40,582
41,698
21
1.4804
40,158
41,262
42,397

83

211 DAY PRINCIPAL’S SECRETARY SALARY SCHEDULE
211 DAYS PER YEAR
7.5 HOURS PER DAY
211 Principal Secretary
Step
Index 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
24,778
25,460
26,160
Base
1
1.0000
24,778
25,460
26,160
2
1.0240
25,373
26,071
26,788
3
1.0480
25,968
26,682
27,415
4
1.0720
26,562
27,293
28,043
5
1.0960
27,157
27,904
28,671
6
1.1200
27,752
28,515
29,299
7
1.1440
28,346
29,126
29,927
8
1.1680
28,941
29,737
30,555
9
1.1920
29,536
30,348
31,182
10
1.2160
30,130
30,959
31,810
11
1.2400
30,725
31,570
32,438
12
1.2640
31,320
32,181
33,066
13
1.2880
31,914
32,792
33,694
14
1.3120
32,509
33,403
34,322
15
1.3360
33,104
34,014
34,949
16
1.3600
33,698
34,625
35,577
17
1.3840
34,293
35,236
36,205
18
1.4080
34,888
35,847
36,833
19
1.4320
35,482
36,458
37,461
20
1.4560
36,077
37,069
38,089
21
1.4804
36,682
37,691
38,727

84

BUILDING SECRETARY SALARY SCHEDULE
186 DAYS PER YEAR
7.5 HOURS PER DAY
186 Building Secretary
Step
Index 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
21,843
22,443
23,060
Base
1
1.0000
21,843
22,443
23,060
2
1.0240
22,367
22,982
23,614
3
1.0480
22,891
23,521
24,167
4
1.0720
23,415
24,059
24,721
5
1.0960
23,939
24,598
25,274
6
1.1200
24,464
25,136
25,828
7
1.1440
24,988
25,675
26,381
8
1.1680
25,512
26,214
26,935
9
1.1920
26,036
26,752
27,488
10
1.2160
26,561
27,291
28,041
11
1.2400
27,085
27,830
28,595
12
1.2640
27,609
28,368
29,148
13
1.2880
28,133
28,907
29,702
14
1.3120
28,657
29,446
30,255
15
1.3360
29,182
29,984
30,809
16
1.3600
29,706
30,523
31,362
17
1.3840
30,230
31,061
31,916
18
1.4080
30,754
31,600
32,469
19
1.4320
31,279
32,139
33,023
20
1.4560
31,803
32,677
33,576
21
1.4804
32,336
33,225
34,139

85

OCCUPATIONAL THERAPIST ASSISTANT SALARY SCHEDULE
190 DAYS PER YEAR
7.5 HOURS PER DAY
Step

Index
Base
1
1.0000
2
1.0240
3
1.0480
4
1.0720
5
1.0960
6
1.1200
7
1.1440
8
1.1680
9
1.1920
10
1.2160
11
1.2400
12
1.2640
13
1.2880
14
1.3120
15
1.3360
16
1.3600
17
1.3840
18
1.4080
19
1.4320
20
1.4560
21
1.4804

OTA
2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
32,367
33,257
34,172
32,367
33,257
34,172
33,144
34,056
34,992
33,921
34,854
35,812
34,698
35,652
36,632
35,475
36,450
37,453
36,251
37,248
38,273
37,028
38,046
39,093
37,805
38,845
39,913
38,582
39,643
40,733
39,359
40,441
41,553
40,135
41,239
42,373
40,912
42,037
43,193
41,689
42,836
44,014
42,466
43,634
44,834
43,243
44,432
45,654
44,020
45,230
46,474
44,796
46,028
47,294
45,573
46,826
48,114
46,350
47,625
48,934
47,127
48,423
49,754
47,917
49,234
50,588

86

HEALTH CLINIC NURSE (NO BACHELOR’S DEGREE) SALARY SCHEDULE
184 DAYS PER YEAR
7.5 HOURS PER DAY
Health Clinic Nurse - No BA
Step
Index 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
33,441
34,360
35,305
Base
1
1.0000
33,441
34,360
35,305
2
1.0550
35,280
36,250
37,247
3
1.1100
37,119
38,140
39,189
4
1.1650
38,958
40,030
41,131
5
1.2200
40,798
41,920
43,072
6
1.2750
42,637
43,809
45,014
7
1.3300
44,476
45,699
46,956
8
1.3750
45,981
47,245
48,545
9
1.4200
47,486
48,792
50,133
10
1.4650
48,991
50,338
51,722
11
1.5100
50,496
51,884
53,311
12
1.5550
52,000
53,430
54,900
13
1.5900
53,171
54,633
56,135
14
1.5962
53,378
54,846
56,354
15
1.6023
53,582
55,056
56,570
16
1.6085
53,789
55,269
56,789
17
1.6146
53,993
55,478
57,004
18
1.6208
54,201
55,691
57,223
19
1.6270
54,408
55,904
57,442
20
1.6331
54,612
56,114
57,657
21
1.6392
54,817
56,324
57,873

87

HEALTH CLINIC NURSE (WITH BACHELOR’S DEGREE) SALARY
SCHEDULE
184 DAYS PER YEAR
7.5 HOURS PER DAY
Health Clinic Nurse - With BA
Index 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
36,785
37,796
38,835
Base
1
1.0000
36,785
37,796
38,835
2
1.0550
38,808
39,875
40,971
3
1.1100
40,831
41,954
43,107
4
1.1650
42,854
44,032
45,243
5
1.2200
44,877
46,111
47,379
6
1.2750
46,900
48,190
49,515
7
1.3300
48,923
50,269
51,651
8
1.3750
50,579
51,970
53,399
9
1.4200
52,234
53,670
55,146
10
1.4650
53,889
55,371
56,894
11
1.5100
55,545
57,072
58,642
12
1.5550
57,200
58,773
60,389
13
1.5900
58,487
60,096
61,748
14
1.5962
58,715
60,330
61,989
15
1.6023
58,940
60,561
62,226
16
1.6085
59,168
60,795
62,467
17
1.6146
59,392
61,026
62,704
18
1.6208
59,620
61,260
62,945
19
1.6270
59,848
61,494
63,185
20
1.6331
60,073
61,725
63,422
21
1.6392
60,298
61,956
63,660

Step

88

TECHNOLOGY COACH SALARY SCHEDULE
211 DAYS PER YEAR
7.5 HOURS PER DAY
Step

Index

Base
1
1.0000
2
1.0240
3
1.0480
4
1.0720
5
1.0960
6
1.1200
7
1.1440
8
1.1680
9
1.1920
10
1.2160
11
1.2400
12
1.2640
13
1.2880
14
1.3120
15
1.3360
16
1.3600
17
1.3840
18
1.4080
19
1.4320
20
1.4560
21
1.4804

Tech Coach
2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
36,387
37,387
38,416
36,387
37,387
38,416
37,260
38,285
39,338
38,133
39,182
40,260
39,007
40,079
41,182
39,880
40,977
42,104
40,753
41,874
43,026
41,627
42,771
43,947
42,500
43,669
44,869
43,373
44,566
45,791
44,246
45,463
46,713
45,120
46,360
47,635
45,993
47,258
48,557
46,866
48,155
49,479
47,740
49,052
50,401
48,613
49,950
51,323
49,486
50,847
52,245
50,359
51,744
53,167
51,233
52,642
54,089
52,106
53,539
55,011
52,979
54,436
55,933
53,867
55,349
56,871

89

THEATER MANAGER SALARY SCHEDULE
184 DAYS PER YEAR
7.25 HOURS PER DAY
Theater Manager
Step
Index 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
24,793
25,475
26,175
Base
1
1.0000
24,793
25,475
26,175
2
1.0240
25,388
26,086
26,803
3
1.0480
25,983
26,697
27,431
4
1.0720
26,578
27,309
28,060
5
1.0960
27,173
27,920
28,688
6
1.1200
27,768
28,531
29,316
7
1.1440
28,363
29,143
29,944
8
1.1680
28,958
29,754
30,572
9
1.1920
29,553
30,366
31,201
10
1.2160
30,148
30,977
31,829
11
1.2400
30,743
31,588
32,457
12
1.2640
31,338
32,200
33,085
13
1.2880
31,933
32,811
33,713
14
1.3120
32,528
33,423
34,342
15
1.3360
33,123
34,034
34,970
16
1.3600
33,718
34,645
35,598
17
1.3840
34,313
35,257
36,226
18
1.4080
34,908
35,868
36,854
19
1.4320
35,503
36,479
37,483
20
1.4560
36,098
37,091
38,111
21
1.4804
36,703
37,713
38,750

90

COMPUTER TECH SALARY SCHEDULE
260 DAYS PER YEAR
8 HOURS PER DAY
Computer Tech
Step
Index 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
42,726
43,901
45,108
Base
1
1.0000
42,726
43,901
45,108
2
1.0240
43,751
44,954
46,190
3
1.0480
44,776
46,008
47,273
4
1.0720
45,802
47,061
48,356
5
1.0960
46,827
48,115
49,438
6
1.1200
47,853
49,169
50,521
7
1.1440
48,878
50,222
51,603
8
1.1680
49,904
51,276
52,686
9
1.1920
50,929
52,330
53,769
10
1.2160
51,954
53,383
54,851
11
1.2400
52,980
54,437
55,934
12
1.2640
54,005
55,490
57,016
13
1.2880
55,031
56,544
58,099
14
1.3120
56,056
57,598
59,182
15
1.3360
57,081
58,651
60,264
16
1.3600
58,107
59,705
61,347
17
1.3840
59,132
60,758
62,429
18
1.4080
60,158
61,812
63,512
19
1.4320
61,183
62,866
64,594
20
1.4560
62,209
63,919
65,677
21
1.4804
63,251
64,991
66,778

91

TECHNOLOGY INTEGRATION COORDINATOR SALARY SCHEDULE
231 DAYS PER YEAR
8 HOURS PER DAY
Technology Integration Coordinator
Index 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025
Step
58,290
59,893
61,540
Base
1
1.000
58,290
59,893
61,540
2
1.035
60,330
61,989
63,694
3
1.070
62,370
64,085
65,848
4
1.100
64,119
65,882
67,694
5
1.130
65,868
67,679
69,540
6
1.160
67,616
69,476
71,386
7
1.190
69,365
71,272
73,232
8
1.220
71,114
73,069
75,079
9
1.250
72,862
74,866
76,925
10
1.280
74,611
76,663
78,771
11
1.310
76,360
78,460
80,617
12
1.340
78,108
80,256
82,463
13
1.365
79,566
81,754
84,002
14
1.390
81,023
83,251
85,540
15
1.415
82,480
84,748
87,079
16
1.440
83,937
86,246
88,617

92

APPENDIX D
MEMORANDUMS OF UNDERSTANDING
*This Memorandum of Understanding confirms that the parties’ 2009 bargaining teams
have agreed to delete the sentence appearing at the top of page 28 of their 2003-2006
collective bargaining agreement on the understanding that those bargaining unit
employees currently receiving an annual $300 study allowance stipend will continue to
receive that stipend until their employment by the Board is severed. It is further
understood that this stipend will not be extended to other employees.

93

APPENDIX E
Appendix E: Certificated/Licensed Evaluation Timeline
Deadline
Date
No later
than Sept.
15

Procedures
Teacher and
evaluator will meet
individually or ina
group no later than
September 15 to
discuss evaluation
procedures.
The Superintendent
and Director of
Human Resources
are not eligibleto be
credentialed
evaluators.

Full
Evaluation
Process

Off-Year
Evaluation
Process

Evaluation Cycle
Identified

Evaluation Cycle
Identified

Professional
Growth Plan
Developed and
submitted no later
than September 15.
Rating from
previous evaluation:
Accomplished:
Developed and
submitted by
individual to
evaluator
Skilled: Developed
collaboratively
between individual
and evaluator

A teacher must
submit awritten
request to the
teacher’s building
principal/supervisor
witha copy to the
Superintendent for
consideration of a
continuing contract
no later than
September 15of
that school year.

Less than Skilled:
Developed at the
direction of the
evaluator

94

No later
than May 1

Evaluator will
conduct apreconference with
theteacher prior to
the firstformal
classroom
observation. All
other observations
may be
unannounced. At
least two (2)
formal
observations of at
leastthirty (30)
minutes per
observation must
be completed.
Evidence of each
classroom
observation will be
shared with the
teacher at the post
conference and
stored within the
required
warehousing
system as required
by Ohio Revised
Code.

OBSERVATION1:
• Holistic
observation that
occurs with a
pre- and postconference.
• Announced
• 30-minute
minimum
observation
required
• Recommended
maximum of two
areas of focus
within theOTES
rubric identified

95

OBSERVATION 1
ONLY:
• Holistic
observation
thatoccurs with
a postconference.
• Unannounced
• 30-minute
minimum
observatio
n required
INFORMAL
OBSERVATIONS:
• Two (2) walkthroughs
required with
feedback to
the teacher
provided.

Mid-Year
Review/Discussion
completed between
evaluator and
teacher
recommended but
not required.

The post classroom
observation conference
will normally be held
within five (5) school
days of the classroom
observation unless
unusual circumstances
prevail. Any teacher may
receive a
recommendation for an
area of refinement. If a
teacher receives a rating
of less than Skilled in any
area of the teacher
performance rubric the
administrator will
document the area of
refinement and the
means of assistance on
the post-conference
recording form.
Teachers who receive a
final summative rating of
Skilled or Accomplished
must have a professional
growth plan established
no later than September
15 of the following school
year. A teacher who has
a final summative rating
of Ineffective or any
teach who is placed on
an Improvement Plan
must have the
Improvement plan
developed within ten (10)
days of the final
evaluation conference.
This plan shall be
incorporated within the
Professional Growth Plan
that must be submitted
no later than September
15 of the following school
year. This provision does
not preclude modification
of a growth or
improvement plan based
on relevant information
received after the ten
(10) day deadline, but
any such modification
must be made within ten
(10) days of receipt of

OBSERVATION
2:
• Observation
thatoccurs
with an
attempt to
emphasize the
identified
areas of focus
from
Observation
#1 that is
followed by a
postconference.
• Unannounced
• 30-minute
minimum
observatio
n required
INFORMAL
OBSERVATIONS:
• Two (2)
walkthroughs
required with
feedback to
theteacher
provided.

96

such information with the
full knowledge of the
individual being
evaluated.
Teachers, who are on
limited or extended
limited contracts pursuant
to Ohio Law and under
consideration for
nonrenewal and/or the
denial of a continuing
contract must receive at
least three (3) formal
observations during the
evaluation cycle.
Teachers holding an
initial full-year limited
contract whose final
summative rating is
Ineffective will be
automatically
recommended for
nonrenewal and be given
written notice of
nonrenewal by June 1.
All formal and informal
observations for staff
completed.
No later
than May 10

Written evaluation must
be received by May 10.

Final Summative
Evaluation
Document
Completed

Final Summative
Evaluation
Document
Completed

Professional Growth
Plan reviewed as a
component of final
evaluation
document
discussion.

Contract Denial Procedures
Regular April
Board of
Education
Meeting
10 days
after
notification
Regular May
Board of
Education
Meeting
No Later
than June 1

Staff member must be notified by the Superintendent if the intention is to recommend
to the Board the nonrenewal of a limited contract, the denial of a continuing contract for
which service and certification status would normally make them eligible, or a limited
contract renewal for less than the normal time as outlined in the Agreement.
Staff member may request, and shall be granted, a conference with the Superintendent
(accompanied by Association representation if desired) to discuss the decision to
recommend nonrenewal; at such conference, the Superintendent shall discuss with the
staff member the reasons for the decision to recommend nonrenewal.
Staff member may request and shall be granted the right to appear before the Board in
executive session, if he/she desires, prior to final action on his/her contract.
If the Board approves the recommendation of nonrenewal, the employee shall be notified
in writing by June 1 of the year in which the limited contract expires. Failure of the
Administration to comply with this provision of the Agreement results in automatic re-

97

employment of the affected member on another limited contract or continuing contract,
if eligible.
Meaning of
“Days”

Unless otherwise specified, the word “days” means school days in this Appendix.

Time
Adjustments

In the event of an unforeseen absence of a staff member or evaluator that makes strict
adherence to the time deadlines in this Appendix impracticable, the affected deadline will
be reasonably adjusted in light of the particular circumstances. This provision does not
apply to the June 1 deadline for written notice of nonrenewal of a limited contract.
Observations

Observations

Observations, formal and informal, may occur during in-person and virtual (Zoom or
other administratively designated platforms) settings. Formal holistic and focused
observations that occur in virtual settings (Zoom or other administratively designated
platforms) must include a pre-conference between the evaluator and staff member. All
in-person and virtual observations include a post-conference as part of the OTES 2.0
process.

98

APPENDIX F - 1
GRANVILLE EXEMPTED VILLAGE SCHOOL DISTRICT
SICK LEAVE BANK
Donation Form

Name of Employee (print)
Initial here
Initial here

I would like to donate one (1) day to the Sick Leave Bank.
I currently do not have accumulated sick leave days but desire to
be a part of the Sick Leave Bank. I authorize the payroll clerk to
deposit my next earned sick leave day to the sick leave bank.

Signature
Date
Treasurer’s Office
Received by
Date

99

APPENDIX F - 2
GRANVILLE EXEMPTED VILLAGE SCHOOL DISTRICT
SICK LEAVE BANK
Request form
Name of Employee (print)
Provide a detailed explanation for request and attach appropriate physician
documentation.

(circle one)

First Request

Second Request

Signature
Date

The following is to be completed by the Review Committee:
Proper Documentation from Doctor:

Yes

No

Committee’s Decision:

Approved

Denied

Signatures of Committee Members:
Date:
Date:
Date:
Date:

100

Health and Safety
Memorandum of Understanding
The Granville Exempted Village School District Board of Education and the Granville
Education Association shall establish and maintain a joint Health and Safety Committee
in each building. The committee will be comprised of members of the administration and
the GEA. Designated bargaining unit members will meet with their specific building
administrator to collaboratively track and resolve day to day concerns. The committee will
meet on a regular basis and not less frequently than monthly. Concerns that cannot be
resolved at the building level will be elevated to the District level administration and GEA
leadership.
When health department orders permit typical educational settings and teaching
conditions, teachers will not be expected to instruct in-person and virtual forums
simultaneously. Teachers assigned to online learning during the pandemic will return to
the classroom; this will not be considered an involuntary transfer.

ted Village Schools

s/n/z-z_

Date ~/

101

CERTIFICATE (O.R.C. 5705.412)

RE:
IT IS HEREBY CERTIFIED that the Granville Exempted Village School District
has sufficient funds to meet the contract , obligation , payment , or expenditure for
the above, and has in effect for the remainder of the fiscal year and the succeeding fiscal
year the authorization to levy taxes which, when combined with the estimated revenue
from all other sources available to the district at the time of certification, are sufficient
to provide operating revenues necessary to enable the district to maintain all personnel,
programs, and services essential to the provision of an adequate educational program
on all the days set forth in its adopted school calendar for the current fiscal year and
for a number of days in the succeeding fiscalyear equal to the number days instruction
was held or is scheduled f or the current fiscal year, except that if the above expenditure
is for a contract , this certification shall cover the term of the contract or the current
fiscal year plus the two immediately succeeding fiscal years, whichever period of years
is greater.
DATED: May 19, 2022

BY: ~
BY:

.~

BY:
President, Board of Education

102

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Between the
GRANVILLE EXEMPTED VILLAGE SCHOOL DISTRICT BOARD OF EDUCATION
and the
GRANVILLE EDUCATION ASSOCIATION

This Memorandum of Understanding ("MOU") is entered into by and between the
Granville Exempted Village School District Board of Education (the "Board") and the Granville
Education Association (the "GEA") (collectively the "Parties").
WHEREAS, the Board and the GEA are parties to a Collective Bargaining Agreement
("CBA") which is in effect from July 1, 2022 through June 30, 2025; and
WHEREAS, the Parties desire to add Maintenance, HVAC Technician and Computer
Technician classifications to the bargaining unit for the mutual benefit of the Parties.
NOW THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY AGREED by and between the Board and the
GEA as follows:

1. Maintenance, HVAC Technician, and Computer Technician positions will be added to the
bargaining unit.
2. Articles 1, 17, and 25 of the CBA will be amended to reflect the addition of these
classifications.
3. These additional classifications may be subcontracted by the Board. The Board will notify
the Association no later than six (6) months prior to its intent to subcontract any of these
positions.
4. The positions will be paid according to the salary schedule set forth in Exhibit A, which
shall be incorporated into Appendix C of the CBA.
5. This MOU shall not establish any precedent nor be characterized by either party as a
"binding past practice" with respect to any future matter.
6. This MOU constitutes the entire agreement between the Board and the GEA regarding the
issues outlined herein. There are no other written or verbal agreements, understandings or
arrangements between the Parties regarding the issues outlined herein. Any changes to
this MOU must be in writing and signed by both Parties.
7. The GEA and the Board have reviewed and approve this MOU and each signatory to this
MOU represents that he or she has the authority to enter into this MOU and bind his/her
Party.

[Signatures on next page]

18576477v2

FOR THE BOARD

s~ L f.f 7
Date

18576477v2

EXHIBIT A
Maintenance
Index

Step
Base

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

18576477v2

1.0000
1.0240
1.0480
1.0720
1.0960
1.1200
1.1440
1.1680
1.1920
1.2160
1.2400
1.2640
1.2880
1.3120
1.3360
1.3600
1.3840
1.4080
1.4320
1.4560
1.4804

2023-2024 2024-2025
39,520
40,607
39,520
40,607
40,468
41,581
41,417
42,556
42,365
43,530
43,314
44,505
44,262
45,480
45,211
46,454
46,159
47,429
47,108
48,403
48,056
49,378
49,005
50,352
49,953
51,327
50,902
52,302
51,850
53,276
52,799
54,251
53,747
55,225
54,696
56,200
55,644
57,174
56,593
58,149
57,541
59,124
58,505
60,114

HVAC

18576477v2

Step

Index

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

Base
1.0000
1.0240
1.0480
1.0720
1.0960
1.1200
1.1440
1.1680
1.1920
1.2160
1.2400
1.2640
1.2880
1.3120
1.3360
1.3600
1.3840
1.4080
1.4320
1.4560
1.4804

2023-2024 202~2025
47,840
49,156
47,840
49,156
48,988
50,335
50,136
51,515
51,284
52,695
52,433
53,875
53,581
55,054
54,729
56,234
57,414
55,877
57,025
58,593
58,173
59,773
59,322
60,953
60,470
62,133
61,618
63,312
62,766
64,492
63,914
65,672
65,062
66,852
66,211
68,031
67,359
69,211
68,507
70,391
69,655
71,571
70,822
72,770

Computer Tech
Index 2023-2024 202~2025
Step
52,481
53,924
Base
1
1.0000
52,481
53,924
53,741
55,218
2
1.0240
1.0480
55,000
56,513
3
56,260
57,807
4
1.0720
1.0960
57,519
59,101
5
58,779
60,395
6
1.1200
7
1.1440
60,038
61,689
61,298
62,983
8
1.1680
62,557
64,278
1.1920
9
63,817
65,572
10
1.2160
66,866
11
1.2400
65,076
66,336
68,160
12
1.2640
67,596
69,454
13
1.2880
70,749
14
1.3120
68,855
70,115
72,043
15
1.3360
71,374
73,337
16
1.3600
1.3840
72,634
74,631
17
73,893
75,925
18
1.4080
19
1.4320
75,153
77,219
76,412
78,514
20
1.4560
77,693
79,830
21
1.4804

18576477v2

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE GRANVILLE EXEl\fPTED VILLAGE SCHOOL DISTRICT BOARD OF
EDUCATION AND THE GRANVILLE EDUCATION ASSOCIATION

This Memorandum of Understanding ("MOU'') is entered into by and between the Granville
Exempted Village School District Board of Education (the "Board") and the Granville Education
Association, (the "Associati~n"), collectively known as "the Parties."
WHEREAS, the Board and the Association are parties to a negotiated agreement in effect from July
1, 2~22 .through June 30, 2025 (the "Agreement"); and
WHEREAS, the Parties desire to amend the terms of the Agreement regarding bus driver pay.
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration ofthe mutual promises and obligations contained herein and
for other good and valuable consideration, the sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, the
Board and the Association agree to the following:

1. Beginning in the 2023-2024 contract year, the base salary of bus drivers shall be increased
from $18.50 per hour to $22.00 per hour.
2. The Full-Time and Part-Time Bus Driver Salary Schedules for the 2023-2024 and 2024-2025
school years are attached to and a part ofthis MOU.
3. The extra trip rates listed in Article 19.C.9.b-c shall be amended as follows:
b. Effective July 1, 2023 $22.00
c. Effective July 1, 2024 $22.61
4. The modification to the Agreement altering compensation for the bus driver classifications
shall apply to duties effective beginning July 1, 2023.
5. The Parties affirm and agree that this MOU shall prevail over any contrary provision in the
Agreement, and this MOU shall not be construed to alter any other salary schedules or
provision ofthe Agreement.

6. This MOU shall set no precedent and shall ~ot be considered as creating any past practice
between the Parties with respect to the subject matter addressed in this MOU.
7. This MOU constitutes the entire agreement between the Board and the Association regarding
the issues outlined herein. There are no other written or verbal agreements, understandings
or arrangements between the Parties regarding the issues outlined herein. Any amendment
to this MOU must be in writing and signed by the Parties.

Page I of2
18686212v2

8. The Parties have reviewed this MOU with their representatives, understand its terms and
conditions, are voluntarily entering into this MOU, and each signatory to this MOU
represents that he or she has the authority to enter into this MOU on behalf of his or her party.
FOR THE GRANVILLE EXEMPTED
SCHOOL DISTRICT BOARD OF
EDUCATION:

FOR THE ASSOCIATION:

Su~
FULL TIME BUS DRIVER
SALARY SCHEDULE

PART TIME BUS DRIVER
SALARY SCHEDULE

189 DAYS PER YEAR
4.5 HOURS PER DAY

189 DAYS PER YEAR
2.25 HOURS PER DAY

Bus Driver
2023-2024 2024-2025
Index
18, 711
19,226
Base
1
1.00'.Xl
18,711
19,226
2
1.0160
19,010
19,533
1.0320
19,310
19,841
3
4
1.0480
19, 609
20,148
1.0640
19,909
20,456
5
1.0800
20,208
20,764
6
20,507
21,071
7
1.0960
8
1.1120
20,807
21,379
1.1280
21,106
21,686
9
21,405
21,994
10
1.1440
11
1.1600
21,705
22,302
1.1760
22,609
12
22,004
13
1.1920
22,304
22,917
14
1.2080
22, 603
23,224
1.2240
22,902
23,532
15
16
1.2400
23, 202
23,840
17
1.2560
23,501
24,147
' 18
1.2720
23,800
24,455
1.2880
24,100
24,763
19
1.3040
24,399
25,070
20
24,702
25,382
21
1.3202

St ep

Part-Time Bus Driver
Index 2023-2024 2024-2025
18,711
19,226
Base
1
0.5000
9,356
9,613
2
0.5080
9,505
9,767
0.5160
9,655
9,920
3
4
0.5240
9,805
10,074
0.5320
9,954
10,228
5
10,104
10,382
6
0.5400
10,254
10,536
7
0.5480
8
0.5560
10,403
10,689
10, 553
10,843
9
0.5640
10,703
10,997
10
0.5720
11
0.5800
10,852
11,151
11,002
11, 305
12
0.5880
11,152
11,458
13
0.5960
14
0.6040
11, 301
11, 612
11,451
11, 766
15
0.6120
I- 0.6200
11,601
11, 920
16
17
0.6280
11,751
12, 074
11,900
12,227
18
0.6360
12,050
12,381
19
0.6440
12,200
12,535
20
0.6520
12,351
12,691
21
0.6601

Step

Page 2 of2
18686212v2

KINDERGARTEN BUS
DRIVER SALARY
SCHEDULE
189 DAYS PER YEAR
1.67 HOURS PER DAY
Kindergarten Bus Driver
Index 2023-2024 2024-2025
18,711
19,226
Base
1
0.495
9,262
9,516
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Step

11

12
13
14

15
16
17
18
19
20
21
