Collective Bargaining Agreement
Between

CITY OF MOUNT VERNON, ILLINOIS
AND
THE LABORERS INTERNATIONAL UNION OF NORTH AMERICA,
THE SOUTHERN & CENTRAL ILLINOIS DISTRICT COUNCIL,
AND, LABORERS’ LOCAL #1197
AND
THE TEAMSTERS AUTOMOTIVE, PETROLEUM AND
ALLIED TRADES, LOCAL #50

MAY 1, 2022 THROUGH APRIL 30, 2026

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41

Recognition
Fair Representation
Dues Check Off
Management Rights
Savings Clause
Non-Discrimination
Universal Equipment & Labor
Seniority
Bidding Procedures and Qualification Periods
New Appointments
Temporary Help in the Bargaining Unit
Layoffs
Resignations
Discipline
Grievances
Pensions
Uniforms
Health Insurance
Hours of Work
Attendance
Holidays
Sick Leave
Personal Leave
Funeral Leave
Vacation
Labor Management Meeting
Education Expenses
Inclement Weather
Safety Shoes
Loss Prevention Program
Wages
Pay Days
No Strike – No Lockout
Residency
Past Practices
Political Activity
Credit Union
Drug and Alcohol Use
Driver’s License
Union Stewards
Term
Signature Page
Wage Schedule – Special Skilled
Wage Schedule – Operator
Wage Schedule – Laborer

Page 2

PAGE
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
7
8
9
10
11
11
11
13
13
13
15
18
18
19
21
21
22
22
23
23
23
23
23
25
25
25
25
25
26
26
30
30
30
31
32
33
34

AGREEMENT
This Agreement is entered into on this
day of
2022, between the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, hereinafter called the City, an Illinois Municipal
Corporation, Laborers International of America, Southern & Central Illinois District Council Local #1197,
and the Teamsters Automotive, Petroleum and Allied Trades, Local #50, jointly hereinafter called Union;
WITNESSETH:
That WHEREAS, the City has voluntarily endorsed the practice and procedures of collective
negotiations as a fair and orderly way of conducting its relations with its permanent, non-supervisory,
non-clerical employees engaged in maintenance, construction and normal labor within the Public Works
Department, Parks Department, Public Utilities Department, Fire Department, and Fleet Services
Department, hereinafter more fully defined as the bargaining unit, as such practices and procedures are
appropriate to functions and obligations of the City to retain their right to operate the City government
effectively and in a responsible and efficient manner; and
WHEREAS, it is the purpose of the parties to set forth their entire Agreement covering rates of
pay, wages, hours of employment and other conditions of employment, to increase the efficiency and
productivity of employees represented by the Union, and to provide for prompt and fair settlement of
grievances without any interruption of or other interference with the operations of the City; and
WHEREAS, the City and the Union agree that in the interests of collective bargaining and
harmonious relations they will at all times abide by the terms and conditions of this Agreement; and
WHEREAS, the City and the Union regard all employees represented by the Union as public
employees who are to be governed by high ideals of honor and integrity in all public and personal
conduct so as to merit the trust and confidence of the general public and their fellow employees;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants herein contained, THE PARTIES DO
HEREBY MUTUALLY COVENANT AND AGREE AS FOLLOWS:

Page 3

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
The City recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for non-supervisory,
non-clerical employees engaged in maintenance, construction or manual labor in the Public Works
Department, Parks Department, Public Utilities Department, Fire Department, and Fleet Services
Department.
For the purpose of clarification, the phrase, "non-supervisory, non-clerical employees engaged
in maintenance, construction, or manual labor" shall be defined as Skilled Labor City Employees who are
represented by the Union. those permanent employees employed in the following classifications:
Laborer
Operator
Special Skilled – Public Utilities Department
Special Skilled – Public Works and Parks Department
Special Skilled Mechanic
Classifications describing similar work in the above listed departments, which are mutually
determined and agreed upon by the City and the Union, shall also be represented by the Union.
The City further agrees to negotiate in good faith with the Union with respect to wages, hours,
and conditions of employment.
ARTICLE 2
FAIR REPRESENTATION
The Union recognizes its responsibility as bargaining agent and agrees fairly to represent all
employees in the bargaining unit, whether or not they are members of the Union. The Union further
agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City and its officials, representatives and agents from
any and all claims, demands, suits or other forms of liability (monetary or otherwise) and for all legal
costs resulting from any failure on the part of the Union to fulfill its duty of fair representation.
The City shall provide written notice to the Union of new employees hired in the bargaining unit.
The Union shall provide written notice to the City listing all current members of the bargaining unit.
ARTICLE 3
DUES CHECK OFF
Upon receipt of a properly signed and completed authorization form for dues check off, the City
will deduct the appropriate dues from each employee's paycheck. Dues check off authorization forms
shall be honored for employees represented by the Union and when they are received at least ten (l0)
days prior to the payday on which dues are to be deducted. All dues check off authorizations shall be
submitted to the Finance Director. Dues will be deducted twice per month from employee’s paychecks.
Bi-monthly dues will be calculated by taking monthly dues multiplied by 12 and divided by 24 pay
periods.

Page 4

ARTICLE 4
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
The City and the Union agree that the City possesses the sole right and authority to direct the
employees of the City and its various departments in all respects; to hire all supervisors and department
heads without interference or input by the Union; to determine the mission of the City, to promulgate
or discontinue policies from time to time, amend policies, and enforce policies, so long as those policies
are not in conflict with this Agreement; and to set standards of services for the public, except where
expressly and specifically restricted by the provisions of this Agreement.
The City of Mt. Vernon shall provide each employee an updated City of Mt. Vernon Employee
Policy Manual.
The City and the Union further agree that the City possesses the sole right and authority to
contract out for goods and services provided such actions do not result in a layoff or reduction of hours
worked by employees represented by the Union.

ARTICLE 5
SAVINGS CLAUSE
In the event that any of the provisions of this Agreement shall conflict with any state or federal
law such provisions shall be deemed to be modified sufficiently in respect to either or both parties to
the extent necessary to comply with such laws or regulations and the remaining portion of this
Agreement shall remain in full force and effect.
ARTICLE 6
NON-DISCRIMINATION
The City and the Union will continue to support policies of non-discrimination against any
employee in wages, hours and conditions of employment because of race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, ancestry, age, order of protection status, marital status, physical or mental disability, military
status, sexual orientation, pregnancy, or unfavorable discharge from military service, or union affiliation.
Masculine pronouns and nouns used in this Agreement shall be construed to mean employees of either
sex.
ARTICLE 7
UNIVERSAL EQUIPMENT & LABOR
Tools, machinery, equipment, and labor shall be interchangeable from one department to
another with consent of the Department Head without regard to any Union recognition clause in any
contract between the City and any other Union representing the City employees.
ARTICLE 8
SENIORITY
Seniority shall be defined as the employee's length of service since their first date of hire
within the bargaining unit (see “Temporary Help Seniority” below). In the event of layoff or outsourcing,
Page 5

seniority shall prevail and be Citywide within the bargaining units of Laborers Local #1197 and
Teamsters Local #50.
Departmental seniority shall be defined as seniority within any of the departments covered by
this Union, covered by this Agreement. If an employee bids or otherwise serves in a position in another
department through his own choosing and leaves a department into which he was originally hired, or his
employment is terminated, he shall, upon returning to the original department or any other department
exercising city seniority, be placed at the bottom of his departmental seniority list.
When an employee is transferred other than by his own choosing to another department and is
returned for any reason to his original department, he shall retain all of his seniority and be free to
exercise the same.
Seniority for all purposes and the employment relationship may be terminated if the employee:
a. quits;
b. is discharged (and not reinstated);
c. retires;
d. falsifies the reason for a leave of absence or is found to be working during a leave of absence
without prior written approval of the City Manager;
e. fails to report to work at the conclusion of an authorized leave of absence, layoff or vacation;
f. is laid off and fails to respond to a notice of recall within five (5) calendar days after receiving
notice of recall or to report for work at the time prescribed in the notice of recall or otherwise
does not timely respond to a notice of recall as provided in Section 14 of this Agreement;
g. upon an employee being appointed and/or qualified to a classification outside the bargaining
unit through his own choosing;
h. upon an employee being on lay-off for a period of three (3) years or longer.
i. does not perform bargaining unit work for the City for a period in excess of twenty-four (24)
months; or
j. is absent for three (3) consecutive working days without notification to or authorization from
the City.
Temporary Help Seniority
Temporary Help employees do not earn any seniority rights unless they are employed for two (2) or more
consecutive seasons and are awarded full-time positions in the Bargaining Unit. When a Temporary Help
employee is awarded a full-time position, the bargaining unit seniority date shall be the first date of hire
without a break in service plus the number of months worked as Temporary Help.
For example:
Temporary Help dates:
Full time appointment date:
Bargaining Unit seniority date:
City seniority date (leave accrual basis):
Departmental seniority date:

May 1 through October 31, 2011 – 6 months
May 1 through August 31, 2012 – 4 months
September 1, 2012
November 1, 2011 (10 months backwards from full- time date)
May 1, 2012 (First date of hire without a break in service)
First date of hire in Department without a break in service

Page 6

For clarification purposes, the following terms and definitions are set forth: 1) Union seniority
determines the basis for bidding; 2) City seniority determines the basis for leave time accrual; and, 3)
City full-time date determines placement on the salary schedule. This is as it has always been in practice
but puts it in writing. i.e. An employee hired from temporary laborer to full-time laborer without a
break in services remains at the start step for six months from the date of full-time hire at which time
he/she advances to the 6-month step.
ARTICLE 9
BIDDING PROCEDURES AND QUALIFICATION PERIODS
When a vacancy arises in a classification represented by the Union, the vacancy shall be posted
for a period of at least seven (7) calendar days. Employees represented by the Union may bid on a
vacancy in the next higher classification by signing the bid sheet on or before the deadline listed on the
bid notice. Employees who do not properly sign the bid sheet on or before the deadline may not be
considered.
For higher classification, the employee will be blended from his existing pay rate to an equal pay
rate in the new classification "or the next higher." He will also receive a five-step rate increase in the
new classification. Upon successful completion of his ninety-day qualification period or a period less
than ninety-days, if the City determines that the employee has met the qualifications of the new
position, the employee will then receive one additional step rate increase in the new classification
provided that the total increase in annual wage rate does not exceed $2,000.00 per classification.
If the employee's "blend" to an equal pay rate in each new classification, or any point on the 5
step increase exceeds an annual wage increase of $2,000.00, then the employee will be placed in the
pay scale of the new classification at the step that would represent a pay increase as close to but
without exceeding $2,000.00 per year. If "blend" to the "Start" step of the new position exceeds
$2,000.00, the employee will be promoted to the new position at the “Start” step.
Upon an employee bidding to a lower classification, the employee will be blended from his
existing pay rate to an equal pay rate in the new classification "or the next lower”. He will also receive a
five-step rate decrease in the new classification. If the employee's "blend" to an equal pay rate in the
new classification, or any point on the 5-step decrease exceeds an annual wage decrease of $2,000.00,
then the employee will be placed in the pay scale of the new classification at the step that would
represent a pay decrease as close to but without exceeding $2,000.00 per classification.
The employee with the greatest seniority in the department or division where the vacancy exists
(from the employees who properly sign the bid sheet) shall be promoted to the vacancy with the
appropriate increase in pay.
If no employee in the department or division where the vacancy exists bids on the vacancy, then
the employee with the greatest overall seniority in the bargaining unit shall be promoted to the vacancy
with the appropriate increase in pay.
If no employee in the bargaining unit bids on the vacancy, the City Manager shall be free to fill
the position from applicants outside the bargaining unit. An applicant so selected shall be considered a
new appointment under the terms of this Agreement.

Page 7

Once an employee has been promoted to a vacancy through the bidding procedure, he/she shall
serve a qualification period of a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days up to a maximum of ninety (90)
calendar days from the date of their promotion. The purpose of the qualification period shall be to
determine the employee's demonstrated ability to fulfill the requirements of the position. If it is
determined that the employee cannot fulfill the minimum requirements, he/she shall be returned to
their former position with no loss of seniority at their appropriate former salary and the vacancy shall be
re-bid according to the procedures described in this section.
The City Manager shall determine the employee's ability to fulfill the requirements of the
position. If the employee or the Union disagrees with the determination of the City Manager and the
Department Head, they may appeal the determination as described in the grievance procedure.
Newly appointed employees undergoing their initial 180-day probationary periods may not bid
on any job vacancies until their probationary periods are successfully completed.
Employees on an approved disability leave shall be notified of the vacancy by certified letter. He
shall then exercise his seniority rights within the posting period. However, if he is the successful bidder,
he will not be promoted to the new position until he comes back to active duty.
If the bid position fills a vacancy caused by another employee being promoted to a higher
position and the employee does not qualify for the higher position within the qualification period, the
employee shall be returned to their former position and both positions will be re-bid.
Seniority shall be the determining factor for shift preference when two (2) or more shifts are
necessary. There shall be a minimum of one (1) full-time employee assigned to each shift.
ARTICLE 10
NEW APPOINTMENTS
The City Manager shall have the sole authority to appoint employees to the City's service and to
appoint a new hire to any union job classification, if no member of the bargaining unit qualifies. All new
appointments to the City's service shall be based solely upon an individual's qualifications, experience,
fitness, and suitability for municipal employment. An individual's qualifications, experience, fitness, and
suitability for municipal employment shall be considered for the position to be filled as well as for any
position or classification the individual may be eligible to bid upon in the future.
A newly appointed employee may be dismissed without cause during their initial one hundred
eighty (180) calendar days of employment and shall have no recourse for appeal under the terms of this
Agreement.
Newly appointed employees do not accumulate any paid vacation leave or personal leave
benefits until their 180-day probationary period is successfully completed. Once successfully
completed, leave balances are calculated from date of hire.
If a temporary employee without a break in service is awarded a permanent position in the
bargaining unit, then that employee's 180-day probationary period would start from his first date of hire
without a break in service.
Page 8

ARTICLE 11
TEMPORARY HELP IN THE BARGAINING UNIT
Temporary help in the bargaining unit shall be classified as either scheduled or unscheduled
based on the purpose that the temporary help is brought in to fill. Scheduled temporary employment in
the bargaining unit shall not exceed 999 hours in any one consecutive season. Scheduled temporary
employment shall not qualify for vacation, holidays, personal leave, or birthday benefits, nor paid sick
leave. City uniforms provided will determined by the City Manager. Temporary help shall be required to
provide their safety shoes.
Unscheduled temporary employment shall be established by mutual consent of management
and the representative of the bargaining unit in order to fulfill unforeseen laborer shortages. Benefits
for unscheduled temporary help shall be the same as outlined for scheduled temporary help.
Temporary employees covered by this agreement and holding a valid Commercial Driver’s
License shall be paid starting at the beginning laborer rate. They are not subject to any recall provisions.
Temporary employees covered by this agreement without a valid Commercial Driver’s License
will be paid at 80% of the starting laborer’s rate. Starting laborer’s rate shall be paid when the
temporary laborer obtains a valid Commercial Driver’s License. They are not subject to any recall
provisions.
If a temporary employee without a break in service is awarded a permanent position in the
bargaining unit, then that employee's City seniority benefits would accrue from his first date of hire
without a break in service
As a condition of employment, employees, including temporary help in the bargaining unit must
pass the written Illinois Commercial Driver License test within 30 days of employment, obtain a CDL
license within 60 days of employment, and must maintain a CDL license while employed.
Temporary help in this bargaining unit does not include seasonal help hired in the Parks and
Recreation Department to supervise JTPA and Community Service crews, assist the swimming pool
operations and other summer recreation programs.
Temporary employees are not eligible for overtime unless full-time employees within the same
Department have declined the overtime. However, if a Temporary employee is working on a job, which
requires overtime hours to complete, he can remain on the job and earn overtime after the overtime is
offered to the other full-time employees on the same job. Any specific overtime job that requires a
reduction in workforce, temporary employees shall be dismissed from that job first.
Before a temporary position is filled by an outside applicant, the temporary position shall be
offered to laid-off full-time employees. While in a temporary position, these employees shall receive
the rate of pay at the pro-rated step and have bidding rights. These employees shall receive no other
City benefits such as leave time, health insurance, and IMRF.

Page 9

ARTICLE 12
LAYOFFS
The City Manager shall have the sole authority to determine when layoffs are necessary and
which classifications are to be vacated. When the City Manager determines that layoffs are necessary,
he shall follow the layoff procedures described in this section.
The City Manager shall first determine which classifications in which departments are to be
vacated. In the event of the layoff of a permanent full-time employee, a notice of lay-off shall be posted
in a conspicuous location for a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days before the lay-off. In the event of
vacating a bargaining unit position, which does not result in the lay-off of a full-time employee, the
notice shall be posted for a minimum of seven (7) days before the effective date. For temporary or parttime employees, no notice of lay-off is required.
An employee in a classification represented by the Union which is to be vacated, may "bump"
another employee in the same department or division, provided he has greater departmental or division
seniority and meets the minimum requirements for the position. An employee "bumping" another
employee in a different classification represented by the Union shall be placed at the appropriate salary
for the new position.
An employee who is "bumped" and cannot "bump" another employee in his own department or
division, who is represented by the Union, may "bump" employees in other departments or divisions who
are represented by the bargaining unit, provided he has greater seniority in the bargaining unit.
An employee who cannot "bump" another employee shall be laid off without pay and without
benefits.
If an opening arises within the bargaining unit while employee(s) are on layoff, the employee with
the greatest seniority within the bargaining unit shall be recalled by registered letter.
An employee on layoff who is called back to work and refuses, for whatever reason, to return to
work shall be considered to have resigned. An employee who is recalled within three (3) years of his layoff
shall receive credit for his previously earned seniority upon his return to work.
If necessary, in order to prevent further employee layoffs, the City and the Union agree to review
the implementation of a four-day week.
The representative of the Bargaining Unit may meet with the City Manager to discuss the rationale
for the layoff; however, any discussion shall be nonbinding.
In the event the City sells Water and Sewer assets, purchaser agrees to pay 100% of Vacation
and Sick Time to employees displaced by the sale.

Page 10

ARTICLE 13
RESIGNATIONS
In order to resign in good standing, employees must submit a written, fourteen (14) calendar
day notice of resignation to their Department Head. The day the notice is presented to the Department
Head shall be considered the first day of the notice of resignation.
ARTICLE 14
DISCIPLINE
Employees shall only be disciplined for just cause.
Disciplinary action may be in the form of oral reprimand, written reprimand, suspension from
duty without pay, or dismissal.
Oral and written reprimands may be issued by any Department Head, but suspensions without
pay and dismissals must be approved by the City Manager before becoming effective. The employee shall
be given a copy of any written reprimand, suspensions without pay or dismissal at the time disciplinary
action is administered and a copy shall also be sent to the Union.
Employees may appeal disciplinary actions according to the grievance procedure provided in this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 15
GRIEVANCES
A grievance shall be defined as a dispute or difference of opinion raised by an employee or a
group of employees (with regard to a single common issue) covered by this Agreement against the City
involving as to him or them the meaning, interpretation, or application of the provisions of this
Agreement. The Union Business Manager or his representative shall represent employees filing a
grievance under the terms of this section.
Supervisors shall make reasonable efforts to respond to an employee grievance at the earliest
possible time without major disruption of daily work activities. Meetings held between employees and
supervisors with regard to a grievance shall be scheduled in advance whenever possible. Union Stewards
shall be authorized to investigate grievances during working hours provided they inform their supervisor.
The grievance procedure shall consist of three (3) steps as described hereinafter:
Step One:
Employee(s) who have a grievance shall file it in written form, with their Department Head within
ten (10) days of the event or occurrence which precipitated the grievance. In filing their grievance,
the employee shall state the nature of the grievance as well as the relief desired.
The Department Head shall evaluate the grievance based on available facts and render a written
decision within ten (10) calendar days of the date the grievance was filed.

Page 11

Step Two:
Employee(s) may appeal the decision of their Department Head by filing a written appeal with the
City Manager within ten (10) calendar days of the date of their department head's decision. The
employee shall state the nature of the appeal and the relief desired.
The City Manager shall evaluate the appeal based on available facts and render a decision within
ten (10) days of the date the appeal was filed.
Step Three:
Employee(s) may appeal the decision of the City Manager to binding arbitration by filing a written
notice with the City Manager within thirty (30) days of the City Manager's decision.
Once a grievance has been appealed to binding arbitration, the City and the Union shall request
a list of nominees for arbitration from the Public Employee's Mediation Roster. When the list is
received, a mediator shall be selected by the Union and the City by alternately striking one name each
until one nominee remains with the Union striking the first name. The remaining nominee shall serve as
the mediator.
The mediator shall be notified of his selection by a joint letter from the City and the Union
requesting that he set a time and place for a hearing, subject to the availability of the City and the
Union. All arbitration hearings shall be held in the City of Mt. Vernon.
The mediator shall act in a judicial, not legislative capacity and shall have no right or authority to
amend, modify, nullify, ignore, add to, or subtract from the provisions of this Agreement. The mediator
shall only consider and make a decision with respect to the specific issue submitted and shall have no
authority to make a decision on any other issue not so submitted to them.
In the event the mediator finds a violation of the terms of this Agreement, he shall determine an
appropriate remedy.
The mediator shall submit, in writing, his decision within thirty (30) calendar days following the
close of the hearing or the submission of briefs by the parties, whichever is later, unless the parties
agree to a written extension. The mediator's decision shall be based solely upon his interpretation of
the meaning or application of the express terms of this Agreement to the facts of the grievance
presented. The mediator's decision shall be final and binding upon the City and the Union.
Expenses for the mediator's services and the proceedings shall be shared equally by the City and
the Union. The City and the Union shall be responsible for compensating its own representatives,
attorneys, and witnesses. If either the City or the Union desires a verbatim record of the proceedings, it
may cause such a record to be made provided it pays for the record. If the other party desires a copy of
the proceedings, it agrees to pay half of the cost of preparing the record as well as all of the costs of
making a copy.
The time limits for filing and appealing a grievance may be extended by mutual consent of the
City and the Union. In the event a grievance or appeal is not filed in a timely manner and no mutual
extension of the deadline was agreed upon, the grievance or appeal shall be considered waived. In the
event, a grievance or appeal is not determined by the appropriate supervisor within the time limit and
Page 12

no mutual extension of the deadline has been agreed upon, the grievance or appeal shall be referred to
the next step automatically.
ARTICLE 16
PENSIONS
The only pension available to employees represented by the Union shall be the Illinois Municipal
Retirement Fund. The costs and contributions to IMRF shall be as provided in State Statutes.
ARTICLE 17
UNIFORMS
Employees are required to wear City provided uniforms. The City will determine types of
uniform, taking into consideration recommendations of a uniform committee. The City shall provide
each employee with a clean uniform per day. Department Heads will advise employees of uniform
requirements and the procedures for the issue and return of the uniforms. Uniforms shall be returned
to the City when an employee ends their employment. If the uniforms are not returned, the cost of the
uniforms shall be deducted from their final payroll check.
City supplied rain gear, safety vests, ice cleats etc. shall be returned to the City when an
employee ends their employment or the cost of the items shall be deducted from their final payroll
check.
“Hot Weather Policy” Employees may wear plain t-shirts (no logos, no collar, no cutoff) when
temperatures are forecasted to be over 85°. The City does not provide t-shirts.

ARTICLE 18
HEALTH INSURANCE
(a) Coverage. The City makes available to active full-time employees and their dependents, group
health and hospitalization insurance and life insurance coverage and benefits. The City reserves
the right to change or offer alternative insurance carriers, health maintenance organizations, or
to self-insure as it deems appropriate, so long as the new coverage and benefits are
substantially similar to those that predated this agreement and that the new coverage applies to
all City bargaining units.
Complete details of the insurance benefits are outlined in the provided insurance booklets. A
summary of benefits follows:
Deductible In-Net:
Deductible Out-of-Net:
Out-of-Pocket PPO:
Out-of-Pocket Non-PPO:
Payable Percentages:

Individual $1,000
Family
Individual $2,000
Family
Individual $2,750
Family
Individual $3,750
Family
80% PPO and 60% Non-PPO

$2,000
$4,000
$5,500
$7,500

(b) Cost. Currently, the City pays one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of full-time employees’
individual group health, hospitalization, and life insurance. The City pays zero percent (0%) of
Page 13

the cost of dependent family coverage above the cost of individual coverage, and the employee
pays one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of dependent family coverage. The cost of an
employee’s portion of insurance premiums will be deducted from the employee’s paychecks.
(c) Cost Containment. The City reserves the right to institute cost containment measures relative
to insurance. Such changes may include, but are not limited to, mandatory second opinions for
elective surgery, preadmission and continuing admission review, preferred provider provisions,
prohibition on weekend admissions except in emergency situations, and mandatory out-patient
elective surgery for certain designated surgical procedures.
(d) Life Insurance. The City shall provide, at no cost to the employee, life insurance coverage. The
City shall provide a $5,000 life insurance policy and an additional $5,000 death benefit for a total
death benefit of $10,000 per active full-time employees. The amount of death benefit coverage
will be the same offered to all eligible employees (including police and firefighters).
(e) Terms of Insurance Policies to Govern. The extent of coverage under the insurance policies
referred to in this Agreement shall be governed by the terms and conditions set forth in said
policies or plans. Any questions or disputes concerning an employee's claim for benefits under
said insurance policies or plans shall be resolved in accordance with the terms and conditions
set forth in said policies or plans and shall not be subject to the grievance and arbitration
procedure set forth in this Agreement. The failure of any insurance carrier(s) or plan
administrator(s) to provide any benefit for which it has contracted or is obligated shall result in
no liability to the City, nor shall such failure be considered a breach by the City of any obligation
undertaken under this or any other Agreement. However, nothing in this Agreement shall be
construed to relieve any insurance carrier(s) or plan administrator(s) from any liability it may
have to the City, employee, or beneficiary of any employee.
Health Insurance for Retirees
(a) Eligibility Employees who were hired before May 1, 1987 are eligible for certain health insurance
benefits. To be entitled, employees shall be eligible to receive Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
(IMRF) retirement or disability (temporary or permanent) pension benefits or complete twenty (20)
years of service with the City. The employees may be eligible to continue their dependent health
insurance benefits provided they pay the cost of their dependent premiums. The City reserves the
right to implement a plan that would require employees receiving retirement and disability pension
benefits to pay a portion of the cost for individual group health, hospitalization, and life insurance so
long as it is implemented Citywide to eligible retired and disabled employees.
Employees hired after May 1, 1987 will not receive this benefit. Employees not eligible for the
continuation of City paid insurance have an option of continuing on the group health insurance plan
as provided by the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA), with payment of the
insurance premiums being the responsibility of the individual.
The City may be required to continue health insurance coverage (cost paid by the employee) for
other retiring, terminating, or disabled employees as required by Federal or State Legislation.
(b) Coverage The City, in its discretion, will determine and select the medical plan(s), coverages, and
benefits to be offered to current and future retirees and disabled employee, and reserves the right
Page 14

to change or offer alternative insurance carriers or health maintenance organizations, or to self –
insure, and to change any coverages, benefits, co-pays, and deductibles, as it deems appropriate, so
long as the new plans, coverages and benefits are implemented to all eligible retired and disabled
employees covered under the plans.
(c) Cost. Currently, the City pays one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of eligible retired and
disabled employee’s individual group health, hospitalization, and life insurance. In the event of
future increases in the premium cost for employee’s individual group health, hospitalization
insurance, retired and disabled employees may be required to share in the cost of individual
coverage provided that all eligible retired and disabled employees pay the same share of premiums.
The City pays zero percent (0%) of the cost of dependent family coverage above the cost of
individual coverage, and the retired or disabled employee pays one hundred percent (100%) of the
cost of dependent family coverage.
(d) Cost Containment. The City reserves the right to institute cost containment measures relative to
insurance. Such changes may include, but are not limited to, increased deductibles, co-pays, and
out of pocket maximums, reduced lifetime caps, coverage limitations, mandatory second opinions
for elective surgery, preadmission and continuing admission review, preferred provider provisions,
prohibition on weekend admissions except in emergency situations, and mandatory out-patient
elective surgery for certain designated surgical procedures. Any cost containment measures shall be
implemented Citywide to eligible retired and disabled employees.

ARTICLE 19
HOURS OF WORK
(a) Schedule Full time employees represented by the Union will have a normal work schedule
consisting of forty (40) hours per week according to the staffing schedule established by the
Department Head. Work schedules as determined by the Department Head shall reflect the
staffing requirements of the Department or Division, and the regular workdays, non-workdays,
and employee assignments for each employee. Such schedules shall be posted in a conspicuous
location. Department Heads have the ability to switch the employees work shift to staff their
department when other departmental employees have scheduled time off. If an employee is
called in to fill a shift caused by an unscheduled time off or training, the employee shall receive
overtime or compensatory time. Seniority shall be the determining factor for shift preference
when two (2) or more shifts are necessary. There shall be a minimum of one (1) full-time
employee assigned to each shift
(b) Regular Hours of Work The hours each employee is scheduled to work as determined by the
Department Head shall constitute each employee’s regular work hours. Except for employees
on two shift operations, the regular workweek shall be Monday through Friday and regular work
hours shall be 7:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m. with a one (1) hour unpaid lunch period normally taken
between 12:00 noon and 1:00.
(c) Lunches and Breaks Employees working a regular schedule of eight (8) hours per day are
entitled to a one (1) hour unpaid lunch period to be taken during the middle of the workday,
depending on operational practicalities. In addition to the lunch period, for employees working
Page 15

a regular schedule of eight (8) hours per day with a one (1) hour lunch period, the employees
shall have one (1) paid 15-minute break in the first half of the work day and a second paid 15minute break in the second half of the work day. Lunch and break schedules will be determined
by the Department Head, but shall not be cumulative, combined, nor taken at the start or end of
the workday.
Employees may be permitted to work a regular schedule of eight (8) hours per day without a
one (1) hour scheduled lunch period, if consistent with operational needs and approved by the
Department Head. Employees on such a schedule will be permitted one (1) paid 20-minute
break at the middle of the workday, depending on operational practicalities. The Department
Head shall determine such break. The 20-minute break shall not be cumulative, combined, not
taken at the start or end of the workday.
(d) Overtime Assignments Overtime opportunities and assignments shall be divided as equitably as
possible between employees of the Department in accordance with the guidelines and policies
of the Department. In the event an employee shows that overtime opportunities or
assignments have not been shared equitably, the remedy shall be for opportunities to be
offered or assignments to be made in such a manner as to correct the imbalance.
Employees are responsible for providing information to Department Heads as to who and how
long an employee worked overtime. Management is not responsible for errors and Employees
waive the right to file a grievance (no time-slipping). The City will correct overtime-scheduling
errors by allowing the employee to make up any missed overtime hours in the future overtime
opportunities.
No employee shall be required to work in excess of sixteen (16) consecutive hours without
receiving eight (8) hours rest, except in the event of a declared emergency announced by the
City Manager and an individual assessment by the City Manager or Department Head that the
employee may work safely.
Employees are called by the order on the call-out list. If there is no immediate answer, then the
next employee on the list is called. Employees are allowed 10 minutes to answer a page,
beeper, or message on answering machine before being deemed refusing overtime call-outs.
The first person contacted will have first opportunity to work overtime. Employees are
responsible for informing their department head of the best possible means of receiving their
notification of call-outs. It is at the employee’s option and cost to have phones, beepers, or
cellular service.
If an employee refuses overtime call-out, directly or by failing to answer the phone or beeper
call or requests to leave before the job is complete, the employee will have their name placed
on the bottom of the list. The overtime hours refused will be added to the actual overtime
hours worked to determine total overtime hours credited to that employee and the employee
will be place on the bottom of the call-out list.
Employees shall not be paid for any time for which they have been relieved from duty or other
time not actually worked, except for regular hours, which fall within a rest period established by
their Department Head. During such rest period, employees are required to the extent
Page 16

permitted by law, to remain at their residence resting since the employee may be subject to
being called out again on the same day.
Temporary employees are not eligible for overtime unless full-time employees within the same
Department have declined the overtime. However, if a Temporary employee is working on a
job, which requires overtime hours to complete, he can remain on the job and earn overtime
after the overtime is offered to the other full-time employees on the same job. Any specific
overtime job that requires a reduction in workforce, temporary employees shall be dismissed
from that job first.
(e) Overtime Pay Except as otherwise provided below, employees shall be paid at a rate of one and
one-half (1-1/2) times their regular straight time hourly rate of pay for each overtime hour
worked outside or beyond their regular hours of work in a work day or in excess of forty (40)
hours in a calendar week (or other seven (7) day work period established by the Department
Head). Overtime pay shall be received in fifteen (15) minute segments as provided by the Fair
Labor Standards Act.
(f) Call Back Pay A call back is defined as a work assignment, which does not immediately precede
or follow an employee’s regularly scheduled working hours. An employee called back to work
after having left work shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half for such hours, with a
minimum of two (2) hours pay, unless the employee is called back to rectify his own error.
Overtime worked immediately prior to or following a scheduled shift and which runs
consecutively with that shift, shall not be subject to the minimum, and shall be paid for actual
time worked.
If an employee on call back is not required to work the full two (2) hours for which pay is
guaranteed, but is then recalled again during the same two (2) hours, he shall not be entitled to
the additional guaranteed minimum of two (2) hours pay. Rather, the two callbacks will be
considered a single call back. Employees on callback must be willing and able to work the full 2hour guaranteed period, and if refused, then the employee shall receive pay only for actual time
worked. This provision shall be administered within reason to avoid both forfeitures and unjust
rewards.
(g) Sunday and Holiday Work Employees shall be paid at a rate of double the employee’s hourly
rate of pay for all time worked on Sundays, unless the time worked is part of the employee’s
regular hours of work. Employees shall be paid at a rate of double the employee’s hourly rate of
pay for time worked on holidays in addition to holiday pay, unless the time worked is part of the
employee’s regular hours of work.
Employees working Saturday and Sunday as part of their regular shift shall be compensated for
working their regular days off at time and one half for the first day (instead of Saturday) and
double time for the second day (instead of Sunday)
(h) Compensatory Time In situations where the Department Head determines it to be in the best
interests of the City and it is mutually agreed with the affected employee, the City shall grant
compensatory time off in lieu of overtime payment at the applicable rate. The employee can
earn no more than 40 hours in a fiscal year.
Page 17

Compensatory time-off shall be taken at such times and in such time blocks as are established or
agreed to by the Department Head or his designee.
The City, in its discretion, may pay an employee on the last regularly scheduled payroll in March
for any and all accrued and unused compensatory time. The employee’s compensatory time
reserve will be reduced by one hour for each hour paid.
(i) Meals. Employees who must work an unscheduled overtime period of 4-hours or more in
duration shall agree that the established practice of providing breakfast and supper meals will
continue. Meals may also be provided in other circumstances at the Department Head’s
discretion. The Department Head and the Union Steward will discuss for resolution the
appropriateness of a meal whenever there is a disagreement to the same. Time to consume
meal shall not be compensated time. The employee shall punch out and punch in on the time
clock to determine the uncompensated time. The City shall reimburse the employee up to
$10.00 per meal.
ARTICLE 20
ATTENDANCE
No employee shall absent himself from work without proper notification to his/her supervisor
without just cause before the beginning of the workday. Department Heads shall conspicuously post the
name and contact number of the person to notify in case of absences.
An employee must use accrued leave time (personal, vacation, birthday, sick, or compensatory)
before he uses unpaid leave time.
ARTICLE 21
HOLIDAYS
The official City holidays shall be:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King's Birthday
Presidents' Day
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Fourth of July
Labor Day

Veteran's Day
Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas Day
*Christmas Eve (1/2 day)
*New Years Eve (1/2 day)
Employee’s Birthday

If a holiday falls on Saturday, it shall be celebrated on the previous Friday; if a holiday falls on Sunday, it
shall be celebrated on the following Monday. If a holiday falls on an employee's day off, the employee shall
receive additional 8 hours pay at straight time or another day off at a later date. If the employee desires to
receive the additional 8 hours pay at straight time, the employee shall notify his Department Head within the
current or the next payroll period that the holiday occurred. If the employee desires day off, Department Heads
shall approve or deny the day off request within 48 hours of the employee’s written request. If a holiday
occurs during an employee's vacation, he shall receive an additional day of vacation.

Page 18

An employee may use his birthday as a floating holiday with the advance approval of his/her
Department Head. If an employee leaves City service, before their actual date of birth, the employee will not be
paid for this day. If the employee has previously taken the birthday as a floating holiday, then the employee
shall reimburse the City for the time taken.
*At the Department Head’s discretion, employees will either be given the full day off on Christmas Eve
or New Year’s Eve and any overtime worked on the Eves would be paid at 1.5 times instead of the holiday rate
of 2 times no matter if the employee was scheduled to work on that day or had the day off.
ARTICLE 22
SICK LEAVE
Employees shall receive one (1) sick day per complete month, with a maximum accumulation of one
hundred and twenty-five (125) days. Employees on authorized leave will earn sick leave, if they are in
attendance at least one day during the calendar month for which the sick leave is earned. No sick leave shall be
earned during periods of leave of absence.
In addition, if an employee does not use sick leave during the calendar year and after the applicable
maximum number of 125 sick leave days have been accumulated; one additional eight-hour day will be added to
the maximum sick leave bank for the next calendar year. In order for an employee to receive this benefit, no
sick leave can be used during the calendar year.
Upon retirement or in the event of death, while still an employee in good standing, an employee shall be
compensated for one-half (1/2) of their unused accumulated sick leave. Normal retirement occurs when an
employee is able to immediately draw pension benefits from a City-sponsored fund.
(a) Sick leave may be used for the following reasons:
1. Personal illness of, or physical incapacity, resulting from causes beyond the employee's control.
(See exception in Paragraph “I’ of this Section)
2. Illness of an employee of the employee's household that requires the employee's personal care
and attention.
3. To care for the employee's legal spouse, legal civil union partner, children, parent, or parent inlaw who has a serious health condition.
4. To care for the employee's child after birth, or placement for adoption or foster care.
5. To keep a doctor or dentist appointment.
(b) The City recognizes the provisions and requirements of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 and
future revisions and updates to the Act. The City reserves the right to implement the Family and
Medical Leave Act consistent with the law and to promulgate administrative policies and procedures.
Employees are eligible if they have worked for the City for at least one (1) year and meet other
requirements. Eligible employees are entitled to up to 12 (twelve) weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave
for certain family and medical reasons. The twelve-month period is measured backward from the date
an employee uses any FMLA leave. Thus, each time an employee takes FMLA leave, the remaining leave
entitlement would be any balance of the twelve weeks not used during the immediately preceding
twelve months. Employees on approved FMLA leave will be required to exhaust all accrued sick leave,
personal leave, vacation leave, and compensatory leave before being eligible for unpaid leave. Sick
leave will be exhausted first, unless the employee requests in writing that other leave be used. The sick
leave, personal leave, vacation leave, and compensatory leave used will be counted as part of the 12
weeks of FMLA leave eligible to an employee.

Page 19

All provisions herein shall be subject to and administered as provided within the Family and Medical
Leave Act, 29 USC 2601 et seq.
(c) Abuse of sick leave is a serious matter. Fraudulent use of sick leave or falsification of any verification of
illness shall be just cause for discipline, up to and including discharge. Sick employees are required to
remain at home unless hospitalized, visiting their doctor, or acting pursuant to reasonable instruction
for care. Upon sufficient evidence of the abuse of sick leave, the employee shall not be paid for such
leave taken nor shall the employee accrue any rights such as seniority or other rights. Sufficient
evidence of abuse shall be presumed if the employee is found not to be home, not acting according to a
physician's care instructions, or the employee cannot establish that he has sought medical treatment.
"Abuse" of sick leave shall subject the employee to disciplinary action pursuant to the terms of this
Agreement. All employees agree to cooperate fully with the Department in verifying illness. The
Employer and Union agree that sick leave abuse is a very serious offense, and the parties further agree
that it is in the interest of the Union and the Employer that the Employer use all reasonable means to
ascertain and effectively deal with sick leave abuse.
(d) An employee on sick leave shall inform his immediate supervisor of the fact and reason therefore before
the start of each work day, if possible, or as shortly thereafter as possible. Failure to do so may be cause
for denial of sick leave with pay for the period of absence.
(e) An employee receiving sick leave with pay who simultaneously receives compensation under the
provision of the Workers’ Compensation Act shall receive only that portion of the regular salary, which
will together with said compensation, equal his regular salary. The employee will be charged at their
rate of pay per hour, rounded to the nearest half hour, of any available leave time for each day off the
job on Workers’ Compensation, when the City pays the difference between Workers' Compensation and
their regular salary. For periods of time off of the job, which Workers’ Compensation does not pay
benefits (i.e. doctor’s appointments, waiting periods), the employee can choose to have the time off
without pay or use paid sick leave or other paid accrued leave time.
The City will cover employees receiving worker compensation benefits under the City’s health insurance
plan for an additional sixty (60) days after the employee has exhausted his FMLA benefits and is no
longer receiving a City payroll check for the any available leave time charged each day off the job while
on Workers’ Compensation.
(f) The City will not normally require a medical certificate for absences of less than three (3) days except in
the cases of suspected abuse. Medical diagnosis is only required if the condition is job-related and is
expected to reveal that the employee is unable to perform the essential job duties or is a danger to
workplace safety.
(g) An employee who is laid off from his position for reasons that are not the fault of the employee may, if
reappointed within 12 (twelve) months, has available for use, any unused sick leave existing at the time
of lay-off. When an employee is transferred to another position, any unused sick leave, which may have
accumulated to their credit, shall continue to be available for use as necessary.
(h) An employee shall not be entitled to any compensation for accrued sick leave at the termination of
employment except upon retirement or in case of death.
(i) Sick leave benefits shall not be used, if the injury or illness occurred while the employee was performing
compensated service outside of employment with the City, without the prior approval of the City
Manager or his designee.

Page 20

(j) An employee, who is absent from duty because of illness or injury, shall not be employed by employers
other than the City (including self-employment) while the employee is using sick leave benefits, without
the prior approval of the City Manager or his designee.

(k) If the City of Mt. Vernon sells water and sewer assets, the purchaser must agree to pay 100% of
Vacation and Sick time owed to employees displaced by the sale.
ARTICLE 23
PERSONAL LEAVE
All employees shall be granted three (3) personal days per calendar year. Personal leave may be used for
any reason. Personal leave may not be carried over from one (1) calendar year to the next.
Employees shall provide advance notice of his/her intent to use personal leave whenever possible.
ARTICLE 24
FUNERAL LEAVE
In the event of a death in the immediate family, an employee may take up to three (3) consecutive
workdays off and receive regular straight-time pay to attend the funeral. Such leave period ordinarily shall start
the day after the employee learns of the death, unless the employee learns of the death while on duty, in which
case the employee may elect to begin funeral leave immediately. For purposes of this section, immediate family
shall include an employee’s or their spouse’s family members. Family members shall be defined as:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Legal Spouse or Civil Union Partner
Son or Daughter including legally adopted and stepchildren
Son or Daughter in-laws
Parents including stepparents
Parent in-laws
Brother or Sister including half & step
Brother or Sister in-laws
Grandparents, including current Step Grandparents
Grandchildren, including current Step Grandchildren

Employee may take one (1) day Funeral Leave to attend the funeral or visitation in the event of the death of an
Aunt or Uncle of the employee only (not spouse).
An employee shall provide satisfactory evidence of the death and of the employee's attendance at the
funeral if so requested by the City. Funeral Leave may be extended at the discretion of the City Manager on a
case-by-case basis and under the terms and conditions prescribed, including requiring the use of accumulated
vacation days, personal days, and/or sick leave days.
Funeral leave is designed to provide employees with paid time away from work to grieve and to handle
matters related to a death in their family. The three days afforded to employees normally run between the date
of death to and including the date of ceremony. The policy does not automatically provide an employee with 3
days off the job. The number of days depends on personal circumstances such as the need for travel to the
funeral, making arrangements, etc. The City has the right to ask for proof of relationship and attendance at the
funeral.

Page 21

ARTICLE 25
VACATION
Vacations with pay shall be granted to employees in the bargaining unit according to the following
schedule:
Two (2) weeks after one (1) year of service
Three (3) weeks after seven (7) years of service
Four (4) weeks after twelve (12) years of service
Vacation leave shall be granted on January 1 of each year and shall be used on or before December 31
of each year. Vacation leave may not be carried over from year to year; vacation leave not used each year shall
be forfeited.
If an employee does not have at least one (1) year of service as of January 1, he/she shall receive
vacation days equal to the number of complete months of service prior to January 1.
When an employee completes seven (7) years or twelve (12) years of service, he/she shall receive the
additional week of vacation on January 1 of that year. If the employee terminates employment prior to their
anniversary date and has used the additional week of vacation, the vacation pay shall be deducted from the
employee's final paycheck or the employee shall reimburse the City for the vacation pay.
All vacation shall only be used with the advance approval of the Department Head. Department Heads
shall approve or deny an unscheduled vacation request within 48 hours of the employee’s written request.
Vacation leave shall be chosen by employees according to seniority as well as the minimum staffing
requirements established by the Department Head. Vacation time must be taken in increments of two (2) hours
or more.
Upon termination, an employee will receive payment of accrued vacation leave based on the time
earned from the first of the year terminated to the last day employee performed bargaining unit work for the
City
If an employee is actively on the job as of December 31st of each year, the employee’s vacation leave
accrual will be posted to the employee’s vacation account for the following calendar year.
ARTICLE 26
LABOR-MANAGEMENT MEETINGS
The Union and Employer agree that during the life of this Agreement representatives of each party shall
meet semi-annually, or more frequently if mutually agreed, at a mutual satisfactory time and place. The
purpose of such meetings shall be to appraise the problems, if any, which have arisen in the application,
administration, and interpretation of this Agreement and which may be interfering with the attainment of the
parties' objectives as set forth above.
Such meetings shall not be for the purpose of conducting continuing collective bargaining, nor in any
way modify, add to, or detract from the provisions of this Agreement.
Prior to any meeting held pursuant to the foregoing paragraphs, the parties shall provide each other
with such advance notice as is reasonable under the circumstances concerning matters intended to be
discussed.

Page 22

ARTICLE 27
EDUCATION EXPENSES
All education required by the City shall be at City’s expense. Voluntary classes or education not required
by the City shall be at the employee's expense.
ARTICLE 28
INCLEMENT WEATHER
Employees required to work in inclement weather shall have City-provided protective clothing available
for their use.
ARTICLE 29
SAFETY SHOES
When the City for safety purposes requires safety shoes, the City shall provide them to employees. If
safety shoes need replacement, the employee shall provide evidence to their Department Head that
replacement is necessary. The City shall pay up to $225.00 for the replacement of safety shoes. If the employee
provides documentation from a qualified medical provider stating the necessity of more expensive shoes, the
City shall pay up to $250.00.
ARTICLE 30
LOSS PREVENTION PROGRAM
The Union recognizes and supports the City's safety program, and agrees that an employee or
employees may from time to time be asked to participate in this safety program. It is understood that the City
retains the option to change, modify, or abandon this safety program at its discretion. To the extent that, in
conjunction with said program, the City awards extra benefits, including personal days, to employees as an
incentive for maintaining a safe work record, such awards will be within the City's rights.
ARTICLE 31
WAGES
Wages paid to employees represented by the Union shall be in accordance with this section and in
accordance with Wage Schedules attached hereto.
In determining an employee's hourly rate of pay, the annual salary shall be divided by two thousand and
eighty (2,080) hours and rounded to the nearest penny.
If the Department Head, Assistant Department Head, or his Designee is unable to answer after hour callouts and the selected employee is required to be available to answer after hour call-outs, the employee shall
receive an additional two (2) hours of base hourly rate paid at time and a half. The Designee cannot be an
employee covered by the CBA. In the case of Sundays and holidays, the time shall be paid at a rate of double
the employee's hourly rate of pay, if not a part of the employee's regular hours of work. In addition, if the
employee is required to work the call-out job, he shall receive the hours worked at his base hourly overtime
rate. When a second call-out occurs during the time the employee is working the first call-out, no overlapping of
the hours is allowed. If the employees on callback are not in fact required to work a full two (2) hours and is
recalled during those same two (2) hours, he shall not be entitled to an additional guaranteed minimum of two
(2) hours. It is management rights to select the employee within the Bargaining Unit who will act in this
Page 23

temporary supervisor’s position. In Departments with more than one union, the selected employee shall
supervise all employees within the Department. The Bargaining Unit shall in no way discipline, discriminate
against or otherwise interfere with a selected employee carrying out his authority in supervision and direction or
control over another Bargaining Unit employee.
Employees within the Bargaining Unit who are temporarily assigned to do work in a higher paying
classification will earn two dollars ($2.00) per hour for each hour worked out of class.
Employees within the Bargaining Unit who are temporarily assigned to do work in a position
represented by another Bargaining Unit will earn one dollar ($1.00) per hour for each hour worked.
Mechanics who achieve NIASE Certification in the Automobile & Light Truck Certification category,
Medium-Heavy Truck Certification, and/or EVT (emergency vehicle technician) Certification category shall
receive additional pay at a rate of $300 per year for each level of certification received up to a maximum of
twenty (20). If supplementary NIASE Certifications are needed, the Fleet Services Director will recommend to
the City Manager for approval of the additional certifications. Active employees as of May 1, 2012 shall
continue to be paid $300 per year for all previously earned NIASE Certifications until the expiration dates of the
Certifications.
Employees who have achieved and maintained a certification as an insecticide chemical OPERATOR and
who works in the City’s Mosquito Abatement Program shall receive additional pay at the rate of $300 per year.
Employees who have achieved and maintained a certification as an insecticide chemical APPLICATOR and who
works in the City’s Mosquito Abatement Program shall receive additional pay at the rate of $300.00 per year.
An employee will not receive both Applicator and Operator additional pay. There will be two (2) Applicator and
two (2) Operator positions. This shall be paid in a lump sum amount on the first paycheck after June 1 of each
year.
Employees who have successfully completed a recognized course in Certified Pool Operator (CPO) and
achieved and maintained the certification shall receive additional pay at the rate of $300.00 per year to be paid
once annually on the first pay period after June 1 of each year. This bonus will only be paid to employees
working in the Parks Department.
Employees who have successfully completed a recognized course in traffic signal controller maintenance
and who are normally assigned the task of maintaining the traffic signal controllers shall receive additional pay
at the rate of $300 per year. There will be five (5) Traffic Signal Controller Maintenance positions. This shall be
paid in a lump sum amount on the first paycheck after June 1 of each year.
Employees hired before May 1, 2012, who have achieved and maintained a certification, as a Surveyor 1,
2, 3 from the Illinois Department of Transportation shall receive additional pay at the rate of $200 per year. This
shall be paid in a lump sum amount on the first paycheck after June 1 of each year. Employees hired after May
1, 2012 will not be eligible for Surveyor 1, 2, 3 pay.
Department Heads shall receive applications for the above certifications. In order to receive payment
for the certifications, current certificates shall be on file with the City’s Human Resource Department. The
Department Head shall use their discretion assigning employees to these positions. Assignment of positions will
be blended evenly among qualified employees.
Employees assigned to operate the “65-foot aerial bucket truck” shall receive an additional $1.00 per
hour when actually operating the truck.

Page 24

ARTICLE 32
PAY DAYS
Paydays shall be every other Friday and shall compensate employee for work performed during the
fourteen- (14) calendar day period ending on the Sunday prior to payday.
ARTICLE 33
NO STRIKE - NO LOCKOUT
The City and the Union agree that the operation of the City is essential to the welfare of the general
public and the City and the Union recognize their obligation to furnish continuous service to the general public.
The City agrees that during the period of this Agreement there shall be no lockout of employees.
The Union, those employees represented by the union, individually and collectively, agrees that there
shall be no strike, or other interruption of work, it being the desire of all parties to provide an uninterrupted
service to the public.
ARTICLE 34
RESIDENCY
Residency within the limits of Jefferson County is required of all City employees.
ARTICLE 35
PAST PRACTICES
The City and the Union agree that the terms of this Agreement shall supersede and replace all past
practices, which may in any way conflict with the terms of this Agreement.
Past practices, which do not alter, modify, or change any of the provisions of this Agreement in any way,
shall only be changed by mutual consent of both parties.
ARTICLE 36
POLITICAL ACTIVITY
While working for the City, all employees in the classified service shall refrain from seeking or accepting
nomination or election to any of the elected offices of the City Government. Employees shall also refrain from
using their influence as a city employee publicly for or against any candidate for the elected offices of the City
Government. Employees who desire to participate in these activities shall resign from the City's service or be
terminated.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent employees in the classified service from becoming
or continuing to be, members of any political organization, from attending political meetings, from expressing
their views on political matters as a citizen, or from voting with complete freedom in any election.
The Employer shall deduct contributions for the Southern Illinois Laborers’ Political League from the
salaries of all employees who voluntarily request such in writing. The employee shall designate in writing the
amount of the contribution. All deductions shall be remitted to the Southern Illinois Laborers’ Political League
monthly.
Page 25

The Union shall indemnify, defend, and hold the Employer harmless in complying with this Article, any
claim, demands, and suit of liability arising from any action taken by the Employer in complying with this Article.
ARTICLE 37
CREDIT UNION
The City has established eligibility with Gen/Fed Credit Union for its employees. Membership in the
credit union will be optional to the employees.
Upon receipt of an employee's properly signed and completed authorization form for monthly credit
union deposits, the City will deduct the regular deposit amounts from the employee's paycheck.
If any employee so desires, the Employer agrees to a payroll deduction to be sent to the LIFE Credit
Union. The employee will authorize the amount of such deduction, furnish the address, and account number
where deductions should be sent.
ARTICLE 38
DRUG AND ALCOHOL USE
The City and the Union recognize the necessity to provide a safe, healthy and productive workplace for
its employees. Employees under the influence of drugs or alcohol while at work can be serious safety risks to
themselves or others. The manufacture, possession, use, sale, distribution or dispensing of illegal drugs or
alcohol in the workplace is totally unacceptable.
(a) Conduct Prohibited The following conduct is hereby prohibited:
1. Manufacture, distribution, transfer, possession, use, sale or being under the influence of drugs or
alcohol in such a manner as to have any effect whatsoever on the employee's work, efficiency or
safety or the conduct of Company's business.
2. Refusal to consent to a search or test under the provisions of this policy, including but not limited to,
any refusal to sign appropriate consent forms in connection with such test or the alteration or
contamination or attempted alteration or contamination of his/her test sample or that of another
employee.
3. Failure or refusal to comply with written conditions imposed in connection with drug and/or alcohol
dependency treatment under the City's Employee Assistance Program or some other program
accepted by the City.
4. Failure to report the use of any drugs whenever the employee is required to report such use under
this Policy.
(b) Definitions As used in this Section regarding Drug and Alcohol Use.
"Drugs" shall mean any substance the use or possession of which is prohibited under federal or state
law regulating drugs, narcotics, controlled substances, and the like. It also includes any legal drug or
substance which can pose a significant risk to the safety of the employee or others including both
prescription and nonprescription drugs when used by an employee without proper authorization
required by law or in a manner in which such use may affect the safety of the employee, his or her
co-workers, members of the public or others. Without limiting the foregoing, "drugs" as used herein
includes: marijuana, hashish, amphetamines, methamphetamine, cocaine, crack, barbiturates,
methaqualones, benzodiazepines and other tranquilizers, LSD, phencyclidine (PCP), and other
hallucinogens, methadone, propoxyphene, and opiates such as heroin, codeine, and morphine.

Page 26

"Under the Influence” for the purpose of this Policy means that an employee is affected by a drug or
alcohol or some combination thereof in any detectable and/or observable manner.
"Legal drugs" means prescribed drugs, over-the-counter drugs, and other substances, which have been
legally obtained and are being used only for the purpose for which they were prescribed or
manufactured, and only by the individual for whom they were prescribed.
(c) Searches City may conduct searches for drugs or alcohol at any time or place (place meaning the City or

work site property in the normal workplace geographic area) where this policy applies when there is
reasonable suspicion to suspect that drugs or alcohol are present. Searches may include an employee's
personal property including, but not limited to, the employee's clothing, lunchbox, cooler, purse, parcels
and similar items as well as an employee's desk or locker. These searches will be subject to the
grievance procedure.
(d) Reasonable Suspicion If the action, appearance, conduct or physical evidence of or associated with an

employee indicates drug usage, as verified by a trained supervisor, the employee will be required to
immediately undergo drug screening. The City will train the local Union steward to provide the
knowledge to observe said behavior/evidence and will use this person, whenever possible, to verify the
requirement of immediate drug screening. In either event, the supervisor will have been trained in the
detection of probable drug usage by observation of a person's behavior and will be required to
document, in writing, his observations. The documentation by the supervisor will be prepared within 24
hours, or before release of the test results, whichever event occurs first. The employee under suspicion
will be offered an opportunity to give an explanation of his/her condition (if present and conscious). The
Union steward shall report directly to the City Manager if the employee under suspicion is a
management employee. If reasonably available, another employee of his/her choice may be present
during such explanation and, if present, shall be entitled to confer privately with the employee. Only
the City's supervisor may authorize an employee search or test.
(e) Reporting Use of Legal Drugs An employee who has reason to believe that the use of a legal drug may

present a safety risk to himself/herself or others or may have a significant adverse effect on his/her
efficiency must report the use of such drug to the City in writing. Any employee who has reported the
use of such a drug or substance to his/her supervisor in writing and who is thereafter permitted to work
or operate equipment at times when the supervisor knows he has taken such drugs shall not be
disciplined under this policy for such use. In appropriate cases when there is substantial, unavoidable
risk of harm by him/her or others, the City may require the employee to take a leave of absence, or to
be transferred to another operation where there would be less risk of injury.
Prior to performing a drug test, the testing facility will offer the employee an opportunity to discuss all
medication or drugs which may affect test results with the Medical Review Officer, or MRO. The
employee's failure to discuss all such substances fully and accurately will be considered a failure to
cooperate and report use when required to do so, and may be grounds for discipline/discharge, subject
to the grievance procedure. Furthermore, the employee may be required to substantiate each such
claim, and the employee may not be given a further opportunity to explain a positive result caused by
his failure to include all substances as discussed with the MRO. To the extent feasible in the
administration of this policy, the testing facility will keep the information listed confidential. Only the
MRO reports the result to the City.
(f) Drug and Alcohol Testing The City may require a blood test, breathalyzer, urinalysis, or other

drug/alcohol test of any employee whom the City reasonably suspects of using or being under the
influence of a drug or alcohol in such a manner as to affect his/her work or performance in any manner.
The City may at its discretion randomly test 25% of the employees per fiscal year. Selection for the
employees to be tested will be as follows: The names of the employees shall be listed alphabetically and
Page 27

shall be numbered consecutively commencing with the number one (1). A number shall be placed in a
container representing each number assigned to each employee. After the numbers are placed in the
container, they shall be drawn one at a time from the container after they have been thoroughly shaken
and mixed. The employee corresponding to the first number drawn shall be the first employee tested.
The City of Mt. Vernon will determine the number of employees to be tested up to the maximum of 25%
of the employees per fiscal year. A union representative and the City Manager or his designee shall be
present at the selection of employee to be tested.
Employees who are called into work after hours have the right of refusal of overtime if they feel that
they are incapacitated or impaired due to influence of drugs or alcohol. It is the employees’
responsibility to notify their Department Head of their reason for refusing overtime. Employees would
retain their position on the overtime call out list if they disclose the reason for refusal. If the employee
reports to work under the influence of drugs or alcohol, the employee would be subject to drug testing
as outlined in this section.
Employees who are injured on the job which involves medical treatment; has an incident in which
another person is injured which involves medical treatment; involved in an incident that results in
damage estimated by their Department Head, at the accident scene, to be over $500.00 to City vehicle
or equipment; and/or to any damage to the general public’s property shall immediately submit to drug
testing.
An alcohol test which reveals a concentration of 0.05% (50 mg/dl) of alcohol in the employee's blood
stream will be considered conclusive evidence that the employee was "under the influence" of alcohol
within the meaning of this drug-free workplace policy. Evidence of a lesser concentration of alcohol
may also be considered along with other evidence indicating impairment in any degree. The testing
laboratory shall be certified to perform tests under the Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace
Testing Programs in effect at that time (hereinafter called "Guidelines").
Positive drug test cut-off levels shall be established by the Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) and published in the guidelines entitled “Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug
Testing Programs”. Test levels are subject to change by the Department of Health and Human Services
as advances in technology or considerations warrant identification of substances at other
concentrations.
In-house breathalyzer and drug screens may be administered for the preliminary screening of postaccident tests. The Department Head or his designee will conduct the in-house tests. A Union Steward
shall be present for in-house test. If the test results are positive for drugs or alcohol, then the employee
will go to a medical clinic or lab for certified post-accident testing. If the test results are negative for
drugs or alcohol, no further tests will be administered unless there is reasonable suspicion for a certified
test. No employment decision made solely on the in-house test. (PBT – Portable Breath Tests & over
the counter 12 to 14 panel drug tests)
Each step in the certified laboratory collecting and processing of the urine specimens shall be
documented to establish procedural integrity and the chain of custody and shall remain independent of
the City. Where a positive result is confirmed, urine specimens shall be maintained in secured,
refrigerated storage for a 72-hour period after the employee is notified of the results.
If an employee is scheduled for a drug or alcohol test during his/her regularly scheduled work shift, the
City will pay the employee for time lost from such scheduled work for that day, provided the employee's
test results are negative and the employee was not otherwise subject to disciplinary suspension at that
time.
Page 28

(g) Sample Collection Requirements A urine or blood collection site can be a doctor's office, a clinic, or any

other suitable location established by the collecting facility. The laboratory utilized to analyze the
specimen must be certified and licensed to perform test. The City will utilize a testing facility of their
choice for the purposes of collecting the necessary samples and performing the necessary test
procedures.
Generally, the employee will have a right to produce the sample in private, without being observed. The
only exception is when the collection person has a particular reason to believe the employee may alter
or substitute the urine sample; if they see clear signs of tampering, if the temperature of the urine is off;
and/or where the last urine test was abnormally dilute. If the employee is being observed, the person
must be of the same sex.
There is a two-step testing procedure. The first test, or screening test, is called an immunoassay. The
most common form of this test is called an "EMIT" test. The levels for a positive finding are higher;
however, this result is not communicated to the City. Rather the sample is then screened through a
second confirmatory test.
If the EMIT or initial screening test is negative, that is the end. It is reported as negative. If the EMIT or
initial screening test is positive for one or more drugs/alcohol, the next step is a highly accurate test
called the gas chromatography/mass spectrometry - GS/MS for short.
If this test is negative, the whole test is reported to the City as negative. If it is positive, the next step is
that the test results and procedures are reviewed by the Medical Review Officer.
The Medical Review Officer, or MRO, is a doctor who is knowledgeable about drug abuse. All lab test
results - positive or negative - go through the MRO.
It is the MRO's job to look at every "positive" report from the lab, to talk with the employee, and to
determine whether or not there is another explanation for the positive result. If the MRO finds a
legitimate explanation, such as medicine use, the MRO will report the test results to the employer as
"negative”.
If the employee is convinced that the first lab test was wrong, the employee may ask the Medical
Review Officer to have the original sample retested by a different NIDA-certified lab. The second sample
must have been provided by the employee at the same time as the original sample.
The request for retesting must be made within 72 hours after the employee was told about the positive
test. Further, the employee must prepay all costs of the second test and if the result is negative, the
employee will be deemed to have had a negative test result, will not be required to comply with the EAP
program. If the second test results are positive, the MRO will report this result to the Employer and the
employee will be disciplined in accordance with this Policy.
(h) Disciplinary Action Violation of any of the prohibited conduct provisions of this Drug-Free Workplace

Policy may result in disciplinary action, including mandatory rehabilitation, suspension, and in some
cases up to and including discharge, subject to the grievance procedure. Any employee who is
participating in a drug and/or alcohol dependency treatment program, either under the City's Employee
Assistance Program (EAP) or otherwise, may be required to undergo periodic drug/alcohol testing at any
time at the sole discretion of management during the treatment period and for up to two (2) years
following completion of any chemical dependency treatment program. Failure to continue in any
follow-up treatment program such as attendance at an Alcoholics Anonymous support group or similar
type of follow-up treatment as recommended by the treatment program or failure to permit such
follow-up periodic testing shall be grounds for immediate discharge provided that such conditions have
Page 29

been clearly spelled out in writing and signed by the employee as a condition of his/her continued
employment. (A copy of any such conditions shall be furnished to any bargaining unit employee's
steward and to the Union.)
Any employee who has successfully gone through treatment under an EAP or treatment program while
employed by the Company or within a total of five (5) years prior to his/her initial employment and who
subsequently tests positive, either through periodic or reasonable suspicion testing, may be terminated.
ARTICLE 39
DRIVER’S LICENSE
As a condition of employment, employees, excluding temporary employees, in the bargaining unit,
must maintain a CDL license while employed.
For full-time employees, the City will provide training and pay for the acquisition of a Class A CDL with
Tanker endorsement as well as pay for the renewal fee for Class A and Class B CDL license fee. The employee is
responsible for any endorsement or restriction fees not included in this article.
For full-time employees who hold a Class A CDL or Tanker Endorsement or obtain and maintain a ClassA CDL or Tanker endorsement, the City will pay for the Class A renewal CDL license fee and Tanker Endorsement
fees. The City will compensate Class A CDL or Tanker Endorsement holders additional pay at the rate of $200 per
year for each Class A license and $200 per year for each Tanker Endorsement. This shall be paid in a lump sum
amount on the first paycheck after June 1 of each year. Employees shall submit a receipt to their Department
Head and proof that they possess the Class A CDL and/or Tanker Endorsement for reimbursement to the
employees. All employees with permanent assignment in the Sewer Division must hold a Tanker Endorsement.
Current employees with a permanent assignment in the Sewer Division will have 180 days from the ratification
date of the contract to acquire the tanker endorsement.
As a condition of employment, all employees hired after May 1, 2022, excluding temporary employees,
must obtain the Class A CDL within 180 days of employment. Employees hired after May 1, 2022 will not be
eligible for the additional pay for holding any CDL or Tanker Endorsement.
ARTICLE 40
UNION STEWARDS
The Union shall be entitled to designate a reasonable number of employees to act as stewards for the
employees covered by this Agreement. The Union shall furnish the City with the names of the employees
selected as stewards. An alternate steward may be appointed to function in the absence of the regular steward.
Any change in the appointment of the designated stewards shall be made known to the City.
There shall be no more than two (2) stewards per union (total of 4 stewards plus the grievant) present at
grievance meetings.
ARTICLE 41
TERM
This Agreement shall take effect retroactive to May 1, 2022, upon approval of and execution by the
City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon and by the requisite authority of the Union and shall continue in full force
and effect until and including April 30, 2026.

If the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) necessitate changes to Article 20
(Health Insurance) to this Agreement, all parties agree to reopen such Article 20 for amendment or
Page 30

modification. This Agreement shall not be canceled or amended by either party from and after its
effective date until and including April 30, 2026. This Agreement shall continue in full force and effect
from year to year thereafter unless the City or the Union provides written notice that it desires to
cancel or amend the Agreement no later than ninety (90) days prior to its expiration. If written notice
is given accordingly, negotiations to amend or modify the Agreement shall begin no later than sixty
(60) days prior to its expiration.
If during the course of the contract term, comparable other employee groups within the City of Mt.
Vernon get wage and benefit modifications greater than those bargained for by the Union, then the Agreement
shall be amended to adjust the bargained wage or benefit by the differential amount.
Comparable other employee groups shall mean all bargaining units with exception of those that have a
right to compulsory interest arbitration as provided in Section 14 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act.
Wage or benefit modifications to be considered regarding this Section is:
1.
2.
3

General Wage Increase
Overtime Rates of Pay
Holiday, Personal Leave, Sick Leave, and Vacation Leave Policy Regarding the Number of
Days of Leave Provided.

This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto and their respective
successors and assigns.
CITY OF MT. VERNON

BARGAINING UNITS

John Lewis
Mayor

Flint Taylor, Business Manager
Laborers’ International Union of America, Local #1197

Mary Ellen Bechtel
City Manager

Trustee
Southern & Central Illinois
Laborer’s’ District Council

Nathan McKenna
Assistant City Manager

Pat Nichols, President, Business Agent
Teamsters, Automotive, Petroleum,
and Allied Trades Local #50

Cheryl Conner
Director of Human Resources

ATTEST:

Mary Jo Pemberton
City Clerk

Page 31

SPECIAL
SKILLED
4.00%

3.00%

3.00%

3.00%

Start
6 Months
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3

5/1/2021
53,212
53,702
54,199
54,699
55,205

5/1/2022
55,340
55,850
56,367
56,887
57,413

5/1/2023
57,000
57,526
58,058
58,594
59,135

5/1/2024
58,710
59,252
59,800
60,352
60,909

5/1/2025
60,471
61,030
61,594
62,163
62,736

Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 8
Step 9

55,715
56,228
56,748
57,273
57,839
58,343

57,944
58,477
59,018
59,564
60,153
60,677

59,682
60,231
60,789
61,351
61,958
62,497

61,472
62,038
62,613
63,192
63,817
64,372

63,316
63,899
64,491
65,088
65,732
66,303

Step 10
Step 11
Step 12
Step 13
Step 14
Step 15

58,884
59,430
59,984
60,543
61,105
61,678

61,239
61,807
62,383
62,965
63,549
64,145

63,076
63,661
64,254
64,854
65,455
66,069

64,968
65,571
66,182
66,800
67,419
68,051

66,917
67,538
68,167
68,804
69,442
70,093

Step 16
Step 17
Step 18
Step 19
Step 20
Step 21
Step 22

62,250
62,830
63,419
63,997
64,606
65,208
65,818

64,740
65,343
65,956
66,557
67,190
67,816
68,451

66,682
67,303
67,935
68,554
69,206
69,850
70,505

68,682
69,322
69,973
70,611
71,282
71,946
72,620

70,742
71,402
72,072
72,729
73,420
74,104
74,799

Step 23
Step 24
Step 25
Step 26
Step 27
Step 28

66,421
67,030
67,702
68,376
69,064
69,754

69,078
69,711
70,410
71,111
71,827
72,544

71,150
71,802
72,522
73,244
73,982
74,720

73,285
73,956
74,698
75,441
76,201
76,962

75,484
76,175
76,939
77,704
78,487
79,271

Step 29
Step 30
Step 31
Step 32
Step 33
Step 34

70,450
71,157
71,867
72,586
73,313
74,046

73,268
74,003
74,742
75,489
76,246
77,008

75,466
76,223
76,984
77,754
78,533
79,318

77,730
78,510
79,294
80,087
80,889
81,698

80,062
80,865
81,673
82,490
83,316
84,149

Step 35

74,786

77,777

80,110

82,513

84,988

**NO CAP ON THE NUMBER OF STEPS
The 6-Month step applies to new hires only. If a current bargaining union employee is promoted to a higher position, then
the 6-month step is the same as a regular step.

Page 32

OPERATOR

Start

05/01/2021
49,335

4.00%
05/01/2022
51,308

3.00%
05/01/2023
52,847

3.00%
05/01/2024
54,432

3.00%
05/01/2025
56,065

6 Months
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5

49,787
50,243
50,703
51,168
51,639
52,113

51,778
52,253
52,731
53,215
53,705
54,198

53,331
53,821
54,313
54,811
55,316
55,824

54,931
55,436
55,942
56,455
56,975
57,499

56,579
57,099
57,620
58,149
58,684
59,224

Step 6
Step 7
Step 8
Step 9
Step 10
Step 11

52,594
53,077
53,565
54,061
54,558
55,064

54,698
55,200
55,708
56,223
56,740
57,267

56,339
56,856
57,379
57,910
58,442
58,985

58,029
58,562
59,100
59,647
60,195
60,755

59,770
60,319
60,873
61,436
62,001
62,578

Step 12
Step 13
Step 14
Step 15
Step 16
Step 17

55,571
56,087
56,605
57,130
57,656
58,194

57,794
58,330
58,869
59,415
59,962
60,522

59,528
60,080
60,635
61,197
61,761
62,338

61,314
61,882
62,454
63,033
63,614
64,208

63,153
63,738
64,328
64,924
65,522
66,134

Step 18
Step 19
Step 20
Step 21
Step 22
Step 23

58,734
59,280
59,830
60,382
60,940
61,515

61,083
61,651
62,223
62,797
63,378
63,976

62,915
63,501
64,090
64,681
65,279
65,895

64,802
65,406
66,013
66,621
67,237
67,872

66,746
67,368
67,993
68,620
69,254
69,908

Step 24
Step 25
Step 26
Step 27
Step 28
Step 29

62,055
62,673
63,303
63,935
64,575
65,216

64,537
65,180
65,835
66,492
67,158
67,825

66,473
67,135
67,810
68,487
69,173
69,860

68,467
69,149
69,844
70,542
71,248
71,956

70,521
71,223
71,939
72,658
73,385
74,115

Step 30
Step 31
Step 32
Step 33
Step 34
Step 35

65,870
66,531
67,196
67,868
68,548
69,232

68,505
69,192
69,884
70,583
71,290
72,001

70,560
71,268
71,981
72,700
73,429
74,161

72,677
73,406
74,140
74,881
75,632
76,386

74,857
75,608
76,364
77,127
77,901
78,678

**NO CAP ON THE NUMBER OF STEPS
The 6-Month step applies to new hires only. If a current bargaining union employee is promoted to a higher position, then
the 6-month step is the same as a regular step.

Page 33

LABORER
Equity Adj.

3.00%

3.00%

3.00%

5/1/2021

5/1/22

5/1/23

5/1/24

5/1/25

START

36,234

45,296

46,655

48,055

49,497

6 MONTHS

37,279

46,382

47,773

49,206

50,682

STEP 1

38,327

47,470

48,894

50,361

51,872

STEP 2

39,372

48,055

49,497

50,982

52,511

STEP 3

40,417

48,483

49,937

51,435

52,978

STEP 4

41,465

48,918

50,386

51,898

53,455

STEP 5

42,508

49,378

50,859

52,385

53,957

STEP 6

43,554

49,799

51,293

52,832

54,417

STEP 7

44,598

50,249

51,756

53,309

54,908

STEP 8

45,644

50,698

52,219

53,786

55,400

STEP 9

46,207

51,153

52,688

54,269

55,897

STEP 10

46,618

51,616

53,164

54,759

56,402

STEP 11

47,037

52,083

53,645

55,254

56,912

STEP 12

47,479

52,548

54,124

55,748

57,420

STEP 13

47,884

53,026

54,617

56,256

57,944

STEP 14

48,316

53,504

55,109

56,762

58,465

STEP 15

48,748

53,991

55,611

57,279

58,997

STEP 16

49,186

54,479

56,113

57,796

59,530

STEP 17

49,631

54,973

56,622

58,321

60,071

STEP 18

50,080

55,473

57,137

58,851

60,617

STEP 19

50,527

55,976

57,655

59,385

61,167

STEP 20

50,987

56,487

58,182

59,927

61,725

STEP 21

51,446

56,998

58,708

60,469

62,283

STEP 22

51,914

57,519

59,245

61,022

62,853

STEP 23

52,384

58,043

59,784

61,578

63,425

STEP 24

52,859

58,574

60,331

62,141

64,005

STEP 25

53,339

59,105

60,878

62,704

64,585

STEP 26

53,823

59,635

61,424

63,267

65,165

STEP 27

54,314

60,167

61,972

63,831

65,746

STEP 28

54,806

60,761

62,584

64,462

66,396

STEP 29

55,307

61,368

63,209

65,105

67,058

STEP 30

55,811

61,982

63,841

65,756

67,729

STEP 31

56,321

62,602

64,480

66,414

68,406

STEP 32

56,832

63,228

65,125

67,079

69,091

STEP 33

57,341

63,860

65,776

67,749

69,781

STEP 34

57,853

64,499

66,434

68,427

70,480

STEP 35

58,424

65,144

67,098

69,111

71,184

**NO CAP ON THE NUMBER OF STEPS
The 6-Month step applies to new hires only. If a current bargaining union employee is promoted to a higher position, then the 6month step is the same as a regular step.
Laborer without CDL Hourly Rate 80% of Start.

13.94

17.42

17.94
Page 34

18.48

19.04
