01-07-15
14-MED-10-1411
2482-01
K31705

BY AND BETWEEN

THE BOARD OF
CLEARCREEK TOWNSHIP TRUSTEES
AND

OHIO PATROLMEN'S BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION
(POLICE OFFICERS)
FROM

JANUARY 1, 2015
THROUGH

DECEMBER 31, 2017

81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

INDEX
TITLE

PAGE

PREAMBLE
ARTICLE
1
ARTICLE
2
ARTICLE
3
ARTICLE
4
ARTICLE
5
ARTICLE
6
ARTICLE
7
ARTICLE
8
ARTICLE
9
ARTICLE
10
ARTICLE
11
ARTICLE
12
ARTICLE
13
ARTICLE
14
ARTICLE
15
ARTICLE
16
ARTICLE
17
ARTICLE
18
ARTICLE
19
ARTICLE
20
ARTICLE
21

*
*

ARTICLE
ARTICLE

22
23

ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE

24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

APPENDIX A

*

3
RECC>CJNITIC>N ----------------------------------------- 3
INTECJRITY C>F ACJREEMENT ---------------------- 3
MANACJEMENT'S RICJHTS -------------------------- 4
EMPLC>YEE'S RESPC>NSIBILITY------------------- 5
NC> STRIKES -------------------------------------------- 5
NC>N-DISCRIMINATIC>N ----------------------------- 6
I>lJES I>EI>lJCTIC>N ----------------------------------- 6
PRC>BATIC>NARY PERIC>I> -------------------------- 7
CJRIEVANCE PRC>CEI>lJRE ------------------------- 7
I>ISCIPLINE --------------------------------------------- 9
EI>lJCATIC>N -------------------------------------------- 11
HC>LII>AYS ---------------------------------------------- 12
HC>lJRS C>F WC>RK ANI> C>VERTIME ------------- 13
lJNIFC>RM ALLC>WANCE --------------------------- 14
SHIFTS --------------------------------------------------- 15
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE ---------------------------- 15
WACJES -------------------------------------------------- 15
SENIC>RITY --------------------------------------------- 16
LAYC>FFS ANI> RECALL ---------------------------- 16
VACATIC>N --------------------------------------------- 17
MEI>ICAL ANI> LIFE INSlJRANCE --------------- 18
I>ESCRIPTI()N MEDICAL AND LIFE INSURANCE
I>ESCRIPTIC>N C>F I>ENTAL INSlJRANCE
SAVINCJS CLAlJSE ----------------------------------- 19
SICK LEAVE------------------------------------------- 19
PREFECT ATTENI>ANCEI>AYS (SECTION23.8) 21
CALL-IN ANI> CC>lJRT TIME---------------------- 21
lJSE C>F LEAVE ---------------------------------------- 22
PERSC>NAL I>AY LEAVE --------------------------- 23
C>PBA REPRESENTATIC>N -------------------------- 23
REIMBlJRSEMENT ----------------------------------- 23
PERSC>NNEL FILES ----------------------------------- 24
C>CClJPATIC>NAL INJlJRY LEAVE--------------- 25
ALCC>HC>L ANI> I>RlJCJ TESTINCJ PC>LICY ----- 26
SlJBCC>NTRACTINCJ --------------------------------- 33
PHYSICAL FITNESS ANI> WELLNESS ---------- 33
TERMS ()F ACJREEMENT --------------------------- 34
----------------------------------------------------------------------- 36

2
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

PREAMBLE
This Agreement is entered into by and between the Trustees of Clearcreek Township,
hereinafter referred to as "the Township", and the Ohio Patrolmen's Benevolent
Association hereinafter referred to as "the Union" or "the OPBA."

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
SECTION 1.1 - RECOGNITION
The Township recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive representative and
bargaining agent of all full-time police officer employees of the Department as set forth
in the certification of the State Employment Relations Board in Case Number 2011-REP09-0079 for purpose of collective bargaining with respect to wages, hours, and other
terms and conditions of employment.

SECTION 1.2 -MALE PRONOUN
Whenever the male pronoun or adjective is used in this Agreement, it shall be deemed to
also include the female, unless otherwise indicated.

ARTICLE2
INTEGRITY OF AGREEMENT
SECTION 2.1 - SUPERSEDES ALL PREVIOUS AGREEMENTS
The Township and the Union agree that the terms and provisions contained in this written
Agreement constitute the entire agreement between the parties and supersede all previous
communications, understandings, or memorandum of understandings, pertaining to any
matters set forth in this Agreement, or to any other matter. This Agreement expresses all
obligations and restrictions imposed on each of the respective parties during its tetm.

SECTION 2.2 - INTEGRITY
The Township and the Union agree that during the negotiations which preceded this
Agreement, each party had the unlimited right to make any demands or proposals and to
bargain about each and every proposal made. The results of such negotiation are
contained herein.

3
81085963.1

OPBA- Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR 2015,2016 AND 2017

ARTICLE3
MANAGEMENT'S RIGHTS
SECTION 3.1 -MANAGEMENT'S RIGHTS
The Township shall retain all of the rights, powers and authority vested in it prior to the
date of this Agreement. Unless the Township has specifically set forth in this Agreement
a limitation upon the Township's or the Police Chief's right or duty to manage the Police
Department, the Township shall retain all rights imposed upon it by law, to carry out the
administration of the Township and the Police Depattment. The right to manage shall
include, but not be limited to:
A-

The right to direct, supervise, hire, promote, demote, suspend, discipline,
or discharge, for just cause; transfer, assign, schedule and retain
employees.

B-

The right to relieve employees from duty and determine the number of
personnel needed in the Police Department, or to perform any function;
detetmine the services to be rendered, the operation to be performed,
utilization of technology, and overall budgetary matter.

C-

The right to purchase equipment, material or services, or to contract for
services if necessary for the efficient management of the Police
Department.

D-

The right to determine the appropriate job duties and personnel by which
operations are to be conducted; determine the overall mission of the Police
Department; maintain and approve the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Police Department, and the Township.

E-

The right to make reasonable rules to regulate the Police Department, and
to establish and amend policies and procedures, and necessary rules
relating to the operation ofthe Police Department in regard to any matter.

F-

The right to take any necessary actions to catTy out the mission of the
Police Department and to take whatever actions may be necessary to catTy
out the wishes of the public not otherwise specified above.

G-

The right to determine equipment to be used; the processes, techniques,
methods and means of operations, schedules of shifts and working hours,
maintain and amend occupational classifications and job descriptions and
establish working rules, regulations, policies and procedures governing the
conduct of the employees.

H-

The power to determine the geographical location of Township facilities,
to establish new units and relocate or eliminate existing units or facilities
in part or in total.

I-

The authority to assign shifts and duties.

J-

The right to determine the methods, means and number of personnel
needed to carry out Departmental responsibilities.
4

81085963.1

OPBA- Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR 2015,2016 AND 2017

K-

The right to take such actions as may be necessary to carry out services as
determined by the Township or the Chief of Police and I or his designee.

L-

The right to introduce new or improved methods, operations, equipment or
facilities.

M-

The right to schedule overtime work as required.

N-

The right to determine the need for additional educational courses, training
programs, on-the-job training and cross-training.

The parties agree where a management right is listed more than once such listings are
inter-changeable.

SECTION 3.2- EXTENT OF MODIFIED RIGHTS
Where the rights, powers, and authority itemized above are modified or limited by the
tetms and provisions of this Agreement, they shall only be modified or limited to the
extent specifically provided herein.

ARTICLE4
EMPLOYEE'S RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION 4.1 -EMPLOYEE'S RESPONSIBILITY
The Union recognizes that the delivery of services in the most efficient and effective
marmer is of paramount importance and interest to both the Township and the Union.
Maximum service to the community is recognized to be a mutual desire of both parties
within their respective roles and responsibilities. Work procedures, schedules, and
assignments for improving services may be established and/or revised from time to time,
in accordance with the management rights provision of this Agreement, so long as no
right guaranteed under the Agreement is violated. Each employee covered by the
Agreement has the primary responsibility to render the utmost in efficient service to the
Police Department and the Township.

ARTICLES
NO STRIKES
SECTION 5.1 -NO STRIKES
The Union agrees that during the term of this Agreement, there shall be no strikes, work
stoppages, slow-downs, picketing, job actions, including any concerted activity. Union
officers, stewards, and employee representatives will continue to carry out their duties as
employees and will take positive action to bring the concerted activity to an end.

5
81085963.1

OPBA- Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND2017

ARTICLE6
NON-DISCRIMINATION
SECTION 6.1 -NON-DISCRIMINATION
The Township and the Union agree that there should be no discrimination against any
employee relating to employment on the basis of race, color, creed, national origin, age,
sex or disability. The parties further agree that there shall be no discrimination in regard
to membership or non-membership in the Union or because of participation or nonparticipation in any lawful activity on behalf of the Union.

ARTICLE7
DUES DEDUCTION
SECTION 7 1- MEMBERSHIP AND FAIR SHARE
The Township agrees to deduct OPBA membership dues and fees in the amount certified
to be correct by the OPBA to the Township from the pay of those employees who are in
the bargaining unit. The Township agrees also to deduct OPBA initiation fees and
assessments in an amount certified to be correct by the OPBA to the Township from the
pay of appropriate OPBA members.
Employees who are not members of the OPBA shall as a condition of employment pay
the OPBA a fair share fee. The amount of the fair share fees shall be determined by the
OPBA, but shall not exceed dues paid by members who are in the Bargaining Unit. The
amount of such fair share fee shall be made known by the OPBA to the Employer at such
time during the te1m of this Agreement as is necessary to be accurate. Such payment
shall be subject to an internal rebate procedure meeting all requirements of State and
Federal laws.
The automatic deduction shall be initiated by the Employer whenever an employee who
is not a member of the OPBA has completed the first sixty (60) days after the effective
date of this Agreement.

SECTION 7.2- DEDUCTIONS
One twenty-sixth (1/26) of the total, armual deduction shall be made from each pay
period, which results in an equal amount being withheld during each pay period. The
Township agrees to furnish the OPBA office in North Royalton, Ohio once each calendar
month, a check in the aggregate amount of the deductions made for that calendar month
together with a list of members from whom deductions were made.

SECTION 7.3 - TOWNSHIP HARMLESS FOR DUES DEDUCTION
The OPBA agrees to hold the Township hmmless from all claims or lawsuits arising out
of deduction of such dues.
6
81085963.1

OPBA- Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR 2015, 2016 AND 2017

SECTION 7.4- TERMINATION OF PAYMENT
The Township shall be relieved from making such individual deductions upon an
employee's: (1) termination of employment, (2) transfer to a job other than the one
covered by the bargaining unit, (3) layoff from work, (4) any pay period during which the
employee does not earn enough wages for the OPBA dues to be deducted after all other
deductions are made.

ARTICLES
PROBATIONARY PERIOD
SECTION 8.1- ONE YEAR PROBATION
The probationary period for newly hired employees shall be one (1) year commencing
with the first day of full time employment as a police officer. After successful
completion of the probatiomny period, employees shall be credited with seniority from
the first day of employment as a police employee. If a non bargaining unit employee is
currently employed with Clearcreek Township, Division of Police, and is hired to full
time status as a Police Officer, the employee's probationary period shall be six (6)
months, only if the employee has successfully completed the required twelve (12) month
probationary period as a non bargaining Division of Police member. The Chief of Police
may extend the probationary period only one (1) increment of three (3) months if the
Chief feels additional time is necessary to adequately evaluate the employee.

SECTION 8.2- NO APPEAL WHILE ON PROBATION
A newly hired probationary employee may receive a verbal reprimand, written
reprimand, suspension without pay, or termination any time within the probationary
period and shall have no appeal, including appeal through the grievance procedure
provided for in this Agreement.

ARTICLE9
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
SECTION 9.1 -DEFINITION AND STEPS
A. DEFINITION-

A grievance is defined as an allegation that the terms of this
written Agreement have been violated. Resolution of grievances
shall be pursued in accordance with the following steps:

STEP1
An employee who has a grievance may discuss the grievance with his or her immediate
supervisor if an oral discussion may be conducive to resolving the matter. An oral
discussion will, however, not relieve the employee from the obligation of filing a written
7
81085963.1

OPBA -Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

grievance within the time period set forth herein. A grievance shall be reduced to writing
and set forth the details of the grievance (i.e., the facts upon which it is based, the
approximate time of the occurrence, the relief or remedy requested), and shall be
submitted to the immediate supervisor within ten (1 0) calendar days after the grievance
becomes known or should have been known. The day following the date of the
occurrence or discovery of occurrence shall be considered the first day of the ten (10) day
period. The immediate supervisor should give a response in writing to the Grievant
within five (5) calendar days after the grievance was presented.

STEP2
If the grievance is not resolved at STEP 1 to the satisfaction of the Grievant, it shall be
presented by the Grievant to the Chief of Police (or designee) within five (5) calendar
days of the decision of the immediate supervisor. If the immediate supervisor has failed
to respond to STEP 1, the grievance must be submitted to the Chief of Police (or
designee) within ten (10) calendar days of the date it was submitted to Step 1. The Chief
of Police (or designee), after conferring with the Assistant Administrator should respond
in writing within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date of the receipt of the grievance.

STEP3
Should the Grievant after receiving the written response to their grievance at STEP 2 of
this procedure still feel that the grievance has not been resolved satisfactorily, then the
grievant may appeal in writing within five (5) calendar days to the Township
Administrator. The Township Administrator shall respond in writing within fomteen
(14) calendar days of receipt of the grievance..

STEP4
Should an employee/grievant, after receiving the written response to the grievance at
STEP 3 of the Grievance Procedure still feel that the grievance has not been resolved to
his or her satisfaction may, through the OPBA, move the grievance to be heard by an
Arbitrator. The OPBA shall notifY the Trustees of the intent to arbitrate within fifteen
(15) days of receipt of the written response from STEP 3. Within fifteen (15) days
following the Trustees receipt of the OPBA's notification for arbitration, the Trustees and
a OPBA representative will attempt to select an impartial arbitrator by mutual agreement.
If no agreement is reached, a joint letter will be issued requesting the Federal Mediation
and Conciliation Service to provide a list of nine (9) arbitrators. Upon receipt of such
list, the OPBA and the Trustees shall alternately cross off one name until one name
remains, that person being selected as Arbitrator. A date will be set as soon as possible in
accordance with the wishes of the Trustees, the OPBA, and the availability of the
Arbitrator. The decision of the Arbitrator shall be binding on all parties. The cost of the
arbitration shall be equally shared by the Township Trustees and the OPBA. The
expense of expert witness shall be paid by the party producing the same. The employee
filing the grievance shall have the right to have representation of the OPBA at anytime
after STEP 1 of the Grievance Procedme.

8
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR 2015,2016 AND 2017

SECTION 9.2 -TIME LIMITS
The time limits imposed in this Atticle may be extended at any step by mutual written
consent of the patties in that step.
The time limits set forth in this grievance procedure may be waived by mutual agreement
of the parties in writing. Unless such time restrictions are waived, they shall be strictly
applied. The bmden of complying with the time restrictions falls upon the grievant and
the Union pursuing the grievance. Failure by the grievant to comply with the time limits
set forth in this procedure shall result in the tennination of the grievance. The events or
acts of the Township giving rise to the grievance shall be deemed to have been within the
proper authority of the Township, and not in violation of the terms of this Agreement.
Failure on the part of any supervisor, the Chief of Police (or designee), the Township
Administrator, or the Trustees, to respond within the time limits set forth in this
Agreement, shall be the equivalent of a denial of the grievance, and shall not be
construed as a default or a granting of the relief requested.

SECTION 9.3 - CLASS ACTION
In any grievance filed by a class of employees, that class shall select one employee to
represent it.

SECTION 9.4- EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATION
All grievances shall be brought exclusively through the union by its designated
representatives. The employees covered hereunder and the Township shall be bound by
any decision, detetminations, agreements, or settlements which may be effectuated
pmsuant to invoking the grievance-arbitration procedure including any determinations as
to the merits or arbitrability of a grievance, as shall be made by the authorized
representatives who are employees covered by this Agreement handling the grievance,
provided however, that such determinations regarding arbitrability or merits shall be
made upon the facts with which the authorized representatives are confronted.

SECTION 9.5- GRIEVANCE AND/OR COMPLAINT RESOLUTION
With respect to grievances or complaints which arise under this Agreement, this
Agreement is to be used exclusively in the resolution of a grievance or complaint in lieu
of the Township Complaint Resolution Procedure described in the Employee Handbook.

ARTICLE 10
DISCIPLINE
SECTION 10.1 -DISCIPLINARY ACTION
The Township, or designee, may take disciplinary action against any employee covered
by this Agreement for just cause. The normal progression of discipline shall be verbal
reprimand (written documentation), written reprimand, suspension, demotion, and
9
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND2017

termination. Nothing in this Agreement shall restrict the right of the Township to impose
any penalty, including termination, if the offense merits a greater penalty than the
disciplinary steps set fotth above.
The exclusive means of appeal of a suspension, demotion, or termination shall be the
grievance procedure set forth in Article 9, and shall begin at Step 3. An employee who is
disciplined under this Article may waive the initial steps of the grievance procedure and
proceed directly to Step 3 of the grievance procedure. Discipline less than a suspension
may not be appealed beyond Step 3 of the grievance procedure. Employees demoted
pmsuant to this Section shall not be eligible for promotion for one (1) year following the
demotion. This shall be deemed to include demotion from a Sergeant's position to a
position covered by this Agreement.
The Chief shall approve all discipline regardless of the level of discipline. The Chief
shall have the authority to institute all levels of discipline up to and including termination
without the approval of and without a hearing before the Board of Trustees.

SECTION 10.2 - DISCIPLINARY PROCESS
When the Township, or designee, commences a disciplinary action that may result in a
suspension, demotion, or termination, the following process shall be utilized:
(1) Pre-disciplinary Hearing.
A pre-disciplinary hearing shall be scheduled to determine the merit of the
allegations against the employee. The pre-disciplinary hearing will be conducted by the
Chief or his designee. The Chief, or his designee, shall begin the pre-disciplinary hearing
by informing the employee of the charges against him. The pre-disciplinary hearing is
not intended as an evidentiaty hearing but only as an opportunity for the employee to
present his side of the facts and to prevent mistaken initial determinations of the
employee's misconduct. The employee has the right to appear in person at the predisciplinary hearing and to be represented by counsel or a union representative; provided,
however, that the employee's counsel or union representative shall not hinder the finding
of facts in any way. The Chief, or his designee, shall set a date for the pre-disciplinary
hearing within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the Chief receiving the investigation
report, which sets forth the allegations against the employee. All time limits on the
grievance procedure will be held in abeyance pending the conclusion of this procedure.
Any time prior to the pre-disciplinary hearing, the employee may elect in writing to
waive his opportunity to have a pre-disciplinaty hearing. The employee shall be given a
copy of the investigation report, which sets forth the allegations against him at least seven
(7) calendar days prior to the pre-disciplinary hearing.
(2) Disciplinary Hearing.
The Chief shall schedule a disciplinary hearing to occur no later than twenty-one
(21) calendar days following the conclusion of the pre-disciplinary hearing. At the
disciplinary hearing, the employee has the right to (1) appear in person and be
represented by legal counsel or a union representative of the employee's choosing, (2)
examine any witnesses which may be presented against the employee, (3) present any
10
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND2017

witnesses or documents which the employee may choose in their defense, and (4) answer
all charges against them. The employee must provide a list of witnesses that the
employee intends to call and submit all documents that the employee intends to introduce
no later than seven (7) calendar days before the disciplinary hearing. The Chief may
issue discipline, up to and including tetmination, at the conclusion of the disciplinary
hearing or within seven (7) calendar days.
During the disciplinary process established in this Section, the Chief may, at his
discretion, place the employee who is subject to potential discipline on administrative
leave, with or without pay, until the conclusion of the disciplinary process.
Administrative leave without pay will only be used in circumstances where the employee
is charged with a criminal offense.

ARTICLE 11
EDUCATION
SECTION 11.1 -ANNOUNCEMENTS
Am10uncements for all police training schools, seminars, classes or academies that come
to the attention of the Township shall be posted in a common location upon receipt for
inspection by full time employees.

SECTION 11.2 -MINIMUM
During each calendar year a minimum of sixteen (16) hours of continuing education at
the employee's choosing shall be available for each employee. Requests for continuing
education shall be submitted in writing to their immediate ranking supervisor as far in
advance of the training as possible. Such request shall include, all costs itemized with the
greatest reasonable accuracy. The Training Officer has the authority to determine the
need for additional educational courses, training programs, on-the-job training and cross
training.
The Chief of Police may reject requests on the grounds of fmancial restraints,
inappropriate topic or ilTeconcilable scheduling difficulties. Any employee who submits
a request for schooling as set forth in the above, and is denied, shall be notified in writing
as to the reason.
Employees scheduled to work first shift on the day immediately prior to the scheduled
training shall, upon request, have working hours for that day changed to allow at least
eight and one half (8%) hours off prior to reporting for said training. The Chief shall
have the right to alter work hours for the four (4) days preceding the start of training and
four (4) days subsequent to the end of training.

SECTION 11.3- FAILURE TO SCHEDULE
Failure of the full time employee to submit a request for training prior to the first (1'-~ of
November of each year may result in forfeiture of paid training.
11
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND2017

SECTION 11.4- EDUCATIONAL BENEFIT INCENTIVE
In the first pay period of December of each year, on a separate check from any other
payment due, qualified employees that have completed their one year probation will
receive the following benefit:
•
•
•

Employees with an Associate's Degree will receive $400.00
Employees with a Bachelor's Degree will receive $600.00
Employees with a Master's or other post-graduate degree will receive $800.00

Proof of completion (i.e., a certificate or degree) must be received by December 1 of each
year to qualifY for the educational benefit.
Employees are only eligible to receive a bonus for the highest level of education they
have attained, regardless of whether they hold more than one of the degrees mentioned
above.

ARTICLE 12
HOLIDAYS
SECTION 12.1- PAID HOLIDAYS
Employees shall be entitled to additional pay described in this Article for the following
holidays during the term ofthe Agreement:
1) NEW YEARS DAY, 2) DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. DAY, 3) POLICE
MEMORIAL DAY (MAY JSTH), 4) MEMORIAL DAY, 5) INDEPENDENCE
DAY, 6) LABOR DAY, 7) COLUMBUS DAY, 8) VETERANS DAY, 9)
THANKSGIVING DAY, 10) CHRISTMAS DAY

SECTION 12.2- HOLIDAY DURING VACATION LEAVE
If a holiday occurs while an employee is on vacation leave, such leave time will not be
charged against the employee's vacation balance.

SECTION 12.3- WORKING HOLIDAYS
If an employee is required to work on a holiday, that employee shall receive payment at
the rate of time and one-half (I ¥2) their regular rate for each hour worked. Payment may
be made in the form of pay or by award of compensatory time, as requested. See
ARTICLE 13, SECTION 3. In addition the employee shall receive eight and a half
(8. 5) hours of holiday pay which will be paid with their regular paycheck.
If the employee is required to work past the scheduled shift on the holiday, the employee
will receive an additional hour of holiday pay for every hour of overtime worked on the
holiday. If the employee calls in sick during the holiday that employee will lose the eight
and a half (8. 5) hours of holiday pay.

SECTION 12.4- HOLIDAY ON DAY OFF
12
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACTFOR2015, 2016 AND2017

If a holiday occurs on an employee's regularly scheduled off day, the employee shall
receive eight and a half (8.5) hours of holiday, which will be paid with their regular
paycheck.

SECTION 12.5- HOLIDAY DURING UNPAID LEAVE
Employees on unpaid leave and laid-off employees shall not receive holiday pay.

SECTION 12.6- LOSS OF HOLIDAY PAY
An employee shall lose holiday pay if the employee is absent either on unapproved sick
leave or without leave on the employee's last scheduled working day before a holiday or
the first scheduled working day following a holiday. In the event the employee is sick on
either or both days, the employee must provide a doctor's excuse for the period of the
absence in order to receive holiday pay. An employee while on disciplinary suspension
shall not be entitled to any holiday pay as provided for in this Atiicle.

SECTION 12.7- HOLIDAY PAY- DEATH IN THE LINE OF DUTY
In the case of the death of an employee while in the Line of Duty, the unpaid holiday pay
to the credit of any such employee shall be paid to the surviving spouse or the employee's
estate.

ARTICLE 13
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME
SECTION 13.1 -HOURS OF WORK
The regular work week shall consist of forty-two and one half(42%) hours. The regular
pay period shall consist of ten (1 0) workdays.

SECTION 13.2 -OVERTIME PAY
Any employee working in excess of their regular schedule hours on an assigned shift will
be compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1%) times their base rate for all such
excess time. Any employee who works on a normal scheduled day off shall be
compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1 %) times oftheir base rate for all such time
worked except where the parties agree that the employee will work such day in exchange
for another day off provided that day off comes before the end of the pay period.
The Chief of Police has the right to make mandatory ovettime assigmnents.

SECTION 13.3- COMPENSATORY TIME
Any employee may waive SECTION 13.2 and receive compensation in the form of
compensatory time in lieu of overtime pay. Compensatory time shall be calculated the
same as overtime pay. An employee may accrue a maximum of sixty-eight (68) hours of
13
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

compensatory time. Such time may be taken in exchange for work time only in two (2)
hour increments, and only after scheduling by the Chief of Police (or designee).

SECTION 13.4- DEATH OF AN OFFICER
In the case of the death of an employee while in the line of duty, unpaid overtime and
unused compensatory time (cash payment) shall be paid to the surviving spouse or to the
employee's estate.

ARTICLE 14
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
SECTION 14.1 -UNIFORM FURNISH TO NEW EMPLOYEES
The Township shall finnish or shall continue to furnish the appropriate seasonal uniforms
and equipment for all employees, excluding footwear. All uniforms remain the property
of the Township and must be turned in when an employee is separated from the
Township service. The Township will provide all necessary and appropriate dry cleaning
services.

SECTION 14.2 - SCHEDULE -UNIFORMED & EQUIPMENT ISSUED
1 - Breast Badge----------------------------------------------------

2 - Collar Brass ----------------------------------------------------3 - Name Plate -----------------------------------------------------4 - Shirts, Winter --------------------------------------------------5 -Tie and Tie-Bar-----------------------------------------------6 - Jacket---------"-------------------------------------------------7 - Hat --------------------------------------------------------------8 - Shirts, Summer ------------------------------------------------9 - Trousers --------------------------------------------------------10 - Hat Badge -----------------------------------------------------11 - Hat Rain Cover -----------------------------------------------12 - Rain Coat ------------------------------------------------------13 -Under Belt-----------------------------------------------------14 - Gunbelt --------------------------------------------------------15 - Holster ---------------------------------------------------------16 - Handcuffs -----------------------------------------------------17 - Handcuff Case -----------------------------------------------18 - Magazine Pouch ---------------------------------------------19 - Key Carrier ---------------------------------------------------20 - Semi-auto -----------------------------------------------------21 -Body Armor with two (2) can·iers -------------------------22 - ASP Baton ----------------------------------------------------23 - ASP Carrying Case -------------------------------------------

2
1 Set
1
5
1
1
1

5
5
1
1

1
1
1
1
1 Pair
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

and any other uniform item or piece of equipment as required by the Chief of Police (or
designee).
14
81085963.1

OPBA -Police Officers
CONTRACTFOR20l5, 2016 AND2017

ARTICLE 15
SHIFTS
SECTION 15.1 - DEFINITION OF SHIFTS
The First (P-~ Shift shall begin between the hours of I 0:45 P.M. and I :00 A.M. each day.
The Second Shift shall begin eight (8) hours from the beginning of the First Shift and the
Third Shift shall begin in sixteen (16) hours from the beginning of the First Shift.

ARTICLE 16
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
SECTION 16.1 -PAY FOR BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
Bereavement leave of three (3) days shall be paid to attend the funeral of a member of the
immediate family. Proof of death and relationship of the deceased MAY be requested.
The immediate family is defined as: I) SPOUSE, 2) PARENT, 3) PARENT-IN-LAW,
4) STEP-PARENT, 5) GUARDIAN, 6) CHILD, 7) STEP-CHILD, 8) BROTHER,
9) SISTER, 10) HALF BROTHER, 11) HALF SISTER, 12) BROTHER-IN-LAW,
13) SISTER-IN-LAW, 14) SPOUSE'S SIBLINGS, 15) SIBLING'S SPOUSES, 16)
GRANDPARENT, 17) GRANDPARENT-IN-LAW. Other RELATIVES living in
the employee's household shall be considered as immediate family.

SECTION 16.2- EXTENDED FAMILY
Bereavement leave of one (1) days shall be granted to attend the funeral of an I) AUNT,
2) UNCLE, 3) AUNT-IN-LAW, and 4) UNCLE-IN-LAW.

SECTION 16.3 -EXTENDED LEAVE
Upon approval by the Chief of Police, bereavement leave in excess of required amount
MAY be charged to the employee's accrued leave balance, but before sick leave may be
used, accrued compensatory time must first be exhausted.

ARTICLE 17
WAGES
SECTION 17.1- ANNUAL WAGE RATE
The annual wage rates paid to sworn personnel covered by this Agreement are set forth in
Appendix A.
15
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR 2015, 2016 AND 2017

SECTION 17.2 -RAISES EVERY TWELVE (12) MONTHS INTERVALS
Step increases will take place on the first pay period following an employee's anniversary
date. After probation, all raises will be automatic, given at twelve (12) months intervals
until STEP 6 (Senior Pay) is reached, and begin at the next regular pay period. Fmther,
the Chief of Police may increase any new lateral transfer employees to a maximmn of
STEP 3 after successful completion of the probationary period. Annual increases will
take effect the first pay period following January 1st of each contract year. Increases
awarded for calendar year 2015 shall be retroactive to January 1, 2015.

SECTION 17.3- OFFICER IN CHARGE
All officers designated by the Police Chief or his designee to serve as Officer in Charge
of a shift shall receive an additional one dollar ($1.00) per hour for every hour worked in
that capacity.

ARTICLE18
SENIORITY
SECTION 18.1 - SENIORITY
Seniority shall be defined as the length of continuous, permanent, full time employee's
date of hire. Seniority shall not be available to employees during their probationary
period, but shall be retroactive to the date of hire upon successful completion of the
probationary period. Seniority shall be lost when an employee:
1234. 5-

Resigns;
Is discharged;
Is laid off and not recalled within one (1) year;
Is off the payroll for any reason whatsoever, except military service, for
one (1) calendar year; or
Is laid off by the Township for a period of their Township Seniority or one
(1) year, which ever period is less.

ARTICLE 19
LAYOFFS AND RECALL
SECTION 19.1- LAYOFF
Layoff of employees shall be made in the inverse order of the date when an employee
first entered into full time service with Clearcreek Township Police Department. If it is
found that two or more employees have the same statting date, then layoff order for the
employees involved shall be determined by a review of performance evaluations.

16
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers

CONTRACTFOR2015, 2016 AND2017

SECTION 19.2- RECALL
The Township shall establish a recall list for each classification in which a layoff has
occurred. The list shall consist of the names of laid off employees in the inverse order of
their layoff, with the most recently laid off person at the top of the list. Should the
Township desire to fill a position within the Police Department in a classification in
which a recall line exists that position shall be first offered to persons on the list in the
inverse order of layoff, with the most recently laid off person receiving the offer first.
The position must be offered to every person on the list in accordance with seniority
before a new employee is hired.

SECTION 19.3 -RECALL PROCEDURE
Notice of recall shall be sent to the employee by certified mail. The Employer shall be
deemed to have fulfilled it's obligations by mailing the recall notice by certified mail,
returned receipt requested, to the last mailing address provided by the employee.
The recalled employee shall have ten (1 0) calendar days following the date of receipt of
the recall notice to notifY the Chief of the intention to return to work is other wised
specified in the notice. It will be assumed that no response from the employee to a recall
notice means the employee does not wish to return to their position.

SECTION 19.4 - RECALL RIGHTS
Employees shall have recall rights for one (J) year from the date of layoff. Employees
who decline a recall offer may be removed fi·om the recall list.

ARTICLE20
VACATION
SECTION 20.1- VACATION SCHEDULE
Employees shall be entitled to paid vacation as follows:
1 - After one (J) year of service 2 - After eight (8) years of service 3 - After fifteen (15) years of service 4- After twenty-five (25) years of service

Two (2) weeks (85 hours)
Three (3) weeks (127% hours)
Four (4) weeks (170 hours)
Five (5) weeks (212% hours)

SECTION 20.2- POSTING VACATION NOTICE
A vacation notice shall be posted during the first week of January of each year.
Employees shall apply for vacation leave within ten (1 0) working days from the date
notice is posted. In cases of coinciding requests the most senior employee shall prevail.

SECTION 20.3 -VACATION REQUEST AFTER VACATION SIGN UP
17
81085963.1

OPBA -Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

Every effort will be made to grant the vacation leave as requested by an employee. Need
of the Department may necessitate a change in an employee's vacation. When two (2)
employees request the same vacation periods after the January sign up period the earliest
request received shall prevail.

SECTION 20.4- CARRY OVER
In special circumstances up to five (5) days of unused vacation leave may be carried over
to the employee's next anniversary year, upon approval of Chief of Police.

SECTION 20.5 -VACATION CONSIST OF
One (I) week of vacation leave shall consist of five (5) workdays.

SECTION 20.6- DEATH OF EMPLOYEE
In the case of the death of an employee, the unused vacation leave to the credit of any
such employee shall be paid to the surviving spouse or to the employee's estate.

ARTICLE21
MEDICAL AND LIFE INSURANCE
SECTION 21.1 - COST TO TOWNSHIP
The Township shall pay eighty-five percent (85%) in 2014 and thereafter, of the cost of
the premiunis for hospital, medical, dental, vision, prescription drug card, and life
insurance for each employee and dependents in the bargaining unit.
Before March 1, 2015, the Township will convene a committee that shall include one
member from the bargaining unit. The purpose of this committee will be to work with
the Township Administrator to evaluate health insurance options and to present a formal
recommendation of the committee to the Board of Trustees prior to a decision being
reached for health insurance coverage benefits for 2016. This committee will continue to
meet each year thereafter and make recommendation to the Trustees prior to a decision
being reached on health insurance coverage for the following year.
The Township is committed to keeping members of the bargaining unit whole, with
respect to total out of pocket expenses, considering options for health insurance carriers,
plan design, and the potential for funding of a Health Reimbursement Account and/or
Health Savings Account or the like as it explores the possibility of transitioning to a
different form of health insurance.

SECTION 21.2- HOSPITAL, MEDICAL, DENTAL, VISION, PRESCRIPTION
DRUG CARD AND LIFE INSURANCE
The Township shall provide hospital, medical, dental, vision, prescription drug card, and
life insurance as specifically described in the plan documents of the plan adopted by the
Township.
18
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACTFOR2015, 2016 AND2017

SECTION 21.3 -TOWNSHIP AUTHORITY TO CHANGE INSURANCE
CARRIER
The Township shall continue to have the authority to change insurance carriers at any
time, or to institute a full or quasi-self-insured plan, provided that the goal of such change
is to reduce costs while maintaining substantially similar benefit levels. The Township
shall immediately notify the Union prior to any change in carrier or benefits and will
meet with representatives of the bargaining unit to discuss such changes. In the event
that the patties disagree with the proposed changes, the parties agree to submit the issue
to the Township Trustees for final detetmination.

ARTICLE22
SAVINGS CLAUSE
SECTION 22.1 - SAVINGS CLAUSE
Should a court of competent jurisdiction determine that a provision of this Agreement is
illegal or unenforceable then such provision shall automatically terminate. The
remainder of the Agreement shall continue in full force and effect. In the event that a
provision is determined to be unlawful, the Township and the Union shall promptly meet
for the purpose of negotiating a lawful alternative provision.

ARTICLE23
SICK LEAVE
SECTION 23.1- ACCUMULATION OF SICK LEAVE
For each completed eighty-five (85) hours in active pay status, exclusive of overtime,
unpaid leave of absence or disciplinary suspension, each employee earns 4.6 hours of
sick leave. (Active pay status may be defined as hours worked, hours on approved paid
leave, and hours on paid sick leave). The amount of sick leave time any one (1)
employee may accrue is sixteen hundred forty (1640) hours. Sick leave for on-duty
personnel shall be charged in minimum units of one half (kl) hour; Off-duty personnel
shall receive sick time in minimum units of one (1) hour. Employees absent on sick
leave shall be paid at the regular rate.

SECTION 23.2 -TRANSFER OF SICK LEAVE
Upon submitting proper verification, by employee to Employer, employees who transfer
between departments (other than within Clearcreek Township), or agencies, or from other
public employment, or who are reappointed or reinstated within ten (1 0) years of prior
public service employment will be credited with one-fourth(¥.) of the accumulated hours
of sick leave up to a maximum of sixteen hundred forty (1640) hours.

19
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers ·
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND2017

Upon retirement from Employer service the bargaining unit member will be paid one-half
( ~) of the accumulated hours not to exceed a maximum of four hundred (400) hours.
Upon separation for any reason other than retirement, no sick leave pay out will occur.
For purposes of this section, retirement means that an employee has completed twelve
(12) years of credited service with the Ohio Public Employee Retirement System and has
retired from Clearcreek Township or is eligible to receive disability pension benefits from
the Ohio Public Employee Retirement System immediately following separation from
employment with the Clearcreek Township Police Department.
When an employee passes away while in active employment, the surviving spouse or
others, as spelled out in Section 2113.04 of the Ohio Revised Code, will be eligible to
receive sick leave payment for which the decedent would otherwise have qualified. Such
payment shall be based on the rate of pay of the employee at the time of death.

SECTION 23.3 - GRANT OF SICK LEAVE
Sick leave may be granted to the employee upon request for the following reasons:
1-

Illness or illjury of the employee or injury or illness of the employee's
immediate family where the employee's presence is reasonably necessary.

2-

Exposure of the employee or a member of the employee's immediate
family to a contagious disease which would have the potential of
jeopardizing the health of the employee or the health of others.

3-

Employee childbitth and or related medical conditions.

Nothing in this section shall be construed as to require the Chief of Police to approve the
use of sick leave by an employee.
The Chief of Police may investigate all usage of sick leave and may with just cause
withhold full payment of said sick leave until the investigation is completed.
Should the Chief of Police determine based on just cause that an employee has not used
sick leave properly, payment may be denied and the employee may be disciplined.
Employees who do not report for work due to sickness and who have exhausted their sick
leave days are subject to disciplinary action for being absent without approved leave.
The Chief of Police is authorized to approve leave without pay.

SECTION 23.4- DOCUMENTATION
An employee absent on sick leave for more than two (2) days shall submit documentation
from a physician substantiating the reason for the leave ("documentation"). The Chief of
Police has authority to require employees to furnish documentation for any sick leave.
Failure to submit documentation as required may result in leave without pay and a
deduction in the subsequent payroll period; - refusal to submit documentation may be
disciplined, up to and including tetmination. The doctor's documentation should be
forwarded to the Chief of Police (or designee) before the employee is permitted to retum
for work.
20
81085963.1

OPBA- Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

SECTION 23.5- NOTIFICATION OF SICK LEAVE
An employee requesting sick leave shall notifY their immediate supervisor or other
designated person of the fact and the reason as far in advance as possible, but in no case
later than two hours prior to the beginning of a scheduled shift. Failure to do so may
result in the employee not being granted sick leave or being paid for any absences; the
employee will also be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
Upon the employee's request, other accrued leave may be used as sick leave after sick
leave is exhausted.

SECTION 23.6- FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT
All Family and Medical Leave Act leave will be granted and/or denied in accordance
with the prevailing Federal Law. Accrued paid leave must be used concunently with the
use ofFMLA Leave.

SECTION 23.7- IMMEDIATE FAMILY
Immediate family, for purposes of the Article, shall be defined as: 1) SPOUSE, 2)
PARENT, 3) CHILD, 4) STEPCHILD, and 5) ANY other relation living in the
employee's household.

SECTION 23.8- PERFECT ATTENDANCE DAYS
Employees who do not use any sick leave during any one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive day period shall be granted one (J) additional perfect attendance day with
pay. A maximum of two (2) additional personal leave days can be earned during any
calendar year. The consecutive day period provided for in this Section can begin at any
time and shall end one hundred eighty (180) days later. Employees must request personal
day leave use as far in advance as possible. The Employer reserves the right to deny any
request for perfect attendance day leave that is not made more than thirty (30) calendar
days in advance. Such denial shall not be subject to the grievance procedure.
Employees must schedule and use earned perfect attendance day leave within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the date on which such perfect attendance day is earned.
Earned perfect attendance day leave not scheduled and used within one hundred eighty
(180) days shall be dropped.

ARTICLE24
CALL-IN AND COURT TIME
SECTION 24.1 - CALL-IN
Employees who are required to come in to work or required to come in for training or a
mandatory depattment meeting at a time not connected to their regular scheduled hours of
work shall be compensated at one and one-half(JY,) times the regular hourly rate of pay
21
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

with a minimum of three (3) hours in pay or in compensatory time for such call-in. A
second call-in within the three (3) hour period shall be considered a continuation of the
first call-in.

SECTION 24.2 - COURT TIME
Employees shall be given a minimum of three (3) hours at time and one half for work
related court appearances not connected to their regular scheduled hours of work. A
work related court appearance is an actual court appearance, filing of a criminal charge,
and/or meeting at the court or prosecutor's office in preparation for trial. At the option of
the employee, payment may be by payroll or compensatory time. Compensatory time
shall not exceed the maximum established in ARTICLE 13, Section 3.

ARTICLE25
USE OF LEAVE
SECTION 25.1 - USE OF LEAVE
Employee shall use vacation and personal days only in eight and half (8%) hour
increments.
Compensatory time may be taken in two (2) hour increments subject to the requirements
of ARTICLE 13, SECTION 3.
When an employee is requesting compensatory time while on-duty, the employee may
request approval for leave from the Chief of Police (or designee). Time off may be
granted if minimum staffing or other assignments will not be impacted by the request.
When an employee is requesting compensatory time while not on duty, the employee is
required to submit the proper request form forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the
requested time. In the event an employee wishes to request compensatory time and the
employee has not requested the compensatory time within the required forty-eight ( 48)
hour period, the employee must provide the name of an employee who has agreed to
cover the employee's shift for the period during which the employee wishes to take
compensatory time. The employee requesting compensatory time with less than fortyeight (48) hours notice must first contact part-time employees to cover the shift. In the
event no part-time employee is available to cover the shift, the employee may then
contact full-time employees to cover the shift. The Township will comply with
applicable Federal Law with respect to the use of compensatory time.

22
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

ARTICLE26
PERSONAL DAY LEAVE
SECTION 26.1 -PERSONAL DAY LEAVE
Each employee shall be credited with one (1) personal leave day per calendar year. This
personal leave day shall not be deducted from earned sick leave. The personal leave day
must be used in the calendar year that it is received or it is lost.

ARTICLE27
OPBA REPRESENTATION
SECTION 27.1 -REASONABLE ACCESS
Access to the OPBA for the purpose of performance of its representational duties shall
not be unreasonably withheld.

SECTION 27.2- SELECTING A UNION REPRESENTATIVE
One (1) employee per bargaining unit will be selected by the union to act as union
representative for the purpose of processing and investigating grievances under the
grievance procedure and shall be known as the DIRECTOR. The Director may have an
alternate who shall act in the Director's absence.

SECTION 27.3 -DIRECTORS TO ADMINISTER THIS AGREEMENT
OPBA Directors shall attend to the administration of this agreement (grievances and
negotiation sessions) on a no-loss/no gain basis.

ARTICLE28
REIMBURSEMENT
SECTION 28.1 -REIMBURSEMENT
Employees required to purchase meals by virtue of a special department duty assignment
outside of Warren County and in noncontiguous counties shall be reimbursed at the
following rates, subject to prior approval by the Chief of Police, and upon presentation of
a receipt for such meals.
$12.00 breakfast or actual cost including tax and 15% tip
· $14.00 lunch or actual cost including tax and 15% tip
23
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR 2015, 2016 AND 2017

$20.00 dinner or actual cost including tax and 15% tip

SECTION 28.2- COMBINED REIMBURSEMENT.
If an employee is required to purchase more than one meal per day, the employee may
exceed the individual allowance, but may not exceed the total amount allowed for the
number of meals purchased. The total amount allowed per day is forty-six ($46.00)
dollars. If an employee is attending an eight (8) hour seminar/training and is within a
seventy (70) mile radius, the employee will be entitled to reimbursement for lunch only.
Employees will be compensated for travel from the police depattment to the training
location or other destination as required by their duties, but may be ordered to travel
from home in order to avoid paying travel time. Employees who travel from home and
submit reimbursement will be reimbursed for mileage at the rate currently set by the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS).

SECTION 28.3 - TRAVEL EXPENSE
Any employee who is required to use their personal vehicle to conduct official police
business shall be compensated at the rate currently set by the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS). The employee will be compensated for the following travel expenses: parking
expenses, highway tolls, and bridge tolls.

SECTION 28.4 - TAXABLE COST REIMBURSEMENTS AND
FRINGE BENEFITS
The Federal government considers certain cost reimbursements and other fi·inge benefits
as patt of an employee's taxable income. Typical fi·inge benefits, such as health
insurance, remain nontaxable. However, ce1tain travel, meal reimbursements and other,
less common, benefits may be considered taxable income to the employee. Clearcreek
Township will always comply with the requirements of federal law with respect to tax
issues. Taxable income will be reported annually on the employee's W-2 form. The
Police Chief is responsible for marking reimbursements f01ms as taxable or nontaxable.
Travel expenses (including lodging, meals and mileage) for overnight trips are
nontaxable. Travel expenses for trips made on a single day are taxable. If the Police
Chief is unsure as to whether an expense is taxable or nontaxable, he/she will consult the
Office of the Township Administrator.

ARTICLE29
PERSONNEL FILES
SECTION 29.1 - ONE OFFICIAL FILE
There shall be one (1) official file which shall be kept in the Assistant Administrator's
Office and every employee shall be allowed to review their own personnel file at any
reasonable time upon written request to the Chief of Police or Assistant Administrator,
during regular business hours. Any employee may copy documents in their file.
24
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

SECTION 29.2 -RELEASE OF INFORMATION
The Police Department will not release personnel file records to persons, agencies, or
entities outside the Police Department other than its representatives unless required by
state or federal law, public records laws, regulation or coutt order to release files to such
other persons, agencies or entities. To the extent required by law, the employees shall be
notified when any records are requested and which records were released.

SECTION 29.3 -ALLEGED INACCURACY
If upon examining their personnel file, any bargaining unit member believes that there are
inaccuracies in documents contained therein, the members may write a memorandum to
the Chief of Police explaining the alleged inaccuracy. The memorandum shall be placed
in the personnel file and attached to the documents containing the alleged inaccuracy.

SECTION 29.4- REMOVAL OF DISCIPLINE RECORDS
If twenty four (24) months have passed following discipline for a verbal or written
reprimand, and no intervening discipline has occutTed, the employee may request (in
writing) that discipline records relating to the offense be removed from the personnel file.
A request to remove discipline records for a suspension or demotion may be made four
(4) years following discipline if no intervening discipline has occurred. Any inactive
record of discipline will, at the request of the employee, be physically removed fi·om the
employee's personnel file and placed in a separate envelope or folder within the
employee's personnel file. Such separate envelope or folder shall be clearly marked
"INACTIVE FILE".
The Chief of Police shall remove such records, to the
"INACTIVE FILE", unless the Chief provides a memorandum to the employee
explaining why the records are still relevant or a result of special circumstance. These
records will cease to have an affect on disciplinary matters after time periods stated
above.

ARTICLE30
OCCUPATIONAL INJURY LEAVE
SECTION 30.1 - ELIGIBLE FOR INJURY LEAVE
An employee who suffers a service-connected injury or illness incu1Ted in the course of
and arising out of employment with the Employer shall be eligible for injury leave upon
the eighth (8tb.) day of lost time. Injury leave for seven (7) days or fewer days of lost time
will be for medical claims only pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Bureau of
Workers' Compensation, the employee may utilize sick or other approved leave during
this tinle. Injury leave shall be available upon the eighth (Bib.) day for ninety (90)
calendar days from the date of injury and any leave used shall be re-credited to the
employee's leave balance. After ninety (90) calendar days, the employee may utilize sick
time or other approved leave of absence to supplement Workers' Compensation benefits.

25
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

SECTION 30.2 - EXECUTION OF AGREEMENT
When an employee applies for injury leave with pay, he must execute an agreement
assigning to the Employer any such pay form Workers' Compensation during the period
of the paid leave and all necessary fotms to process to appropriate claims with the Ohio
Bureau of Workers' Compensation. The Employer will issue a Check to the employee
each pay period equivalent to the employee's base wage for a pay period. Any payment
from Workers' Compensation for a covered claim during the above ninety (90) calendar
day period shall be paid over to the Township. When an employee and the Township
disagree concerning an injury or illness, the employee may utilize sick or other approved
leave. Should the Industrial Commission ruie favorably to the employee, the Township
shall re-credit the leave used and the Township shall be reimbursed with Workers'
Compensation disability payment.

SECTION 30.3- REVIEW THE EMPLOYEE'S PHYSICAL AND
MENTAL STATUS
The Chief of Police has the right to review the employee's physical and mental status
each thirty (30) days of absence in order to determine the member's ability to retum to
work. In the event of a difference of opinion as to the employee's mental or physical
status between the employee's physician and the Employer's physician, the issue shall be
submitted to an Industrial Commission Specialist whose decision shall be final and
binding on both parties. The services of the third physician shall be paid by the
Employer.

SECTION 30.4- TIME LENGTH
The ninety (90) calendar day injury leave is available for each distinct, separate injury or
illness. Recurrence of the same injury/illness shall be charged to the original ninety (90)
calendar days.

ARTICLE31
ALCOHOL AND DRUG TESTING POLICY
SECTION 31.1 -PROHIBITING ACTIVITIES
All Employees are subject to this Article. All employees covered by this Atiicle are
prohibited from engaging in the following:
A.

Reporting to duty, remaining on duty, or performing any function while
having any alcohol concentration; unless on official business with the
prior approval of the Chief of Police;

B.

Reporting to duty, remaining on duty, or performing any function while
using a controlled substance (including prescription drugs, unless the
physician has advised the employee that the substance does not adversely
affect the employee 's ability to function) or if the employee tests positive
for controlled substances;
26

81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACTFOR2015, 2016 AND2017

C.

Possessing alcohol while on duty, other than on official police business;

D.

Using alcohol or controlled substances while on duty;

E.

Perfotming any functions within four (4) hours after using alcohol;

F.

Using alcohol for eight (8) hours following an accident in which the
employee is required to take a post-accident alcohol test or until the
employee undergoes a post-accident alcohol test, whichever occurs first;

G.

Refusing to submit to a post-accident, random, reasonable suspicion or
follow-up alcohol or controlled substance test.

SECTION 31.2 - REQUIRED TESTING
An employee will be required to submit to testing for alcohol and/or controlled
substances under the following circumstances:
A.

New Employee Testing: Prior to the first time an employee performs any
Township function, the employee will be tested for controlled substances.
The employee will not be permitted to perfotm any functions unless the
controlled substance test results are negative.

The Township shall atTange the time and location for the new employee
test. The employee is responsible for reporting to the collection site for
the test. The Township will be responsible for only the cost of the test
itself. All other costs incmTed by the employee concerning a new
employee test are entirely the employee's responsibility.
B.

Post-Accident Testing: As soon as practicable following: (a) an
employee who suffers or causes an employee to suffer a service-connected
injury or illness incmTed in the course of and arising out of employment
with the Employer, (b) an accident in which a fatality occurs, (c) an
accident in which an injury is treated away from the scene and the
employee receives a citation for a moving violation arising from the
accident, (d) an accident in which a vehicle is required to be towed from
the scene and the employee receives a citation for a moving violation
arising from the accident, or (e) when an employee causes a vehicle
accident; the employee shall be tested for alcohol and controlled
substances. The Township shall cease attempts to administer the test eight
(8) hours following the accident for alcohol and after thirty-two (32) hours
for controlled substances.

The employee shall be transported to the collection site by a representative
of the Township. Following the test, the employee shall be transported
home and the employee will not be permitted to perform any functions
until a negative controlled substance test result is reported.
Following a breath alcohol test which shows no detectable amoUllt of
alcohol, the employee will be petmitted to apply for accU!Dulated sick
leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory time, or unpaid leave to
cover the period of absence until the controlled substance test results are
available. If the controlled substance test results are negative, the
27
81085963.1

OPBA- Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

employee will be credited for the used paid leave, or compensated for the
period of leave without pay at the employee's regular hourly rate of pay,
unless other work tule violation(s) have occurred.
Following a breath alcohol test which shows any detectable level of
alcohol, the employee will be taken home and permitted to apply for
accumulated paid leave. The employee may not perform any functions for
a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours. An employee with a breath alcohol
test of less than 0.04 shall also be subject to appropriate disciplinary
measures in accordance with the Township's Drug Free Workplace Policy
or other applicable policies.
Following a breath alcohol test result indicating any concentration, or
following a positive controlled substance or illegal drug test result, if the
employee's employment is not terminated, the employee may request the
use of accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory
time, or unpaid leave and the consequences listed in Section 31.2 above
will result.
C.

Random Testing: A minimum number of employees (currently 10 %for
alcohol and 50% for controlled substances) armually will be randomly
selected using a scientifically valid method in which each employee will
have an equal chance of being tested each time selections are made. The
dates for testing shall be unannounced and spread throughout the calendar
year. When an employee is selected for testing, he shall cease doing their
function and proceed to the test site immediately. If an employee is
randomly selected for an alcohol test and that employee is not cunently
performing, just about to perfotm, or just finished performing their
Township function, the employee's selection may be kept confidential
until the next time that employee perfotms a Township function.

Following a breath alcohol test which shows any detectable level of
alcohol, the employee will be taken home and permitted to apply for
accumulated paid leave. The employee may not perform any functions for
a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours. An employee with a breath alcohol
test of less than 0.04 shall also be subject to appropriate disciplinary
measures in accordance with the Township's Drug Free Work-place Policy
or other applicable policies.
Following a breath alcohol test result indicating any concentration or
following a positive controlled substance test result, if the employee's
employment is not terminated, the employee may request the use of
accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory time, or
unpaid leave and the consequences listed in Section 31.2 above will result.
D.

Reasonable Suspicion Testing: A trained supervisor or official may
require an employee to undergo testing for alcohol or controlled
substances based upon specific, contemporaneous, articulable observations
concerning the appearance, behavior, speech, or body odors of the
employee. If an employee is required to undergo testing under this
section, the employee must immediately cease to perform their Township
28

81085963.1

OPBA- Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

function and he will be transpmted to the collection site by a
representative of the Township. If an employee is required to undergo
reasonable suspicion controlled substance testing, such employee shall not
be permitted to perform any Township functions until a negative
controlled substance test result is reported. Following a reasonable
suspicion controlled substance test, the employee will be permitted to
apply for accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory
time, or unpaid leave until the test results are available. If the controlled
substance test results are negative and no other work rule violation(s) have
occurred, the employee shall be returned to his position and credited for
his entire used paid leave or compensated for the period of leave without
pay at the employee's regular hourly rate of pay.
Following a breath alcohol test which shows any detectable level of
alcohol, the employee will be taken home and permitted to apply for
accumulated paid leave. The employee may not perform any Township
functions for a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours. An employee with a
breath alcohol test of less than 0.04 shall also be subject to appropriate
disciplinaty measures in accordance with the Township's Drug Free
Workplace Policy or other applicable policies.
Following a breath alcohol test result indicating any concentration or
following a positive controlled substance test result, if the employee's
employment is not terminated, the employee may request the use of
accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory time, or
unpaid leave and the consequences listed in Section 31.2 above will result.
The Township will cease attempts to administer the test eight (8) hours
after the observation was made.
E.

Return-To-Duty Testing: Before an employee who has been found to be

in violation of the prohibitions section of this Alticle, set out in Section
31.1, may return to duty in a position requiring the performance of any
functions, the employee must undergo testing for alcohol and/or controlled
substances. The results of the alcohol test must show no concentration if
the offense involved alcohol and the controlled substance test must be
negative if the offense involved controlled substances. Any costs
associated with this test will be the responsibility of the employee at the
time the test is administered.
F.

Follow-Up Testing: When an employee has been found to be in violation
of the prohibitions section of this Article, set out in Section 31.1, and the
substance abuse professional has determined that the employee needs
assistance in resolving alcohol or substance abuse problems, the employee
will be subject to a minimum of two (2) unanoounced follow-up tests
within the first twelve (12) months as directed by the substance abuse
professional. Any costs associated with this test will be the responsibility
of the employee at the time the test is administered.

29
81085963.1

OPBA -Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR 2015, 2016 AND 2017

SECTION 31.3 - CONSEQUENCES
If an employee violates any of the prohibitions listed in Section 31.1 of this Article, the
following consequences will result:
A.

The employee may be disciplined for any acts committed while under the
influence of alcohol or a controlled substance in accordance with the
disciplinary Article of this contract. An employee who tests positive will
be given an opportunity to participate in a rehabilitation program. An
employee shall be permitted only one (J) chance at rehabilitation.
Disciplinary conferences should be held within three (3) days of the
notification of an alleged violation, when possible.
If the employee is not terminated, the employee may be required to apply
for accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal leave, and compensatoty
time, and Family and Medical Leave, if applicable, to cover any period of
absence. If the employee does not have sufficient paid leave to cover the
period of absence, the employee must request unpaid leave in accordance
with Township policy.

B.

The employee shall be immediately removed (taken out of service) from
any Township function. Such removal is in accordance with federal
regulations, and therefore not subject to any grievance procedure the
Township follows.
At the Township's discretion, an employee may be permitted to perform
non-safety sensitive functions, if the Township determines that such a
position is available. If no such non-safety sensitive position is available,
and no paid leave is available, the employee can request an unpaid leave
of absence (e.g. Family and Medical Leave, disability leave, or other
unpaid leave of absence).

C.

The employee shall be provided with infotmation regarding the services
available for alcohol and substance abuse.

D.

The employee shall be evaluated by a substance abuse professional (SAP),
and may not perform any functions until all recommended counseling and
treatment is completed. These actions are in accordance with federal
regulation, and therefore not subject to any grievance procedure the
Township follows. If the SAP does not recommend any treatment or
counseling then there shall be no further discipline under this policy unless
other provisions of this policy are violated or the employee has a blood
alcohol level greater then 0.04.
Failure to complete or participate in prescribed counseling rehabilitation
program shall result in the employee's tetmination. Any costs associated
with the prescribed counseling, treatment, or rehabilitation program are
the responsibility of the employee, unless otherwise covered by the
Township-sponsored medical benefit plan to which the employee
participates.

E.

The employee will be subject to re-evaluation, return-to-duty testing and
unannounced follow-up tests for twelve (12) months following the
30

81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

member's return to duty. These actions are in accordance with federal
regulations, and therefore not subject to any grievance procedure the
Township follows.

SECTION 31.4- REPORTING THE USE OF PRESCRIPTION/NONPRESCRIPTION MEDICINE
An employee is required to report the use of any prescription or non-prescription
medicines containing alcohol or any of the prohibited controlled substances listed in
Section 31.5, below, to their supervisor. At the time the medication is prescribed, the
employee shall inquire as to whether the medication will impair the employee's ability to
perfmm any functions. The employee shall be required to produce a signed statement
from the treating physician that any prescribed medication containing alcohol or a
controlled substance (as defined in Section 31. 5) does not impair the employee's ability to
perform any functions and/or does not interfere with the safe performance of the
employee's job.
If the treating physician determines that the medication will impair the employee's ability
to perform his functions, at the Township's discretion, the employee may be permitted to
perform light duty (non-safety sensitive) functions, if the Township determines that such
a position is available at that time. If no light duty is available, the employee will be
permitted to use accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory time, or
unpaid leave to cover the period of absence. The employee may also be required to
follow the Township's FMLA policy and procedures, if applicable, if the absence
qualifies.

SECTION 31.5- CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Controlled substances for the purpose of this Article shall include all legal, illegal and
prescription chugs containing marijuana, cocaine, opiates (e.g. codeine, morphine, etc.),
PCP, and amphetamines. All drug screening and confi1mation tests shall be conducted
by a laboratmy certified under the DHHS "Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace
Drug Testing Programs". The Township and the laboratory shall have a clear and welldocumented procedure for collection, shipment, and accessing of urine specimens. The
Township, the collection site, and the laboratory shall follow the procedures in 49 CFR
Part 40, including an evidentiary chain of custody and control and split sample collection
and testing. The collection site person is responsible for maintaining the integrity of the
specimen collection and transfer process. All procedures shall be outlined in writing and
provided to Township representatives and donors. A separate sample will be made
available for the employee being tested. The member may request that the sample be sent
to a neutral laboratory certified under DHHS for testing. The cost of this test will be
borne by the bargaining unit member.

SECTION 31.6- TRAINED TECHNICIAN
All alcohol breath tests shall be administered by a trained breath alcohol technician (BA1)
or a law enforcement officer certified to conduct such tests. Only evidential breath
testing (BE1) devices shall be used alone with the prescribed breath alcohol testing form.
The Township and the testing facility shall follow the procedures in 49 CFR Part 40.
31
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

SECTION 31.7- REFUSAL TO SUBMIT
Refusal to submit to any of the alcohol or controlled substance tests required by this
Article will result in the employee's immediate removal from the any Township functions
and may result in disciplinary action. Refusal will be treated as a positive test and the
employee will be referred to a counseling program and subject to return-to-duty and
follow-up testing. Actions constituting a refusal to submit to a test include:
1.

Failing to provide adequate breath for alcohol testing;

2.

Failing to provide adequate urine for controlled substance testing;

3.

Engaging in conduct that clearly obstructs the testing procedure;

4.

Failing to remain readily available for a post-accident test.

SECTION 31.8- ZERO TOLERANCE
Employees who have been tested for alcohol with the results showing any concentration
will not be permitted to perform any functions for twenty-four (24) hours following
administration of the test. Discipline may be administered in accordance with the
Township's Drug Free Workplace Act Policy or in accordance with any labor agreement
between the patties and/or other disciplinary policies.

SECTION 31.9- CALL OUTS
Employees who are on call are responsible for informing the Township when the
employee is called if he is unable to report due to alcohol consumption. The Township
will, whenever possible, notify employees ofthe likelihood of a call out situation. When
an employee is on notice of a possible call out, and the call out is communicated to the
member eight (8) hours in advance of the call out, and employee is then unable to rep01t
because of alcohol consumption, the employee may be subject to discipline.

SECTION 31.10- EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Information regarding the effects of alcohol and controlled substance use on an
individual's health, work, and personal life, and information about drug and alcohol
counseling, rehabilitation, and employee assistance programs is available through the
Assistant Administrator's Office or your individual department head's office, and will be
periodically provided to employees.
Employees are encouraged to voluntarily admit problems with drugs and alcohol prior to
violating Township policies. If an employee voluntarily enters into counseling or
rehabilitation he will be petmitted to apply for an unpaid leave, personal leave, or other
leave of absence. The employee may also be permitted or required to use all available
sick leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory time, and Family and Medical Leave,
if applicable. Any costs associated with a voluntary counseling or rehabilitation program
are the responsibility of the employee, unless otherwise covered by the Townshipsponsored medical benefit plan to which the employee patticipates.

32
81085963.1

OPBA -Police Officers
CONTRACTFOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

SECTION 31.11 - OBTAINING EMPLOYEES RECORDS
Upon written request from the employee, the Township will promptly provide copies of
any records pertaining to the employee's use of alcohol or controlled substances including
the results of any tests. The Township may charge a reasonable fee for copies. However
access to this inf01mation will not be contingent upon payment for records other than
those specifically requested.

SECTION 31.12- COMPLIANCE TO ALL OTHER REGULATIONS
All bargaining unit employees are subject to this Article and remain subject to all other
policies, procedures, rules, and regulations established by the Township under its
independent authority which are not inconsistent with the requirements herein. All
employees also remain subject to all other relevant federal, state, and local laws and
regulations.

ARTICLE32
SUBCONTRACTING
SECTION 32.1 - SUBCONTRACTING
In the event the Township desires to subcontract any bargaining unit work, it will not
result in the reduction of the bargaining unit hours, nor will it result in layoffs. Rather,
the subcontracting will be limited to the Township utilizing non-bargaining unit
personnel to provide the services or duties that no current bargaining unit members have
the current skill or ability to perform or that they are currently performing.

ARTICLE33
PHYSICAL FITNESS AND WELLNESS
SECTION 33.1 c ROUTINE PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS
Regular employees shall have a minimum of one physical examination biannually until
age forty-five (45) and aunually thereafter. The Township shall pay the cost of such
examinations. These examinations shall be perf01med by a qualified physician which
shall be designated by the Township. These examinations shall be for the purpose of
determining the employee's ability to perform their duties with average efficiency.

SECTION 33.2- ADDITIONAL EXAMINATIONS
Employees retuming from disability or sick leave shall be subject to physical
petformance, fitness and/or medical examinations appropriate to the employee's duties.
These additional physical examinations and supplemental medical evaluations may be
ordered by the Chief of Police or the Assistant Administrator and paid for by the
Township. If the employee chooses to select a physician for the physical examination,
the fee shall be paid by the employee and the medical report will be submitted to the
33
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

physician chosen by the Township to make an evaluation of the employee's condition
and overall fitness. However, the Chief of Police or the Assistant Administrator reserves
the right to require additional physical examinations at the Township's expense. Physical
perfotmance examinations and fitness examinations shall be conducted in accordance
with the standards and procedures cun·ently as adopted by the Township in 2004. These
examinations shall be for the purpose of determining the employee's ability to perform
their duties with average efficiency.

SECTION 33.3 - CORRECTIVE MEASURES
In requiring a physical examination or medical evaluation, the Chief of Police shall
request that the examining physician recommend measures to be taken by the employee
to correct or improve any health or physical condition which impairs the employee in the
performance of his assigned duty. The Chief of Police may direct the employee to follow
such corrective measures within the time frame recommended by the physician and order
follow-up examinations. Failure to follow corrective measure shall be grounds for
disciplinary action up to and including termination.

SECTION 33.4- WELLNESS PROGRAM
To ensure the fitness and wellness of all employees, the employees are eligible to
participate in a wellness program at The Helen & Charles Coffman Family YMCA in
Springboro, Ohio. The Township will participate in the YMCA of Metropolitan Dayton
Corporate Membership Program. This would entitle employees to become members at a
discounted rate. The employee may, by payroll deduction have his membership fee
deducted from their paycheck. It is the intent of this program is to enhance aerobic
capacity, improve strength and/or flexibility, non-passively improve ability to perform
strenuous work and actively assist the employee in reducing body fat to assist in any
compliance with Section 33.2 and/or Section 33.3.

SECTION 33.5- USE OF TOBACCO
Employees shall not use any type of tobacco products while on duty unless necessary for
performance of specific tasks approved by the Chief of Police. Employees shall not use
any type of non-tobacco products which are smoked or any form of electronic cigarette
while on duty unless necessary for performance of specific tasks approved by the Chief
of Police.

ARTICLE34
TERMS OF AGREEMENT
DURATION
SECTION 35.1 -DURATION
The Agreement shall be in full force and effect from the period 12:01 A.M., January 1,
2015, unti111:59 P.M., December 31, 2017 and shall renew automatically fi'om year to
year thereafter, unless either party serves notice of the intent to terminate or modify this
34
81085963.1

OPBA- Police Officers
CONTRACT FOR2015, 2016 AND 2017

Agreement at least sixty (60) days prior to December 31, 2017, or any successive
December 31st thereafter.
IN.JVITNESS WHEREOF, the patties hereto have duly executed this Agreement this
·

~day off;id,Cc~ 14.

THE BOARD OF CLEARCREEK
TO~SEUP~USTEES

Ld~h.

OffiO PATROLMEN'S BENEVOLENT
ASSOCIATI N

~

35
81085963.1

OPBA - Police Officers

CONTRACTFOR2015, 2016 AND2017

APPENDIX A
Salary Schedule
Patrol Officers
2015-17
2015 (2.5%)

2016 (2.5%)

2017 (2.5%)

Step

Annual

Hourly

Annual

Hourly

Annual

Hourly

Senior

$67,393.75
$65,044.79
$62,695.83

$30.49
$29.43
$28.37
$27.31

$69,078.59
$66,670.91
$64,263.23
$61,855.55
$59,447.86

$31.26
$30.17
$29.08
$27.99
$26.90

$70,805.55
$68,337.68
$65,869.81
$63,401.94
$60,934.06

$32.04
$30.92
$29.81
$28.69
$27.57

$57,040.18
$54,632.50

$25.81
$24.72

$58,466.19
$55,998.31

$26.46
$25.34

5
4
3
2
1
Probation

$60,346.88
$57,997.92
$55,648.96
$53,300.00

$26.24
$25.18
$24.12

36
81085963.1
