COLLINSVILLE COMMUNITY UNIT SCHOOL DISTRICT
NO. 10
COLLINSVILLE, ILLINOIS

AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE BOARD OF EDUCATION
AND
SERVICE EMPLOYEES INTERNATIONAL UNION, LOCAL 316

OFFICE EMPLOYEES

Fiscal Year
2012-2013

COLLINSVILLE COMMUNITY UNIT SCHOOL DISTRICT NO. 10
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE BOARD OF EDUCATION
AND
SERVICE EMPLOYEES INTERNATIONAL UNION, LOCAL 316
OFFICE EMPLOYEES
July 1, 2012
Through
June 30, 2013
Index

Page

RECOGNITION

1

ARTICLE I

SENIORITY
Section 1: Seniority date
Section 2: (A) Seniority lists
(B) Probationary period
Section 3: Accumulated seniority

2
2
2
2
2

ARTICLE II

LAYOFF PROCEDURE
Section 1: Layoff procedure

3
3

ARTICLE III

JOB VACANCIES
Section 1: (A) Vacancy notices
(B) Notification during summer months
(C) Non-Union vacancies
(D) Job disturbance
Section 2: Application for vacancies posted
Section 3: Notification of filling of vacancy
Section 4: Right to appeal
Section 5: Examination & review of test results

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

ARTICLE IV

EXPERIENCE
Section 1: Severance of seniority rights

6
6

ARTICLE V

HOURS OF WORK
Section 1: Workday and work week
Section 2: Overtime
Section 3: Overtime re: paid absence
Section 4: Prior approval of overtime
Section 5: Minimum hours when report for work
Section 6: Paid lunch break re: overtime
Section 7: Call back to work

7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7

ii
Index
ARTICLE IV

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Application of grievance procedure
Section 1: Discharge of employees
Section 2: Procedure for filing grievances

Page
8
8
8
8

ARTICLE VII WORK YEAR AND HOLIDAYS
Section 1: Work year for twelve month secretaries
Section 2: Work year for ten month secretaries
Section 3: Work year for nine and one half month secretaries
Section 4: Holidays
Section 5: Work on unauthorized holiday

9
9
9
9
9

ARTICLE VIII VACATIONS

10

ARTICLE IX

SICK LEAVE
Section 1: Months worked and days grated
Section 2: Continual illness or serious injury
Section 3: Written notice of absence
Section 4: Interpretation of sick leave
Section 5: Funeral leave
Section 6: Duty connected injury
Section 7: Employee benefit for accumulation of unused earned absence

11
11
11
11
11
11
12
12

ARTICLE X

SUBSTITUTE OFFICE HELP
Section 1: Rate of pay
Section 2: No fringe benefits
Section 3: Use of substitutes
Section 4: When substitutes will be provided
Section 5: No fringe benefits re: temporary subs
Section 6: Regular employee substitute

13
13
13
13
13
13
13

ARTICLE XI

GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1: Leave of absence
Section 2: No work by other classifications
Section 3: Insurance
Section 4: Dues deduction
Section 5: Pay for required attendance at meetings
Section 6: Snow days
Section 7: Personal leave
Section 8: Pay day
Section 9: Jury duty or subpoenaed witness
Section 10: Medical examinations
Section 11: Summer school employment

14
14
14
14
15
15
15
15
16
16
16
16

iii
Index
ARTICLE IX

GENERAL PROVISIONS (continued)
Section 12: Call back to work – regular employees
Section 13: Work as a substitute during Christmas and spring break
and summer months
Section 14: Temporary employees during layoff
Section 15: Transportation
Section 16: Legality
Section 17: Discrimination
Section 18: Interpretation of contract
Section 19: Review of secretarial classifications
Section 20: Telephone facilities
Section 21: Term of agreement
Section 22: Strike provision
Section 23: Statement of economic interests
Section 24: Fair share
Section 25: Worker’s compensation
Section 26: Volunteerism
Section 27: Evaluations

16
16

OFFICE EMPLOYEES SALARY RATES

19

ATTACHMENT:


Page

Memorandum of Agreement on the Student Registration/Records Secretarial Position

16
16
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
18
18
18
18
18
19

-1AGREEMENT FOR OFFICE EMPLOYEES
The board of Education of Collinsville Community Unit School District No.10, Collinsville,
Illinois, hereinafter referred to as the “Employer,” hereby recognizes Service Employees
International Union, Local 316, hereinafter referred to as the “Union,” as the exclusive
bargaining representative for wages, hours, and working conditions as set forth in this
Agreement for all office personnel filling positions classified as a Secretary and bookkeeper
with the following exceptions:
Secretary to the Superintendent of Schools
Secretary to the Board of Education
Secretary to Director of Business Affairs
Secretary to Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources and
Information Systems
Secretary to Director of Building and Grounds
Student Registration/Records Secretary
Accounting Supervisor
Payroll Supervisor
The Board of Education is an Equal Opportunity Employer and will not discriminate
against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, creed, religion,
national origin, age, sex, handicap, impairment, veteran or marital status.

-2ARTICLE I: SENIORITY
Section 1 Seniority shall date from the first day of continuous employment. As used in this
Agreement, the term “continuous employment” shall be so construed that absences from employment due to illness, accident, or family death shall not cause a break in such continuous
employment. Seniority right shall cease upon voluntary termination of employment, even though
re-employed by the district at a later time.
Section 2
A. Seniority lists will be provided by the Board of Education at the beginning of the
school year by September 30. Revised seniority lists will be provided on request,
but not to exceed two (2) such lists per year.
B. All employees shall serve a probationary period of sixty (60) working days while
school is in session, if applicable.
C. All new employees shall serve a probationary period of six (6) months while
school is in session, if applicable.
Section 3 Seniority earned in any higher classification shall be added to accumulated seniority
earned in any lower classification.

-3ARTICLE II: LAYOFF PROCEDURE
Section 1 Layoff Procedure: In any case of any reduction in force in any classification covered by
this Agreement, the following procedure will be followed. The least senior employee in seniority will
be laid off first. To accomplish this, the following procedure will be followed:
A layoff in any classification covered by this Agreement gives that person being laid
off the opportunity to bump any employee with less seniority. This does not preclude
the laid off person from bumping into a lower job classification. The person that is
bumped may repeat the same process. This procedure does not include upward
mobility; i.e., a class three bumping to a four, etc., except where an employee is
working out of classification and the bumping employee has seniority rights for that
position.
Any person bumping to a different position must meet the qualifications as
determined by the immediate supervisor. If qualifications have not been met, the
bumping procedure will be repeated until final placement has been made. If there is
doubt about qualifications, a probation period of up to sixty (60) days will be
established to determine actual qualifications while on the job.
The SENIOR person actually laid off will be hired back first the next SENIOR person laid off shall
be hired back next, etc., provided the person is qualified. Refusal in accepting a job of equal or more
hours and months of work and rate of pay offered by the Board (not including the school’s
disqualification) severs any obligation on the part of the Board to hire this person at any later date
or time.
1. Any employee in classifications covered by this Agreement who, because of layoff
situation must bump to a lower classification shall carry their rate of pay to the lower
classification.
2. In any case where an employee is denied their bumping privileges because of lack of
qualifications, they shall be notified in writing, if requested, of the reasons.
3. In the event that any employee is denied assignment to the last available bumping
position, they shall have the right to appeal to the Board/Administration. This
appeal shall be made within one (1) week of notification of the job assignment denial
to the Superintendent. The review committee to consider such appeals shall be
appointed by the President of the Board of Education. The employee may bring to
this meeting an accompanying person or persons representing their interest.
4. Laid off Secretaries will have the right of recall privileges up to and including a
period of twenty-four (24) months from the effective date. Beyond that time, the
Administration has no obligation to recall these laid off individuals. Also, any time a
laid off Secretary refuses an available open job during that twenty-four (24) month
period, the obligation of this return provision automatically ends for that individual.
No new employees shall be hired in any classification while any employee qualified in that
classification is working in a lower classification.

-4Article II: Layoff Procedure (continued)
Prior to the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1998, the Office seniority list was based on a monthly count
for time worked as a Secretary in Unit 10. Persons employed prior to July 1, 1988, will remain at
their seniority standing as of June 30, 1988. Effective July 1, 1988, employees covered by this
Agreement will accrue one year of seniority each year regardless of the number of months employed
that year except for those employees hired after the beginning of a fiscal year. Employees hired after
the beginning of a fiscal year will receive a partial year credit based upon the employment date
during that fiscal year. Less than full-time employees will receive a pro-rated amount each year.
Any clerical employee covered by this Agreement on leave of absence is subject to the above layoff
procedure should their seniority be subject to this clause.

-5ARTICLE III: JOB VACANCIES
Section 1
A. Notices of all job vacancies will be posted in all schools, Administration Buildings
and the district website. During the summer months, vacancy notices will be
posted in the schools where summer school is in session, in the Administration
Buildings, and a notice will be emailed to the Union Officers. Such notices shall
state the nature of job, the qualifications needed, possible salary classifications,
length of the employment day and length of the employment year, if other than a
full day and a full year job.
B. Annually, during the summer months, those working less than twelve (12)
months shall be notified by mail to their home, if requested in writing.
C. Employees covered under this Agreement shall have the opportunity to apply for
any vacancy in the District for which they qualify and shall not be discriminated
against in any non-union vacancy.
D. Any reduction in the employee’s pay, i.e., in the rate paid, number of hours
worked, the number of days, weeks, or months worked shall be considered
“disturbing” and shall permit that employee the right to “bump” any employee
covered by this Agreement with less seniority.
Section 2 Applications for positions posted must be sent to the office specified in the posting within
five (5) WORKING days of posting of the notice. Primary consideration and interviews will be given
to all internal candidates. All outside applicants must take the test now being given to all
candidates for office positions. Applicants from within may be required to take the test now being
given to all candidates for office positions. If results of the test are already on file, the applicant need
not take it again. Recommendations to the Board of Education will be based upon the following
factors:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

The interview by the immediate supervisor.
Past work performance.
Seniority (if applicable)
Performance on various elements of the test.
Any other factors applicable in determination of the selection process.

Section 3 Any Unit District employee who applies for a position within the District will be notified
in writing as to the outcome the day following the filling of the position.
Section 4 In the event that an outside candidate is selected over an inside candidate on a posted
position, the internal denied candidate shall have the right to appeal to the Board/Administration.
This appeal shall be made within one (1) week of the notification of the job assignment denial to the
Superintendent. The review committee to consider this appeal shall be appointed by the President of
the Board of Education. The employee may bring to this meeting an accompanying person or
persons representing their interest.
Section 5 Employees covered under this Agreement will be privileged to examine and review their
own test results and evaluations in connection with their application for a higher-ranking position
under this Agreement.

-6ARTICLE IV: EXPERIENCE
Section 1 Any employee who has severed the rights of seniority, as stated in the Agreement, and
who is re-employed in a classification covered by this Agreement will be granted years of experience
the same as if she were an employee in the District for the first time.

-7ARTICLE V: HOURS OF WORK
Section 1 Each day for 12 month employees shall consist of eight and one half (8-1/2) hours which
includes one hour of unpaid lunch. Each day for 9-1/2 and 10 month employees shall consist of eight
(8) hours which includes one half-hour of unpaid lunch OR eight and one half (8-1/2) hours which
includes one hour of unpaid lunch. The regular work week, totaling thirty-seven and one half (371/2) hours, shall consist of five (5) consecutive days, Monday through Friday.
Section 2 All time worked in excess of the regular workday or the regular work week shall be paid
at the rate of time and one-half times the employee’s regular rate of pay. All time worked on the
sixth (6th) consecutive day shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half. All time worked on Sunday
shall be paid at the rate of two (2) times the regular rate of pay.
Section 3 Time charged to any paid absence shall count as time worked for the purpose of
computing overtime.
Section 4

All overtime worked must have the prior approval of the immediate supervisor.

Section 5 When an employee reports for work as scheduled, they shall be allowed to work a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of their regularly scheduled hours of work at regular pay unless
otherwise notified at least one (1) hour prior to the beginning of their shift. If the employee is not
notified due to failure of a union member to make the notification, then the right to work on days
when school is closed is forfeited.
Section 6 Any employee who works for three (3) or more hours past their regularly scheduled hours
shall be allowed a thirty (30) minute paid lunch break and an additional thirty (30) minute paid
lunch break for each ensuing four (4) hour period.
Section 7 When an employee is called back to work, such work not being a continuation of the
employee’s regular hours, she shall be paid a minimum of three (3) hours work at one and one-half
(1-1/2) their regular rate of pay.

-8ARTICLE VI: GREIVANCE PROCEDURE
The grievance procedure shall apply to the provisions of this Agreement and the administrative
practices and policies of the District directly affecting the employees covered by this Agreement.
Section 1 No employee shall be discharged without just cause. The Superintendent of the District
shall provide a written statement of cause for dismissal. The President of Local 316 will be notified
prior to dismissal. Violation of this Agreement by an employee may be regarded as cause for
discharge.
Section 2 In the event an employee is dissatisfied with a ruling submitted by the direct supervisor,
or if there is any difference of opinion or dispute between the employer and the employee regarding
the interpretation or operation of this Agreement, the following procedure will be followed:
A. A written grievance must be filed with the employee grievance committee and a copy
sent to the immediate supervisor within seven (7) days after knowledge of the occurrence
of the act which resulted in the grievance. Failure to file a grievance, as provided, will
relieve the employer of all financial obligation and responsibility concerning the
complaint.
B. Should a grievance arise, an attempt will be made to settle such dispute between the
authorized representative of the Union and the immediate supervisor. If a satisfactory
solution is not reached by these parties within five (5) working days, then the
representatives of the Union and the Superintendent of Schools will attempt to adjust
the grievance. They shall have five (5) working days to reach an agreement, unless by
mutual consent a longer period is agreed upon.
C. In the event the representatives of the Union and the Superintendent of Schools cannot
adjust the grievance within the time provided, the matter will be referred to the Board of
Education for review. Such review will be conducted in committee session with the
grieving employee and two (2) people of his/her choice present. If no settlement is
reached within ten (10) working days, the services of an arbitrator from the Illinois
Education Relations Labor Board facilities shall be used to bring about a settlement.
The arbitrator’s ruling will be binding.

-9ARTICLE VII: WORK YEAR AND HOLIDAYS
Section 1 The work year for twelve (12) month secretaries shall be 260 or 261 days of which fifteen
(15) shall be paid holidays.
Section 2 The work year for ten (10) month secretaries shall be 223 days of which fourteen (14)
days shall be paid holidays. Ten (10) month secretaries shall work the 180 days included in the
school calendar plus a total of 29 days before and/or after the school year. These 29 days are
considered “FLEX” days, which means they can be used with the administrator’s approval to fit the
convenient time for the secretary and administrator and needs of the position.
Section 3 The work year for nine and a half months (9-1/2) secretaries shall be 207 days of which
twelve (12) days shall be paid holidays. Nine and one half-month secretaries (9-1/2) shall work the
180 days included in the school calendar plus a total of fifteen (15) days before and/or after the school
year. These fifteen (15) days are considered “FLEX” days which means they can be used with the
administrator’s approval to fit the convenient time for the secretary and administrators and the
needs of the position.
Section 4 The following holidays, with pay, will be observed for twelve (12) month members of the
secretarial personnel:
Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving Day, Day after Thanksgiving Day,
Christmas Eve Day, Christmas Day, New Years Eve Day, New Years Day, Martin Luther
King’s Birthday, President’s Day, Casmir Pulaski Day, Good Friday, Easter Monday,
Memorial Day, and Independence Day (if this day falls on a Saturday or Sunday and
Summer School is in session the preceding Friday and/or the following Monday, the holiday
will be the first day after the end of Summer School).
Ten (10) month secretaries will receive all of the above paid holidays except Independence Day. Nine
and one-half months (9-1/2) secretaries will receive all of the above paid holidays except
Independence Day, Columbus Day, and President’s Day.
When any of the above holidays fall on a Saturday and/or Sunday, the proceeding Friday and/or the
following Monday will be observed as a holiday provided school is not in session. If school is in
session, such Friday and/or Monday will be considered a regular working day and the holiday will be
considered a floating holiday which may be taken by the secretary on any day students are not in
attendance.
Section 5 Should any employee be required to work on an authorized holiday as stated in the
paragraph above, all time so worked will be at one and one-half (1-1/2) times the regular rate of pay
in addition to the holiday pay.

-10ARTICLE VIII: VACATIONS
Vacations shall accrue at the following rates for the effective period of this Agreement:
Employees who have been employed for a period of one (1) year (365 days) will granted a two (2)
week vacation with pay.
Employees who have completed eight (8) or more years of service will be granted three (3) weeks
vacation with pay.
Employees who have completed fifteen (15) or more years of service will be granted four (4) weeks
vacation with pay.
When a holiday falls during the vacation period of an employee, that holiday does not count as a day
of vacation.
Any employee who transfers from less than full-time employment to a full-time position will receive
years of service credit per seniority list to be taken one year after transfer.
Vacation time may be used at any time during the year, but any vacation time requested outside the
normal summer schedule must be submitted to the building Principal or direct supervisor no later
than ten (10) working days in advance of the requested vacation day(s). Vacation requests approved
by the building Principal or direct supervisor will be forwarded to the district’s Human Resources
Office for approval.
Upon leaving the service of the District, the payment of any earned but unused vacation days shall
be limited in an amount to ensure the District is not subject to any IMRF 6% penalty. Any vacation
pay that would cause the employee to exceed the 6% limit shall be paid to the employee postemployment as non-IMRF creditable earnings. The post-employment payment, if any, will be paid to
the employee on the 65th day after the employee’s last day or work.

-11ARTICLE IX: SICK LEAVE
Section 1

Sick leave benefits will be determined in accordance with the following schedule:

Number of Months Worked

Number Days Granted Per Year

9-1/2…………………………………………………11-1/2
10…………………………………………………….12
12…………………………………………………….14
Maximum accumulation allowed: Unlimited.
Does not include summer school, night school, or substitute employment.
Any employee starting work after school is in session shall receive sick leave benefits on a pro-rated
basis for the time worked that school year; i.e., one day per month for every employee starting after
the school year begins.
Section 2 In the event any employee experiences a continual illness or a serious injury within any
given school term which would prevent him from performing his regular duties in the District, salary
payments would continue for the current fiscal year. All other benefits, such as vacation, holidays,
insurance payments, and seniority would be maintained, provided the employee has been employed
in the District for fifteen (15) years and has forty-five (45) days accumulated sick leave. Said paid
absence will be counted against the accumulated sick leave.
Section 3 Written notice of any absence shall be presented to the immediate supervisor upon
return to work. Such notice shall include the date and/or dates of absence and reasons of the
employee. The supervisor shall submit written notices of any absence to the Office of the
Superintendent each week. The School District shall provide a proper form to be submitted by the
employee, which shall include a carbon to be retained by the employee.
Section 4 Sick leave shall be interpreted to mean personal illness, quarantine at home, serious
illness or death in the immediate family. The immediate family, for the purpose of this Section, shall
include: parents, spouse, brothers, sisters, children, grandparents, grandchildren, parents-in-law,
brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, legal guardians, corresponding in-law relations and any relative
living in the same household. All sick leave requests must be made to the Switchboard Operator
both during the regular school year and during the summer months. The employee must notify their
immediate Supervisor of the intended absence. All employees who are absent because of illness or
injury for an extended time should, upon return, have a written release from their physician.
Section 5 Reasonable time at full pay shall be granted for funeral leave for members of the
immediate family. Such leave will not be deducted from sick leave. The Superintendent should be
notified for determination of the number of days to be granted. Immediate family, for the purpose of
this Section, shall include: parents, spouse, brothers, sisters, children, grandparents, grandchildren,
parents-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, legal guardians, corresponding in-laws relations, and
any relative living in the same household.
Funeral leave for other than a member of the immediate family must be requested in advance, via
phone or email and approved by the Superintendent or his/her designee and shall be deducted from
accumulated sick leave.

-12Article IX: Sick leave (continued)
Section 6 In the event of an absence related to a duty connected injury the District shall provide
only workmen’s compensation as determined by the insurance carrier, effective with the August 15,
1986, payroll.
In the event said employee was enrolled for family insurance at least three full months prior to being
on workmen’s compensation, the District shall provide said coverage to the employee at no cost to the
employee for a period not to exceed two years.
Section 7 Upon leaving the service of the Unit District, each employee who has accumulated 545 or
more hours of unused earned absence shall receive a benefit equal to 100% of the employee’s normal
daily rate for each day of unused earned absence but not to exceed $6,000. These payments may be
paid in equal installments over three (3) quarters payable seven (7) months prior, four (4) months
prior, and on the final paycheck to the employee if sufficient notice is provided to the School District.
However, an employee’s receipt of compensation for unused sick leave shall be limited in an amount
to ensure the district is not subject to any IMRF 6% penalty. Any sick leave monies that are not paid
to the employee in his/her final paycheck because of the 6% penalty limit, will be considered a
retirement severance benefit and will be paid to the employee on the 65 th day after the employee’s
last day of work. This severance payment will not be treated as creditable earnings under IMRF. In
the event the amount due under this provision changes because of the number of accumulated hours
at termination, the final paycheck will reflect the appropriate adjustment. Whenever said benefit is
paid, only the unpaid unused sick days will be reported to Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund.
Upon the death of any employee qualified under this Section, the monies due for the time so
accumulated will be paid to the estate of the employee.

-13ARTICLE X: SUBSTITUTE OFFICE HELP
Section 1 In the event a clerical substitute, extra, or temporary clerical employee is hired to assist
or temporarily replace a regular employee in the District who is under this Agreement, the rate of
pay for that substitute shall be established by the Board of Education.
Any employee in classifications covered by this Agreement, who leaves the employment of the
District in good standing because of a reduction in staff as determined by the board of Education,
shall be paid at the rate of seventy percent (70%) of the beginning Class II rate for all time worked as
a substitute, extra, or temporary employee.
Section 2

Substitutes shall receive no fringe benefits during the time they are employed.

Section 3 Such substitute employees shall be used only to assist or supplement the regular
employees and shall not otherwise do any work that has been or is now begin done or will be done by
regular employees of the clerical or office staff in any classification, except in the absence of the
regular employee.
Section 4 Substitutes may be provided for any employee who is absent if a qualified substitute is
available.
Section 5 Substitute temporary employees shall receive no fringe benefits of this Agreement, except
that seniority earned on a temporary position shall be granted only when the employee is hired on a
permanent basis for that same position. At that time, all seniority earned as a temporary employee
on the same position shall be granted retroactively.
Section 6 A regular secretarial employee who subs for a regular secretary for more than 20 or more
days shall be paid at the rate of the filled position at step 1, but will not be paid less that her regular
pay.

-14ARTICLE XI: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1 Leaves of Absence: A Secretary may make a request for a leave of absence that will
include the following conditions:
A. The leave shall not be for more than one (1) year but may be extended upon review and approval
of the Board of Education
B. Seniority shall not accrue during the leave of absence.
C. At the time the request for a leave of absence is made, the Board will consider any statement
requesting a desire to return to their former position or a statement that the return assignment
may be at the discretion of the Administration and/or Board. Regardless of which option is
granted, that Secretary requesting the leave will be guaranteed that she will not lose her
classification or her rate of pay upon her return. The Secretary shall state specifically which
option she wants the Board to consider. Upon granting the leave of absence, the Board will then
notify the Secretary in writing the decision of the Board concerning her request.
D. For any leave of absence granted for six (6) months or more, that vacated position shall be posted
as a temporary position, giving any regularly employed Secretary an opportunity to move up to a
higher classification. Selection shall be as shown in Article III, Section 2, of this Agreement.
(Lateral or downward moves shall not be considered, nor will Education Assistants be eligible as
it pertains to this Section.) Leaves granted for less than six (6) months will be filled by a
substitute and the Secretary taking the leave will return to her former position.
E. The old position of the Secretary who transfers to the temporary position will be filled by a
substitute. If the Secretary who is on the leave of absence is allowed to return to her former
position, the Secretary occupying this temporary position shall be moved back to her former
position.
F. If the Secretary on a leave of absence resigns before her scheduled return, this
position shall be posted as permanent. Consideration for this permanent position
shall be the same as shown in Article III, Section 2, of this Agreement.
G. If no regularly employed Secretary wishes to move into a higher classification, as described
above, this temporary position shall be filled by a substitute.
Section 2 No work normally done by employees covered by this Agreement shall be done by any
employee in any other classification in the Unit 10 School District, unless agreed to by the SEIU
Union. The number of student workers shall remain as the same during the term of this Agreement.
Section 3 Insurance: The Board of Education shall provide a hospitalization, medical, and major
medical insurance program for full-time non-certificated personnel who enroll. The Board of
Education shall pay the individual coverage premium in full and shall provide payroll deductions of
the remaining premiums for full family coverage of any personnel desiring such additional coverage.
The Board of Education shall pay $75.00 per month in addition to the individual plan rate for those
full-time non-certificated personnel enrolled in the family plan. The insurance carrier will be
selected by the Board of Education, after consultation with the C.E.A. and S.E.I.U., provided that
there is no decrease in coverage. The Board provided insurance shall be for twelve (12) consecutive
months.

-15Article XI: General Provisions (continued)
For employees whose term of employment is twelve (12) months per year, insurance shall continue
for so long as the individual remains an employee of the District. For employees whose term of
employment is nine (9) months per year or more but less than twelve (12) months per year, coverage
shall be on a twelve (12) month per year basis for so long as the individual remains an employee of
the District.
Employees whose workweek is twenty-five (25) hours or more shall receive the full individual
premium payment as noted above. Those whose regular work week is at least seventeen and onehalf (17-1/2) hours but less than twenty-five (25) shall receive one-half of the individual premium
payment if enrolled in the individual plan. If the seventeen and one-half (17-1/2) but less than
twenty-five (25) hours employee enrolls in the family plan. The Board of Education shall pay an
additional $43.00 per month for dependent coverage.
Section 4 Any employee who is a member of any group recognized by the Board of Education, or
who has applied for membership in any such group, shall be granted a payroll deduction of dues
upon written request. Executed dues deduction request forms shall be furnished to the Direction of
Business Affairs prior to the first month in which the deduction goes into effect. The District shall
not be responsible for any make-up deductions. Such authorization for dues deductions shall
continue in effect from year to year unless revoked in writing prior to June 15 of the ensuing year.
Section 5 When an employee in classifications covered by this Agreement is required to attend a
meeting, they shall be paid for all time so spent.
Section 6 Nine and one half (9-1/2) and ten (10) month employees shall not be expected to work on
weather cancellation days. If a 9-1/2 or 10 months employee works on a weather cancellation day,
the day will count as one of the employee’s required work days (FLEX days). Twelve (12) month
employees may request the use of personal or vacation days (in one-half or full day increments),
without prior approval by the building principal, direct supervisor or district’s Human Resources
Office, when a weather cancellation day has been announced by the district superintendent or
his/her designee.
Section 7 The Board shall grant up to three (3) days personal leave per year at full pay subject to
the following conditions:
1. Such leave shall be cumulative up to a maximum of five (5) days.
2. Once an employee has accumulated the maximum of five (5) unused personal leave days, any
additional personal leave days granted to the employee pursuant to this section will accumulate
as sick leave.
3. Any request for personal leave shall be made at least three (3) calendar days prior to the date
requested (except in emergencies) to the office of Human Resources.
4. It should be understood that permission would be granted only if this request is for important
business reasons which cannot be transacted outside of school hours.
If the personal leave day is denied, written reasons for the denial will be given within three (3) days.

-16Article XI: General Provisions (continued)
Section 8

Payday shall be every other Friday as established by Board Policy.

Section 9 Employees covered by this Agreement will be guaranteed no loss in pay while serving
jury duty or appearing as a subpoenaed witness in any court action. The difference in pay above that
paid for jury duty will be paid to the employee.
Section 10 All new employees are required to pass a medical examination at School District
expense; such examination to be designed by the School District and administered by a physician
named by the School District. If the employee does not pass the medical examination, his/her
employment will be terminated immediately. If an employee is required to have subsequent medical
examinations as a condition of continued employment or for payment of sick leave benefits, the cost
of the examinations shall be at the expense of the employer. In the event of a strike, work stoppage,
or any other disruption of school operation, any Local 316 Service Employees International Union,
calling in ill must present a doctor’s excuse at the employee’s expense.
Section 11 When a summer school program requires employment of a Secretary, it will be offered
first to the available employees in the building where the regular program is normally held on a
seniority basis after the required procedure stipulated in the Educational Assistants’ Agreement has
been followed. If that program is transferred to another building during the summer, the original
building employees are eligible first for the assignment for that particular program. If any Secretary
is not available at the time the job is open because they are already working for Unit 10 School
District on their regular position, such Secretary shall be eligible to work on a seniority basis in the
summer school position when their regular job is completed. Reasons other than working for Unit 10
School District or illness will not be accepted for late placement in a summer program. If the illness
exceeds three (3) days, a doctor’s statement is required to support the illness. The Board of
Education is not obligated to make that position available whenever said illness exceeds five (5)
working days. The rate of pay will be determined in accordance with guidelines established by the
Board of Education.
Secretaries working less than twelve (12) months who are interested in summer school employment
shall respond to the summer school vacancy postings for the position in which they are interested.
Any Secretary working 20 or more consecutive work days in the summer shall be paid for any
recognized holiday (July 4) that occurs during their summer employment period.
Section 12 Any regular secretarial employee who is called back to work on their regular job during
the summer months when regular school is not in session will be paid their regular hourly rate that
is received during the regular time of employment.
Section 13 If a regular less than 12 month secretary is interested in working as a substitute during
Christmas and spring breaks and during the summer months, the employee should notify the
appropriate administrator responsible for employment in that department, in writing, indicating
their interest at the start of any school year. This information will be disseminated to the proper
supervisor. Failing to notify that office relieves the District of consideration of this employee. The
Board is not required to fill the substitute position with regular staff and/or on a seniority basis.
Regular employees who work as substitutes will be paid the standard substitute rate of pay as
applicable to Substitute Secretaries and Educational Assistants.
Section 14

No temporary employee shall work while any permanent employee is on layoff.

-17Article XI: General Provisions (cont’d.)
Section 15 The mileage reimbursement rate shall be 23 cents a mile beginning January 1, 1998,
and shall increase 3 cents each January 1 thereafter until the IRS rate is reached. From that time
on the mileage reimbursement rate shall be the same as the IRS rate.
Section 16 Should any Article, Section, or Clause of this Agreement be declared illegal by court of
competent jurisdiction, by State or Federal law, or otherwise changed by fact-finding or arbitration,
said Article, Section, or Clause, as the case may be, shall automatically be terminated from this
Agreement.
Section 17 The Board of Education and S.E.I.U., Local 316, agrees not to discriminate against any
employee because of sex, race, color, or creed.
Section 18 The interpretation of this contract for S.E.I.U., Local 316, shall be made by the
Chairman of the negotiating committee for this present contract, the Business Representative, and
the present officers; for the Board of Education, interpretation shall be made by the Chairman of the
Board negotiating committee, the Superintendent, and the Assistant Superintendents.
Section 19 All newly created secretarial positions will be established as Class I positions unless
otherwise classified by the Board of Education after conferring with the Service Employees
International Union (SEIU Local 316) before posting the position.
The following positions shall be class IV:
High School Principal Secretary
Middle School Principal Secretary
Director of Special Education & Related Services Secretary
Accounts Payable Clerk
Vocational Director Secretary
Education Center Secretary
Class III secretaries are secretaries, regardless of position, who have seven or more years of
employment as a secretary with the school district.
Class II secretaries are secretaries, regardless of position, who are in their fourth, fifth, or sixth
years of employment as a secretary with the school district. There will be three steps in Class II. A
secretary moving from Class II to Class III will move to Step 1 in Class III.
Class I secretaries are secretaries, regardless of position, who are in their first three years of
employment as a secretary with the school district. There will be three steps in Class I. A secretary
moving from Class I to Class II will move to Step 1 in Class II.
Section 20 Telephone facilities shall be made available to personnel for their reasonable use for
school related business. Personal calls on school phones, except in emergencies, are discouraged. If a
personal long distance toll call is made, this charge must be billed to the employee’s home.
Section 21 This Agreement shall remain in full force and effect from July 1, 2012 through June 30,
2013. If a new Agreement has not been reached prior to the expiration date, this agreement shall
remain in full force and effect until a new agreement is reached.

-18Article XI: General Provisions (continued)
Section 22 Employees covered by this Agreement shall not engage in a strike except under the
conditions as shown in Section 13 of the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act (H.B. 1530).
Section 23 Employees who are required to file a Statement of Economic Interests must file the form
and provide the school Business Office with a copy of the employee’s receipt of filing not later than
the required filing date. Notification of the need to provide a copy of receipt to the Board Office shall
be given 30 days in advance of any withholding of salary payments. In the event such evidence is
not provided to the Business Office, the District shall withhold salary payments to the employee
until compliance is provided.
Section 24 Fair Share-The following provision shall apply to members of the bargaining unit who
were members of S.E.I.U., Local 316 on or after November 6, 1991, and to all members of the
bargaining unit hired after November 6, 1991:
1. Each bargaining unit member, as a condition of his/her employment, on or before thirty (30) days
from the date of commencement of duties or the effective date of this Agreement, whichever is
later, shall join the Union or pay a fair share fee to the Union equivalent to the amount of dues
uniformly required of members of the Union, including local, state, and national dues.
2. In the event that the bargaining unit member does not pay his/her fair share fee directly to the
Union by a certain date as established by the Union, the employer shall deduct the fair share fee
from the wages of the non-member.
3. Such fee shall be paid to the Union by the employer no later than ten (10) days following
deduction.
4. In the event of any legal action against the employer brought in a court of administrative agency
because of its compliance with this Article, the Union agrees to defend such action at its own
expense and through its own counsel provided:
1. The employer gives immediate notice of such action in writing to the Union, and permits
the Union intervention as a party if it so desires; and
2. The employer gives full and complete cooperation to the Union and its counsel in
securing and giving evidence, obtaining witnesses, and making relevant information
available at both trial and all appellate levels.
Section 25 In the event of an absence related to a duty-connected injury, the District shall provide
only workmen’s compensation as determined by the insurance carrier.
Section 26 The District shall not use volunteers to avoid hiring additional employees. Volunteers
may not be used where there are certification requirements, violation of IDPH regulations,
confidentiality concerns, or in situations where special training or knowledge is required to do the
job. Volunteers may not be in restricted areas, such as in food service kitchens, behind office
counters, or in custodial closets, without the express approval of an employee who regularly works in
that area.

-19Article XI: General Provisions (continued)
If an employee objects to the District’s use of a volunteer in a specific situation, the employee shall
have the right to submit a written objection to the use of the volunteer with his/her supervisor. The
objection must state what the volunteer is doing that the employee finds objectionable and why
he/she finds it objectionable. The employee’s supervisor and the employee shall attempt to reach an
agreement regarding the situation. Failing to reach an agreement, the grievance procedure shall be
followed.
Volunteers must meet acceptable standards of dress and conduct.
Section 27

“Union” members will be evaluated on an annual basis by his/her immediate supervisor.

Class

Step

Years

2012-13

I

1
2
3

16.37
16.81
17.26

II

1
2
3

17.77
18.31
18.82

III

1
2
3
4
5
6

1
2&3
4 thru 6
7 thru 9
10 thru 12
13 and over

19.49
20.16
20.83
21.50
22.16
22.85

IV

1
2
3
4
5
6

1
2&3
4&6
7 thru 9
10 thru 12
13 and over

22.85
23.36
23.90
24.41
24.92
25.44

This reflects an overall 3.14% increase for 2012/13.
A RIF (reduction in force) substitute rate is determined by multiplying the Class 2, Step 1 rate by
75%.
When a person is initially employed, that person begins on the first step of the salary schedule in the
appropriate classification of the position. Nine and one-half (9-1/2) and 10 month employees hired
between July 1 and December 31 advance to the next step of the salary schedule on September 1 of
the next school year. Nine and one-half (9-1/2) and ten (10) month employees hired between

-20January 1 and June 30 remain on the initial step of the salary schedule for the next school year.
Twelve (12) month employees hired between July 1 and December 31 advance to the next step of the
salary schedule on July 1 of the next fiscal year. Twelve (12) month employees hired between
January 1 and June 30 remain on the initial step of the salary schedule for the next fiscal year.
Steps are earned by years of experience within a Class. Experience earned in a lower Class
assignment. One must earn the experience within that Class. Excepting 2012/13 school year where
agree to a freeze in steps. Steps will resume during the next bargaining session.
In the event a person moves from a Local 316 Secretarial assignment to a higher class, the person
would begin on the first step of the Class unless the employee would have a pay reduction. If the
schedule provides a pay reduction, the employee would move to the lowest step level, which does not
result in a pay decrease. The employee would remain on that step level until sufficient experience
has been achieved to legitimately qualify them for a higher step.
Persons who lose their assignment in a Class due to a reduction in force or otherwise as provided by
the contract and have to bump into a lower Class can take their Class and Step with them into the
lower Class assignment but cannot achieve a higher step in the higher Class so long as they remain
in a lower Class.
Effective March 1, 1993, deductions from employees for IMRF shall be placed in a tax-sheltered
status.

-21IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this Agreement is entered into this _________ board of
Education of Collinsville Community Unit District No. 10, through its President and
Secretary, and by the Service Employees International Union, Local 316, through its duly
authorized representatives.

BOARD OF EDUCATION, COLLINSVILLE
COMMUNITY UNIT DISTRICT NO. 10

By____________________________________
President
By____________________________________
Secretary

SERVICE EMPLOYEES INTERNATION
UNION, LOCAL 316
By____________________________________
President
By____________________________________
Secretary
By____________________________________
Business Representative

-22-
