BUDGET
Fiscal Year July 1, 2017 to June 30, 2018

Patti Garrett, Mayor
Fred Boykin, Mayor pro tem
Scott Drake, Commissioner
Tony Powers, Commissioner
Brian Smith, Commissioner

BUDGET
Fiscal Year July 1, 2017 to June 30, 2018

City of Decatur, Georgia
509 North McDonough Street
P.O. Box 220
Decatur, GA 30031
404.370.4100 phone
678.553.6518 fax

www.decaturga.com

FISCAL YEAR 2017-2018

Table of Contents
BUDGET MESSAGE

Message

BUDGET NARRATIVE

3

SUMMARY OF FUND BUDGETS
Fund Organizational Chart
Fund Balance Summary – All Funds
Summary of Expenditures – All Funds
Summary of Revenue & Expenditures – General Fund
All Funds Overview

31
32
33
34
35

GENERAL FUND
Revenue Summary Overview
Personnel Position Summary
Revenue Summary
Expenditure Summary
Revenue Detail
Expenditure Detail
City Organizational Chart
Department Directory
Department Detail

51
55
56
58
63
69
70
71
72

CAPITAL PROJECTS FUNDS
Capital Projects Fund Narrative
Capital Projects Summary
Capital Projects Fund Detail
Cemetery Capital Improvements Fund Detail
General Obligation Bond Fund Detail
2010 Urban Redevelopment Agency Fund Detail
2013 Urban Redevelopment Agency Fund Detail
URA-Callaway Fund
Public Facilities Authority Fund
Debt Service Summary
Debt Service Fund Detail

101
109
110
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
134

OTHER FUNDS
Children & Youth Services Fund
Emergency Telephone System (E911) Fund
Solid Waste Fund
Stormwater Utility Fund
Conference Center/Parking Deck Fund
Hotel/Motel Tax Fund
Tree Bank Fund
Confiscated Drug Fund
Community Grants Fund

138
140
142
144
147
147
148
148
149

APPENDIX A – BUDGET GUIDE
APPENDIX B – GLOSSARY
APPENDIX C – FINANCIAL POLICIES
APPENDIX D – POSITION CLASSIFICATION PLAN
APPENDIX E – 2017 SALARY SURVEY RESULTS
APPENDIX F – DEMOGRAPHIC AND STATISTICAL INFORMATION
APPENDIX G – 2016 CITIZEN SURVEY RESULTS
APPENDIX H – MUNICIPAL BENCHMARK REPORT

CITY OF DECATUR

v

Award of Distinguished Budget Presentation
The Government Finance Officers Association of the United States and Canada
(GFOA) presented a Distinguished Budget Presentation Award to the City of Decatur,
Georgia for its annual budget for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2016.
In order to receive this award, a governmental unit must publish a budget document
that meets program criteria as a policy document, as an operations guide, as a financial
plan, and as a communications device.
This award is valid for a period of one year only. We believe our proposed budget
continues to conform to program requirements, and we are submitting it to GFOA to
determine its eligibility for another award.

vi

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

CITY OF DECATUR

vii

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts

To:

City Commissioners

From:

Peggy Merriss
City Manager

Date:

May 15, 2017

Subject:

2016-2017 Revised Budget Estimates
2017-2018 Proposed Budget Estimates

The purpose of this budget message is to provide an introduction to the 2016-2017 Revised Budget
Estimates and the 2017-2018 Proposed Budget Estimates with a focus on highlights and a high
level overview of process, environment and policy goals incorporated into the recommended
budgets.
The “Budget Narrative” (pages 3 – 27) is an extremely important part of the budget document and it
is a key part of the City’s overall fiscal plan. It will be necessary to read the narrative for a full
understanding of the basis of funding and expenditure recommendations included in this budget.
The narrative and department budgets highlight quantitative and qualitative measures as well as
results from the 2016 citizen survey and do a thorough job of describing the work plans for the
coming year and the successes and accomplishments for the City from the past year.
The “All Funds Overview” (pages 35 – 48) and the “Revenue Summary Overview” (pages 51-54)
provide specific information regarding the 2016-2017 Revised Budget Estimates and the 20172018 Proposed Budget Estimates for all funds, including detailed information regarding the General
Fund. The “Capital Fund Narrative” and budgets (pages 101-124) describe the City’s capital
program and provides specific project listings with each budget.
You will be asked to take final action on the budget on June 19, 2017. We have also scheduled an
extended budget work session with the City Commissioners from 3:30pm – 6:30pm before the
regular City Commission Meeting on Monday, June 5, 2017. The City will also use the Open City Hall
forum to encourage comments via the City’s website. Copies of the budget will be available on the
City’s website, at City Hall and at the Decatur Library.

Highlights





Acquisition of the United Methodist Children’s Home property and implementation of an
associated operations budget.
Estimated real property digest increase of 5%.
Increase in the General Fund operating millage rate from 9.30 mills to 9.50 mills.
The debt service millage remains the same at .92 mills for the 2007 general obligation debt
but increases from 1.57 mills to 1.97 mills for debt service related to the 2016 school
general obligation bond referendum.








Use of $1,180,030 in general fund balance in order to stay within financial policy guidelines.
The 2017-2018 Proposed General Fund Budget increases 3.5% from the 2016-2017 Revised
General Fund Budget.
A 5% market based salary range adjustment effective January 1, 2018 is recommended.
Funding of 2.5% in-step merit based salary increases.
Group health insurance costs increased necessitating an employee contribution increase
and some plan modifications.
The City’s required 8% contribution to the Employees’ Retirement System remains the
same.

Vision-Based Budget
A vision-based budget is developed to sustain and achieve the outcomes that the community has
identified as most important. Each department determines what it does to support these common
goals and the budget communicates to the public how the allocation of resources reflects
community priorities and its vision for the future.
In order to produce the 2017-2018 Proposed Budget Estimates, we relied on information provided
in the 2010 Strategic Plan and the results of citizen and employee surveys to provide guidance
regarding the community’s priorities. Ultimately five interdepartmental vision-based budgeting
teams were part of the budget process, one for each of the four principles articulated in the 2010
Strategic Plan and one to focus on an additional principle that supports the City of Decatur’s
organizational commitment to exceptional public service based on innovation, professional
expertise and creativity.
The City’s vision-based budget consists of three main elements - a descriptive narrative;
identification of quantitative and qualitative measures that relate activities and financial resources
directly to the community’s goals to determine if we are making a difference; and, broad
organization-wide budgets that show how each strategic principle is supported financially. As part
of the budget presentations in June, we will also provide a report that compares selected Decatur
performance measures to other cohort cities from across the United States.

Overall Financial Condition
The City’s mature economy, its overall real estate market stability and desirability, long-term
growth management strategy and dedication to superior services make it possible for the City to
remain on strong financial footing. Over the years, the City Commission has made strategic
decisions that have positioned the City to better withstand financial stress. For the past thirty years,
the City’s growth has been directed to redevelopment of undervalued and underutilized properties
in the central business district and in smaller neighborhood commercial areas. The reasonable scale
of this type of growth has provided opportunities for residential and commercial spaces to be
absorbed by the market instead of creating a significant number of vacancies.
During the past year there have been continued improvements in the overall economy which have
supported stable economic growth for the City. We remain a regional destination for restaurants,
shops, festivals and special events. The continued high quality of the City Schools of Decatur is an
important part of the overall appeal of the City. City services which focus on high-touch and
personal attention contribute to a “clean, green, active and attractive, safe and secure” community
that is a very desirable place to live, work and play. The City represents a highly desirable, niche

Message - 2

market in the metropolitan Atlanta area. Its reputation for political stability, quality management
and a commitment to long-term planning puts the City in the right place to continue its healthy
financial position.
The City Commission has adopted financial policies for the overall operation of the City of Decatur.
The purpose of having financial policies is to enable the City to achieve and maintain a long-term
positive financial condition. The policies include direction on providing a conservative approach to
budgeting that generally means expenditures are calculated using the best estimate of true cost
without discounting and that revenues are estimated at a level that would reasonably be collected
within the fiscal year based on historic collection data, as well as realistic expectations about
existing and future economic conditions and activities.
Overall, the City maintains a strong financial position by continuing to utilize conservative fiscal
practices and by making strategic decisions that support the community’s vision. This is confirmed
by the City’s AA+ bond rating from Standard & Poor’s and a Moody’s rating of Aa2.
The 2016-2017 Revised Budget Estimates and the 2017-2018 Proposed Budget Estimates were
prepared with the knowledge that residential re-development and home sales continue to reflect
growing demand in a limited market. In the past two years three commercial redevelopments have
been completed and the occupancy and rental rates are meeting projections. Two large commercial
redevelopments are underway and should be completed in 2018. Private sector capital investment
continues to occur. However, we have also taken into account that future economic prosperity is
not a given and we continue to base our budget estimates on providing the best possible services at
the least possible cost. We also realize that the community expects responsive high quality services
which are provided by City employees who are committed to improvement, innovation and public
service.
The 2016-2017 Revised General Fund Budget is $43,010 less (-0.18%) than the Approved 20162017 General Fund Budget. The 2017-2018 Proposed General Fund Budget is $819,550 (+3.3%)
more than the 2016-2017 Proposed General Fund Budget.

Real Property Digest
The value of the real estate digest is very important to the City of Decatur budget as real property
taxes are 62% of all general fund revenues. During the recession period from 2008 – 2012, the
City’s real estate digest remained relatively flat, showing a 1.2% increase over the five year period.
Comparatively speaking, this was outstanding. As the economy has rebounded, the real estate
digest has shown healthy improvement consistent with real estate sales and development.
Unlike prior years, the DeKalb County Tax Assessor’s Office has not provided any preliminary
property digest information. It is our understanding that we will receive a digest report at the end
of May. This has made developing revenue estimates more difficult. We developed the 2017-2018
Proposed Budgets based on a conservative real estate digest increase of 5%. We are hopeful that
we will be able to make a more detailed report at the work session and public hearing scheduled for
the June 5 City Commission meeting.
At this point, we are proceeding as if we will need to hold public hearings and advertise a tax
increase as required by the “Truth in Taxation” legislation. We have reserved Monday, June 12,

Message - 3

2017, at 6:00pm and Monday, June 19, 2017, at 3:30pm and 7:30pm for the required public
hearings.
While current tax digest information is not yet available, real estate sales show a 9% increase in
the average sales price of a single-family home from $574,460 in January 2016 to $626,260 in
January 2017; and, a 20% increase in the average single-family home sales price from $520,720 in
January 2015 to $626,260 in January, 2017.
Current permitting activity along with current and anticipated construction expected to take place
in the remainder of 2017 through late-2018 indicates that property values will continue to increase.
We believe the reevaluation of existing real estate, as well as new value from construction of singlefamily homes and the value of significant improvements to existing homes will still be a strong
positive contributor to the overall tax digest. New value will be added as commercial developments
recently completed are fully occupied and their full value is added to the tax digest in 2017. New
developments currently under construction should be completed in 2018 and will impact the 2019
real estate digest values.

Millage Rates and Increased Homestead Exemptions
Based on the estimated 5% increase in the property digest value, it is recommended that the
General Fund Millage increase from 9.30 mills to 9.50 mills. Increasing the General Fund millage
will result in a $45 increase in City of Decatur property taxes for a property valued at $500,000.
This increase is necessary due to the City’s pending purchase of the United Methodist Children’s
Home property.
As part of the November 8, 2016 election, Decatur voters approved various homestead exemption
increases that apply to the General Fund, Capital Improvement Fund and the DDA Fund. All
approved exemption increases were reflected in the first installment billing in April, 2017. The
estimated reduction in general fund real property taxes is $385,000 for fiscal year 2016-2017 and
$770,000 for fiscal year 2017-2018.
The debt service millage for the 2007 general obligation bonds remains at .92 mills. The 2017 debt
service millage for school system capital improvements increases from 1.57 mills to 1.97 mills
because the first principal payment will be due in August 2018 and funds must be collected in 2017
in order to meet the repayment schedule.
Due to capital needs, it is recommended that the Capital Improvement Fund Millage remain at 1 mill
and due to resident, business and visitor requests for increased community engagement activities,
improved public spaces, and business development, it is recommended that the DDA Fund Millage
remain at .38 mills.

United Methodist Children’s Home
Earlier this year the City Commission saw an amazing opportunity to take ownership of 77 acres
owned by the United Methodist Children’s Home (UMCH). Preliminary private development
possibilities provided to UMCH indicated that somewhere north of 600 townhomes could be
developed on the property if it was sold to a developer. The property is immediately adjacent to the
existing southeastern city limits and about one-third of the property is natural open green space. It
also contains existing playing fields, a gymnasium, swimming pool and administrative and

Message - 4

warehouse buildings. In order to meet community and strategic plan goals for increasing the
amount of open natural green space and to meet demands for additional active living facilities, on
April 19, 2017 the City Commission authorized purchase of the UMCH property for $40 million.
We are working on the financing plan and anticipate the City of Decatur Public Facilities Authority
issuing bonds in late July 2017 and closing on the property in August 2017. In addition to the
purchase cost of the property, $500,000 will be included for playing field maintenance and
improvement. In 2018 a community master planning effort will be held in order to determine the
future use of this unique property.
We have budgeted a $750,000 transfer from the General Fund balance to the Public Facilities
Authority Fund in order to cover debt service interest payments. We anticipate that the capital
improvement millage will need to be increased by 1.2 mills in 2018 to account for the debt service
required to pay the bonded interest and principal.
We anticipate taking possession of the property in October 2017. At that time we will become
responsible for maintenance (such as cutting grass), utilities and insurance. In order to use the
gymnasium we will need one Active Living staff member to be present to operate, supervise and
manage the facility. We also believe we will need two facility maintenance staff to work on the
grounds and facilities and provide some level of security for the 77-acre property. Initial estimated
operating and maintenance costs of approximately $500,000 are included in the 2017-2018
Proposed Budget Estimates which results in a recommendation of a millage increase from 9.30
mills to 9.50 mills. If the new property tax digest comes in higher than 5%, it is anticipated that the
millage rate recommendation can be reduced.
The debt service and operating costs of purchasing the UMCH property for the overall 2017-2018
Proposed Budget Estimates is $1,190,000. Without this expenditure, proposed use of General Fund
balance could be reduced by about two-thirds and the small millage increase would not be needed.

Personnel Services
The City is committed to continuing to provide an exceptional level of public safety, public works
and quality of life services that contribute to the stability of property values and have made the City
a desirable place in which to live, work, invest in and visit. In the most recent 2016 Citizen Survey,
94% of respondents rated the overall quality of life in Decatur as “excellent” or “good.” Also, 90% of
the respondents rated services provided by the City of Decatur “excellent or “good.” This resulted in
Decatur being ranked among the top 10% of communities that used the survey and asked the same
questions. City staff is an integral part of assuring that quality of life and services meet the
demanding expectations of our community and rewarding those efforts is an important part of the
City’s financial strategy.
The 2017-2018 Proposed Budget Estimates incorporate funding for 2.5% merit increases for
employees who are still below the maximum in their salary range. These merit adjustments occur
throughout the budget year on an annual basis. As part of this year’s budget process, the City
conducted a salary survey of metropolitan Atlanta cities and used data collected by the Georgia
Department of Community Affairs for benchmark comparisons. Appendix E contains the results for
benchmark positions. The City strives to maintain salary ranges above the median offered in the
Atlanta metropolitan area for the same or similar work. Based on the results of the survey, and to
retain an excellent workforce and be competitive in recruiting new staff, we are recommending

Message - 5

shifting salary ranges by ten-percent and authorizing a 5% a merit-based general market
adjustment for full-time employees effective January 1, 2018.
All full-time employees will be eligible including those who have been at the maximum salary rate
for their position and who have not received an increase in compensation in the last three years.
The cost of the in-step merit increase is estimated to be about $140,000. The cost of the meritbased general market salary range adjustment is estimated to be approximately $330,000, for a
total cost of $470,000, or 2% of general fund expenditures.
In addition to the changes for full-time staff, we are recommending a $2.00 per hour increase for
part-time staff in the Children and Youth Services Division. We believe this will significantly
enhance our recruitment efforts and stabilize our retention effort for staff in our after-school and
camp programs.
The 2017-2018 Proposed Budget Estimates include the addition of four new positions, three for
operations at the United Methodist Children’s Home property and one to meet department
operational needs for the Community and Economic Development.
Details on personnel expenses are included in the “All Funds Overview” later in this document.
Including health care costs, fees and stop-loss coverage, the wellness initiative, the smoking
cessation program and a weight loss program, the City’s overall health care costs per employee are
budgeted to increase about 7% in the 2017-2018 Proposed Budget Estimates. The overall costs are
split with the City absorbing 80% of the cost while employees and retirees will contribute 20%
towards the plan. In order to maintain the 80/20 split, we are recommending a 6% increase in
employee contributions to health care costs in the 2017-2018 Proposed Budget. The employee
wellness premium reduction plan remains funded. We believe that this investment assists in
reducing future health care costs, less use of sick leave and increased employee productivity.
All full-time employees are also members of the City of Decatur Employees’ Retirement System. The
City’s system offers conservative benefits to employees who have served the community over a long
period of time. The City’s required employer contribution to the system has remained steady over
the past ten years, fluctuating between 6.25% - 9.07% of payroll. The budgeted employer
contribution for fiscal year 2017-2018 remains at 8% of payroll or approximately $902,460. The
total required employer contribution is approximately 3% of total operating expenditures.
Employee contributions to the system average 14% for public safety employees who are not
members of Social Security and 8% for general employees who participate in Social Security.
The City relies on private contractors to provide certain services when it makes financial sense and
the quality of service can be assured. The City currently has contracts for building inspection
services, geographic information systems (GIS), information technology services, payroll, recycling,
athletic field maintenance and swimming pool management. These contracts are managed and
supervised closely to assure that costs are less than or equal to what they would be for the City to
provide the same or similar services.
The City has taken steps to assure financial security and to support our ability to provide the high
level of services expected by our community. The City is an organization that is positioned to take
advantage of opportunities, capable of making appropriate investments in our employees and
committed to offering superior services for the least possible costs.

Message - 6

Fund Balance
The City’s financial policies also provide direction for maintaining an adequate fund balance equal
to 20 to 30 percent of operating expenses. Maintaining an adequate fund balance allows
governments the ability to weather financial difficulties without having to depend on millage rate
increases or service delivery reductions. Due to the City’s history of conservative budgeting
practices that estimates expenditures fully and limits revenue estimates to likely possible
collections, the City has been able to maintain a stable fund balance.
The 2015-2016 Revised General Fund budget estimated a $639,830 contribution to fund balance
but the actual contribution was $1,211,185, resulting in a fund balance as of June 30, 2016 of
$8,420,470. The 2016-2017 Proposed General Fund budget anticipated using $1,224,340 from the
general fund balance to provide enough revenue to cover 2016-2017 Proposed General Fund
expenditures. Due primarily to increased revenues, the 2016-2017 Revised General Fund Budget
estimates that the use of fund balance will be reduced to $554,110. The estimated general fund
balance at June 30, 2017 is estimated to be approximately $7,866,360 or 32% of 2016-2017
Revised General Fund expenditures.
The 2017-2018 Proposed General Fund budget anticipates using approximately $1,180,030 of the
general fund balance. This should decrease the general fund balance at June 30, 2018 to
approximately $6,686,330, or 27% of 2017-2018 Proposed General Fund expenditures. The use of
fund balance is appropriate to cover the costs of one-time, non-recurring expenses in order to keep
the fund balance within policy parameters. For 2017-2018, fund balance will used to pay for the
initial interest payment for purchase of the United Methodist Children’s Home, to cover the costs of
updates to the Community Transportation and Greenspace master plans, for information
technology security set-up fees, imaging old City Commission Meeting minutes and phase 2 for an
impact fee assessment.
The City will still retain sufficient general fund balance to provide resources in case there is a need
for unforeseen or emergency expenditures or to provide resources to take advantage of
unanticipated opportunities consistent with supporting the City’s strategic plan.

Challenges
HOST and adoption of a Special Purpose Local Option Sales Tax (SPLOST)
The City currently receives a distribution from the capital improvement portion of the county-wide
Homestead Option Sales Tax (HOST) sales tax that is meant to equalize the benefit between city and
county taxpayers from paying the one percent sales tax. The distribution is calculated based the
value of owner-occupied residential property within a city, the DeKalb County millage rates for
special
service districts and on a formula that shares the proceeds among all cities in DeKalb County. In
November, 2015 local referendums were held and the City of Tucker was established. In November,
2016 a successful referendum established the City of Stonecrest. As it currently stands, the addition
of the City of Tucker does not decrease the City of Decatur’s share of the HOST capital

Message - 7

improvements funding. An analysis of the effect of the City of Stonecrest has not yet been
published.
However, we believe that DeKalb County will actively pursue the adoption of a special purpose local
option sales tax (SPLOST) which would result in significant changes to the HOST. For the SPLOST to
go forward, voters would have to approve what is being referred to as an E-HOST (equalized-HOST)
that would use 100% of the proceeds from the HOST one percent sales tax to fund homestead
exemptions to be applied to the cost of services paid for at the same level by all county owneroccupied taxpayers to include the DeKalb County Maintenance and Operations (M&O) millage and
the Hospital Authority Assessment (Grady). E-HOST proceeds would not be available to fund any
special tax district (i.e., City) tax.
It is anticipated that SPLOST funding would be based on a formula previously negotiated in 2016.
Details are not currently available. Depending on the particulars of the SPLOST and EHOST that are
approved, there could be implications for the City’s 2018-2019 and forward capital improvement
and debt service budgets.
Open Space and Greenspace Acquisition and Maintenance
The City has been budgeting a token amount of resources, approximately $50,000 per year for the
purchase of open space and green space and has had success in acquiring tax parcels and donated
parcels near or adjacent to existing City properties or along streams and creeks. The City has also
been able to reserve $500,000 for purchase of 16 parcels adjacent to Dearborn Park.
We are currently under contract to purchase the United Methodist Children’s Home which contains
at least 22 acres of open natural greenspace. There has been strong support communicated to the
City Commission for creation of additional open space/green space in downtown Decatur. We were
able to work with the City Schools of Decatur (CSD) and the Decatur Housing Authority (DHA) to
secure community use of greenspace at the corner of West Trinity Place and Commerce Drive until
CSD needs to construct a building and then we will have access to shared greenspace for the
downtown community.
The City Commission has also discussed the importance of open space and green space acquisition
throughout the City. We will continue to pursue options as resources allow. In order to make any
major purchases or improvements, there would need to be a new source of funding.

Millage Rate Adoption
The 1999 General Assembly adopted O.C.G.A. § 48-5-32.1, known as the "Truth in Taxation" law. It
requires every levying authority (i.e., the City) and every recommending authority (i.e., the City
Schools) to take the percentage of the digest increase due to property reassessments and calculate
the operations millage rate (debt service is not included) reduction due to the increased digest. To
the extent that the recommended operations millage rate exceeds the "roll-back" rate, certain
advertisements and public hearings are required. This requirement began with the certified 2000
digest. The current combined operation millage rate is 10.68 mills. The proposed combined
operations millage is 10.88, an increase of .20 mills. However until we get a real property digest
report from DeKalb County, we cannot calculate the roll-back millage rate. We do expect to get a
report by the end of May 2017 and believe that we can meet the requirements of the law providing
a legal advertisement, issuing a press release and holding three public hearings. It is recommended

Message - 8

that the required public hearings be held on Monday, June 12, 2017 at 6:00pm and Monday, June
19, 2017 at 3:30pm and 7:30pm. In addition, we have scheduled an extended work session from
3:30pm – 6:30pm before your regular meeting on June 5, 2017.

CONCLUSION
The City’s objective is to provide quality services that reflect the community’s goals and vision
within reasonable fiscal limits. This means that we have to take a strategic approach that relies on
and builds upon the City’s strengths while preserving and protecting community financial
resources. To that end, the 2016-2017 Revised Budget Estimates and the 2017-2018 Proposed
Budget Estimates include funding for a number of programs and projects that are responsive to
community needs and concerns but also position the City well for the future.
The 2017-2018 Proposed Budget Estimates assure that that City will maintain its capacity to offer
the high-level, high-quality services desired by our residents. This budget also supports our
continued commitment to making the necessary infrastructure improvements and investments that
will benefit our community long into the future. We remain committed to our conservative fiscal
policies that allow us to meet the needs of the community today while assuring future generations
will have the same access to resources and quality of life we currently enjoy. Below is a summary of
property tax millage rates since 2012 and the recommended 2017 millage rates:
2012
Levy
10.20

2013
Levy
10.20

2014
Levy
10.20

2015
Levy
9.70

2016
Levy
9.30

2017
Levy
9.50

General Fund
General Fund
Cap. Improv.
Downtown Dev.
Authority
Operations Total:

1.10

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

.38
11.68

.38
11.58

.38
11.58

.38
11.08

.38
10.68

.38
10.88

2007 Bonds
2015 School Bonds
Bonded Debt Total:

1.32
0
1.32

1.42
0
1.42

1.42
0
1.42

.92
1.57
2.49

.92
1.57
2.49

.92
1.97
2.89

TOTAL:

13.00

13.00

13.00

13.57

13.17

13.77

Completion of the 2016-2017 Revised Budget Estimates and 2017-2018 Proposed Budget
Estimates would not be possible without the assistance of Accounting and Personnel staff, the
teamwork and support shown by City employees in all departments, the Narrative Teams and
particularly without the work of Assistant City Manager Andrea Arnold and Budget & Performance
Measurement Manager Meredith Roark.
I will be glad to review the following budget proposals with you at your convenience.

Message - 9

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts

Budget
Narrative
Budget FY 2017-2018

FISCAL YEAR 2017-2018

Budget
Narrative
irst chartered as a municipality by the State of Georgia in 1823, the City of
Decatur serves as the county seat of DeKalb County, a large, urban county
in the Atlanta metropolitan area. After decades of population decline,
Decatur’s population has been on the increase since 1990 and will soon
exceed the 22,000 person census count reached in 1960. The City currently
occupies a land area of approximately 4.4 square miles making it one of
the most densely populated cities in the State of Georgia. However, the City’s commitment to a long-range vision of balanced growth and development has resulted in a community well-known for its high quality of life, vibrant commercial districts and as a great
example of Smart Growth in the region.

F

The City of Decatur
will assure a high
quality of life
for its residents,
businesses and
visitors both today
and in the future.

Decatur’s central location in DeKalb County and proximity to the City of Atlanta and Emory University make the City of Decatur an attractive location for a wide range of professional service, legal, financial, medical and creative/technology businesses. Decatur is home
to educational institutions like Agnes Scott College and Columbia Theological Seminary, as
well as the headquarters for a number of non-profit organizations including the Task Force
for Global Heath. A number of locally-owned restaurant and retail businesses also make the
City of Decatur a destination shopping and dining district in metro-Atlanta. The essential
nature of these services and the stability of health and education related businesses provide
a solid basis for the City’s economic well-being.
The City of Decatur centers on a vibrant downtown business district that is surrounded by
beautiful, historic neighborhoods reflecting a variety of architectural styles. The downtown
business district offers a healthy mix of office, retail, restaurant and residential uses designed
to encourage walking and an active lifestyle for all ages. New buildings blend with historic
commercial buildings and surround a traditional courthouse square that provides a link to
the City’s history. Downtown residents in mid-rise, mixed-use condominiums and apartments have created a new type of neighborhood providing an important housing option for
empty-nesters and young professionals seeking an urban lifestyle. These residents contribute
to the economic vitality of the downtown commercial district. Smaller commercial centers
scattered throughout the City also contribute to the sense of community and the vibrancy of
surrounding traditional, single-family neighborhoods by providing opportunities for residents
to walk to a variety of shopping and dining options.
The City’s well-regarded local public school system is attracting a healthy mix of young
families back to the City’s single-family neighborhoods. This influx of school-aged children
resulted in an increase in school enrollment and a long-term strategy to accommodate this
growth. The City Schools of Decatur provide one city-wide early childhood education center,
five neighborhood K-3 elementary schools, one system-wide 4-5 academy, one middle
school and one high school. Major expansion of the middle school and high school are
CITY OF DECATUR

3

underway and the school system is expected to build at least one new school in the near
future.
The City of Decatur is authorized to levy a property tax on both real and personal properties located within its boundaries and the City provides a full range of municipal services
to support its residents, businesses and visitors. These services include public safety,
public works, planning and zoning, sanitation, engineering, municipal court, active living,
children and youth services, a municipal cemetery and community and economic development. The City also owns a 280-space parking facility and a 25,000 square foot conference
center. In addition to these traditional municipal services, the City of Decatur is committed
to providing a high quality of life for its residents and supports a volunteer program, an
award-winning after school program and a wide variety of special events and civic engagement activities.
The City has three MARTA transit stations and multiple bus routes within its 4.4 square
miles, providing direct transit access to downtown Atlanta and Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport. In addition to public transit, the City supports and encourages a wide variety
of alternative transportation options including walking, bicycling, the Clifton Corridor
shuttle to Emory University and the Go60+ Shuttle for senior citizens.
Decatur’s tree-lined streets, strong sense of community, high quality services and nationally recognized public school system continue to draw residents to the City. The City of
Decatur has evolved into a vibrant, small urban city that values its history and enjoys the
sophistication and excitement similar to a college town along with all the benefits of living
in a major metropolitan area. This balance of urban amenities and small town character has
made the City of Decatur an attractive option for creative business owners, entrepreneurs
and individuals seeking an opportunity to reside and work in the same community.

History

This painting of
Captain Stephen
Decatur, USN, by
John Wesley Jarvis,
is part of the U.S.
Naval Academy Museum Collection.

The City of Decatur, incorporated on December 10, 1823, was named in honor of Commodore Stephen Decatur, a U.S. Naval hero. Commodore Decatur died in
1820 and Congress decreed that his name be honored throughout the nation.
As a result more than 40 cities and counties around the United States bear his
name and show the western migration of the country during the early half of
the 19th century. The City of Decatur, Georgia is the second oldest municipality in the Atlanta metropolitan area and the seat of DeKalb County. Decatur
adjoins Atlanta’s city limits and is six miles east of Atlanta’s central business
district.
The courthouse square in downtown Decatur is located on a rise of land where
two Native American trails once crossed. The Old Courthouse on the Square is
the fourth courthouse building to occupy the square. Historically, the courthouse square served as the community gathering place. Today it continues as
the heart of the community, hosting festivals and special events and providing
a place to meet and relax with family and friends. The historic commercial
district is a successful example of transit-oriented development and is connected to the
surrounding traditional, historic single-family neighborhoods by an expanding network of
sidewalks, bicycle lanes and a regional trail system.

Government

4

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

The City of Decatur operates under the commission-manager form of government. The
City Commission determines the policies of the local government and enacts local laws
necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. The City Commissioners

provide leadership in identifying community needs and developing programs to meet community objectives. There are five City Commissioners, elected in nonpartisan elections, for
overlapping four-year terms. Two commissioners are elected from the north district and two
from the south district and one commissioner is elected at-large giving every voter in the
City the opportunity to elect three of the five commissioners. Every year at its organizational meeting in January, the City Commission elects one of its members to serve as Mayor/
Chair of the City Commission. Patricia Garrett was elected Mayor in 2016. She has been
a member of the City Commission since 2009. Fred Boykin also was elected by his fellow
commissioners to serve as Mayor pro tem in 2016 and has served on the City Commission
since 2001. The other Commissioners are Scott Drake who was first elected in 2013; and,
Tony Powers and Brian Smith who were sworn in for their first terms in January 2016. It is
the responsibility of the Mayor to preside at all meetings of the City Commission. While the
Mayor has no veto power, he or she retains the right to vote on all matters brought before
the City Commission. The Mayor’s vote carries the same weight as any other Commissioner.

Budget
Narrative

The City Commission appoints the members of a number of volunteer boards and commissions who carry out responsibilities specified by State law, the City Charter, and local ordinances. These boards and commissions include the Decatur Housing Authority, the Zoning
Board of Appeals, the Decatur Downtown Development
Authority, the Planning Commission and the Historic
Preservation Committee. Special advisory committees
and task forces are also appointed by the City Commission to provide citizen input on issues and projects as
needed. Currently, these boards include the Active Living Board, the Better Together Advisory Board, Decatur
Youth Council, the Environmental Sustainability Board
and the Lifelong Community Advisory Board,
The City Commission also appoints the Municipal Court
judges and the City Attorney, who provides legal counsel for the government. The commission also appoints a
city manager to provide professional management and
direct the day to day operations of the City. The City
Manager serves as the Chief Executive and Administrative Officer and is responsible for carrying out the
policies and ordinances of the City Commission, for
overseeing the day-to-day operations of the government and the appointment of all employees and serves at the pleasure of the commission. The appointment of department heads is
subject to confirmation by the City Commission. The current city manager, Peggy Merriss,
has served as manager since May, 1993 and has been employed with the City since 1983.

The Decatur City Commission
(clockwise from bottom right); Mayor
Patti Garrett, Mayor Pro Tem Fred
Boykin, and Commissioners Brian
Smith, Tony Powers, and Scott Drake.

Vision
The City of Decatur will assure a high quality of life for its residents,
businesses and visitors both today and in the future
Successful organizations have a clear vision of where they are going and how they intend
to achieve their mission. The City of Decatur has a long history of engaging residents in
crafting a strategic vision for the City – most recently in 2000 and 2010. To support the vision, the City Commission holds an annual working retreat to reflect on past achievements,
identify future goals, and discuss challenges to implementing those goals. With the community vision as a guide, City Commissioners must balance the needs of a diverse population,
limited financial resources, federal and state mandates and unanticipated infrastructure costs.

CITY OF DECATUR

5

In April 2010, the City kicked off the planning process to create the 2010 Strategic Plan for
the next decade of the City’s future. An extensive effort was made to ensure broad participation by age, gender, race and geographical location in the planning process and participants generated over 8,000 ideas and comments about issues facing Decatur and hopes and
dreams for the City’s future.
Using this information, a plan was crafted that contained goals and tasks grouped into four
primary principles that captured a shared vision for our community. These principles are:
Principle A Manage Growth While Retaining Character
Principle B Encourage a Diverse and Engaged Community
Principle C Serve as Good Stewards of the Environment and
Community Resources
Principle D Support a Safe, Healthy, Lifelong Community
More than 1,500 residents participated in the planning process from the Round Tables to
the Community Academies to the Open Houses where drafts of the plan were presented.
Every comment was captured, analyzed and is included in the final report that was adopted
in March 2011. The entire plan is available at www.decaturnext.com and includes four
principles, 16 goals and more than 80 tasks that are incorporated into the City’s annual
work program. Also, the City’s budget is directly linked to the principles and goals of the
Strategic Plan to show residents how city resources are allocated to meet the community’s
vision and goals.
Now seven years into the implementation of the 2010 ten year plan, City staff is testing an
on-line reporting system that will allow residents to track the successful completion of tasks
and view the timeline for those that are in progress. The City will kick off the development of a new ten-year strategic plan in 2019 with expanded opportunities for community
engagement and public input.

Performance Management
A successful organization needs to know how well it is doing towards achieving its vision
and goals. The City has developed quantifiable measurements to track how efficiently and
effectively the organization is meeting its goals. Selective benchmarking is undertaken during the development of departmental budget requests. Performance measures are reviewed
by an interdepartmental committee on a monthly basis to identify successful processes and
work on areas that need improvement. Measures are included throughout the budget narrative to illustrate how the City is performing.
Between 2006 and 2016, the City participated in the International City/County Management
Association’s (ICMA) Comparative Performance Measurement Program (CPM). CPM provided performance measures in 16 service areas that the City used to evaluate existing services, to benchmark results with other communities and to exchange best practices within a
group of participating jurisdictions. In late 2016, CPM transition from being a subscription
based service to a being a program advisor. Beginning in 2017, the City has embarked on its
own comparative program.
Additional information on the quality of services provided by the City is gauged through
a biennial citizen survey. The last citizen survey was conducted in February and March
2016 to gauge satisfaction with the community and local government services. This was the
City’s sixth citizen survey. The full report is posted, along with the results from previous
surveys, on the City’s website at www.decaturga.com.
6

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Budget
The annual budget serves as the foundation for the City’s financial planning and control.
All work groups submit departmental budget requests by the first week of March. Utilizing
the goals and tasks described in the Strategic Plan, the departmental requests are the starting point for developing the proposed budget. Once departmental budgets are submitted,
department heads and senior staff meet collectively to review all requests.

Budget
Narrative

The proposed budget is formally
presented to the City Commission
on the third Monday in May. The
operating budget includes both
proposed expenditures and revenues.
The City publishes a summary of
the proposed budget in the official
legal organ (currently The DeKalb
Champion), makes copies available
to the residents of the City, provides
copies to the local library and posts
the proposed and revised budget on
the City’s website. Public hearings
on the proposed budget are held
in June. The budget is then legally
enacted through adoption of a budget
resolution by the City Commission,
normally on the third Monday in June
but no later than June 30, the close of
the fiscal year.
The budget document is a written plan that provides the financial
basis for implementing the City’s vision and related goals. It represents city departments’
best efforts at achieving the vision within an environment of competing goals and limited
resources.
More information on the budget and the budget process can be found in the Budget Guide
under Appendix A.

Vision Based Budgeting
As we move forward toward the completion of the 2010 Strategic Plan, the annual budget
continues to serve as the primary implementation tool to bring the community’s vision to
life. The Vision Based Budget is a financial planning document that allows the City to connect the community’s vision with the necessary resources (personnel, equipment and funding) required to implement it. It also describes narratively and numerically the programs,
policies and projects identified in the Strategic Plan and each City department’s relationship
to them.
The following pages highlight the four principles outlined in the 2010 Strategic Plan plus an
additional principle that aims to capture the internal work of the City. Under each principle
is a description of how the goals and tasks of that principle are being implemented, past
accomplishments, proposed projects for this fiscal year, performance measures and unique
partnerships. For more specifics on the role of departments, city programs or partnerships
visit www.decaturga.com.
CITY OF DECATUR

7

Principle A: Manage Growth While Retaining Character
Accommodate commercial and residential growth while retaining Decatur’s unique sense of place within an urban environment.
Four key goals are involved in managing this objective successfully:

National
Citizen
Survey
Results
Sense of Community

Goal 1 Retain and enhance the character of existing commercial districts
and expand it to new districts
Goal 2 Encourage a diversity of business types with particular focus on
small businesses and businesses that provide daily needs
Goal 3 Protect existing neighborhoods while promoting growth in desired
areas and adopting standards that guide future growth
Goal 4 Protect and encourage the creative reuse of historic buildings,
structures, and places

(% rated excellent/good)
2006-84
2008-90
2010-86
2012-92
2014-91
2016-83

Quality of Economic
Development
(% rated excellent/good)
2006-74
2008-78
2010-69
2012-73
2014-84
2016-73

Overall Quality of
business and service
establishments
(% rated excellent/good)
2006-n/a
2008-89
2010-83
2012-91
2014-87
2016-83

Would recommend
living here to someone
who asks
(reported very likely)
2006-n/a
2008-75
2010-74
2012-78
2014-84
2016-72

8

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Residents, business owners, and visitors have made preservation of Decatur’s strong sense
of community and unique character an important issue, and rightfully so. For it is the quaint
tree-lined streets, historic neighborhoods, vibrant commercial districts, festivals and events,
and the neighborliness that make Decatur a destination people seek to visit and a place
people joyously call home. In order to balance future growth and ensure Decatur’s unique
character remains, the City focuses on quality development and business recruitment that
meet the community’s vision for a variety of housing, commercial and retail options.
Decatur Goes Tiny
To protect existing neighborhoods while accommodating future growth, Decatur decided to
think smaller. The first ever Tiny House Festival for the Atlanta region was held in the City,
drawing crowds from across the country. Festival attendees learned that Decatur has no
minimum square footage for homes on foundation, that the tiny house movement addresses
the critical need for aging in place and “missing middle” housing options, and that the City
is supportive of both smaller primary residences and accessory dwelling units. The festival
was such a success that the second annual Tiny House Festival is also located in Decatur
later this year.
The City also went tiny by initiating the Cottage Court Pilot Project. The project began
with a 3-day design charrette, where residents
met architect Bruce Tolar and collaborated
with the architect, city staff, and neighbors to
develop a site plan appealing to all stakeholders involved. The Cottage Court Pilot
Project will create an affordable small-scale,
neighborhood-friendly alternative to largeformat, single-family infill housing. Additionally, being located in the Old Decatur Local
Historic District, the project will balance the
old and new and blend seamlessly with some
of the City’s oldest architecture.
Decatur ♥ Art
Much of the City’s character is intertwined
with its love of art and creating unique,
quirky experiences. Any city can be the
next concrete jungle, but Decatur chooses

to enhance its commercial districts with art that is appealing to the eye that surprises and
delights residents and visitors alike. Over the past year, the City has added many colorful
exhibits to its commercial districts. Collaborating with the Decatur Arts Alliance, the City
was able to bring a second phase of the outdoor art gallery – five new sculptures – to the
Oakhurst neighborhood. Each of the downtown traffic signal cabinets became canvases for
local artists. Seven creative crosswalks have been integrated into the downtown pedestrian
infrastructure, creating a visible and entertaining crossing experience. Additionally, the City
collaborated with MARTA, artists MILAGROS Collective, and residents to transform a
bland MARTA overpass into a pleasant and uplifting mural, which now acts as the western
gateway into the City core.
Decatur Does DENSITY
Appropriately placed density was significant this year in both enhancing the existing commercial districts and protecting single-family neighborhoods. The ARLO, which after years
of sitting as a vacant lot, was completed, and brought a mixed-use development with 210
residential units and 10 commercial spaces to the southeast quadrant of downtown. Of these
residential units, 6 are live-work units and 21 are lifecycle dwellings, providing a variety of
housing and business options to Decatur’s downtown. The Callaway property was successfully sold to Cousins Properties. With demolition of the building complete and site work
underway, the mixed-use development will bring 329 residential units, 30,000 square feet
of Class A office space, and new retail spaces to downtown Decatur. Both of these projects
help anchor the Trinity Place corridor and expand the vibrancy of downtown south of the
Square. Expansion of the downtown streetscape bicycle track network provides better connections within the downtown district and with surrounding neighborhoods.
Over the past year, the City has focused its density on transit oriented development, first
around the downtown Decatur MARTA station and now around the City’s other two
stations. In November 2016, the Avondale MARTA Station development broke ground
for a mixed use development that will include 92 affordable senior residential units, 378
market-rate units, 20,000 square feet of commercial space, and a trail connection between
the PATH Foundation’s East Decatur Greenway and Stone Mountain trails. The City was
also awarded an Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC) Livable Centers Initiative grant,
along with MARTA and the City of Atlanta, to study future development of the East Lake
MARTA station. The intent is to prepare a plan that encourages appropriate development
which will tie into the existing fabric of surrounding neighborhoods and expand small-scale
commercial developments within walking distance of these neighborhoods.

Budget
Narrative

By the
Numbers

25

Number of painted
traffic signal boxes
around the City

Future Focus ➜
The next fiscal year will see many projects and programs that continue to implement Principle A, its four goals, and the various associated tasks. New bicycle racks, holiday decorations, trash and recycling bins, dog waste stations, benches, seasonal plantings, and Walk
There signs will elevate the commercial districts, as will the cleaning and repairs of informational kiosks. The Scottish Rite Hospital will get a signage face-lift that will complement
the architecture and protect the views of the Scottish Rite Hospital Local Historic District.
The City also anticipates new developments that enhance the character of Decatur and
businesses that provide for a variety of interests. More emphasis will be placed on office
development to balance recent residential developments and provide for more opportunities
to live and work in the City of Decatur.

CITY OF DECATUR

9

FY 2016-2017 Accomplishments:
• Net gain of 36 new businesses with a vacancy rate of 5% (Task 2A)
• Awarded an ARC Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) grant to study transit oriented development at the East Lake MARTA station (Tasks 3C and 14A)

By the
Numbers
New Business Licenses
FY12-13 – 109
FY13-14 – 157
FY14-15 – 161
FY15-16 – 109

New Jobs Created
FY12-13 – 274
FY13-14 – 515
FY14-15 – 416
FY15-16 – 402

• Completion of the Cottage Court charrette and adoption of the site plan and elevations
that celebrate the architectural features of the Old Decatur Local Historic District (Tasks
4B and 15B)
• Improved the landscaping in the Square and at the MARTA Church Street entrance (Task
1E)
• Groundbreaking for the Callaway redevelopment project by Cousins Properties (Task
3B)
• Avondale MARTA Transit-Oriented Development groundbreaking with the inclusion of
affordable senior housing (Task 3C)
• Completion of the ARLO development with lifecycle dwelling units and live-work units
(Task 3B)

FY 2017-2018 New Projects, Programs and Policies:
• Additional bicycle racks, holiday decorations, trash and recycling bins, dog waste stations, benches, seasonal plantings (Tasks 1D and 1F)
• New Walk There signs (Task 1D)

By the
Numbers

5

New Phase 2 Decatur Artway
Sculptures
1. Dreamsicle

• Maintenance of online business license renewals (Task 2A)
• Adopt a mobile food facility ordinance (Task 2D)
• Scottish Rite Sign Program (Task 4B)

Principle A Financial Impact
Department	amount
Governmental Control

46,740

General Government

298,500

Community & Economic Development

1,190,150

Active Living

222,020

(Oakview Rd - Harmony Park)

Children & Youth Services

47,170

2. Shelter II (basics)

Administrative Services

391,810

(435 Oakview Rd - Wylde Center)

Fire

952,230

3. Phil Proctor

Police

585,880

(356 W. Hill St – Decatur Fire
Station No. 2)

E-911

21,570

Public Works

761,540

4. Earth, Water, Fire, Wind

Design, Environment & Construction

182,150

(321 W. Hill St – The Solarium)

Solid Waste

430,800

5. Prairie Vane

Storm Water

29,710

(4th Ave and Oakview Rd – F.AVE)

TOTAL:

decaturartsalliance.org/decaturartway-sculptures

10

• Tree well, MARTA plaza, crosswalk, informational kiosk maintenance (Task 1D)

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

$5,160,270

Principle B: Encourage a Diverse and
Engaged Community
Protect and expand diversity among Decatur residents, businesses, and
visitors while promoting an innovative, engaged and informed community.

By the
Numbers

The Strategic Plan includes four goals related to encouraging a diverse and engaged community:

Decatur 101
Graduates 2000-2017

Goal 5 Maintain and encourage diversity of race, ethnicity, income, culture,
age, family type and other kinds of diversity
Goal 6 Strengthen communication and involvement in and among neighborhoods, city government, volunteer boards and commissions,
institutions, community organizations, local businesses and Decatur
as a whole
Goal 7 Support, expand and develop programs, services, events, and opportunities that respond to diverse interests, encourage community
interaction, and promote a stronger sense of community
Goal 8 Promote a culture of creative innovation and expression
For decades, Decatur residents have voiced support for maintaining the diversity of the
community and identified this diversity as one of the most important factors of the City’s
unique character. These valued differences include racial and economic diversity but also
gender, lifestyle, age and cultural differences among others. The community’s vision can
be summed up as a desire to be open, inclusive and welcoming to all. While this is a noble
aspiration, the Decatur community recognized that achieving it is not easy and requires
intentional conversation and action.

1,143
By the
Numbers
Citizen Police
Academy Graduates
2013-2017

102

It Starts With Conversation
In 2016, the City Commission appointed the first Better Together Advisory Board to lead
the implementation of the Community Action Plan for Equity, Inclusion and Engagement.
Board members were intentionally chosen to bring diverse experiences and ideas to this effort. Areas of focus include: expanded community participation and engagement; prioritizing racially-just community policing; ensuring availability of diverse and affordable housing options; cultivating a welcoming and inclusive retail environment; maximizing use of
public spaces and facilitating low-cost transportation options. The efforts will be on-going,
involve coordination with other volunteer advisory boards and focus on the importance of
improving and supporting on-going conversations across differences.
Broadening Our Connections
For over 15 years, Decatur’s successful Decatur 101 program has been connecting residents
with their government and with each other. In 2017, 77 people participated and applicants
are already on the list for 2018. The program now has over 1,148 graduates most of whom
have gone on to become active volunteers, members of city boards or run for public office.
The program’s goal of putting a face on government allows participants to meet city staff,
learn how budget decisions are made and experience how city departments work to implement the community’s vision. An annual encore class is offered every fall to focus on a
timely topic and is open to all Decatur 101 graduates.
The creation of volunteer advisory boards is another opportunity to connect residents with
programs and issues that are important to them. These boards (Environmental Sustainability, Active Living, Lifelong Community and Better Together and Decatur Youth Council)
CITY OF DECATUR

11

National
Citizen
Survey
Results
Opportunities to participate in community
matters
(% rated excellent/good)
2006 – n/a
2008 – 81
2010 – 82
2012 – 88
2014 – 87
2016 – 85

Quality of public information services
(% rated excellent/good)
2006 – 69
2008 – 82
2010 – 89
2012 – 85
2014 – 86
2016 – 89

Opportunities to volunteer
(% rated excellent/good)
2006 – n/a
2008 – 87
2010 – 90
2012 – 91
2014 – 92
2016 – 90

Openness of community towards people of
diverse backgrounds
(% rated excellent/good)
2006 – 82
2008 – 87
2010 – 87
2012 – 89
2014 – 82
2016 – 79
12

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

allow the City to tap into the professional expertise and passion of citizens and expand
on the level of work that gets done. A critical step is coordinating the work of the City’s
volunteer advisory boards and city staff to avoid duplication and provide support to each
other. A good example of this effort involves senior citizen support. City staff in multiple
departments work alongside volunteers and nonprofit organizations to support programs
that allow senior citizens to remain in their homes and participate in a variety of activities.
The Active Living, Fire and Police departments provide programs and initiatives to engage
older residents in physical and social activities that support health and safety. The Season of
Giving/Christmas Decatur program expanded its outreach in 2016 to include more senior
citizens living in senior residential high-rises. And, the Martin Luther King Jr. Service
project receives support from every city department for equipment, trash pick-up, installation of smoke and carbon monoxide detectors and volunteer labor to make home repairs,
do yard work, and help in other support roles alongside over a thousand citizen volunteers.
Better communication and shared event calendars now help avoid conflicts and encourage
cross-departmental coordination.
The Lifelong Community Advisory Board is working to expand participation by energizing the Decatur Neighborhood Alliance and encouraging more face-to-face communication
within and among Decatur’s many residential neighborhoods. Members of the board are
meeting with neighborhood leaders and will be working with city staff to develop a neighborhood mini-grant program to support neighborhood initiatives.
Getting Off on the Right Foot
Contributing to community and respect for differences are habits that begin early. In fact,
Decatur’s youngest residents often lead in these areas. The Children and Youth Services
(CYS) division provides a safe and healthy afterschool environment for children to learn
important life skills and experience different cultures & religions through fun activities. The
program offers many events to cultivate community involvement such as the Family Dance
and the After School Celebration each year. Project R.E.A.L., the middle school afterschool
program, includes community service projects with the older residents at Philips Tower to
connect students with the community in a meaningful way. Afterschool program participants at the middle school and 4-5 Academy create art work to sell at the annual YEA! Art
Festival and contribute all the money earned to the Mary Miller Decatur Youth Fund. The
Decatur Youth Fund, housed within the Decatur Education Foundation, provides scholarships for lower income families to pay for after-school, camps and cultural enrichment
activities.
The Decatur Youth Council was established in 2016 to engage high school-aged residents
who attend public, private, or home-based schools in a meaningful city-sponsored leadership program. As part of the program, participants learn about how the City is governed,
engage with the community and provide input into programs and initiatives that impact
younger generations. Decatur city staff members in coordination with Decatur High School
staff lead this program. The first class of participants have helped shape the program and
will assist in recruiting participants for next year.
Community Policing 2.0
The Decatur Police Department has long engaged in the practice of community policing but
recognized that there was room for improvement. Collaborating with a broad range of community stakeholders, the department adopted a three-year strategic plan in 2016 with a mission for the department to be open and responsive to the needs of the entire community and
solve problems through community relationships, innovative technology and exceptional
service. One of the action steps for the first year was for all police officers and command

staff to complete the Fair and Impartial Policing™ training. Training is now complete and
all agreed that it was a powerful and productive experience.
Other action steps included in the plan were designed to improve positive interaction
between the police staff and residents. Like many other departments across the city, the
police department created a Facebook page and Twitter account to expand communication
and build personal connections. A “Football, Franks and the Fuzz” tag football game and
cookout was held to create an opportunity for police department staff to interact with young
people in a fun and positive way.
The Citizens Police Academy (CPA) provides an excellent opportunity for police department staff to interact with the public and build relationships with the residents they took an
oath to protect and serve. CPA participants meet one hour a week for ten weeks learning
the daily activities that go on within the police department, participating in a ride along
with a patrol officer, learning about detective work and visiting the DeKalb County Jail. In
2016, the class maxed out capacity at 28 participants. The 2017 CPA this fall will likely be
another full house. Many CPA graduates go on to become members of the CAPS (Citizens
Assisting Public Safety) program. CAPS support sworn police officers and firefighters during large events such as festivals and road races.
The Junior Police Academy mimics the outline of the Citizens Police Academy but is
geared towards younger residents. Like the adult classes, young people are exposed to daily
activities of a patrol officer and get to learn about things like how to lift latent fingerprints.
More importantly, this program allows police officers and young people to meet in a positive way.

By the
Numbers
Issues reported using
the MyDecaturGA app
August 2016-April 2017

1,291
51%
44%
5%

by web
by mobile

by city

Out of Town House
check request is the
most popular request
type

CITY OF DECATUR

13

FY16-17 Accomplishments:
• Successful voter registration effort through the Decatur Votes initiative (Goal 7)
• Decatur senior citizens, city staff, Lifelong Community Advisory Board members, and
Commissioners went to the Georgia State Capitol to encourage legislators to pass the
bills for Homestead Exemptions, followed by their overwhelming passage by Decatur
voters (Tasks 5A and 5E)
• Creation of Better Together Advisory Board (Goals 5 and 7)
• Expanded social media outlets with Police Dept. and Fire Dept. blogs and Facebook
presence (Task 6A)
• Creation of Extreme Makeover website and social media to provide status updates on
infrastructure and development projects (Task 6A)

By the
Numbers

• Successful community engagement through a variety of new outreach options to complete the Comprehensive Plan Update (Task 6A)

MLK Service
Day Volunteers 2017

• Continue to present the Decatur 101 program in the Spring and an encore class in the
Fall with strong participation (annual Decatur 101 waiting list and Fall encore class
filled) (Task 7C)

1,330
Value of MLK Service
Day volunteer hours

258,100

$

14

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

• Creation of new Decatur Youth Council to involve high school students in long-range
planning and local government (Task 7E)

• Active Living and Lifelong Community Advisory Boards expanded volunteer board
participation through a committee structure that allows interested people to work with
the board and be trained as potential future board members (Task 5D)
• Expansion of public art from downtown Decatur to the Oakhurst business district
through the Decatur Artway partnership with the Decatur Arts Alliance to provide a
rotating outdoor sculpture gallery (Tasks 8A, 8B, 8C)
• Addition of the Amplify Music Festival to the City’s special events calendar (Task 5B)
• Completion of the MARTA Overpass Mural (Task 8C)

• Completion of the citywide traffic signal cabinet art (Task 8C)
• Installation of the Beacon Information Desk located at the Police Department (Goals 6
and 7)

Budget
Narrative

FY17-18 New Projects, Programs, and Policies:
• Better Together Advisory Board will engage the community to fulfill the Community Action Plan (Tasks 5B and 5C)
• Engage neighborhood leaders through the Decatur Neighborhood Alliance and the Lifelong Community Decatur
Neighbors committee to encourage support between neighbors and between neighborhoods to provide community
support (Tasks 5A, 5E, 6B, 7A, 7B, 7D)
• Continue to develop leadership skills and engage members
of the new Decatur Youth Council as they learn about city
government and our community and provide feedback on
how to best meet their need (Task 7E)
• Continue to provide Open Office Hour live streaming video
of City Commission members discussing topics of community interest and answering viewers’ questions live via
social media, email or telephone (Task 6A)
• Implement the Foresight Augmented Reality (FAR) app to
help the blind and visually impaired to navigate their way
to Decatur’s shops, restaurants, and businesses (Tasks 5C,
6A, 8D)
• Explore inclusion of universal design/visibility guidelines
(Task 5F)

Principle B Financial Support:
Department	amount
Governmental Control

46,740

General Government

497,500

Community & Economic Development

910,330

Active Living

242,970

Children & Youth Services

337,000

Administrative Services

381,310

Fire

919,830

Police

610,380

E-911

21,570

Public Works

159,770

Design, Environment & Construction

364,300

Solid Waste

143,600

Storm Water

133,700

TOTAL:

$4,769,000

CITY OF DECATUR

15

Principle C: Serve as Good Stewards of the Environment and Community Resources
Practice fiscal, environmental, and organizational stewardship to make efficient use of finite resources through collaboration and conservation.

National
Citizen
Survey
Results
Value of services for
taxes paid

(rated excellent or good)
2006 – 63
2008 – 64
2010 – 64
2012 – 73
2014 – 73
2016 – 66

Goal 9

Expand and diversify the City’s revenue base

Goal 10 Continue to provide quality services within fiscal limits acceptable
to the community
Goal 11 Assure the efficient use and coordination of all community facilities by strengthening community partnerships
Goal 12 Foster environmental, social, and economic sustainability in all
aspects of city life and government practice
Goal 13 Protect and restore natural resources, support environmental
health and ecological awareness

2006 – n/a
2008 – 78
2010 – 75
2012 – 81
2014 – 87
2016 – 79

Awareness and conservation of finite resources, whether they are natural, built or monetary
has been an integral part of sound local governance for many years in the City of Decatur.
In the natural environment, thoughtful conservation guides the City’s actions to ensure that
our ecosystem will continue to provide residents with those elements necessary to sustain
and improve our lives. In the built world, sustainability, whether it is constructing a building to consume less energy or responsibly recycling consumer products, shapes the role of
government by providing buildings and services that have the least impact on financial and
natural resources. In the realm of fiscal responsibility, stewardship of revenues generated
by our residents and businesses is integral in creating a community that is both resilient and
innovative in its governance.

Quality of recycling
service

Principle C strives to reinforce responsibility to sustain finite resources within the boundaries of the City of Decatur as well as the Metro Atlanta region in three specific areas:

2006 – 80
2008 – 87
2010 – 90
2012 – 92
2014 – 91
2016 – 87

1. Stewardship of Natural Resources
2. Stewardship of the Built Environment
3. Stewardship of Monetary and Administrative Resources

Quality of overall
natural environment

(rated excellent or good)

(rated excellent or good)

Recycled from home
(at least once in the last
year)
2006 – 80
2008 – 89
2010 – 89
2012 – 91
2014 – 97
2016 – 96

16

Five goals were identified in the 2010 Strategic Plan as ways to sustain the City’s natural
and built environments and to protect the City’s economic viability:

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Caring for the Environment
Stewardship of our natural resources begins with a conscious effort to study and understand
our resources and develop ways we might respond to environmental challenges so that
the City of Decatur continues to be ecologically well positioned. The City of Decatur will
undertake two very important studies over the next two years - an update to the Stormwater
Masterplan and an update to the Greenspace Masterplan. The Stormwater planning effort
will study the current infrastructure and establish standardized guidelines for residents and
developers to follow to limit flooding and storm related water damage. The Greenspace
planning effort will update inventory and engage the community in developing a strategy
to acquire and utilize green space as an amenity to residents and a benefit to the natural
environment.
Tree maintenance and replacement will continue to be a priority for the Design, Environment & Construction (DEC) division of Public Works. Tree canopy conservation efforts
involve working with private developers to conserve existing trees when possible and to
encourage the planting of new trees in public rights of way and in City parks. The City will

continue to collaborate with Trees Atlanta to plant new street trees in residential neighborhoods that provide shade along sidewalks and do not conflict with overhead utilities such as
electrical power lines. Using funds from the City’s Tree recompense fund to transplant existing trees rather than planting new trees is also a priority for future development projects.
Two such projects were completed at the Callaway Building site and at the future Hampton
Inn site on Clairemont Avenue.
The City continues to use outside funding sources to expand greenspace and improve the
natural environment. Public Works recently completed the demolition of a single-family
residence plagued by flooding at 115 Willow Lane with a Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) grant creating new greenspace where a wildflower planting and introduction of a pollinator colony assists in curbing the depopulation of bee habitats throughout the
region.
The North McDonough Streetscapes improvement project is funded in part by a grant from
the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC) that will assist in conserving our downstream
waterways. In addition to improving bicycle and pedestrian safety, the project’s design includes an innovative bio-swale system in the medians between the car lanes and bike lanes
that includes the installation of geotextiles, filtering gravels and planted with vegetation to
absorb high amounts of run-off. This bio-swale system collects and filters storm water from
the street before it enters the storm water system reducing the level of pollutants in creeks,
rivers and lakes downstream.

Budget
Narrative

By the
Numbers
Homestead Exemption Totals (2017)
20.5% - Residential properties with no exemptions

59.5% - residential properties with only the basic
exemption
13.6% - Residents with
senior exemptions
7.1% - Residents with
income-based exemptions

Building for The Future
The City of Decatur continues to be a regional leader in building and maintaining its own
sustainable infrastructure as well as guiding environmentally friendly private development
through its High Performance Building Standards. The city will undergo several improvement projects to its existing LEED certified buildings over the next year that will maintain
or increase its standing with the United States Green Building Council. A large painting
project at the Bandstand on the square, City Hall and the Public Works Building will utilize
low V.O.C paints. The recently completed park pavilions at Oakhurst and McKoy Parks
make use of “solar tube” skylights to light restrooms interiors and reduce the level electricity requirements. And since its adoption in November of 2015, nearly 100 single family
homes and townhomes have been certified under the High Performance Building Standards.
Ongoing sidewalk repairs throughout the City and new dedicated bicycle lanes along North
McDonough Street, West Trinity Place and Commerce Drive will improve safety and
expand transportation options for residents and visitors. Repairs and installation of new alternative transportation infrastructure benefits the environment by
reducing reliance on fossil fuel based transportation. In addition, creating safer
travel options for communities has been found to increase use of pedestrian and
bicycle infrastructure, reduce automobile trips and increase health benefits.
Improving Efficiency
Coordinated facilities among departments and other community partners
has been a successful way to maximize limited space and share maintenance
costs. The City has a history of collaborating with City Schools of Decatur,
the YMCA, Boys & Girls Club, Agnes Scott College and other community
institutions to share facilities. In the coming fiscal year, the Active Living and
Planning divisions will hire a consultant to update the Comprehensive Facilities
Plan to accommodate projected growth in Decatur’s population and increased
use of city parks, open space and recreation facilities. This plan update will
include shared use agreements for fields and facilities with community partners
and identify additional facility partners to expand our inventory.

CITY OF DECATUR

17

The City continues to identify opportunities to maximize internal resources too. Over the
next two years, fuel data tracking devices will be purchased for every city vehicle with an
onboard computer. These devices will track fuel consumption and upload error messages
from the vehicle. Messages will be automatically communicated to fleet maintenance so
vehicle repair issues can be handled before more serious and costly problems arise.
The Public Works department is researching technology vendors that offer software providing electronic notification to residents and property owners regarding street sweeping, trash/
recycling collection and neighborhood clean-up days. Improved service schedule reminders will increase service delivery and greatly improve the efficiency of our street sweeping
efforts by reminding residents to move vehicles to allow crews to more effectively clean up
leaf litter and debris. Currently over 375 tons of leaves are collected by the street sweeper
and delivered to the landfill for compost purposes. With better notification to neighborhoods
and residents, the collection rate will increase resulting in fewer clogged storm water drains
and less bio-waste entering water systems down-stream.
The Police and Fire departments have instituted more programs to provide in-house employee training, which is cheaper and eliminates the time needed to travel to off-site training
locations. The City’s building improvements were designed to include more flexible space
and improved audio and visual technology to make in-house training easier. On-site training
makes it possible for employees to get additional hours of training at a reduced cost.
Electronic payments, online application procedures and shared resources throughout departments allows City of Decatur residents to access services from the comfort of home or office. The RecTrac online registration software allows front desk staff at the City’s recreation
centers to serve both Children and Youth Services and Active Living program and activity
sign ups. These two divisions also co-publish the “Playbook” four times a year to summarize the many programs, camps, activities and athletic opportunities available along with
schedules.
The Administrative Services department will continue to reduce paper by researching ways
in which the Decatur Municipal Court can institute more electronic documentation procedures as part of its day to day operations. Contractors and residents in need of obtaining
building construction permits are now able to request building inspections on-line without
paper forms and it is anticipated that the DEC will begin accepting electronic permits and
plan reviews during the 2017-18 fiscal year.
As the Metro Atlanta Region continues to grow, the City of Decatur’s vision for a more
sustainable community set forth within principle C of the 2010 Strategic plan will become
increasingly important as demand for resources such as water and energy will test existing
infrastructure. A strategic plan with strong sustainability goals provides the tools and policies
the City needs to be adaptive, resilient and better able to respond positively to unforeseen
environmental and fiscal challenges that have become inevitable in an ever-changing world.

FY16-17 Accomplishments:
• Re-engineered a glass recycling program saving 35-40 tons of glass per month from being placed in landfills. (Task 12J)
• Transplanted trees from the former Callaway Building and Hampton Inn sites (Task
13A)
• Installed LED street lights throughout the city by Georgia Power reducing electrical
consumption and improving light quality (Task 12F)
18

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

• Implementation of High Performance Building Standards for Single Family residential
renovations (Task 12B)

• Received an ARC Supplemental Grant of $850K in additional funding for the North
McDonough Streetscape project (Task 10B)

Budget
Narrative

• Expedited permitting process for Solar Panel installations with the assistance of the
Environmental Sustainability board (Task 12A)
• Completion of the Decatur 360 Comprehensive Plan with staff and financial assistance
from the Atlanta Regional Commission (Task 10B)

By the
Numbers

• Passage of new homestead exemption options (Task 10D and15E)

FY17-18 New Projects, Programs, and Policies:
• Redevelopment of the Callaway Building and the Avondale transit oriented development
will begin to come on line (Tasks 9C and 9D)
• Re-opening of the indoor pool at the Boys & Girls Club as a shared use facility (Tasks
11A and 16D)
• Completion of a Comprehensive Open Space and Shared Facilities Masterplan among
community organizations, City Schools of Decatur and the City of Decatur (Tasks 10A,
11A and 16F)

106
trees planted in public
areas and rights-of-way

• Installation of electronic fuel tracking and maintenance logging devices on city vehicles
(Task 12A)
• Complete the multi-year energy conservation audit for city facilities to update sustainability policies for facilities (Tasks 10A and 12E)
• Update the City’s existing Stormwater Masterplan (Task 13B)
• Update the City’s existing Greenspace Masterplan (Task 13D)
• Refine online applications and permitting in Children and Youth Services, Active Living
and Design Environment and Construction divisions (Task 10A)
• Complete improvements to the Barry Street/ downtown storm drainage project (Task
13B)

Principle C Financial Support:
Department	Amount
Governmental Control

46,740

General Government

497,500

Community & Economic Development

168,770

Active Living

242,570

Children & Youth Services
Administrative Services

47,170
1,569,920

Fire

270,320

Police

347,740

E-911
Public Works
Design, Environment & Construction
Solid Waste
Storm Water
TOTAL:

21,570
1,358,670
91,080
1,005,200
59,420
$5,726,670
CITY OF DECATUR

19

Principle D: Support a Safe, Healthy, Lifelong Community
Assure that housing, mobility and support services exist to provide everyone at every age a high quality of life.
Three key goals in the 2010 Strategic Plan address this principle:

National
Citizen
Survey
Results
Ease of walking

(rated excellent or good)
2006 – 79
2008 – 87
2010 – 87
2012 – 92
2014 – 88
2016 – 83

Quality of recreation
programs and classes
(rated excellent or good)
2006 – 78
2008 – 87
2010 – 82
2012 – 84
2014 – 88
2016 – 89

Amount of public
parking

(rated excellent or good)
2006 – 30
2008 – 39
2010 – 32
2012 – 38
2014 – 37
2016 – 25

Quality of traffic
enforcement

(rated excellent or good)
2006 – 63
2008 – 67
2010 – 71
2012 – 65
2014 – 67
2016 – 66

20

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Goal 14 Enhance mobility options within and to Decatur
Goal 15 Expand the variety of high quality housing options to meet the
needs of a diverse community
Goal 16 Provide programs and services that support and enhance a safe,
healthy and active lifestyle
The goal of Principle D is to provide a high quality of life for citizens of all ages through
expanded housing options and programs that support health, safety, mobility and physical
activity for all ages and abilities.
Be Safe Out There!
When you think safety, we hope that the Decatur Police and Fire departments come to
mind. But they do much more than enforce laws, patrol neighborhoods and fight fires.
Police department staff offer the Rape Aggression Defense (RAD) course to train women
of all ages and abilities in safety awareness and self-defense techniques. Since 2016, 125
women have taken the course. The department partners with the community to support the
annual National Night Out event, attend neighborhood association meetings, participate
in retail association meetings and offers the Parents Reducing Injuries and Driver Error
(PRIDE) course designed for parents and their new (or soon to be) teen drivers. In cooperation with the Drug Enforcement Administration’s (DEA) Drug Take Back program, Decatur
Police installed a permanent depository at the station for unused, unwanted or outdated
drugs. Between November 1, 2016 and March 29, 2017, a total of 234 pounds of old, unused or unwanted prescription drugs were dropped off for proper disposal.
In addition to fighting fires, Fire department staff are trained Emergency Response Technicians (EMTs) and are first responders to medical emergencies in the City. Firefighters
provide first aid support at all festivals and special events and offer a wide range of services
and programs designed to reduce fire risks, promote health and safety and teach citizens
how to respond to medical emergencies. Additionally, the Fire department offers free CPR
training each month to residents and make certain that every City of Decatur employee receives annual CPR training and certification. This year the department added a Bike Medic
program to reduce response time for medical emergencies at large events and in areas with
limited accessibility.
The Children and Youth Services (CYS) division is also in the safety business providing
high quality, supervised activities for Decatur’s younger residents. CYS serves more than
600 participants through summer camp and afterschool programs. The addition of the Ebster Whiz Kids afterschool site at Ebster Recreation Center expanded the number of 4th and
5th graders able to participate in the afterschool program and brought the total number of
afterschool program sites to nine. New summer enrichment camps were added to offer over
one hundred summer activities for children.
The Active Living division also provides programming for younger residents. The annual
Valentines Dance for 1st-5th graders had more than 150 more participants this past February and 250 people attended the annual Halloween haunted house and dance, an increase of
25% from previous years. Club Ebster has 175 registered youth and teens at Ebster Recreation Center who participate in a wide range of free programs including healthy cooking

classes, hip hop dance, garden club, teen mentorship groups, circus camps and arts and
crafts.
Let’s Get Active
For young adults and older adults who are young at heart, Active Living provides a wide
range of programs to keep the body and the mind healthy. The city’s adult softball league
provides residents and business owners and staff the opportunity to play softball at parks
with 24 co-ed teams competing each year. Open gym hours are perfect for pick-up basketball games and tennis teams, tennis lessons, table tennis, aerobics and exercise classes for
all ages are just a few of the ways Active Living helps citizens stay active.
The addition of 50+ Walks in partnership with PEDS, Third Sunday Strolls, Fourth Thursday Walks and the continuation of the Walk with A Doc program expand opportunities to
make walking a habit for all age groups. Senior events such as the Valentine’s Social, Senior
Game Day, Picnic in the Park and National Senior Health and Fitness Day are collaborations among Active Living, Police and the Community & Economic Development departments. Adult activities include pickleball, bridge club and the Silver Spokes adult tricycle
class as well as fitness classes and open gym activities.
Biking is a priority in Decatur. Third Friday fun bike rides are offered March through
October in partnership with the Southern Bicycle League. The new Earn a Bike program for
children ages 6-10 and bike rodeos teach children how to be safe on their bikes. Active Living staff work with Police staff to offer bike registration at the annual Touch A Truck event.
The division recently installed adult fitness equipment at McKoy Park with a grant from
Exofit Manufacturers to promote healthy lifestyles for adults in Decatur.
The new Lil Warriors program is an adaptive sports class for youth with special needs in
Decatur. Youth team sports such as ultimate Frisbee have seen a large increase in participation this year. Youth basketball continues to be the largest sports program with over 500
participants’ ages 5-18 years old.
The Active Living division also coordinates the Safe Routes to School (SRTS) program
along with assistance from the City Schools of Decatur and the City’s Police department,
which manages the crossing guards. The City’s participation in this year’s Georgia Walk
and Roll to School Day event saw a 57% increase in participation; an increase of 10% from
the previous year.

Budget
Narrative

By the
Numbers

4

outdoor
tornado
warning
sirens in
Decatur

Glennwood Elementary
Westchester Elementary
Oakhurst Elementary
Winnona Park Elementary

By the
Numbers

2

city parks
equipped
with adult
fitness
equipment

McKoy Park
Glenlake Park

Expanding Mobility Options
In response to a transportation survey, the Lifelong Community Board created a “Mobility
Council” to address mobility concerns. Several City departments currently work together
to provide the weekly Go60 shuttle to take Oakhurst senior citizens to the grocery store
and other services downtown. The Mobility Council plans to work with local churches and
nonprofits to connect existing shuttle services and create a more extensive shuttle program
for older residents throughout the City.
The City is expanding cycle tracks around town to improve cycling safety and create a
better network of bicycle-friendly streets. A protected cycle track is under construction as
part of the North McDonough streetscape improvement project. This track will connect
with the PATH trail that runs along Howard Avenue. In conjunction with this project and the
streetscape improvements along East Trinity Place, railroad crossings at both Candler/Howard and McDonough/Howard Avenue are being reconstructed to provide safer crossings for
all modes of transportation.
The City partnered with the PATH Foundation to create a city-wide connectivity plan. One
section of this project is designed and will connect the North McDonough bike track to

CITY OF DECATUR

21

Church Street along Commerce Drive beginning next year. Through a partnership with
the PATH Foundation and Columbia Ventures, a new East Decatur Greenway Trail extends
from South Columbia Drive around Katie Kerr and through the E. Co. Development project
to connect with the Stone Mountain trail utilizing the existing MARTA bridge over College Avenue. Eventually, Decatur’s bicycle network will connect to the Atlanta Beltline and
Emory University.

By the
Numbers

6

decorative
crosswalks
in downtown
Decatur

By the
Numbers
Safe Routes to School
participants in Georgia Walk
and Roll to School Day
2013 – 993 (39%)
2014 – 1,452 (44%)
2015 – 1,622 (47%)
2016 – 1,852 (46%)

The City is working closely with the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) staff
to identify opportunities to improve pedestrian safety and calm traffic where possible.
Current projects include the installation of HAWK (High-Intensity Activated crosswalk
beacons) signals and crosswalks at East Davis and South Candler Street and on Clairemont
Avenue at the Decatur YMCA. The City submitted an application for a GDOT grant to fund
the installation of a HAWK signal in front of Westchester Elementary School. New raised
crosswalks with decorative artwork installed downtown have slowed traffic on the main
corridor to make walking safer. Of course, these bicycle and pedestrian safety improvements result in slower traffic and the perception of increased traffic congestion. The goal is
to create a balanced network for all transportation modes.
Housing Choices
Creating and maintaining housing options for all ages and incomes is a challenge. The proposed Cottage Court housing development directly relates to Goal 15 by expanding housing
options in the city. Construction will begin in the 2017-2018 fiscal year on the site at 230
Commerce Drive. The project, which includes six homes ranging in size from 460 square
feet to 1,100 square feet, is intended as a pilot project to encourage private developers to
use this model.
The Avondale MARTA station Transit Oriented Development project includes over 90 affordable apartments for senior citizens making 60%-80% of the median income. The ARLO
apartment project in downtown Decatur included 21 affordable units targeting individuals
and families making 80% of the median income. Three new multi-family rental developments are complete in downtown Decatur and a fourth is under construction. While not
affordable by standard measurements, the need for new apartments to attract younger residents was identified in the City’s affordable housing study.
The City made it easier to build smaller homes and accessory dwelling units to encourage
more affordable housing options in residential neighborhoods. An analysis of the City’s
zoning ordinances is currently underway to identify tweaks in the code that can be made to
encourage more private developers to construct affordable housing options and maintain the
remaining stock of affordable housing.

FY 2016-2017 Accomplishments:
• Installation of a bicycle repair station with pump at Harmony Park (Task 14C)
• Installation of Downtown Decatur Crosswalks (Task 14A)
• Expansion of the off-street path system including new protected bike lanes, Olympic
trail and PATH master plan (Tasks 14A and 16A)
• Completion of improvements to pavilions at McKoy and Oakhurst Parks including new
restrooms, pavilion, concession stand and exercise equipment (Task 16D)
• Completion of the downtown crosswalks (Task 14A)

22

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

• Awarded an ARC Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) grant to study transit oriented development at the East Lake MARTA station (Task 14A)

Budget
Narrative

• Completion of the Cottage Court charrette and adoption of the site plan and elevations
that celebrate the architectural features of the Old Decatur Local Historic District (Task 15B)
• Conducted sidewalk analysis identifying areas of priority, hazardous areas for pedestrians, and segments needing repair or improvement in school and senior living
areas (Task 14A)
• Addition of the Tiny House Festival to the City’s special
events calendar (Task 15B)
• Established successful Ebster Whiz Kids program – first
off-site 4th-5th program offered by Child and Youth
Services (Task 16C)
• Adopted Clean Air Campaign ordinance prohibiting
smoking in public greenspaces (Goal 16)

FY 2017-2018 New Projects, Policies and
Programs:
• Resurfacing of McKoy Pool and Oakhurst tennis courts
(Goal 16)
• Implementation of sidewalk improvements based on
sidewalk assessment (Goal 14)
• Improvements to bicycle and pedestrian facilities including expansion of cycle tracks,
sidewalks and road diet on Howard Ave (Task 14A)
• Upgrade and expand the Outdoor Tornado Warning Siren System (Goal 16)

Principle D Financial Support
Department	Amount
Governmental Control

46,740

General Government

298,500

Community & Economic Development

470,040

Active Living

2,049,970

Children & Youth Services

1,976,500

Administrative Services

569,710

Fire

1,134,790

Police

4,093,360

E-911

808,880

Public Works

1,118,400

Design, Environment & Construction

1,092,910

Solid Waste

1,005,200

Storm Water
TOTAL:

1,114,160
$15,779,160

CITY OF DECATUR

23

Principle E: Provide the Necessary Support within
City Government to Achieve the Vision and Goals of
the Community

National
Citizen
Survey
Results
Had contact with a
city employee in the
past year
2006 – 53
2008 – 61
2010 – 57
2012 – 54
2014 – 51
2016 – 52

Overall impression
of interaction with
city staff

(rated excellent or good)
2006 – 78
2008 – 77
2010 – 79
2012 – 86
2014 – 83
2016 – 87

City of Decatur
Employee Job
Satisfaction
2007 – 93
2009 – n/a
2011 – 93
2013 – 96
2015 – 88
* National Employee Survey result

24

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Support an innovative and creative work environment that attracts the best
employees, provides them with the tools needed to perform their work
and sets an expectation of exceptional public service for the community.
Principle E was created by a committee of city employees to align the internal operations of
the City with the principles and goals identified by the citizens in the 2010 Strategic Plan.
Each year as part of the budgeting process, city departments develop their annual work
programs and expenditure plans in response to specific goals and tasks included in the strategic plan. A large percentage of the City’s budget is allocated to personnel and equipment
as well as to internal administrative activities but many of these expenditures do not easily
relate to specific strategic plan goals. Principle E was designed to clarify this linkage and
reinforce the important connection between what the City does as an organization and how
City staff accomplish the work.
Goal I:

Recruit the best employees possible with knowledge and skills, a
commitment to high performance and an appreciation for Decatur’s unique character
Goal II: Retain the best employees by providing just compensation and
benefits, the highest level of employee training possible and a
commitment to developing leadership potential
Goal III: Provide and maintain the most efficient tools and equipment possible to allow staff to perform their work safely and effectively
Goal IV: Provide attractive, efficient, well-maintained public buildings,
parks and facilities as a reflection of our resident’s pride in their
community and to provide a pleasant environment for people to
enjoy and our employees to work
Goal V: Maintain the highest standards of financial accountability of public funds
Goal VI: Employ technology to provide the highest level of service possible
to our residents
The Best and the Brightest
In the service industry, employees are the most important asset to achieving the organization’s goals. Public service employees must be committed to the unique goals and values
of a local government organization. Unlike private sector businesses, City of Decatur
employees are not focused on maximizing profit, but rather are charged with serving all
members of the community with respect and integrity. This work is done in an environment
that demands high ethical standards and financial accountability. The City uses innovative
strategies to attract and recruit qualified applicants such as creative job postings, unique operational videos, and clever marketing posters. The City has created and continues to foster
an organizational culture that promotes teamwork, measured risk-taking and innovation in
a professional environment. Once employees are hired, the City invests in them through
education and training opportunities as well as provides robust health and wellness benefits.
Tuition reimbursement for approved degree programs and training is available and employees are encouraged to pursue higher degrees that benefit their work in the organization.
Salary surveys are conducted at least every other year to evaluate benefits and pay rates to
make certain the City remains competitive with similarly sized municipalities. The ADP
software platform allows employees to self-manage payroll, time, and attendance functions.

The impact of these efforts is highly skilled and committed employees that remain engaged
in the organization much longer than the national average.
Working Smarter
The City of Decatur encourages continuous learning and professional development for all
employees. Employees are supported in their efforts to improve their skills and to develop
new skills consistent with supporting the City’s strategic plan goals. Employees attend local, state and national conferences to bring back new program ideas. Many employees have
been invited to present at national conferences and teach classes because the City is seen as
a model organization among its peers in many areas, including planning, local government
management and budgeting.
The City strives to provide the best tools and facilities possible to allow employees to work
smarter, efficiently and effectively. Technology plays a crucial role in this practice. The city
offers IT training and easy access to technology support. Training in cyber security measures is now required for all employees. Many employees use iPads and an app to access
their desktop from remote locations or while traveling so that they can stay connected to
the office. The City is also employing the latest in police body cameras, vehicle tracking
software, on-line surveys, social media communications, electronic applications and on-line
forms with customer service in mind. WiFi is also available in all City buildings.
The City recently completed a conversion from Microsoft Office to the Office 365 software
platform. This upgrade allows employees to connect better with team members and customers with a wider range of communication tools, from email and instant messaging to social
networking and video conferencing from anywhere and at any time, all while benefiting
from real time cloud computing.
The City utilizes technology to make it easier for residents to access city services. Everything from online tax information and payments, business license renewals, building and
construction permits, car seat and home safety inspection requests, afterschool and camp
registration to customer input surveys are available online. The City even offers an app
called MyDecaturGa built on the SeeClickFix platform to make it easier for users to photograph and report issues such potholes, cracked sidewalks, graffiti and broken playground
equipment to the proper department. The app also gives users access to city event calendars,
restaurant and shop listings and an easy way to communicate with elected officials.
Decatur is a registered Smart911 city allowing residents and business owners to create an
online profile to provide faster and more informed response by first responders in the event

Budget
Narrative

By the
Numbers
Employee wellness
program participants
FY13-14

119 (out of 205)
FY14-15

98 (out of 214)
FY15-16

110 (out of 209)
FY16-17

142 (out of 197)

By the
Numbers

6

Facebook
pages
operated by
the city

City of Decatur –
Government
Decatur Active Living
Decatur Active Living –
Athletics
City of Decatur Fire and
Rescue
City of Decatur Police
Department
City of Decatur Human
Resources

CITY OF DECATUR

25

of an emergency. The system also allows individuals with special needs to alert emergency
personnel in advance and offers two-way texting capabilities with Communications Officers in the City’s E-911 call center in case a caller is unable to speak. The system includes
opt-in notifications for the receipt of severe weather warnings.

By the
Numbers

11,793
Cumulative number of
visitors to Open City Hall
online forum, launched
October 2008

By the
Numbers

13

Number of years Decatur
has earned GFOA’s
Certificate in Achievement
for Excellence in Financial
Reporting

9

Number of years the city has
earned GFOA’s Distinguished
Budget Presentation Award

The City also uses technology to better connect with residents. The City’s website is constantly being updated and several departments now use Facebook, blogs and other social
media outlets to keep residents informed. Meetings of the Decatur City Commission are now
live-streamed on the website so residents can see their elected officials in action. Residents
and business owners can weigh in on issues and policy questions using the Open City Hall
online forum and participate in the recently launched “Open Office Hour” program. Each
Open Office Hour sessions features a city commissioner answering questions from the community about a specific topic. Staff in the Community & Economic Development department use an online film permitting system as well as an online volunteer registration system
to manage and track the thousands of volunteers who participate in special events each year.
The City recognizes that the broad use of technology comes with risks. Cyber threats are
not new but the prevalence and severity of such attacks continue to grow. Government
agencies are a common target of cyber criminals. In an effort to protect the City’s electronic
data and computer systems from unauthorized access, the City conducted a cybersecurity
risk assessment with the assistance of the Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI) and its
Cyber Technology and Information Security Lab. In the next fiscal year, the City will be
addressing the recommendations from the cybersecurity assessment.
Because the City of Decatur values environmental and economic sustainability, City
departments look for fuel-efficient vehicles when making budget requests. New technology allows departments to track fuel usage, monitor vehicle maintenance and track vehicle
locations aimed at reducing operating and repair costs as well as pollution.
All city facilities were constructed to meet or exceed LEED certification standards by using
environmentally friendly and energy efficient products and systems in their construction.
Flexible, multi-use space has been included to respond to changing work needs and to accommodate community meetings. While building security is in place, the goal is to remain
open and inviting to customers.
Fiscal Responsibility
City employees strive to be good stewards of the public’s financial resources. A financial
transparency portal now exists to offer more timely and detailed information to residents
using a system built on the ClearGov platform. The portal was designed to provide public
access to financial information and provide a centralized source of financial data to city officials to make more informed policy and budgetary decisions. Users can access data back
to 2011.
FY 2016-2017 Accomplishments:
• Partnered with Corporate Health Partners for onsite health coaching and nutritionist giving greater response to employee wellness program for all employees (Goal II and III)
• Implemented new strategic plans in Administrative Services, Community & Economic
Development, Police and Fire departments (Goal II and V)
• Incorporated the Special Needs Certification training for all employees (Goal I and II)
• Completed first round of cyber security training for all staff (Goal II)
• Awarded the Distinguished Budget Award and Certificate of Achievement for Excellent
in Financial Reporting from GFOA (Goal V)

26

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

• Launched the “Decatur by the Numbers” financial transparency portal (Goal V and VI)

• Accepted e-checks to reduce bank exceptions and manual posting of payments (Goal III
and VI)

Budget
Narrative

FY 2017-2018 New Projects, Programs, & Policies:
• Expand employee wellness program to include activities to combat obesity and diabetes
(Goal II)
• Upgrade telephone system in city facilities (Goal III and VI)
• Replace the fiber network connecting city facilities (Goal III and VI)
• Purchase a training simulator for use by the Police and Fire departments (Goal III)
• Deploy electronic invoicing and invoice work flow system through accounts payable
software (Goal V)
• Implement recommendations and best practices from cybersecurity risk assessment
(Goal VI)
• Develop and begin implementation of Decatur’s Smart City Initiative (Goal VI)

Principle E Financial Support:
Amount
ADP HR & Payroll system

98,000

Envisio Strategic Plan Dashboard

8,000

Financial Transparency Initiatives

5,000

IT Support & equipment

762,000

Utilities

1,111,400

Audit &other financial service

140,000

Janitorial supplies

59,310

Postage

47,200

Telephone

261,750

GIS

80,000

Insurance premiums

271,900

Administrative duties

2,622,080

Training

385,180

TOTAL:

$5,851,820

This narrative would
not have been possible
without the assistance
of the following city
employees who served
on a budget visioning
team:
Gina Amos
Jennings Bell
Dan Bellis
Gwen Blackwell
Kris Boyett
Will Chandler
Chris Clark
Joeann Cohen
Jabari Cole
Mark Ethun*
Courtney Frisch*
Amy Hall
Lee Ann Harvey
Ashton Hudson
Olivia Burrell-Jackson
Corey Jay
Tim Karolyi
Janet Kindelberger
Portia Langley*
Catherine Lee
Mike Matics
Lyn Menne
Claire Miller
Jackie Moore
Kimberly Parks
Danielle Perry*
Richard Phillips
Zack Ray*
Kevin Rice
Greg Thomas
Ashley Thorpe
Angela Threadgill
Ninetta Violante*
Chet Walker
Tammy Washington
*team captain

CITY OF DECATUR

27

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts

Summary of
Fund Budgets
Budget FY 2017-2018

CITY OF DECATUR
Fund Organizational Chart
Governmental

Governmental
Funds

Funds

Other

on-­‐Major

OtherNNon-Major
Governmental

Governmental
Funds

Funds

Enterprise

unds

EnterpriseFFunds

Fiduciary

unds

FiduciaryFFunds

General
  Fund

General Fund

Cemetery
  Capital

Cemetery
Fund
  Capital
Fund

Conference

Conference
Center/Parking

Center/Parking
Deck
  Fund

Deck Fund

Agency
  Funds

Agency Funds
DDA

DDA
Municipal
  Court

Municipal Court

Capital

Capital
Improvement

Improvement
Fund

Fund

Hotel/Motel
  Tax

Hotel/Motel
Fund
   Tax
Fund

Solid
  Waste
  Fund

Solid Waste Fund

Pension
  Trust

Pension
Fund
  Trust
Fund

General

Obliga7on

General
Bond

Fund

Obligation
Bond
Fund

Tree
  Bank
  Fund

Tree Bank Fund

Stormwater
  Fund

Stormwater Fund

Urban

Urban
Redevelopment

Redevelopment
Agency
  F
und
  2010

Agency Fund 2010

Conﬁscated
  Drug

Confiscated
Fund
   Drug
Fund

Urban

Urban
Redevelopment

Agency
  F
und
  2013

Redevelopment
Agency Fund 2013

Grant
  Fund

Grant Fund

URA-­‐Callaway

Fund

URA-Callaway
Fund

Debt
  Service
  Fund

Debt Service Fund

Children
  &
  Youth

Services
  &Fund

Children
Youth
Services Fund

Emergency
  911

Fund
   911
Emergency
Fund

The City’s accounts are organized by fund groups,
each of which is treated as a separate accounting
entity. Fund accounting is designed to demonstrate
legal compliance and to aid financial management by segregating transactions related to certain
government functions or activities.
Fund budgets are presented within this budget
document. Fund descriptions can be found in
Appendix A - Budget Guide.

Public
  Facili7es


Authority

The City's accounts
are organized by fund groups, each of which is treated as a separate accounting
DECATUR
entity. Fund accounting is designed to demonstrate legal compliance and to aid financial CITY OF
management
by segregating transactions related to certain government functions or activities.

31

32

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018
0
1,180,000
806,750
45,331,300
0
4,850,240
0
0
0
0
0
0
$52,668,290

Capital
Project Funds

General
Fund
16,307,990
6,016,680
2,871,920
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
$25,196,590

1,871,700
0
0
0
0
6,496,230
0
0
548,700
0
$8,096,100

Capital
Project Funds

General
Fund
20,079,310
1,035,400
1,020,000
0
1,856,660
428,800
107,500
0
10,000
(521,110)
$24,016,560

$18,553,224
$11,825,399
$14,827,909
$6,449,858

$5,501,604
$7,209,285
$8,420,470
$7,866,360

0
73,240
142,000
132,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
$347,240

Non-major
Govt’l Funds

674,260
0
0
10
55,000
87,000
0
0
25,000
0
$841,270

Non-Major
Govt’l Funds

$349,059
$327,873
$384,187
$401,162

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6,315,450
0
0
$6,315,450

Debt
Service Fund

5,651,000
0
0
500
0
0
0
0
18,400
0
$5,669,900

Debt
Service Fund

$6,383,974
$6,575,325
$5,900,233
$4,518,093

843,040
128,730
31,950
0
0
0
40,630
0
0
0
0
0
$1,044,350

E911
Fund

0
0
0
0
564,300
0
0
0
0
0
$564,300

E911
Fund

$156,069
$174,769
$272,801
$226,621

1,650,540
379,980
324,920
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
$2,355,440

Children & Youth
Services Fund

0
0
0
0
1,923,770
0
0
0
0
0
$1,923,770

Children & Youth
Services Fund

$800,730
$962,399
$1,131,616
$944,406

1,455,960
1,266,930
302,270
418,600
479,890
0
0
730,000
145,200
0
0
0
$4,798,850

Enterprise
Funds

0
0
0
0
3,935,800
0
0
0
0
0
$3,935,800

Enterprise
Funds

$5,289,992
$14,995,225
$14,719,966
$15,729,366

$20,257,530
$9,045,560
$4,479,810
$45,881,900
$479,890
$4,850,240
$40,630
$730,000
$145,200
$6,315,450
0
$0
$92,726,210

Total
Expenditures

$28,276,270
$1,035,400
$1,020,000
$510
$8,335,530
$7,012,030
$107,500
$0
$602,100
($521,110)
$45,868,230

Total
Revenues

$37,034,652
$42,070,275
$45,657,182
$36,135,867

Assigned for Health Insurance
Unassigned

$252,925
$6,433,405

$0
$5,959,378

$0
$245,932

$0
$3,872,543

$21,092
$125,479

$34,305
$628,431

$6,519
$15,279,398

$314,840
$32,386,367

Excess (deficinecy) of revenues
($1,180,030)
($43,751,660)
$494,030
($645,550)
($480,050)
($431,670)
($863,050)
($46,857,980)
over (under) expenditures
Other Financing Sources (Uses)
Proceeds from Capital Lease
0
42,537,180
0
0
0
0
418,600
$42,955,780
Transfers In
0
3,707,980
55,000
0
400,000
150,000
204,630
$4,517,610
Transfers Out
0
(2,983,980)
704,260
0
0
0
203,630
($3,891,870)
Reserved for Bond Projects
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
$0
Use of Reserves
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
$0
Total Other Financing Sources
$0
$43,261,180
759,260
$0
$400,000
$150,000
$826,860
43,581,520
Fund Balance, end of year
$6,686,330
$5,959,378
$245,932
$3,872,543
$146,571
$662,736
$15,285,916
$32,859,407

Personnel Services
Other Services and Charges
Supplies
Capital Outlay
Indirect Costs
Debt Services
Lease Payments
Depreciation/Amortization
OPEB Costs
Bond Principal and Interest
Cost of Asset Sale
Transfers
Total Expenditures

EXPENDITURES

Taxes
Licenses and permits
Fines and forfeitures
Interest income
Charges for services
Intergovernmental
Contributions
Sale of Assets
Miscellaneous
Transfers
Total Revenues

REVENUES

Fund Balance, end of FY 13-14
Fund Balance, end of FY 14-15
Fund Balance, end of FY 15-16
Fund Balance, beginning of year (est)

Fund Balance Summary - All Funds

CITY OF DECATUR 2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET

CITY OF DECATUR 2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET

Summary of Expenditures - All Funds
ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2012-2013

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE EXPENDITURE
2013-2014
2014-2015

ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2015-2016

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2017-2018

DEPARTMENT
GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL

164,890

188,039

207,357

141,047

180,600

171,000

187,350

GENERAL GOVERNMENT

1,503,840

1,398,193

1,556,835

1,772,702

1,874,440

1,973,730

1,931,690

COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

1,072,087

1,546,874

1,723,833

1,776,873

2,013,620

1,973,220

2,275,640

PLANNING, ZONING AND INSPECTIONS

918,806

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES

2,723,922

2,901,724

3,019,804

3,306,769

3,802,900

3,708,180

4,107,210

POLICE

4,674,890

5,014,163

4,945,760

5,353,096

5,739,870

5,603,540

5,801,080

FIRE

3,335,435

3,461,359

3,581,509

3,634,133

3,630,150

3,632,660

3,538,840

PUBLIC WORKS

2,605,929

2,676,733

2,535,397

2,757,442

3,103,960

3,119,220

3,304,470

PUBLIC WORKS - ENGINEERING

691,079

DESIGN, ENVIRONMENT & CONSTRUCTION

1,977,793

1,972,786

1,604,704

1,936,130

2,051,420

1,815,790

ACTIVE LIVING

1,486,486

1,574,018

1,762,494

1,854,743

2,095,370

2,101,060

2,234,520

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

NON-DEPARTMENT EXPENSES

MISCELLANEOUS & TRANSFER ACCOUNTS
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

GENERAL FUND TOTAL EXPENDITURES
19,177,364
20,738,896
21,305,776
22,201,509
24,377,040 24,334,030 25,196,590

OTHER FUNDS
CAPITAL PROJECTS-CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT (350)

2,203,007

3,133,134

2,378,371

2,770,126

10,460,870

8,854,640

8,090,450

GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND FUND (310)

361,713

365,362

1,912,276

1,460,031

248,240

300,000

330,000

URA 2010 BONDS FUND (340)

8,789,920

5,074,376

1,184,302

1,182,674

1,174,450

1,174,450

1,169,700

URA 2013 BONDS FUND (345)

5,751,311

26,840,423

8,557,796

2,184,355

1,885,060

1,898,040

1,885,710

DEBT SERVICE FUND (410)

9,778,699

2,010,020

2,034,056

3,283,440

6,016,990

6,016,990

6,315,450

CHILDREN & YOUTH SERVICES FUND (225)

1,529,212

1,520,134

1,651,355

1,744,152

2,344,540

2,151,170

2,355,440

EMERGENCY TELEPHONE (E911) (215)

799,877

908,864

906,732

874,156

997,400

1,010,480

1,044,350

CAPITAL PROJECTS-CEMETERY CAP. IMP. (355)

37,559

0

19,428

18,201

177,000

100,000

132,000

HOTEL MOTEL TAX FUND (275)

486,921

521,639

572,237

616,169

642,000

642,000

674,260

TREE BANK FUND (260)

19,098

6,070

28,960

30,630

30,000

30,000

55,000

CONFISCATED DRUG FUND (210)

0

4,836

700

0

2,500

500

1,000

COMMUNITY GRANTS FUND (220)

84,619

0

10,020

325,639

0

23,800

159,240

URA-CALLAWAY FUND (347)

212,944

88,581

119,232

10,763,040

10,725,650

0

PUBLIC FACILITIES AUTHORITY (341)*

0

41,192,430

CONFERENCE CTR/PARKING DECK FUND (555)

485,156

341,931

333,598

322,199

350,000

350,000

345,000

SOLID WASTE ENTERPRISE (540-4520)

2,486,873

2,708,419

2,257,077

2,731,833

2,837,460

2,859,020

2,849,230

STORMWATER UTILITY FUND (505)
1,276,949
2,068,353
1,044,627
1,037,798
1,969,710
2,952,760
1,603,620

OTHER FUNDS TOTAL EXPENDITURES
34,090,914
45,716,504
22,980,117
18,700,634
39,899,260 39,089,500


68,702,880

TOTAL EXPENDITURES

93,899,470

53,268,278

66,455,400

44,285,892

40,902,143

64,276,300

63,423,530


* City of Decatur Public Facilities Authority was created in 2017 by the Georgia General Assembly.


CITY OF DECATUR

33

CITY OF DECATUR 2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET

Summary of Revenues and Expenditures - General Fund
Estimated Beginning Fund Balance:							 $7,866,360
FY 12-13
ACTUAL

FY 13-14
ACTUAL

FY 14-15
ACTUAL

FY 15-16
ACTUAL

FY 16-17
ADOPTED

FY 16-17
REVISED

FY 17-18
PROPOSED

REVENUES
Taxes

$15,034,726

$15,309,966

$17,614,545

$19,511,834

$18,846,500

$19,278,810

$20,079,310

Licenses and permits

$882,323

$1,482,051

$1,428,792

$653,009

$1,031,250

$1,377,950

$1,035,400

Fines and forfeitures

$811,178

$1,386,757

$1,582,236

$927,961

$1,110,000

$989,000

$1,020,000

$181

$360

$0

$0

$0

$0

$0

Charges for services

$1,488,590

$1,546,406

$1,775,444

$1,959,828

$1,854,250

$1,801,050

$1,856,660

Intergovernmental

$349,790

$385,250

$437,421

$399,275

$432,700

$408,770

$428,800

Contributions

$67,385

$94,084

$100,214

$120,010

$122,000

$106,000

$107,500

Miscellaneous

$21,778

$21,279

$20,927

$41,635

$25,000

$24,200

$10,000

$223,675

($2,731,972)

$53,879

($200,859)

($269,000)

($205,860)

($521,110)

$18,879,626

$17,494,182

$23,013,457

$23,412,694

$23,152,700

$23,779,920

$24,016,560

$554,110

$1,180,030

Interest income

Transfers In
Current Year Revenues
Fund balance appropriation - Use of Reserves
Total Revenues

$297,738

$3,244,714

($1,707,681)

($1,211,185)

$1,224,340

$19,177,364

$20,738,896

$21,305,776

$22,201,509

$24,377,040

$24,334,030 $25,196,590

EXPENDITURES
Governmental Control

$164,890

$188,039

$207,357

$141,047

$180,600

$171,000

$187,350

General Government

$1,503,840

$1,398,193

$1,556,835

$1,772,702

$1,874,440

$1,973,730

$1,931,690

Community and Economic Development

$1,072,087

$1,546,874

$1,723,833

$1,776,873

$2,013,620

$1,973,220

$2,275,640

Planning, Zoning & Inspections

$918,806

Administrative Services

$2,723,922

$2,901,724

$3,019,804

$3,306,769

$3,802,900

$3,708,180

$4,107,210

Police

$4,674,890

$5,014,163

$4,945,760

$5,353,096

$5,739,870

$5,603,540

$5,801,080

Fire

$3,335,435

$3,461,359

$3,581,509

$3,634,133

$3,630,150

$3,632,660

$3,538,840

Public Works

$2,605,929

$2,676,733

$2,535,397

$2,757,442

$3,103,960

$3,119,220

$3,304,470

Public Works - Engineering

$691,079

Design, Environment & Construction*

$1,977,793

$1,972,786

$1,604,704

$1,936,130

$2,051,420

$1,815,790

Active Living

$1,486,486

$1,574,018

$1,762,494

$1,854,743

$2,095,370

$2,101,060

$2,234,520

Non-department expenses

$0

$0

$0

$0

$0

$0

$0

Miscellaneous & transfer accounts

$0

$0

$0

$0

$0

$0

$0

Total Expenditures
$19,177,364
$20,738,896
$21,305,776
$22,201,509 $24,377,040 $24,334,030 $25,196,590

Estimated Ending Fund Balance:

$6,686,330

* Design, Environment & Construction created in 2013.

Revenues & Expenditures
Millions of $

26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
FY2013

34

FY2014

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

FY2015

FY2016

FY2017

FY2018

Georgia State law requires that municipalities
adopt balanced budgets where expenditures do
not exceed revenues. It is possible to achieve a
balanced budget by using available fund balance
or reserves. Fund balance should be used
prudently and only in accordance with the city’s
fund balance policy. The 2017-2018 budget uses
$1,180,0300 from fund balance. This will result
in a fund balance of $6,686,330 which is 27%
of the city’s operating budget. The city’s policy
states that the fund balance should be within
20-30% of the operating budget.

Summary of Fund Budgets

All Funds
Overview

2016-2017 REVISED GENERAL FUND BUDGET ESTIMATE
The 2016-2017 Revised Estimate is $43,010 less than the approved 2016-2017 Budget
Estimate, a .18% decrease. Overall personnel services expenditures decrease in the revised
estimate by $203,920. Specifically, there are decreases expected for full-time and part-time
salaries and retirement contributions. The salary savings are a result of vacancies because
the approved budget funds all full-time positions as if they are filled throughout the entire
fiscal year. The majority of the decrease was in the Police department. Other areas in the revised budget with significant savings include street lighting and motor fuels. Street lighting
drops $40,000 as the monthly charge for lighting has dropped almost 10% since last fiscal
year even with the addition of streetlights with new streetscapes, improved lighting around
city facilities and an upgrade to roadway lights from high-pressure and mercury vapor
fixtures to LED fixtures. Savings of over $34,000 are expected in motor fuels which reflect
lower than anticipated gasoline prices throughout the year.
Overtime increases approximately $230,000 in the revised expenditure estimates. Most of
the increases are in the Police and Fire departments which have minimum staffing levels.
The overtime is required when employees are sick, on approved leave and positions are vacant. While overtime increases, there are offsetting reductions in regular, full-time salaries.
The City is reimbursed when police officers work overtime for non-City sponsored special
events such as road races.
Professional services increase by $208,340 primarily due to increased costs associated
with permitting and inspection services provided by the third party, Safebuilt. Construction
activity was strong during this fiscal year, and there are additional large, active projects that
will be permitted later this calendar year. A corresponding increase in development permit
revenues is reflected in the revised budget.
Workers compensation expenditures increase $84,800 or 45% due to a claim settlement as
well as a small number of costly on-the-job injuries.
Group insurance increases $79,720 or approximately 3.8% in the revised budget due to
higher than expected insurance costs. As of March 2017, five participants exceeded the
$75,000 specific stop loss deductible. The City is self-insured up to the specific stop loss
per member and the aggregate stop loss as a whole. In addition to the impact on the current
expenditures, exceeding the stop loss will effect fixed costs associated with the stop loss
coverage in the next fiscal year.
Utility usage has resulted in higher than expected expenditures. In particular, the City’s
overall budget for water and sewer from DeKalb County is increasing by $44,000 to
$130,000 in the revised estimates. While water usage rates have increased, further study is
underway to determine the exact cause of the growth in this area.

CITY OF DECATUR

35

The 2016-2017 Revised General Fund revenue estimates decrease $43,010 from the approved 2016-2017 budget. Before taking into consideration interfund transfers and use of
fund balance, the revised revenue estimates are $564,080 or 2% more than the approved
2016-2017 revenue estimates. Real estate property taxes are increased by $280,000 primarily due to a better collection rate than budgeted. Development-related permit fees increase
$337,400 due to strong commercial and residential development activity. As noted earlier,
there is a corresponding expenditure increase for permitting and inspection services. There
are increases in other revenue categories including an increase of $107,810 in the insurance
premium tax, $60,000 in franchise taxes with the addition of the energy excise tax, and
$25,000 in occupation taxes due to increased gross receipts at financial institutions. Decreases include $101,000 in lower revenue from fines and forfeitures, a decrease of $50,000
in motor vehicle taxes, $45,000 in parking meter fees and $20,000 less in penalty and interest. Most other revenue categories remain flat or change only slightly.
Other adjustments are shown for transfers between the Solid Waste Fund, the Storm Water
Utility Fund, Capital Improvements Fund, Hotel/Motel Tax Fund, E911 Fund and the
Children and Youth Services Fund. The charges to the Solid Waste and Stormwater Funds
reflect revised overhead costs as well as fee credits that were granted on the 2016 tax bills.
The transfer to the Capital Improvements Fund reflects the amount needed to purchase
property adjacent to Glenlake Park. The transfer to the Children and Youth Services Fund
was reduced by $25,000 as that operation reduces its financial dependency on the General
Fund. The General Fund transfer to the E911 Fund remains at $400,000.
There is a decrease in the amount needed from the fund balance. The 2016-2017 Adopted
General Fund anticipated using $1,224,340 from fund balance. The 2016-2017 Revised
General Fund anticipates using $554,110 in fund balance. This will result in a fund balance of approximately $7,866,360 or 31% of the 2017-2018 Adopted General Fund budget
expenditures.

2017-2018 Adopted General Fund Budget Expenditures
The 2017-2018 Adopted General Fund Budget Estimate of $25,196,590 is $819,550
or 3.3% more than the initial 2016-2017 Adopted General Fund Budget Estimate and
$862,560 or 3.5% more than the Revised General Fund Budget Estimate.

36

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

The Personnel Services category increases $487,670 in the 2017-2018 Adopted General
Fund Budget Estimate over the 2016-2017 Revised General Fund Budget Estimate. Within
that category, full-time salaries increase $331,620 and part-time salaries increase $273,670.
Much of this increase is due to full funding for all authorized positions and the addition of
four full-time positions. Of the four proposed positions, three are needed for initial maintenance and operations upon purchase of the United Methodist Children’s Home. These
positions include a Public Works Crew Supervisor, Crew Worker and an Active Living
Program Assistant. The fourth position, an Administrative Services Assistant, is requested
by the Community and Economic Development department. This position would perform
receptionist and front office responsibilities for the department. The Community and Economic Development department requests that the current Office Manager be re-classified to
a new Operations Analyst position to better reflect the finance, accounting, and administration roles of that employee. This position would be funded by the Downtown Development
Authority. Other additions include a part-time program leader for the Athletics division at
Ebster Recreation Center, three part-time school-crossing guards, a part-time payroll clerk
and fifteen part-time firefighters. Program fees at both recreation centers will help to offset
the costs associated with the Active Living position. The part-time firefighters are being
added to address the impact of minimum staffing requirements on overtime. It is anticipated
that the addition of part-time firefighters will result in a significant reduction in the use of
overtime while still meeting minimum staffing requirements.

A comprehensive salary survey was conducted in March 2017 which includes data from
cities in the metro-Atlanta region. In addition to the salary survey conducted by the City,
data from the Georgia Department of Community Affairs Wage and Salary survey was
incorporated into City’s salary survey data. Overall, most positions are at least 5% below
the market median salary. In an effort to improve the City’s competiveness with salaries in
the Atlanta area, a 10% shift upward in salary ranges is proposed. This shift changes the pay
scale and makes salaries more attractive from a recruitment perspective. A change to current
employee salaries is recommended with a 5% market-rate salary adjustment for all full-time
employees effective January 1, 2018. Regular, full-time employees who are not at the top of
their salary range are eligible for a 2.5% in-step merit increase on their anniversary within
fiscal year 2017-2018.

All Funds
Overview

Some positions are being reclassified from one pay range to another based on the salary
survey results, internal equity issues, or both. Those are: Parking Attendant -Range 1 to
Range 3; Accounting Clerk -Range 3 to Range 4: Fire Inspector - Range 9 to Range 10: Assistant Active Living Director, Assistant Children & Youth Services Director and Budget &
Performance Measurement Director -Range 14 to Range 15; City Clerk, Facilities Superintendent, Personnel Director, Revenue & Technology Director and Sanitation Services
Superintendent - Range 15 to Range 16; Building Official -Range 16 to Range 17; Planning
Director -Range 17 to Range 18; Chief-Civic Engagement, Education & Communication,
Fire Chief and Police Chief - Range 20 to Range 21; and, Assistant City Manager - Range
22 to Range 23.
There are three reclassifications being recommended based on job duties. An Officer Manager to Operations Analyst - Range 7 to Range 10; a Fire Captain to Assistant Fire Chief
-Range 16 to Range 17; and, an Administrative Assistant to Office Manager - Range 5 to
Range 7. The Payroll & Benefits Coordinator is retitled to Health & Wellness Coordinator
with no range change.
The City estimates full funding for all positions in the adopted budget. Any salary savings
due to unfilled positions are accounted for during the revised budget process. Because it can
be difficult to predict the City’s actual employee recruitment and retention rate and a schedule for filling vacancies, it is prudent to fund all positions and it does provide departments
with some financial flexibility for unanticipated expenses during the budget year.
After salaries, group insurance is the single largest personnel services expenditure in the
general fund budget at $2,383,070 or 9% of the overall budget. This is an increase of
$162,030 or about 7%. Group insurance includes health claims, prescription drug costs,
specific and aggregate stop loss fees, claims handling fees, Affordable Care Act reinsurance
fees, dental and vision claims and fees, life insurance and short term disability insurance,
and wellness program fees. After 5 years with a fully-insured health plan, the City returned
to a partially self-insured health plan in fiscal year 2014-2015. The partially self-insured
plan includes specific and aggregate stop loss coverage to limit the city’s maximum liability.
In the revised 2016-2017 estimates, the City’s contribution towards health costs increases
3.8%. Based on claims paid through March 2017, total health claims are estimated to be
close to 98% of budgeted claims at the end of the fiscal year. The adopted budget also
includes an increase for health insurance coverage. The specific stop loss insurance rates for
fiscal year 2017-2018 are increasing 23% or over $545,000, primarily due to five claimants
exceeding the specific stop loss deductible. The cost for specific stop loss coverage is based
on increasing the deductible from $75,000 to $85,000. Retaining a $75,000 deductible will
increase cost by an additional $90,000. There is an increase of 2.7% in the administration
fees for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Georgia (BCBSGA). Based on current information about
the Affordable Care Act, the City’s reinsurance payment decreases. The adopted budget
estimates claims to be around 90% of the City’s maximum claims liability. To put this in

CITY OF DECATUR

37

perspective, the City’s actual expenditures on health claims were 84% of the maximum
claims liability in fiscal year 2015-2016. The City’s overall group insurance expenditures
were about $46,000 less than budgeted in fiscal year 2015-2016. This resulted in a cumulative amount of $314,839 as assigned fund balance for the purpose of smoothing health
costs. The assigned fund balance is useful for a self-insured health plan that can be sensitive
to a number of high claims. The revised fiscal year 2016-2017 budget uses $185,000 in fund
balance towards health costs.
The City’s funding policy for health costs are calculated based on employee contributions
funding 20% of the overall cost and the city paying the remaining 80%. Early retirees (pre65) are offered a high deductible health insurance plan. In the proposed budget, employee
contributions increase 6%. Other changes include the addition of a surcharge for spouses
that have access to coverage with another employer and an increase in the employee’s out
of pocket cost for non-formulary prescription drugs. Employees have the opportunity to
reduce their insurance contribution by up to 30% through participation in the city’s wellness
program. The 6th full year of the city’s wellness program will continue in the next budget
year. The City partners with Corporate Health Partners to provide wellness services. Based
on the results of a biometric and health risk assessment, a employee meets with a health
coach during the year to identify health risks and develop strategies for addressing the risks.
The cost of the wellness premium discount plus the health coaching program is estimated to
be around $175,000. Studies consistently show that investment in employee wellness pays
off with healthier, more productive employees.
The City’s contribution to the City of Decatur Employees’ Retirement System remains at
8% of payroll, the same rate as FY 2016-2017.
Professional services is the second largest expenditure, totaling $2,334,620 in the adopted
budget, a decrease of $164,450. The majority of the decrease is due to an anticipated decrease in the permitting and inspections services provided by Safebuilt. Other professional
services include legal services, IT support services, accounting services and services from
other professional and technical fields. Legal fees are budgeted lower in the FY 2017-2018
fiscal year and information technology related services are higher in response to necessary
improvements to the City’s cybersecurity efforts. Contractual services total $1,653,500, an
increase of $32,670. Included in this increase are non-recurring projects including updates
to the community transportation and greenspace master plans.
The pool management contract increases with extended weekend hours after Labor Day
weekend at Glenlake Pool. Other new or increased expenditures include increased costs for
a bike share program, financial transparency software , strategic plan management software, crime analysis software, specialized training for police officers, and an anticipated
increase in gasoline costs. Expenditures continue for general operating items such as safety
equipment for fire and police personnel, CPR and First Aid training for City employees and
citizens, turf and park maintenance, invasive plant control, AEDs for city facilities, community-wide Active Living programs including Team Decatur, creative business recruitment
strategy, the Fire CAPS program and continued emphasis on pedestrian and bicycle safety
and environmental initiatives.
In addition to the personnel requested to meet the basic maintenance and operations needs
of the new City property on South Columbia Drive, the budget includes an additional
$175,000 for utilities for the new property, $45,000 for grounds maintenance, $25,000 for
telecommunications, and $27,000 for insurance. The amount needed for the stormwater fee
is uncertain but an additional $48,000 is included.
38

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

2017-2018 Adopted General Fund Budget Revenues
The 2017-2018 Proposed General Fund revenue estimates are $862,560 higher than the
revised 2016-2017 General Fund revenue estimates.

All Funds
Overview

The 2017-2018 Adopted General Fund real property tax estimate is $810,000 higher than
revised 2016-2017 based on an estimated 5% increase in the real property digest for 2017
and increasing the general fund millage from 9.3 mills to 9.5 mills. The purpose of the .20
millage rate increase, which is estimated to produce about $350,000, is to meet the initial
maintenance and operations needs of the property on South Columbia Drive. The adopted
revenues incorporates the application of the homestead exemptions approved in fall 2016
which reduces anticipated property tax revenue by approximately $385,000. The total estimate for real property tax revenue is $15,205,000 which is 62% of total anticipated revenues.
Construction permits reflect strong development activity in the city. The revised 2016-2017
development-related fees are budgeted at just under $1.3 million; a significant increase over
the $765,752 received in fiscal year 2015-2016. The estimate for fiscal year 2017-2018 is a
bit more conservative at $926,500. Additional permitting is anticipated for the development
at East College, the Callaway project and a new downtown hotel. Parking meter fees and
violations are expected to be close to $850,000. Fines and forfeitures are expected to remain
near $800,000. This is consistent with the revised fiscal year 2016-2017 estimates but still
much lower than the $1.3 million collected in fiscal year 2014-2015. The fluctuations in fine
revenue reflect how sensitive these revenues are to staffing levels and patrol assignments.
Recreation program fees and facility rentals are expected to increase to $792,000 with updated rental fees and increasing demand for the City’s active living services.
Starting in fiscal year 2015-2016, the City began distributing 50% of net revenues from
alcoholic beverage excise taxes, licenses and server permits to the City Schools of Decatur.
The actual transfer of close to $320,000 was consistent with initial estimates. The alcoholic
beverage revenues are expected to remain stable.
It is anticipated that other revenue sources will generally show modest or no changes based
on estimates using historic and economic trends.
A transfer from the Solid Waste Fund to the General Fund is shown as revenue to cover
the indirect costs of providing residential and commercial solid waste services minus the
cost of services provided to the City of Decatur and to the City Schools of Decatur, the cost
for street sweeping and the cost for emptying litter containers in the commercial district.
A transfer from the Storm Water Utility Fund to the General Fund is shown as revenue to
cover indirect costs of supporting storm water activities.
The E-911 Fund accounts for all the revenues and expenditures associated with operating
the emergency public safety dispatch system. Fees from telephone lines as well as cellular
phone service are dedicated to this purpose. However, a transfer from the general fund is
required to meet the balance of the expenditures not covered by the E-911 fees. The 20172018 Adopted General Fund estimate shows a $400,000 transfer to the E-911 fund, which is
the same as the 2016-2017 Revised budget.
Children and Youth Services expenditures and revenues are budgeted in a special revenue
fund that combines annual city support, grant revenues and fees to support the program.
The original 2016-2017 budget estimate of $175,000 is reduced to $150,000 in the revised
budget due to lower expenditures. For 2017-2018, there is a transfer from the General Fund
to the Children and Youth Services Fund of $150,000.
A transfer of $385,000 is budgeted from the revised 2016-2017 General Fund to the Capital
Improvements Fund for the purchase of property adjacent to Glenlake Park. A transfer of

CITY OF DECATUR

39

$750,000 is budgeted from the adopted 2017-2018 General Fund to the Public Facilities
Authority Fund to cover debt service costs for purchase of the United Methodist Children’s
Home property. It was recommended that the levy for general fund operations decrease to
9.24 mills.
Enterprise Funds
The City Commission was also asked to adopt 2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Proposed
Budgets for three Enterprise Funds. Enterprise Funds are used to account for operations that
are financed and operated in a manner similar to private business enterprise where the intent
is that the cost of providing goods or services to the general public on a continuing basis be
financed primarily through user charges.
Conference Center/Parking Deck
The City has entered into a long-term lease with the Decatur Downtown Development
Authority (DDA) for operation and management of the conference center and parking deck.
The DDA entered into a sub-lease with the Noble Investment Group for management and
operation of the conference center. Hotel/motel tax collections for the upkeep and maintenance of the conference center are placed in a reserve account to be used for maintenance
of the facility. That is the only public financial obligation for operation, maintenance and
capital improvements for the conference center. A strong economy and the popularity of
downtown Decatur as a destination for personal and professional travel contribute to the
revenue available for facility maintenance and capital improvements.
The 2016-2017 Revised Budget includes a transfer of $183,500 from the Hotel/Motel Tax
Fund to cover maintenance costs. The 2016-2017 Revised Budget includes $20,000 in
expenditures which includes maintenance and repairs for the parking deck lobby.
The 2017-2018 Adopted Budget revenues include a transfer of $192,630 from the Hotel/
Motel Tax Fund to cover maintenance costs. Expenditures include $15,000 for parking
deck maintenance and repair. The City’s reserves from prior years’ service fees will likely
be depleted in fiscal year 2017-2018. The funds in the capital maintenance reserve will be
available to address future capital needs of the conference center. A maintenance reserve account has also been created with revenue from the parking deck management contract. The
revenue in this account is available for maintenance and repairs for the parking deck.
Solid Waste
Effective July 1, 2000, solid waste services began to be accounted for using an Enterprise
Fund. Sanitation fees and income from refuse bag sales are shown in the Solid Waste Fund
along with all operational expenses.
A transfer of $154,390 will be made from the 2016-2017 Revised Solid Waste Fund to the
2016-2017 Revised General Fund Budget to cover the indirect cost of services paid for by
the General Fund for solid waste management services minus a credit for the cost of street
sweeping, the cost of collecting the downtown litter containers, a credit for services provided but not billed to the City and to the City Schools of Decatur and a credit for the cost
of the fee waiver granted in 2016 to low-income seniors.
An estimated transfer of $172,150 will be made from the 2017-2018 Adopted Solid Waste
Fund to the 2017-2018 Adopted General Fund Budget to cover the indirect cost of services
paid for by the General Fund for solid waste management services minus a credit for the
cost of street sweeping, the cost of collecting the downtown street cans, a credit for services
provided but not billed to the City and to the City Schools of Decatur.
40

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Using an estimate of total solid waste costs included in the 2017-2018 Adopted Budget, the
2017 recommended user fees for various sanitation services were calculated earlier this year
and the City Commission adopted the following schedule of fees:
• Increased the annual assessment from $275 to $278 for residential properties.
• Retained per cubic yard charge for dumpster service from at $4.05.
• Increased the annual assessment from $750 to $760 per single 95-gallon cart for once a
week pick-up, with fees increasing based on the number of carts and the number of pickups per week.
• Increased the annual assessment from $1,125 to $1,140 per 3 cubic yard dumpster collection with increased charges depending on the number of pick-ups per week.
• Retained the charges for the costs of residential garbage bags at $1.35 per 30-gallon bag,
$0.65 per 15-gallon bag, and $0.38 per 8-gallon bag to cover disposal costs.
The City contracts with Latham Home Sanitation for residential recycling services. The recently adopted residential service fee should cover the anticipated increase in the fiscal year
2017-2018 recycling contract which will increase equivalent to the consumer price index.

All Funds
Overview

Total revenues for 2017-2018 are estimated to be $2,630,800 and expenses prior to nonoperating expenses like depreciation are estimated to be $2,416,080. The current collection
rate for sanitation fees is 99.6% for the 2016 service year.
Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2017-2018 for solid waste operations include a street
sweeper ($218,600) to replace a 2005 street sweeper.
Storm Water Utility
The major activity of this fund has been the construction of downtown storm drainage
improvements and construction of neighborhood storm drainage improvements. In June
2016, an increase in the stormwater utility charge was approved from the annual fee of $75
per Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) to $100 per ERU in an effort to address the City’s
ongoing capital stormwater needs. The fee was previously updated in 2005.
Revenue from fees, including the regional stormwater facility fees, for the 2016-2017
Revised Storm Water Utility is $2,167,000. Expenses, including transfers to other funds,
indirect costs, depreciation and costs related to other post employment benefits (OPEB) are
estimated to be $2,952,760. Revenue from fees for the 2017-2018 Asopted Storm Water
Utility is $1,305,000 and expenses are estimated to be $1,603,620. In the revised budget,
$150,000 is budgeted for Lockwood Terrace and $2,275,000 is budgeted for the expenses
for extending the downtown main storm sewer system to Barry Street. The original approved budget for this project was $1,725,000. The $550,000 increase is due to the need to
repair the streets and sidewalks that were disturbed as the result of emergency repairs by
DeKalb County of a deteriorated and obsolete sanitary sewer system in the project area.
This project is being funded from $725,000 in HOST funds, $830,000 in revenue from the
regional stormwater facility, and $720,000 from stormwater utility fees. In the 2017-2018
Adopted Storm Water Utility Fund, $250,000 is budgeted to cover approximately onehalf of the cost of a stormwater master plan, $100,000 for a replacement dump truck and
$100,000 for capital repairs. Upon the completion of the current capital stormwater projects
and the master plan, there will be limited funding for major capital projects until the fund
builds up reserves from year to year.
Starting in fiscal year 2014-2015, the stormwater utility began to receive revenue from
participants in the regional stormwater facility that is part of the Beacon Municipal Center
project. Properties being developed in the upper Peavine basin have the option to use the
Beacon detention facility to store stormwater in lieu of on-site water storage. To date, close
CITY OF DECATUR

41

to $830,000 has been paid into the regional stormwater facility, which is being used to fund
phase 2 of storm drainage improvements at Barry Street.
A transfer of $297,750 will be made from the 2016-2017 Revised Storm Water Utility
Fund to the 2016-2017 Revised General Fund Budget to cover the indirect cost of services
paid for by the General Fund for storm water management plus a credit for the fee waiver
granted in 2016 to low-income seniors. A transfer of $307,740 will be made from the
2017-2018 Storm Water Fund to the 2017-2018 Adopted General Fund Budget to cover the
indirect costs.
OTHER FUNDS
The City Commission was also asked to adopt 2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Proposed Budgets for the Capital Improvement Fund, the 2007 General Obligation Bond Fund,
the 2010 and 2013 Urban Redevelopment Agency Funds, the URA Callaway Fund, the
Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund, Children and Youth Services Fund, the Debt Service
Fund, the Tree Bank Fund, the Emergency Telephone System (E911) Fund, the Community
Grants Fund and the Confiscated Drug Fund.
Capital Improvement Fund
The 2016-2017 Revised Capital Improvement Fund budget includes $1,705,000 in tax revenue and $3,221,000 in intergovernmental revenue. The intergovernmental revenue is for
design of the Clairemont/Church/Commerce intersection improvements, Livable Centers
Initiative (LCI) funding for the North McDonough Streetscapes, Transportation Enhancement (TE) funding for the railroad crossings project and funding from the State of Georgia
for street repair, patching and resurfacing under the Local Maintenance and Improvement
Grant (LMIG) program. In 2016-2017, the City received $4,363,380 from HOST, which is
included in the 2016-2017 Revised Capital Improvement Fund budget.

42

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Examples of capital outlay projects in the 2016-2017 Revised Capital Improvement Fund
Budget Estimate include:
• Playground Equipment
• Bandstand Repairs & Painting
• Zero-turn Mower
• Fire Station 1 Driveway Repairs
• Police Portable Radios
• Police Firearms Replacement
• Sidewalk Construction & Repair
• Traffic Calming Devices
• Street patching, repair and paving
• Square Landscaping Improvements
• Police Furniture & Equipment
• Public Works and Public Safety Vehicles
The 2016-2017 Revised Capital Improvement Fund budget includes expenditures of
$550,290 for debt service to cover payments for previously purchased equipment. HOST
funds are designated for projects including the Boys & Girls Club Pool renovations
($360,000), Facility Upgrades at Oakhurst & McKoy Parks ($1,250,000), Decatur Recreation Center Movement Studio Window Shade Modification ($10,000), McDonough &
Candler Railroad Crossings ($710,000), North McDonough Streetscapes IV ($470,000),
Public Art ($10,000), West Howard Avenue Redesign Services ($20,000), Keyless Entry
Systems at Fire Stations 1 and 2 ($20,500), Property Purchases ($254,000) and A/V Equipment at Public Works ($10,000) and transfers of $185,600 and $1,481,330 to the 2010 URA
and 2013 URA Funds, respectively, as well as a $48,560 transfer to DDA for debt service

and a transfer to the stormwater fund in the amount of $725,000 towards the Barry Street
stormwater improvement project.

All Funds
Overview

The 2017-2018 Adopted Capital Improvement Fund budget includes $1,713,500 in tax revenue and $2,297,300 in intergovernmental revenue. The intergovernmental revenue is from
the MARTA offset program for design of the Clairemont/Commerce and Church/Commerce intersections, from the Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) for the North McDonough
Streetscapes, from the State of Georgia for street repair, patching and resurfacing under the
Local Maintenance and Improvement Grant (LMIG) program, Transportation Enhancement
revenue for the McDonough/Candler railroad crossing project and the PATH Foundation
for the Commerce Drive bike track. HOST proceeds are budgeted to be $3,500,000. Once
the City has closed the financing and purchase of the property from the United Methodist
Children’s Home, reimbursement of expenses associated with the sale will be reimbursed to
the capital improvements fund.
Examples of capital outlay projects in the 2017-2018 Capital Improvement Fund Budget
Estimate include:
• Skatepark Equipment
• McKoy Pool Resurfacing
• Automated Parking Pay Stations
• Fiber Network Upgrade
• Sidewalk Construction & Repair
• Traffic Calming Devices
• Street patching, repair and paving
• Commerce Drive cycle track
• City Hall carpet
• Public Works and Public Safety Vehicles
The 2017-2018 Capital Improvement Fund Budget Estimate includes authorization for the
Fire department to prepare specifications and order a replacement fire pumper in an amount
not to exceed $1,100,000.
The 2017-2018 Adopted Capital Improvement Fund budget includes expenditures of
$1,102,400 for debt service to cover payments for previously purchased equipment. From
the HOST proceeds, there is a transfer of $751,900 to the 2010 URA Fund for debt service on the 2010 URA bonds and a transfer of $1,482,980 to the 2013 URA Fund for debt
service. In addition, starting January 2017, the City Schools of Decatur began paying rent
for their use of the joint facility on Talley Street. This revenue is applied to the 2010 URA
debt service. Other HOST funded projects include the Master Planning effort for the United
Methodist Children’s Home property ($150,000), Ebster & McKoy Fields Storage Buildings ($100,000), Commerce Drive Cycle track ($750,000), Building B Buildout & Shelving
($150,000), Sidewalk Construction and Repair ($175,000), West Howard Avenue Redesign services ($40,000), Avondale MARTA match ($300,000), HAWK Signal grant match
($55,000), Public Art ($10,000), North McDonough Streetscapes ($238,000), McDonough
& Candler Railroad Crossings ($370,000), and Clairemont/Church/Commerce Pedestrian &
Bike Improvements ($72,000).
It was recommended that the levy for capital improvement purposes increase to 1.06 mills.
General Obligation Bond Fund
The General Obligation Bond Fund accounts for the approved general obligation bond fund
projects that are being financed primarily through a 2007 GO Bond issue.
CITY OF DECATUR

43

The 2016-2017 General Obligation Bond Fund projects include Oakhurst Streetscapes and
Downtown Streetscapes – Phase V. The 2016-2017 Revised General Obligation Bond Fund
project expenditures total $300,000. In addition to the general obligation bond proceeds,
there is Department of Transportation funding budgeted for both projects.
The 2017-2018 budget funds improvements to the McDonough/Candler railroad crossings.
The 2017-2018 Adopted General Obligation Bond Fund expenditures total $330,000. The
fund balance should be depleted at the end of fiscal 2017-2018.
2010 Urban Redevelopment Agency (URA) Fund
The 2010 URA Fund accounts bonds that were issued by the URA in December 2010. The
bond revenue was used for construction and renovation of Fire Station #1, Decatur Recreation Center and the Public Works facility.
The 2016-2017 Revised 2010 URA Fund budget includes a federal rebate of $302,860 on
the interest paid on the bonds. Other revenues include $562,550 from the sale of property
as part of the Callaway redevelopment and $121,600 rent revenue from the City Schools of
Decatur for their part of the joint maintenance facility on Talley Street. These funds have
been applied towards the 2010 URA debt service.
The 2016-2017 Revised 2010 URA Fund budget accounts for the debt service on the bond
proceeds. HOST proceeds are budgeted as a transfer from the Capital Improvement Fund
for the debt service ($185,600).
The 2017-2018 Adopted URA Fund budget includes revenue of $296,200 for the federal
rebate on the interest paid by the City on the bonds. Other revenues include $121,600 from
the City Schools of Decatur for rent for their use of the joint maintenance facility on Talley
Street.
Expenditures for the 2017-2018 Adopted URA Fund budget include debt service payments
in the amount of $1,169,700 prior to the interest rebate, and will be paid with HOST funds
transferred from the Capital Improvement Fund.
2013 Urban Redevelopment Agency (URA) Fund
The 2013 URA accounts for the revenue bonds that were issued by the URA in April 2013.
The revenue from these bonds was used for construction and renovation of the Beacon
Municipal Center.
The 2016-2017 Revised 2013 URA Fund budget includes $12,980 in project related expenditures to complete the final payments for the renovation and construction of the Beacon
Municipal Center. Two bond series, Series 2013A and 2013B, are accounted for in this
fund. Series 2013A includes the City portions of the project and series 2013B includes the
City Schools of Decatur portion of the project.
HOST proceeds are budgeted as a transfer from the Capital Improvement Fund in the
amount of $1,481,330 for debt service. The school system is responsible for $403,730 in
debt service.
The 2017-2018 Adopted URA Fund expenditure budget accounts for the debt service on the
revenue bonds. Debt service totals $1,482,980 for the Series 2013A bonds and $402,730
for the Series 2013B bonds, the latter of which is the financial responsibility of the school
system. A transfer of $1,482,980 will be made from the HOST proceeds in the Capital
Improvement Fund for the City’s portion of the debt service.
44

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

URA Callaway Fund
The URA Callaway Fund accounts for the revenue bonds that were issued in October
2013 by the URA. The proceeds from these bonds, which totaled $5,120,000, were used
to purchase the Callaway Building from DeKalb County for redevelopment purposes. The
City was responsible for interest only payments until the principal amount was due on
November 1, 2016. The URA entered into a lease agreement with the building’s tenant,
DeKalb County, and the lease payments covered the interest payments. Upon the sale of the
property in August 2016 for redevelopment the outstanding principal and interest were paid.

All Funds
Overview

Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund
The 2016-2017 Revised Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund reflects revenue of $98,000
that is mainly revenue from sales of lots. Expenditures are estimated at $100,000 for
cemetery maintenance and repair projects, including the replacement of stairs and handrails
throughout the cemetery.
The 2017-2018 Adopted Budget includes $55,000 in revenues from lot sales which reflects
the limited supply of available grave sites. Adopted expenditures total $132,000 and include
improvements to the water system, landscaping & signage at the entrances and the ongoing
cemetery marker restoration. In order to fund the total project budget for the major cemetery
improvements, a transfer was made by the Capital Improvement Fund to the General Obligation Bond Fund to cover some of the costs of the cemetery project. For several years, the
Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund will transfer funds back to the Capital Improvement
Fund and Stormwater Fund. In FY 2016-2017 and FY 2017-2018 transfers of $18,000 to the
Capital Improvement Fund and $12,000 to the Stormwater Utility Fund are budgeted.
Debt Service Fund
The 2016-2017 Revised Debt Service Fund Budget shows $1,690,000 in tax revenue to retire debt on the 2007 general obligation bond issue. There is a $1,073,500 interest payment
and a $660,000 principal payment for the bonded debt. At June 30, 2017 it is estimated that
there will be approximately $983,420 in fund balance for the city’s 2007 general obligation
bonds.
The 2017-2018 Adopted Debt Service Fund Budget shows $1,715,000 in tax revenue to
retire debt on the 2007 bond issue. There is a $1,048,000 interest payment and an $820,000
principal payment for bonded debt included in the 2017-2018 Adopted Debt Service Fund
Budget. At June 30, 2017 it is estimated that there will be approximately $830,420 in fund
balance for the city’s general obligation bonds.
In December 2012, the City issued $5,400,000 in general obligation sales tax notes on
behalf of the City Schools of Decatur. The City Schools of Decatur funds repayment of the
notes with special purpose local option sales tax revenues. The principal and interest payments are reflected in the Debt Service Fund budget. In years 2016-2017 and 2017-2018,
the school system will pay $54,850 and $18,400 respectively, in interest. The school system
will make a principal payment of $1,805,000 in 2016-2017 and the final principal payment
of $1,840,000 in 2017-2018.
In February 2016, the City issued $75,000,000 in general obligation bonds for the City
Schools of Decatur capital projects. The 2016-2017 Revised Debt Service Fund Budget
shows $2,890,000 in tax revenue for debt service. At June 30, 2017 it is estimated that there
will be approximately $1,694,891 in fund balance.
The 2017-2018 Adopted Debt Service Fund Budget shows revenues of $3,936,000 in tax
revenue for debt service. A $2,589,050 interest payment for bonded debt is included in the
CITY OF DECATUR

45

2017-2018 Adopted Debt Service Fund Budget. At June 30, 2018 it is estimated that there
will be approximately $3,041,841 in fund balance for the 2016 school general obligation
bonds.
In August 2018, the first principal payment of $1,165,000 for the 2016 school general obligation bonds is due. The revenue must be collected in fiscal year 2017-2018 in advance of
the August 2018 due date. This requires an increase in the debt service levy of four-tenths of
a mill. It is recommended that the levy of 1.57 mills for the 2016 school general obligation
bonds be increased to 1.97 and the levy for the 2007 general obligation bonds remain at .92
mills for a total debt service levy of 2.89.
Tree Bank Fund
The Tree Bank Fund was established to receive payments from property owners in lieu of
planting replacement trees required for compliance with the city’s tree ordinance. Fees are
used to purchase and plant trees in public parks, rights of way and other public properties,
the purchase of green space, funding tree care educational programs and similar activities
associated with maintaining and improving the city’s public tree canopy.
The 2016-2017 Revised Tree Bank Fund Budget shows $57,000 in revenues and $30,000 in
expenditures. The balance in the tree bank as of June 30, 2016 was $167,745. At the end of
fiscal year 2016-2017, the Tree Bank Account balance is estimated to be $194,745.
The 2017-2018 Adopted Tree Bank Fund Budget shows tree bank contributions of $25,000.
There are expenditures of $55,000 for tree plantings and downtown tree maintenance. The
balance in the tree bank as of June 30, 2018 is estimated to be $164,745.
Emergency Telephone System Fund
The City collects $1.50 per land phone line, cell phone line and voice over IP account in the
City for provision of E-911 emergency telephone services. This is the maximum amount allowed by State law. In August 2011, the City Commission approved a resolution to impose
a 911 charge on prepaid wireless services to be paid directly from the State to the City.
The City is required to maintain a separate Emergency Telephone System Fund to account
for the revenues from E-911 fees and to account for the expenditures for provision of the
service. Therefore, all E-911 fees and all E-911 expenditures are accounted for in this fund.
Because it costs the City more to provide E-911 services than is collected through fees, a
transfer from the General Fund covers the balance.
Revenue for the 2016-2017 Revised Emergency Telephone System Fund is $564,300
and expenditures are estimated to be $1,010,480. Revenue for the 2017-2018 Adopted
Emergency Telephone System Fund is $564,300 and expenditures are estimated to be
$1,044,350. The 2016-2017 revised budget includes the annual lease payment of $28,600
for the E911 call handling system. In addition to the lease payment on the E911 call handling system, the 2017-2018 adopted budget includes a lease payment of $10,000 for the
call recording system.
A transfer of $400,000 will be made to the 2016-2017 Revised Emergency Telephone System Fund from the 2016-2017 Revised General Fund Budget to cover the cost of providing
E-911 not covered by E-911 fees. A transfer of $400,000 is estimated from the 2017-2018
Adopted General Fund Budget to the 2017-2018 Proposed Emergency Telephone Fund for
the same purpose. In the absence of additional revenues and/or reduced expenditures, the
E911 fund balance will be nearly depleted.

46

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

In May 2017, Governor Deal vetoed Senate Bill 222 that would have created a Local
Government 911 Authority and would have resulted in changes to 911 fee collection and

disbursement. Instead, the Governor stated that he would create such authority by executive
order and house it in the Georgia Emergency Management and Homeland Security Agency.

All Funds
Overview

Children and Youth Services Fund
Upon the completion of the 21st Century Learning Center grant, the City established a
special revenue Children and Youth Services Fund to account for grants, program fees, accumulated fees, contributions from other partners and a transfer from the General Fund for
support of children and youth services.
Revenue for the 2016-2017 Revised Children and Youth Services Fund is anticipated to
be $1,813,960 and expenditures are estimated to be $2,151,170. The revised revenues
are slightly lower than the original budget because the school system is operating its own
after-school tutoring program and no longer providing financial support for a city-sponsored
tutoring program. A transfer of $150,000 will be made from the 2016-2017 Revised General
Fund Budget to cover the cost of providing children and youth services not covered by other revenue sources. This is $25,000 less than the original 2016-2017 budget. The remaining
difference will be covered by the accumulated reserve resulting in an ending fund balance
of approximately $944,400.
Revenue for the 2017-2018 Adopted Children and Youth Services Fund is $1,923,770 and
expenditures are estimated to be $2,355,440. The adopted budget includes increases of $2 to
the starting pay rates for part-time counselors. A transfer of $150,000 is budgeted from the
2017-2018 Adopted General Fund Budget to cover the cost of providing children and youth
services not covered by other revenue sources. The remaining difference will be covered
by the accumulated reserve resulting in an ending fund balance of $662,730.
The transfer from the general fund has decreased from a high of $450,000 in 2008-2009 to
$150,000 in the current fiscal year. The goal is for the program to be financially self-supporting while remaining affordable and accessible.
Confiscated Drug Fund
The purpose of this fund is to account for monies and goods confiscated when the Police
department makes an arrest and obtains a conviction in a drug-related case. Funds are made
available to the department when the case has been successfully prosecuted. Expenditures
from this fund can only be made for law enforcement purposes.
The 2016-2017 Revised Confiscated Drug Fund Budget shows revenues of $10 and expenditures of $500. It is estimated that the fund balance at June 30, 2017 will be $11,589. The
2017-2018 Adopted Confiscated Drug Fund Budget Estimate shows revenues of $10 and
expenditures of $1,000. It is estimated that the fund balance at June 30, 2018 will decrease
to $10,599.
Hotel/Motel Tax Fund
The purpose of this fund is to account for monies collected pursuant to the imposition of a
hotel/motel tax on rooms rented by hotels and motels within the City. Expenditures from
this fund can only be made for purposes defined in state law, including the support of a
conference center, support of a tourism bureau and for general purposes.
The 2016-2017 Revised Hotel/Motel Tax Fund Budget shows revenues of $642,000 and expenditures of $183,500 for the support of the Decatur Tourism Bureau; a $183,500 transfer
to the Conference Center Fund; and a $275,000 transfer to the General Fund.

CITY OF DECATUR

47

The 2017-2018 Adopted Hotel/Motel Tax Fund Budget Estimate shows revenues of
$674,260. Expenditures include $192,630 for the support of the Decatur Tourism Bureau; a
$192,630 transfer to the Conference Center Fund; and a transfer of $289,000 to the General
Fund.
Public Facilities Authority Fund
The City of Decatur Public Facilities Authority was created by the Georgia General Assembly in 2017. The fiscal year 2017-2018 Public Facilities Authority budget reflects the
proposed issuance of $41 million in revenue bonds for the purchase of the United Methodist
Children’s Home property. This property will provide valuable greenspace and recreational
facilities for the community. The long-term future of the property will be determined
through a community-wide master planning process.
It is anticipated that the first interest payment will be due February 2018. A transfer of
$750,000 from the general fund balance is budgeted for an interest payment. Revenue for
future debt service payments may be transferred from the capital improvements fund and
will require an increase in the millage rate of 1.2 mills. The timing of the millage rate increase is uncertain at this time but could be as early as March 2018 or in June 2018 with the
adoption of the fiscal year 2018-2019 budget.

48

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Summary of General
Fund Revenues and
Expenditures
Budget FY 2017-2018

FISCAL YEAR 2017-2018

General Fund
Revenue
Summary
The City of Decatur has 7 broad revenue categories: taxes, licenses and permits, intergovernmental revenue, charges for services, fines and forfeitures, investment income and miscellaneous revenue. The majority of revenues are collected directly by the Revenue division
of the Administrative Services department. The Revenue division collects taxes and fees in
accordance with all relevant federal, state, and local laws.
Revenue estimates are developed using conservative forecasting techniques especially with
the more elastic revenue sources.
Taxes
Taxes are the city’s largest revenue category, accounting for $20,068,810 or 82% of total
general fund revenues, excluding transfers. This percentage has remained consistent over
the past ten years with slight variations from year to year. Within this category, there are
a variety of tax sources including property, public utilities, utility franchises, excise, and
insurance premiums.
Real Property Taxes
Taxes on real property make up 76% of all taxes collected by the city. The assessed values
of real property within the city are determined by the DeKalb County Property Appraisal
department. Residential and commercial values as a percentage of the overall property
values total 85% and 15%, respectively. The 2015 collection rate for real property taxes was
99.4% by October 2016. The 2016 real property digest increased about 6% over the 2015
digest. In the absence of any data from DeKalb County, the proposed budget estimates a 5%
increase in the digest. This increase is consistent with the City’s data about new construction, redevelopment and property sales over the past year. An increase in the millage rate is
recommended for the general fund from 9.3 to 9.5 mills to cover the immediate operating
expenses for the 77-acre property being purchased by the City in Fall 2018. An increase in
the debt service fund millage from 1.57 to 1.97 mills is needed in anticipation of the first
principal payment on the school system’s general obligation bond issue that was approved
by the voters in November 2015. The principal payment is due August 2018.
New and expanded homestead exemptions were approved by referendum in November
2016 and became effective in the 2017 first installment billing. This resulted in a negative
impact of just under $200,000 to fiscal year 2016-2017 general fund tax revenues. General
CITY OF DECATUR

51

fund tax revenues will decline close to $385,000 in fiscal year 2017-2018 as a result of the
new and expanded homestead exemptions for city taxes.
Motor Vehicle Tax
Legislation passed in 2012 eliminates the annual ad valorem tax and sales tax on the
purchase of vehicles after March 1, 2013 and replaces it with a one-time title fee or Title
Ad Valorem Tax (TAVT) of up to 7%. The city currently receives around $500,000 annually from the ad valorem tax or about 2% of general operating revenues. The legislation is
designed to make local governments whole for ad valorem collections through the end of
the fiscal year. This revenue source will not increase in future years. Because the funding
formula depends on income from the title fee, there is also the possibility that revenue will
decrease. In fact, the current revenue is tracking closer to $450,000 for the current fiscal
year.
Sales and Excise Tax
The city does not have access to a local option sales tax. State law mandates a 7% cap on
sales tax. The city has reached this cap with the statewide 4% sales tax, a 1% education
sales tax (SPLOST), 1% homestead option sales tax (HOST) and 1% MARTA public transit
tax.
The city collects sales and excise tax from wholesale and retail sales of alcohol. Revenue
from alcohol sales has increased over 90% since fiscal year 2006 and was not negatively
impacted during the economic downturn.
Starting in fiscal year 2016, one half of the net revenues related to alcoholic beverage sales
were distributed to the City Schools of Decatur. Close to $320,000 was distributed to the
school system which is consistent with initial estimates.
The resolution of the HOST lawsuit between the City of Decatur and DeKalb County
resulted in disbursements beginning in fiscal year 2012 from the homestead option sales
tax to the capital improvement fund for capital expenditures. In fiscal years 2016 and 2017,
this amount totaled $3,899,700 and $4,620,700, respectively. From year to year, the amount
of the distribution is affected by the value of homestead properties and County millage
rates. The addition of the cities of Tucker and Stonecrest may result in a decrease of HOST
revenue to the City of Decatur.
Georgia House Bill 960, effective July 1, 2016, changed the annual interest rate that can be
charged by cities and counties for delinquent taxes. The annual interest rate is now the bank
prime rate plus 3 percent. The new law also set the penalty for non-payment at 5 percent of
unpaid taxes for every 120 days of delinquency, not to exceed a total penalty of 20 percent.
Franchise Taxes
Franchise taxes are a significant revenue source for the city. The city collects over $1.5 million in franchise taxes from electric, natural gas, cable and telephone utilities.

52

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Occupation Taxes
All businesses in the city are required to pay an occupation tax annually. The city uses profitability ratios to determine the rate paid by each business as opposed to assessing the tax
on actual gross receipts. Occupation taxes have increased steadily since fiscal year 2009.
The fiscal year 2017 revised occupation tax revenues are expected to increase $25,000 over
the original budget. The majority of this increase is due to increases in the occupation taxes
paid by financial institutions which are calculated on the bank’s gross receipts. The city
anticipates revenue of $560,000 from occupation taxes in fiscal year 2017.

Hotel/Motel Taxes
State law allows hotel/motel taxes to be collected and distributed to the City’s tourism
bureau, conference center/parking deck fund and general fund. This revenue source has
increased 100% since fiscal year 2010 and is anticipated to be $674,100 in fiscal year 2018.
The hotel/motel tax is distributed in accordance with Georgia law to the Decatur Tourism
Bureau, the City’s conference center fund and the general fund. The hotel/motel tax is 7%
of the taxable room rental revenue. The construction of a new hotel in 2017-2018 will bring
additional hotel/motel tax revenue most likely starting in fiscal year 2019.

General Fund
Revenue
Summary

Construction Permits
From fiscal years 2008 to 2009, the revenue from construction permits dropped by 50% to
around $300,000. Revenues have rebounded and reached $1,268,560 at the end of fiscal
year 2015. This is comparable to fiscal year 2014 construction permit revenues. Revenues
slowed in fiscal year 2016 and totaled $765,752 which was still higher than budgeted.
Based on current revenues and construction activities, revenues are expected to be just under $1,300,000 for fiscal year 2017. Construction permits are anticipated to decrease slightly in fiscal year 2018 dependent upon the timing of several development projects including the Callaway project, downtown hotel and the Columbia Ventures Avondale MARTA
project. The City contracts with a private vendor for permitting and inspection services. A
percentage of construction permit revenues is used to pay for those services. A corresponding expenditure is budgeted in the Design, Environment and Construction budget.
Fines from Code Violations
During the latter part of fiscal year 2011, the city implemented new court-related fines
to make them consistent with similar fines in metro-Atlanta area jurisdictions. The city
collected just over $1,000,000 from code violation fines in fiscal year 2015 and just over
$580,000 in fiscal year 2016. The city expects to collect $650,000 in code violations which
are mostly traffic related. The fluctuations in fine revenue reflect how sensitive these revenues are to staffing levels and patrol assignments. Through an agreement with the school
system and American Traffic Solutions (ATS), the city is enforcing school bus stop arm
violations through the use of an automated camera system. Revenues from the school bus
camera program are shared with the school system and ATS.
Recreation Fees
Fees are charged for a variety of recreation activities ranging from team sports to special
interest classes. The re-opening of the Decatur Recreation Center in February 2013 allowed
for increased programming within the facility. The re-opening of Ebster Recreation Center,
gym, and pool at the Beacon Municipal Center offers even more opportunities for recreation
activities. As the City’s school age population increases, program revenues increase accordingly. The Active Living division will generate around $680,000 during the next fiscal year
plus another $100,000 for recreation facility rentals. Since fiscal year 2009, revenues from
recreation fees have increased around 70%.
Sanitation Fees
The city’s Solid Waste enterprise fund is dependent upon sanitation service fees for its
operation. The Sanitation Service division provides commercial and residential collection
services and contracts for residential recycling. In 2017, the single-family residential fee
increased from $275 to $278 per unit. The primary driver for the fee increase is the additional cost associated with the separate glass recycling collection process. Commercial rates
were also increased in 2017. The rate for 95 gallon carts increased from $750 to $760 per
cart for weekly service, a 1.4% increase. The annual charge for 3 cubic yard containers was
increased from $1,125 to $1,140, also a 1.4% percent increase. The per cubic yard fee for

CITY OF DECATUR

53

dumpsters remained at $4.05. The Solid Waste fund has budgeted to collect over $2.6 million in residential and commercial sanitation fees and solid waste bag sales. Sanitation fees
are billed in April for the calendar year service and due in June of each year. The residential
fee is included on the tax bill and commercial sanitation fees are billed separately. The collection rate to date for 2016 is 99.6%.
Stormwater Fees
All developed properties are assessed a stormwater fee. In June 2016, an increase in the
annual fee was approved from $75 per equivalent residential unit (ERU) to $100 per ERU.
Residential properties pay an annual fee of $100 and non-residential properties pay based
on their impervious surface. The fee remains unchanged for the next year. The fee will
generate just around $1.3 million each year. The stormwater fee is included on the tax bill.
Starting in fiscal year 2015, the stormwater utility began to receive revenue from participants in the regional stormwater facility that is part of the Beacon Municipal Center project.
The Beacon detention vault was designed to store stormwater generated from properties
in their developed condition in the upper Peavine basin. Properties being developed in the
upper Peavine basin have the option to use the Beacon detention facility to store stormwater
in lieu of on-site water storage.
Parking
In May 2014, the city implemented a new parking management system including new parking meters that accept multiple forms of payment including credit cards. In addition to the
updated parking meters, the city is partnering with a vendor to collect delinquent parking
fees. Meter fees are expected to generate approximately $785,000 and parking violations
may generate another $65,000.
Fees-General
Annually, fees are reviewed by each department and a fee schedule is adopted. The fee
schedule includes fees for alcoholic beverage licenses, cemetery fees, development fees,
parking fines, recreation program and rental charges, special events permits, to name a few.
Fees are compared to cities and counties in the metro Atlanta area. Some fees have a differential based on residency.

54

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

CITY OF DECATUR 2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET

Personnel Position Summary

FY
FY
FY
FY
FY 17-18
FY



2013-2014

2014-2015

2015-2016

2016-2017

Changes

2017-2018

Governmental Control
City Manager’s Office (1320)
4
5
5
5
5

4
5
5
5		 5

Community & Economic Development
Administration (7510)
4
4
3
2		 2
Economic Development (7550)
2
2
2
2
1.00
3
Planning (7410)
1
1
3
3		 3
Marketing/PR (1570)
1
1
2
4		 4
Parking Management (3230)
1
2
2
1
1
Active Living (6110, 6121, 6122, 6124, 6126, 6130)
7
9
9
10
1.00
11
Children & Youth Services (6135)
11
12
12
13
13

27
31
33
35
2.00
37

Administrative Services
Administration (1510)
4
4
5
5		 5
Accounting (1512)
3
3
3
3		 3
Revenue Collections (1514)
4
4
4
4
4
Municipal Court (2650)
3
3
3
3
3

14
14
15
15		 15
Public Works Services
Administration (4510)
3
3
3
3		 3
Solid Waste (540-4520)
14
14
14
14
14
Facilities Maintenance (1565, 1566)
18
18
20
20
2.00
22
Cemetery (4950)
6
6
6
6		 6
Motor Maintenance (4900)
3
3
3
3
3
Central Supply (4910, 4911)
1
1
1
1
1
Codes Enforcement (7450)
1
1
1
1
1
Design, Environment & Construction
19
19
19
19
19
(1575, 4220, 7200, 505-4320)
65
65
67
67
2.00
69


Emergency Management Services
Fire & Rescue (3500)
39
39
39
39
39
Police (3210, 3223, 3221, 215-3800)
59
60
60
60
60

98
99
99
99		 99

TOTAL Full-time Positions

208

214

219

221

4.00

225

CITY OF DECATUR

55

CITY OF DECATUR 2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET

General Fund — Summary of Revenues

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
BUDGET
REVISED
BUDGET

REVENUE
REVENUE
REVENUE
REVENUE
ESTIMATE ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE

2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015 2015-2016
2016-2017 2016-2017 2017-2018

311110

PUBLIC UTILITY TAXES

311190

PAYMENT IN LIEU OF TAXES

311200

REAL PROPERTY TAXES

181,889

136,258

175,520

152,253

165,000

140,000

140,000

60,000

60,000

60,000

60,000

60,000

60,000

60,000

10,288,996

10,665,947

12,723,088

14,492,254

14,115,000

14,395,000

15,205,000

311300

MOTOR VEHICLE /RAILROAD EQUIPMENT TAXES

539,093

549,562

547,908

511,037

502,000

452,000

432,000

311400

BUSINESS PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES

206,259

225,698

218,214

206,898

210,500

214,000

214,000

311600

OTHER TAXES

361,232

248,249

263,243

300,838

274,000

296,000

296,000

311700

FRANCHISE TAXES

1,486,336

1,451,343

1,563,926

1,623,456

1,630,000

1,690,000

1,690,000

314000

SALES & EXCISE TAXES

446,700

473,358

502,121

489,262

245,000

254,000

254,000

316100

OCCUPATIONAL TAXES

500,948

502,174

514,353

561,801

530,000

555,000

560,000
1,222,310

316200

OTHER TAXES - INSURANCE

963,272

997,376

1,046,173

1,114,034

1,115,000

1,222,810

319100

PENALTY & INTEREST

230,441

218,343

245,095

221,279

225,000

205,000

225,000

321000

ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES & PERMITS

171,528

184,156

160,231

(112,742)

100,250

109,550

108,900

322100

CONSTRUCTION PERMITS & FEES

710,795

1,297,894

1,268,561

765,752

931,000

1,268,400

926,500

330000

GRANT REVENUE - INTERGOVERNMENTAL

349,790

385,250

437,421

399,275

432,700

408,770

428,800

351000

PENALTIES & FINES

580,738

1,168,414

1,337,140

706,682

885,000

784,000

795,000

361000

INTEREST

341000

MISCELLANEOUS FEES

181

360

0

0

0

0

0

162,545

181,195

245,492

113,886

71,050

76,450

77,500

342000

PUBLIC SAFETY FEES & CHARGES

114,830

140,811

230,206

254,999

201,000

222,400

220,960

343000

STREETS AND SIDEWALKS FEES & CHARGES

566,462

528,330

577,459

801,053

795,000

750,000

775,000

347000

RECREATION FEES

535,597

594,926

628,798

677,878

697,000

682,000

692,000

349000

CHARGES FOR OTHER SERVICES

109,155

101,144

93,490

112,012

90,200

70,200

70,200

371000

GIFTS & CONTRIBUTIONS

20,027

14,647

10,019

2,050

10,000

3,000

5,000

381000

USE OF PROPERTY

47,358

79,438

90,196

117,960

112,000

103,000

102,500

21,778
21,279
20,927
41,635
25,000
24,200
10,000
389000 MISCELLANEOUS REVENUES

GENERAL FUND CURRENT REVENUE
FIXED ASSETS

18,655,951 20,226,154
10,146

8,246

22,959,578

23,613,552

9,195

0

23,421,700 23,985,780
10,000

2,000

24,537,670
10,00

TRANSFERS & OTHER
Operating Transfer from Solid Waste Fund

231,000

236,450

104,510

57,010

163,600

154,390

172,150

Operating Transfer from Storm Water Utility Fund

257,500

268,430

207,571

236,000

295,400

297,750

307,740

0

0

0

(180,000)

(438,000)

(385,000)

0
(750,000)

Operating Transfer from (To) Capital Improvement Fund
Transfer from (to) Public Facilities Authority Fund

0

0

0

0

0

0

Transfer from (to) Urban Redevelopment Agency Fund

0

(3,000,000)

0

0

0

0

0

Transfer (to) from E911 Fund

(250,000)

(260,000)

(350,000)

(400,000)

(400,000)

(400,000)

(400,000)

Transfer (to) from Hotel/Motel Tax Fund

200,029

214,902

236,578

261,926

275,000

275,000

289,000

Transfer (to) from Children & Youth Services Fund

(150,000)

(225,000)

(200,000)

(150,000)

(150,000)

(175,000)

(150,000)

Transfer (to) from Community Grants Fund

0

0

(3,975)

0

0

0

0

Transfer (to) from Tree Bank Fund

0

0

0

(25,795)

0

0

0

TOTAL OTHER
223,675 (2,731,972)
53,879
(200,859)
(269,000)
(205,860)
(521,110)

From (To) Fund Balance
297,738
3,244,714
(1,707,681)
(1,211,185)
1,224,340
554,110
1,180,030

GENERAL FUND OTHER REVENUE - TOTAL

521,413

512,742 (1,653,802) (1,412,044)

955,340

348,250

658,920


GENERAL FUND TOTAL REVENUES

56

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

19,177,364 20,738,896

21,305,776

22,201,509

24,377,040 24,334,030

25,196,590

General Fund Revenues
FY 17-18 Adopted Budget
“Where the Money Comes From”

0.4%
1.7%

4.7%

7.4%
4.0%
4.1%

SOURCE
Taxes
Charges for Current Services
Appropriation From (To) Fund Balance
Licenses, Permits & Inspections
Penalties, Fines & Forfeitures
Intergovernmental Revenues
Miscellaneous Revenue
Sale of Fixed Assets
Operating Transfers
TOTAL REVENUES

79.6%

AMOUNT
20,079,310
1,856,660
1,180,030
1,035,400
1,020,000
428,800
107,500
10,000
(521,110)
$25,196,590

%
79.7%
7.4%
4.7%
4.1%
4.0%
1.7%
0.4%
0.0%
-2.1%
100.0%

CITY OF DECATUR

57

CITY OF DECATUR 2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET

General Fund — Summary of Expenditures
ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2012-2013

ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2013-2014

ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2014-2015

ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2015-2016

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2017-2018

DEPARTMENT
GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL

164,890

188,039

207,357

141,047

180,600

171,000

187,350

GENERAL GOVERNMENT

1,503,840

1,398,193

1,556,835

1,772,702

1,874,440

1,973,730

1,931,690

COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

1,072,087

1,546,874

1,723,833

1,776,873

2,013,620

1,973,220

2,275,640

PLANNING, ZONING AND INSPECTIONS

918,806

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES

2,723,922

2,901,724

3,019,804

3,306,769

3,802,900

3,708,180

4,107,210

POLICE

4,674,890

5,014,163

4,945,760

5,353,096

5,739,870

5,603,540

5,801,080

FIRE

3,335,435

3,461,359

3,581,509

3,634,133

3,630,150

3,632,660

3,538,840

PUBLIC WORKS

2,605,929

2,676,733

2,535,397

2,757,442

3,103,960

3,119,220

3,304,470

PUBLIC WORKS - ENGINEERING

691,079

DESIGN, ENVIRONMENT & CONSTRUCTION

1,977,793

1,972,786

1,604,704

1,936,130

2,051,420

1,815,790

1,486,486

1,574,018

1,762,494

1,854,743

2,095,370

2,101,060

2,234,520

19,177,364

20,738,896

21,305,775

22,201,509

24,377,040

24,334,030

25,196,590

ACTIVE LIVING
GENERAL FUND TOTAL EXPENDITURES

58

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Departmental Expenditures
FY 17-18 Adopted Budget
“Where the Money Goes”

0.5%
9%

8%

8%

7%
15%
13%
23%
14%

DEPARTMENT
AMOUNT
POLICE
5,801,080
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
4,107,210
FIRE
3,538,840
PUBLIC WORKS
3,304,470
COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2,275,640
ACTIVE LIVING
2,234,520
GENERAL GOVERNMENT
1,931,690
DESIGN, ENVIRONMENT & CONSTRUCTION 1,815,790
GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL
187,350
TOTAL EXPENDITURES
25,196,590

%
23.0%
16.3%
14.0%
13.1%
9.0%
8.9%
7.7%
7.2%
0.7%
100%

CITY OF DECATUR

59

Departmental Expenditures
Revised FY 16-17 and Adopted FY 17-18 Budget Comparison
$7 MILLION
REVISED ESTIMATE 2016-2017
$6 MILLION
BUDGET ESTIMATE 2017-2018
$5 MILLION
$4 MILLION
$3 MILLION
$2 MILLION
$1 MILLION
$0

s
ol
ent
ent
ice
ntr
m
m
v
o
r
n
p
r
e
o
S
al C
vel
ove
tive
ent
De
lG
a
r
a
m
c
t
r
i
n
is
ne
om
ver
Ge
min
Go
con
Ad
E
ty &
uni
m
m
Co

GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL
GENERAL GOVERNMENT
COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
POLICE
FIRE
PUBLIC WORKS
DESIGN, ENVIRONMENT & CONSTRUCTION
ACTIVE LIVING

60

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

lice
Po

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2017-2018
187,350
1,931,690
2,275,640
4,107,210
5,801,080
3,538,840
3,304,470
1,815,790
2,234,520
$25,196,590.00

s
tion
ork
ing
W
ruc
Liv
t
c
i
s
e
l
n
b
iv
Co
Pu
Act
&
t
en
nm
o
r
i
nv
n, E
g
i
s
De
e
Fir

0.7%
7.7%
9.0%
16.3%
23.0%
14.0%
13.1%
7.2%
8.9%
100%

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2016-2017
171,000
1,973,730
1,973,220
3,708,180
5,603,540
3,632,660
3,119,220
2,051,420
2,101,060
$24,334,030.00

1%
8%
8%
15%
23%
15%
13%
8%
9%
100%

General Fund
Revenue
Estimate Detail
Budget FY 2017-2018

CITY OF DECATUR 2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET

General Fund — Revenue Estimate Detail





ACTUAL
REVENUE
2012-2013

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2013-2014

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2014-2015

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2015-2016

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2017-2018

311110 PUBLIC UTILITY TAXES
311110 Utility Property Taxes
PUBLIC UTILITY TAXES

181,889

136,258

175,520

152,253

165,000

140,000

140,000

181,889

136,258

175,520

152,253

165,000

140,000

140,000


311190 PAYMENT IN LIEU OF TAXES
311191 Philips Towers

23,500

23,500

23,500

23,500

23,500

23,500

23,500

311192 Clairemont Oaks

36,500

36,500

36,500

36,500

36,500

36,500

36,500

60,000

60,000

60,000

60,000

60,000

60,000

60,000

PAYMENT IN LIEU OF TAXES - TOTAL


311200 REAL PROPERTY TAXES
311209 2009 Taxes & Prior Year Taxes

1,392

311210 2010 Taxes

(5,406)

87

0

206

0

0

0

311211 2011 Taxes

65,813

409

0

224

0

0

0

315

0

511

0

0

0

311202 2012 Taxes

5,309,733

50,543

203

565

0

0

0

311203 2013 Taxes

4,917,465

5,554,594

35,287

5,896

0

0

0

311204 2014 Taxes

0

5,059,999

6,873,778

90,175

0

0

0

311205 2015 Taxes

0

0

5,813,820

7,761,876

215,000

135,000

0

311206 2016 Taxes

0

0

0

6,632,802

7,300,000

7,650,000

150,000

311207 2017 Taxes

0

0

0

0

6,600,000

6,610,000

7,890,000

311208 2018 Taxes
PROPERTY TAXES - TOTAL

0

0

0

0

0

0

7,165,000

10,288,996

10,665,947

12,723,088

14,492,254

14,115,000

14,395,000

15,205,000


311300 MOTOR VEHICLE/RAILROAD EQUIPMENT TAXES
311310 Motor Vehicle Tax
311350 Railroad Equipment Tax
MOTOR VEHICLE TAXES - TOTAL

539,093

547,550

543,661

508,865

500,000

450,000

0

2,012

4,246

2,173

2,000

2,000

430,000
2,000

539,093

549,562

547,908

511,037

502,000

452,000

432,000


311400 BUSINESS PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES
311410

2010 Taxes & Prior Years

5,404

2,256

283

105

0

0

0

311411

2011 Taxes

966

158

193

81

0

0

0

311402

2012 Taxes

199,889

1,855

1,010

81

0

0

0

311403

2013 Taxes

0

221,429

3,592

535

0

0

0

311404

2014 Taxes

0

0

213,137

282

0

0

0

311405

2015 Taxes

0

0

0

205,814

500

4,000

0

311406

2016 Taxes

0

0

0

0

210,000

210,000

4,000

311407

2017 Taxes
BUSINESS PERSONAL PROPERTY - TOTAL

0

0

0

0

0

0

210,000

206,259

225,698

218,214

206,898

210,500

214,000

214,000


311600 OTHER TAXES
311600

Intangibles Tax

295,544

188,877

197,938

211,878

210,000

235,000

311601

Property Transfer Tax

65,688

59,373

65,304

88,960

64,000

61,000

235,000
61,000

OTHER TAXES - TOTAL

361,232

248,249

263,243

300,838

274,000

296,000

296,000

continued

CITY OF DECATUR

63

CITY OF DECATUR 2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET

General Fund — Revenue Estimate Detail continued





ACTUAL
REVENUE
2012-2013

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2013-2014

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2014-2015

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2015-2016

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2017-2018

311700 FRANCHISE TAXES
311710

Electric Franchise

924,243

893,236

990,088

1,014,443

1,020,000

1,008,000

1,008,000

311730

Natural Gas Franchise

140,958

140,535

142,545

139,572

140,000

137,000

137,000

311740

Video Service Franchise

84,643

154,503

159,727

130,871

140,000

130,000

130,000

311750

Cable Franchise

260,149

175,868

192,813

234,806

230,000

240,000

240,000

311760

Telephone Franchise

76,343

76,144

63,558

71,606

60,000

60,000

60,000

311790

Energy Excise Tax

0

11,057

15,195

32,159

40,000

115,000

115,000

1,486,336

1,451,343

1,563,926

1,623,456

1,630,000

1,690,000

1,690,000

FRANCHISE TAXES - TOTAL


314000 SALES & EXCISE TAXES
314200
314300

Beer & Wine Sales

248,489

226,420

203,116

204,545

110,000

105,000

105,000

Liquor Sales

198,211

246,938

299,005

284,717

135,000

149,000

149,000

SALES & EXCISE TAXES - TOTAL

446,700

473,358

502,121

489,262

245,000

254,000

254,000


316100 OCCUPATIONAL TAXES
316100

Business & Occ. Licenses

308,387

299,754

264,811

375,903

300,000

370,000

375,000

316101

Professional Taxes

147,924

159,027

197,602

138,994

180,000

140,000

140,000

316102

Insurance Occupation Taxes

44,638

43,393

51,940

46,904

50,000

45,000

45,000

OCCUPATIONAL TAXES - TOTAL

500,948

502,174

514,353

561,801

530,000

555,000

560,000


316200 OTHER TAXES - INSURANCE
316200

Insurance Premiums Tax

963,272

997,376

1,046,173

1,114,034

1,115,000

1,222,810

1,228,310

OTHER TAXES - TOTAL

963,272

997,376

1,046,173

1,114,034

1,115,000

1,222,810

1,228,310


319100 PENALTY & INTEREST
319110

Penalty & Interest - Real Property

319120

Penalty & Interest - Personal Property
PENALTY & INTEREST - TOTAL

220,823

210,498

239,590

220,081

220,000

200,000

220,000

9,618

7,846

5,505

1,198

5,000

5,000

5,000

230,441

218,343

245,095

221,279

225,000

205,000

225,000


321000 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES & PERMITS
321110

Beer Licenses

36,938

53,213

58,163

56,674

29,500

32,000

321120

Wine Licenses

23,563

12,638

13,503

10,225

5,250

5,900

32,000
5,900

321130

Liquor Licenses

83,375

87,050

69,000

94,250

48,000

47,000

47,000

321135

Server Permits

21,060

22,855

8,475

30,080

12,000

13,000

13,000

321139

School Portion of Excise Tax

0

0

0

(319,786)

0

0

0

321140

Corking Licenses

0

0

1,188

0

0

0

0

321500

Film Permits

5,243

7,601

9,203

14,415

5,000

10,000

10,000

322000

Non Business License

1,350

800

700

1,400

500

1,650

1,000

171,528

184,156

160,231

(112,742)

100,250

109,550

108,900

ALCOHOLIC BEV. LICENSES & PERMITS - TOTAL



continued

64

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018





ACTUAL
REVENUE
2012-2013

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2013-2014

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2014-2015

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2015-2016

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2017-2018

322100 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS & FEES
322120

Building Permits

445,312

893,358

867,828

536,989

650,000

1,000,000

655,000

322130

Plumbing Inspection Fees

58,488

78,630

97,081

51,353

70,000

55,000

55,000

322140

Electrical Inspection Fees

74,126

121,918

154,267

87,746

100,000

85,000

88,000

322160

HVAC Inspection Fees

66,540

69,039

113,669

65,639

67,800

85,000

85,000

322190

ROW Permit

(28,127)

13,710

(21,225)

(4,860)

0

0

0

322210

Zoning & Land Use Application Fees

91,442

119,057

55,411

25,273

40,000

40,000

40,000

322230

Sign Permits

2,830

1,374

1,530

2,262

2,000

1,600

2,000

322240

Special Events Permit Fee

0

50

0

850

700

1,300

1,000

322250

Logo Licensing Fees

111

750

0

500

500

500

500

323100

Pen. & Int. on Licenses

75

9

0

0

0

0

0

710,795

1,297,894

1,268,561

765,752

931,000

1,268,400

926,500

CONSTRUCTION PERMITS & FEES - TOTAL


330000 INTERGOVERNMENTAL
331100
337200

Federal Grants

0

0

9,401

0

0

0

0

DDA Management Services Agreement

349,790

385,250

428,020

371,495

432,700

408,770

428,800

INTERGOVERNMENTAL - TOTAL

349,790

385,250

437,421

374,275

432,700

408,770

428,800


341000 MISCELLANEOUS FEES
341322

TreePlan Review Fees

4,265

12,667

27,625

33,191

25,000

25,000

25,000

341400

Copying Charges

3,204

2,231

2,199

1,815

2,000

1,500

1,500

341920

Advertising Fee

0

0

0

1,050

0

0

0

341930

Maps & Publications Charges

6,392

7,215

15,199

6,250

5,000

7,500

7,500

147,085

153,421

191,056

19,630

0

0

0

0

0

0

35,600

36,550

37,050

38,500

341940

Reimbursement for Capital Construction Management

341941

Reimbursement from Decatur Tourism Bureau

341990

Other Fees
MISCELLANEOUS FEES - TOTAL

1,599

5,661

9,413

16,350

2,500

5,400

5,000

162,545

181,195

245,492

113,886

71,050

76,450

77,500


342000 PUBLIC SAFETY FEES & CHARGES
342140

Police Background Check Fee

10,015

12,349

12,528

14,032

10,000

12,700

13,000

342150

CPR-Non-Resident Fee

285

108

348

56

500

150

150
3,500

342200

Fire Alarm Fees

2,050

3,035

2,092

3,408

2,000

3,800

342215

Other Revenues - Fire

0

400

0

845

0

20

0

342220

Fire Report Copies

105

75

10

65

100

1,100

100

342900

Other Public Safety Fees

9,420

1,812

6,533

1,778

2,500

500

500
85,000

342905

Public Safety OT Reimbursements

51,152

74,573

130,794

116,180

75,000

85,000

342910

Recycling Income - Fire Station #1

0

0

0

480

0

0

0

342915

CSOD Resource Officer

26,565

30,714

68,973

108,264

102,800

110,420

110,000

342920

School Crossing Guard

15,239

17,745

8,929

9,893

8,100

8,710

8,710

PUBLIC SAFETY FEES & CHARGES

114,830

140,811

230,206

254,999

201,000

222,400

220,960



continued

CITY OF DECATUR

65

CITY OF DECATUR 2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET

General Fund — Revenue Estimate Detail continued





ACTUAL
REVENUE
2012-2013

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2013-2014

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2014-2015

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2015-2016

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2017-2018

343000 STREETS & SIDEWALKS FEES & CHARGES
343910

Parking Meter Fees

566,462

528,330

577,459

801,053

795,000

750,000

785,000

STREETS & SIDEWALKS FEES & CHARGES

566,462

528,330

577,459

801,053

795,000

750,000

785,000


347000 RECREATION FEES
347200

Recreation Service Fees

524,693

571,673

617,316

663,395

685,000

670,000

680,000

347500

Recreation Sale of Goods

11,097

12,260

11,482

14,483

12,000

12,000

12,000

347900

Other Recreation
RECREATION FEES - TOTAL

(193)

10,993

0

0

0

0

0

535,597

594,926

628,798

677,878

697,000

682,000

692,000


349000 CHARGES FOR OTHER SERVICES
349100

Cemetery Service Fees

349300

Return Check Fees
CHARGES FOR OTHER SERVICES - TOTAL

108,850

101,733

93,420

111,587

90,000

70,000

305

(589)

70

425

200

200

81,000
200

109,155

101,144

93,490

112,012

90,200

70,200

81,200


351000 PENALTIES & FINES
351170

Fines from Code Viol.

418,169

1,000,198

1,099,238

583,477

750,000

650,000

351171

School Bus Stop Arm Violations

0

0

60,544

23,388

40,000

60,000

60,000

351400

Court Hearing Reschedule Fees

56,171

95,562

94,493

20,626

20,000

9,000

20,000

351930

650,000

Parking Violations

106,398

72,655

82,865

79,192

75,000

65,000

65,000

PENALTIES & FINES - TOTAL

580,738

1,168,414

1,337,140

706,682

885,000

784,000

795,000


361000 INTEREST
361000

Interest on Investments

181

360

0

0

0

0

0

INTEREST - TOTAL

181

360

0

0

0

0

0

371000 GRANT REVENUE
371500

Private Grants
GRANT REVENUE - TOTAL

0

0

0

25,000

0

0

0

349,790

385,250

437,421

399,275

432,700

408,770

428,800


371000 GIFTS & CONTRIBUTIONS
371200

Gifts & Contributions

20,027

14,647

10,019

2,050

10,000

3,000

5,000

GIFTS & CONTRIBUTIONS - TOTAL

20,027

14,647

10,019

2,050

10,000

3,000

5,000


381000 USE OF PROPERTY
381010

Bandstand Rentals

381020

Recreation Facilities Rentals

381030

875

1,000

1,900

2,875

2,000

3,000

2,500

28,641

78,438

88,296

115,085

110,000

100,000

100,000

Facilities Leases

17,842

0

0

0

0

0

0

USE OF MONEY & PROPERTY - TOTAL

47,358

79,438

90,196

117,960

112,000

103,000

102,500

continued

66

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018





ACTUAL
REVENUE
2012-2013

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2013-2014

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2014-2015

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2015-2016

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2016-2017

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2017-2018

389000 MISCELLANEOUS REVENUES
Insurance Reimbursement

4,875

23,933

12,505

14,005

0

13,200

0

389000

Misc. Revenues

12,203

(2,604)

8,422

27,630

25,000

11,000

10,000

389001

Cemetery Lot Sales

4,700

(50)

0

0

0

0

0

MISCELLANEOUS REVENUES - TOTAL

21,778

21,279

20,927

41,635

25,000

24,200

10,000

383010


GENERAL FUND CURRENT REVENUE

18,655,951

20,226,154

22,959,578

23,613,552

23,421,700

23,985,780

24,537,670


392100 FIXED ASSETS
392100

Sale of General Fixed Assets

10,146

8,246

9,195

0

10,000

2,000

10,000

FIXED ASSETS - TOTAL

10,146

8,246

9,195

0

10,000

2,000

10,000


TRANSFERS & OTHER
Operating Transfer from Solid Waste Fund

231,000

236,450

104,510

Operating Transfer from Storm Water Utility Fund

57,010

163,600

154,390

172,150
307,740

257,500

268,430

207,571

236,000

295,400

297,750

Transfer (to) from Capital Improvement Fund

0

0

0

(180,000)

(438,000)

(385,000)

0

Transfer (to) from Public Facilities Authority Fund

0

0

0

0

0

0

(750,000)

200,029

214,902

236,578

261,926

275,000

275,000

289,000

Transfer (to) from Hotel/Motel Tax Fund

0

(3,000,000)

0

0

0

0

0

Transfer (to) from E911 Fund

Transfer (to) from Urban Redevelopment Agency Fund

(250,000)

(260,000)

(350,000)

(400,000)

(400,000)

(400,000)

(400,000)

Transfer (to) Children/Youth Services Fund

(225,000)

(200,000)

(150,000)

(150,000)

(175,000)

(150,000)

(150,000)

0

0

(3,975

0

0

0

0

Transfer (to) Community Grants Fund
Transfer (to) Tree Bank Fund
TOTAL OTHER

0

0

0

(25,795)

0

0

0

223,675

(2,731,972)

53,879

(200,859)

(269,000)

(205,860)

(521,110)


From (To) Fund Balance

297,738

3,244,714

(1,707,681)

(1,211,185)

1,224,340

554,110

1,180,030


GENERAL FUND OTHER REVENUE - TOTAL

521,413

512,742 (1,653,802)

(1,412,044)

955,340

348,250

658,920


GENERAL FUND TOTAL REVENUES

19,177,364

20,738,896

21,305,776

22,201,509

24,377,040

24,334,030

25,196,590

CITY OF DECATUR

67

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts

General Fund
Expenditure
Estimate Detail
Budget FY 2017-2018

City Organization

City Organization
Voters
City Commission
City Manager

Deputy City Manager
Capital Construction Projects

Assistant City Manager
Administrative Services

Assistant City Manager
Community & Economic
Development Services

Assistant City Manager
Public Works Services

Finance
• Revenue
• Accounting

Economic & Business
Development

Public Works
• Solid Waste & Recycling
• Motor Maintenance
• Building & Grounds
Maintenance
• Cemetery

Budget

Civic Engagement,
Communication & Marketing

Technology

Special Events & Film Permits

Insurance

Lifelong Community

Personnel
• Payroll
• Wellness

Children & Youth Services

Records Management
Municipal Court
Fire

70

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Active Living
Planning & Zoning

Design, Environment
& Construction
• Engineering
• Streets
• Stormwater
• Permitting & Inspections
• Codes Enforcement
Police
• E911

Department Directory
GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL

PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT

1110

4510
1565
1566
4900
4910
4950

City Commission

GENERAL GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT
1320
1510
1530

City Manager
Administrative Services
City Attorney

COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
7510
7410
7550
1570
3230

CED Administration
Planning
Economic Development
Communications & Civic Engagement
Parking Management
ACTIVE LIVING DIVISION
6110
Active Living Administration
6121
Athletic Services
6122
Recreation Services
6124
Aquatic Services
6126
Tennis Services
6130
Facilities & Equipment
CHILDREN & YOUTH
SERVICES DIVISION
225-6133 Children & Youth Administration Fund
225-6135 Children & Youth Services Fund

PW Administration
Buildings Maintenance
Grounds Maintenance
Motor Maintenance
Central Supply
Cemetery
SOLID WASTE DIVISION
540-4520 Solid Waste Fund
DESIGN, ENVIRONMENT &
CONSTRUCTION DIVISION
7340
DEC Administration
4220
Streets
7200
Permits & Inspections
7450
Codes Enforcement
505-4320 Stormwater Utility Fund
POLICE DEPARTMENT
3210
General Management
3221
Criminal Investigation
3223
Uniform Patrol
215-3800 E-911 Fund

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DEPARTMENT
1512
1514
1400
1580
1535
1567
1555
2650

Accounting
Revenue
City Elections
Records Management
Information Technology
Utilities & Services
General Insurance
Municipal Court
FIRE DEPARTMENT
3500
Fire & Rescue Services

CITY OF DECATUR

71

GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT
ADOPTED 2017-2018 BUDGET ESTIMATE

Five City Commissioners are elected in nonpartisan elections to staggered four year terms.
Each January, Commissioners select one of their members to serve as Mayor. The City
Commission meets in public open session on the first and third Mondays of each month at
City Hall.
Mission Statement:
The City of Decatur will assure a high quality of life for its residents, businesses, and visitors both today and in the future

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Overall image or reputation of Decatur
2006: 88% rated as excellent/good
2008: 94% rated as excellent/good
2010: 91% rated as excellent/good
2012: 93% rated as excellent/good
2014: 95% rated as excellent/good
2016: 94% rated as excellent/good

Decatur as a place to live
2006: 93% rated as excellent/good
2008: 97% rated as excellent/good
2010: 97% rated as excellent/good
2012: 96% rated as excellent/good
2014: 98% rated as excellent/good
2016: 97% rated as excellent/good

In the last 12 months, have you
attended a government or other local
public meeting?
2006: 32% had attended once or more
2008: 39% had attended once or more
2010: 32% had attended once or more
2012: 36% had attended once or more
2014: 33% had attended once or more
2016: 35% had attended once or more

Decatur as a place to retire
2006: 65% rated as excellent/good
2008: 77% rated as excellent/good
2010: 76% rated as excellent/good
2012: 75% rated as excellent/good
2014: 77% rated as excellent/good
2016: 66% rated as excellent/good

Decatur City Commission
Mayor Patti Garrett — District 2
Mayor Pro Tem Fred Boykin — District 1
Commissioner Scott Drake — District 1
Commissioner Tony Powers — At-large
Commissioner Brian Smith — District 2

72

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT
2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET



EXPENDITURE OBJECTS

511100
511200
512200
512300
512600
512700

521200
522201
522202
522203
522205
522206
522320
522321
522500
523202
523300
523400
523450
523600
523700
523701

2017-18

2016-17

2015-2016

0
23,680
1,468
343
0
2,386

TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

31,400

27,877

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
40,000
30,000
40,000
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Landscape
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
0
0
0
Auto Allowance
0
0
0
Other Contractual Services
50,000
44,000
40,000
Telephone
0
0
0
Advertising
4,600
6,500
6,800
Printing and Binding
5,000
5,000
5,000
Signs
500
0
0
Dues and Fees
30,000
30,000
31,000
Education and Training
14,000
16,000
12,500
Business Meetings
4,200
1,000
5,000

31,630
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
27,663
0
1,400
4,262
0
27,580
15,183
345

31,800

148,300

2016-17

AUDIT

PERSONNEL SERVICES
Regular Salaries & Wages
0
0
0
Temp Salaries and Wages
27,300
27,300
27,300
Social Security (FICA)
1,700
1,700
1,700
Medicare
400
400
400
Unemployment Insurance
0
0
0
Workers Compensation
2,400
2,900
2,000

TOTAL OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
531102
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531111
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

1110
TOTAL
REVISED
BUDGET
BUDGET
BUDGET
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE

32,300

132,500

140,300

108,063

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Janitorial
0
0
0
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
0
0
0
Supplies-Office
250
200
400
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
0
0
0
Supplies-Specialized Dept
1,500
1,000
1,500
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
0
0
0
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
0
0
0
Computer Equipment
1,000
1,000
2,500
Gasoline
0
0
0
Food-Subsistence and Support
4,500
4,000
4,500
Books and Periodicals
0
0
0
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
0
0
0
Small Equipment
0
0
0
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
0
0
0

0
0
116
0
942
0
0
0
0
3,906
0
0
0
143

TOTAL SUPPLIES
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

7,250

6,200

8,900

5,106

0

0

0

0

187,350

171,000

180,600

141,047

CITY OF DECATUR

73

GENERAL GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT
ADOPTED 2017-2018 BUDGET ESTIMATE

The General Government department manages daily operations of the city including, capital
improvements, departmental performance, personnel services and the budgeting process.
Staff ensures that policies of the City Commission are carried out effectively, at the lowest
possible cost, and are legally sound.
Mission Statement:
Our mission is to work with the citizens of Decatur to meet the needs of the community
while serving all with respect and integrity. We strive to do so with Competence, Accessibility, Responsiveness, and Excellence. We Care!

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Overall quality of services
Quality of Emergency

provided by the City of Decatur
Preparedness services provided
by the City of Decatur
2006: 84% rated as excellent/good
2006: N/A
2008: 88% rated as excellent/good
2008: 68% rated as excellent/good
2010: 89% rated as excellent/good
2010: 81% rated as excellent/good
2012: 94% rated as excellent/good
2012: 84% rated as excellent/good
2014: 90% rated as excellent/good
2014: 79% rated as excellent/good
2016: 89% rated as excellent/good
2016: 80% rated as excellent/good

Performance Measures
Average years of
municipal
service by employees
FY 2013: 11.30
FY 2014: 11.37
FY 2015: 10
FY 2016: 10

Number of employees
participating in
wellness program
FY 2013: 121
FY 2014: 98
FY 2015: 110
FY 2016: 142

National Citizen
Survey Response Rate
2006: 41%
2008: 40%
2010: 46%
2012: 40%
2014: 40%
2016: 41%

GENERAL GOVERNMENT

DEPARTMENT

PERSONNEL SUMMARY


CITY
MANAGER’S
ADMIN
CITY
TOTAL
TOTAL TOTAL
OFFICE Services ATTORNEY
20172016- 20151320
1510
1530
2018
2017
2016
REGULAR JOB CLASSES
City Manager
1
0
0
1
1
1
Deputy City Manager
1
0
0
1
1
1
Assistant City Manager
0
1
0
1
1
1
Budget & Performance Measurement Director
1
0
0
1
1
1
Personnel Director
0
1
0
1
1
1
Personnel Specialist
0
1
0
1
1
1
Payroll & Benefits Coordinator
0
0
0
0
1
1
Health & Wellness Coordinator
0
1
0
1
0
0
Office Manager
1
0
0
1
1
1
Administrative Services Assistant
0
1
0
1
1
1
Facilities Security Coordinator
1
0
0
1
1
1
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES
5
5
0
10
10
10

74

OTHER JOB CLASSES
City Attorney
0
0
1
1
1
Payroll Clerk
0
1
0
1
0
Graduate Intern
1
1
0
1
1

1
0
1

TOTAL OTHER CLASSES

2

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

1

2

1

3

2

GENERAL GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT
2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET



TOTAL
1320
1510
1530

BUDGET
REVISED
BUDGET

ESTIMATE
CITY
ADMIN
CITY
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
AUDIT
EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
2017-18
MANAGER
SERVICES
ATTORNEY
2016-17
2016-17
2015-16

PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
676,510
346,760
329,750
0
671,000
679,770
627,015
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
218,050
187,150
30,900
0
180,500
192,030
188,714
511300 Overtime Wages
6,960
3,500
3,460
0
4,000
4,960
4,109
512100 Employer Group Insurance
145,950
79,500
66,450
0
138,270
134,840
136,451
512200 Social Security (FICA)
50,220
28,270
21,950
0
52,500
47,920
45,426
512300 Medicare
12,830
7,750
5,080
0
13,850
12,600
12,607
512400 Retirement Contributions
39,070
13,020
26,050
0
45,800
39,270
40,881
512401 Retirement Contributions-ICMA
48,400
38,900
9,500
0
48,310
47,660
51,425
512600 Unemployment Insurance
700
420
280
0
700
700
649
512700 Workers Compensation
15,700
4,800
10,900
0
18,800
13,000
19,672
1,172,750

1,126,951

521200
521303
522200
522201
522202
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523201
523202
523300
523400
523600
523700
523701
523800
523911

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
480,200
41,150
89,050
350,000
589,000
480,800
Misc Personal Service Fees
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repairs and Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
50
50
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
200
200
0
0
1,440
1,440
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
200
200
0
0
300
200
Rental of Land & Buildings
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
0
0
0
0
0
0
Auto Allowance
3,700
3,700
0
0
4,300
4,300
Other Contractual Services
109,500
1,000
108,500
0
104,000
99,000
Insurance-Awards
0
0
0
0
0
0
Postage
0
0
0
0
0
0
Telephone
0
0
0
0
100
100
Advertising
200
200
0
0
700
700
Printing and Binding
1,000
1,000
0
0
1,000
1,500
Dues and Fees
18,500
14,000
4,500
0
14,000
18,900
Education and Training
56,400
30,000
26,400
0
45,000
43,000
Business Meetings
27,550
18,000
9,550
0
22,500
33,950
Licenses
0
0
0
0
0
0
Bank Charges
0
0
0
0
0
0

TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

452,899
0
0
0
0
0
1,335
38
0
0
3,888
99,415
(11)
0
0
875
561
10,511
33,617
22,588
42
0

TOTAL OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES

625,758

531101
531102
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531111
531112
531113
531115
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
100
100
0
0
100
100
0
Supplies-Janitorial
300
300
0
0
300
300
187
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Office
5,000
3,500
1,500
0
5,500
4,500
4,288
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Specialized Dept
2,000
1,000
1,000
0
1,500
2,000
633
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
200
200
0
0
200
200
0
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
500
500
0
0
500
1,000
167
Computer Equipment
3,600
2,600
1,000
0
2,100
2,600
3,805
Computer Software
0
0
0
0
410
0
0
Office Equipment and Furniture
2,000
2,000
0
0
500
500
5,819
Supplies- Batteries
0
0
0
0
50
0
0
Gasoline
1,000
1,000
0
0
1,100
1,100
1,067
Food-Subsistence and Support
3,000
2,500
500
0
3,500
3,000
3,563
Books and Periodicals
1,000
500
500
0
1,000
1,500
158
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Small Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
200
21
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
1,100
300
800
0
900
800
286
TOTAL SUPPLIES
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

1,214,390

697,500

710,070

109,500

504,320

238,000

0

350,000

1,173,730

782,340

683,890

19,800

14,500

5,300

0

17,660

17,800

19,994

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1,931,690

834,070

747,620

350,000

1,973,730

1,874,440

1,772,702

CITY OF DECATUR

75

COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
ADOPTED 2017-2018 BUDGET ESTIMATE

The Community & Economic Development department is responsible for economic development initiatives, community engagement and education, special events and strategic
planning. The department works to actively market the City and recruit new businesses and
help existing businesses thrive.
Mission Statement:
The mission of the Community and Economic Development Department is to enhance the
economic vitality of the city, strengthen Decatur’s sense of community, improve the City’s
ability to serve our citizens’ needs through every stage of life and provide opportunities to
connect, educate and inform our citizens.

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Opportunities to participate in
social events and activities
2006: N/A
2008: 88% rated as excellent/good
2010: 85% rated as excellent/good
2012: 91% rated as excellent/good
2014: 90% rated as excellent/good
2016: 90% rated as excellent/good

Vibrant Downtown/
Commercial Area
2006: N/A
2008: N/A
2010: N/A
2012: 93% rated as excellent/good
2014: 90% rated as excellent/good
2016: 90% rated as excellent/good

Performance Measures
Total Views on The
Decatur Minute blog
2013: 35,794
2014: 26,945
2015: 64,095
2016: 57,554

76

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Number of MLK, Jr.
Service Day Volunteers
Calendar 2014: 1,100
Calendar 2015: 1,300
Calendar 2016: 1,300
Calendar 2017: 1,330

Number of Decatur
101 participants
Spring 2014: 75
Spring 2015: 88
Spring 2016: 92
Spring 2017: 77

COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET


TOTAL
7510
7550
7410
1570
3230

BUDGET
COMM &
REVISED
BUDGET

ESTIMATE
ADMINI- ECONOMIC
CIVIC PARKING ESTIMATE ESTIMATE
AUDIT
EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
2017-18 STRATION
DEV PLANNING
ENGAGEMT
MGMT
2016-17
2016-17
2015-16

PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
662,350
157,560
0
203,700
270,030
31,060
663,980
687,240
579,936
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
209,840
2,500
167,840
12,500
9,000
18,000
174,650
174,650
165,951
511300 Overtime Wages
1,500
0
0
0
0
1,500
4,830
0
5,036
512100 Employer Group Insurance
172,610
26,680
39,730
39,880
53,170
13,150
150,870
147,370
142,107
512200 Social Security (FICA)
54,240
9,770
10,410
13,380
17,710
2,970
50,050
50,680
45,298
512300 Medicare
12,740
2,290
2,450
3,150
4,150
700
13,400
12,010
10,760
512400 Retirement Contributions
57,800
12,610
4,800
16,300
21,600
2,490
51,550
48,130
51,150
512401 Retirement Contributions-ICMA
30,380
17,050
6,500
0
6,830
0
34,800
32,300
29,838
512600 Unemployment Insurance
980
140
210
210
280
140
1,010
1,010
0
512700 Workers Compensation
15,000
4,800
2,400
3,000
3,000
1,800
18,100
12,500
9,924
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES
1,217,440
233,400
234,340
292,120
385,770
71,810 1,163,240 1,165,890 1,040,001
521200
522200
522201
522202
522203
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523102
523201
523202
523300
523400
523450
523600
523700
523701
523800

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
295,050
40,000
75,000
80,000
90,250
9,800
176,300
201,550
Repairs and Maintenance
1,500
0
0
0
0
1,500
1,000
1,000
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Landscape
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
500
0
0
0
0
500
500
500
Rental of Land & Buildings
40,400
22,700
0
0
0
17,700
38,500
38,500
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7,200
Auto Allowance
7,200
7,200
0
0
0
0
7,200
0
Other Contractual Services
533,800
6,000
137,800
220,000
123,000
47,000
439,400
439,400
Insurance-Awards
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance-Legal Liability
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Postage
30,750
0
0
0
30,750
0
30,000
30,000
Telephone
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Advertising
18,850
0
5,000
850
13,000
0
11,720
14,220
Printing and Binding
11,000
1,000
3,000
1,500
4,000
1,500
10,600
11,000
Signs
6,350
100
1,000
0
250
5,000
2,900
3,700
Dues and Fees
23,100
500
3,000
15,000
4,000
600
10,300
11,300
Education and Training
31,150
2,500
7,500
7,650
11,500
2,000
21,500
19,500
Business Meetings
8,250
250
1,000
3,000
4,000
0
13,200
13,200
Licenses
4,700
0
3,500
1,200
0
4,700
4,700
TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES 1,012,600
80,250
233,300
331,500
281,950
85,600
767,820
795,770

531101
531102
531103
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531111
531112
531113
531114
531115
531230
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Janitorial
600
0
0
0
0
600
0
600
1,091
Supplies-Landscape Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
600
0
0
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Office
6,300
5,500
100
500
0
200
6,800
6,800
5,467
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
Supplies-Specialized Dept
32,250
1,000
7,500
250
15,000
8,500
29,200
39,000
25,864
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
200
0
0
0
0
200
200
200
0
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Computer Equipment
1,300
0
0
1,000
300
0
3,200
3,200
407
Computer Software
300
0
0
0
0
300
300
0
0
Supplies - Office Equipment
1,800
0
300
1,500
0
0
0
300
1,807
Furniture and Fixtures
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Batteries
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Electricity
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Gasoline
500
0
0
0
0
500
500
500
370
Food-Subsistence and Support
350
0
0
100
0
250
0
0
379
Books and Periodicals
800
0
0
500
300
0
600
600
289
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Small Equipment
400
0
0
0
0
400
260
260
28
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
800
0
0
300
0
500
500
500
553
TOTAL SUPPLIES
45,600
6,500
7,900
4,150
15,600
11,450
42,160
51,960
36,260
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES



0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2,275,640

320,150

475,540

627,770

683,320

168,860

1,973,220





303,461
161
0
0
0
0
0
0
27,179
0
6,078
289,722
0
0
23,530
157
8,880
13,429
0
6,654
11,830
7,012
2,521
700,612

0

0

2,013,620 1,776,873

CITY OF DECATUR

77

					 CIVIC
COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC
			 ECON		ENGAGEMENT
DEVELOPMENT
DEPARTMENT

ADMIN
DEV. PLANNING
& COMM
PERSONNEL SUMMARY

7510
7550
7410
1570

PARKING
MGMT.
3230

TOTAL
20172018

TOTAL
20162017

REGULAR JOB CLASSES
Assistant City Manager
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
Chief, Division of Community, Education
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
& Civic Engagement
Planning Director
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
Planner
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
Downtown Development Manager
Lifelong Community Program Coordinator
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
Special Events Coordinator
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
Communications Specialist
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
Community Information Services & Volunteer Coordinator
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
Office Manager
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
Operations Analyst
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
Administrative Services Assistant
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
Parking Manager
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
Parking Attendant
0
0
0
0
1
1
1

78

TOTAL
20152016
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1

TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES
2
3
3
4
1
13
12

OTHER JOB CLASSES

12

Planning Intern
P/T Special Events Volunteer Coordinator
P/T Parking Attendant

0
1
0

0
0
0

1
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
1

1
1
1

1
1
1

0
1
1

TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES

1

0

1

0

1

3

3

2

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

ACTIVE LIVING DIVISION

ADOPTED 2017-2018 BUDGET ESTIMATE
The Active Living division promotes a healthy and active lifestyle through holistic services and programming. Recreational and educational activities, offered by division staff
and community partners, enhance the quality of life for all Decatur residents. Through its
programming, the Active Living division helps create a community where residents and
visitors can participate in physical activity, regardless of physical limitations, in addition to
offering traditional recreation programming.
Mission Statement:
It is the mission of the Decatur Active Living Department to provide physical and educational opportunities that contribute to the quality of life of the citizens of Decatur. Decatur
Active Living is committed to enhancing the lives of individuals and families by contributing to the City’s economic development, preserving and promoting our greenspaces and
celebrating diversity while bringing the community together.

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Recreational opportunities
2006: 67% rated as excellent/good
2008: 80% rated as excellent/good
2010: 74% rated as excellent/good
2012: 85% rated as excellent/good
2014: 79% rated as excellent/good
2016: 80% rated as excellent/good

Used a Decatur recreation center or
service in the past 12 months
2006: 44% at least once
2008: 45% at least once
2010: 49% at least once
2012: 46% at least once
2014: 54% at least once
2016: 58% at least once

Performance Measures:
Total attendance at city pools
Summer 2013: 38,396
Residents – 67.9%
Summer 2014: 35,934
Residents – 60.1%
Summer 2015: 39,404
Residents – 56.6%

Number of Team
Decatur members
FY 2013: 207
FY 2014: 225
FY 2015: 160
FY 2016: 108

Summer 2016: 42,987
Residents – 55.5%

CITY OF DECATUR

79

ACTIVE LIVING DIVISION
2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET



TOTAL
6110
6121
6122
6124

BUDGET

ESTIMATE
ADMINISATHLETIC
RECREATION
AQUATICS
EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
2017-18
TRATION
SERVICES
SERVICES
SERVICES

PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
609,300
155,220
128,670
265,170
0
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
495,370
47,520
75,580
180,220
70,050
511300 Overtime Wages
10,000
2,000
8,000
0
0
512100 Employer Group Insurance
145,640
26,670
39,560
66,150
0
512200 Social Security (FICA)
71,280
12,580
12,680
26,800
4,340
512300 Medicare
2,970
6,280
1,020
16,700
2,950
512400 Retirement Contributions
48,790
12,420
10,300
21,250
0
512600 Unemployment Insurance
770
140
210
350
0
512700 Workers Compensation
19,330
3,630
4,800
5,500
1,800
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

521200
521301
521302
522200
522201
522202
522203
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523201
523202
523300
523400
523450
523600
523700
523701
523911

531101
531102
531103
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531111
531112
531113
531114
531115
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
Instructor Fees
Official Fees
Repairs and Maintenance
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
Repair and Maint-Landscape
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
Rental of Land & Buildings
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
Auto Allowance
Other Contractual Services
Insurance-Awards
Postage
Telephone
Advertising
Printing and Binding
Signs
Dues and Fees
Education and Training
Business Meetings
Bank Charges

88,520
14,000
3,100
0
38,610
300
65,000
0
0
0
0
14,400
4,450
267,570
1,000
0
0
0
22,200
2,800
9,050
6,930
27,280
15,000

TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES

580,210

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
Supplies-Janitorial
Supplies-Landscape Maintenance
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
Supplies-Office
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
Supplies-Specialized Dept
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
Communication Equipment
Computer Equipment
Computer Software
Office Equipment
Outdoor Furniture and Fixtures
Batteries
Gasoline
Food-Subsistence & Support
Books and Periodicals
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
Small Equipment
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
TOTAL SUPPLIES
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

80

1,417,180

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

1,000
1,250
6,450
0
7,000
0
95,070
1,840
3,000
1,730
2,900
100
0
6,970
100
500
14,260
600
4,000
4,290
86,070

263,130

282,770

571,720

77,210


9,800
180
7,490
0
0
0
14,000
0
0
2,700
0
400
0
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
1,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14,400
0
0
0
200
350
3,600
0
0
12,090
25,480
226,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
11,800
4,550
5,250
0
300
0
200
750
700
1,900
1,350
4,500
4,000
1,180
550
0
5,000
4,500
14,980
0
15,000
0
0
0
61,200

27,450

102,900

233,150


1,000
0
0
0
0
0
950
0
0
0
5,800
450
0
0
0
0
7,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,000
37,000
26,820
9,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
150
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
1,600
910
10,750
0
100
100
400
0
0
0
0
0
100
440
1,850
400
750
67,230
11,190
5,000

237,130

12,550

105,680

57,760

19,500

0

0

0

0

0

2,234,520

336,880

415,900

732,380

329,860

6126
6130

REVISED
BUDGET
TENNIS/PARK
FACILITIES
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
AUDIT
SERVICES
& EQUIPM.
2016-17
2016-17
2015-16


60,240
0
603,510
589,850
546,293
122,000
0
458,380
478,380
411,439
0
0
2,900
0
416
13,260
0
125,670
122,510
119,598
14,880
0
57,390
66,280
58,142
3,480
0
13,820
15,530
13,598
4,820
0
48,500
46,750
49,444
70
0
700
700
1,600
3,600
0
23,400
16,000
14,694
222,350

0

1,334,270

1,336,000

1,215,223


800
70,250
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7,110
0
300
0
65,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
300
0
3,000
1,000
0
1,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
600
0
1,550
0
600
0
1,200
0
2,800
0
0
0

83,530
21,880
400
0
32,060
300
60,000
0
0
0
0
13,400
1,350
260,070
1,000
0
0
0
21,650
1,350
4,040
10,370
14,100
15,000

82,790
21,880
400
0
31,500
300
60,000
0
0
0
0
14,400
1,400
249,450
1,000
0
0
0
19,200
2,850
7,490
11,060
11,680
15,000

65,075
13,547
0
0
25,892
0
57,628
0
0
20
0
11,432
588
230,216
100
0
0
0
17,667
1,130
7,675
3,455
16,929
10,701

540,500

530,400

462,055


0
0
200
300
0
1,230
200
0
3,760
0
0
200
0
0
9,000
0
0
10
19,450
300
85,590
0
1,840
1,840
0
3,000
4,750
0
1,580
1,150
0
2,900
2,000
0
100
100
0
0
0
0
3,470
11,000
0
100
150
0
0
3,470
1,000
0
14,120
0
0
400
4,000
0
3,500
1,500
0
4,310
1,900
0
79,510

1,200
1,200
5,650
0
7,000
0
88,590
1,840
3,000
1,730
2,900
100
0
11,000
0
3,470
14,220
400
3,500
4,310
78,860

0
712
2,317
7,536
1,088
6
69,543
0
762
122
2,645
30
0
2,991
0
1,854
11,550
223
4,166
1,635
70,286

10,850

144,660

28,350

13,290

226,290

228,970

177,465

0

0

0

0

0

261,550

157,950

2,101,060

2,095,370

1,854,743

CITY OF DECATUR

81

ACTIVE LIVING DIVISION
PERSONNEL SUMMARY
REC				 TOTAL


ADMIN ATHLETICS PROGRAMS AQUATICS TENNIS FACILITIES
2017
6110
6121
6122
6124
6126
6130
2018

TOTAL
20162017

REGULAR JOB CLASSES
Active Living Director
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
Assistant Active Living Director
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
3
0
1
0
5
5
Program Supervisor
Program Assistant
0
2
1
0
0
0
3
2
Administrative Assistant
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES
2
3
5
0
1
0
11
10

OTHER JOB CLASSES
Aquatics Director
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
Program Leader P/T
0
2
7
0
7
0
16
15
Specialized Instructor
0
0
18
15
7
0
40
40
Receptionist P/T
3
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
Front Desk Attendant
0
0
0
10
0
0
10
10
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES
3
2
25
26
14
0
70
69

82

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

TOTAL
20152016
1
1
5
1
1
9
1
12
32
3
10
58

CHILDREN AND YOUTH SERVICES DIVISION
ADOPTED 2017-2018 BUDGET ESTIMATE*

The Children & Youth Services (CYS) division provides after school and summer camp
programming designed to help children and youth develop into healthy, productive, lifelong
learners.
Mission Statement:
The mission of the Children and Youth Services division is to work with community partners to promote the development of Decatur’s children and youth into healthy, productive,
lifelong learners.

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Decatur as a place to raise children
2006: 90% rated as excellent/good
2008: 93% rated as excellent/good
2010: 90% rated as excellent/good
2012: 95% rated as excellent/good
2014: 96% rated as excellent/good
2016: 97% rated as excellent/good

Availability of affordable, quality
childcare
2006: 51% rated as excellent/good
2008: 52% rated as excellent/good
2010: 50% rated as excellent/good
2012: 55% rated as excellent/good
2014: 76% rated as excellent/good
2016: 60% rated as excellent/good

Performance Measures:
Number of children
provided with care
FY 2013: 1,019
FY 2014: 919
FY 2015: 1,228
FY 2016: 1,256

Homeless children
provided with care
FY 2013: 5
FY 2014: 24
FY 2015: 13
FY 2016: 6

Percentage of subsidized
summer camp spots
FY 2013: 38%
FY 2014: 13%
FY 2015: 19%
FY 2016: 9%

* For budget estimate detail, see page 138


CHILDREN & YOUTH
CHILDREN & YOUTH SERVICES
SERVICES
TOTAL
TOTAL
PERSONNEL SUMMARY
6133/6135
2017-2018
2016-2017
REGULAR JOB CLASSES
Children & Youth Services Director
1
1
1
Assistant CYS Director
1
1
1
Program Supervisor
1
1
1
Site Director
9
9
9
Administrative Assistant
1
1
1
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES
13
13
13
OTHER JOB CLASSES
Academic Building Coordinators
0
0
Academic Tutors
0
0
Afterschool Counselor
51
51
Family Liaison
1
1
Instructor
34
34
Junior Counselor
3
3
Lead Counselor
4
4
Site Director P/T
0
0
Summer Camp Counselor
14
14
Tech Support Staff
1
1
Technology Lead Instructor
3
3
Technology Instructor
3
3
Technology Specialist
1
1
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES
115
115

7
18
51
1
34
3
5
0
14
1
0
8
1
143

TOTAL
2015-2016
1
1
1
8
1
12
7
18
44
1
34
3
5
1
15
1
0
8
1
138

CITY OF DECATUR

83

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DEPARTMENT
ADOPTED 2017-2018 BUDGET ESTIMATE

The Administrative Services department includes accounting, elections, information technology, municipal court, personnel, records management and revenue divisions. Most of
the City’s resources, such as employees, finances and technology, are directly supported by
this department. Much of the department’s work supports the goals of other city departments but the department also provides many public facing functions such as municipal
court and tax billing. The Administrative Services Department also budgets for the City’s
property and liability insurances and utilities such as electricity and natural gas.
Mission Statement:
Members of the Administrative Services Department are committed to delivering exceptional services, consistent with the city’s vision and values, in finance, human resources,
court, records and technology management. We strive to promote a collaborative environment that cultivates progressive thinking, strategic planning and innovative practices.

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Citizen Satisfaction Survey
responses:
Value of services for taxes paid
2006: 63% rated as excellent/good
2008: 64% rated as excellent/good
2010: 65% rated as excellent/good
2012: 72% rated as excellent/good
2014: 74% rated as excellent/good
2016: 66% rated as excellent/good

Contacted the City for help or
information in the last 12 months
2006: 53% reported as yes
2008: 61% reported as yes
2010: 57% reported as yes
2012: 54% reported as yes
2014: 51% reported as yes
2016: 52% reported as yes

Performance Measures
Property tax collection rate for prior
year as of the following April 1st
FY 2013: 99.3%
FY 2014: 99.2%
FY 2015: 99.8%
FY 2015: 98.8%

84

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Number and Type of most
adjudicated cases in Municipal
Court
FY 2013: Speeding – 1,325
FY 2014: Speeding – 2,426
FY 2015: Speeding – 1,017
FY 2016: Speeding – 826

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL

REVENUE		MUNICIPAL
SUMMARY

ACCTG COLLECTIONS RECORDS
COURT-



1512

1514

1580

2650

TOTAL
20172018

TOTAL
20162017

REGULAR JOB CLASSES
City Clerk
1
0
0
0
1
1
Accounting Clerk
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
Accounts Payable Officer
0
1
0
0
1
1
Revenue and Technology Director
0
1
0
0
1
1
Sr. Revenue Officer
Revenue Officer
0
2
0
0
2
2
Chief Court Clerk
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
2
2
2
Court Clerk
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES
3
4
0
3
10
10

OTHER JOB CLASSES
Records Specialist
0
0
1
0
1
1
Intern
0
0
0
1
1
1
Chief Judge
0
0
0
1
1
1
Judge
0
0
0
4
4
4
Marshall
0
0
0
1
1
1
Bailiff
0
0
0
1
1
1
Solicitor
0
0
0
1
1
1
Public Defender
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
2
2
2
Customer Service Clerk
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES
0
0
1
12
13
13

TOTAL
20152016
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
10
1
0
1
4
1
1
1
1
2
12

CITY OF DECATUR

85

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DEPARTMENT
2017-2018
ADOPTED BUDGET



EXPENDITURE OBJECTS

PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
511300 Overtime Wages
512100 Employer Group Insurance
512200 Social Security (FICA)
512300 Medicare
512400 Retirement Contributions
512600 Unemployment Insurance
512700 Workers Compensation

TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES
521200
521303
522201
522202
522204
522205
522206
522320
522321
522500
523101
523102
523104
523105
523106
523107
523201
523202
523300
523400
523600
523700
523701
523800
523911

531101
531102
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531111
531112
531113
531115
531210
531215
531220
531230
531231
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

86

TOTAL
1512
1514
1400
1580
1535
BUDGET
ESTIMATE
REVENUE
CITY
RECORDS
INFORMATION
2017-2018
ACCOUNTING COLLECTIONS
ELECTION MANAGEMENT
TECHNOLOGY




512,850
159,130
198,530
0
0
0
218,410
0
0
0
23,660
0
58,500
4,500
24,000
0
0
0
132,270
39,700
52,900
0
0
0
44,610
9,900
12,590
0
1,470
0
10,440
2,320
2,950
0
350
0
41,050
12,730
15,900
0
0
0
1,330
210
280
0
70
0
8,400
2,400
2,400
0
600
0
1,027,860

230,890

309,550

0

26,150

0

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
483,400
195,400
32,000
15,000
43,500
112,000
Misc Personal Service Fees
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
50
0
50
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
1,650
600
250
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
30,240
240
0
0
0
0
Auto Allowance
3,500
0
0
0
0
0
Other Contractual Services
339,170
20,200
56,760
0
57,000
204,650
Insurance-Awards
10,000
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance-Legal Liability
80,400
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance-Property
83,900
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance-Vehicles
109,000
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance-Performance Bond
200
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance-Commercial Excess Liability
25,400
0
0
0
0
0
Postage
15,000
0
0
0
0
0
Telephone
260,950
350
400
0
0
0
Advertising
4,400
0
2,900
1,500
0
0
Printing and Binding
11,320
0
10,320
0
0
0
Dues and Fees
3,780
1,250
510
0
420
1,000
Education and Training
35,060
7,000
7,000
0
2,060
7,000
Business Meetings
3,600
2,000
800
0
0
300
Licenses
0
0
0
0
0
0
Bank Charges
52,900
50,000
2,900
0
0
0
TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES

1,553,920

277,040

113,890

16,500

102,980

324,950

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
Supplies-Janitorial
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
Supplies-Office
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
Supplies-Specialized Dept
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
Computer Equipment
Computer Software
Supplies-Office Equipment and Furniture
Supplies-Batteries
Water and Sewer
Stormwater Utility
Natural Gas
Electricity
Street Lighting
Gasoline
Food-Subsistence and Support
Books and Periodicals
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
Small Equipment
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
TOTAL SUPPLIES
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

0
0
460
0
24,630
0
1,650
0
0
18,500
69,880
3,000
50
130,000
368,900
33,000
587,000
280,000
720
2,980
1,160
0
0
3,500
1,525,430
0
4,107,210

0
0
100
0
5,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
500
0
0
500
6,650
0
514,580

0
0
160
0
9,630
0
150
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
720
880
110
0
0
600
12,250
0
435,690

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7,200
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7,200
0
23,700

0
0
0
0
5,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
150
0
0
100
5,850
0
134,980

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
17,000
54,780
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
800
72,580
0
397,530

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

1555
1567
2650

MUNICIPAL
REVISED
BUDGET
GENERAL
UTILITIES &
COURT
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
AUDIT
INSURANCE
SERVICES
SERVICES
2016-17
2016-17
2015-16


0
0
155,190
503,300
532,710
494,646
0
0
194,750
175,000
213,160
184,073
0
0
30,000
58,000
66,000
55,235
0
125,550
122,230
126,659
0
39,670
0
0
20,650
42,900
46,650
43,815
0
0
4,820
10,120
11,110
10,272
0
0
12,420
40,850
41,100
44,459
0
0
770
1,260
1,330
0
0
0
3,000
10,100
7,000
10,741
0

0

461,270

967,080

1,041,290

969,900


7,500
0
78,000
377,290
374,820
361,019
0
0		 0
0
0
0
0
0
50
50
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
300
1,990
1,990
1,390
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
27,000
3,000
30,740
30,740
27,621
2,732
0
0
3,500
3,500
2,500
0
560
0
429,740
424,990
233,595
10,000
0
0
10,000
10,000
27,554
80,400
0
0
67,040
61,000
58,050
83,900
0
0
63,680
71,900
68,475
109,000
0
0
103,470
102,800
97,849
200
0
0
200
200
200
25,400
0
0
24,120
25,000
23,396
0
15,000
0
14,000
15,350
12,612
0
260,200
0
252,600
260,000
228,494
0
0
0
2,610
2,400
2,330
0
0
1,000
12,600
10,260
7,970
0
0
600
3,310
3,720
1,553
0
0
12,000
32,400
31,530
26,472
0
0
500
2,350
4,350
760
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50,900
50,900
53,268
316,400

303,260

98,900

1,482,590

1,484,500

1,235,341

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
316,400

0
0
0
0
2,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
130,000
368,900
33,000
587,000
280,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,400,900
0
1,704,160

0
0
200
0
2,500
0
1,500
0
0
1,500
7,900
3,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,500
400
0
0
1,500
20,000
0
580,170

0
0
480
0
23,630
0
2,650
0
0
9,820
64,650
3,000
20
130,000
320,500
31,000
395,000
270,000
720
2,800
1,310
0
10
2,920
1,258,510
0
3,708,180

0
0
480
0
21,950
0
2,500
0
0
15,320
67,870
13,000
0
86,000
320,500
33,000
400,000
310,000
230
1,550
1,310
0
0
3,400
1,277,110
0
3,802,900

0
0
128
0
15,313
0
8
0
0
3,848
52,320
522
0
93,408
192,300
27,096
425,146
289,076
708
748
58
0
41
808
1,101,527
0
3,306,769

CITY OF DECATUR

87

FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT
ADOPTED 2017-2018 BUDGET ESTIMATE

The Fire and Rescue department provides fire suppression, emergency medical and rescue
services, hazardous materials emergency response, environmental protection, and fire cause/
arson investigation services. The Fire and Rescue Department responds to all fires, medical
calls, accidents and emergencies and enforces fire and life safety code compliance.
Mission Statement:
The mission of the City of Decatur Fire and Rescue Department is to preserve life and property, provide education awareness and enhanced level of customer service to the community
to improve the quality of life to the community.

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Quality of Fire services
2006: 93% rated as excellent/good
2008: 97% rated as excellent/good
2010: 96% rated as excellent/good
2012: 97% rated as excellent/good
2014: 98% rated as excellent/good
2016: 97% rated as excellent/good

Quality of Fire Prevention and
Education
2006: 75% rated as excellent/good
2008: 87% rated as excellent/good
2010: 83% rated as excellent/good
2012: 88% rated as excellent/good
2014: 89% rated as excellent/good
2016: 92% rated as excellent/good

Performance Measures
Total Fire & Medical calls
responded to
FY 2013: 3,379
FY 2014: 3,645
FY 2015: 4,822
FY 2016: 3,366

Number of car seats
fit-checked by firefighters
FY 2013: 74
FY 2014: 83
FY 2015: 96
FY 2016: 83

FIRE DEPARTMENT
			 TOTAL
TOTAL
TOTAL

FIRE
201720162015PERSONNEL SUMMARY

3500
2018
2017
2016
REGULAR JOB CLASSES
Fire Chief
Deputy Fire Chief
Assistant Fire Chief
Fire Station Captain
Fire Lieutenant
Fire Sergeant
Fire Inspector
Fire Apparatus Operator
Firefighter
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES

88

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

1
1
1
3
3
3
3
12
12
39

1
1
1
3
3
3
3
12
12
39

1
1
0
4
3
3
0
12
15
39

1
1
0
4
3
3
0
12
15
39

FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT
2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET


3500

TOTAL BUDGET
REVISED
BUDGET

ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
2017-18
2016-17
2016-17

PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
2,155,550
2,187,000
2,305,930
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
100,000
0
0
511300 Overtime Wages
100,000
288,000
205,000
511400 Special Events Overtime
0
5,000
5,000
512100 Employer Group Insurance
503,000
502,000
447,540
512200 Social Security (FICA)
0
0
0
512300 Medicare
31,300
34,000
36,840
512400 Retirement Contributions
172,500
164,500
177,680
512600 Unemployment Insurance
2,730
3,010
3,010
512700 Workers Compensation
53,200
64,000
44,000
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES
521200
522200
522201
522202
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523102
523105
523201
523202
523300
523400
523600
523700
523701
523800
523911

531101
531102
531103
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531111
531112
531113
531115
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

3,247,510

2,206,811
0
227,434
4,302
537,697
0
33,358
191,835
0
51,576

3,225,000

3,253,012

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
97,750
101,100
101,100
Repairs and Maintenance
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
3,000
8,500
2,000
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
12,000
10,000
11,500
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
8,300
6,300
6,300
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
28,000
46,000
35,000
Rental of Land & Buildings
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
6,100
5,700
5,700
Auto Allowance
500
500
500
Other Contractual Services
1,000
1,000
1,000
Insurance-Awards
1,000
80
1,000
Insurance-Legal Liability
0
0
0
Insurance-Vehicle
0
0
0
Postage
300
300
300
Telephone
0
0
0
Advertising
150
150
150
Printing and Binding
1,900
1,900
1,900
Dues and Fees
4,750
3,750
5,250
Education and Training
36,200
25,780
25,780
Business Meetings
8,000
9,000
5,000
Licenses
0
900
0
Bank Charges
0
10
0

89,722
0
7,371
9,963
8,137
0
40,719
0
5,284
233
1,457
3,456
0
0
336
0
0
746
3,340
25,959
5,299
780
0

TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES

3,118,280

AUDIT
2015-16

208,950

220,970

202,480

202,802

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
2,500
Supplies-Janitorial
6,000
Supplies-Landscape Maintenance
1,000
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
5,800
Supplies-Office
2,500
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
0
Supplies-Specialized Dept
50,900
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
4,200
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
20,300
Communications Equipment
0
Computer Equipment
3,600
Computer Software
1,000
Office Equipment and Furniture
0
Supplies - Batteries
4,220
Gasoline
36,200
Food-Subsistence & Support
6,000
Books and Periodicals
7,840
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
0
Small Equipment
3,800
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
55,750
TOTAL SUPPLIES
211,610
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
0
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES
3,538,840

0
6,000
1,000
6,400
2,500
10
45,280
5,300
18,500
0
3,600
1,000
0
6,500
22,900
7,000
5,840
0
1,500
30,850
164,180
0
3,632,660


2,500
6,000
1,000
6,400
2,500
0
50,280
4,200
25,000
0
3,600
1,000
0
6,500
35,000
5,500
5,840
0
1,500
45,850
202,670
0
3,630,150

0
6,845
0
4,349
2,759
0
59,214
11,305
6,075
0
494
12,886
0
1,104
18,415
6,134
4,566
0
2,505
41,669
178,319
0
3,634,133

CITY OF DECATUR

89

POLICE DEPARTMENT

ADOPTED 2017-2018 BUDGET ESTIMATE
The Police department ensures the safety of Decatur residents and visitors through proactive patrolling, crime prevention and investigation. Employees of the Police Department
also provide information and general assistance to the public.
Mission Statement:
The mission of the City of Decatur Police Department is to promote the quality of life in
Decatur by providing police services with integrity and a spirit of excellence, in cooperation
with the community.

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Quality of Police services
2006: 84% rated as excellent/good
2008: 91% rated as excellent/good
2010: 90% rated as excellent/good
2012: 89% rated as excellent/good
2014: 92% rated as excellent/good
2016: 90% rated as excellent/good

Feeling “very” or “somewhat” safe in
your neighborhood
2006: 97%
2008: 96%
2010: 97%
2012: 98%
2014: 96%
2016: 97%

Performance Measures

* For E911budget detail, refer to page 140

POLICE DEPARTMENT
PERSONNEL SUMMARY


RAD participants
Calendar Year 2013: N/A
Calendar Year 2014: 42
Calendar Year 2015: 58
Calendar Year 2016: 94

DUI arrests
FY 2013: 97
FY 2014: 135
FY 2015: 110
FY 2016: 59

GEN		UNIFORM		 TOTAL
TOTAL

MGMT
E911*
PATROL
CID20172016
3210
3800
3223
3221
2018
2017
REGULAR JOB CLASSES
Police Chief
1
0
0
0
1
1
Deputy Police Chief
1
0
0
0
1
1
Police Captain
3
0
0
0
3
3
Police Lieutenant
1
0
3
0
4
4
Police Sergeant
0
0
6
1
7
7
Police Investigator†
0
0
0
4
4
4
Community Education & Information Manager
1
0
0
0
1
1
Police Officer, MPO, SRO††
0
0
26
0
26
26
Support Services Technician
1
0
0
0
1
1
Administrative Assistant
1
0
0
0
1
1
Communications Officer
0
11
0
0
11
11
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES
9
11
35
5
60
60

OTHER JOB CLASSES
Animal Control Officer
0
0
1
0
1
1
School Crossing Guard†††
0
0
32
0
32
30
Administrative Investigator/ Permit Clerk
1
0
0
0
1
1
Fingerprint Examiner
0
0
0
1
1
1
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES
1
0
33
1
35
33
90

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

911 calls received
FY 2013: 76,820
FY 2014: 52,407
FY 2015: 74,515
FY 2016: 69,101

TOTAL
20152016
1
1
3
4
7
4
1
26
1
1
11
60
1
30
1
1
33

†Investigator positions are
assignments, not permanent
positions, and are at the same
salary range as Master Police
Officer (MPO.)
†† Two School Resource
Officers (SRO) are included
per the request of the City
Schools of Decatur.
†††The Police Department
currently is allocated 31
crossing guard positions.
One additional position is
funded by the City Schools
of Decatur bringing the total
number of crossing guards
to 32.

POLICE DEPARTMENT

2017-2018
ADOPTED BUDGET

TOTAL
3210
3221
3223

BUDGET				 REVISED
BUDGET

ESTIMATE
POLICE
CRIME INV.
UNIFORM
ESTIMATE ESTIMATE
AUDIT
EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
2017-18
ADMIN & TRAINING
PATROL
2016-17
2016-17
2015-16


PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
2,954,020
740,220
300,700
1,913,100
2,753,100
3,009,520
2,741,871
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
430,330
49,000
31,200
350,130
399,000
404,030
323,940
511300 Overtime Wages
283,000
60,000
23,000
200,000
370,000
270,000
336,556
511400 Special Events Overtime
133,000
9,000
15,000
109,000
104,000
74,000
95,784
512100 Employer Group Insurance
649,900
120,200
66,300
463,400
603,170
600,710
636,307
512200 Social Security (FICA)
25,650
6,730
1,940
16,980
42,100
30,740
25,438
512300 Medicare
47,880
11,000
4,820
32,060
51,800
49,500
48,353
512400 Retirement Contributions
238,290
59,220
24,100
154,970
210,600
231,770
234,317
512600 Unemployment Insurance
5,600
700
420
4,480
12,200
5,600
734
512700 Workers Compensation
60,700
9,700
8,500
42,500
72,800
50,000
56,068
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES
4,828,370 1,065,770
475,980
3,286,620
4,618,770 4,725,870 4,499,366
521200
522200
522201
522202
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523102
523105
523201
523202
523300
523400
523600
523700
523701
523800

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
238,350
221,350
3,000
14,000
237,850
248,350
Repairs and Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
20,200
17,200
1,000
2,000
28,750
29,200
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
19,500
3,500
3,000
13,000
19,500
19,500
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
2,950
1,200
1,000
750
1,600
2,950
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
43,000
3,500
10,000
29,500
42,000
40,000
Rental of Land & Buildings
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
22,700
19,700
2,000
1,000
21,800
22,700
Auto Allowance
2,000
1,000
0
1,000
1,000
2,000
Other Contractual Services
83,760
60,650
7,470
15,640
82,120
82,120
Insurance-Awards
0
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
Insurance-Legal Liability
0
0
0
0
24,830
24,830
Insurance-Vehicle
0
0
0
0
0
0
Postage
1,100
400
200
500
900
1,100
Telephone
500
500
0
0
500
500
Advertising
12,000
7,000
0
5,000
1,600
1,500
Printing and Binding
4,100
0
600
3,500
7,350
11,100
Dues and Fees
3,050
1,600
500
950
2,850
3,050
Education and Training
88,000
31,000
15,000
42,000
85,000
85,000
Business Meetings
6,000
4,000
500
1,500
3,900
6,000
Licenses
1,100
300
0
800
1,100
1,100
TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES
548,310
372,900
44,270
131,140
572,650
591,000

197,142
0
5,510
15,774
0
0
28,459
0
17,651
96.68
92,463
0
23,591
453
0
0
597
3,938
2,028
73,885
703
762
463,053

531101
531102
531103
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531111
531112
531113
531115
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
Supplies-Janitorial
Supplies-Landscape Maintenance
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
Supplies-Office
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
Supplies-Specialized Dept
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
Communications Equipment
Computer Equipment
Computer Software
Office Equipment and Furniture
Supplies- Batteries
Gasoline
Food-Subsistence & Support
Books and Periodicals
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
Small Equipment
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
TOTAL SUPPLIES

542200

CAPITAL OUTLAY
Capital Outlay-Vehicles
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

6,200
2,850
0
1,000
17,500
100
74,500
23,000
50,000
0
28,100
23,500
4,000
1,500
116,700
15,400
6,100
0
700
53,250
424,400


0
200
6,000
2,000
100
750
0
0
0
0
500
500
17,500
0
0
0
0
100
8,600
10,900
55,000
3,500
4,500
15,000
3,500
10,000
36,500
0
0
0
2,500
1,400
24,200
0
900
22,600
2,000
1,000
1,000
0
500
1,000
10,000
16,700
90,000
13,000
400
2,000
3,500
600
2,000
0
0
0
0
200
500
8,000
10,550
34,700
74,100
58,450
291,850

4,500
2,550
0
500
16,500
100
63,900
21,300
49,000
2,500
21,500
23,300
5,000
1,500
115,700
15,220
4,100
0
400
64,550
412,120

4,500
2,850
0
1,000
17,000
100
66,900
23,000
50,000
2,500
22,500
23,500
5,900
1,500
116,700
13,200
5,100
0
700
66,050
423,000

0
2,305
0
0
10,524
0
52,955
11,259
50,860
42
15,863
4,400
4,914
1,454
65,834
10,912
2,293
0
120
44,389
278,125

0
0


0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0

0
0

112,552
112,552

5,603,540

5,739,870

5,353,096

5,801,080

1,512,770

578,700

3,709,610

CITY OF DECATUR

91

PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
ADOPTED 2017-2018 BUDGET ESTIMATE

The Public Works department keeps Decatur beautiful through progressive refuse and recyclables collection, street cleaning services and the careful maintenance of city buildings,
grounds and cemetery using well maintained fleet and motorized equipment.
Mission Statement:
The mission of the City of Decatur Public Works Department is to provide the highest
quality public works services to the community and other City departments, balanced with
efforts to maintain a cost effective operation and to provide these services in a responsible
and efficient manner. This mission is accomplished through the prudent use of resources,
technology, innovations, teamwork and coordination with other departments and community partners.

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Cleanliness of Decatur
2006: N/A
2008: 90% rated as excellent/good
2010: 88% rated as excellent/good
2012: 91% rated as excellent/good
2014: 88% rated as excellent/good
2016: 86% rated as excellent/good

Quality of Garbage Collection
2006: 85% rated as excellent/good
2008: 90% rated as excellent/good
2010: 88% rated as excellent/good
2012: 91% rated as excellent/good
2014: 91% rated as excellent/good
2016: 87% rated as excellent/good

Performance Measures:
Tons of leaves
collected during street
sweeping
FY 2013: 286
FY 2014: 298
FY 2015: 307
FY 2016: 423

92

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Total tons of
recyclable materials
collected
FY 2013: 3,147
FY 2014: 2,752
FY 2015: 2,706
FY 2016: 2,540

Tree removal
expenditure per capita
FY 2013: $4.10
FY 2014: $5.07
FY 2015: $2.95
FY 2016: $2.23

PUBLIC WORKS
DEPARTMENT
SOLID

PERSONNEL SUMMARY

BLDG GROUNDS		 MOTOR CENTRAL TOTAL TOTAL TOTAL

ADMIN WASTE MAINT
MAINT CEMETERY
MAINT SUPPPLY
2017- 2016- 2015
4510
540*
1565
1566
4950
4900
4910
2018
2017
2016
REGULAR JOB CLASSES
Assistant City Manager
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
Sanitation
Services Superintendent
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
Facilities Maintenance Superintendent
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
Project Manager
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
2
1
1
0
0
5
4
4
Crew Supervisor
0
0
7
6
2
0
0
15
14
15
Crew Worker
0
0
0
2
2
0
0
4
4
4
Equipment Operator
Building Specialist
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
3
3
2
Lead Auto Mechanic
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
2
2
2
Automotive Mechanic
Administrative Assistant
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
Office Manager
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
Sanitation Equipment Operator II
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
5
5
5
Sanitation Equipment Operator I
0
7
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
Supply Clerk
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
Cemetery Specialist
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES
3
14
13
9
6
3
1
49
47
47

OTHER JOB CLASSES
Facility Monitor
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
Crew Worker (P/T)
0
2
1
4
0
0
0
7
7
7
Seasonal Laborer
0
0
2
0
2
0
0
4
4
4
0
2
5
4
2
0
0
13
13
13
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES

* For solid waste budget detail, refer to page 142

CITY OF DECATUR

93

PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET


TOTAL
4510
1565
1566
4900

BUDGET

ESTIMATE
ADMINIBUILDING
GROUNDS
MOTOR MAINT
EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
2017-18
STRATION
MAINT
MAINT
& SUPPLY



PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
1,522,210
216,680
554,720
351,590
145,000
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
85,500
0
42,000
37,000
0
511300 Overtime Wages
76,300
500
18,000
8,000
25,000
512100 Employer Group Insurance
461,610
39,940
171,400
118,520
39,650
512200 Social Security (FICA)
99,830
13,750
36,800
24,100
9,000
512300 Medicare
23,520
3,220
8,700
5,640
2,150
512400 Retirement Contributions
105,570
17,350
28,150
28,130
11,600
512401 Retirement Contributions-ICMA
9,500
9,500
0
0
0
512600 Unemployment Insurance
2,730
210
1,050
700
210
512700 Workers Compensation
35,800
4,800
8,500
8,500
5,500
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES
521200
522110
522200
522201
522202
522203
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522322
522500
523101
523102
523201
523202
523300
523400
523600
523700
523701
523800

TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES
531101
531102
531103
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531111
531112
531113
531114
531115
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

305,950

869,320

582,180

238,110

587,550

45,600

249,500

215,150

26,900

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
25,000
0
25,000
0
0
Supplies-Janitorial
47,450
250
32,000
14,000
400
Supplies-Landscape
48,800
0
0
47,000
0
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
200
0
0
0
200
Supplies-Office
5,300
4,300
0
0
200
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
2,650
0
250
2,000
0
Supplies-Specialized Dept
27,700
2,000
7,000
3,000
8,700
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
8,100
1,200
2,400
1,700
500
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
17,600
1,000
3,000
9,000
1,000
Communications Equipment
1,100
1,000
0
0
100
Computer Equipment
6,300
2,000
0
0
1,500
Computer Software
500
0
0
0
500
Supplies - Office Equip & Furniture
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Outdoor Furniture
2,500
2,500
0
0
0
Supplies-Batteries
1,050
0
0
500
350
Gasoline
61,900
4,000
20,000
22,000
5,000
Food-Subsistence and Support
5,550
4,500
0
250
0
Books and Periodicals
200
100
100
0
0
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
0
0
0
0
0
Small Equipment
13,400
0
2,500
5,000
3,900
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
19,050
550
6,600
6,700
1,800
TOTAL SUPPLIES
294,350
23,400
98,850
111,150
24,150
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

94

2,422,570

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
51,200
18,000
6,500
3,900
9,700
Solid Waste Disposal
0
0
0
0
0
Repairs and Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
51,600
0
45,000
0
1,100
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
4,650
3,900
300
150
200
Repair and Maint-Landcape
190,500
0
0
178,500
0
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
4,700
0
500
2,500
700
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
600
200
100
0
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
10,600
500
2,000
4,300
1,000
Rental of Land & Buildings
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
10,400
3,000
1,400
4,000
1,400
Auto Allowance
0
0
0
0
0
Other Rentals
2,600
2,000
0
0
600
Other Contractual Services
216,700
4,500
183,700
16,000
5,000
Insurance-Awards
10,000
0
2,500
2,500
2,500
Insurance-Legal Liability
0
0
0
0
0
Postage
0
0
0
0
0
Telephone
300
0
200
100
0
Advertising
800
0
200
100
0
Printing and Binding
1,600
500
400
0
500
Dues and Fees
4,100
3,500
600
0
0
Education and Training
23,000
8,000
3,600
3,100
4,000
Business Meetings
4,100
1,500
2,500
0
100
Licenses
100
0
0
0
100

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

0

0

0

0

0

3,304,470

374,950

1,217,670

908,480

289,160

4950
4910

CENTRAL
REVISED
BUDGET
CEMETERY
SUPPLY
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
AUDIT

ADMIN
2016-17
2016-17
2015-16


219,040
35,180
1,404,900
1,460,190
1,292,006
6,500
0
96,300
88,300
92,650
24,000
800
88,800
72,800
89,321
78,950
13,150
414,250
407,100
422,991
14,000
2,180
96,650
95,440
86,875
3,300
510
22,800
22,460
20,412
17,520
2,820
110,850
112,570
115,349
0
0
9,750
9,290
9,094
490
70
2,660
2,660
0
6,700
1,800
43,000
29,500
38,174
2,300,310

2,166,871


8,100
5,000
48,500
50,560
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3,500
2,000
52,600
51,600
100
0
2,750
4,650
12,000
0
206,800
143,800
1,000
0
4,200
4,200
200
100
400
600
2,000
800
10,100
10,600
0
0
0
0
600
0
8,800
7,400
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,300
2,600
2,500
5,000
206,000
207,000
2,500
0
6,000
10,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
250
250
0
500
400
800
100
100
1,200
1,450
0
0
3,200
4,100
3,100
1,200
21,800
22,900
0
0
2,900
4,100
0
0
200
100

370,500

41,453
0
0
47,620
1,168
142,959
0
185
1,471
0
5,528
0
2,422
130,980
0
0
0
0
0
138
2,039
16,603
1,201
31

35,700

56,510

14,700

2,289,960

578,400

526,710

393,798


0
0
25,000
20,000
19,973
500
300
43,700
43,400
50,334
1,800
0
35,800
45,800
37,660
0
0
100
200
0
800
0
3,900
3,800
3,631
400
0
2,650
2,650
1,656
6,000
1,000
23,500
27,700
16,960
1,800
500
7,000
6,800
6,333
2,600
1,000
19,600
17,100
10,128
0
0
600
1,100
515
0
2,800
4,800
6,300
1,906
0
0
500
500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
200
0
1,300
1,250
1,666
10,000
900
46,400
61,900
38,239
800
0
5,810
5,740
8,611
0
0
100
250
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,000
0
13,050
13,400
8,352
2,900
500
17,050
19,050
(9,191)
29,800
7,000
250,860
276,940
196,772
0

0

0

0

0

436,000

78,210

3,119,220

3,103,960

2,757,442

CITY OF DECATUR

95

DESIGN, ENVIRONMENT & CONSTRUCTION DIVISION
ADOPTED 2017-2018 BUDGET ESTIMATE

The Design, Environment & Construction division handles development and land-use
regulation and services through plan review, construction, property inspection, and code enforcement. Staff is also responsible for the administration, planning, maintenance, construction management and technical engineering of the City’s infrastructure. The department
also operates the Stormwater Utility, which is responsible for the maintenance of the City’s
stormwater system.
Mission Statement:
The mission of the Design, Environment and Construction division is to protect the city’s
environment and maintain its infrastructure through regulation, capital improvements,
education and is to ensure that the physical development of the community is accomplished
according to the codes, ordinances, and plans adopted by the City Commission.

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Quality of Sidewalk Maintenance
2006: 44% rated as excellent/good
2008: 58% rated as excellent/good
2010: 53% rated as excellent/good
2012: 55% rated as excellent/good
2014: 51% rated as excellent/good
2016: 42% rated as excellent/good

Quality of Code Enforcement
2006: 48% rated as excellent/good
2008: 58% rated as excellent/good
2010: 54% rated as excellent/good
2012: 55% rated as excellent/good
2014: 62% rated as excellent/good
2016: 59% rated as excellent/good

Performance Measures:
Linear feet of sidewalk
installed or repaired
FY 2013: 1,133 linear feet
FY 2014: 502 linear feet
FY 2015: 186 linear feet
FY 2016: 300 linear feet

96

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Number of
potholes repaired
FY 2013: 29
FY 2014: 30
FY 2015: 43
FY 2016: 35

Number of building
permits issued
Calendar Year 2013: 734
Calendar Year 2014: 962
Calendar Year 2015: 719
Calendar Year 2016: 703

DESIGN, ENVIRONMENT AND
CONSTRUCTION DIVISION
2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET



EXPENDITURE OBJECTS


TOTAL
7340
4220
7200
7450
BUDGET
REVISED
BUDGET
ESTIMATE
DE&C
STREETS
LICENSE
CODES ESTIMATE ESTIMATE
AUDIT
2017-18
ADMIN
& INSP.
ENF
2016-17
2016-17
2015-16


511100
511200
511300
512100
512200
512300
512400
512600
512700

PERSONNEL SERVICES
Regular Salaries & Wages
Temp Salaries and Wages
Overtime Wages
Employer Group Insurance
Social Security (FICA)
Medicare
Retirement Contributions
Unemployment Insurance
Workers Compensation
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

521200
522200
522201
522202
522203
522204
522205
522206
522210
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523102
523201
523202
523300
523400
523450
523600
523700
523701
523800

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
560,150
31,650
5,000
520,000
3,500
855,500
710,760
571,990
Repairs and Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
100
0
0
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Landscape
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
400
0
400
0
0
400
400
28
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
234
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
8,800
800
5,250
1,750
1,000
14,000
9,500
4,363
Repair and Maint-Infrastructure
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Land & Buildings
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
11,000
10,000
1,000
0
0
11,400
9,000
9,492
Auto Allowance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Other Contractual Services
52,000
2,000
50,000
0
0
54,500
54,500
39,384
Insurance-Awards
2,500
0
0
2,500
0
1,500
0
1,912
Insurance-Legal Liability
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Postage
50
0
50
0
0
0
0
8
Telephone
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Advertising
450
450
0
0
0
450
450
410
Printing and Binding
700
250
0
250
200
730
700
898
Signs
23,100
0
23,100
0
0
23,100
23,100
21,098
Dues and Fees
3,690
2,200
300
1,140
50
3,390
3,390
1,128
Education and Training
16,500
8,000
5,000
2,000
1,500
18,300
17,500
10,404
Business Meetings
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Licenses
0
0
0
0
0
150
0
152
TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES
679,340
55,350
90,100
527,640
6,250
983,520
829,300
661,500

531101
531102
531103
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531111
531112
531113
531115
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

711,220
8,320
10,000
172,090
44,780
10,460
56,910
1,120
15,200
1,030,100

270,500
4,000
0
53,170
17,150
4,010
21,650
420
4,300
375,200

247,540
4,320
10,000
79,070
15,650
3,650
19,800
490
4,800
385,320

138,100
0
0
26,600
8,560
2,000
11,050
140
4,300
190,750


55,080
0
0
13,250
3,420
800
4,410
70
1,800
78,830

685,600
8,320
12,900
161,260
42,550
10,040
53,610
980
18,200
993,460

721,040
10,440
10,000
159,020
45,360
10,630
55,760
980
12,500
1,025,730

598,986
4,196
9,604
159,708
36,255
8,479
53,357
0
14,315
884,901

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Janitorial
400
100
200
100
0
350
300
377
Supplies-Landscape Maintenance
200
0
200
0
0
180
200
208
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Office
5,450
5,000
0
300
150
5,450
4,450
4,409
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
100
0
100
0
0
200
200
18
Supplies-Specialized Dept
31,100
800
25,000
5,300
0
21,080
25,500
25,144
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
6,900
500
4,000
1,600
800
6,950
6,900
1,519
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
8,000
2,000
6,000
0
0
11,950
8,000
6,829
Communications Equipment
750
0
750
0
0
300
700
0
Computer Equipment
1,900
0
0
1,900
0
5,200
2,500
1,348
Computer Software
15,000
0
0
15,000
0
1,000
1,000
0
Office Equipment and Furniture
0
0
0
0
0
250
750
0
Supplies - Batteries
300
0
300
0
0
430
300
775
Gasoline
17,600
4,000
10,200
1,700
1,700
11,500
17,600
8,494
Food - Subsistence and Support
3,200
3,200
0
0
0
2,220
3,200
3,095
Books and Periodicals
1,550
250
100
1,200
0
100
250
0
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Small Equipment
9,600
100
9,500
0
0
2,550
4,500
3,013
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
4,300
450
3,000
350
500
4,730
4,750
3,076
TOTAL SUPPLIES
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION

106,350

16,400

59,350

27,450

3,150

74,440

81,100

58,304

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1,815,790

446,950

534,770

745,840

88,230

2,051,420

1,936,130

1,604,704

CITY OF DECATUR

97

DESIGN, ENVIRONMENT &
CONSTRUCTION
DIVISION

STORM
ADMIN
STREETS
WATER
PERSONNEL SUMMARY
7340

4220

505*

LICENSE
& INSP
7200

CODE
ENF
7450

TOTAL
20172018

TOTAL
20162017

TOTAL
20152016

REGULAR JOB CLASSES
DE&C Director
Senior Engineer
Project Civil Engineer
Arborist
Engineering Inspector
Crew Supervisor
Crew Worker
Equipment Operator
Code Enforcement Officer
Building Official
Building Inspector
Permit & Zoning Technician
Administrative Assistant
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES

1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
4

0
0
0
0
0
1
3
2
0
0
0
0
0
6

0
0
1
0
0
1
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
5

0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
4

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1

1
1
1
1
1
2
5
3
1
1
1
1
1
20

1
1
1
1
1
2
5
3
1
1
1
1
1
20

1
1
1
1
1
2
5
3
1
1
1
1
1
20

OTHER JOB CLASSES
Seasonal Laborer
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES

1
1

1
1

0
0

0
0

0
0

2
2

2
2

2
2

* For stormwater budget estimate detail, refer to page 144

98

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Capital
Projects
Budget FY 2017-2018

FISCAL YEAR 2017-2018

Capital
Projects
Narrative
The Capital Projects Funds are used to account for financial
resources to be used for the acquisition or construction of
major capital facilities and capital outlay.
Capital investments are critical to the maintenance and sustainability of public assets.
Deferred maintenance may be a cost-cutting option but as many local governments have
learned, this short-sighted view results in major problems and expensive solutions later on.
The City of Decatur takes its responsibility as a trustee of community resources seriously.
By identifying long-term capital investment needs and budgeting for these expenses, the
City makes certain that public buildings and infrastructure are well maintained. Over the
past decade, the City has completed major renovations or replacements of all city facilities
and invested in upgrades to all city parks. This work represented the most extensive capital
investment by the City since the late 1950s. As a result of this work, the City has ensured
that these assets will serve the public for the next 50 years. Many of the more recent projects also respond directly to goals of the City’s Strategic Plan.

United Methodist Children’s Home

In April 2017, the City Commission agreed to purchase the 77-acre United Methodist
Children’s Home on South Columbia Drive for $40 million. Acquisition will be financed
through the Decatur Public Facilities Authority and other sources. Annexation of the property into the City of Decatur is expected to take place shortly after the acquisition closes. A
comprehensive master planning process for the property is anticipated in FY 2017-18.

In Planning
Commerce Drive Cycle Track
The PATH Foundation of Atlanta has provided a preliminary design for a new 2-way “cycle
track” on Commerce Drive between West Trinity Place and Church Street. Cycle tracks
are physically separated from the vehicle roadway and are also known as protected bicycle
lanes. The Commerce Drive cycle track is designed to connect with planned protected
bicycle facilities on North McDonough Street and on Church Street, will extend the City’s
bicycle network and will provide opportunities for persons of all ages and skills to use
bicycles as a safe and healthy way to get around Decatur. A project budget of $1 million has
been established for design and construction.

CITY OF DECATUR

101

Pedestrian Safety Improvements at Clairemont Avenue and
Commerce Drive and at Church Street and Commerce Drive;
Church Street Bicycle Lanes
Planning for pedestrian safety improvements at the intersections of Clairemont Avenue and
Commerce Drive and at Church Street and Commerce Drive began in September, 2011. The
improvements will be designed to improve pedestrian accessibility and safety in these two
busy intersections in downtown Decatur and to provide protected bicycling lanes and traffic
calming elements on Church Street from downtown Decatur to the northern city limits. The
project is based on the elements of Decatur’s Community Transportation Plan. Design is
funded through the MARTA offset program. About $3.7 million in construction funding has
been secured through the Atlanta Regional Commission’s (ARC) Livable Centers Initiative
(LCI) program and the City’s HOST fund. A design team led by Development Planning and
Engineering, Inc. of Buford and including Alta Planning and Design of Charlotte has been
retained to design the improvements.

Under Construction
Railroad Crossing Improvements
Planning for the Railroad Crossing Improvements at Candler and McDonough Streets is
completed and construction is underway. The project will improve pedestrian accessibility
and safety around and across two CSX railroad crossings at the intersections of College Avenue with Candler Street and McDonough Street. The project is based on recommendations
in Decatur’s Community Transportation Plan. The total project budget is $2.7 million, with
$1.2 million provided by the HOST fund and other local sources and about $1.5 million
from the Georgia Department of Transportation’s Transportation Enhancement Program.
The project is being planned by AECOM (formerly URS Corporation) of Atlanta.

North McDonough Streetscape Improvements
Planning for the North McDonough Streetscape Improvements is completed and construction is underway. The primary goals of the North McDonough Streetscape Improvements
are to improve safety and accessibility for pedestrians, bicyclists and others using North
McDonough Street. The project is based on Decatur’s 2008 Community Transportation
Plan which encourages healthy lifestyles and active living in Decatur.
The project has a budget of $2.9 million. Design is funded through the MARTA offset
program. Construction will be funded by the City’s HOST fund and other local sources and
a $2.3 million grant from the Georgia Department of Transportation through the Atlanta
Regional Commission’s (ARC) Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) program.
The proposed improvements include reducing North McDonough to two vehicle lanes,
widening sidewalks on both sides of the street, and a 2-way “cycle track” on the west side of
the street, along with traditional streetscape improvements and on-street parking. The project
will also feature “green infrastructure” improvements to improve storm water quality. The
project is being designed by AECOM (formerly URS Corporation) and Sprinkle Consulting,
a nationally recognized design firm that specializes in bicycle and pedestrian planning.

Downtown Decatur Storm Drainage Improvements

102

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Work was completed on the first phase of the downtown Decatur’s storm drainage improvements. This is one of the oldest storm water systems in DeKalb County. The first phase
improvements start on North McDonough in front of the Decatur High School Gym, run
under East Maple Street and through the properties at 215 Church Street and 231 East
Trinity Place. This part of the system terminates in front of Decatur Fire Station No. 1. An
additional storm line starts in the 300 block of Church Street and runs south to East Howard

Avenue. The southern part of this line replaces an old storm drainage system that runs under
several properties on the east side of Church Street.
The project is funded by the City’s Storm Water Utility and was designed by Atkins North
America (formerly PBS&J) of Atlanta. The general contractor was Reeves Contracting
Company of Sugar Hill.

Capital
Projects
Narrative

Phase 2 includes new storm drainage improvements that begin at Decatur Fire Station No. 1
and runs easterly along East Trinity Place and East Howard Avenue to Barry Street, then up
Barry Street. This phase began in mid-2016 with a budget of $1.725 million. Astra Grading
and Pipe is the general contractor.

Lockwood Terrace Storm Drainage Improvements
This project is designed to alleviate recurring localized flooding at the intersection of Lockwood Terrace and Fairview Street. A project budget of $130,000 has been established from
the storm water utility fund. Construction is underway.

Recently Completed
Downtown Decatur Streetscape Improvements – Phase V
Construction of Phase V of the downtown Decatur Streetscape Improvements was completed
in early 2016. The project area includes the south side of East Trinity Place from North
McDonough Street to Church Street, both sides of East Trinity Place from Church Street to
just past the Fire Station, and Church Street from East Trinity Place south to East Howard
Avenue. The purpose of the project was to improve accessibility and safety for pedestrians and to reduce conflicts between pedestrians and motorists. Improvements include new
sidewalks, crosswalks, curb ramps, street trees, pedestrian scale lights, and trash receptacles.
The improvements were similar to the earlier phases of the downtown Decatur streetscape
program.
The total project budget was $1.2 million, with $1 million provided by the Capital Projects
Bond Fund and about $600,000 from the Georgia Department of Transportation’s Transportation Enhancement Program. The project was designed by Atkins North America of
Atlanta. The general contractor was GS Construction, Inc. of Lawrenceville.

Park Pavilions and Concession Buildings
Construction has been completed on new pavilions and concession buildings at McKoy
and Oakhurst Parks. The new buildings include all-season restrooms and replacement of
outdated park amenities that were originally built in the 1970s. The total cost was about
$1.3 million. The improvements were designed by Lyman Davidson Dooley Architects. The
general contractor was BM&K Construction of Braselton.

Oakhurst Streetscape Improvements
Construction of the Oakhurst Streetscape Improvements was completed in 2016. Major
goals of the project included improving pedestrian accessibility and safety throughout
Oakhurst Village, with wider sidewalks and outdoor seating areas, improved crosswalks,
additional on-street parking, new street lights and street trees, additional benches, bicycle
racks and litter containers. The original drive-through parking lot in Harmony Park was
removed to expand the park and plaza space. Parking spaces were replaced with angled and
parallel on-street spaces along East Lake Drive and Oakview Road. The total project budget
was about $2.5 million, with $1.5 million provided by the Capital Projects Bond and HOST
Funds and $1 million from the Georgia Department of Transportation’s Transportation
Enhancement Program. The project was designed by Atkins North America of Atlanta. The
general contractor was CMES, Inc. of Norcross.

CITY OF DECATUR

103

Athletic Field Lighting
New field lighting was installed at the baseball and softball fields at McKoy and Oakhurst
Parks. The lighting system is substantially more efficient and was designed to reduce lighting on adjacent residential areas. The lighting improvements were designed by Womack
Lumsden and Associates of Atlanta and erected by Davco Electrical Contractors of Boynton
Beach, Florida.

Beacon Municipal Center
The Beacon Municipal Center, an 80,000 square foot multi-building campus located on West Trinity Place in downtown Decatur, was dedicated
in May 2015. The building was built in the mid-1950’s to replace the old
Herring Street School and was converted in 1981 to house the Decatur
Police Department and Municipal Court, the Ebster Recreation Center and
Gym and studios for visual and performing arts.
Improvements included a new modern Police Department and Municipal
Court, an expanded Ebster Recreation Center and Gym, administrative offices of the City Schools of Decatur, and a living memorial to the residents
of the Beacon community, historical center of Decatur’s historic AfricanAmerican community, and to the graduates of Beacon Elementary and
Trinity High Schools. In additional, a major storm water management facility has been built
under Ebster Field. Renovations to the Ebster Pool and Bathhouse were also included.
The project budget was $38.5 million with funding from a variety of sources, including the
City’s fund balance, HOST revenues and Urban Redevelopment Authority bonds.
The project was designed by Rutledge Alcock Architects of Decatur, McMillan Pazdan
Smith Architects of Greenville, South Carolina and Lord Cultural Resources of New York.
Potts Construction of Suwanee was the general contractor.

Eloise T. Leveritt Public Works Building
Construction of improvements to the City’s Eloise T. Leveritt Public Works facility on
Talley Street were completed in January, 2014. Improvements include space for current
public works operations (Solid Waste Collection, Facilities Maintenance, Engineering and
Motor Maintenance) as well as additional space for building permitting and inspections
so that residents, developers and contractors will have one stop for obtaining plan reviews
and permits. The new facility also included office and shop space for the City Schools of
Decatur’s facilities maintenance staff. Funding was provided by Urban Redevelopment
Authority bonds and HOST revenues. The building has been certified LEED Gold, received
the American Public Works Association (APWA) Georgia Chapter Project of the Year
Award and was named one of the national APWA’s Public Works Projects of the Year for
2015. Stevens & Wilkinson Architects of Atlanta designed the building improvements. The
general contractor was Hogan Construction Group of Norcross.

Ongoing Investments
Greenspace Acquisition and Improvement

104

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

An all-weather trail has been completed in the greenway south of Dearborn Park. The City
also is continuing its program to remove and control invasive plants in various locations
around Decatur. This program is focused on the eradication of kudzu, English ivy, privet
and similar invasive plants that harm native plants and reduce habitat in the City’s greenspaces.

Previously, a community-based master plan for Hidden Cove Park was completed and
approved by the City Commission. New footbridges and park furniture were installed,
removal of invasive plants was started and additional trees were planted to begin implementation of the master plan. Acquisition of additional properties to the City’s greenspace
inventory also is being considered.

Capital
Projects
Narrative

Sidewalk Improvement Program
Construction was completed on Phase 2 of the sidewalk improvement program in spring of
2012. Sidewalk improvements were initiated considering priorities from the Community
Transportation Plan, providing logical connections and reducing gaps in the sidewalk system, providing sidewalks where there is a substantial amount of existing pedestrian traffic,
and providing sidewalks in areas with high volumes of vehicular traffic. Many of the sidewalk improvements were designed to enhance the City’s popular Safe Routes to Schools
program. Almost 3½ miles of new sidewalk were included in Phase 2, along with enhanced
crosswalks at key intersections in downtown Decatur and on streets with high volumes of
pedestrian use. Agnes Scott College also funded new flashing beacons at new, highly visible
crosswalks on East College Avenue and South Candler Street.
The City Commission continues to appropriate funding each year for improvements to the
City’s sidewalk, pedestrian and bicycle facilities and for traffic calming improvements to
discourage speeding and make walking and biking safer in Decatur. Recent sidewalk and
traffic calming efforts include sidewalk improvements on Clairemont Avenue, Kirk Road,
Maxwell Street and Westchester Drive. A new system of medians, roundabouts and similar
traffic calming features were implemented in the Ponce de Leon Terrace neighborhood and
a new pedestrian bridge was completed over Shoal Creek in the Winnona Park neighborhood.
On-going sidewalk and pedestrian improvements completed in 2016-17 include the Olympic Place pedestrian trail, a sidewalk extension on Harold Byrd Drive and new decorative
crosswalks in downtown Decatur.

Decatur Cemetery
Work was completed in 2012 on Phase 1 of the Decatur Cemetery Improvements. The Decatur Cemetery is the City’s largest publicly owned open space
and is adjacent to Glenlake Park, the City’s largest public park. The City
Commission approved a master plan for the Decatur Cemetery in September
2008, after a comprehensive public planning effort. The master plan included
a landscape improvement and tree replacement program; improvements to the
storm water system; new walkways, drives and other infrastructure elements
with an emphasis on pedestrian amenities; a “pond side” park; repairs to the
historic Old Cemetery and a maintenance plan to address erosion, stream
restoration; and, development of a more dignified and park-like entrance at
Church and Bell Streets. Trees Atlanta is continuing a multi-year restoration
program of the woodland section on the eastern side of the Cemetery. The
master plan was prepared by the firm of Edward L. Daugherty, FASLA. Ed Castro Landscape, Inc. of Atlanta was the general contractor for the Phase 1 improvements.
Work was completed in 2010 on restoration of the Cemetery Office building using sustainable construction methods. Improvements to the Cemetery Office building were designed
by Brian Randall, Architect, of Decatur. The general contractor was Ward General Contractors of Kennesaw.
CITY OF DECATUR

105

Phase 2 of the Decatur Cemetery Improvements include development of a prominent
entrance at Bell Street, restoration of the Old Cemetery, and additional pedestrian and landscape improvements.

Completed between 2007-2014:
Fire Station No. 2: Completed 2009
• New 4,500 square foot building replaced a smaller outdated building
• Included two engine bays and living and sleeping quarters for five firefighters
• High-performance “green building” received LEED Silver certification
• Received design awards from the Georgia Chapter of the American Institute of Architects and the Atlanta Business Chronicle

Glenlake Park: Completed 2010
• Construction of new pool bathhouse, walking trails, pedestrian bridges, new multi-purpose pavilions, a dog park, and renovated athletic fields
• Installation of a new court surface at the Glenlake Tennis Center along with a new court
lighting system
• Restoration of stream corridor and storm drainage improvements to improve water quality, reduce downstream flooding and make the stream an integral part of the park experience

West Ponce de Leon-West Trinity Place Bicycle Lanes:
Completed 2011
• The bicycle lanes run along West Ponce de Leon Avenue and West Trinity Place from the
western City limits near East Parkwood Road to North McDonough Street in downtown
Decatur
• The improvements included traffic calming elements along West Ponce de Leon Avenue
between West Trinity Place and the western City limits, reduction of travel lanes to one
in each direction, addition of a bike lane in each direction, “bulb outs” with crosswalks
at intersections, and on-street parking permitted on both sides of the street
• The Atlanta Bicycle Coalition honored the project with its 2011 Blinkie award for Best
New Bicycle Facility

Fire Station No. 1: Completed 2012
• A full restoration and small addition to Decatur’s Fire Station No. 1 at 230 East Trinity
Place was completed in spring of 2012
• Built in the mid-1950s, Fire Station No. 1 is a 2-story building of about 10,000 square
feet with 3 engine bays, offices, day room and kitchen, bunker gear and hose storage
room, dormitory area, and restrooms
• Improvements included energy efficient upgrades and designing facilities for “coed” use
• High-performance “green building” and features geothermal mechanical equipment,
solar hot water, gray water and rainwater harvesting systems to reduce water usage, and
other energy saving features
• LEED Platinum certification by the U.S. Green Building Council

106

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Decatur Recreation Center: Completed 2012
• Full renovation and expansion of the Decatur Recreation Center
• The original building was built in the mid-1950’s

Capital
Projects
Narrative

• Improvements included a new elevated track, multi-purpose exercise and dance studio,
institutional kitchen, new meeting rooms and lounge areas, and additional staff office
space
• LEED Silver certification
• The Decatur Recreation Center received the 2013 design award from the Georgia Chapter of the American Institute of Architects

Decatur City Hall: Completed 2007
• Renovation of the historic Decatur City Hall originally built in 1928
• Historically sensitive renovation of the original building
• Construction of a 7,000 sf addition to provide additional office space and a larger, more
accessible city commission meeting room on the ground floor

CITY OF DECATUR

107

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts

Capital Projects
Summary

Capital Projects
Summary

Capital Improvement Program
A Capital Improvement Program (CIP) is a planning process that identifies the capital investments a local government intends to make over a period of time. Capital improvements
includes the facilities and materials needed to perform the City’s functions and to produce
and deliver the services expected of it.
The following guidelines determine what a capital project is:
• Relatively high monetary value (at least $5,000)
• Long life (at least two years)
• Results in creation of a capital asset, or the revitalization of a capital asset
Included within the above definition of a capital project are the following items:
• Construction of new City facilities
• Remodeling or expansion of existing facilities
• Purchase, improvement, and development of land
• Street construction, reconstruction, resurfacing, or road improvements
• Sidewalks and stormwater projects
• Vehicles, heavy equipment, computers, and other machinery & equipment
• Planning and engineering costs related to specific capital improvements
The City develops and updates a five-year Capital Improvement Program (CIP) annually.
The capital budget is the first year of the CIP and provides the basis for control of expenditures for the acquisition of significant City assets and construction of all capital facilities.
As capital improvement projects are completed, they are capitalized and the operations and
maintenance are funded in the annual general fund operating budget.

The FY 2018-2022 Capital Improvement Program

The FY 2018-2022 capital improvement program totals $22,245,320. A summary of the
plan is as follows:
FY 2018
Proposed

FY 2019
Proposed

FY 2020
Proposed

FY 2021
Proposed

FY 2022
Proposed

Total

Capital Improvements Fund

3,747,120

3,732,190

3,201,600

1,986,800

1,781,400

$14,449,110

Cemetery Capital Improvements Fund

132,000

62,000

12,000

15,000

15,000

$236,000

HOST projects

2,510,000

350,000

590,000

10,000

10,000

$3,470,000

Solid Waste Fund

215,730

218,730

207,630

198,830

148,520

$989,440

Stormwater Fund

452,470

676,700

503,000

412,000

504,000

$2,548,170

E911 Fund

38,600

10,000

-

82,000

82,000

$212,600

-

-

-

-

10,000

$10,000

330,000

-

-

-

-

$330,000

$7,425,920

$5,049,620

$4,514,230 $ 2,704,630 $ 2,550,920

$22,245,320

Children & Youth Services Fund
GO Bond/URA funds
Totals

CITY OF DECATUR

109

The projects included in the Adopted FY 2018-2022 Capital Improvement Program are
listed on the following pages.

Capital Improvements
Fund Capital

FY 16-17
Revised
Estimate

FY 17-18
Adopted
Estimate

FY 18-19
CIP
Estimate

FY 19-20
CIP
Estimate

FY 20-21
CIP
Estimate

FY 21-22
CIP
Estimate

$3,434,750

$1,696,900

$1,580,400

$1,540,400

$220,400

$205,400

Description
CITYWIDE
Telephone System Upgrade
65,000
Laptop Replacement
14,750
UPS Batteries
12,500
Fiber Network Installation
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
Network Upgrade
40,000
40,000
Police/City Hall Servers
30,000
Wireless Network Upgrade/Refresh
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
75,000
North McDonough Streetscapes - Phase IV
1,880,000
402,000
McDonough & Candler Railroad Crossings
1,040,000
440,000
CCC Ped Safety & Bike Lane Improvements
75,000
327,000
1,360,000
1,360,000
Norris Street Property Purchase
385,000
Commerce Drive bicycle track
1,000,000
East Decatur Greenway
40,000
UMCH Trail Design and Installation
240,000
Outdoor Tornado Siren System
30,400
30,400
30,400
30,400
30,400
CITYWIDE:

FACILITIES MAINTENANCE UPKEEP
Bandstand Painting and Repair
8,000
15,000
City Hall Interior and Exterior Painting
12,000
50,000
City Hall Carpet
35,000
City Hall Bathroom Upgrade
20,000
City Hall Commission Room Technology
50,000
City Hall Parking Lot Sealing and Restriping
5,000
Cemetery Office Interior Painting
8,000
Decatur Recreation Center Wood Floor Re-finish
30,000
Decatur Recreation Center Floor Covers
15,000
Decatur Recreation Center Boiler
50,000
Decatur Recreation Center Chiller
50,000
Decatur Tennis Center Roof
15,000
Decatur Recreation Center & Fire Station 1
Concrete Floor Re-finish
5,000
Fire Station 2 Interior Painting
45,000
Fire Station 1 Interior Painting
80,000
Facilities Security Upgrades
28,000
10,000
Landscaping Improvements on Decatur Square
34,000
Public Works Facility Exterior Painting
11,600

FACILITIES UPKEEP:
110

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

$93,600

$115,000

$65,000

$15,000

$208,000

$80,000

FY 16-17
Revised
Estimate

Description

FY 17-18
Adopted
Estimate

FY 18-19
CIP
Estimate

FY 19-20
CIP
Estimate

FY 20-21
CIP
Estimate

FY 21-22
CIP
Estimate

CITY MANAGER’S OFFICE
City Manager’s Vehicle
7,800
7,800
7,800
8,500
8,500
General Government Vehicle
15,000
City Hall Generator
140,000
CMO:

$8,500

$8,500

COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC DEV
Smart Parking Meters System
70,000
70,000
Additional pay stations
16,000
48,000
20,000
PALS Vehicle
10,000

10,000

CED:

$7,800

$86,000

$22,800

$118,000

$147,800

$0

$8,500

8,500

$0

$30,000

$10,000

ACTIVE LIVING
Athletic Field Lighting
82,000
82,000
McKoy Pool Shell Resurfacing
20,000
25,000
25,000
Playground Equipment
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
Skatepark Equipment
50,000
Recreation Services Van
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
Active Living Pickup Truck
5,000
5,000
5,000
5,000
Floor Scrubber for Decatur Recreation Center
8,500
Scott Park Tennis Court Painting
5,000
Active Living F150
5,000
Arbors for Scott Park Garden, McKoy Park
and Oakhurst Park
50,000
Movie Equipment at Beacon Municipal Complex
75,000
Park Signage Upgrade
25,000
Oakhurst Tennis Courts Resurfacing &
Lighting Replacement
115,000
Glenlake Pool Shade Panels
10,400
18,500
Sand Volleyball Courts
40,000
Ebster Recreation Center Window Tinting
7,380
Basketball Court Resurfacing		12,750
AL:

$232,400

$330,630

$117,000

$55,500

$42,000

$47,000

$0

$0

$0

FIRE
Rescue/Medical Vehicle
13,000
13,000
13,000
Fire Engine/Tiller
157,500
157,500
157,500
Fire Admin vehicle
10,000
10,000
10,000
12,000
Fire Admin/Inspections Vehicle
5,300
5,300
5,300
6,000
6,000
Fire Engine/Pumper
144,000
144,000
Air/Light Truck (2005)
51,500
51,500
51,500

157,500
12,000
6,000

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
Records Management Enterprise Software
AS:

50,000
$0

$0

$50,000

51,500

Fire continued
CITY OF DECATUR

111

FY 16-17
Revised
Estimate

Description

FY 17-18
Adopted
Estimate

FY 18-19
CIP
Estimate

FY 19-20
CIP
Estimate

FY 20-21
CIP
Estimate

FY 21-22
CIP
Estimate

HazMat Truck (2008)
67,500
Portable Radio Replacement (18)
15,300
15,300
15,300
15,500
15,500
15,500
Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus
24,000
Fitness Equipment
12,500
12,500
12,500
Station 1 Driveway
33,400
Station 1 Furniture
15,000
15,000
Station 2 Appliances
15,000
Station Interior Painting
15,000
Extrication Equipment
30,000
Misting Trailer
12,000
Station 2 Roof
60,000
Mini Fire Pumper
38,000
38,000
38,000
38,000
38,000
Apparatus Back-up Guidance System
26,500
PT Firefighter Equipment
60,000
FIRE:

$222,000

$314,100

$382,600

$349,000

$321,000

$355,500

POLICE
2013 Admin Vehicle
6,500
2014 Admin Vehicle
7,200
7,200
2015 Admin Vehicle
8,500
8,500
8,500
2016 Admin Vehicle
6,400
6,400
6,400
2017 Admin Vehicle
8,900
8,900
8,900
2018 CID Vehicle
9,400
9,400
9,400
2018 Admin Vehicle
9,400
9,400
9,400
2019 Admin Vehicle
9,600
9,600
2020 CID Vehicle
9,800
9,800
2020 Admin Vehicle
10,000
122,500
134,000
Patrol Vehicles
119,000
126,300
130,000
138,000
Prisoner Transport Van with Insert
9,700
9,700
9,700
9,700
9,700
Intoxilyzer 9000
10,000
10,000
10,000
7,500
7,500
7,500
Animal Control Truck
Police Motorcycle
20,000
Mobile Command Trailer Upgrades
10,000
Heavy duty Truck to Tow Command Center
15,000
15,000
15,000
License Plate Reader system
6,600
6,600
6,750
6,750
6,750
Fitness Equipment; Bookshelves, chair arms;
bunks; art; lectern; TVs
10,000
10,000
10,000
Vehicle technology upgrades and
Police worn body cameras
61,270
61,270
61,270
Digital Radio Upgrade
(65 portable radio replacement)
59,000
59,000
59,000
59,000
Patrol Rifles
14,700
14,700
14,700
Tasers

23,000
23,000
23,000
Live Scan fingerprint system

5,000
5,000
5,000
Police continued
112

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

FY 16-17
Revised
Estimate

Description
Latent Print Server
Training Simulator
CALEA Certification

FY 17-18
Adopted
Estimate

23,700


POLICE:

$278,070

$328,470

FY 18-19
CIP
Estimate

FY 19-20
CIP
Estimate

FY 20-21
CIP
Estimate

FY 21-22
CIP
Estimate

20,000
23,700
23,700
10,000
$422,120

$348,450

$259,150

$219,500

PUBLIC WORKS
Fuel System Vehicle Kits
25,000
25,000
Cemetery Dump Truck
6,100
6,100
6,100
Cemetery Loader Backhoe
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
Buildings Pickup
7,100
7,100
7,100
Buildings Pickup
8,000
Buildings Pickup
8,000
8,000
Admin Vehicle
12,000
12,000
12,000
Grounds Zero Turn Mower
9,300
12,000
Cemetery Kubota RTV
9,000
9,000
9,000
Cemetery Zero Turn Mower
12,000
10,000
Grounds Kubota
6,300
Grounds Supervisor Pickup
10,000
10,000
10,000
Grounds Crew Pickup
10,460
10,460
10,460
10,000
Grounds Pickup		10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
Grounds Tractor
6,250
6,250
6,250
Grounds Tractor
10,000
10,000
10,000
Fuel System Dispensers
20,000
Water Tower Painting
5,000
PW:

$73,260

$104,660

$110,910

$68,250

$88,250

DESIGN, ENVIRONMENT & CONSTRUCTION
2014 Ford Escape Admin Vehicle
4,600
4,600
5,500
5,500
2016 Ford Ranger Building Official Vehicle
4,600
4,600
2017 Ford Ranger Engineering Inspector
8,000
8,000
8,000
F250 Regular Cab
8,000
8,000
8,000
Roadway Patching, Repair & Repaving
390,600
485,000
450,000
450,000
450,000
Sidewalk Installation & Repair
453,750
175,000
175,000
175,000
Traffic Calming Improvements
100,000
150,000
150,000
150,000
Midblock Crosswalk Rebuilding
36,250
Asphalt Roller
6,600
6,600
6,600
2014 Ford F250 Streets Crew Supervisor
Pickup Truck
8,000
9,000
F750 Dump Truck
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
Streets Pickup Truck Replacement 2005 F250
11,740
11,740
11,740
Backhoe Replacement 2001
18,500
18,500
18,500
Streets Bobcat Replacement 1996/Skid Steer Loader 8,520
8,520
8,520
Spreader and brine apparatus plus storage rack
41,000
DE&C:

$46,000
5,500

450,000
175,000
150,000

9,000
20,000

$943,160

$716,560

$856,360

$816,500

$809,500

$809,500

CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND TOTAL: $5,371,040

$3,747,120

$3,732,190

$3,201,600

$1,986,800

$1,781,400

CITY OF DECATUR

113

FY 16-17
Revised
Estimate

Description

FY 17-18
Adopted
Estimate

FY 18-19
CIP
Estimate

FY 19-20
CIP
Estimate

FY 20-21
CIP
Estimate

FY 21-22
CIP
Estimate

HOST Funded Capital:
Public Works Building B Buildout and Shelving
150,000
Decatur Recreation Center Movement Studio
Window Shade Modification
10,000
Keyless Entry System for Fire Stations
20,500
Boys & Girls Club Indoor Pool
360,000
McKoy Field Storage Building
50,000
Ebster Field Storage Building
50,000
Public Art
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
Property Purchases
254,000
HAWK Signal Grant Match
55,000
Public Works AV equipment
10,000
McDonough & Candler RR Crossings
710,000
370,000
CCC Pedestrian/Bike Improvements
72,000
340,000
580,000
Commerce Drive bicycle track
1,000,000
N. McDonough Streetscapes-Phase IV
470,000
238,000
Sidewalk Construction and Repair
175,000
Oakhurst and McKoy Parks Facility Upgrades
1,250,000
W. Howard Ave. Redesign
20,000
$40,000
Barry Street Storm Sewer Extension
725,000
Avondale MARTA Match
300,000
HOST:

$3,839,500

$2,510,000

$350,000

$59,000

$10,000

CEMETERY CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND
Cemetery Marker and Wall Restoration
12,000
12,000
12,000
15,000
Cemetery Stairs and Handrail Improvements
70,000
Cemetery Demolition of Art Shack and Roly Poly
25,000
Cemetery Entrance Improvements
70,000
Cemetery Water System Improvements
50,000
50,000
CEMETERY TOTAL:

$95,000

General Obligation Bond Capital:
GO BONDS
N. McDonough Streetscapes-Phase IV
McDonough & Candler Railroad Crossings
300,000
GO Bonds:

114

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

$300,000

$132,000

$62,000

$12,000

$15,000

$10,000
15,000

$15,000

100,000
230,000
$330,000

$0

$0

$0

$0

FY 16-17
Revised
Estimate

Description

FY 17-18
Adopted
Estimate

FY 18-19
CIP
Estimate

FY 19-20
CIP
Estimate

FY 20-21
CIP
Estimate

Solid Waste Fund Capital:
2016 Ford F150
8,800
8,800
8,800
2011 6 cubic yard rear loader
(Downtown collection vehicle)
18,200
2016 6 cubic yard rear loader
(Downtown collection vehicle)
19,510
19,510
19,510
19,510
19,510
2007 Peterbilt Appliance/Compost Collection
25,000
25,000
2012 Front Loader
38,000
38,000
2013 Rear Loader
36,100
36,100
36,100
2017 Rear Loader
38,800
38,800
38,800
38,800
2018 Rear Loader
41,000
41,000
41,000
5 Kubota Residential Collection
Vehicle Replacement
30,800
30,800
30,800
30,800
30,800
43,720
Street Sweeper		43,720
43,720
43,720
SOLID WASTE:

$142,610

$215,730

$218,730

$207,630

$198,830

STORMWATER FUND
2015 F250 Drainage Pickup Truck Replacement
8,770
8,770
9,000
Backhoe Replacement 2001
11,000
11,000
11,000
2015 F250 Drainage Pickup Truck Replacement
12,700
12,700
12,700
2017 F750 Drainage Dump Truck Replacement
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
2018 Inspector SUV
8,000
8,000
8,000
Stormwater Master Plan
250,000
250,000
Barry Street Storm Sewer
2,275,000
Master Plan Infrastructure Improvements
250,000
250,000
250,000
Master Plan Water Quality Improvements
25,000
25,000
25,000
Hazard Mitigation
50,000
100,000
100,000
Roadway Milling		100,000
100,000
100,000
Lockwood at Fairview
150,000

25,000

38,800
41,000

43,720
$148,520
9,000

20,000

250,000
25,000
100,000
100,000

$503,000

$412,000

$504,000

E911 FUND
Dictaphone Recording System/NICE
Recording System
10,000
10,000
10,000
E911 Emergency Call Handling System (VIPER)
28,600
28,600
Console Replacement

12,000
35,000
35,000

12,000
35,000
35,000

$82,000

$82,000

STORMWATER:

E911:
CHILDREN & YOUTH SVCS FUND
Activity Bus
CYS:

$2,457,470

$38,600

$452,470

$38,600

$676,700

FY 21-22
CIP
Estimate

$10,000

$0

9,800
10,000
$9,800

$0

$0

$0

$0

$10,000

CITY OF DECATUR

115

CAPITAL PROJECTS FUND - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS (350)
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates






CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13

CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2013-14

CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2014-15

CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2015-16

CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
ESTIMATE
2016-17

CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
REVISED
2016-17

CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
5,205,813
7,578,160
4,437,864
5,977,128
7,643,838
7,711,039
6,119,769

REVENUES
311200
General Taxes
1,121,002
1,165,845
1,350,084
1,634,667
1,675,590
1,705,000
1,871,700
313300
Homestead Option Sales Tax (HOST)
3,662,885
3,968,584
4,620,717
3,899,722
3,500,000
4,363,860
3,500,000
361000
Interest
16,074
13,550
11,382
10,302
0
0
0
334100
Intergovernmental
224,892
300,819
185,384
144,434
2,508,540
3,221,000
2,297,300
371200
Gifts & Contributions
0
5,000
0
0
0
0
0
381000
Use of Property/Rent
0
0
0
0
0
0
95,100
389000
Miscellaneous
7,970
3,000
1,985
2,035
0
0
0
Bond Expense Reimbursement
0
62,854
23,001
0
0
0
332,000
393150
383010
Insurance Claims/Losses
23,620
0
44,555
4,880
0
0
0
Total Revenue
5,056,443
5,519,651
6,237,108
5,696,040
7,684,130
9,289,860
7,937,900

EXPENDITURES
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES
521200 Professional Services
106,782
68,071
128,073
128,361
30,000
252,000
245,000
522200 Repairs & Mnt.
9,750
9,750
0
0
0
0
0
522201 R&M Bldg and Fixed Equipment
9,621
0
8,539
25,680
107,000
50,000
115,000
522202 R&M Communications Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522203 R&M Landscape
0
0
0
12,183
40,000
34,000
0
522206 R&M Vehicles
0
0
9,650
0
10,000
10,000
0
522210 R&M Infrastructure
133,595
262,380
673,146
331,727
450,000
390,600
485,000
522310 Rental of Land/Bldgs
129,273
268,142
67,350
8,660
0
0
0
522320 Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522321 Auto Allowance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522500 Other Contractual Services
22,534
10,645
70,000
10,000
310,000
370,000
335,000
523103 Insurance - Misc
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523202 Telephone
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,805
0
0
290
0
120
0
523300 Advertising
523400 Printing & Binding
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523450 Signs
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523600 Dues & Fees
180
68
1,800
0
0
2,820
0
523700 Education & Training
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523701 Business Meetings
603
0
0
0
0
0
0
523800 Licenses
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523911 Bank Charges
Total Services
413,782
619,055
958,558
516,901
947,000
1,109,540
1,180,000

SUPPLIES
531101 Bldg. & Fixed Equipment
0
0
0
5,053
42,000
48,500
34,000
531103 Landscape Supplies
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531105 Office Supplies
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531107 Specialized Departmental Supplies
0
13,288
0
31,667
77,000
93,000
176,000
531110 Communications Equipment
118,112
0
0
0
0
0
65,000
531111 Computer Equipment
0
0
3,692
0
255,000
14,750
242,500
531112 Computer Software
0
16,194
20,000
0
0
0
0
531113 Off Eqp Furnishings
227
0
26,908
66,306
10,000
12,280
0
531114 Outdoor Furn and Equipment
39,764
8,024
32,903
40,227
138,400
51,400
289,250
531300 Food-Subsistence & Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531400 Books & Periodicals
446
0
0
0
0
0
0
531600 Small Equipment
0
7,998
5,837
0
0
0
0
Total Supplies

116

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

158,550

45,504

89,341

143,253

522,400

219,930

806,750



CAPITAL
CAPITAL
CAPITAL
CAPITAL
CAPITAL
CAPITAL
CAPITAL

IMP. FUND
IMP. FUND
IMP. FUND
IMP. FUND
IMP. FUND
IMP. FUND
IMP. FUND

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE

2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2016-17
2017-18
541100
541101
541200
541300
541301
541400
542100
542101
542102
542200
542301
542401
542500

CAPITAL OUTLAY
Sites
0
0
0
23,396
50,000
254,000
0
Right of Way
114,753
(22,903)
5,705
0
42,000
0
0
Site Improvements
714,087
1,015
8,985
0
0
33,400
240,000
Buildings
0
0
14,927
82,482
50,000
385,000
100,000
Building Improvements
387
0
0
16,514
1,520,000
1,250,000
170,000
Infrastructure
106,808
481,926
106,196
117,826
5,739,500
4,705,000
3,734,000
Machines, Motors & Power Tools
0
146,756
25,920
8,199
12,000
9,300
12,000
Communications Equipment
0
100,837
323,487
173,477
0
0
0
Office Machines/Equipment
0
0
55,736
0
0
0
0
Vehicles
109,354
882,021
248,672
189,388
396,500
223,180
552,300
Outdoor Furniture & Equipment
150,802
328,346
0
3,486
115,000
115,000
152,000
Computer Systems Software
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous Equipment
0
9,999
0
0
25,000
0
41,000
Land Other Than ROW
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Total Capital Outlay
1,196,192
1,927,998
789,627
614,768
7,950,000
6,974,880
5,001,300

DEBT SERVICES
581100
Principal-Bonds
120,000
125,000
130,000
130,000
135,000
135,000
145,000
58120
Principal-Capital Leases
211,841
322,335
309,706
315,366
825,000
338,620
878,500
58210
Interest-Bonds
84,065
79,373
74,486
48,863
42,770
42,770
39,260
582200
Interest-Capital Leases
18,578
13,869
25,654
21,962
38,700
33,900
39,640
584000
Cost of Issuance Long Term Debt
0
0
1,000
979,013
0
0
0
Total Non-operating
434,484
540,577
540,845
1,495,204
1,041,470
550,290
1,102,400
Total Expenditures
2,203,007
3,133,134
2,378,371
2,770,126
10,460,870
8,854,640
8,090,450

OTHER USES
611100
Transfer (to) from General Fund
0
0
0
180,000
438,000
385,000
0
391340
Transfer (to) from Public Facilities Auth.
0
0
0
0
0
0
(705,100)
391340
Transfer (to) from URA 2010 Debt Service
(493,000)
(874,973)
(872,960)
(875,000)
(188,230)
(185,600)
(751,900)
391340
Transfer (to) from URA 2010 Project
(950,000)
(1,894,123)
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer (to) from URA 2013 Debt Service
0
(707,883)
(1,475,514)
(1,479,230)
(1,481,330)
(1,481,330)
(1,482,980)
391340
391340
Transfer (to) from URA 2013 Project
92,822
(3,090,017)
0
0
0
0
0
391310
Transfer (to) from GO Bond Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
391505
Transfer (to) from Stormwater Utility
0
0
11,000
11,000
(1,084,000)
(714,000)
11,000
Transfer (to) from Conference Center Fund
236,645
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer (to) from Cemetery Capital
391355
Improvements Fund
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
392100
Sale of Fixed Assets
0
0
0
30,264
0
0
0
393501
Proceeds from Capital Leases
614,444
1,022,184
0
173,477
1,342,500
0
1,537,180
393100
Issuance of Long-term Debt
0
0
0
75,979,013
0
0
0
611220
Transfer (to) from Grant Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
(55,000)
611286
Transfer (to) from Downtown
Development Authority
0
0
0
(229,528)
0
(48,560)
0
Transfer Bond Proceeds (to) from
620000
City Schools of Decatur
0
0
0
(75,000,000)
0
0
0
Total Other Uses
(481,089)
(5,526,812)
(2,319,473)
(1,192,004)
(955,060)
(2,026,490)
(1,428,800)

ENDING FUND BALANCE
7,578,160
4,437,864
5,977,128
7,711,039
3,912,038
6,119,769
4,696,619
Restricted-HOST
4,817,103
2,230,290
4,299,348
5,685,484
2,874,108
4,380,074
3,567,194
Restricted-Other
659,296
494,571
265,353
227,058
365,360
227,058
227,058
Nonspendable
384,505
526,196
363,213
1,088,350
363,220
511,490
504,590
For Capital Bond Projects
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
To (From) Assigned Fund Balance
476,967
(530,449)
(137,59)3
(339,067)
(1,163,620)
291,000
(603,370)
ENDING ASSIGNED FUND BALANCE

1,717,256

1,186,807

1,049,214

710,146

309,350

1,001,147

397,777

CITY OF DECATUR

117

118

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

FY 2016-17 capital items

Impact on operating budget

Active Living: Athletic Field Lights-McKoy and
Oakhurst (5th of 6 Payments) ($82,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in energy
expenses with more energy efficient lighting

Active Living: Oakhurst Tennis Courts Resurfacing and Lighting Replacement ($115,000)
(542301)

Ongoing program – decrease in energy
expenses with more energy efficient lighting

Active Living: Playground Equipment Replacement ($25,000) (531114)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs associated with older equipment
and reduce liability for injuries

Active Living: Shade Panels at Glenlake Pool
($10,400) (531114)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

Buildings Maintenance: Replacement Vehicle
(1st of 3 Lease Payments) ($7,100)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

City Manager: City Manager Admin Vehicle
(1st of 3 Lease Payments) ($7,800)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Cemetery: Kubota RTV (1st of 3 Lease Payments) ($9,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Cemetery: Replacement Dump Truck (3rd of 5
Lease Payments) ($6,100)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Citywide: Clairemont/Church/Commerce
Pedestrian & Bike Improvements ($75,000)
(541400) MARTA

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: N. McDonough Streetscapes IV
($1,880,000) (541400) LCI

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: McDonough & Candler Railroad
Crossings ($1,040,000) (541400) TE

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: East Decatur Greenway ($40,000)
(541400)

One-time cost

Citywide: Purchase of Norris Street Property
($385,000) (541300)

One-time cost

DEC: Streets Replacement Vehicle (1st of 3
Lease Payments) ($11,740)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: Crew Supervisor Pickup Truck (3rd of 3
Lease Payments) ($8,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: Backhoe (3rd of 5 Lease Payments)
($18,500)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: Asphalt Roller (3rd of 5 Lease Payments)
($6,600)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: Skid Steer Loader (3rd of 5 Lease Payments) ($8,520)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: Building Official Vehicle (4th of 5 Lease
Payments) ($4,600)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: DEC Dir, Vehicle (4th of 5 Lease Payments) ($4,600)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: Midblock Crosswalk, Sidewalks, and
Traffic Calming ($490,000)(541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

DEC: Patching, Repair and Resurfacing
($390,600) (522210)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

FY 2016-17 capital items continued

Impact on operating budget

Fire: Fire Replacement Portable Radios (18)
(3rd of 5 Lease Payments) ($15,300)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Fire: Fire Inspection Replacement Vehicle
(3rd of 5 Lease Payments) ($5,300)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Fire: Fire Engine Replacement (4th of 5 Lease
Payments) ($144,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Fire: Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus
(SCBA) bottles (24) and pack ($24,000)
(531107)

One-time cost – increase staff safety

Capital Projects
Fund
Capital
Improvements (350)

Fire: Fire Station #1 Driveway Repair ($33,400) One-time cost – increase staff safety
(541200)
General Government: City Hall Interior, Public
Works Exterior and Bandstand Painting &
Repairs ($31,600) (522201)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

General Government: Facilities Security
Upgrades ($28,000) (531101)

Ongoing program – increase staff safety

General Government: Landscaping Improvements on Decatur Square ($34,000) (522203)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

Grounds Maintenance: Replacement Crew Cab
Truck (1st of 3 Lease Payments) ($10,460)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Grounds Maintenance: Kubota Vehicle (3rd of
3 Lease Payments) ($6,300)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Grounds Maintenance: Zero Turn Mower
($9,300) (542100)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Parking: Smart Parking Meter System (4th of 5
Lease Payments) ($70,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Parking: Automated Parking Stations
($16,000) (531114)

One-time cost – increase automated parking
options

Police: Admin Vehicle (1st of 3 Lease Payments) ($8,500)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: Admin Vehicle (2nd of 3 Lease Payments) ($7,200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: Admin Vehicle (3rd of 3 Lease Payments) ($6,500)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: In-Car Productivity Technology Tool/
Police Body Cameras (1st of 3 Lease Payments) ($61,270) (542101)

Ongoing program – increase staff safety and
decrease liability costs

Police: License Plate Reader System (2nd of 3
Lease Payments) ($6,600)

Ongoing program – increase staff efficiencies

Police: Patrol Vehicles (3) ($119,000)
(542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: Police Portable Radios (65) (2nd of 5
Lease Payments) ($59,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: Mobile Command Trailer upgrades
($10,000) (522206)

Ongoing program – increase staff efficiencies

CITY OF DECATUR

119

120

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

FY 2016-17 capital items continued

Impact on operating budget

Public Works: Fuel System Vehicle Kits
($25,000) (531107)

One-time cost – increase staff and equipment
efficiencies

Technology: Laptop Replacements ($14,750)
(531111)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

FY 2016-17 HOST items

Impact on operating budget

Active Living: Boys & Girls Club Pool Contract
($360,000) (522500)

One-time cost

Active Living: Oakhurst & McKoy Parks Facility Upgrades ($1,250,000) (541301)

One-time cost

Active Living: Movement Studio Window
Shade Modification ($10,000) (522201)

One-time cost

Citywide: McDonough & Candler Railroad
Crossings ($710,000) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual
maintenance costs associated with older
infrastructure

Citywide: N. McDonough Streetscapes IV
($470,000) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual
maintenance costs associated with older
infrastructure

Community & Economic Development: Public
Art ($10,000) (522500)

Ongoing program – nominal impact on
operating budget

DEC: W. Howard Ave. Redesign ($20,000)
(521200)

One-time cost

Fire: Keyless Entry System for 2 Fire Stations
($20,500) (531101)

One-time cost – increase staff safety

General Government: Property Purchases
($254,000) (541100)

One-time cost

General Government: Transfer to DDA for Debt
Service ($48,560) (611286)

Ongoing debt service

Public Works: AV Equipment for Public Works
Community & Conference Rooms ($10,000)
(531113)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

Transfer to URA 2010 Fund: Debt Service
($185,600)

Ongoing debt service

Transfer to URA 2013 Fund: Debt Service
($1,481,330)

Ongoing debt service

Transfer to Stormwater Fund for Barry Street
Project ($725,000)

One-time cost – reduced costs associated
with flooding and infrastructure repairs

FY 2017-2018 capital items

Impact on operating budget

Active Living: Athletic Field Lights-McKoy and
Oakhurst (6th of 6 Payments) ($82,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in energy
expenses with more energy efficient lighting

Active Living: Arbors in Scott Park Garden,
Oakhurst & McKoy Parks ($50,000) (531114)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

FY 2017-18 capital items continued

Impact on operating budget

Active Living: Basketball Courts ResurfacingOakhurst & McKoy ($12,750) (531114)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs associated with older equipment
and reduce liability for injuries

Active Living: Ebster Recreation Gym Window
Tinting ($7,380) (531101)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

Active Living: Glenlake Pool Shade Panels
($18,500) (531114)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

Active Living: McKoy Pool Resurfacing
($20,000) (531114)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs associated with older equipment
and reduce liability for injuries

Capital Projects
Fund
Capital
Improvements (350)

Active Living: Park Signage Upgrade ($25,000) One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
(531114)
budget
Active Living: Playground Equipment Replacement ($25,000) (531114)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs associated with older equipment
and reduce liability for injuries

Active Living: Sand Volleyball Courts
($40,000) (531114)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

Active Living: Skatepark Replacement
($50,000) (531114)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs associated with older equipment
and reduce liability for injuries

Buildings Maintenance: Replacement Vehicle
(2nd of 3 Lease Payments) ($7,100)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Cemetery: Kubota RTV (2nd of 3 Lease Payments) ($9,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Cemetery: Replacement Dump Truck (4th of 5
Lease Payments) ($6,100)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Cemetery: Zero Turn Mower ($12,000)
(542100)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

City Manager: City Manager Admin Vehicle
(2nd of 3 Lease Payments) ($7,800)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Citywide: Clairemont/Church/Commerce
Pedestrian & Bike Improvements ($39,000)
(541400) MARTA

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: Clairemont/Church/Commerce
Pedestrian & Bike Improvements ($288,000)
(541400) LCI

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: N. McDonough Streetscapes IV
($402,000) (541400) LCI

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: McDonough & Candler Railroad
Crossings ($440,000) (541400) TE

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: Commerce Dr Bike Track ($160,000)
(541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: UMCH Trail Design and Installation
($240,000) (541200)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

DEC: Engineering Inspector Vehicle (1st of 3
Lease Payments) ($8,000) (542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: F250 Regular Cab Vehicle (1st of 3 Lease Ongoing program – decrease in annual mainPayments) ($8,000) (542200)
tenance associated with older equipment
CITY OF DECATUR

121

FY 2017-18 capital items continued

Impact on operating budget

DEC: F750 Dump Truck (1st of 5 Lease Payments) ($20,000) (542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: Spreader Attachment and Storage Rack
($41,000) (542500)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

DEC: Streets Replacement Vehicle (2nd of 3
Lease Payments) ($11,740)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: Asphalt Roller (4th of 5 Lease Payments)
($6,600)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: Skid Steer Loader (4th of 5 Lease Payments) ($8,520)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: Building Official Vehicle (5th of 5 Lease
Payments) ($4,600)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: DEC Director, Vehicle (5th of 5 Lease
Payments) ($4,600)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

DEC: Traffic Calming Improvements
($100,000) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

DEC: Patching, Repair and Resurfacing
($485,000) (522210)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Fire: Fire Replacement Portable Radios (18)
(4th of 5 Lease Payments) ($15,300)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Fire: Fire Inspection Replacement Vehicle (4th
of 5 Lease Payments) ($5,300)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Fire: Fire Engine Replacement (5th of 5 Lease
Payments) ($144,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Fire: Replacement Administrative Vehicle (1st
of 3 Lease Payments) ($10,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Fire: Fire Mini-Pumper (1st of 5 Lease Payments) ($38,000) (542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Fire: Back-In Guidance System ($26,500)
(531101)

One-time cost – increase staff safety

Fire: Fire Station Painting ($15,000) (522201)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

Fire: Part-time Firefighter Equipment ($60,000) One-time cost – reduce overtime expenditures
(531107)
*Fire: Authorization to prepare specifications
and order replacement Fire Apparatus Vehicle
in an amount not to exceed $1,100,000.
General Government: City Hall Carpet Replace- One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
ment ($35,000) (522201)
budget

122

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

General Government: City Hall Exterior Painting & Repair ($50,000) (522201)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

General Government: Facilities Security
Upgrades ($10,000) (522201)

Ongoing program – increase staff safety

General Government: Restroom Facility Upgrade ($20,000) (541301)

One-time cost – increase staff wellness

General Government: Shared Administrative
Vehicle ($15,000) (542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

FY 2017-18 capital items continued

Impact on operating budget

General Government: Telephone System
Upgrade ($65,000) (531110)

One-time cost – increase staff efficiencies

General Government: Outdoor Warning Siren
System (1st of 5 Lease Payments) ($30,400)
(542301)

Ongoing program – increase community
safety

Grounds Maintenance: Pickup with Dump
Body (1st of 5 Lease Payments) ($10,000)
(542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Grounds Maintenance: Replacement Crew Cab
Truck (2nd of 3 Lease Payments) ($10,460)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Parking: Automated Parking Stations
($48,000) (531114)

One-time cost – increase automated parking
options

Parking: Smart Parking Meter System (5th of 5
Lease Payments) ($70,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: Admin Vehicle (1st of 3 Lease Payments) ($8,900) (542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: Admin Vehicle (1st of 3 Lease Payments) ($6,400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: Admin Vehicle (2nd of 3 Lease Payments) ($8,500)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: Admin Vehicle (3rd of 3 Lease Payments) ($7,200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: In-Car Productivity Technology Tool/
Police Body Cameras (2nd of 3 Lease Payments) ($61,270)

Ongoing program – increase staff safety and
decrease liability costs

Police: License Plate Reader System (3rd of 3
Lease Payments) ($6,600)

Ongoing program – increase staff efficiencies

Police: Patrol Rifles (1st of 3 Lease Payments)
($14,700)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: Police Portable Radios (65) (3rd of 5
Lease Payments) ($59,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: Prisoner Transport Van (1st of 5 Lease
Payments) ($9,700)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Police: Police Training Simulator (1st of 3
Lease Payments) ($23,700) (531107)

Ongoing program – increase staff efficiencies

Police: Patrol Vehicles (3) ($122,500)
(542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Public Works: Fuel System Dispenser
($20,000) (531107)

One-time cost – increase staff and equipment
efficiencies

Public Works: Fuel System Vehicle Kits
($25,000) (531107)

One-time cost – increase staff and equipment
efficiencies

Public Works: Water Tower Logo Painting
($5,000) (522201)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating
budget

Technology: Police/City Hall Servers
($30,000) (531111)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Capital Projects
Fund
Capital
Improvements (350)

Technology: Wireless Network Upgrade (1st of Ongoing program – decrease in annual main4 Lease Payments) ($50,000) (531111)
tenance associated with older equipment
CITY OF DECATUR

123

124

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

FY 2017-18 capital items continued

Impact on operating budget

Technology: Fiber Network Replacement (1st
of 7 Lease Payments) ($100,000) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older equipment

Technology: UPS Batteries ($12,500)
(531111)

One-time cost – increase staff efficiencies

FY 2017-18 HOST items

Impact on operating budget

Active Living: Ebster & McKoy Fields Storage
Buildings ($100,000) (541300)

One-time cost – eliminate need for storage
building rental

Citywide: McDonough & Candler Railroad
Crossings ($370,000) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: N. McDonough Streetscapes IV
($238,000) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: Clairemont/Church/Commerce
Bike & Pedestrian Improvements ($72,000)
(541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: Commerce Dr Bike Track ($750,000)
(541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Community & Economic Development: Public
Art ($10,000) (522500)

Ongoing program – nominal impact on
operating budget

DEC: Sidewalk Construction and Repair
($175,000) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

DEC: W. Howard Ave. Redesign ($40,000)
(521200)

One-time cost

General Government: Avondale MARTA match
($300,000) (522500)

One-time cost

Public Works: HAWK Signal grant match
($55,000) (611220)

One-time cost

Public Works: Building B Buildout & Shelving
($150,000) (541301)

One-time cost – eliminate need for storage
building rental

Transfer to URA 2010 Fund: Debt Service
($751,900)

Ongoing debt service

Transfer to URA 2013 Fund: Debt Service
($1,482,980)

Ongoing debt service

CAPITAL PROJECTS FUND - CEMETERY CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT (355)
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates
CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13

CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2013-14

CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2014-15

CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2015-16

CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
ESTIMATE
2016-17

CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
REVISED
2016-17

CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
55,380
77,551
151,151
166,673
181,673
202,671
170,671

REVENUES
Interest
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Facility Lease Payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Lot Sales
80,400
90,400
64,950
84,200
70,000
98,000
55,000
State Grants
9,329
10,900
0
0
0
0
0
Loss Reimbursement
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Gifts and Contributions
0
2,300
0
0
0
0
0

EXPENDITURES
Maint. & Repair
0
0
0
100
0
0
0
Capital Outlay
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Cont. Services
37,559
0
19,428
18,101
177,000
100,000
132,000
Claims, Losses
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Land Other Than ROW
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

TOTAL EXPENDITURES
37,559
0
19,428
18,201
177,000
100,000
132,000

To Capital Imp Fund
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
To Stormwater Fund
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
To GO Bond Fund
To (From) Fund Balance
22,170
73,600
15,522
35,999
(137,000)
(32,000)
(107,000)

ENDING FUND BALANCE
77,551
151,151
166,673
202,671
44,673
170,671
63,671

CITY OF DECATUR

125

GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND FUND (310)
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates






BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

GENERAL
OBLIGATION
BOND FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13
2,995,972

GENERAL
OBLIGATION
BOND FUND
ACTUAL
2013-14
2,627,100

GENERAL
OBLIGATION
BOND FUND
ACTUAL
2014-15
2,212,919

GENERAL
OBLIGATION
BOND FUND
ACTUAL
2015-16
808,787

GENERAL
OBLIGATION
BOND FUND
ESTIMATE
2016-17
248,247

GENERAL
OBLIGATION
BOND FUND
REVISED
2016-17
442,974

GENERAL
OBLIGATION
BOND FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18
330,024

361000
334100
389000

REVENUES
Taxes
0
0
Interest
4,174
3,009
2,734
1,497
0
1,050
0
Intergovernmental
0
0
680,290
984,106
0
186,000
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
128,246
0
0
0
Total Revenue
4,174
3,009
683,024
1,113,848
0
187,050
0

521200
522310
522320
523700
523701
523800
523911

EXPENDITURES
Professional Services
1,692
(1,692)
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Land/Bldgs
6,821
13,979
10,367
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Education & Training
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Business Meetings
184
0
0
0
0
0
0
Licenses
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Bank Charges
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Services
8,697
12,287
10,367
0
0
0
0
Total Supplies

0

0

0

0

0

0

0


CAPITAL OUTLAY
541100
Sites
74,807
6,180
0
0
0
0
0
541200
Site Improvements
66,304
33,465
2,471
0
0
0
0
541300
Buildings
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
541301
Building Improvements
118,374
0
0
0
0
0
0
541400
Infrastructure
93,531
313,431
1,899,438
1,460,031
248,240
300,000
330,000
Total Capital Outlay
353,016
353,076
1,901,909
1,460,031
248,240
300,000
330,000
Total Expenditures

361,713

365,362

1,912,276

1,460,031

248,240

300,000

330,000

582110
585000
584000

DEBT SERVICE
Interest			1
0
0
0
0
Advance Refunding Escrow
31,623,796
0
0
0
0
Issuance Costs
608,169
0
0
0
0
Total Debt Service
32,231,965
0
0
0
0

392100
393300
393400

OTHER FINANCING SOURCES
Sale of General Fixed Assets
16,176
0
0
0
Refunding Bonds Issued
29,895,000
0
0
0
Premium on Bond Issuance
2,336,966
0
0
0
Total Other Financing Sources
32,248,141
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

OTHER USES

Transfer (to) General Fund
(11,334)
(51,828)
(191,056)
(19,630)
0
0
0
Transfer from Capital Improvements Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer (to) Capital Improvements Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from Cemetery Capital Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from Tree Bank/Economic Dvlpt Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from Stormwater Utility
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer Fund Balance from Capital
Improvements Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Total Other Uses
(11,334)
(51,828)
(191,056)
(19,630)
0
0
0
Ending Fund Balance

126

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

2,627,100

2,212,919

808,787

442,974

7

330,024

24

2010 URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY FUND (340)
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates




BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

URA2010
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13

URA 2010
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2013-14

URA 2010
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2014-15

URA 2010
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2015-16

9,225,010

2,093,495

1,218

1,821

URA 2010
URA 2010
BONDS FUND BONDS FUND
ESTIMATE
REVISED
2016-17
2016-17
1,881

URA 2010
BONDS FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18

1,901

61

361000
392200
393200
389000

REVENUES
Taxes
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Interest
10,803
1,298
0
0
0
0
0
Property Sale
0
0
0
0
562,550
562,550
0
Federal Subsidy
340,355
313,297
311,945
307,754
302,050
302,860
296,200
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
121,600
121,600
121,600
Total Revenue
351,158
314,594
311,945
307,754
986,200
987,010
417,800

521200
522200
522201
522202
522210
522310
522320
522321
522500
523103
523104
523202
523300
523400

EXPENDITURES
Professional Services
(17,190)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repairs & Mnt.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
R&M Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
R&M Communications Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
R&M Infrastructure
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Land/Bldgs
39,497
34,445
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Auto Allowance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Other Contractual Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance - Misc
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance - Property
9,995
0
0
0
0
0
0
Telephone
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Advertising
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Printing & Binding
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Services
32,302
34,445
0
0
0
0
0
SUPPLIES
Total Supplies
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

541100
541200
541300
541301
541400

CAPITAL OUTLAY
Sites
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Site Improvements
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Buildings
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Building Improvements
7,924,370
3,851,682
0
0
0
0
0
Infrastructure
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Capital Outlay
7,924,370
3,851,682
0
0
0
0
0

581100
582100
581100
582100
584000

DEBT SERVICE
Principal-RZEDB Series A
0
355,000
380,133
370,000
375,000
375,000
385,000
Interest-RZEDB Series A
756,344
756,344
804,169
735,770
722,530
722,530
707,790
Principal-Series B
17,919
18,994
0
21,341
22,630
22,630
23,980
Interest-Series B
58,986
57,911
0
55,563
54,290
54,290
52,930
Cost of Issuance Long Term Debt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Non-operating
833,248
1,188,248
1,184,302
1,182,674
1,174,450
1,174,450
1,169,700
Total Expenditures

393100
393100

8,789,920

5,074,376

1,184,302

1,182,674

1,174,450

1,174,450

1,169,700

OTHER USES
Transfer from (to) General Fund
(135,752)
(101,593)
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from Stormwater Utility
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from Capital Improvements Fund
1,443,000
2,769,096
872,960
875,000
188,230
185,600
751,900
Transfer from Host Proceeds
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Adjust Construction Retainage
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Proceeds from debt issuance series A
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Proceeds from debt issuance series B
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Other Uses
1,307,248
2,667,503
872,960
875,000
188,230
185,600
751,900
Ending Fund Balance

2,093,495

1,218

1,821

1,901

1,861

61

CITY OF DECATUR

61

127

2013 URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY FUND (345)
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates





BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

URA 2013
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2013-2014

URA 2013
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2014-15

URA 2013
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2015-16

0

26,849,188

6,830,406

(244,574)

URA 2013
URA 2013
BONDS FUND BONDS FUND
ESTIMATE
REVISED
2016-17
2016-17
(960,564)

12,984

URA 2013
BONDS FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18
4

361000
334100
389000

REVENUES
Taxes
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Interest
1,018
23,741
7,303
2,149
0
0
0
Intergovernmental
0
0
0
960,533
1,364,330
403,730
402,730
Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Revenue
1,018
23,741
7,303
962,682
1,364,330
403,730
402,730

521200
522500
523600

EXPENDITURES
Professional Services
79,067
0
0
0
0
0
0
Other Contractual Services
21,581
0
0
0
0
0
0
Dues & Fees
308
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Services
100,956
0
0
0
0
0
0

531101
531300

SUPPLIES
Bldg. & Fixed Eqp
1,395
0
0
0
0
12,980
0
Food-Subsistence & Support
73
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Supplies
1,468
0
0
0
0
12,980
0

541100
541200
541300
541301
541400
542100
542101
542102
542200
542300
542301
542401
542500

581100
582100
581100
582100
584000

CAPITAL OUTLAY
Sites
9,800
0
0
0
0
0
0
Site Improvements
1,718,447
7,499,558
759,279
104,831
0
0
0
Buildings
3,129,620
18,474,978
5,066,370
195,724
0
0
0
Building Improvements
246,382
0
0
0
0
0
0
Infrastructure
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Machines, Motors & Power Tools
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Communications Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Office Machines/Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Vehicles
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Furniture & Fixtures
14,080
0
0
0
0
0
0
Outdoor Furniture & Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Computer Systems Software
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous Equipment
148,613
15,417
836,759
0
0
0
0
Land Other Than ROW
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Capital Outlay
5,266,943
25,989,953
6,662,407
300,555
0
0
0
DEBT SERVICE
Principal-Series 2013A
0
0
420,000
430,000
445,000
445,000
460,000
Interest-Series 2013A
0
707,883
1,061,814
1,049,225
1,036,330
1,036,330
1,022,980
Principal-Series 2013B
0
0
200,000
195,000
200,000
200,000
205,000
Interest-Series 2013B
0
142,383
213,575
209,575
203,730
203,730
197,730
Cost of Issuance Long Term Debt
381,944
204
0
0
0
0
0
Total Non-operating
381,944
850,470
1,895,389
1,883,800
1,885,060
1,885,060
1,885,710
Total Expenditures

393100
393100

5,751,311

26,840,423

8,557,796

2,184,355

1,885,060

1,898,040

1,885,710

OTHER USES
Transfer from General Fund
0
3,000,000
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from Stormwater Utility
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from (to) Capital Improvements Fund
(92,822)
707,890
1,475,513
1,479,230
1,481,330
1,481,330
1,482,980
Transfer from Host Proceeds
0
3,090,010
0
0
0
0
0
Adjust Construction Retainage
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Proceeds from debt issuance series 2013A
29,290,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
Proceeds from debt issuance series 2013B
3,402,303
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Other Uses
32,599,481
6,797,900
1,475,513
1,479,230
1,481,330
1,481,330
1,482,980
Ending Fund Balance

128

URA 2013
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

26,849,188

6,830,406

(244,574)

12,984

36

4

4

URA-CALLAWAY FUND (347)
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates






URA-CALLAWAY
FUND
ACTUAL
2013-14

URA-CALLAWAY
FUND
ACTUAL
2014-15

URA-CALLAWAY
FUND
ACTUAL
2015-16

URA-CALLAWAY
FUND
ESTIMATE
2016-17

URA-CALLAWAY
FUND
REVISED
2016-17

URA-CALLAWAY
FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18

0

5,070,815

5,282,234

5,368,044

6,659,011

0

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
361000
381000
392100

521200
522310
522500
523600

575000

581100
582100
584000

REVENUES
Investment Income
0
0
1,246,010
0
(1,245,820)
Use of Property
226,613
300,000
250,000
0
0
Sale of Assets
0
0
0
5,395,000
6,335,300

0
0
0

Total Revenues

5,089,480

0

SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
217
500
500
513,540
0
Rental of Land and Buildings
0
2,612
8,335
0
0
Other Contractual Services
0
285
30,010
0
469,750
Dues and Fees
0
4,800
0
0
6,400

0
0
0
0

Total Services and Charges

0

226,613

217

300,000

8,197

1,496,010

38,845

5,395,000

513,540

476,150

OTHER COSTS
Cost of Asset Sale
0
0
0
5,089,300
5,089,300

0

Total Other Costs

5,089,300

0

DEBT SERVICE
Principal-Bonds
0
0
0
5,120,000
5,120,000
Interest-Bonds
44,881
80,384
80,387
40,200
40,200
Issuance Costs
167,846
0
0
0
0

0
0
0

Total Debt Service

212,727

80,384

80,387

5,160,200

5,160,200

0

Total Expenditures

212,944

88,581

119,232

10,763,040

10,725,650

0

0

0

0

5,089,300

OTHER USES
Proceeds from debt issuance
Transfers (to) Capital Improvements Fund
Transfers (to) Downtown Development Authority
Transfers (to) URA 2010 Fund

5,120,000
(62,854)
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
(460,290)
(562,550)

0
0
0
0

Total Other Uses

5,057,146

0

0

0

(1,022,840)

0

Ending Fund Balance

5,070,815

5,282,234

6,659,011

4

0

0



CITY OF DECATUR

129

Public Facilities Authority Fund
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates




BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

361000
334100
389000

0

0

0

0

0

0

CAPITAL OUTLAY
Sites
0
40,000,000
Site Improvements
0
500,000
Buildings
0
0
Building Improvements
0
0
Infrastructure
0
0
Machines, Motors & Power Tools
0
0
Communications Equipment
0
0
Office Machines/Equipment
0
0
Vehicles
0
0
Furniture & Fixtures
0
0
Outdoor Furniture & Equipment
0
0
Computer Systems Software
0
0
Miscellaneous Equipment
0
0
Land Other Than ROW
0
0
Total Capital Outlay

581100
582100
584000

0

SUPPLIES
Bldg. & Fixed Eqp
0
0
Food-Subsistence & Support
0
0
Total Supplies

541100
541200
541300
541301
541400
542100
542101
542102
542200
542300
542301
542401
542500

0

EXPENDITURES
Professional Services
0
0
Other Contractual Services
0
0
Dues & Fees
0
0
Total Services

531101
531300

PFA
2017 BONDS FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18

REVENUES
Taxes
0
0
Interest
0
0
Intergovernmental
0
0
Miscellaneous
0
0
Total Revenue

521200
522500
523600

PFA
2017 BONDS FUND
REVISED ESTIMATE
2016-17

0

40,500,000

DEBT SERVICE
Principal-Series 2017
0
0
Interest-Series 2017
0
692,430
Cost of Issuance Long Term Debt
0
500,000
Total Non-operating

0

1,192,430

Total Expenditures

0

41,692,430

OTHER USES

393100

130

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Transfer from General Fund
0
Transfer from Stormwater Utility
0
Transfer from (to) Capital Improvements Fund
Transfer from Host Proceeds
0
Proceeds from debt issuance series 2017
0
Total Other Uses
0

750,000
0
705,100
0
41,000,000
41,955,100

Ending Fund Balance

762,670

0

FISCAL YEAR 2017-2018

Capital Projects Debt
Service Summary
Capital Projects Funds are used to account for financial resources to be used for the acquisition or construction of major
capital facilities and capital outlay.
Historically, the City has utilized debt cautiously, conservatively and sparingly. Until the
City issued general obligation bond debt in 2007, it had not issued long-term debt since the
1950s, instead relying on pay-as-you-go financing and short-term financing mechanisms.
Advantages of issuing long-term debt as opposed to pay-as-you-go financing include the
ability to complete more capital projects in a shorter amount of time and an allocation of the
project costs to the citizens that benefit from the projects.
In November 2015, Decatur voters approved a $75 million general obligation bond issuance
for City Schools of Decatur capital improvements projects. A separate millage rate was approved by the City Commission in March 2016 to generate the revenue needed to make the
debt service payments on the school bonds.
As of June 30, 2016, the City had just over $164,840,000 in debt outstanding. This includes
$108,752,000 in general obligation bond debt for city and school capital projects from the
2007 bond issuance and the general obligation bond debt for school capital projects from
the 2016 bond issuance. In December 2010, the City issued $13,760,000 in Recovery
Zone Economic Development Bonds to cover the cost of construction of improvements to
the Decatur Recreation Center, Fire Station #1 and the Decatur Public Works facility. In
December 2012, the City issued $5,415,000 in sales tax bonds on behalf of CSD. In April
2013, the Urban Redevelopment Agency issued $29,290,000 in
revenue bonds for the construction of the Beacon Municipal ComCity Direct Debt
plex to include the police department, E911 operation, municipal
as of June 30, 2016
court and an active living facility as well as a large stormwater
project on the site. The City Schools of Decatur (CSD) is finanGeneral Obligation debt
cially responsible for $5,360,000 of the overall bond issue for the
School’s administrative facility on the site. In October 2013, the
Revenue Bonds
City issued revenue bonds through the Urban Redevelopment
Capital Leases
Agency to purchase the Callaway Building in downtown Decatur
from DeKalb County. Revenue from rent covered the interest
Notes Payable
payments until the building was sold to a developer in 2016 and the
sale proceeds paid the principal and remaining interest.
Certificates of Participation
In December 2014, the DDA borrowed $1,785,000 to purchase the
Scottish Rite property in Oakhurst. Revenue from property rentals
are expected to cover the debt service payments.

Total direct debt

$108,752,000
$48,654,030
$792,707
$3,692,233
$2,965,000
$164,855,970

Other debt includes Certificates of Participation in the amount of $3,757,707 for the renovation and addition of City Hall, the Georgia Municipal Association lease pool agreement and
capital leases for equipment.
Many of the bond funded projects are described in the Capital Projects Narrative.
Under state law, the City’s outstanding general obligation debt should not exceed 10%

CITY OF DECATUR

131

of total assessed property value. As of June 30, 2016, the City’s general obligation debt
equaled 6.2% of total assessed property value which remains within the legal debt limit.

Debt Refinancing
In February 2015, the City negotiated a decrease in the interest rate on the certificates of
participation that were issued in 2005 for the renovation and addition of City Hall. The
reduction will result in a net present value savings of approximately $132,000 over the term
of the loan.
In April 2015, in an effort to take advantage of favorable interest rates, the City completed
an advance refunding of the outstanding series 2007 general obligation bonds. The refunding will result in a net present value savings of approximately $2,600,000 or $155,000 per
year over the term of the bonds.

Schedule of Debt Service Payments
A summary of scheduled debt service payments for FY 2017-2018 is provided below:
			 Ending
2017-2018 PAYMENTS
Interest
Principal
Balance

132

Final
Maturity

Certificates of Participation (Capital Improvements Fund)

39,260

145,000

1,365,000

2026

General Obligation Bonds (2007) (Debt Service Fund)

1,047,081

820,000

29,075,000

2037

School General Obligation Bonds (2016) (Debt Service Fund)

2,589,044

0

69,755,000

2042

School Sales Tax Notes (Debt Service Fund)

18,400

1,840,000

0

2017

Scottish Rite (DDA)

75,900

80,000

1,570,000

2030

Urban Redevelopment Agency Revenue Bonds (2010 URA Fund)

760,712

408,979

11,773,108

2038

Urban Redevelopment Agency Revenue Bonds (2013 URA Fund)

1,220,700

665,000

26,735,000

2044

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Bond Ratings
The City’s bond ratings reflect its financial strength as evaluated by the bond rating agencies. When the City issues general obligation debt or other securities, rating agencies
analyze the City’s current and future ability to repay debt. The City’s current bond ratings
are AA+ from Standard & Poor’s (S&P) Ratings Services and Aa2 from Moody’s Investors Service. These are relatively high ratings for a mature city of this size. A positive bond
rating reduces the City’s cost of borrowing thus saving money for the City taxpayer.
Positive contributing factors to the City’s bond ratings include:
• Diverse employment base
• Good management policies and practices
• Healthy fund balance levels
• Strong socioeconomic indices
• High-density development
• Strong wealth and income levels
• Maintained strong financial position through recession
• Recent significant tax base growth
Moody’s and S&P both stated that the rating could improve with an increase in economic
activity and tax base growth. Alternately, if the fund balance falls below policy limits, the
debt burden increases, or if revenues dedicated to paying debt service decline then the ratings could be threatened.

Future Debt Service
In April 2017, the City entered into a sales contract with the United Methodist Children’s
Home of the North Georgia Conference to purchase a 77-acre property adjacent to the
City’s southeastern city limits. It is anticipated that the City of Decatur Public Facilities
Authority will issue approximately $41 million in revenue bonds to finance the purchase of
the property.

CITY OF DECATUR

133

DEBT SERVICE FUND (410)
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

DEBT SERVICE
FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13

DEBT SERVICE
FUND
ACTUAL
2013-14

DEBT SERVICE
FUND
ACTUAL
2014-15

DEBT SERVICE
FUND
ACTUAL
2015-16

DEBT SERVICE
FUND
ESTIMATE
2016-17

DEBT SERVICE
FUND
REVISED
2016-17

DEBT SERVICE
FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18

2,781,842

6,455,271

6,383,974

6,575,325

5,819,475

5,900,233

4,518,093

REVENUES
Taxes-Conference Center
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Taxes-GO Bond (2007/2015)
1,833,853
1,829,850
2,117,107
1,289,217
1,653,700
1,690,000
1,715,000
Taxes-School GO Bond (2016)
0
0
0
1,228,531
2,737,000
2,890,000
3,936,000
Interest
438
573
0
0
0
0
500
Miscellaneous-School
246,372
108,300
108,300
90,600
54,850
54,850
18,400

EXPENDITURES
GO Bond Principal (2007/2015)
475,000
520,000
565,000
610,000
660,000
660,000
820,000
School Sales Tax Bond Principal (2012)
1,700,000
0
0
1,770,000
1,805,000
1,805,000
1,840,000
School GO Bond Principal (2016)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,400,535
1,381,544
1,360,736
812,840
1,073,500
1,073,500
1,048,000
GO Bond Interest (2007/2015)
School Sales Tax Bond Interest (2012)
73,409
108,300
108,300
90,600
54,850
54,850
18,400
School GO Bond Interest (2016)
0
0
0
0
2,423,640
2,423,640
2,589,050
Loan Fees-School Board
443,694
0
0
0
0
0
0
General Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Bank Charges
328
176
20
0
0
0
0

Transfer to (from)
Enterprise Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Proceeds from debt issuance
5,415,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
Premium on debt issuance
270,732
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Expenditures

9,778,699

To Fund Balance

3,673,428

(71,297)

ENDING FUND BALANCE

6,455,271

6,383,974

School Sales Tax Reserve

5,414,780

5,414,780

City GO Debt Service Reserve

1,040,491
0

School GO Debt Service Reserve

134

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

2,010,020

2,034,056

3,283,440

6,016,990

6,016,990

6,315,450

191,351

(675,092)

(1,571,440)

(1,382,140)

(645,550)

6,575,325

5,900,233

4,248,035

4,518,093

3,872,543

5,414,780

3,644,780

1,839,780

1,839,780

(220)

969,194

1,160,545

1,026,923

934,895

983,422

830,422

0

0

1,228,531

1,473,360

1,694,891

3,041,841





Other
Funds
Budget FY 2017-2018

CHILDREN & YOUTH SERVICES FUND (235)
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM (E911) FUND (215)
SOLID WASTE ENTERPRISE FUND (540-4520)
STORMWATER UTILITY FUND (505)
REVISED 2016-2017 AND ADOPTED 2017-2018 BUDGET ESTIMATES

2016 Citizen Satisfaction Survey* responses:
Housing Unit types
Single-family detached: 54%
Building with 2+ apartments or
condos: 43%
Other: 3%
Housing Tenure (Rent/Own)
Rented: 36%
Owned: 64%
Monthly Housing Cost
Less than $300: 5%
$300 to $599: 8%
$600 to $999: 17%
$1,000 to $1,499: 18%
$1,500 to $2,499: 28%
$2,500 or more: 24%

Presence of Children in Household
No: 57%
Yes: 43%
Presence of Older Adults in
Household
No: 79%
Yes: 21%
Gender
Female: 57%
Male: 43%
Primary Phone type
Cell phone: 78%
Land line: 9%
Both: 13%

* For a more detailed explanation of the demographic responses,
go to www.decaturga.com/citizensurvey.

CITY OF DECATUR

137

CHILDREN AND YOUTH SERVICES FUND (225)
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates


CYS
CYS
CYS
CYS
CYS
CYS
TOTAL

FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
6133
6135
BUDGET

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL ESTIMATE
REVISED
CYS
CYS ESTIMATE
EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15 2015-2016 2016-2017 2016-2017
ADMIN PROGRAM 2017-2018

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
804,390
748,412
800,730
962,399
855,499
1,131,616
944,406

331100 Federal Grants
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
334100 State Grants
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
336000 Local Grants
1,324
3,114
2,219
1,347
0
0
0
0
0
347200 Recreation Service Fees
1,129,479
1,256,151
1,548,805
1,649,906
1,801,470
1,813,960
0
1,923,770
1,923,770
347500 Recreation Sale of Goods
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
347900 Other Recreation
0
16
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
361000 Interest Income
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
371200 Gifts & Contributions
117,432
113,172
112,000
112,116
111,870
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
381020 Recreation Facilities Rentals
TOTAL REVENUES
1,248,235
1,372,453 1,663,024 1,763,369 1,913,340 1,813,960
0 1,923,770 1,923,770
PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100
511200
511300
512100
512200
512300
512400
512600
512700

Regular Salaries & Wages
Temp Salaries and Wages
Overtime Wages
Employer Group Insurance
Social Security (FICA)
Medicare
Retirement Contributions
Unemployment Insurance
Workers Compensation
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

369,262
502,955
5,940
106,640
53,459
12,503
34,116
3,813
17,880
1,106,568

425,252
456,454
4,260
128,007
53,738
12,568
39,132
0
15,103
1,134,515

473,687
519,567
2,859
102,900
60,039
14,042
42,680
968
26,707
1,243,448

494,029
527,551
2,660
151,475
61,752
14,442
44,222
1,120
26,681
1,323,932

558,960
750,700
9,950
146,250
81,900
18,990
41,170
840
28,500
1,637,260

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
521200
521301
521302
522200
522201
522202
522203
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523201
523202
523300
523400
523450
523600
523700
523701
523800
523911

Professional Services
30,041
Instructor Fees
56,614
Official Fees
0
Repairs and Maintenance
0
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
Repair and Maint-Landscape
0
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
0
Rental of Land & Buildings
52,364
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
3,289
Auto Allowance
1,453
Other Contractual Services
56,978
Insurance-Awards
0
Postage
204
Telephone
8,228
Advertising
330
Printing and Binding
1,939
Signs
122
Dues and Fees
507
Education and Training
19,389
Business Meetings
1,853
Licenses
970
Bank Charges
14,672
TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES 248,953

29,503
59,358
0
0
0
0
0
0
195
0
7,442
1,402
774
57,986
209
23
7,295
0
1,555
0
310
21,593
1,637
6,905
22,630
218,817

37,239
37,398
0
0
0
0
0
0
195
0
6,850
62
816
51,101
0
18
9,169
0
3,415
0
456
27,954
6,837
4,242
30,856
216,607

36,368
39,134
0
0
0
0
0
0
195
0
3,362
16
948
52,753
0
18
9,911
0
795
0
1,797
23,299
179
19,870
36,455
225,099

567,650
615,080
18,140
163,130
59,500
13,900
43,300
910
41,500
1,523,110

242,490
0
0
53,050
15,050
3,520
19,400
280
7,900
341,690

318,740
707,200
30,860
118,380
65,520
15,320
25,500
630
26,700
1,308,850

561,230
707,200
30,860
171,430
80,570
18,840
44,900
910
34,600
1,650,540


60,400
47,120
0
0
0
0
0
0
430
2,000
7,560
3,800
3,950
128,740
0
320
11,110
0
9,850
300
2,650
57,840
900
5,350
35,000
377,320

49,600
47,120
0
0
0
0
0
0
430
2,000
7,560
3,800
3,950
127,340
0
320
11,110
0
1,250
300
2,650
38,040
900
3,700
35,000
335,070

16,940
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
430
2,000
7,560
3,800
1,950
37,500
0
320
11,110
0
9,600
300
1,050
23,650
900
0
40,000
157,110

48,000
50,890
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,860
85,630
0
0
0
0
250
0
0
35,290
0
950
0
222,870

64,940
50,890
0
0
0
0
0
0
430
2,000
7,560
3,800
3,810
123,130
0
320
11,110
0
9,850
300
1,050
58,940
900
950
40,000
379,980

CHILDREN AND YOUTH SERVICES FUND (225) continued

138

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

CHILDREN AND YOUTH SERVICES FUND (225) CONTINUED
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates



EXPENDITURE OBJECTS

CYS
FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13

CYS
FUND
ACTUAL
2013-14

CYS
FUND
ACTUAL
2014-15

CYS
CYS
FUND
FUND
ACTUAL ESTIMATE
2015-2016 2016-2017

CYS
TOTAL
FUND
6133
6135
BUDGET
REVISED
CYS
CYS ESTIMATE
2016-2017
ADMIN PROGRAM 2017-2018

SUPPLIES
531101
531102
531105
531107
531108
531109
531111
531112
531113
531115
531270
531300
531400
531600
531700

Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
Supplies-Janitorial
Supplies-Office
Supplies-Specialized Dept
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
Computer Equipment
Computer Software
Office Furniture and Equipment
Supplies - Batteries
Gasoline
Food-Subsistence & Support
Books and Periodicals
Small Equipment
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
TOTAL SUPPLIES

0
238
4,375
43,258
0
0
24,877
2,254
0
0
283
83,764
1,469
218
12,955
173,692

0
0
5,121
34,967
0
0
24,953
874
0
0
525
80,346
1,342
3,692
14,981
166,802

0
0
6,542
44,645
476
374
16,540
600
0
0
382
96,470
3,836
4,708
16,728
191,300

0
0
5,708
47,070
276
10
28,594
3,275
0
0
93
89,398
2,102
1,784
16,813
195,122

0
960
6,000
96,790
1,800
1,500
31,960
4,000
4,800
200
2,200
126,510
4,670
14,900
23,370
319,660

CAPITAL OUTLAY
542200

Vehicles
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
960
6,000
78,940
1,800
1,500
31,960
4,000
0
200
2,200
118,990
4,670
7,920
23,550
282,690

0
200
6,000
2,660
1,800
1,500
3,360
0
4,800
200
2,200
5,580
0
100
800
29,200

0
760
0
94,020
0
0
28,600
3,100
0
0
0
121,840
4,670
17,080
25,650
295,720

0
960
6,000
96,680
1,800
1,500
31,960
3,100
4,800
200
2,200
127,420
4,670
17,180
26,450
324,920


0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

NON-OPERATING EXPENDITURES
581200
582200

Principal-Capital Leases
Interest-Capital Leases
TOTAL NON-OPERATING EXPENDITURES
TOTAL EXPENDITURES

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

9,800
500
10,300

9,800
500
10,300

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

1,529,212

1,520,134

1,651,355

1,744,152

2,344,540

2,151,170

528,000

1,827,440

2,355,440

NON-OPERATING REVENUE
393501

391100

Capital Lease Proceeds
TOTAL NON-OPERATING REVENUE

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

Balance
(280,977)
(147,681)
11,669
19,217
(431,200)
(337,210)
(431,670)
To(From) Prior Years Transfer Reserve
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfers In from General Fund
225,000
200,000
150,000
150,000
175,000
150,000
150,000
Final (Cost)/Gain
(55,977)
52,319
161,669
169,217
(256,200)
(187,210)
(281,670)
Transfers in from Grants Fund
Ending Reserved Fund Balance
748,412
800,732
962,399 1,131,616
599,299
944,406
662,736

FY 2016-17 Capital Items
CYS Activity Bus (5th of 5 lease payments) ($9,800)

CITY OF DECATUR

139

EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM (E911) FUND (215)
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates




BEGINNING FUND ALANCE
342500
342550
342560
313900

E-911
FUND
ACTUAL
2014-15

E-911
FUND
ACTUAL
2015-16

E-911
FUND
ESTIMATE
2016-17

E-911
FUND
REVISED
2016-17

E-911
FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18

278,032

269,098

156,069

174,768

183,588

272,801

226,621

540,943

527,816

575,431

572,189

554,500

564,300

564,300

PERSONNEL SERVICES
Regular Salaries & Wages
447,904
485,098
479,091
448,717
507,560
489,000
498,610
Temp Salaries and Wages
0
0
2,897
0
0
0
0
Overtime Wages
36,628
45,609
60,878
63,825
65,000
95,000
95,000
Special Events Overtime
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Employer Group Insurance
120,403
128,015
94,069
133,950
134,130
137,950
145,150
Social Security (FICA)
28,856
31,337
32,035
30,161
31,470
33,750
38,990
Medicare
6,749
7,329
7,492
7,052
7,360
8,000
9,120
Retirement Contributions
38,387
42,801
40,600
38,096
39,100
38,500
39,900
Unemployment Insurance
0
0
0
0
770
770
770
Workers Compensation
9,000
7,602
12,173
12,682
12,500
18,100
15,500
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

521200
521310
522200
522201
522202
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523102
523105
523201
523202
523300
523400
523600
523700
523701
523800

E-911
FUND
ACTUAL
2013-14

REVENUES
E911 Phone Line Fees
292,567
250,970
281,601
279,518
270,000
250,000
250,000
E911 Wireless Fees
248,377
276,846
259,419
258,129
250,000
275,000
275,000
E911 Wireless Reserve
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
E911 Prepaid Wireless Distribution
0
0
34,411
34,542
34,500
39,300
39,300
TOTAL REVENUES

511100
511200
511300
511400
512100
512200
512300
512400
512600
512700

E-911
FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13

821,070

843,040

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
19,209
40,093
49,022
47,015
52,600
50,000
Wireless Collection Fees
26,620
21,400
23,339
22,965
25,000
25,000
Repairs and Maintenance
0
0
0
0
500
400
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
153
0
0
0
400
300
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
25,046
26,192
26,829
22,340
36,000
36,000
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Land & Buildings
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
0
0
0
0
0
0
Auto Allowance
0
0
0
0
300
300
Other Contractual Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance-Awards
0
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance-Legal Liability
0
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance-Vehicle
0
0
0
0
0
0
Postage
34
65
0
0
250
250
Telephone
0
0
0
0
0
0
Advertising
0
0
0
0
0
0
Printing and Binding
0
0
0
0
500
500
Dues and Fees
314
1,385
720
0
1,380
880
Education and Training
6,949
7,199
3,498
3,044
10,000
9,000
Business Meetings
0
0
0
0
0
0
Licenses
0
0
0
0
0
0

53,300
25,000
500
400
37,100
0
0
0
0
0
300
0
0
0
0
250
0
0
500
1,380
10,000
0
0

TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES

687,926

78,324

747,791

96,335

729,236

103,407

734,484

95,364

797,890

126,930

122,630

128,730

EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM (E911) FUND (215) continued

140

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM (E911) FUND (215) CONTINUED

2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates


E-911
E-911
E-911
E-911
E-911
E-911
E-911

FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE

2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2016-17
2017-18
SUPPLIES
531101
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
0
0
0
0
1,000
800
1,000
531102
Supplies-Janitorial
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
531103
Supplies-Landscape Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531104
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
531105
Supplies-Office
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531106
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531107
Supplies-Specialized Dept
(252)
113
454
307
500
400
500
531108
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531109
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531110
Communications Equipment
1,297
87
531
0
1,500
1,500
1,500
531111
Computer Equipment
1,431
0
267
3,956
3,800
1,800
3,800
531112
Computer Software
13,642
15,578
12,181
9,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
531113
Office Equipment and Furniture
16
832
0
359
1,000
600
1,000
531270
Gasoline
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531300
Food-Subsistence & Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531400
Books and Periodicals
0
0
0
0
5,750
2,750
5,750
531500
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531600
Small Equipment
0
0
0
0
200
100
200
531700
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
TOTAL SUPPLIES
542101
542401

Lease Payment
Interest
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

393501
391100

16,611

13,434

13,621

31,950

26,150

31,950

CAPITAL OUTLAY
Capital Outlay-Communications Equipment
9,530
8,017
29,930
0
0
0
0
Capital Outlay-Computer Software
7,962
9,805
0
0
0
0
0
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY

581200
582200

16,134

17,492

17,822

29,930

0

0

0

0

0
0

25,721
4,584

27,041
3,684

28,117
2,569

40,630
0

40,630
0

40,630
0

799,877

908,864

906,732

874,156

997,400

1,010,480

1,044,350

Proceeds from Capital Leases
Capital Lease Proceeds
8,017
0
0
0
0
Transfers in
250,000
260,000
350,000
400,000
400,000
400,000
From Wireless Reserve
Excess (deficiency) of revenues
(8,934)
(113,032)
18,699
98,033
(42,900)
(46,180)

(80,050)

ENDING FUND BALANCE

146,571

269,098

156,066

174,768

272,801

140,688

226,621

0
400,000

GMA LEASE POOL ACTIVITY
Proceeds from GMA Capital Lease Financing
GMA Annual Lease Payments


FY 2016-17 Capital Items
542101: Call Recording System (1st of 3 Year Lease) ($10,000)
581200: Positron E911 Telephone System (4th of 5 Year Lease) ($28,600)

FY 2017-18 Capital Items
542101: Call Recording System (2nd of 3 Year Lease) ($10,000)
581200: Positron E911 Telephone System (5th of 5 Year Lease) ($28,600)

CITY OF DECATUR

141

SOLID WASTE ENTERPRISE FUND (540-4520)
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates


SOLID WASTE SOLID WASTE SOLID WASTE SOLID WASTE SOLID WASTE SOLID WASTE SOLID WASTE

FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE

2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2016-17
2017-18

Beginning Retained Earnings
(30,175)
(39,731)
(427,242)
(396,800)
(317,520)
(540,039)
(324,879)

REVENUES
311193 Payment in Lieu of Taxes - Decatur Housing Auth. 39,661
42,507
43,598
37,536
43,500
37,500
37,500
313010 General Sales and Use Tax
55
53
0
24
0
0
0
319110 Penalty & Interest
630
0
0
0
0
0
0
344115 2005 and Prior Years Sanitation Service Fees
4
357
2
0
0
0
0
344116 2006 Sanitation Service Fees
62
0
0
0
0
0
0
344117 2007 Sanitation Service Fees
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
344118 2008 Sanitation Service Fees
1,660
0
0
0
0
0
0
344119 2009 Sanitation Service Fees
769
(450)
0
0
0
0
0
344120 2010 Sanitation Fees
1,641
0
0
0
0
0
0
344121 2011 Sanitation Fees
3,029
0
331
0
0
0
0
344122 2012 Sanitation Fees
70,151
2,104
0
0
0
0
0
344123 2013 Sanitation Fees
1,800,209
73,038
2,671
237
0
0
0
344124 2014 Sanitation Fees
0
1,834,810
64,926
3,807
0
0
0
344125 2015 Sanitation Fees
0
0
1,783,910
68,082
5,000
2,500
0
344126 2016 Sanitation Fees
0
0
0
1,813,878
221,400
253,000
5,000
344127 2017 Sanitation Fees
0
0
0
0
2,025,600
2,115,000
65,000
344128 2018 Sanitation Fees
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,115,000
Total Fee Revenue

1,917,871

1,952,418

1,895,439

1,923,565

2,295,500

2,408,000

2,222,500

344130 Scrap Metal Sales
344150-344157 Solid Waste Bag Sales
344160 Recycling Income-Sanitation
344161 Recycling-OCG
344190 Other Revenues-Sanitation
383010 Insurance Reimbursement
389000 Miscellaneous
392100 Sale of Fixed Assets
Adjustment for Bad Debt

4,242
334,991
20,241
0
1,417
0
0
8,558
0

0
353,536
20,127
0
1,080
0
0
8,060
0

0
373,299
18,088
0
400
0
293
0
0

0
404,713
8,863
0
285
0
0
0
0

0
395,000
13,000
0
100
0
0
0
0

0
395,000
13,000
0
300
37,880
0
0
0

0
395,000
13,000
0
300
0
0
0
0

TOTAL REVENUES

2,287,322

2,335,221

2,287,519

2,337,426

2,703,600

2,854,180

2,630,800

511100
511200
511300
512100
512200
512300
512400
512600
512700

EXPENDITURES
Regular Salaries & Wages
646,128
651,675
670,165
675,721
708,740
712,000
700,350
Temp Salaries and Wages
20,746
22,228
22,452
22,937
20,000
20,000
20,000
Overtime Wages
80,371
96,767
91,432
82,762
75,000
85,000
75,000
Employer Group Insurance
153,322
165,919
157,026
187,565
169,420
173,580
181,480
Social Security (FICA)
44,098
44,744
45,222
45,878
45,190
56,700
49,310
Medicare
10,313
10,464
10,576
10,730
10,570
13,500
11,530
Retirement Contributions
56,824
56,857
34,403
101,885
54,610
55,450
56,030
Unemployment Insurance
0
0
0
0
980
980
980
Workers Compensation
12,600
10,643
18,084
17,463
19,000
27,600
24,000
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

521200
522110
522115
522201
522202
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522322
522500
523101
523201
523202
523300
523400
523600

142

1,144,810

1,118,680

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
4,127
4,902
5,677
5,433
6,100
6,100
Solid Waste Disposal
325,016
359,238
276,094
445,874
400,000
380,000
Recycling Services
170,766
180,326
240,554
273,738
340,000
360,000
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
0
0
0
400
400
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
52
0
0
0
100
100
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
27,443
17,482
47,779
48,714
20,000
60,000
Rental of Land & Buildings
4,600
13,800
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
282
4,076
0
0
400
400
Auto Allowance
0
0
0
0
0
0
Other Rentals
0
0
0
0
0
0
Other Contractual Services
334
0
0
850
1,500
4,500
Insurance-Awards
6,503
3,124
0
590
2,500
3,000
Postage
0
0
0
1,751
0
0
Telephone
2,000
1,309
1,180
1,284
1,850
1,920
Advertising
0
80
0
60
100
100
Printing and Binding
1,337
1,659
968
2,544
4,000
3,800
Dues and Fees
15
61
195
165
1,300
1,300

7,000
380,000
360,000
0
400
100
50,000
0
400
0
0
1,500
2,500
0
2,400
100
4,000
1,300

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

1,024,402

1,059,298

1,049,359

1,144,941

1,103,510

SOLID WASTE ENTERPRISE FUND (540-4520) continued

SOLID WASTE ENTERPRISE FUND (540-4520) CONTINUED
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates




523700
523701
523800
523911

SOLID WASTE
FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13

SOLID WASTE
FUND
ACTUAL
2013-14

644
1,044
0
96

3,844
0
10
0

2,293
61
0
0

544,259

589,910

574,800

Education and Training
Business Meetings
Licenses
Bank Charges
TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES

531101
531102
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531111
531112
531115
531270
531300
531501
531502
531503
531600
531700

SOLID WASTE
FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18

6,442
162
900
0

5,000
2,700
200
0

7,000
700
800
0

5,000
2,700
200
0

788,506

786,150

830,120

817,600

280,202

361,222

313,686

255,383

326,200

253,700

261,200

189,995

181,434

0

251,168

227,000

220,000

218,600

2,038,857

2,191,864

1,937,845

2,439,998

2,442,860

2,448,630

2,416,080

NON-OPERATING EXPENSES
Depreciation
135,078
157,454
143,475
126,913
150,000
150,000
Annual OPEB Cost
81,938
122,651
77,564
101,003
81,000
106,000
Indirect Costs
231,000
236,450
104,510
57,010
163,600
154,390
Bad Debt Expense
0
0
(6,318)
6,909
0
0
Principal-Capital Leases
0
0
0
0
0
0
Interest-Capital Leases
0
0
0
0
0
0
GMA Reclassification
0
0
0
0
0
0

150,000
111,000
172,150
0
0
0
0

TOTAL OPERATING EXPENSES

TOTAL NON-OPERATING EXPENSES
TOTAL EXPENSES
393501
982200
982300

SOLID WASTE
FUND
REVISED
2016-17

CAPITAL OUTLAY
Capital Outlay-Vehicles
189,995
181,434
0
251,168
227,000
220,000
218,600
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY

561000
512850
551540
574000
581200
582200
982500

SOLID WASTE
FUND
ESTIMATE
2016-17

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Janitorial
8,613
6,348
12,950
3,601
6,000
2,500
6,000
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
90
0
169
1
200
200
200
Supplies-Specialized Dept
13,135
13,686
15,476
7,564
21,000
11,000
11,000
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
37,372
27,012
41,300
17,254
44,000
20,000
44,000
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
59,413
56,077
74,687
74,215
80,000
65,000
40,000
Communications Equipment
91
0
173
75
100
100
100
Computer Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Computer Software
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Batteries
755
750
1,065
1,476
1,500
1,500
1,500
Gasoline
61,505
65,551
59,613
37,268
70,000
50,000
55,000
Food-Subsistence and Support
1,325
1,786
2,012
1,305
2,000
2,000
2,000
8 Gallon Refuse Bags
16,547
33,791
21,662
12,316
17,050
17,050
17,050
15 Gallon Refuse Bags
39,879
75,044
41,886
38,804
42,000
42,000
42,000
33 Gallon Refuse Bags
35,028
74,552
32,205
28,714
34,650
34,650
34,650
Small Equipment
529
346
315
39
500
500
500
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
5,920
6,278
10,175
32,752
7,200
7,200
7,200
TOTAL SUPPLIES

542200

SOLID WASTE SOLID WASTE
FUND
FUND
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
2014-15
2015-16

448,016

516,555

319,231

291,835

394,600

410,390

433,150

2,486,873

2,708,419

2,257,077

2,731,833

2,837,460

2,859,020

2,849,230

NON-OPERATING REVENUE
Capital Lease Proceeds
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Principal to Balance Sheet
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Capital Outlay to Balance Sheet
189,995
180,500
0
251,168
227,000
220,000
218,600
TOTAL NON-OPERATING REVENUE
TOTAL DIVISION

189,995

180,500

0

251,168

227,000

220,000

218,600

2,296,878

2,527,919

2,257,077

2,480,665

2,610,460

2,639,020

2,630,630

Retained Earnings
(9,556)
(71,501)
30,442
(143,239)
93,140
215,160
170
Accumulated Retained Earnings
(39,731)
(111,232)
(396,800)
(540,039)
(224,380)
(324,879)
(324,709)


2016-2017 CAPITAL ITEMS:
Solid Waste: 2016 6yd Rear Loader (2nd of 5 Lease
Solid Waste: 2016 6yd Rear Loader (1st of 5 Lease
Solid Waste: 2011 6yd Rear Loader for Downtown
Payments) ($19,510)
Payments) ($19,510)
Collection & Multi-Family Recycling (5th of 5 Lease
Solid Waste: 2016 Ford F150 for Crew Supervisor (1st of
Payments) ($18,200)
3 Lease Payments) ($8,800)
2017-2018 CAPITAL ITEMS:
Solid Waste: 2012 40yd Front Loader for Commercial/
Solid Waste: 2017 Rear Loader for Residential Solid Waste
Solid Waste: 2012 40yd Front Loader for Commercial/
Multi-Family Solid Waste Collection (4th of 5 Lease
Collection (1st of 5 Lease Payments) ($38,800)
Multi-Family Solid Waste Collection (5th of 5 Lease
Payments) ($38,000)
Payments) ($38,000)
Solid Waste: 2017 Street Sweeper (1st of 5 Lease
Solid Waste: 2013 Rear Loader for Residential Solid
Payments) ($43,720) (542200)
Solid Waste: 2013 Rear Loader for Residential Solid
Waste Collection (3rd of 5 Lease Payments) ($36,100)
Waste Collection (4th of 5 Lease Payments) ($36,100)
Solid Waste: Kubota Residential Collection Vehicles (5)
(1st of 5 Lease Payments) ($30,800)

Solid Waste: Kubota Residential Collection Vehicles (5)
(2nd of 5 Lease Payments) ($30,800)

CITY OF DECATUR

143

STORMWATER UTILITY FUND (505)

2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates

STORMWATER STORMWATER STORMWATER STORMWATER STORMWATER STORMWATER STORMWATER

UTILITY FUND UTILITY FUND UTILITY FUND UTILITY FUND UTILITY FUND UTILITY FUND UTILITY FUND

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE

2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2016-17
2017-18

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
3,997,913
4,183,590
3,900,017
13,903,365
4,118,155
14,093,544
15,582,784

REVENUES
344147 Stormwater Utility Fees-2007
110
0
0
0
0
0
0
344148 Stormwater Utility Fees-2008
1,496
0
0
0
0
0
0
344149 Stormwater Utility Fees-2009
2,133
0
0
0
0
0
0
344150 Stormwater Utility Fees-2010
4,075
0
0
0
0
0
0
344141 Stormwater Utility Fees-2011
8,078
0
0
0
0
0
0
344142 Stormwater Utility Fees-2012
38,453
2,163
0
0
0
0
0
344143 Stormwater Utility Fees-2013
913,575
55,237
4,883
48
0
0
0
344144 Stormwater Utility Fees-2014
0
917,093
94,092
1,175
0
0
0
344145 Stormwater Utility Fees-2015
0
0
869,561
43,843
5,000
5,000
0
344146 Stormwater Utility Fees-2016
0
0
0
919,054
60,000
360,000
5,000
344147 Stormwater Utility Fees-2017
0
0
0
0
1,510,000
1,240,000
60,000
344148 Stormwater Utility Fees-2018
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,240,000
344166 Regional Stormwater Facility Fees
3
0
107,660
159,026
120,000
562,000
0
TOTAL REVENUES
511100
511200
511300
512100
512200
512300
512400
512600
512700

Professional Services
Repairs and Maintenance
Repair and Maintenance-Communications Equip
Repair and Maintenance - Landscape
Repair and Maintenance-Machines and Tools
Repair and Maintenance-Office Equipment
Repair and Maintenance-Vehicles
Repair and Maintenance - Infrastructure
Rental of Land and Building
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
Contractual Services
Insurance Awards
Postage
Telephone
Advertising
Printing
Signs
Dues and Fees
Education and Training
Business Meetings
Licenses
TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES

531102
531103
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531111
531112

974,492

1,076,196

1,123,146

1,695,000

2,167,000

1,305,000

EXPENDITURES
Regular Salaries & Wages
174,710
185,192
198,548
203,105
214,860
215,500
215,980
Temp Salaries and Wages
2,367
2,762
2,565
2,066
4,200
4,200
4,200
Overtime Wages
2,277
3,833
3,155
2,478
5,000
5,000
5,000
Employer Group Insurance
65,684
69,333
51,335
58,735
60,900
62,750
65,940
Social Security (FICA)
11,650
11,318
12,118
12,566
13,580
13,500
13,400
Medicare
2,724
2,647
2,834
2,939
3,190
3,190
3,130
Retirement Contributions
16,616
16,151
10,301
32,569
16,550
16,750
17,280
Unemployment Insurance
0
0
0
0
350
350
350
Workers Compensation
6,000
5,068
9,520
9,296
9,500
14,000
12,000
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

521200
522200
522202
522203
522204
522205
522206
522210
522310
522320
522500
523101
523201
523202
523300
523400
523450
523600
523700
523701
523800

967,923

Janitorial & Cleaning Supplies
Landscape Maintenance Supplies
Office Supplies
Pesticides, Herbicides, Chemicals
Specialized Dept Supplies
Tires and Batteries
Vehicle and Equipment Maint Supplies
Communications Equipment
Computer Equipment
Computer Software

282,028

296,304

290,378

323,754

328,130

335,240

337,280

14,392
1,260
0
0
993
40
4,338
82,589
0
2,158
3,977
0
46
1,575
120
589
756
517
3,086
744
0

355,673
0
0
0
59
0
1,736
60,261
0
1,386
20,206
0
0
1,341
0
489
264
297
1,412
0
0

58,671
0
0
0
4,793
0
315
168,607
0
1,669
10,850
897
52
1,214
0
0
0
576
2,704
0
21

95,044
0
0
0
147
0
0
63,609
0
630
1,540
0
0
1,216
0
176
0
450
2,277
0
100

306,000
0
0
0
2,000
0
2,000
145,000
0
3,000
10,000
0
30
1,400
200
500
500
500
4,000
50
200

130,000
0
0
0
2,000
0
8,000
145,000
0
3,000
10,000
0
50
1,400
200
500
1,000
500
4,000
50
200

260,000
0
0
0
2,000
0
2,000
150,000
0
3,000
10,000
0
30
1,400
200
500
500
500
4,000
0
200

117,180

443,124

250,368

165,190

475,380

305,900

434,330

158
0
1,716
306
6,970
2,381
4,805
0
546
0

145
0
230
52
7,484
1,887
2,651
0
0
0

124
40
408
59
3,282
878
4,793
0
0
0

89
112
43
423
5,122
749
2,085
0
0
0

150
100
500
250
15,000
2,000
4,000
0
0
0

150
100
500
250
10,000
2,000
4,000
0
0
0

150
100
250
250
15,000
2,000
4,000
0
0
0

STORMWATER UTILITY FUND (505) continued

144

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

STORMWATER UTILITY FUND (505) CONTINUED
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates




531113
531115
531270
531300
531400
531600
531700
541100
541400
542200

581200
582200

Office Equipment and Furniture
Batteries
Gasoline
Food-Subsistence and Support
Books and Periodicals
Small Equipment
Uniforms and Protective Equipment

STORMWATER STORMWATER STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND UTILITY FUND UTILITY FUND
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16

STORMWATER STORMWATER STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND UTILITY FUND UTILITY FUND
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE
2016-17
2016-17
2017-18

0
273
8,256
322
86
1,283
2,338

1,095
0
14,878
122
0
1,941
3,051

0
96
8,638
6
0
663
2,572

0
292
8,367
0
0
3,532
2,943

500
200
10,000
200
0
3,000
2,400

500
200
9,000
200
20
3,000
2,400

3,500
200
10,000
200
20
3,000
2,400

TOTAL SUPPLIES

29,441

33,536

21,560

23,756

38,300

32,320

41,070

Capital Outlay-Sites
Capital Outlay-Infrastructure
Capital Outlay-Vehicles

0
497,153
0

0
903,076
125

0
0
26,288

0
0
0

0
1,650,000
0

0
2,425,000
0

0
100,000
100,000

TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY

497,153

903,201

26,288

0

1,650,000

2,425,000

200,000

DIVISION TOTAL

925,802

1,676,165

588,595

512,700

2,491,810

3,098,460

1,012,680

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
11,000
0

0
11,000
0

0
11,000
(1,095,000)

0
11,000
(725,000)

0
11,000
0

(12,000)
257,500
105,646
0
0
0
0

(12,000)
268,430
107,155
28,603
0
0
0

(12,000)
207,571
249,461
0
0
0
0

(12,000)
236,000
249,566
30,966
9,566
0
0

(12,000)
295,400
250,000
28,500
0
0
0

(12,000)
297,750
250,000
32,550
0
0
0

(12,000)
307,740
250,000
34,200
0
0
0

1,276,949

2,068,353

1,044,627

1,037,798

1,969,710

2,952,760

1,603,620

Transfers to GO Bond Fund
Transfer to Capital Improvements Fund
Transfer from Capital Improvements Fund
Transfer from Cemetery Capital
Improvements Fund
Indirect Costs
Depreciation
Annual OPEB Cost
Bad Debt Expense
Principal-Capital Leases
Interest-Capital Leases
TOTAL EXPENSES

393501

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13

NON-OPERATING REVENUE
Capital Lease Proceeds
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Capital to Balance Sheet
494,703
903,076
9,971,779
104,831
1,650,000
2,275,000
200,000
TOTAL NON-OPERATING REVENUE

494,703

903,076

9,971,779

104,831

1,650,000

2,275,000

200,000

TOTAL DIVISION

782,245

1,165,277

(8,927,152)

932,967

319,710

677,760

1,403,620

Retained Earnings
ENDING FUND BALANCE

185,677

(190,785)

10,003,348

190,179

1,375,290

1,489,240

(98,620)

4,183,590

3,992,805

13,903,365

14,093,544

5,493,445

15,582,784

15,484,164



CAPITAL ITEMS:
Crew Truck (2nd of 3 Lease Payments) ($12,700) (542200)
Crew Supervisor Truck (3rd of 3 Lease Payments) ($8,770) (542200)
Backhoe and Trailer (4th of 5 Lease Payments) ($11,000) (542200) (Transfer to Capital Improvements Fund)
Drainage Dump Truck Replacement (1st of 5 Lease Payments) ($20,000) (542200)

CITY OF DECATUR

145

CONFERENCE CENTER/PARKING DECK FUND (555)
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX FUND (275)
TREE BANK FUND (260)
CONFISCATED DRUG FUND (210)
COMMUNITY GRANTS FUND (220)
REVISED 2016-2017 AND ADOPTED 2017-2018 BUDGET ESTIMATES

2016 Citizen Satisfaction Survey* responses:
Employment Status
Not currently employed for pay: 25%
Yes, full-time: 65%
Yes, part-time: 10%
Health Considered to Be
Excellent: 29%
Very Good: 45%
Good: 23%
Fair: 3%
Poor: 0%
Vote in Local Elections
Never: 6%
Rarely: 8%
Sometimes: 11%
Usually: 24%
Always: 51%

Age
18 to 24 years: 1%
25 to 34 years: 25%
35 to 44 years: 23%
45 to 54 years: 22%
55 to 64 years: 12%
65 to 74 years: 12%
75 years or older: 5%
Race*
American Indian or Native
American: 2%
Asian, Asian Indian or Pacific
Islander: 7%
Black or African American: 13%
White: 79%
Other: 2%
* Total may exceed 100% as respondents
could select more than one option.

146

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

* For a more detailed explanation of the demographic responses,
go to www.decaturga.com/citizensurvey.

CONFERENCE CENTER/PARKING DECK FUND (555)
2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates


CONF CTR/
CONF CTR/
CONF CTR/
CONF CTR/
CONF CTR/
CONF CTR/
CONF CTR/

DECK FUND
DECK FUND
DECK FUND
DECK FUND
DECK FUND
DECK FUND
DECK FUND

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE

2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2016-17
2017-18

REVENUES
Taxes
0
0
5,040
0
0
0
0
Interest
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Service Fees
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Monthly Revenue
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total

0

0

5,040

0

0

0

0

EXPENDITURES
DCVB
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Professional Service Fees
20,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
Technical Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
R&M Building/Fixed Equipment
15,390
42,142
33,809
21,691
20,000
20,000
15,000
Cost of Sales/Svc.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Capital Improvement
155,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance-Awards
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Depreciation/Amoritization
293,766
299,789
299,789
300,508
330,000
330,000
330,000

Bond Principal
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Bond Interest
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Note Payable
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Note Interest
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Bond Fees
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total

485,156

341,931

333,598

322,199

350,000

350,000

345,000

OTHER USES
Transfer to (from)
Debt Service Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Hotel/Motel Tax Fund
(133,446)
(143,368)
(157,829)
(174,740)
(183,500)
(183,500)
(192,630)
Capital Improvements Fund
236,645)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Principal to Balance Sheet
(155,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
Prepaid Items
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Capital Reserve Deposit
133,446
143,368
157,829
174,740
183,500
183,500
192,630
Sale of General Fixed Assets
Total Net Assets

2,159,148

1,817,217

1,488,660

1,166,461

781,660

816,461

471,461

HOTEL/MOTEL HOTEL/MOTEL HOTEL/MOTEL
TAX FUND
TAX FUND
TAX FUND
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16

HOTEL/MOTEL
TAX FUND
ESTIMATE
2016-17

HOTEL/MOTEL
TAX FUND
REVISED
2016-17

HOTEL/MOTEL
TAX FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18

HOTEL/MOTEL TAX FUND (275)

2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates





HOTEL/MOTEL
TAX FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
60,683
44,564
24,564
4,563
263
0
0

REVENUES
Taxes
470,802
501,638
552,237
611,605
642,000
642,000
674,260
Other
0
0
0
0
0
0

EXPENDITURES
DCVB
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Decatur Tourism Bureau
153,446
163,368
177,829
179,502
183,500
183,500
192,630
Transfer to Conference Center Fund
133,446
143,368
157,829
174,740
183,500
183,500
192,630
Transfer to General Fund
200,029
214,902
236,578
261,926
275,000
275,000
289,000
To Fund Balance
(16,119)
(20,001)
(20,001)
(4,563)
0
0
0

ENDING FUND BALANCE
44,564
24,564
4,563
0
263
0
0

CITY OF DECATUR

147

TREE BANK FUND (260)

2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates




BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

TREE
BANK FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13

TREE
BANK FUND
ACTUAL
2013-14

TREE
BANK FUND
ACTUAL
2014-15

TREE
BANK FUND
ACTUAL
2015-16

TREE
BANK FUND
ESTIMATE
2016-17

TREE
BANK FUND
REVISED
2016-17

TREE
BANK FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18

62,310

50,726

163,686

142,930

162,930

167,745

194,745

REVENUES
Interest
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Intergov’t
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Gifts
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Sponsorships
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Tree Bank Account
7,513
119,030
14,860
29,650
25,000
57,000
25,000
Misc. Revenues
0
0
(6,655)
0
0
0
0
Private Grants
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

EXPENDITURES
Cont. Services
0
0
1,350
1,350
0
0
0
Capital Outlay
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Public Improvements
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
R&M Landscaping
1,790
1,350
0
29,280
30,000
30,000
55,000
Other Contractual Services
17,308
4,720
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance-Awards
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Landscape Mnt.
0
0
27,610
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Outdoor Furniture
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

TOTAL EXPENDITURES
19,098
6,070
28,960
30,630
30,000
30,000
55,000

Reserve for Tree Plantings
51,766
164,726
142,931
141,950
157,930
194,745
164,745
Transfer to GO Bond Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from General Fund
0
0
0
25,795
0
0
0

To (From) Unreserved Fund Balance
(17,308)
(4,720)
0
0
0
0
0
To (From) Reserved Fund Balance
5,723
112,960
(21,797)
8,019
(5,000)
27,000
(30,000)

ENDING FUND BALANCE
50,726
163,686
142,930
167,745
157,930
194,745
164,745
Reserved For Tree Plantings
Unreserved Fund Balance

51,766
(1,040)

164,726
(1,040)

142,930
0

167,745
0

157,930
0

194,745
0

164,745
0

CONFISCATED CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
DRUG FUND
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
2014-15
2015-16

CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
ESTIMATE
2016-17

CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
REVISED
2016-17

CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
ESTIMATE
2017-18

11,585

12,079

11,589

CONFISCATED DRUG FUND (210)

2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Adopted Budget Estimates






CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
ACTUAL
2012-13

CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
ACTUAL
2013-14

11,999

12,004

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

9,397

12,075


REVENUES
Interest
5
4
4
5
10
10
10
Confiscated Currency
0
2,225
3,373
0
0
0
0
Sale of General Fixed Assets
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

EXPENDITURES
Public Safety
0
4,836
0
0
2,500
500
Other Contractual Services
0
0
700
0
0
0
Capital Outlay - Computers
0
0
0
0
0
0

To Fund Balance
5
(2,607)
2,678
5
(2,490)
(490)

ENDING FUND BALANCE
12,004
9,397
12,075
12,079
9,095
11,589

148

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

1,000
0
0
(990)
10,599

COMMUNITY GRANTS FUND (220)

2016-2017 Revised and 2017-2018 Proposed Adopted Estimates

GRANT
GRANT
GRANT
GRANT
GRANT
GRANT
GRANT

FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE

2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2016-17
2017-18

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

13,176

12,746

13,437

6,917

5,267

6,917

24,157


REVENUES
Intergovernmental
84,189
691
3,500
325,639
0
23,800
87,000
Interest
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Misc. Revenues
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21-C Program Fees
0
0
0
0
0
17,240
0
REVENUE TOTAL

511100

521200
521300
522206
522500
523400
523600
523700
523701

531107
531600
531700

691

3,500

325,639

0

41,040

87,000

EXPENDITURES
PERSONNEL SERVICES
Regular Salaries& Wages
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

0

0

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
5,000
0
0
9,575
0
23,800
Technical Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
R & M Vehicles - Outside Labor
0
0
2,069
0
0
0
Other Contractual Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
Printing and Binding
0
0
0
0
0
0
Dues & Fees
241
0
0
0
0
0
Training Expenses
0
0
0
0
0
0
Business Meetings Expenses
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
17,240
0
0
0
0

TOTAL OTHER SVS. AND CHARGES

17,240

0

5,241

0

0

0

2,069

0

9,575

0

0

23,800

SUPPLIES
Specialized Departmental Supplies
79,187
0
3,975
0
0
0
Small equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
Uniforms & Protective Eqp.
0
0
0
0
0
0
TOTAL SUPPLIES

542200
542400
541100

84,189

79,187

0

142,000

CAPITAL OUTLAY
Vehicles
191
0
0
0
0
0
Computers
0
0
0
0
0
0
Sites
0
0
0
316,064
0
0

0
0
0

TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY

191

0

0

316,064

0

0

0

EXPENDITURE TOTAL

84,619

0

10,020

325,639

0

23,800

159,240

OTHER USES
Refunds
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer to Children & Youth Services Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from (to) General Fund
0
0
3,975
0
0
0
Transfer from Capital Improvement Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
55,000
0

OTHER USES TOTAL

0

55,000

0

0

3,975

0

3,975

0

0

0

0
0
0

0

To (From) Fund Balance

(430)

691

(6,520)

0

0

17,240

(17,240)

Ending Fund Balance

12,746

13,437

6,917

6,917

5,267

24,157

6,917

Reserved 21 C Sustainment Fund Balance
UNRESERVED FUND BALANCE
12,746
13,437
6,917
6,917
5,267
24,157

6,917

CITY OF DECATUR

149

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts

Appendix A
Budget Guide
Budget FY 2017-2018

FISCAL YEAR 2017-2018

Budget Guide

T

he city’s charter requires the City Manager to prepare an annual budget
on the basis of estimates submitted by the directors of departments and
approved by the City Commission. The budget document is the result
of months of planning. The budget allocates the city’s limited financial
resources to provide services based on organizational and community priorities. The resulting document becomes the plan that guides departments’
operations throughout the fiscal year.
The budget period is the city’s fiscal year which begins on July 1 and ends on June 30. While
budgeting is an ongoing process, departments officially submit budget requests to the City
Manager, or her designee, in February. The budget is scheduled for adoption by the City
Commission on the third Monday in June. A detailed budget schedule is attached.
Georgia state law requires that the operating budget be balanced with current revenues and
other financing sources, including unreserved fund balance. Any unencumbered appropriations lapse at year-end and do not carry forward into the next fiscal year.
Throughout the year, the City Manager and department heads are provided with periodic
financial reports of revenues, expenditures and encumbrances compared with the adopted
budget. These reports allow staff to monitor and manage the budget as authorized by the City
Commission.

Process
In January, departments are notified in writing of the budget schedule including budget due
dates and departmental budget hearings. Any necessary forms related to the budget, performance measures and capital improvements planning are provided at this time.
Departments use prior and current year expenditure information to determine the resources
necessary to maintain the current level of service. Based on City Commission and community priorities, estimates may be developed for a change in service level. While departments
use past expenditures to develop their budgets, the budget process is a form of zero based
budgeting because departments must justify each account request annually (i.e. a budget allocation in one year does not guarantee a continued allocation in the following year.)
Department budget requests are submitted to the City Manager, Assistant City Manager and
Budget Manager for review in late February. All department heads meet as a group with budget staff to present their work plans and discuss their budget requests for the next year. This
meeting is held in March. In April, department heads present their final budget requests to the
City Manager. During this time, vision-based budgeting teams are convened to prepare the
narratives and document the resources being allocated towards each strategic plan principle.
Proposed and revised budget documents are presented to the City Commission at the
second commission meeting in May. Work sessions are held with the City Commission
and public hearings are held prior to the final adoption of the budget in June. Additional
public forums occur during March, April and May to provide opportunities for the public to
participate in the budgeting process.
CITY OF DECATUR

A-3

Budgetary Funds

The City’s accounts are organized by fund groups, each of which is treated as a separate accounting entity. Annual operating budgets are approved for the following funds:
General Fund: The general operating fund of the city. It accounts for resources traditionally associated with government that are not required to be accounted for in another fund.
Capital Improvement Fund: Established to account for the receipt and expenditures
of money from major capital projects. This fund is general in nature and may be used to
finance any capital project that the City Commission designates.
General Obligation Bond Fund: Established to account for the receipt and expenditures of money from the general obligation bond issued in 2007.
Urban Redevelopment Agency Funds: Established to account for the receipt and
expenditures of money from the bonds issued by the Urban Redevelopment Agency of the
City of Decatur in 2010 and 2013.
URA Callaway Fund: Established to account for the debt service on the October 2013
bonds issued to purchase the Callaway Building property in downtown Decatur for redevelopment purposes.
Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund: Established to account for the financing and
expenditure activity of a capital nature occurring within the cemetery. Financing is provided
by one-half of the proceeds from cemetery lot sales. This fund is intended to provide for the
capital needs of the cemetery into perpetuity.
Tree Bank Fund: Established for the purpose of collecting fees in lieu of planting replacement trees required for compliance with the tree ordinance. Fees are used to purchase and
plant trees on public parks, rights of way and other public properties, the purchase of green
space, and similar activities associated with maintaining and improving the city’s public
tree canopy.
Conference/Parking Deck Fund: Established to account for the activity of the conference center and parking deck.
Stormwater Utility Fund: Established to account for the collection of fees for repairs,
maintenance and construction of stormwater drains and other related expenses.
Solid Waste Enterprise Fund: Established to account for the collection of fees for residential and commercial sanitation service.
Debt Service Fund: Established to account for the accumulation of resources and payment of long-term obligations.
Grant Fund: Established to account for grants received from the U.S. Department of
Education.
Confiscated Drug Fund: Established to account for the use of confiscated drug money
and/or assets by the city’s Police Department.
Emergency Telephone System (E911) Fund: Established to account for funds received for all emergency 911 charges and wireless enhanced charges.
Hotel/Motel Tax Fund: Established to account for the hotel/motel taxes collected as
required by general law.
A-4 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Children & Youth Services Fund: Established to account for the collection of participation fees and grants and expenditures related to the city’s after-school and summer
programs.

Appendix A
Budget Guide

Public Facilities Authority Fund: Established to account for the financial activities
of the City of Decatur Public Facilities Authority including debt issuance and debt service
payments.

Basis of Budgeting

All fund budgets described above, with the exception of the stormwater, solid waste and
conference/parking deck funds, are prepared on a modified accrual basis meaning that
expenditures are budgeted if the obligation will be incurred that fiscal year and revenues are
budgeted if they are measurable and available. For example, an outstanding purchase order
is an example of an incurred expenditure. “Measurable” means the amount of the transaction can be determined and “available” means collectible within the budgeted fiscal period
or soon enough thereafter to pay liabilities of that fiscal period. For example, real property
tax bills that are billed in April and due in June are budgeted as revenue in the billing year.
The remaining funds are enterprise funds which are budgeted on a full accrual basis. Expenditures are recognized when a commitment is made and revenues are recognized when they
are obligated to the city (i.e. stormwater fee bill is generated).
The basis of accounting refers to the time at which revenues and expenditures or expenses
and the related assets and liabilities are recognized in the accounts and reported in the financial statements. In the city, the basis of budgeting and the basis of accounting are the same
with the exception that the budget does not reflect depreciation expenses or compensated
absences. The city’s comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR), which is prepared in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), provides the specific
information for depreciation and compensated absences.

Fund Balance

The accounting definition of fund balance is the difference between assets and liabilities on
the balance sheet. If revenues exceed expenditures at the end of the fiscal year, the remainder is identified as ‘fund balance’. The practice of conservative revenue estimates and
carefully monitored expenditures may result in a fund balance. The city’s financial policies
recommend an unassigned, formerly ‘unreserved’, fund balance between twenty and thirty
percent of the operating budget. The city does not budget for contingencies and therefore,
must rely on the fund balance for emergency expenditures. In some years, the city may
budget to use fund balance for one-time, non-recurring expenditures while remaining within
the acceptable level for fund balance.
In June 2011, the City Commission amended the city’s financial policies to reflect new
fund balance requirements under the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB)
Statement 54. The five classifications of fund balance can be found in the financial policies
in Appendix C.
In the fiscal year ending June 30, 2016, the general fund balance totaled $8,420,470 or 35%
of the 2016-2017 revised operating budget. This was an increase of $1,211,185 from the
previous year’s fund balance. In the Revised 2016-2017 budget estimates, the city has budgeted to use $554,110 of fund balance. In the FY 2017-2018 budget estimates, the city has
budgeted to use $1,180,030 of fund balance. The City has identified expenditures totaling
just over $1,180,000 that are one-time, non-recurring expenditures which is a proper use of

CITY OF DECATUR

A-5

fund balance and consistent with the City’s fund balance policy. Fund balance is estimated
to be $6,686,330 at the end of FY 17-18 or 27% of the adopted operating budget.

Budget Revisions

Since the legal level of budgetary control is at the departmental level, each department head
has the authority to recommend budget transfers within the department budget to the City
Manager for approval. State law prohibits transfers within the ‘salaries’ line-items without
approval of the governing body.
Concurrent with the budget process for the next fiscal year, revisions to the current year’s
budget are developed. The current year revised budget is adopted with the next year’s proposed budget. In the case that unanticipated budget revisions are necessary before the end
of the fiscal year, the budget may be amended with the approval of the City Commission.

Performance Measures

The city incorporates performance measures and objectives into the budget document. For
each department, there are at least three years of actual performance data. The city will
continue to improve upon the performance measurement program and make it a substantive
part of the budget development process.

Strategic Planning

In the fall of 1998 the city sponsored a community forum known as the Decatur Roundtables which involved 500 community members. A report of key concerns and action teams
developed from this process. This report and recommendations from the action teams
guided many of the City’s activities. Over 200 stakeholders helped develop a ten-year strategic plan based on the work of the Roundtables project. The strategic plan was completed
in the summer of 2000. Three core principles emerged from the plan:
A. Manage Growth While Retaining Character
B. Encourage Community Interaction
C. Provide Quality Services Within Fiscal Limits
In the spring and summer of 2010, the process was repeated with 1,500 stakeholders and the
2010 Strategic Plan was adopted in March 2011. The three core principles from the 2000
plan were updated and a fourth was added. For internal purposes, city staff developed a fifth
principle that recognizes the need for a city organization to support and achieve the other
strategic plan principles.
A. Manage Growth While Retaining Character
B. Encourage a Diverse and Engaged Community
C. Serve as Good Stewards of the Environment and Community Resources
D. Support a Safe, Healthy, Lifelong Community
E. Provide the Necessary Support within City Government to Achieve the Vision and Goals
of the Community
The plan identifies goals and specific tasks for each principle. The plan is reviewed annually
in conjunction with the budget to ensure the budget supports the plan’s principles and tasks
and incorporates community input into the budget process.

Community Engagement

A-6 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Each budget season, the city invites interested citizens to participate in discussions of the
budget process. These community budget gatherings were first held in 2002. Because of the
success and contribution of these meetings to the budget process, the city continues to invite
active citizen participation in the budget process through these community gatherings.

The goal of the community budget gatherings is to provide relevant budget and financial
information in an informal environment so that participants can better understand the city’s
budget process including how revenue and expenditure recommendations are made.
Starting in 2013, the city has held an annual Budget Expo or ‘Touch a Budget’ event. At this
event, structured much like a science fair or vendor expo, city staff set up stations representing each strategic plan principle and display equipment, documents and other materials that
are in the proposed budget and support each strategic plan principle. The public is invited
to attend and visit each principle area to learn more about the budget requests and how
they support the city’s overall strategic vision. This offers an informal setting for citizens
to meet employees from all departments and engage in a dialogue about City services and
programs.

Appendix A
Budget Guide

Budget Reporting

State law requires that the budget be posted on the Tax and Expenditure Data (TED)
website maintained by the Carl Vinson Institute of Government. In addition to complying
with that State law, the city also posts the budget on the city website and makes hard copies
available at multiple locations within the city.

Budget Schedule Fiscal Year 2017-2018

January 24		Budget Memo and Schedule to Departments
February 15 Monthly Staff Meeting
February 24		Department Proposed Budget Requests and BVE Worksheets due by 5 pm
March 3
CIP Requests and VBB-Strategic Plan Principles due
March 8
Budget Review Meeting-Department Heads
March 14		Strategic Plan Principles Narrative Teams begin working
March 15
Monthly Staff Meeting
March 20		City Commission Adopts Billing Ordinance
March 21		Budget Expo
March 24
Personnel Estimates Due
March 31		Revised Budget Requests and BVE Worksheets due by 5 pm
April 1
Tax Bill Mailing Deadline
April 3
Revenue Projections Due
April 3
Prepare Notice for Decatur Focus
April 4
Budget Request Follow-up and 10-Year Capital Plan Drafting
April 7
Strategic Plan Principles Narratives Due
April 12		Monthly Staff Meeting
April 14
Draft Proposal to City Manager (tentative)
April 21
Preliminary Budget Complete
May 11
Public Hearing Announcements to Legal Organ
May 12
Budget delivered in City Commission packet
May 15		Presentation of Budget to Commission and Adoption of Tentative 2017 Millage Rate
May 17
Monthly Staff Meeting
May 18, 25, June 1 Public Hearing Ads Published in Legal Organ
June 5
Work Session and Public Hearing on Budget and Millage Rate
June 12
Public Hearing on Budget and Millage Rate (if necessary)
June 19
Public Hearing on Budget and Millage Rate,
Adoption of FY 2017-2018 Budget and Revised 2016-2017 Budget, and
Adoption of Final 2017 Millage Rate

CITY OF DECATUR

A-7

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts

Appendix B
Glossary
Budget FY 2017-2018

FISCAL YEAR 2017-2018

Glossary
The following is an abbreviated list of the specialized governmental budgeting and accounting terms used in this budget:

Aaag
Acronyms at a glance:

ACCOUNT NUMBER – A line item code defining an appropriation.

CIP

ACCOUNTS PAYABLE – A liability account reflecting amounts on open account owing to
private persons or organizations for goods and services received by a government.

CSOD City Schools of Decatur

Capital Improvement
Program

ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE – An asset account reflecting amounts owing on open account
from private persons or organizations for goods and services furnished by a government.

DOT

Department of
Transportation

ACCRUAL ACCOUNTING – A basis of accounting in which revenues are recognized in
the accounting period in which they are earned, and expenses are recognized in the period
in which they occur.

FTE

Full-time equivalent

AD VALOREM TAXES – Commonly referred to as property taxes, are levied on both real
and personal property according to the property’s valuation and the tax rate.

GAAP Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles
GASB

Governmental
Accounting Standards
Board

GMA

Georgia Municipal
Association

LARP

Local Assistance Road
Program

LMIG

Local Maintenance &
Infrastructure Grant
Program

OPEB

Other Post-employment
benefits

PFA

Public Facilities Authority

URA

Urban Redevelopment
Agency

AMORTIZATION – The reduction of debt by regular payments of principal and interest
sufficient to retire the debt by maturity.
ANNUAL BUDGET – A budget applicable to a single fiscal year.
APPROPRIATION – A legal authorization granted by a legislative body to make expenditures and to incur obligations for specific purposes. An appropriation is usually limited in
amount and as to the time when it may be expended.
ASSESSED VALUATION – A valuation set upon real estate or other property by a government as a basis for levying taxes.
ASSETS – Resources owned or held by a government which have monetary value.
BALANCED BUDGET – A budget in which planned revenues available equals planned
expenditures.
BASIS OF ACCOUNTING – A system used by an individual government to determine
when revenues have been realized and when expenditures have been incurred. The City
uses the modified accrual method.
BASIS OF BUDGETING – A system used by an individual government to determine
when budgetary revenues have been realized and when budgetary expenditures have been
incurred. The City uses the modified accrual method.
BOND – A written promise to pay a specified sum of money, called the par value or principal, at a specified date or dates in the future, together with periodic interest at a specified
rate.
BONDED DEBT – That portion of indebtedness represented by outstanding bonds.
BUDGET – A service plan for a given period embodying estimated expenditures for
providing services and the proposed means of financing them. A balanced budget limits
expenditures to available resources.

CITY OF DECATUR

B-3

BUDGET AMENDMENT – A revision of the adopted budget that, when approved, replaces the original provision and increases or decreases the budget appropriation.
BUDGET CALENDAR – The schedule of key dates that a government follows in preparation and adoption of the budget.
BUDGET ORDINANCE – The governmental action which appropriates revenues and fund
balances for specified purposes, functions, or activities for a budget period.
BUDGET PERIOD – The period for which a budget is proposed or a budget ordinance is
adopted. Normally coincides with the fiscal year.
BUDGET TRANSFER – A procedure utilized by City Departments to revise budget appropriations within the departmental operating budget accounts. Transfers monies from one
account to another and does not increase or decrease the overall budget appropriation for
the department.
BUDGETARY CONTROL – The control or management of a government or enterprise
in accordance with an approved budget for the purpose of keeping expenditures within the
limitations of available appropriations and available revenues.
CAPITAL ASSETS – Assets of significant value and having a useful life of several years.
Capital assets for the City of Decatur have a purchase cost of $5,000.00 or over and have a
useful life of more than one year. See also Fixed Assets.
CAPITAL OUTLAY – Expenditures for the acquisition of capital assets.
CAPITAL PROJECT – A project that results in the purchase or construction of capital
assets. Capital projects may encompass the purchase of land, construction of a building or
facility, or purchase of a major piece of equipment.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND – A fund established to account for the receipt and
expenditures of money from major capital projects.
CHART OF ACCOUNTS – A numbering system that assigns a unique number to each
type of transaction and to each budgetary unit in the organization. The City of Decatur
utilizes the Uniform Chart of Accounts for Local Governments in Georgia as mandated by
the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA).
CIP – Capital Improvement Program.
COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT (CAFR) – The report that summarizes financial data for the previous fiscal year in a standardized format.
CSOD – City Schools of Decatur, the City’s independent school district.
DEBT – An obligation resulting from the borrowing of money or from the purchase of
goods and services over a period of time. Debts of government include bonds, time warrants, notes, and floating debts.
A. General Obligation Debt is secured by the pledge of the issuer’s full faith, credit, and
taxing power.
B. Revenue Debt is a bond, debt, or obligation for which principal and interest are payable
exclusively for the earnings of a government enterprise. This term can refer more broadly to
any state or local government debt that is not a general obligation.
DEBT LIMIT – The maximum amounts of gross or net debt that is legally outstanding debt.
DEBT SERVICE – Payment of principal and interest to lenders or creditors on outstanding
debt.
B-4 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

DEBT SERVICE FUND – A fund that is established to account for the accumulation of
resources for the payment of long-term obligations.

Appendix B
Glossary

DEFICIT – The excess of an entity’s liabilities over its assets or the excess of expenditures
or expenses over revenues during a single accounting period.
DEPRECIATION – Expiration in the service life of capital assets attributable to wear and
tear, deterioration, action of the physical elements, inadequacy or obsolescence.
DOT – Department of Transportation.
ENTERPRISE FUND – Enterprise Funds are used to account for operations that are
financed and operated in a manner similar to private business enterprise where the intent
of the governing body is that the cost of providing goods or services to the general public
on a continuing basis be financed primarily through user charges. Services accounted for in
enterprise funds are tangible, and it is possible to determine the extent to which they benefit
individual service consumers.
EXPENDITURES – Decreases in net financial resources. Expenditures include current operating expenses, which require the current or future use of net current assets, debt service,
and capital outlays.
EXPENSES – Decreases in net total assets. Expenses represent the total cost of operations
during a period regardless of the timing of related expenditures.
FIDUCIARY FUND – Those trust and agency funds used to account for assets held by a
local government in a trustee capacity or as an agent for individuals, private organizations,
other governmental units, or other funds.
FINANCIAL INDICATORS – Comparison of planned vs. actual expenditures, cost, obligations, receipts, allocations or losses.
FISCAL YEAR (FY) – The accounting period for which an organization’s budget is termed
the fiscal year. In Decatur, the fiscal year runs from July 1 to June 30 of the following year.
FIXED ASSETS – A financial resource that is tangible in nature, has a useful life of more
than one year, is not a repair part or supply item and has a value equal to, or greater than,
the capitalization threshold of $5000. See also Capital Assets.
FTE – Full-time equivalent-in reference to personnel.
FUND – A fund is an independent financial and accounting entity. It has a balanced set
of accounts and records, cash and other resources together with all related liabilities and
residual equities or balances which are segregated for the purpose of carrying on specific
activities or attaining certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions
or limitations. Though funds are independent entities with the financial records of a government, there need not be physical segregation of assets.
FUND ACCOUNTS – All accounts necessary to set forth the financial position and results
of operations of a fund.
FUND BALANCE – The difference between assets and liabilities on the balance sheet.
GAAP – See Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
GASB – See Governmental Accounting Standards Board.

CITY OF DECATUR

B-5

GENERAL FUND – This fund accounts for the revenues and activities not required by law
or administrative decision to be accounted for in a special fund. Ordinarily, the General
Fund has a great variety of revenues and is used to finance many more activities than any
other fund. The General Fund provides general-purpose governmental services.
GENERAL OBLIGATION (GO) BONDS – Bonds that are secured by the issuer’s full
faith and credit pledge. Most GO bonds are backed by the issuer’s ability to level an ad
valorem tax in an amount sufficient to meet debt service requirements.
GENERAL REVENUE – The revenue of a government other than those derived from and
retained in an enterprise. If a portion of the net income in a Proprietary or Enterprise Fund
is contributed to another non-enterprise fund, such as the General Fund, the amount transferred constitutes general revenue to the government.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES (GAAP) – Uniform minimum,
standards used by state and local governments for financial accounting, recording and reporting, encompassing the conventions, rules and procedures that define accepted accounting principles; established by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB).
GMA – Georgia Municipal Association, organization representing municipalities in Georgia.
GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD (GASB) – The body that
sets accounting standards specifically for governmental entities at the state and local level.
GOVERNMENTAL FINANCE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (GFOA) – Professional
association of state/provincial and local finance officers in the Unites States and Canada
dedicated to the sound management of government financial resources.
GRANTS – A financial gift, donation or award that is made from a funding source, usually
a governmental unity, to the City for the acquisition of goods, services or land. The grant
award agreement defines the City’s responsibilities and duties to be exchanged for the grant.
Grants are often earmarked for a specific purpose of program.
INTERNAL SERVICE FUNDS – A fund used to account for the financing of goods or
services provided by one department to other departments within the City on a cost-reimbursement basis.
INVESTMENTS – Securities and real estate held for production of revenue in the form of
interest, dividend, rentals or lease payments. The term does not include fixed assets used in
governmental operations.
LEVY – To impose taxes, special assessments of service charges for the support of governmental activities.
LINE-ITEM BUDGET – A budget format in which departmental outlays are grouped according to the items that will be purchased, with one item or group of items on each line.
LMIG – Local Maintenance & Infrastructure Grant Program – Grant program sponsored by
the Georgia Department of Transportation.
LONG-TERM DEBT – Debt with a maturity of more than one year after the date of issuance.
MAJOR FUND – Funds with revenues, expenditures, assets or liabilities that make up at
least 10 percent of the total for the fund category or type and at least five percent of the
aggregate amount of all governmental and enterprise funds. The general fund is always
considered a major fund.

B-6 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

MILLAGE RATE – The rate used in calculating taxes based upon the value of property,
expressed in mills per dollar of property value.

Appendix B
Glossary

MISSION – The reason or purpose for the organizational unit’s existence.
NET INCOME – Enterprise Fund in excess of operating revenues, non-operating revenues,
and operating transfers-in over operating expenses, non-operating transfers-out.
NON-MAJOR FUND – A fund in which the revenues, expenditures, assets or liabilities
do not make up at least 10 percent of the total for the fund category or type and at least five
percent of the aggregate amount of all governmental and enterprise funds.
OBJECTIVES – The specified end result expected and can include the time at which it will
be achieved.
OPEB – Other Post-employment benefits.
OPERATING EXPENSES – Enterprise Fund expenses that are directly related to the fund’s
primary service activities.
OPERATING INCOME – The excess of Enterprise Fund operating revenues over operating expenses.
OPERATING REVENUES – Enterprise Fund revenues that are directly related to the
fund’s primary service activities. They consist of user charges for services.
PFA – Public Facilities Authority.
PROPRIETARY FUND – Used to account for a government’s ongoing organizations and
activities that are similar to those often found in the private sector (enterprise and internal
service funds). All assets, liabilities, equities, revenues, expenses and transfers relating to
the government’s business and quasi-business activities – where net income and capital
maintenance are measured – are accounted for through proprietary funds.
REVENUES – Increases in governmental fund type net current assets from other than expenditure refunds and residual equity transfers.
TAX DIGEST – The total assessed value of all real estate property, motor vehicles, mobile
homes, timber and heavy-duty equipment in the City of Decatur, Georgia.
TAX RATE LIMIT – The maximum rate at which a government may levy a tax. Overall tax
rate limits usually restrict levies for all purposes and of all governments, state or local, having jurisdiction in a given area. Taxes are levied via a Tax Levy Ordinance.
TAXES – Compulsory charges levied by a government for the purpose of financing services
performed for a common benefit. This term does not include specific charges made against
particular persons or property for current or permanent benefits such as special assessments.
UNIFORM CHART OF ACCOUNTS – State mandated financial reporting format for
governments. See “Chart of Accounts.”
URA – Urban Redevelopment Agency.

CITY OF DECATUR

B-7

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts

Appendix C
Financial Policies
Budget FY 2017-2018

FISCAL YEAR 2017-2018

Financial
Policies
I. Purpose and Objective
The City of Decatur has a responsibility to carefully account for public funds, to
manage municipal finances wisely, and to plan for the provision of public services.
Sound financial policies are necessary to carry out these objectives responsibly and
efficiently.
The City of Decatur’s financial policies set forth below are the basic framework for its
overall financial management. These policies incorporate long-standing principles and
traditions that have served the City well in maintaining a sound and stable financial
condition.
The broad purpose of the following financial policies is to enable the City of Decatur
to achieve and maintain a long-term positive financial condition. The key values of
the City’s financial management include fiscal integrity, prudence, planning, accountability, honesty, and openness. Specifically, the purpose is to provide guidelines for
planning, directing, and maintaining day-to-day financial affairs.

II. Operating Budget
A. Preparation
Budgeting is an essential element of the financial planning, control, and evaluation process of municipal government. The “operating budget” is the City’s annual
financial operating plan. The annual budget includes the operating departments
of the general fund, special revenue fund, debt service fund, capital project fund,
enterprise funds, and other approved funds that may be established as needed. The
budget encompasses a fiscal year that begins on July 1 and ends on June 30. The
budget is prepared by the City Manager with the cooperation of all City departments, on a basis that is consistent with generally accepted accounting principles.
1.

Proposed Budget – A proposed budget shall be prepared annually by the City
Manager with participation of all City Departments consistent with provisions
of the City Charter and state budget laws.
a.

The budget shall include (1) revenues, (2) personnel costs, (3) operating
and maintenance supply costs, (4) general services costs, and (5) capital
and other (non-capital) costs.

b.

The budget review process shall include public hearings. At the time the
proposed budget is transmitted to members of the City Commission by
the City Manager, a copy will be made available for public inspection at

CITY OF DECATUR

C-3

City Hall and advertised in a local newspaper of general circulation. No
earlier than seven days after the proposed budget is transmitted to the
City Commission and at least seven days in advance of budget adoption,
a public hearing takes place to give the public an opportunity to comment
on the proposed budget. Notice of public hearing must be advertised at
least seven days in advance of the public hearing.
c.

2.

The City Commission, prior to the first day of the fiscal year, will
adopt an annual budget at a public meeting. The annual budget shall be
advertised at least one week prior to the meeting. The proposed budget
is prepared by the City Manager and transmitted to members of the City
Commission for its review with sufficient time given for the City Commission to address policy and fiscal issues.

Adoption – The budget shall be adopted by the approval of a budget resolution that specifies the anticipated revenues by appropriate categories, the proposed expenditure totals for each department, each non-departmental expense,
and for each fund covered by the budget. Amendments to the budget must be
approved by resolution. The budget shall be adopted at the fund/department
level, which is the legal level of budgetary control. The current year’s budget
may be adjusted to reflect changes in local economy, changes in priorities or
services needs, receipt of unbudgeted revenues and for unanticipated expenditures.

B. Balanced Budget
The operating budget will be balanced with anticipated revenues, including appropriated unencumbered surplus, equal to proposed expenditures. All funds within
the budget shall also be balanced.

C. Planning
The City will utilize a decentralized budget process. All departments will be given
an opportunity to participate in the budget process and submit funding requests to
the City Manager.

D. Reporting
Periodic financial reports will be prepared and distributed to the City Manager
and Department Heads. These reports allow Department Heads to manage their
budgets and enable the City Manager to monitor and control the budget. Summary
financial and budgetary reports should be presented by the City Manager to the
City Commission monthly.

E. Control and Accountability
Each Department Head is responsible for ensuring that his/her department expenditures do not exceed budgeted funds. Departments cannot exceed appropriations
described in the budget. Failure to achieve budgetary control will be evaluated and
investigated by the City Manager.

F. Performance Measures
The City integrates performance measures and objectives into the budget document. The City will also develop a system to monitor performance in meeting
these objectives.

C-4 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

G. Budget Transfers
Contingent upon remaining within the confines of the total department budget,
each Department Head has the authority to recommend budget transfers to the City
Manager. Funds within departmental budget line items can be transferred upon the
recommendation of the Department Head and with approval of the City Manager.

Appendix C
Financial Policies

II. Capital Budget Policies and Capital Improvement
Plan
A. Scope
A capital projects plan will be developed and updated annually. A five-year Capital
Improvement Program will assist in the planning, acquisition, and financing of
capital projects. A major capital project is generally defined as a non-recurring
capital expenditure that has an expected useful life of more than 10 years and an
estimated total cost of $25,000 or more. Examples include parks improvements,
streetscapes, computer systems, trucks, loaders, and expansion of facilities.
Major capital projects will be budgeted in the Capital Improvement Fund reflecting all available resources. With the involvement of responsible departments, the
City Manager will prepare the capital budget annually. The City’s capital budget
will be adopted with the operating budget.

B. Control
All capital expenditures must be approved as part of each department budget or
in the Capital Improvement Fund. Before committing to a capital improvement
project, the City Manager or his/her designee must verify fund availability.

C. Program Planning
The capital budget provides annual funding for long-term capital projects identified in the Capital Improvement Program (CIP). During the annual budget process,
each department submits its budget request including operating and capital needs.
Upon review of the requests, major capital projects are placed in the capital improvements fund. Other capital outlay is placed in the department’s operating budget. Capital outlay is generally defined as an individual item of excess of $5,000
with a life expectancy of more than two years but less than 10 years.
Citywide capital improvements are assessed and prioritized based on the City’s
objectives and goals, the City’s comprehensive work plan, and the City’s strategic
plan.

D. Timing
At the beginning of the fiscal year, the City Manager or his/her designee will work
with Department Heads to schedule the appropriate timing of capital purchases to
ensure the availability of funds.

E. Reporting
Periodic financial reports will be provided to enable the City Manager to monitor
and control the capital budget and to enable the Department Heads to manage their
capital budgets.

CITY OF DECATUR

C-5

IV. Debt
A. Policy Statement
Debt results when one borrows from an individual or an institution. The borrower
receives funds to acquire resources for current use with an obligation for repayment later. The debt from borrowing generally must be repaid with interest.
The City of Decatur recognizes that to maintain flexibility in responding to changing service priorities, revenue inflows, and cost structures, a debt management
strategy is required. The City strives to balance service demands and the amount
of debt incurred. The City realizes that failure to meet the demands of growth may
inhibit its continued economic viability, but also realizes that too much debt may
have detrimental effects as well.
The goal of the City’s debt policy is to maintain a sound fiscal position and to protect the credit rating of the City. When the City of Decatur utilizes debt financing,
it will ensure the debt is financed soundly and conservatively.

B. Conditions for Using Debt
Debt financing of capital improvements and equipment will be done only when
one or more of the following four conditions exist:
1.

When non-continuous projects (those not requiring continuous annual appropriations) are desired;

2.

When it can be determined that future users will receive a benefit from the
improvement;

3.

When it is necessary to provide basic services to residents and taxpayers;

4.

When total debt, including that issued by overlapping government entities,
does not constitute an unreasonable burden to residents and taxpayers.

C. Sound Financing of Debt
When the City utilizes debt financing, it will ensure that the debt is soundly
financed by:

C-6 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

1.

Taking a prudent and cautious stance toward debt, incurring debt only when
necessary;

2.

Conservatively projecting the revenue sources that will be used to pay the debt;

3.

Insuring that the term of any long-term debt incurred by the City shall not
exceed the expected useful life of the asset for which the debt is incurred and
shall be limited to capital improvements only;

4.

Determining that the benefits of the improvement exceed the costs, including
interest costs;

5.

Maintaining a debt service coverage ratio which ensures that combined debt
service requirements will not exceed revenues pledged for the payment of
debt;

6.

Analyzing the impact of debt service on total annual fixed costs before
bonded long-term debt is issued; and,

7.

Maintaining total debt service for general obligation debt that does not exceed
10 percent of the net operating revenues. Net operating revenues are all general
fund revenues available after accounting for transfers between other City funds.

D. Post-Issuance Tax Compliance for Tax-Exempt Debt
The City shall comply with all federal and state laws, rules and regulations related
to the issuance of debt.
1.

Responsibility – The City Manager shall be responsible for reviewing the requirements and responsibilities of the City under the Policy with bond counsel
on or before the closing date of any Debt issued by the City.

2.

Dissemination and Training – The policy shall be disseminated to all
relevant personnel in the City and to the auditor. Appropriate training will be
provided to all personnel directly involved in the administration of tax-exempt
debt to ensure they comply with the provisions of the Policy. The City Manager shall consult as appropriate with qualified attorneys with respect to the
content of such training.

3.

Review – The policy shall be reviewed and revised annually by the City Manager and redistributed to all relevant personnel in the City and to the auditor
as needed. The City Manager shall annually conduct a due diligence review
of all Debt currently outstanding to ensure proper compliance with each of the
provisions of the Policy. If the City Manager discovers non-compliance with
any provisions of the Policy, steps necessary to correct the noncompliance
will be taken within ten (10) business days of the conclusion of the annual due
diligence review. Records of all corrective action taken shall be retained in
accordance with the Policy.

4.

Provisions
a.

Record Keeping – All records relating to the Debt needed to comply
with Section 6001 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended
(the “Code”) shall be maintained. These records shall be kept in paper or
electronic form and shall include, among other things, (i) basic records
relating to the transaction (including the bond documents, the opinion
of bond counsel, etc.), (ii) documents evidencing the expenditure of the
proceeds of the Debt, (iii) documentation evidencing the use of Debtfinanced property by public and private entities (e.g., copies of management contracts, leases and research agreements) and (iv) documentation
pertaining to any investment of Debt proceeds (including the purchase
and sale of securities, SLG subscriptions, yield calculations for each class
of investments, actual investment income received from the investment
of the proceeds of the Debt, guaranteed investment contracts and rebate
calculations. Such records must be maintained as long as the Debt is
outstanding, plus three years after the final payment or redemption date
of the respective Debt.

b.

Use of Proceeds – A list of all property financed with the proceeds of the
Debt shall be created and maintained. The use of such property shall be
monitored to ensure that such use does not constitute “private business
use” within the meaning of the Code. Without limiting the foregoing,
each contract, including but not limited to management contracts and
leases, relating to such property shall be reviewed by legal counsel prior
to the execution of such contract. The list of property shall be reviewed at
least annually to ensure that none of the property has been sold.

c.

Remedial Action- In the event that property financed with the proceeds
of the Debt is used in a manner that constitutes “private business use” or
the property is sold, the remediation provisions of Treasury Regulation §

Appendix C
Financial Policies

CITY OF DECATUR

C-7

1.141-12 shall be carried out in consultation with bond counsel.
d.

Yield Restriction- If bond counsel advises that a fund or account needs to
be yield restricted (i.e., not invested at a yield in excess of the Debt), the
moneys on deposit in such fund or account shall be invested in United
States Treasury Obligations – State and Local Government Series, appropriate “yield reduction payments” shall be made if permitted by the Code
or the City Manager shall establish other procedures to ensure that such
fund or account is yield restricted.

e.

Rebate- At the time the Debt is issued, the City Manager shall determine
if he or she reasonably expects that one of the arbitrage rebate exceptions will be satisfied. If the arbitrage rebate exception relates to the time
period over which the proceeds of the Debt are spent, the City Manager
shall verify that the appropriate expenditures have been made at each
milestone. If one of the milestones is not satisfied or the City Manager
does not reasonably expect that one of the arbitrage rebate exceptions
will be satisfied, an outside arbitrage rebate consultant shall be retained
unless the City Manager has determined that positive arbitrage will not
be earned.

V. Accounting, Audits, and Financial Reporting
The City shall maintain a system of financial monitoring, control, and reporting for all
operations and funds in order to provide effective means of ensuring that overall City
goals and objective are met.

A. Accounting Records and Reporting
The City will maintain its accounting records in accordance with state and federal
laws and regulations and in a manner to facilitate an efficient audit process. The
City will report its financial condition and results of operations in accordance with
state regulations and Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) described
in Governmental Accounting, Auditing, and Financial Reporting (GAAFR). The
City’s accounts shall be kept in such a manner as to show fully the financial conditions of the City. In addition, the books shall be open to the public during business
hours.
The City will maintain a Chart of Accounts that complies with requirements of the
State of Georgia and is in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.

B. Auditing
An independent auditor or auditing firm will annually perform the City’s financial
audit. The auditor must be a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) that can demonstrate that s/he has the capability to conduct the City’s audit in accordance with
generally accepted auditing standards. The auditor’s opinions will be supplemented in the City’s Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR). A copy of the
audit will be sent to the State Auditor who will respond with comments regarding
compliance. Results of the annual audit shall be provided to the City Commission
in a timely manner.

C. Simplified Fund Structure

C-8 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

The City will attempt to minimize the number of funds. Funds will be categorized
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for reporting
purposes.

D. Financial Reporting
As a part of the audit, the auditor shall assist with the preparation of the required
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR). The CAFR shall be prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The CAFR will be presented in a way to communicate effectively with citizens about the financial affairs
of the City. The CAFR shall be made available to the elected officials, creditors,
and citizens. In addition, two sets are maintained with the City’s records.

Appendix C
Financial Policies

Internal financial reports will be prepared that are sufficient to plan, monitor, and
control the City’s financial affairs. Monthly accounting reports are meant to transmit information regarding the financial situation of the City. These regular reports
are made available to the City Commission, City Manager, Department Heads, and
other staff as necessary.

VI. Revenues
A. Characteristics
The City shall strive for the following characteristics in its revenue structure:
1.

Simplicity – The City shall strive to maintain a simple revenue structure in
order to reduce compliance costs for the taxpayer and/or service recipient.
A corresponding decrease in the City’s cost of collection and a reduction in
avoidance to pay should result.

2.

Equity – The City shall make every effort to maintain equity in its revenue
system. The City shall seek to minimize subsidization between entities, funds,
service, customer classes, and utilities.

3.

Adequacy – The City shall require that a balance in the revenue system
be achieved. The revenue structure’s base shall have the characteristics of
fairness and neutrality as it applies to cost of service, willingness to pay, and
ability to pay.

4.

Administration – The benefits of a revenue source shall exceed the cost of
levying and collecting that revenue. The price of collection shall be reviewed
periodically for effectiveness as a part of the indirect cost of service analysis.

5.

Diversification and Stability – The City shall maintain a diversified and
stable revenue structure to shelter it from short-term fluctuations in any single
revenue source. The revenue mix shall combine elastic and inelastic revenue
sources to minimize the effect of economic downturns.

6.

Conservative Estimates –Revenues will be estimated realistically and
prudently. Revenues of a volatile nature will be estimated conservatively.
Conservative revenue estimates based on prior year collections may be used
for revenue projections.

7. Aggressive Collection Policy – The City shall follow an aggressive policy of
collecting revenues. As a last resort, real property will be sold to satisfy nonpayment of property taxes.

CITY OF DECATUR

C-9

B. Issues
The following considerations and issues will guide the City in its revenue policies
concerning specific sources of funds:
1.

Non-Recurring Revenues – One-time or non-recurring revenues shall not be
used to finance current ongoing operations. Non-recurring revenues should
be used only for non-recurring expenditures and will not be used for budget
balancing purposes.

2.

Property Tax Revenues – All real and business personal property located
within the City shall be valued at 50% of the fair market value for any given
year based on the current appraisal supplied to the City by the DeKalb County
Board of Tax Assessors.

3. User-Based Fees and Service Charges – For services associated with a user
fee or charge, the direct and indirect costs of that service shall be offset by
a fee where possible. There will be an annual review of fees and charges to
ensure that the fees provide adequate coverage of cost.
The City Commission shall set schedules of fees and charges.
4.

Intergovernmental Revenues (Federal/State/Local) – These revenue
sources will be expended only for the intended purpose of grant aid. It must
be clearly understood that operational requirements set up as a result of a
grant or aid could be discontinued once the term and conditions of the project
have terminated.

5.

Revenue Monitoring – Revenues received shall be compared to budgeted
revenues. Significant variances will be investigated by the City Manager or
designee.

VII. Purchasing
A. Intent
The purpose of this policy is to provide guidance for the procurement of goods and
services in compliance with procurement provisions of the City and the State of
Georgia. The goal of this policy is to establish, foster, and maintain the following
principles:
1.

To consider the best interests of the City in all transactions;

2.

To purchase without prejudice, seeking to obtain the maximum value for each
dollar expenditure with maximum quality standards;

3.

To subscribe to and work for honesty and truth in buying.

B. Vendors
The City will make every effort to obtain high quality goods and services at the
best possible price. All procurement procedures will be conducted in a fair and
impartial manner with avoidance of any impropriety. All qualified vendors have
access to City business. No bidder will be arbitrarily or capriciously excluded. It
is the intent of the City that competition be sought to the greatest practical degree.
The conditions of the contract shall be made clear in advance of the competition.
Specifications shall reflect the needs of the City.


C-10 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

1.

Solicitation of Vendors and Submission of Bids
When a purchase for a single good is expected to exceed $10,000, competition is required to the extent that it exists. Each department must attempt to
obtain a minimum of three bids from different sources. If threesources are not
possible, the seeker of the bid must attempt to obtain as many vendors as possible. Each department head shall document the competitive bidding process
with records of the vendor and bids received.

Appendix C
Financial Policies

Each department has full authority to determine and obtain professional and
contractual services as provided for in the budget. When possible and practical, competitive quotes for professional and contractual services should be
obtained. If competitive quotes are not possible, the City Manager must be
notified in writing. Each department head shall document the process.
2. `Interest of City Officials in Expenditure of Public Funds
No official of the City of Decatur will be interested directly or indirectly in
any transaction with, sale to, work for, or contract of the City or any department of government or service involving the expenditure of public funds in
violation of the City’s “Ethics Ordinance.” The City shall not use a vendor
who is a member of the immediate family of a City Commissioner, City Attorney, City Manager, Assistant City Manager, a Department Head, Personnel
Officer, or Payroll Clerk. The City shall not use a vendor for services in an operating department who is a member of the immediate family of an employee
of that operating department.
3.

Request for Proposal
It is suggested that, whenever appropriate, a Request For Proposal (RFP)
process be used for procuring products and services. The RFP should specify
the service, evaluation criteria, and terms and conditions required by the City.
Large purchases should be advertised in the legal organ and other venues as
time and advertising funds allow.

4.

Award of Bids
Bids are awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. A responsive bid is one that conforms in all material respects to the need of the City.
Responsible means a bidder who has the capability to perform the requirements.

5.

Local Bidder Preference
If all other relevant factors are met, each department is authorized to negotiate with and select a local vendor if the local vendor’s bid is within 10% of
the lowest offer. A current City of Decatur business license is required to be
considered as a local vendor.

6.

Equal Opportunity
The City of Decatur will provide an equal opportunity for all businesses to
participate in City contracts regardless of sex, race, color, religion , national
origin, political affiliation, age, handicapped status, sexual orientation, sexual
preference, or transgender status. The City will actively seek to ensure that
minority-owned and operated firms have the opportunity to participate in the
purchasing process, including bidding, negotiations and contract awards. The
City will not knowingly conduct business with contractors that discriminate
or permit discrimination against persons because of sex, race, color, religion,
national origin, political affiliation, age, handicapped status, sexual orientation, sexual preference, or transgender status
CITY OF DECATUR

C-11

7.

Ineligible Vendors
Any person, firm, or corporation who is in arrears to the City for taxes, or otherwise, will not be qualified to bid on any purchase until their lien to the City
has been cleared. No requisition will be approved for such vendors.

8.

State Contracts
The City is authorized to use state contracts in lieu of issuing bids to vendors
or buying locally when it is to the economic advantage of the City or deemed
appropriate by the City Manager. The state contract price may be used to
establish the maximum price for a good or service.

9.

Back-up Policy and Emergency Purchases
The City should strive to decrease dependency on single-source vendors in
order to achieve maximum efficiency in its purchases. In order to achieve the
City’s fiscal independence, it is strongly suggested that each department have
back-up vendors for each recurring and/or large purchase.
In cases of emergency, a contract may be awarded without competitive bidding, but the procurement shall be made with as much competition as the
circumstances allow (i.e., informal quotes). An emergency is defined as a
threat to life or property, or an unforeseen situation that curtails or greatly diminishes an essential service as determined by the City Manager. In the event
of an emergency, the City Manager shall be contacted.

C. Decentralization of Purchasing Authority
1.

Purchasing of Goods
Each department head shall have the authority to purchase individual goods
costing less than $1,000 each as long as costs remain within the approved
budget. Each department head is responsible to ensure that internal control
procedures, including those issued by the City Manager, are followed.
For individual goods costing over $1,000, the department shall make every
effort to solicit a minimum of three competitive prices. To the extent that an
emergency condition exists or an item is supplied by only one source, the
Department Head shall inform the City Manager and make the appropriate
notation on the purchase order.

2.

Monitoring of Purchases
Although authority may be delegated, the ultimate responsibility rests with
the City Manager. Purchases must be monitored to assure compliance with
City policy.

D. Purchase Order (PO)
A “Purchase Order” (PO) cannot be issued unless sufficient funds are available
in the budget. The following is the established City procedure for use of purchase
orders:

C-12 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

1.

An item or service is required and sufficient funds exist in the approved budget to cover the cost of the item or service.

2.

The item or service is ordered by a department.

3.

The item or service is received and verified by the department.

4.

The department is invoiced by a vendor for the required item or service.

5.

A PO is prepared and the invoice is attached. The departmental purchasing
authority must certify that funds are available to cover the cost of the purchase.

6.

The PO is approved by the departmental purchasing authority.

7.

The invoice and PO are reviewed by the bookkeeper or designee.

8.

The invoice and PO are reviewed and authorized by the City Manager and or
his/her designee.

9.

Payment to the vendor is generated.

Appendix C
Financial Policies

E. Petty Cash
Petty cash is used to make small cash disbursements for those purchases that must
be made quickly and without prior notice on a contingency basis.
Each department has a petty cash expense account. Petty Cash is incurred as an
expense for each department. The petty cash account must be replenished by a
Purchase Order (PO) for the individual department. Departments are monitored at
least twice a year to verify account balances.
The following is the City’s policy on petty cash distributions:
1.

Under $50 – cash is distributed at the department level with department head
approval.

2. Over $50 – cash distribution must be approved by the City Manager.
The following is the City’s procedure for petty cash:
1.

Petty cash request form is completed. The Petty Cash request form contains
details of the request and documented account numbers.

2.

The petty cash request is approved by the department head.

3.

Petty cash is then received by the requesting party.

4.

Once the purchase is made, a receipt must be obtained.

5.

The receipt is then attached to the request form and returned to the petty cash
box.

6.

On a regular basis, a PO must be issued for the department’s purchases and
cash box replenished and balanced.

F. City Credit Cards
1.

General
For the purpose of this policy, the term ‘credit card’ equates to ‘financial
transaction card’ as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30.
Each City Commissioner and the City Manager will be issued a city credit
card. Per City Manager approval, management level employees will be issued
a city credit card. The credit card is to be used for City business only to purchase goods, services, or for specific expenditures incurred under approved
conditions. All purchases utilizing a city credit card must be in accordance
with city policy and state law. The cardholder is the only person authorized
use the credit card.
Before being issued a city credit card under this policy and state law, all authorized cardholders shall sign and accept an agreement with the city that the
cardholder will use the city credit card only in accordance with the policies of
the city.
CITY OF DECATUR

C-13

2.

Regulations of Use
The established monthly credit card limit per card for City Commissioners
is $3,000. The City Manager is authorized to approve credit limits for city
employees.
City credit cards may not be used for the following:
a.

Any purchases for personal use.

b.

Cash refunds or advances.

c.

Items specifically restricted by this policy, unless a special exemption is
granted by the City Manager.

d.

Purchases or transactions in violation of purchasing policy, transactional
limits or state law.

City credit cards may be used for official city business to purchase goods and/
or services that are not prohibited by this policy or state law.
3.

Roles and Responsibilities
The City Clerk is designated as the administrator of the city’s credit cards.
The administrator’s responsibilities are determined by the City Manager and
shall include, but not be limited to:
a.

Serve as liaison between the city’s cardholders and the issuer(s) of such
cards.

b.

Maintain the cardholder agreement for all cardholders.

c.

Provide instruction, training, and assistance to cardholders.

d.

Upon receipt of information indicating fraudulent use or lost/stolen cards,
report such incident to the appropriate parties, including the issuer, in a
timely manner.

e.

Conduct monthly review and audit of credit card transactions.

f.

Recommend the credit card issuer and system for documenting credit
card transactions by cardholders.

g.

Make available for public inspection those documents related to purchases using city credit cards in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(b).

Employees designated as credit card approvers are responsible for reviewing
the monthly credit card statement of each employee for whom they have been
assigned as an approver. Responsibilities include reviewing all transactions
for compliance with the city policy and state law, ensuring each transaction is
coded correctly and that receipts have been produced for each transaction.
The credit card holder is responsible for documentation and safekeeping of
the credit card during the employee’s issuance. A receipt for each transaction
must be obtained by the employee when a purchase is made using the City
credit card. This receipt shall be dated and a description of the service or item
purchased and account codes shall be written on the back of every receipt or
otherwise documented during the monthly statement reconciliation process.
Each month, the credit card holder must submit on a timely basis documentation of credit card purchases with the credit card statement. Late submittal of
credit card documentation may result in credit card privileges being cancelled.
C-14 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

4.

Violations
Violation of the city’s credit card policy or state law regarding the use of
government-issued credit cards may result in suspension or revocation of city
credit card privileges. Violation of the city’s credit card policy may constitute
a violation of the city’s Personnel Rules and Regulations and cardholder may
be subject to disciplinary action including, but not limited to, reprimand,
suspension, demotion, or termination.

Appendix C
Financial Policies

Nothing in this ordinance shall preclude the City Manager from referring
misuse of a credit card for criminal prosecution.
In the event that a cardholder inadvertently makes a transaction in violation of
city policy, the cardholder must report the transaction to the card administrator within 10 business days of receipt of the card transaction statement. The
cardholder will be responsible for reimbursing the City the full amount of the
unacceptable transaction.

G. Expense Reimbursements
Receipts for City business related expenses requiring reimbursement from the City
of Decatur must be submitted to the accounting office with an expense reimbursement within 60 days of the date the expense was incurred. Each receipt shall be
dated and contain a description of the service or item purchased and account codes
shall be written on the back of every receipt. Each expense reimbursement form
must be approved by the appropriate departmental supervisor. Failure to submit
the required documentation will result in forfeiture of the reimbursement.

H. Travel Expenses
When City business travel requires advance payment to the employee for estimated travel expenses, a travel expense/reimbursement form shall be submitted to
the accounting office no less than two weeks before the travel date. Within 60 days
of the final day of travel, all receipts with dates and a description of the service
or item purchased will be submitted to accounting for verification purposes. If
documented expenses exceed the travel advance, a reimbursement will be provided to the employee. If documented expenses are less than the travel advance,
the employee will provide the City with the difference between the advance and
actual expenses. Failure to provide the appropriate documentation will result in
the advance being reported as income on the employee’s W-2 and may result in
disciplinary action.

VIII. Investments
A. Scope
This investment policy applies to all funds under the City of Decatur’s control;
excluding the City’s pension funds which are invested at the direction of the City
of Decatur Employees’ Retirement System Board of Trustees.

B. Objectives
The following investment objectives shall be met with this policy:
1.

Safety – Preservation of principal shall always be the foremost objective in
any investment transaction involving City funds. Those investing funds on the
City’s behalf must first ensure that capital losses are avoided by limiting credit
and interest risk. Credit risk is the risk of loss due to the failure of the security
issues or backer. Interest risk is the risk that market value portfolios will fall
due to an increase in general interest rates.

CITY OF DECATUR

C-15

2.

Liquidity – The second objective shall be the maintenance of sufficient liquidity within the investment portfolio. The City’s investment portfolio shall be
structured such that securities mature at the time when cash is needed to meet
anticipated demands (static liquidity). Additionally, since all possible cash
demands cannot be anticipated, the portfolio should maintain some securities
with active secondary or resale markets (dynamic liquidity).

3.

Return on Investment – The third objective shall be the realization of competitive investment rates, relative to the risk being assumed. However, yield
on the City’s investment portfolio is of secondary importance compared to the
safety and liquidity objectives described above.

C. Delegation of Authority
The overall management of the investment program is the responsibility of the
City Manager. Responsibility for the daily investment activities will be assigned
by the City Manager. The City Manager may designate an employee or employees to assist with the management and implementation of the City’s investment
program.
Responsibilities to fulfill this authority include: opening accounts with banks,
brokers, and dealers; arranging for the safekeeping of securities; and executing
necessary documents.
A system of internal controls over investments is established and approved by the
City’s independent auditors. The controls are designed to prevent losses of public
funds arising from fraud, error, misrepresentation by third parties, unanticipated
changes in financial markets, and/or imprudent action by staff and City officials.
No person may engage in an investment transaction except as provided for under
the terms of the policy.

D. Authorized Investments
All investment activity is required to be in compliance with Chapter 83 of Title 36
of the Official Code of Georgia, which establishes guidelines for local government
investment procedures.
The City of Decatur may invest funds subject to its control and jurisdiction in the
following:

C-16 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

1.

Certificates of Deposit (CD’s) issued by banks insured by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Deposits in excess of FDIC coverage must
be collateralized by securities with a market value equal to at least 110% of
the deposit. Only those securities described in Georgia Code 50-17-59 can be
pledged as collateral;

2.

Certificates of Deposit (CD’s) issued by savings and loans associations issued
by the Federal Saving s and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC). Deposits
in excess of the FSLIC coverage must be collateralized by securities equal to
at least 110% of the deposit. Only those securities described in Georgia Code
50-17-59 can be pledged as collateral;

3.

Obligations issued by the United States government;

4.

Obligations fully insured or guaranteed by the United States government or a
United States government agency;

5.

Obligation of any corporation of the United States government;

6.

Obligation of the state of Georgia or of other states;

7.

Obligation of other political subdivision of the state of Georgia;

8.

The Local Government Investment Pool of the state of Georgia managed by
the State Department of Administrative Services, Fiscal Division;

9.

Repurchase agreements (REPO’s) issued by commercial banks insured by the
FDIC and collateralized by securities described in Georgia Code 50-17-59
with a market value equal to at least 103% of the Repurchase Agreements’
maturity value;

Appendix C
Financial Policies

10. Repurchase agreements (REPO’s) issued by primary dealers supervised by
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and collateralized by securities described in Georgia Code 50-17-59 with a market value of at least 103% of the
Repurchase Agreements’ maturity value; and
11. Prime Banker’s Acceptances.

E. Prudence
The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be the “prudent
person” standard and shall be applied in thecontext of managing an overall portfolio. Under the “prudent person” standard, investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence,
discretion, and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not
for speculation but for investment, considering the probable safety of their capital
as well as the probable revenue to be gained.
The City Manager and all designees acting in accordance with 1) written procedures, 2) this investment policy, and 3) exercising due diligence shall be relieved
of personal responsibility for an individual security’s credit risk or market price
changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion
and appropriate action is taken to control adverse development.

F. Diversification
The City of Decatur agrees with the premise that diversification is an important
component of portfolio security. Therefore, the City shall endeavor to maintain an
adequate level of diversification among its investments. The City shall not be over
invested in any one type of instrument or financial institution. No more than 25%
of the total investment portfolio shall be placed with a single issuer. This limitation
shall not apply to the Local Government Investment Pool or direct obligations of
the United States government.

G. Maturities
To achieve the aforementioned objective of adequate liquidity within City’s portfolio, the City shall attempt to match investment maturities with anticipated cash
flow requirements. Unless matched to a specific cash flow, the maximum maturity
of any instrument in the City’s portfolio may not exceed two years from the date of
acquisition by the City. In order to preserve liquidity and to lessen market risk, not
more then 25% of the total portfolio may mature more than one year beyond the
date of calculation. The maturity of non-negotiable time deposits may not exceed
one year.

H. Safekeeping and Custody
All investment securities purchased by the City of Decatur shall be delivered
against payment and shall be held in a third-party safekeeping account by the trust
department of a bank insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The
City Manager, or his/her designee, shall be responsible for the selection of a finan-

CITY OF DECATUR

C-17

cial institution for this purpose, as well as the execution of a written safekeeping
agreement with the trustee.

I. Ethics and Conflicts of Interest
Officers and employees involved in the investment process will refrain from
personal business activity that would conflict with proper execution of the investment program, or which would impair their ability to make impartial investment
decisions. Employees and investment officials will disclose to the City Manager
any material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business with
the City, and they will further disclose any large personal financial/investment positions that would be related to the performance of the City’s portfolio. Employees
and investment officials will subordinate their personal investment transactions to
those of the City – particularly with regard to the time of purchases and sales.

J. Relationships with Banks and Brokers
The City of Decatur will select depositories through the City’s banking services
procurement process – including formal requests for proposals issued as needed.
In selecting depositories, objective business criteria will be used. To the extent
possible, preference will be given to depositories located within the City of Decatur. The creditworthiness of the institutions will be a fundamental consideration.

K. Report on Deposits and Investments
Periodic investment reports will be submitted to the City Manager. Reports should
include the following: an average daily balance of investment in each investment
category; a current portfolio yield for each investment type and for the portfolio as
a whole; an average daily balance of uninvested collected funds; an average daily
balance of uncollected funds; and a percent of available funds invested. The report
shall also provide a list of investments and accrued interest as of the last day of the
quarter.

L. Performance Evaluation
The City Manager, or his/her designees, will seek to achieve a market average rate
of return on the City’s portfolio. Given the special safety and liquidity needs of the
City, the basis used to determine whether market yields are being achieved shall be
the six-month Treasury Bill.

IX. Grants
A. Scope
The purpose of this policy is to provide direction in the application, acceptance
and administration of funds awarded through grants to the City from other local
governments, the state or federal government, non-profit agencies, philanthropic
organizations and the private sector.

B. Application and Acceptance of Grants.
1.

C-18 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

The City Manager is given authority to make application for and accept grants
that:
(a) are expected to be $200,000 or less on an annual basis with no required
City match; or,

(b) are expected to be $100,000 or less on an annual basis with a required
match of 20% or less; or,
(c) are expected to be $50,000 or less on an annual basis with a required
match of over 40%.
2.

The City Commission must approve the application of and acceptance of any
grants in excess of the limits established in Section 1 of this policy.

3.

The City will assess the merits of a particular program as if it were funded
with local tax dollars. Local tax dollars will not be used to make up for losses
of intergovernmental aid without first reviewing the program and its merits
as a budgetary increment. Therefore, no grant will be accepted that will incur
management and reporting costs greater than the grant amount.

Appendix C
Financial Policies

C. Grant Administration.
1.

2.

Each department must notify the City Clerk upon acceptance of any grant.
Prior to the receipt or expenditure of grant revenues, the City Clerk must be
provided with the following information prior to receiving grant revenues or
making purchases against the grant:
a.

Copy of grant application

b.

Notification of grant award

c.

Financial reporting and accounting requirements including separate account codes and/or bank accounts

d.

Schedule of grant payments

Each department is responsible for the management of its grant funds and
periodic reporting.

X. Fixed Assets
A. Fixed Asset Criteria
A fixed asset is defined as a financial resource meeting all of the following criteria:
1.

It is tangible in nature.

2.

It has a useful life of greater than one year.

3.

It is not a repair part or supply item.

4.

It has a value equal to, or greater than, the capitalization threshold of $5,000.

Keeping an accurate record of the City’s fixed assets is important for a myriad of
reasons. Some of the most important reasons that the City needs to keep a good
record of fixed assets are: for financial statement information, for insurable values,
for control and accountability, for maintenance scheduling and cost analysis, for
estimating and accounting for depreciation, for preparation of capital and operating budgets, and for debt management.

B. General Policy
1.

Each Department Head is ultimately responsible for the proper recording,
acquisition, transfer, and disposal of all assets within their Department. City
property may not be acquired, transferred, or disposed of without first providing proper documentation. A fixed asset information form must accompany
each step.

CITY OF DECATUR

C-19

2.

Recording of Fixed Assets
Unless otherwise approved by the City Clerk, all recordable fixed assets must
be recorded within 30 calendar days after receipt and acceptance of the asset.
A fixed asset form must be attached to the purchase order before submitting
request for payment.
Assets will be capitalized at acquisition cost, including expenses incurred in
preparing the asset for use.
Donated assets shall be recorded at fair market value as determined by the
Department Head. Fair market value may be defined as, but is not limited
to, an average of documented prices for equivalent items from three separate
vendors.
The City will recognize acquisition costs based on individual unit prices.
Assets should not be grouped. For example, in acquiring equipment, if three
personal computers (PC) were acquired simultaneously at $2,000 each, this
would not be an asset of $6,000 consisting of 3 PCs. Instead, it would be 3
separate acquisitions of $2,000. Each PC would be recorded as a separate
controllable item.
For equipment purchases, title is considered to pass at the date the equipment
is received. Similarly, for donated assets, title is considered to pass when the
asset is available for the agency’s use and when the agency assumes responsibility for maintaining the asset.
Constructed assets are transferred from the construction in progress account
to the related building, improvements other than buildings, or equipment
accounts when they become operational. Constructed buildings, for example,
are assumed to be operational when an authorization to occupy the building is
issued, regardless of whether or not final payments have been made on all the
construction contracts.

3.

4.

C-20 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Acquisition of Fixed Assets
There are various methods by which assets can be acquired. The asset acquisition method determines the basis for valuing the asset. Fixed assets may be
acquired in the following ways:
•

New purchases

•

Donations

•

Transfers from other City departments

•

City surplus

•

Internal/external construction

•

Lease purchases

•

Trade-in

•

Forfeiture or condemnation

Lease Purchases
Assets may be lease-purchased through installment purchases (an agreement
in which title passes to the Department) or through lease financing arrangements (an agreement in which title may or may not pass).
Departments considering a lease purchase for greater than $10,000 and other
than from an established, City approved contract, must consult with the City
Manager.

5.

Transfer of Fixed Assets
An asset transfer between departments usually represents the sale of an item
by one department to another and may be treated as a new purchase. A transfer between related departments under the same control (Police and Fire, for
example) may, if desired, be treated as a transfer rather than sale. That is, the
asset is recorded under the new Department with original acquired date and
funding amount.

Appendix C
Financial Policies

A fixed asset form must be sent to the Payroll Coordinator for all transfers.
6.

Sale of Fixed Assets, Non-Fixed Assets, and Confiscated Goods
The City is interested in full realization of the value of goods it purchases.
The City policy is aimed at making sure all surplus is disposed to the economic advantage of the City.
Sale of fixed assets and other surplus goods by a department must be to the
highest, responsible bidder and must be conducted by sealed bid or by auction, including online auctions.
Central Supply is responsible for receiving, storing, and safeguarding all
auction materials before, during, and after the auction. Public Safety will be
responsible for the storage and safeguarding of all small, high value items,
such as jewelry.
Central Supply will also administer the sale of all surplus property including
Fixed Assets, Non-Fixed Assets, and Confiscated Goods under the supervision of the Public Works Director.
Reporting
Central Supply will issue a request for surplus goods available for auction on
a quarterly basis to each department.
The department head will submit a description form for each auction item.
This form will include at minimum a description of the item, serial number,
fixed assets number, estimate of value, date of sale, and amount of sale. Large
quantities of similar items may be reported on one form, unless it is a Fixed
Asset.
Accounting will keep the original fixed asset form and the description form in
the same file after a fixed asset has been declared surplus.
Advertising
After each quarterly reporting period Central Supply will publish a list online
of surplus items that are available for use by city departments. Departments
will have ten (10) working days from the publication of the list online to
request a transfer of the item to their department. Items will be distributed
on a first-come, first-served basis. If the item is not claimed for departmental
transfer within ten working days it will be auctioned to the highest, responsible bidder.
The auction must be publicized in accordance with GA Code 36-37-6 and
other applicable state laws.
At the conclusion of an auction a list of unsold items will be published on the
city’s web site for donation to non-profit organizations on a first-come, firstserved basis.
CITY OF DECATUR C-21

Sale of the Item
Eligibility. Members of the general public may participate as buyers at public
sales, in sealed bids, and auctions. No employee whether full-time, part-time
or temporary, of the City of Decatur, member of the employee’s household
and/or the employee’s immediate family, or any person acting on the employee’s behalf may participate in public sales if the employee has had any
role in declaring the item surplus, processing the item or related paperwork, or
offering it for sale. City Commissioners are also excluded from participating
in city auctions.
The Central Supply manager will be responsible for managing the seller
account with Ebay and posting items for bid. He will determine the most efficient communication and listing procedures in conjunction with the Director
of Public Works. The costs associated with the auction will be paid from the
advertising account in Division 4910.
Department heads or their designees are responsible for providing an estimate
of the value of fixed assets and confiscated goods designated for auction.
Pricing of an item will be determined by reviewing the same or similar items
for sale on electric auction service. Vehicle estimates will be determined by
using Kelly’s Blue Book or a similar source. A reserve amount is required for
all vehicle sales and estimates over $500 dollars. Before listing an item for
auction the estimated value or reserve amount must be approved by Central
Supply and Accounting. The City is interested in realizing the highest possible
value for its surplus items.
The buyer is responsible for pick-up and all shipping costs incurred. Vehicles
will not be shipped, but require pick-up at Central Supply or Public Safety.
The City will accept cash, money orders, and cashier checks.
The sale of certain Public Safety items requires a release form for public and/
or non-emergency use. The Central Supply officer is responsible for ensuring
the proper disposal according to state and federal laws regarding these items.
A signed release form from the buyer acknowledging proper use is required at
the time of pick-up. The release form will be kept with the description form.
The city may re-list an auction item up to two (2) times if it does not meet the
reserve price in a particular auction.
Recording of the sale
The date of sale, amount of sale, and signature of the buyer will be recorded
on the item description form.
The Accounting Department will have access to the seller account on Ebay.
The City Clerk or his designee will compare the submitted description forms
to the record of sale provided by electronic auction service. A quarterly report
will be prepared by the accounting office including at minimum the list of
items sold, the sale price, the buyer contact information, and listing fees paid.
Revenues from the sale of confiscated goods will be issued to the police
department. Revenues from the sale of all other goods will be issued to the
appropriate fund.
Central Supply will coordinate with the Finance Department to properly
record the sale of surplus items.
C-22 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Procedures for the recording of the sale will be in accordance with GAAP.
7.

Disposal of Fixed Assets, Non-Fixed Assets, and Confiscated Goods
When an asset is disposed of, its value is removed from the financial balances
reported and from inventory reports; however, the asset record, including
disposal information, remains on file in hardcopy form for three years, in the
City Clerk’s Office, after which time it is purged from the system according
to general accepted accounting principles. This preserves an audit trail for disposed items, and facilitates departmental comparisons between actual or historical useful life information with useful life guidelines. Such comparisons
permit a more precise definition of an asset’s useful life than those provided
by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) or other guidelines initially used.

Appendix C
Financial Policies

A disposal action is appropriate only when certain conditions occur resulting
in an asset no longer being in the possession of the agency. Assets no longer
in use, which remain in the possession of the department, are considered
surplus property and not a disposal.
Fixe d assets may be disposed of in any one of seven ways:
a.

Sale or trade-in

b.

Abandonment/Retirement

c.

Lost or stolen

d.

Transfer

e.

Cannibalization (taking parts and employing them for like uses within the
department, such as is often the practice in computer or vehicle maintenance).

f.

Casualty loss

g.

Donation to a 501 (c3) non-profit organization

The city should try to obtain the highest value out of the disposed item. If another city department does not need the item then it should be put up for auction or sealed bid. If the item is not suitable for sale or does not meet reserve
requirements then it can be donated to a non-profit organization.
Only when the asset is no longer in possession of the department, due to one
of the seven reasons listed above, is disposal action appropriate.
Assets are “abandoned” or “retired” when there is no longer any use for them
in the Department, they are of no use to any other City department, they cannot be repaired, transferred, cannibalized, sold, or traded-in. Thus meaning
that, there is no safe and appropriate use for the abandoned goods to the City
or for others.
Stolen items must be reported to Decatur Police and a police report filed. A
copy of this report must accompany the disposal record.
Casualty losses must be documented within 24 hours of loss and reported to
the City’s Administrative Services Director immediately for follow-up with
the City’s insurance carrier.
Cannibalized items are considered surplus and are disposed of by noting
cannibalization on the disposal record. Ideally, this method will allow departments to look at cannibalized items on the disposal report and assess what
surplus parts may be available. Departments will send documentation of items
cannibalized to the City Clerk’s Office, and all remaining costs and accumu-

CITY OF DECATUR C-23

lated depreciation will be removed from appropriate asset accounts in the
general fixed asset fund.
All assets no longer in the possession of the department, due to one of these
six qualifying conditions and after submission of all appropriate documentation to the City Clerk’s Office, will be removed from the master departmental
asset file and considered disposed.
Department management is responsible for reviewing disposal reports, evaluating causes and trends leading to disposals, and implementing procedures to
more effectively manage and control disposals when the dispositions represent problems, inefficiencies, and/or the incurrence of unnecessary cost.
The Sanitation and Facilities Maintenance Department will not take City
property for disposal without the accompaniment of proper documentation. \
Disposal of Items of De Minimus Value
In accordance with O.G.G.A. 36-37-6(b), the City may dispose of property
with an estimated value of $500 or less without advertisement or the acceptance of bids. The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to approve
the disposal of property with an individual value not exceeding $500 in such
manner as he/she judges appropriate. Such disposal may include recycling or
transfer to a waste collection site in addition to any of the options described in
section B (7) of this policy. In such cases, the department will document the
property to be disposed of through a physical log and photographs; and, when
practical, provide an estimated value of the property, either individually or as
a lot.
8.

Physical Inventory
An annual physical inventory of all fixed assets will be performed by the
City Clerk’s Office. The inventory will be conducted with the least amount
of interruption possible to the department’s daily operation. A full report of
the results of the inventory will be sent, within 30 days of completion, to all
departments for verification and acceptance.

XI. Fund Balance Policy
A. Fund balance is the cumulative difference between revenues and expenditures at
the end of the City’s fiscal year. It is also understood to be the difference between
assets and liabilities on the balance sheet. The practice of conservative revenue
estimates and carefully monitored expenditures may result in a fund balance. The
City intends to maintain an unreserved unassigned fund balance in the general
fund between twenty and thirty percent of the operating budget or an amount
equal to 3-4 months’ operating expenses. The City does not budget for contingencies and therefore, must rely on the fund balance for emergency expenditures. In
some years, the City may budget to use fund balance for one-time expenditures
while remaining within the acceptable level for fund balance. Fund balance may
not be used to support long-term, recurring operating expenditures.

If fund balance is used to support one-time capital and one-time
non-operating expenditures, the City Commission must appropriate the
funds.

C-24 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

If, at the end of the fiscal year, the fund balance falls below the targeted range,
City staff will present a plan to the City Commission for aligning the fund balance
with the policy.

B. Fund Balance Classifications. In accordance with the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board (GASB) Statement 54, the City recognizes the following five
classifications of fund balance for financial reporting purposes:
a.

Nonspendable – non-cash assets such as inventories or prepaid items.

b.

Restricted – funds legally restricted for specific purposes, such as grant
funds.

c.

Committed – amounts that can only be used for specific purposes pursuant to a formal vote of the City Commission.

d.

Assigned – amounts intended to be used for specific purposes. The City
Commission can choose to delegate this authority.

e.

Unassigned – residual spendable fund balance after subtracting all above
amounts and are available for any legal purpose.

Appendix C
Financial Policies

C. Spending Prioritizations.
a)

When an expenditure is incurred that would qualify for payment with either restricted or unrestricted funds, it will be paid from restricted funds.

b) When an expenditure is incurred that qualifies for payment from either of
the three unrestricted fund balance categories, it will be applied in the following order:1) Committed, 2) Assigned, and 3) Unassigned.
D. Committed Fund Balance. The City Commission may commit fund balance by a
formal vote prior to the government’s fiscal year-end for that fiscal year. Future
modification or rescission of committed funds must likewise be accomplished by
a formal vote of the City Commission prior to fiscal year-end.
E. Pursuant to the requirements of Accounting Statement 54 of the Governmental
Accounting Standards Board (GASB), the City Commission hereby commits all
of the revenue received by the following Special Revenue funds to be used exclusively for each respective program’s operating expenditures:
Special Revenue Fund
Children & Youth Services
Economic Development
F.

Committed Revenue Source
Attendance and registration fees
Tree bank account fees

Assigned Fund Balance. The City Commission expressly delegates to the City
Manager the authority under this policy to assign funds for particular purposes.

CITY OF DECATUR C-25

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts

Appendix D
Position
Classification Plan
Budget FY 2017-2018

ASSIGNMENT OF CLASSES TO SALARY RANGE
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2018

SALARY
RANGE

ANNUAL
MINIMUM

ANNUAL
MAXIMUM

TITLE

01
29,328
48,048


Crew Worker
Sanitation Equipment Operator I

02

---------------------------------------------------

30,805

50,482

03
32,365
53,040
Administrative Services Assistant
Asst. Active Living Program Supervisor


Building Maintenance Specialist
			Equipment Operator
			Parking Attendant
			Site Director
04
34,008
55,723
Accounting Clerk
			Communications Officer

Sanitation Equipment Operator II

Support Services Technician
35,734
58,552
Accounts Payable Officer
05
			Administrative Assistant
			Automotive Mechanic
			Court Clerk
			Revenue Officer
			Supply Clerk
37,544
61,506
06


Firefighter I
Lead Automotive Mechanic

07
39,437
64,626
Cemetery Specialist

Codes Enforcement Officer
			Firefighter II
			Office Manager

Health & Wellness Coordinator

Permit & Zoning Technician
			Personnel Specialist

Senior Revenue Officer
08

41,434

67,912

---------------------------------------------------

09
43,534
71,365
Active Living Program Supervisor

Chief Court Clerk

Children & Youth Services Program Supervisor
			Crew Supervisor

Facilities Security Coordinator

Fire Apparatus Operator
			Police Officer
45,739
74,984
Building Inspector
10
			Communications Specialist
			Engineering Inspector
			Fire Inspector
			Information Coordinator
			Arborist

Master Police Officer
			Operations Analyst
			Planner
			Police Investigator

Special Events Coordinator

continued

CITY OF DECATUR

D-3

SALARY
RANGE

ANNUAL
MINIMUM

ANNUAL
MAXIMUM

TITLE

11

48,048

78,770

--------------------------------------------------------

12
50,482
82,763
Fire Sergeant

Lifelong Community Program Manager
			Parking Manager
			Police Sergeant
13
53,040
86,944
Fire Lieutenant
			Police Lieutenant
14
55,723
91,354
Community Education & Information Manager

Downtown Development Manager

Project Civil Engineer
			Project Manager
15
58,552
95,992



Assistant Active Living Director
Assistant Children & Youth Services Director
Budget & Performance Measurement Director

16
61,506
100,838
City Clerk
			Facilities Superintendent
			Fire Captain
			Personnel Director
			Police Captain

Revenue & Technology Director

Sanitation Services Superintendent
17
64,626
105,934
Assistant Fire Chief
			Building Official
			Senior Engineer
18
67,912
111,301
Active Living Director

Children And Youth Services Director

Deputy Fire Chief

Deputy Police Chief

Design, Environment & Construction Director
			Planning Director
19

71,365

116,938

--------------------------------------------------------

20

74,984

122,866

--------------------------------------------------------

21
78,770
129,085
Chief-Civic Engagement, Education & Communication
			Fire Chief
			Police Chief

D-4

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

22

82,762

135,616

-------------------------------------------------------

23

86,944

142,480

Assistant City Manager

CITY OF DECATUR

D-5

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

30,056
578.00
14.45
2,505

30,805
592.40
14.81
2,567

31,574
607.20
15.18
2,631

32,365
622.40
15.56
2,697

33,176
638.00
15.95
2,765

31,574
607.20
15.18
2,631

34,008
654.00
16.35
2,834

32,365
622.40
15.56
2,697

34,861
670.40
16.76
2,905

33,176
638.00
15.95
2,765

35,734
687.20
17.18
2,978

34,008
654.00
16.35
2,834

36,629
704.40
17.61
3,052

34,861
670.40
16.76
2,905

H

37,544
722.00
18.05
3,129

35,734
687.20
17.18
2,978

I

38,480
740.00
18.50
3,207

36,629
704.40
17.61
3,052

J

39,437
758.40
18.96
3,286

37,544
722.00
18.05
3,129

K

40,414
777.20
19.43
3,368

38,480
740.00
18.50
3,207

L

41,434
796.80
19.92
3,453

39,437
758.40
18.96
3,286

M

42,474
816.80
20.42
3,539

40,414
777.20
19.43
3,368

N

43,534
837.20
20.93
3,628

41,434
796.80
19.92
3,453

O

44,616
858.00
21.45
3,718

42,474
816.80
20.42
3,539

P

45,739
879.60
21.99
3,812

43,534
837.20
20.93
3,628

Q

46,883
901.60
22.54
3,907

44,616
858.00
21.45
3,718

R

48,048
924.00
23.10
4,004

45,739
879.60
21.99
3,812

S

49,254
947.20
23.68
4,105

46,883
901.60
22.54
3,907

T

33,176
638.00
15.95
2,765

34,008
654.00
16.35
2,834

34,861
670.40
16.76
2,905

35,734
687.20
17.18
2,978

36,629
704.40
17.61
3,052

37,544
722.00
18.05
3,129

38,480
740.00
18.50
3,207

39,437
758.40
18.96
3,286

40,414
777.20
19.43
3,368

41,434
796.80
19.92
3,453

42,474
816.80
20.42
3,539

43,534
837.20
20.93
3,628

44,616
858.00
21.45
3,718

45,739
879.60
21.99
3,812

46,883
901.60
22.54
3,907

48,048
924.00
23.10
4,004

49,254
947.20
23.68
4,105

50,482
970.80
24.27
4,207

34,861
670.40
16.76
2,905

35,734
687.20
17.18
2,978

36,629
704.40
17.61
3,052

37,544
722.00
18.05
3,129

38,480
740.00
18.50
3,207

39,437
758.40
18.96
3,286

40,414
777.20
19.43
3,368

41,434
796.80
19.92
3,453

42,474
816.80
20.42
3,539

43,534
837.20
20.93
3,628

44,616
858.00
21.45
3,718

45,739
879.60
21.99
3,812

46,883
901.60
22.54
3,907

48,048
924.00
23.10
4,004

49,254
947.20
23.68
4,105

50,482
970.80
24.27
4,207

51,750
995.20
24.88
4,313

53,040
1,020.00
25.50
4,420

54,371 55,723
1,045.60 1,071.60
26.14
26.79
4,531
4,644

36,629
704.40
17.61
3,052

37,544
722.00
18.05
3,129

38,480
740.00
18.50
3,207

39,437
758.40
18.96
3,286

40,414
777.20
19.43
3,368

41,434
796.80
19.92
3,453

42,474
816.80
20.42
3,539

43,534
837.20
20.93
3,628

44,616
858.00
21.45
3,718

45,739
879.60
21.99
3,812

46,883
901.60
22.54
3,907

48,048
924.00
23.10
4,004

49,254
947.20
23.68
4,105

50,482
970.80
24.27
4,207

51,750
995.20
24.88
4,313

53,040
1,020.00
25.50
4,420

54,371
1,045.60
26.14
4,531

55,723
1,071.60
26.79
4,644

57,117 58,552
1,098.40 1,126.00
27.46
28.15
4,760
4,879

38,480
740.00
18.50
3,207

39,437
758.40
18.96
3,286

40,414
777.20
19.43
3,368

41,434
796.80
19.92
3,453

42,474
816.80
20.42
3,539

43,534
837.20
20.93
3,628

44,616
858.00
21.45
3,718

45,739
879.60
21.99
3,812

46,883
901.60
22.54
3,907

48,048
924.00
23.10
4,004

49,254
947.20
23.68
4,105

50,482
970.80
24.27
4,207

51,750
995.20
24.88
4,313

53,040
1,020.00
25.50
4,420

54,371
1,045.60
26.14
4,531

55,723
1,071.60
26.79
4,644

57,117
1,098.40
27.46
4,760

58,552
1,126.00
28.15
4,879

60,008 61,506
1,154.00 1,182.80
28.85
29.57
5,001
5,125

ANNUAL 39,437
WEEKLY 758.40
18.96
HRLY
MTHLY
3,286

40,414
777.20
19.43
3,368

41,434
796.80
19.92
3,453

42,474
816.80
20.42
3,539

43,534
837.20
20.93
3,628

44,616
858.00
21.45
3,718

45,739
879.60
21.99
3,812

46,883
901.60
22.54
3,907

48,048
924.00
23.10
4,004

49,254
947.20
23.68
4,105

50,482
970.80
24.27
4,207

51,750
995.20
24.88
4,313

53,040
1,020.00
25.50
4,420

54,371
1,045.60
26.14
4,531

55,723
1,071.60
26.79
4,644

57,117
1,098.40
27.46
4,760

58,552
1,126.00
28.15
4,879

60,008
1,154.00
28.85
5,001

61,506
1,182.80
29.57
5,125

63,045 64,626
1,212.40 1,242.80
30.31
31.07
5,254
5,385

RANGE: 07 		Position Titles: Cemetery Specialist, Codes Enforcement Officer, Health & Wellness Coordinator, Office Manager, Permit & Zoning Tech, Personnel Specialist, Senior Revenue Officer

ANNUAL 37,544
WEEKLY 722.00
18.05
HRLY
MTHLY
3,129

RANGE: 06 Position

Titles: Lead Automotive Mechanic

ANNUAL 35,734
WEEKLY 687.20
17.18
HRLY
MTHLY
2,978

RANGE: 05 		Position Titles: Accounts Payable Officer, Administrative Asst, Automotive Mechanic, Court Clerk, Revenue Officer, Supply Clerk

ANNUAL 34,008
WEEKLY 654.00
16.35
HRLY
MTHLY
2,834

50,482
970.80
24.27
4,207

48,048
924.00
23.10
4,004

U

51,750 53,040
995.20 1,020.00
24.88
25.50
4,313
4,420

RANGE: 04 		Position Titles: Accounting Clerk, Communications Officer, Sanitation Equipment Operator II, Support Services Technician

ANNUAL 32,365
WEEKLY 622.40
15.56
HRLY
MTHLY
2,697

RANGE: 03 		Position Titles: Admin. Services Asst., Asst. Active Living Program Supervisor, Building Maintenance Specialist, Equipment Operator, Parking Attendant, Site Director

ANNUAL 30,805
WEEKLY 592.40
14.81
HRLY
MTHLY
2,567

RANGE: 02 		Position Titles: None

ANNUAL 29,328
WEEKLY 564.00
HRLY
14.10
MTHLY
2,444

RANGE: 01 		Position Titles: Crew Worker, Sanitation Equipment Operator I

STEP:

Effective January 1, 2018

CITY OF DECATUR SALARY RATE TABLE

D-6

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

R

S

T

U

42,474
816.80
20.42
3,539

43,534
837.20
20.93
3,628

44,616
858.00
21.45
3,718

45,739
879.60
21.99
3,812

46,883
901.60
22.54
3,907

48,048
924.00
23.10
4,004

49,254
947.20
23.68
4,105

50,482
970.80
24.27
4,207

51,750
995.20
24.88
4,313

53,040
1,020.00
25.50
4,420

54,371
1,045.60
26.14
4,531

55,723
1,071.60
26.79
4,644

57,117
1,098.40
27.46
4,760

58,552
1,126.00
28.15
4,879

60,008
1,154.00
28.85
5,001

61,506
1,182.80
29.57
5,125

63,045
1,212.40
30.31
5,254

64,626
1,242.80
31.07
5,385

66,248 67,912
1,274.00 1,306.00
31.85
32.65
5,521
5,659

44,616
858.00
21.45
3,718

45,739
879.60
21.99
3,812

46,883
901.60
22.54
3,907

48,048
924.00
23.10
4,004

49,254
947.20
23.68
4,105

50,482
970.80
24.27
4,207

51,750
995.20
24.88
4,313

53,040
1,020.00
25.50
4,420

54,371
1,045.60
26.14
4,531

55,723
1,071.60
26.79
4,644

57,117
1,098.40
27.46
4,760

58,552
1,126.00
28.15
4,879

46,883
901.60
22.54
3,907

48,048
924.00
23.10
4,004

49,254
947.20
23.68
4,105

50,482
970.80
24.27
4,207

51,750
995.20
24.88
4,313

53,040
1,020.00
25.50
4,420

54,371
1,045.60
26.14
4,531

55,723
1,071.60
26.79
4,644

57,117
1,098.40
27.46
4,760

58,552
1,126.00
28.15
4,879

60,008
1,154.00
28.85
5,001

61,506
1,182.80
29.57
5,125

63,045
1,212.40
30.31
5,254

60,008
1,154.00
28.85
5,001

64,626
1,242.80
31.07
5,385

61,506
1,182.80
29.57
5,125

66,248
1,274.00
31.85
5,521

63,045
1,212.40
30.31
5,254

67,912
1,306.00
32.65
5,659

64,626
1,242.80
31.07
5,385

69,618
1,338.80
33.47
5,801

66,248
1,274.00
31.85
5,521

71,365
1,372.40
34.31
5,947

67,912
1,306.00
32.65
5,659

73,154 74,984
1,406.80 1,442.00
35.17
36.05
6,096
6,249

69,618 71,365
1,338.80 1,372.40
33.47
34.31
5,801
5,947

49,254
947.20
23.68
4,105

50,482
970.80
24.27
4,207

51,750
995.20
24.88
4,313

53,040
1,020.00
25.50
4,420

54,371
1,045.60
26.14
4,531

55,723
1,071.60
26.79
4,644

57,117
1,098.40
27.46
4,760

58,552
1,126.00
28.15
4,879

60,008
1,154.00
28.85
5,001

61,506
1,182.80
29.57
5,125

63,045
1,212.40
30.31
5,254

64,626
1,242.80
31.07
5,385

66,248
1,274.00
31.85
5,521

67,912
1,306.00
32.65
5,659

69,618
1,338.80
33.47
5,801

71,365
1,372.40
34.31
5,947

73,154
1,406.80
35.17
6,096

74,984
1,442.00
36.05
6,249

51,750
995.20
24.88
4,313

53,040
1,020.00
25.50
4,420

54,371
1,045.60
26.14
4,531

55,723
1,071.60
26.79
4,644

57,117
1,098.40
27.46
4,760

58,552
1,126.00
28.15
4,879

60,008
1,154.00
28.85
5,001

61,506
1,182.80
29.57
5,125

63,045
1,212.40
30.31
5,254

64,626
1,242.80
31.07
5,385

66,248
1,274.00
31.85
5,521

67,912
1,306.00
32.65
5,659

69,618
1,338.80
33.47
5,801

71,365
1,372.40
34.31
5,947

73,154
1,406.80
35.17
6,096

74,984
1,442.00
36.05
6,249

76,856
1,478.00
36.95
6,405

78,770
1,514.80
37.87
6,564

80,746 82,763
1,552.80 1,591.60
38.82
39.79
6,729
6,897

76,856 78,770
1,478.00 1,514.80
36.95
37.87
6,405
6,564

54,371
1,045.60
26.14
4,531

55,723
1,071.60
26.79
4,644

57,117
1,098.40
27.46
4,760

58,552
1,126.00
28.15
4,879

60,008
1,154.00
28.85
5,001

61,506
1,182.80
29.57
5,125

63,045
1,212.40
30.31
5,254

64,626
1,242.80
31.07
5,385

66,248
1,274.00
31.85
5,521

67,912
1,306.00
32.65
5,659

69,618
1,338.80
33.47
5,801

71,365
1,372.40
34.31
5,947

73,154
1,406.80
35.17
6,096

74,984
1,442.00
36.05
6,249

76,856
1,478.00
36.95
6,405

78,770
1,514.80
37.87
6,564

80,746
1,552.80
38.82
6,729

82,763
1,591.60
39.79
6,897

84,822 86,944
1,631.20 1,672.00
40.78
41.80
7,069
7,245

57,117
1,098.40
27.46
4,760

58,552
1,126.00
28.15
4,879

60,008
1,154.00
28.85
5,001

61,506
1,182.80
29.57
5,125

63,045
1,212.40
30.31
5,254

64,626
1,242.80
31.07
5,385

66,248
1,274.00
31.85
5,521

67,912
1,306.00
32.65
5,659

69,618
1,338.80
33.47
5,801

71,365
1,372.40
34.31
5,947

73,154
1,406.80
35.17
6,096

74,984
1,442.00
36.05
6,249

76,856
1,478.00
36.95
6,405

78,770
1,514.80
37.87
6,564

80,746
1,552.80
38.82
6,729

82,763
1,591.60
39.79
6,897

84,822
1,631.20
40.78
7,069

86,944
1,672.00
41.80
7,245

89,128 91,354
1,714.00 1,756.80
42.85
43.92
7,427
7,613

ANNUAL 58,552
WEEKLY 1,126.00
HRLY
28.15
MTHLY
4,879

60,008
1,154.00
28.85
5,001

61,506
1,182.80
29.57
5,125

63,045
1,212.40
30.31
5,254

64,626
1,242.80
31.07
5,385

66,248
1,274.00
31.85
5,521

67,912
1,306.00
32.65
5,659

69,618
1,338.80
33.47
5,801

71,365
1,372.40
34.31
5,947

73,154
1,406.80
35.17
6,096

74,984
1,442.00
36.05
6,249

76,856
1,478.00
36.95
6,405

78,770
1,514.80
37.87
6,564

80,746
1,552.80
38.82
6,729

82,763
1,591.60
39.79
6,897

84,822
1,631.20
40.78
7,069

86,944
1,672.00
41.80
7,245

89,128
1,714.00
42.85
7,427

91,354
1,756.80
43.92
7,613

93,642 95,992
1,800.80 1,846.00
45.02
46.15
7,803
7,999

RANGE: 15		Position Titles: Asst Active Living Dir, Asst Children & Youth Services Dir, Budget & Performance Measurement Dir

ANNUAL 55,723
WEEKLY 1,071.60
HRLY
26.79
MTHLY
4,644

RANGE: 14		Position Titles: Community Education & Information Mgr., Downtown Development Mgr., Project Civil Engineer, Project Mgr.

ANNUAL 53,040
WEEKLY 1,020.00
HRLY
25.50
MTHLY
4,420

RANGE: 13
Position Titles: Police Lieutenant

ANNUAL 50,482
WEEKLY 970.80
HRLY
24.27
MTHLY
4,207

RANGE: 12		Position Titles: Lifelong Community Program Manager, Parking Manager, Police Sergeant

ANNUAL 48,048
WEEKLY 924.00
HRLY
23.10
MTHLY
4,004

RANGE: 11
Position Titles: None

ANNUAL 45,739
WEEKLY 879.60
HRLY
21.99
MTHLY
3,812

RANGE: 10		Position Titles: Arborist, Building Inspector, Communications Specialist, Engineering Inspector, Information Coordinator,
Master Police Officer, Operations Analyst, Planner, Police Investigator, Special Events Coordinator

ANNUAL 43,534
WEEKLY 837.20
20.93
HRLY
MTHLY
3,628

RANGE: 09		Position Titles: Active Living Program Supervisor, Chief Court Clerk, Children & Youth Services Program Supervisor, Crew Supervisor, Facilities Security Coordinator, Police Officer

ANNUAL 41,434
WEEKLY 796.80
HRLY
19.92
MTHLY
3,453

RANGE: 08
Position Titles: None

STEP:

CITY OF DECATUR

D-7

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

R

S

T

63,045
1,212.40
30.31
5,254

64,626
1,242.80
31.07
5,385

66,248
1,274.00
31.85
5,521

67,912
1,306.00
32.65
5,659

69,618
1,338.80
33.47
5,801

71,365
1,372.40
34.31
5,947

73,154
1,406.80
35.17
6,096

74,984
1,442.00
36.05
6,249

76,856
1,478.00
36.95
6,405

78,770
1,514.80
37.87
6,564

80,746
1,552.80
38.82
6,729

82,763
1,591.60
39.79
6,897

84,822
1,631.20
40.78
7,069

86,944
1,672.00
41.80
7,245

89,128
1,714.00
42.85
7,427

91,354
1,756.80
43.92
7,613

93,642
1,800.80
45.02
7,803

95,992
1,846.00
46.15
7,999

66,248
1,274.00
31.85
5,521

67,912
1,306.00
32.65
5,659

69,618
1,338.80
33.47
5,801

71,365
1,372.40
34.31
5,947

73,154
1,406.80
35.17
6,096

74,984
1,442.00
36.05
6,249

76,856
1,478.00
36.95
6,405

78,770
1,514.80
37.87
6,564

80,746
1,552.80
38.82
6,729

82,763
1,591.60
39.79
6,897

84,822
1,631.20
40.78
7,069

86,944
1,672.00
41.80
7,245

89,128
1,714.00
42.85
7,427

91,354
1,756.80
43.92
7,613

93,642
1,800.80
45.02
7,803

95,992
1,846.00
46.15
7,999

98,384
1,892.00
47.30
8,199

100,838
1,939.20
48.48
8,403

103,355 105,934
1,987.60 2,037.20
49.69
50.93
8,613
8,828

69,618
1,338.80
33.47
5,801

71,365
1,372.40
34.31
5,947

73,154
1,406.80
35.17
6,096

74,984
1,442.00
36.05
6,249

76,856
1,478.00
36.95
6,405

78,770
1,514.80
37.87
6,564

80,746
1,552.80
38.82
6,729

82,763
1,591.60
39.79
6,897

84,822
1,631.20
40.78
7,069

86,944
1,672.00
41.80
7,245

89,128
1,714.00
42.85
7,427

91,354
1,756.80
43.92
7,613

93,642
1,800.80
45.02
7,803

95,992
1,846.00
46.15
7,999

98,384
1,892.00
47.30
8,199

100,838
1,939.20
48.48
8,403

103,355
1,987.60
49.69
8,613

105,934
2,037.20
50.93
8,828

108,576 111,301
2,088.00 2,140.40
52.20
53.51
9,048
9,275

73,154
1,406.80
35.17
6,096

74,984
1,442.00
36.05
6,249

76,856
1,478.00
36.95
6,405

78,770
1,514.80
37.87
6,564

80,746
1,552.80
38.82
6,729

82,763
1,591.60
39.79
6,897

84,822
1,631.20
40.78
7,069

86,944
1,672.00
41.80
7,245

89,128
1,714.00
42.85
7,427

91,354
1,756.80
43.92
7,613

93,642
1,800.80
45.02
7,803

95,992
1,846.00
46.15
7,999

98,384
1,892.00
47.30
8,199

100,838
1,939.20
48.48
8,403

103,355
1,987.60
49.69
8,613

105,934
2,037.20
50.93
8,828

108,576
2,088.00
52.20
9,048

111,301
2,140.40
53.51
9,275

114,088 116,938
2,194.00 2,248.80
54.85
56.22
9,507
9,745

76,856
1,478.00
36.95
6,405

78,770
1,514.80
37.87
6,564

80,746
1,552.80
38.82
6,729

82,763
1,591.60
39.79
6,897

84,822
1,631.20
40.78
7,069

86,944
1,672.00
41.8
7,245

89,128
1,714.00
42.85
7,427

91,354
1,756.80
43.92
7,613

93,642
1,800.80
45.02
7,803

95,992
1,846.00
46.15
7,999

98,384
1,892.00
47.3
8,199

100,838
1,939.20
48.48
8,403

103,355
1,987.60
49.69
8,613

105,934
2,037.20
50.93
8,828

108,576
2,088.00
52.2
9,048

111,301
2,140.40
53.51
9,275

114,088
2,194.00
54.85
9,507

116,938
2,248.80
56.22
9,745

119,870 122,866
2,305.20 2,362.80
57.63
59.07
9,989 10,239

80,746
1,552.80
38.82
6,729

82,763
1,591.60
39.79
6,897

84,822
1,631.20
40.78
7,069

86,944
1,672.00
41.8
7,245

89,128
1,714.00
42.85
7,427

91,354
1,756.80
43.92
7,613

93,642
1,800.80
45.02
7,803

95,992
1,846.00
46.15
7,999

98,384
1,892.00
47.3
8,199

100,838
1,939.20
48.48
8,403

103,355
1,987.60
49.69
8,613

105,934
2,037.20
50.93
8,828

108,576
2,088.00
52.2
9,048

111,301
2,140.40
53.51
9,275

114,088
2,194.00
54.85
9,507

116,938
2,248.80
56.22
9,745

119,870
2,305.20
57.63
9,989

122,866
2,362.80
59.07
10,239

125,944 129,085
2,422.00 2,482.40
60.55
62.06
10,495 10,757

84,822
1,631.20
40.78
7,069

86,944
1,672.00
41.8
7,245

89,128
1,714.00
42.85
7,427

91,354
1,756.80
43.92
7,613

93,642
1,800.80
45.02
7,803

95,992
1,846.00
46.15
7,999

98,384
1,892.00
47.3
8,199

100,838
1,939.20
48.48
8,403

103,355
1,987.60
49.69
8,613

105,934
2,037.20
50.93
8,828

108,576
2,088.00
52.2
9,048

111,301
2,140.40
53.51
9,275

114,088
2,194.00
54.85
9,507

116,938
2,248.80
56.22
9,745

119,870
2,305.20
57.63
9,989

122,866
2,362.80
59.07
10,239

125,944
2,422.00
60.55
10,495

129,085
2,482.40
62.06
10,757

132,309 135,616
2,544.40 2,608.00
63.61
65.20
11,026 11,301

ANNUAL 86,944
WEEKLY 1,672.00
HRLY
41.8
7,245
MTHLY

89,128
1,714.00
42.85
7,427

91,354
1,756.80
43.92
7,613

93,642
1,800.80
45.02
7,803

95,992
1,846.00
46.15
7,999

98,384
1,892.00
47.3
8,199

100,838
1,939.20
48.48
8,403

103,355
1,987.60
49.69
8,613

105,934
2,037.20
50.93
8,828

108,576
2,088.00
52.2
9,048

111,301
2,140.40
53.51
9,275

114,088
2,194.00
54.85
9,507

116,938
2,248.80
56.22
9,745

119,870
2,305.20
57.63
9,989

122,866
2,362.80
59.07
10,239

125,944
2,422.00
60.55
10,495

129,085
2,482.40
62.06
10,757

132,309
2,544.40
63.61
11,026

135,616
2,608.00
65.20
11,301

139,006 142,480
2,673.20 2,740.00
66.83
68.50
11,584 11,873

RANGE 23
Position Titles: Assistant City Manager

ANNUAL 82,763
WEEKLY 1,591.60
HRLY
39.79
MTHLY
6,897

RANGE 22
Position Titles: None

ANNUAL 78,770
WEEKLY 1,514.80
HRLY
37.87
MTHLY
6,564

RANGE 21		Position Titles: Chief-Civic Engagement, Education & Communication, Fire Chief, Police Chief

ANNUAL 74,984
WEEKLY 1,442.00
36.05
HRLY
MTHLY
6,249

RANGE 20
Position Titles: None

ANNUAL 71,365
WEEKLY 1,372.40
HRLY
34.31
MTHLY
5,947

RANGE 19
Position Titles: None

ANNUAL 67,912
WEEKLY 1,306.00
HRLY
32.65
5,659
MTHLY

RANGE 18 		Position Titles: Active Living Director, Children & Youth Services Director, Deputy Fire Chief, Deputy Police Chief, Design, Environment & Construction Director, Planning Director

ANNUAL 64,626
WEEKLY 1,242.80
HRLY
31.07
MTHLY
5,385

U

98,384 100,838
1,892.00 1,939.20
47.30
48.48
8,199
8,403

RANGE 17		Position Titles: Assistant Fire Chief, Building Official, Senior Engineer

ANNUAL 61,506
WEEKLY 1,182.80
HRLY
29.57
5,125
MTHLY

RANGE: 16		Position Titles: City Clerk, Facilities Superintendent, Personnel Director, Police Captain, Revenue & Technology Dir, Sanitation Services Superintendent

STEP:

AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL
CITY OF DECATUR 2017-2018 ADOPTED BUDGET



FY 15-16
Full-time
Part-time

FY 16-17
Full-time Part-time

FY 17-18
Full-time

Part-time

Governmental Control
City Manager

1

1			 1

Deputy City Manager

1

1			 1

Assistant City Manager

1

1			 1

Budget & Performance Measurement Director

1

1			 1

Facilities Security Coordinator

1

1			 1

Personnel Director

1

1			 1

Personnel Specialist

1

1			 1

Payroll & Benefits Coordinator

1

1			 -

Health & Wellness Coordinator

-

-			 1

Office Manager

1

1			 1

Administrative Services Assistant

1

1			 1

City Attorney

1

1

1

Graduate Intern

1

1

1

Payroll Clerk

1



10

2

10

2		 10

3


Administrative Services
City Clerk

1

1			 1

Accounts Payable Officer

1

1			 1

Accounting Clerk

1

1			 1

Revenue & Technology Director

1

1			 1

Revenue Supervisor

1

1			 -

Senior Revenue Officer

-

-			 1

Revenue Officer

2

2			 2

Chief Court Clerk

1

1			 1

Court Clerk

2

2			 2

Records Specialist

1

1

1

Customer Service Clerk

2

2

2

Intern

0

1

1

Chief Judge

1

1

1

Judge

4

4

4

Marshall

1

1

1

Bailiff

1

1

1

Solicitor

1

1

1

Public Defender


10

1

1

1

12

13		 10

13

10


D-8 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018


FY 15-16
FY 16-17
FY 17-18

Full-time
Part-time
Full-time Part-time
Full-time
Fire & Rescue
Fire Chief

1

1

1

Deputy Fire Chief

1

1

1

Assistant Fire Chief

-

-

1

Station Captain

4

4

3

Fire Lieutenant

3

3

3

Fire Sergeant

3

3

3

Fire Inspector

3

3

3

Firefighter-Driver

12

12

12

Firefighter

12

12

12



39

39

39

Part-time


Community & Economic Development
Assistant City Manager

1

1

1

Chief, Division of Civic Engagement, Education & Communication

1

1

1

Economic Development Coordinator

1

1

1

Planning Director

1

1

1

Planner

1

1

1

Lifelong Community Program Coordinator

1

1

1

Special Events Coordinator

1

1

1

Communications Specialist

1

1

1

Information Coordinator

1

1

1

Office Manager

1

1

-

Operations Analyst

-

-

1

Administrative Services Assistant

-

-

1

Parking Manager

1

1

1

Parking Attendant

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

Special Events Coordinator


12

1

12

1

13


Active Living
Active Living Director

1

1

1

Assistant Active Living Director

1

1

1

Program Supervisor

5

5

5

Program Assistant

1

1

2

Administrative Assistant

1

2

2

Aquatics Director

1

1

1

Program Leader

12

12

13

Specialized Instructor

32

32

32

Receptionist

3

3

3

Front Desk Attendant

10

10

10

58

58

59



9

10

11


CITY OF DECATUR

D-9

						FY 15-16			 FY 16-17

Full-time
Part-time
Full-time Part-time
Full-time

FY 17-18
Part-time

Children & Youth Services
Children & Youth Services Director

1

1

1

Assistant CY&S Director

1

1

1

Program Supervisor

1

1

1

8

1

9

9

1

1

1

Site Director
Administrative Assistant

Academic Building Coordinator

7

7

7

Academic Tutor

18

18

18

After-School Counselor

44

51

51

Lead Counselor

5

5

5

Summer Camp Counselor

15

14

14

Instructor

34

34

34

Family Liaison

1

1

1

Junior Counselor

3

3

3

Technology Specialist

1

1

1

Technology Instructor

8

8

8

Technology Support Staff


12

1

1

1

138

143

143

13

13


Public Works
Assistant City Manager

1

1

1

Sanitation Services Superintendent

1

1

1

Facilities Maintenance Superintendent

1

1

1

Project Manager

1

1

1

Crew Supervisor

4

4

5

Crew Worker

15

14

15

Equipment Operator

4

4

4

Building Specialist

2

3

3

Lead Automotive Mechanic

1

1

1

Automotive Mechanic

2

2

2

Administrative Assistant

1

1

-

Office Manager

-

-

1

Sanitation Equipment Operator II

5

5

5

Sanitation Equipment Operator I

7

7

7

Supply Clerk

1

1

1

Cemetery Specialist

1

1

1

Facility Monitor

2

2

2

Crew Worker

7

7

7

Seasonal Laborer


D-10 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

47

4

4

4

13

13

13

47

49




FY 15-16
Full-time
Part-time

FY 16-17
Full-time Part-time

FY 17-18
Full-time

Part-time

Design, Environment & Construction
DE&C Director

1

1

1

Senior Engineer

1

1

1

Project Civil Engineer

1

1

1

Engineering Inspector

1

1

1

Building Official

1

1

1

Building Inspector

1

1

1

Arborist

1

1

1

Planning & Zoning Technician

1

1

1

Crew Supervisor

2

2

2

Crew Worker

5

5

5

Equipment Operator

3

3

3

Codes Enforcement Officer

1

1

1

Administrative Assistant

1

1

1

Seasonal Laborer


20

2

2

2

2

2

2

20

20


Police
Police Chief

1

1

1

Deputy Police Chief

1

1

1

Police Captain

3

3

3

Police Lieutenant

4

4

4

Police Sergeant

7

7

7

Police Investigator

4

4

4

Community Education & Information Manager

1

1

1

Police Officer, MPO

26

26

26

Communications Officer

11

11

11

Support Services Technician

1

1

1

Administrative Assistant

1

1

1

Animal Control Officer

1

1

1

Administrative Investigator/Permit Clerk

1

1

1

Fingerprint Examiner

1

1

1

School Crossing Guard

30

30

32

33

33

60

35

225

270



60

60


TOTAL				219

260

221

266

CITY OF DECATUR

D-11

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts

Appendix E
Salary
Survey
Budget FY 2017-2018

Crew Worker
City
Min
Marietta
$28,538
Cartersville
$34,668
Decatur Proposed
$29,328
Duluth
$29,285
Woodstock
$29,807
Decatur Current
$26,560
Fayetteville
$26,210
Canton
$28,084
Snellville
$22,868
Smyrna
$27,186
Newnan
$26,096
Chamblee
$27,380
Douglasville
$24,553
Kennesaw
$24,814
Doraville
$24,960
McDonough
$22,237
Union City
$23,783
Acworth
$22,714
Median Salary
$26,210
Avg Market Salary $26,455

Accounts Payable Officer
Max
$58,024
$52,752
$48,048
$45,377
$45,366
$43,534
$43,367
$42,126
$41,579
$40,789
$40,459
$38,863
$38,065
$37,211
$36,026
$35,724
$35,675
$35,402
$40,789
$41,785

Building Maintenance Specialist
City
Min
Newnan
$34,923
Woodstock
$42,110
Canton
$41,691
Decatur Proposed
$32,365
Duluth
$32,289
Decatur Current
$29,328
Cartersville
$31,407
Chamblee
$31,795
Union City
$30,026
East Point
$26,436
Median Salary
$31,795
Avg Market Salary $33,334

Max
$68,358
$64,093
$62,537
$53,040
$52,562
$48,048
$47,790
$45,785
$45,039
$41,231
$48,048
$52,827

City
Min
Snellville
$41,068
Woodstock
$42,110
Decatur Proposed
$35,734
Chamblee
$39,807
Brookhaven
$34,974
Duluth
$35,630
Canton
$35,950
Union City
$35,761
Decatur Current
$32,365
Cartersville
$34,668
Acworth
$35,318
East Point
$30,603
McDonough
$28,381
Median Salary
$35,474
Avg Market Salary $35,553

Max
$74,669
$64,093
$58,552
$57,321
$55,958
$55,188
$53,925
$53,642
$53,040
$52,752
$52,437
$47,731
$45,594
$53,784
$55,529

Appendix E
Salary Survey

Accounting Clerk
City
Min
Duluth
$47,709
Suwanee
$42,890
Woodstock
$38,154
Brookhaven
$34,974
Decatur Proposed
$34,008
Chamblee
$36,603
John’s Creek
$38,022
Fayetteville
$30,340
Douglasville
$31,351
Acworth
$33,134
Newnan
$31,072
Decatur Current
$29,328
McDonough
$29,800
East Point
$29,145
Marietta
$29,917
Union City
$28,326
Median Salary
$31,351
Avg Market Salary $34,051

Max
$73,969
$66,477
$58,062
$55,958
$55,723
$52,706
$50,918
$50,203
$48,579
$48,360
$48,182
$48,048
$47,874
$45,457
$45,348
$42,490
$48,579
$52,175

CITY OF DECATUR

E-3

Administrative Assistant

Personnel Specialist

City
Min
Dunwoody
$41,300
Decatur Proposed
$35,734
Woodstock
$38,154
Douglasville
$36,270
Milton
$37,393
Brookhaven
$34,974
Duluth
$35,630
Suwanee
$35,194
Decatur Current
$32,365
Cartersville
$34,668
Marietta
$27,159
Kennesaw
$34,611
Smyrna
$34,445
Fayetteville
$30,340
Canton
$32,569
Snellville
$26,473
East Point
$30,603
Doraville
$32,240
Chamblee
$31,795
McDonough
$28,381
Newnan
$23,325
Union City
$28,326
Acworth
$28,870
Median Salary
$32,467
Avg Market Salary $32,504

City
Min
Smyrna
$52,578
Suwanee
$49,733
Brookhaven
$44,671
Marietta
$46,574
Decatur Proposed
$39,437
Cartersville
$42,240
East Point
$39,059
Decatur Current
$35,734
Douglasville
$36,270
Union City
$35,761
McDonough
$32,855
Newnan
$32,938
Median Salary
$39,059
Avg Market Salary $40,765

Max
$62,100
$58,552
$58,062
$58,037
$56,090
$55,958
$55,188
$54,558
$53,040
$52,752
$52,560
$52,000
$51,667
$50,203
$48,854
$48,132
$47,731
$46,571
$45,785
$45,594
$45,466
$42,490
$41,766
$51,834
$51,118

Revenue Officer
City
Min
Brookhaven
$44,671
Decatur Proposed
$35,734
Duluth
$37,415
Suwanee
$35,194
Decatur Current
$32,365
McDonough
$31,290
Median Salary
$35,194
Avg Market Salary $36,187

E-4

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Max
$71,474
$58,552
$57,940
$54,558
$53,040
$50,268
$54,558
$57,456

Max
$78,867
$77,085
$71,474
$70,481
$64,626
$64,273
$60,914
$58,552
$58,037
$53,642
$52,781
$51,067
$60,914
$63,3798

Court Clerk
City
Min
Dunwoody
$52,300
Duluth
$50,104
Kennesaw
$46,068
Chamblee
$43,011
Marietta
$28,538
Decatur Proposed
$35,734
Acworth
$47,476
Brookhaven
$34,974
Suwanee
$35,194
Doraville
$32,240
Decatur Current
$32,365
Fayetteville
$31,857
Snellville
$27,796
Woodstock
$32,910
Canton
$32,569
Smyrna
$30,098
McDonough
$28,381
Newnan
$29,325
Douglasville
$28,434
East Point
$27,758
Union City
$25,210
Median Salary
$32,303
Avg Market Salary $34,830

Max
$78,700
$77,646
$69,102
$61,935
$60,974
$58,552
$57,407
$55,958
$54,558
$54,080
$53,040
$52,714
$50,539
$50,064
$48,854
$47,299
$45,594
$45,466
$44,061
$43,293
$37,816
$52,877
$54,455

Chief Court Clerk
City
Min
Milton
$66,690
Suwanee
$52,250
Brookhaven
$48,468
Decatur Proposed
$43,534
Cartersville
$46,425
Canton
$46,019
Decatur Current
$34,437
Snellville
$32,178
Union City
$35,761
McDonough
$32,855
Chamblee
$36,603
Woodstock
$34,571
Duluth
$33,928
Median Salary
$36,182
Avg Market Salary $41,682

Firefighter I &II – MIN
Max
$100,035
$80,995
$72,549
$71,365
$70,795
$69,029
$64,626
$58,505
$53,642
$52,781
$52,706
$52,599
$52,562
$61,566
$65,069

Max
$69,517
$54,265
$64,626
$70,481
$55,422
$54,143
$58,191
$58,552
$50,606
$58,117
$50,117
$44,678
$55,422
$56,735

Firefighter I &II – MAX

Communications Officer
City
Min
Canton
$58,909
Duluth
$35,630
Decatur Proposed
$34,008
Suwanee
$35,194
Snellville
$30,000
Newnan
$32,938
Decatur Current
$30,805
Chamblee
$34,999
Smyrna
$32,989
Kennesaw
$32,989
Doraville
$32,240
East Point
$29,145
Median Salary
$32,989
Avg Market Salary $35,076

City
Min
Woodstock
$43,476
Milton
$40,702
Decatur Proposed
$37,544
Marietta
$36,483
Cartersville
$36,423
Newnan
$34,923
McDonough
$34,498
Decatur Current
$34,008
Union City
$33,737
Fayetteville
$33,450
East Point
$32,134
Smyrna
$28,746
Median Salary
$34,498
Avg Market Salary $35,325

Appendix E
Salary Survey

Max
$88,363
$57,940
$55,723
$54,558
$52,000
$51,067
$50,482
$50,399
$49,483
$49,483
$46,571
$45,457
$50,482
$54,164

City
Min
Marietta
$36,483
Woodstock
$43,476
Decatur Proposed
$37,544
Decatur Current
$34,008
McDonough
$34,498
Fayetteville
$33,450
Cartersville
$36,423
Milton
$40,702
Newnan
$34,923
Union City
$33,737
East Point
$32,134
Smyrna
$28,746
Median Salary
$34,498
Avg Market Salary $35,325

Max
$70,481
$69,517
$64,626
$58,552
$58,191
$58,117
$55,422
$54,265
$54,143
$50,606
$50,117
$44,678
$55,422
$56,735

CITY OF DECATUR

E-5

Fire Inspector
City
Min
Brookhaven
$56,164
Milton
$61,541
Decatur Proposed
$45,739
East Point
$44,328
Union City
$47,857
Cartersville
$46,625
Decatur Current
$39,437
McDonough
$38,034
Median Salary
$46,625
Avg Market Salary $47,712

Police Officer – MIN
Max
$89,862
$78,141
$74,984
$70,521
$71,785
$70,945
$64,626
$61,101
$70,945
$72,426

Fire Sergeant
City
Min
Decatur Proposed
$50,482
Decatur Current
$45,739
Woodstock
$45,706
Newnan
$44,105
Union City
$45,148
McDonough
$38,034
Cartersville
$31,407
Median Salary
$44,627
Avg Market Salary $41,690

Max
$82,763
$74,984
$69,517
$68,358
$67,722
$61,101
$47,790
$68,040
$64,912

Fire Chief
City
Min
Cartersville
$93,086
Marietta
$91,354
Decatur Proposed
$78,770
Smyrna
$85,950
Fayetteville
$73,016
Union City
$80,343
Newnan
$74,496
East Point
$73,651
Woodstock
$75,435
Decatur Current
$67,912
McDonough
$71,718
Median Salary
$74,965
Avg Market Salary $78,696

E-6

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Max
$141,642
$141,634
$129,085
$124,522
$120,822
$120,514
$115,479
$114,869
$114,769
$111,301
$109,728
$117,997
$121,528

City
Min
Decatur Proposed
$43,534
Milton
$41,490
Dunwoody
$41,300
Duluth
$41,239
Brookhaven
$41,171
Chamblee
$39,807
Kennesaw
$39,520
Decatur Current
$39,437
Suwanee
$38,854
Douglasville
$38,445
McDonough
$38,034
Doraville
$37,440
Smyrna
$37,336
East Point
$37,199
Marietta
$36,483
Cartersville
$36,423
Canton
$35,950
Woodstock
$35,813
Union City
$35,761
Snellville
$35,000
Newnan
$34,923
Acworth
$33,488
Fayetteville
$33,450
Median Salary
$37,388
Avg Market Salary $37,662

Max
$74,984
$61,714
$62,100
$63,864
$65,874
$57,321
$59,280
$64,626
$60,216
$61,250
$61,101
$51,813
$60,362
$58,016
$60,974
$55,422
$53,925
$54,493
$53,642
$59,968
$54,143
$56,597
$64,075
$60,092
$59,126

Police Officer – MAX
City
Min
Decatur Proposed
$43,534
Brookhaven
$41,171
Decatur Current
$39,437
Fayetteville
$33,450
Duluth
$41,239
Dunwoody
$41,300
Milton
$41,490
Douglasville
$38,445
McDonough
$38,034
Marietta
$36,483
Smyrna
$37,336
Suwanee
$38,854
Snellville
$35,000
Kennesaw
$39,520
East Point
$37,199
Chamblee
$39,807
Acworth
$33,488
Cartersville
$36,423
Woodstock
$35,813
Newnan
$34,923
Canton
$35,950
Union City
$35,761
Doraville
$37,440
Median Salary
$37,388
Avg Market Salary $37,662

Max
$74,984
$65,874
$64,626
$64,075
$63,864
$62,100
$61,714
$61,250
$61,101
$60,974
$60,362
$60,216
$59,968
$59,280
$58,016
$57,321
$56,597
$55,422
$54,493
$54,143
$53,925
$53,642
$51,813
$60,092
$59,126

Police Sergeant
City
Min
Brookhaven
$52,588
Decatur Proposed
$50,482
Duluth
$50,104
Decatur Current
$45,739
Suwanee
$47,341
Douglasville
$45,792
Kennesaw
$47,694
Milton
$56,049
Woodstock
$46,748
Snellville
$40,000
McDonough
$44,029
Marietta
$46,574
Canton
$46,019
Acworth
$45,365
Newnan
$41,588
Union City
$45,148
Cartersville
$44,378
Smyrna
$44,595
Chamblee
$46,215
East Point
$41,011
Doraville
$43,680
Median Salary
$45,766
Avg Market Salary $46,033

Max
$84,141
$82,763
$77,646
$74,984
$73,362
$73,259
$71,552
$71,167
$71,132
$71,113
$70,732
$70,481
$69,029
$68,744
$68,358
$67,722
$67,526
$66,893
$66,550
$63,964
$61,152
$70,606
$70,475

Appendix E
Salary Survey

CITY OF DECATUR

E-7

Police Chief
City
Brookhaven
Suwanee
Duluth
Dunwooody
Cartersville
Marietta
Decatur Proposed
Union City
Kennesaw
Douglasville
Smyrna
Canton
Newnan
East Point
Woodstock
Decatur Current
Chamblee
McDonough
Fayetteville
Doraville
Median Salary
Avg Market Salary

Communications Specialist
Min
$96,866
$94,494
$94,515
$96,100
$93,086
$91,354
$778,770
$85,163
$84,500
$75,898
$85,950
$79,226
$74,496
$73,651
$75,435
$67,912
$76,658
$71,718
$66,228
$79,560
$79,560
$82,253

Max
$154,986
$146,474
$146,405
$144,600
$141,642
$141,634
$129,085
$127,745
$126,750
$125,236
$124,522
$118,839
$115,479
$114,869
$114,769
$111,301
$110,387
$109,728
$109,589
$97,802
$124,522
$125,408

Engineering Inspector
City
Min
Woodstock
$56,073
Cartersville
$51,465
Decatur Proposed
$45,739
Newnan
$44,105
Decatur Current
$41,434
Canton
$35,950
Median Salary
$44,105
Avg Market Salary $45,805

E-8

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Max
$85,334
$78,310
$74,984
$68,358
$67,912
$53,925
$68,358
$70,768

City
Min
Suwanee
$52,250
Newnan
$49,556
Decatur Proposed
$45,739
Canton
$48,349
Douglasville
$43,195
Decatur Current
$41,434
Snellville
$35,476
Chamblee
$44,612
Union City
$42,593
McDonough
$36,222
Duluth
$37,415
Median Salary
$42,894
Avg Market Salary $43,110

Max
$80,995
$76,802
$74,984
$72,524
$69,121
$67,912
$64,502
$64,241
$63,889
$58,191
$57,940
$66,207
$67,612

Project Civil Engineer
City
Min
Smyrna
$74,342
Newnan
$59,005
Decatur Proposed
$55,723
Marietta
$54,955
Decatur Current
$50,482
East Point
$52,342
McDonough
$46,230
Canton
$48,349
Kennesaw
$69,243
Median Salary
$53,649
Avg Market Salary $56,869

Max
$111,513
$91,462
$91,354
$85,246
$82,763
$81,636
$74,269
$72,524
$69,243
$82,200
$83,582

Budget Manager
City
Min
Union City
$80,343
Duluth
$70,524
Chamblee
$67,044
Decatur Proposed
$58,552
Woodstock
$61,908
Decatur Current
$50,482
East Point
$49,849
Smyrna
$47,500
Marietta
$46,574
McDonough
$41,932
Median Salary
$50,482
Avg Market Salary $57,351

Max
$120,514
$109,242
$96,543
$95,992
$94,206
$82,763
$77,748
$71,249
$70,481
$67,364
$82,763
$87,790

City Clerk
City
Min
Suwanee
$77,563
Duluth
$53,253
Union City
$75,795
Smyrna
$74,342
Brookhaven
$68,418
McDonough
$65,050
East Point
$66,803
Dunwoody
$67,900
Decatur Proposed
$61,506
Milton
$66,690
Chamblee
$67,044
Woodstock
$61,908
Kennesaw
$59,969
Canton
$58,909
Decatur Current
$53,040
Fayetteville
$51,891
Doraville
$53,995
Newnan
$49,556
Cartersville
$46,425
Douglasville
$43,195
Marietta
$61,800
Median Salary
$61,854
Avg Market Salary $61,177

Planning Director
Max
$120,224
$114,691
$113,693
$111,513
$109,468
$104,503
$104,190
$102,100
$100,838
$100,035
$96,543
$94,206
$89,953
$88,363
$86,944
$85,865
$77,917
$76,802
$70,795
$69,121
$61,800
$95,375
$93,936

Active Living Director
City
Min
Union City
$75,795
Decatur Proposed
$67,912
Douglasville
$68,846
Duluth
$67,163
Decatur Current
$61,506
Chamblee
$67,044
Woodstock
$42,110
Acworth
$47,476
Median Salary
$67,044
Avg Market Salary $61,420

Max
$113,693
$111,301
$110,162
$104,074
$100,838
$96,543
$64,093
$63,705
$100,838
$93,301

City
Min
Max
Cartersville
$84,331
$128,321
Marietta
$81,578
$126,530
Smyrna
$80,146
$126,530
Suwanee
$77,563
$120,224
Canton
$79,226
$118,839
Union City
$75,795
$113,693
Decatur Proposed
$67,912
$111,301
Duluth
$70,524
$109,242
Brookhaven
$81,791
$106,329
East Point
$66,803
$104,190
Douglasville
$64,962
$103,934
Newnan
$66,291
$102,770
Decatur Current
$58,552
$95,992
McDonough
$59,003
$94,788
Chamblee
$65,442
$94,236
Woodstock
$47,476
$67,997
Median Salary
$70,524
$106,329
Avg Market Salary $70,632 $1,075,734

Appendix E
Salary Survey

Assistant City Manager
City
Brookhaven
Cartersville
Suwanee
Kennesaw
Decatur Proposed
Dunwoody
Chamblee
Smyrna
Douglasville
Newnan
Decatur Current
East Point
McDonough
Union City
Median Salary
Avg Market Salary

Min
$118,450
$102,750
$94,494
$97,583
$86,944
$92,200
$95,833
$91,754
$80,458
$83,708
$74,984
$77,333
$65,050
$45,148
$91,754
$86,134

Max
$190,550
$156,346
$146,474
$146,374
$142,480
$138,700
$138,000
$137,631
$132,752
$129,757
$122,866
$120,614
$104,503
$67,722
$137,631
$133,253

CITY OF DECATUR

E-9

Appendix F
Demographic
& Statistical
Information
Budget FY 2017-2018

FISCAL YEAR 2017-2018

Demographic
& Statistical
Information

T

Date of
Incorporation:
1823

he City of Decatur government is a commission-manager style of government
with a city manager. The Five City Commissioners are elected in nonpartisan
elections for overlapping four-year terms. Each January, Commissioners elect
two of their fellow members to serve as Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem. The City
Commissioners determine the policies of the City and enact the local laws necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. They provide leadership
in identifying community needs and developing programs to meet community objectives.
They oversee the delivery of services to citizens and are responsible for adoption of an annual budget and the levying of taxes necessary to finance local government operations.

Date First
Charter Adopted:
1909

City Commission meetings are held the first and third Mondays of a month in the City
Commission meeting room of the Decatur City Hall, 509 North McDonough Street. In
addition to the City Commission, various boards and commissions assist in carrying out
established policies.

Form of Government:
Commission-Manager

Date Present
Charter Adopted:
2001
Location:
6 miles east of Atlanta, Ga.

Active Living Advisory Board meets 1st Tuesday of the month, 8 am
Better Together Advisory Board meets 1st Tuesday of the month, 6:30 pm
Decatur Development Authorities meets 2nd Friday of the month, 8 am
Environmental Sustainability Board meets 3rd Friday of the month, 8 am
Lifelong Community Advisory Board meets 4th Monday of the month, 6:30 pm
Historic Preservation Commission meets 3rd Tuesday of the month, 6:30 pm
Planning Commission meets 2nd Tuesday of the month, 7 pm
Zoning Board of Appeals meets 2nd Monday of the month, 7:30 pm

CITY OF DECATUR

F-3

From the 2010 Census and 2011-2015 American Community Survey

Area –
square miles:
4.4

Total Estimated Population:

21,957

Population Composition:

White

73.5%

Black

20.2%

Hispanic

3.2%

Other

3.1%

Under 19

6,477

20 to 24

1,049

25 to 34

2,589

35 to 54

6,105

55 to 64

2,118

65 & over

2,267

Population by Age:

Number of
Registered Voters:
15,821

Median Age:

35.5

Educational Attainment:

Less than 9th grade		 281
High school, no diploma		 322
High school graduate		 1,155
Some college, no degree		 1,419
Associate’s degree		 387
Bachelor’s degree		 4,545
Graduate degree		 4,970

F-4

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Median household income:

$81,970

Mean household income:

$112,720

Per capita income:

$44,572

From the City’s Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
(FY Ended June 30, 2016)
2015 assessed valuation:

$1,720,543,000

Net Bonded Debt per capita:

$4,850

Ratio of Net Bonded Debt to Assessed Value:

6.18%

City Bond Rating:
Major Employers:

Aa2/AA+

1. DeKalb County Government

1,000

2. Emory Healthcare

822

3. City Schools of Decatur

556

4. Agnes Scott College

274

5. US Postal Service

200

6. City of Decatur

200

7. DeKalb Medical – Decatur Hospital

150

8. DeVry University

120

9. Task Force for Global Health

118

10. Columbia Theological Seminary

75

FROM CITY STAFF
Number of Full-Time Employees:

222

Fire Protection
Number of Stations:

2

Number of Engines:

5

Number of Employees:

39

ISO Classification:

II

Police Protection
Number of Stations:

1

Number of Employees:

60

Number of Police Vehicles:

40

Municipal Sanitation Service
Number of Residential Consumers:

7,002

Number of Employees: 15

Number of Commercial Consumers:

210

Number of Vehicles:

12

Active Living
Number of Parks & Playgrounds: 14

Number of Tennis Courts:

9

Acreage in Parks & Playgrounds:

57

Number of Athletic Fields:

7

Number of Swimming Pools:

3

Number of Recreation Buildings: 3

Miles of Streets, Sidewalks
Streets paved:

75

Sidewalks paved:

65

CITY OF DECATUR

F-5

F-6

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Appendix G
2016 Citizen
Survey Results
Budget FY 2017-2018

Decatur, GA

Community Livability Report
2016

2955 Valmont Road Suite 300
Boulder, Colorado 80301
n-r-c.com • 303-444-7863

777 North Capitol Street NE Suite 500
Washington, DC 20002
icma.org • 800-745-8780

Contents
About .............................................................................................. 1
Quality of Life in Decatur .................................................................. 2
Community Characteristics ............................................................... 3
Governance ..................................................................................... 5
Participation .................................................................................... 7
Special Topics.................................................................................. 9
Conclusions ................................................................................... 12

The National Citizen Survey™
© 2001-2016 National Research Center, Inc.
The NCS™ is presented by NRC in collaboration with ICMA.
NRC is a charter member of the AAPOR Transparency Initiative, providing
clear disclosure of our sound and ethical survey research practices.

About
The National Citizen Survey™ (The NCS) report is about the “livability” of Decatur. The phrase “livable
community” is used here to evoke a place that is not simply habitable, but that is desirable. It is not only where
people do live, but where they want to live.
Great communities are partnerships of the
government, private sector, community-based
organizations and residents, all geographically
connected. The NCS captures residents’ opinions
within the three pillars of a community
(Community Characteristics, Governance and
Participation) across eight central facets of
community (Safety, Mobility, Natural
Environment, Built Environment, Economy,
Recreation and Wellness, Education and
Enrichment and Community Engagement).

Residents

Private
sector

The Community Livability Report provides the
opinions of a representative sample of 558
residents of the City of Decatur. The margin of
error around any reported percentage is 4% for the
entire sample. The full description of methods used
to garner these opinions can be found in the
Technical Appendices provided under separate
cover.

Communities
are
partnerships
among...

Government

1

Communitybased
organizations

Quality of Life in Decatur
Almost all residents rated the quality of life in Decatur as excellent or good. This rating was higher than ratings
given in other communities across the nation (see Appendix B of the Technical Appendices provided under
separate cover).
Shown below are the eight facets of community. The color of each community facet summarizes how residents
rated it across the three sections of the survey that represent the pillars of a community – Community
Characteristics, Governance and Participation. When most ratings across the three pillars were higher than the
benchmark, the color for that facet is the darkest shade; when most ratings were lower than the benchmark, the
color is the lightest shade. A mix of ratings (higher and lower than the benchmark) results in a color between the
extremes.
Overall Quality of Life

In addition to a summary of ratings, the image below includes one or
Excellent
49%
more stars to indicate which community facets were the most
important focus areas for the community. Residents identified Safety,
Economy and Built Environment as priorities for the Decatur
community in the coming two years. It is noteworthy that Decatur
Poor
residents gave strong ratings to the facet of Economy as well as to
1%
Education and Enrichment and Community Engagement. Ratings for
Good
Fair
Safety, Mobility, Natural Environment, Built Environment and
46%
4%
Recreation and Wellness were positive and similar to other
communities. This overview of the key aspects of community quality
provides a quick summary of where residents see exceptionally strong performance and where performance offers
the greatest opportunity for improvement. Linking quality to importance offers community members and leaders
a view into the characteristics of the community that matter most and that seem to be working best.
Details that support these findings are contained in the remainder of this Livability Report, starting with the
ratings for Community Characteristics, Governance and Participation and ending with results for Decatur’s
unique questions.

Legend
Higher than national benchmark
Similar to national benchmark
Lower than national benchmark
Most important

Natural
Environment

Mobility

Education
and
Enrichment

Built
Environment

Safety

Recreation
and Wellness

Economy

2

Community
Engagement

The National Citizen Survey™

Community Characteristics
What makes a community livable, attractive and a place where people want to be?
Overall quality of community life represents the natural ambience, services and amenities that make for an
attractive community. How residents rate their overall quality of life is an indicator of the overall health of a
community. In the case of Decatur, 97% rated the City as an excellent or good place to live. Respondents’ ratings
of Decatur as a place to live were higher than ratings in other communities across the nation.
In addition to rating the City as a place to live, respondents rated several aspects of community quality including
Decatur as a place to raise children and to retire, their neighborhood as a place to live, the overall image or
reputation of Decatur and its overall appearance. Nearly all residents gave positive ratings to the overall image of
Decatur, their neighborhood as a place to live and Decatur as a place to raise children, and about 9 in 10 were
pleased with the overall appearance of Decatur; these ratings were all higher than the national benchmark. About
two-thirds of residents favorably rated Decatur as a place to retire and this rating was similar to the benchmark.
Delving deeper into Community Characteristics, survey respondents rated over 40 features of the community
within the eight facets of Community Livability. Broadly, ratings across all three pillars tended to be strong. Many
aspects received ratings higher than the national benchmark; this included all aspects of Community Engagement
as well as many aspects within Economy, Recreation and Wellness and Education and Enrichment. Ratings were
more varied within the facet of Built Environment: while more than 8 in 10 respondents gave positive ratings to
public places where people want to spend time and about 7 in 10 favorably rated the overall built environment and
new development in Decatur, only about 2 in 10 were pleased with affordable quality housing (a rating lower than
the benchmark). Ratings within the facet of Mobility were also mixed.
Place to Live
About 8 in 10 residents positively rated ease of walking and about 6 in
10 gave favorable ratings to travel by public transportation, both of
Good
which were higher than ratings given elsewhere. However, only about
35%
4 in 10 were pleased with ease of travel by car and about one-quarter
positively rated public parking, ratings which were lower than the
national benchmark.
Excellent
62%

Fair
2%
Poor
1%

Percent rating positively (e.g., excellent/good)

Comparison to national benchmark
Higher

94%

95%

97%

Similar

Lower

89%
66%

Overall image

Neighborhood

Place to raise children
3

Place to retire

Overall appearance

The National Citizen Survey™
Figure 1: Aspects of Community Characteristics
SAFETY
Overall feeling of safety
Safe in neighborhood
Safe downtown/commercial area
MOBILITY
Overall
ease
of travel
Comparison to national
Paths
and
walking
trails
benchmark
Ease of walking
Higher
Travel by bicycle
Travel by public transportation
Similar
Travel by car
Public parking
Lower
Traffic flow
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
Overall natural environment
Cleanliness
Air quality
BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Overall built environment
New development in Decatur
Affordable quality housing
Housing options
Public places
ECONOMY
Overall economic health
Vibrant downtown/commercial area
Business and services
Cost of living
Shopping opportunities
Employment opportunities
Place to visit
Place to work
RECREATION AND WELLNESS
Health and wellness
Mental health care
Preventive health services
Health care
Food
Recreational opportunities
Fitness opportunities
EDUCATION AND ENRICHMENT
Education and enrichment opportunities
Religious or spiritual events and activities
Cultural/arts/music activities
Adult education
K-12 education
Child care/preschool
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
Social events and activities
Neighborliness
Openness and acceptance
Opportunities to participate in community matters
Opportunities to volunteer

Percent rating positively
(e.g., excellent/good,
very/somewhat safe)

88%
97%
97%
74%
63%
83%
53%
59%
44%
25%
35%
80%
86%
75%
71%
67%
23%
45%
84%
85%
90%
83%
27%
68%
47%
88%
83%
87%
66%
76%
74%
80%
80%
78%
88%
90%
85%
74%
93%
60%
90%
83%
79%
85%
90%

4

Governance
How well does the government of Decatur meet the needs and expectations of its residents?
The overall quality of the services provided by Decatur as well as the manner in which these services are provided
are a key component of how residents rate their quality of life. In Decatur, about 9 in 10 residents gave excellent or
good ratings to the overall quality of City services, which was higher than the national benchmark, and about 4 in
10 positively rated services provided by the Federal Government, which was similar to the benchmark.
Survey respondents also rated various aspects of Decatur’s leadership and governance. About 8 in 10 respondents
gave positive ratings to the overall customer service by Decatur employees and the job City government does at
welcoming citizen involvement, and about 7 in 10 favorably rated their overall confidence in City government,
government acting in the best interest of Decatur, being honest and treating all residents fairly. About two-thirds
of survey participants were pleased with the value of services for taxes paid and the overall direction that Decatur
is taking. These aspects received ratings similar to or higher than ratings given in other communities.
Respondents evaluated over 30 individual services and amenities available in Decatur. Aspects of Safety received
positive ratings from at least three-quarters of respondents and police services were rated higher than the
benchmark. Within Natural Environment, at least 8 in 10 residents gave favorable ratings to garbage collection,
recycling and yard waste pick-up, and at least 8 in 10 respondents positively rated all aspects of Recreation and
Wellness, Education and Enrichment and Community Engagement. Additionally, economic development,
recreation programs, recreation centers and special events all received ratings higher than those given in
communities elsewhere.
Overall Quality of City Services
Excellent
34%

Good
55%

Poor
2%
Fair
9%

Percent rating positively (e.g., excellent/good)

Comparison to national benchmark
Higher

66%

79%
63%

Similar

Lower

87%
70%

72%

72%

69%
41%

Value of
services for
taxes paid

Overall
direction

Welcoming Confidence Acting in the Being honest Treating all
citizen
in City
best interest
residents
involvement government of Decatur
fairly

5

Customer
service

Services
provided by
the Federal
Government

The National Citizen Survey™
Figure 2: Aspects of Governance
SAFETY

Percent rating positively
(e.g., excellent/good)

Police

90%

Fire
Crime prevention

Comparison to national
benchmark
Higher

Similar

97%
83%

Fire prevention

Lower

92%

Animal control

74%

Emergency preparedness

79%

MOBILITY
Traffic enforcement

66%

Street repair

42%

Street cleaning

59%

Street lighting

67%

Sidewalk maintenance

42%

Traffic signal timing

40%

Bus or transit services

67%

NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
Garbage collection

87%

Recycling

86%

Yard waste pick-up

85%

Natural areas preservation

55%

Open space

59%

BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Storm drainage

50%

Land use, planning and zoning

49%

Code enforcement

59%

ECONOMY
Economic development

73%

RECREATION AND WELLNESS
City parks

85%

Recreation programs

89%

Recreation centers

88%

EDUCATION AND ENRICHMENT
Public libraries

88%

Special events

89%

COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
Public information

82%

6

Participation
Are the residents of Decatur connected to the community and each other?
An engaged community harnesses its most valuable resource, its residents. The connections and trust among
residents, government, businesses and other organizations help to create a sense of community; a shared sense of
membership, belonging and history. In Decatur, 83% of survey participants described the sense of community in
the City as excellent or good, a rate that was higher than the national benchmark. Also, nearly all residents would
recommend living in Decatur to someone who asked and about 4 in 5 planned to remain in Decatur for the next
five years.
The survey included over 30 activities and behaviors for which respondents indicated how often they participated
in or performed each, if at all. While rates of Participation generally varied across the facets of Community
Livability, all were similar to or higher than the national benchmark. Rates were particularly strong in the facet of
Mobility: about 9 in 10 respondents had walked or biked instead of driving, 7 in 10 had used public transportation
instead of driving and about half had carpooled. All of these rates were higher than those seen in other
communities. Within Recreation and Wellness, about 9 in 10 residents had visited a City park, eaten 5 portions of
fruits and vegetables a day and participated in moderate or vigorous physical activity. While rates of participation
in aspects of Community Engagement tended to vary, the rates at which respondents had campaigned for an issue,
cause or candidate (33%), done a favor for a neighbor (92%) and attended a local public meeting (35%) were
higher than rates of participation in other communities across the nation. Finally, about 8 in 10 respondents had
attended a City-sponsored event, a rate that was also higher than the national
benchmark.
Sense of Community

Excellent
44%

Poor
2%

Good
39%
Fair
15%

Comparison to national
benchmark

Percent rating positively
(e.g., very/somewhat likely,
yes)
Higher

94%

Similar

Lower

87%
52%

Recommend Decatur Remain in Decatur

7

Contacted Decatur
employees

The National Citizen Survey™
Figure 3: Aspects of Participation
Percent rating positively
(e.g., yes, more than
once a month,
always/sometimes)

SAFETY
Stocked supplies for an emergency

37%

Did NOT report a crime

79%

Was NOT the victim of a crime

87%

Comparison to national
MOBILITY
benchmark
Used public transportation instead of driving
Higher
Carpooled instead of driving alone
Similar
Lower

70%
54%

Walked or biked instead of driving

89%

NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
Conserved water

82%

Made home more energy efficient

69%

Recycled at home

93%

BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Did NOT observe a code violation

60%

NOT under housing cost stress

75%

ECONOMY
Purchased goods or services in Decatur

97%

Economy will have positive impact on income

32%

Work in Decatur

35%

RECREATION AND WELLNESS
Used Decatur recreation centers

58%

Visited a City park

90%

Ate 5 portions of fruits and vegetables

94%

Participated in moderate or vigorous physical activity

92%

In very good to excellent health

73%

EDUCATION AND ENRICHMENT
Used Decatur public libraries

74%

Participated in religious or spiritual activities

47%

Attended a City-sponsored event

80%

COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
Campaigned for an issue, cause or candidate
Contacted Decatur elected officials

33%
23%

Volunteered
Participated in a club

47%
24%

Talked to or visited with neighbors

96%

Done a favor for a neighbor

92%

Attended a local public meeting
Watched a local public meeting
Read or watched local news
Voted in local elections

8

35%
23%
81%
86%

Special Topics
The City of Decatur included three questions of special interest on The NCS. The first question asked residents to
indicate their level of support for the continued use of the “Complete Streets” policy in Decatur. Nearly 9 in 10
residents strongly or somewhat supported the continued use of the policy, and only 3% strongly opposed it.
Figure 4: Support for “Complete Streets”

The City of Decatur now has a “Complete Streets” policy that requires all streets to have bicycle and pedestrian
safety features. These involve the use of lower speed limits, narrower vehicle lanes, fewer “right-on- red”
opportunities, more mid-block crosswalks and similar techniques. To what extent do you support or oppose
continued use of this policy?
Somewhat
support
24%
Strongly
support
65%

Somewhat
oppose
8%

Strongly
oppose
3%

9

The National Citizen Survey™
The second special-interest question asked residents how likely or unlikely they would be to attend presentations
by the Decatur police department on a variety of topics. Topic areas on which residents would be most likely to
attend presentations included crime prevention tips (66% very or somewhat likely to attend), fraud prevention
(63%) personal safety for children (53%), traffic safety and enforcement (50%) and child sex abuse awareness and
prevention (49%). Residents indicated that they would be least likely to attend presentations on workplace safety
(37% very or somewhat likely to attend) and firearms safety (40%).
Figure 4: Community Presentations by Police Department

The Decatur Police Department is considering offering community presentations on the following topics. How
likely or unlikely would you be to attend a presentation for each of the following?
Very likely
Crime prevention tips

Fraud prevention

Personal safety for children

Traffic safety & enforcement

Somewhat likely

27%

Not at all likely

39%

22%

34%

41%

15%

37%

38%

24%

47%

26%

50%

Child sex abuse awareness & prevention

15%

34%

51%

Personal safety for teens

17%

29%

54%

Laws affecting teens (e.g., teen driving
regulations, underage drinking, being charged as
an adult vs. as a minor, etc.)

22%

24%

54%

Drug awareness, identification & trends

18%

26%

56%

Safety for seniors

18%

24%

58%

Firearms safety

20%

20%

60%

Workplace safety

14%

23%

10

63%

The National Citizen Survey™
The final question asked residents to indicate their level of support for establishing a Community Advisory Board.
About 9 in 10 survey respondents indicated that they strongly or somewhat supported establishing the board,
while only 4% strongly opposed it.
Figure 5: Support for Community Advisory Board

The City Commission is considering establishing a community advisory board which would provide
recommendations regarding various activities, potentially including economic, cultural and racial diversity,
inclusion and equity. To what extent do you support or oppose the City Commission establishing this type of
community advisory board?
Strongly
support
52%

Strongly
oppose
4%
Somewhat
oppose
5%

Somewhat
support
39%

11

Conclusions
Residents continue to enjoy a high quality of life in Decatur.
Nearly all survey respondents rated their overall quality of life, Decatur as a place to live and the City as a place to
raise children as excellent or good and would recommend living in Decatur to someone who asked. About 9 in 10
planned to remain in the City for the next five years and gave positive ratings to the overall image and overall
appearance of Decatur and their neighborhood as a place to live. Ratings for most quality of life indicators
remained stable when compared from the previous survey in 2014 (for more information, see the Trends over
Time report under separate cover).

Economy is important to residents and is highly rated in the City.
Residents indicated that the Economy was an important area for the City to focus on in the next two years and
ratings for aspects of Economy were generally high across the three pillars of community livability. At least 8 in 10
respondents gave positive ratings for the overall economic health of Decatur, its vibrant downtown/commercial
area, the overall quality of business and service establishments and Decatur as a place to visit and to work.
Additionally, about three-quarters of residents rated economic development in the City as excellent or good. All of
these aspects received ratings higher than the benchmark. However, ratings for shopping opportunities,
employment opportunities, cost of living, Decatur as place to work and economic development decreased from
2014 to 2016.

Built Environment is also a priority for residents.
Survey respondents also indicated that Built Environment would be an important area of focus in the coming
years. More than 8 in 10 residents positively rated public places where people want to spend time (a rating higher
than the benchmark) and around 7 in 10 gave favorable ratings to the overall built environment and the overall
quality of new development in Decatur. However, only about one-quarter gave excellent or good ratings to the
availability of affordable quality housing, which was lower than ratings given in other communities, and ratings
for new development, affordable quality housing, variety of housing options and overall built environment
decreased from 2014 to 2016. When asked to indicate their level of support for a “Complete Streets” policy that
requires all streets to have bicycle and pedestrian safety features, nearly 9 in 10 respondents indicated that they
strongly or somewhat supported the continued use of the policy.

Decatur residents are highly engaged in the community.
Eight in 10 survey respondents rated the sense of community in Decatur as excellent or good, which was a higher
rating than seen elsewhere. Many other aspects of Community Engagement received ratings higher than the
national benchmark, including social events and activities, neighborliness, openness and acceptance of the
community toward people of diverse backgrounds, opportunities to participate in community matters and
opportunities to volunteer. Further, more Decatur residents campaigned for an issue, cause or candidate, did a
favor for a neighbor or attended a local public meeting at higher rates than residents of other communities. When
asked how likely or unlikely they would be to attend presentations by the Decatur police department on a variety
of topics, between one-third and two-thirds of respondents indicated they would be at least somewhat likely to
attend presentations on all topics listed; also, when asked about their level of support for establishing a
Community Advisory Board, most residents indicated that they strongly or somewhat supported it. Ratings for
Community Engagement tended to remain stable from 2014 to 2016, although the rating for sense of community
decreased.

12

Appendix H
MUNICIPAL
BENCHMARK
REPORT
Budget FY 2017-2018

Municipal
Benchmark
Report
Decatur’s Top Ten

B

enchmarking is “the practice of comparing performance with standards or
the performance results achieved by others”i and it is not a new concept
to many local governments. Following the Great Recession many places,
including the City of Decatur, began looking for ways to do more with
less. This challenge presented a unique opportunity to review internal and
external processes and workflows in an effort to make cost-effective and
efficient improvements.
In the fall of 2013, the City’s Performance Measurement Team embarked on a project to
identify communities around the United States that were similar to the City of Decatur in
order to make comparisons and learn best practices. As a starting point, comparable places
were drawn from a list of jurisdictions that participate in the National Research Center’s
citizen survey program and were members of the former ICMA Center for Performance
Measurement program. Each location was selected based on criteria that included population, proximity to a large city in a metropolitan region and a council-manager form of
government.
The data gathered and shared by these 10 cities, plus the City of Decatur, tell a unique story
about community engagement, transparency and people. This report includes short profiles,
maps, interesting factors and figures for fiscal year 2015-2016.
The metrics shared with us by this group, now affectionately known as Decatur’s “Top Ten”
help tell an interesting story. Even though we range in size from 15,000 to 40,000 people,
our residents do not share the same amount of living space or even the same make-up.
However, each of the 11 cities cares about the public it serves and this is evident by the
answers to the questions in the following nine subject areas. A summary chart of all the
responses follows.
Citizen Education Ten out of 11 cities offer at least one citizen education course. Most
of the courses are multi-session and touch a number of municipal departments. The average
number of courses offered is 36.1 and the median is 5. Six out of 11 cities broadcast public
meetings via live streaming for an average of 46 showings a year.
Communications All of the cities surveyed believe in utilizing social media to reach out
to their residents. Ten out of 11 cities have a Facebook page, nine have a Twitter account,
and four have an Instagram page. The City of Dover has even braved the world of Vimeo!
Therefore, it is no surprise that the majority of city communications originate online with an
average percentage rate of online based communciations at 66%.

CITY OF DECATUR

H-3

1. Bettendorf, Iowa
2. Cartersville, Georgia
3. Clayton, Missouri
4. Decatur, Georgia
5. Dover, New Hampshire
6. Elk River, Minnesota
7.

Greer, South Carolina

8. La Vista, Nebraska
9. Mooresville, North Carolina
10. Piqua, Ohio
11. Suwanee, Georgia

Welcome to the digital age! Ten out of the 11 cities responded that they offered at least two
services via the web. The types of services offered are varied and include citizen request
reporting portals, bill payment, business license renewals, court fine payment and recreation
program registration. The average number of online services offered is 9.1 and the median
is 5.
Planning Greenspace appears to be an important component for the cities. The average amount of greenspace is 434.66 acres. Quality cities do not happen on their own-they
require stratgic planning. This is something every city surveyed understands and each one
has adopted a strategic plan.
Recycling Services Nine of the 11 cities reported on the collection of recycling materials.
The average amount is 1,532.96 tons of co-mingled materials. The way each city handles
recycling of glass runs the gamet with some places requiring separation before reaching a
recycling center, putting in landfills or recycling through a private contractor.
Personnel Each city appears to be staffed by seasoned and well-trained employees. The
average years of service is 11.5 years and the median is 12, while the average amount spent
on employee training is almost $137,000 with a median of about $118,000. Nine cities also
have an employee wellness program with an average participation rate of 55%. The City of
Greer has an almost a perfect participation rate - 93% of their employees take advantage of
the city-sponsored wellness program.
Public Safety On average, it doesn’t take long for help to arrive in the 11 cities. With an
average response time of 5.27 minutes for Police calls and 5 minutes for Fire calls in FY1516, the staff in the Police and Fire departments are doing a great job.

H-4 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Special Events From the Decatur Art Festival to Mooresville’s Music on Main indoor
concert series to Clayton’s Centennial, our residents are never far from something fun to do.
We averaged over 25 special events in 2016 and Cartersville had over 70 in FY 15-16!

Appendix H
Municipal
Benchmark
Report

Taxes Great services and fun festivals are not free. On average, 60% of the tax base is
residential and 31.6% is commercial tax base. The average value of tax exempt properties is
over $210 million with a median of $193,603,403.
Transportation City roadways receive much use and requires lots of maintenance. The
11 cities maintained an average of 181 lane miles of streets and 6 lane miles of bicycle
lanes. Only three cities reported completing traffic calming projects in 2016 with Greer
completing an impressive eight projects.

City

Region

Metro Area

Area
(Sq Mi)

Population

Population
Under 18

Population
65+

Bettendorf, IA
Cartersville, GA
Clayton, MO
Decatur, GA
Dover, NH
Elk River, MN
Greer, SC
La Vista, NE
Mooresville, NC
Piqua, OH
Suwanee, GA

Midwest
Southeast
Midwest
Southeast
Northeast
Midwest
Southeast
Midwest
Southeast
Midwest
Southeast

Davenport-Moline
Atlanta
St. Louis
Atlanta
Portsmouth-Rochester
Minneapolis
Greenville
Omaha
Charlotte
Dayton-Springfield
Atlanta

21.22
29.15
2.48
4.27
26.72
42.29
20.64
4.28
14.7
11.62
10.88

35,727
20,753
16,623
22,813
31,153
24,364
29,000
17,143
36,543
20,906
19,421

25.5%
26.2%
15.8%
22.6%
20.3%
28.5%
26.6%
25.9%
28.4%
24.8%
27.9%

14.8%
13.2%
11.9%
11.1%
13.1%
9.3%
10.9%
7.5%
9.8%
14.7%
6.6%

City
Bettendorf, IA
Cartersville, GA
Clayton, MO
Decatur, GA
Dover, NH
Elk River, MN
Greer, SC
La Vista, NE
Mooresville, NC
Piqua, OH
Suwanee, GA

City
Bettendorf, IA
Cartersville, GA
Clayton, MO
Decatur, GA
Dover, NH
Elk River, MN
Greer, SC
La Vista, NE
Mooresville, NC

2016 Gen’l Fund
Expenditures ii

Central

County

College or

Independent

Bachelors
Degree or Higher

$22,672,138
$47,100,000
$23,075,559
$22,201,509
$102,043,895
$13,548,188
$20,605,900
$13,318,145
$60,853,215
$10,400,000
$12,938,290

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
Y
N

Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

48.7%
21.1%
79.7%
72.8%
41.3%
32.1%
30.6%
32.8%
34.5%
9.7%
51.3%

Travel time
to work (minutes

White

18.1
22.1
16.4
25.0
23.8
30.3
21.6
18.8
25.6

91.9%
70.8%
78.0%
73.5%
90.6%
93.4%
70.8%
86.9%
76.7%

Black
2.2%
18.5%
8.2%
20.2%
1.7%
1.9%
17.3%
3.9%
10.9%

Other

Hispanic/
Asian

0.2%
0.4%
0.2%
0.2%
0.2%
0.4%
0.3%
0.5%
0.5%

3.1%
1.0%
10.8%
2.9%
4.6%
1.7%
2.2%
3.2%
3.3%

Latino
3.6%
12.7%
3.1%
3.2%
2.2%
3.1%
14.5%
6.5%
6.9%

Female
51.4%
51.5%
49.1%
56.4%
51.0%
49.8%
52.5%
51.7%
51.5%

CITY OF DECATUR

H-5

Subject Area

Benchmarking Metric

Bettendorf

Cartersville

Clayton

Dover

Elk River

Citizen Education

How many citizen education
classes did your city host in
2016?

4

0

95

6

90

Communications

How many online services does
your city offer?

5

2

15

5

16

Do you broadcast your public
meetings using live streaming?

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

If yes, how many meetings did
you stream in 2016?

n/a

24

n/a

102

100

Types of social media
platforms used? iii

FB, TW, YT

FB, TW

FB, TW, YT, IN,
ND

FB, TW, TU, IN, YT,
PT, VM

FB, TW, YT, IN

What percentage of your communications is paper based?

--

40%

22%

--

35%

What percentage of your communications is online based?

--

60%

88%

--

65%

Do you have a citywide strategic
plan?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

If yes, what year was the plan
adopted?

2016

2007

2012

2017

2014

How many acres of greenspace
do you maintain in your city?

730

400

99.82

181

1,335

How many tons of recyclable
materials did you collect in
2016?

2,256

360

1,429.13

2,634.06

1,724.64

Do you collect co-mingled
materials?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

If yes, how is glass handled?

Glass is collected, separated
and crushed

Separated at recycling center and
put in landfill

Recycled through
Material Recovery
Facility

Separated
at facility

Co-mingled
curbside and
often broken

How much did you spend on
employee training in FY15-16?

$287,757

--

$141,729

--

$129,548

Do you have an employee wellness program?

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

If yes, what is your participation
rate?

38%

n/a

n/a

28%

70%

What is the average years
of service for your full-time
employees?

15

12

12

12

11.95

What percentage of your organization is female?

30%

25%

41%

26%

33.92%

What percentage of your organization is minority?

--

15%

21%

2.60%

0.81%

Planning

Recycling Services

Personnel

H-6 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Appendix H
Municipal
Benchmark
Report
Greer

La Vista

Mooresville

Piqua

Suwanee

Decatur

Median

Average

5

3

4

1

163

26

5

36.1

4

4

--

5

11

24

5

9.1

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

--

--

n/a

n/a

2

21

n/a

27

25.5

46

FB, RSS, TW

FB, IN, TW, ND

FB, TW

TW, ND

FN, IN, TW

ND, FB, TW, IN,
PT, LI, YT

70%

20%

--

30%

30%

40%

32.50%

35.90%

30%

80%

--

70%

70%

60%

67.50%

65.40%

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2014

2014

2017

2017

2012

2010

96.69

221

554

668.1

372

123.7

372

434.66

728.5

0

2,195.25

1,462

n/a

2,540

1,593.32

1,532.96

Yes

n/a

Yes

Yes

n/a

Yes

Not collected

n/a

Sent to a recycling center

Co-mingled

n/a

Sent to a recovery
facility

$136,845

$53,641

$67,665

$107,203

$55,735

$252,469

$118,376

$136,986

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

93%

32%

71%

60%

35%

72%

60%

55.40%

8.2

12.8

7.82

13

8

10

12

11.5

29%

--

25%

5.50%

37%

46%

29.50%

29.80%

14%

--

13%

4%

26%

67%

14%

18.20%

CITY OF DECATUR

H-7

Subject Area

Benchmarking Metric

Bettendorf

Cartersville

Clayton

Dover

Elk River

Public Safety

What was your average
response time for Police calls
in FY15-16?

--

--

2.9

4.2

7.2

What was your average
response time for Fire calls in
FY15-16?

--

4.45

4.38

4.3

8.48

What percentage of your Public
Safety staff are female?

4%

--

15%

10%

29%

What percentage of your Public
Safety staff are minority?

--

12.67%

10%

1%

2.40%

How many special events did
your city host in 2016?

--

74

52

30

23

How many of those special
events were organized by the
city?

5

74

31

2

2

How many total hours did
volunteers work during special
events?

--

1,010

--

--

--

What percentage of your tax
base is residential?

86%

40%

52%

74%

62%

What percentage of your tax
base is commercial?

14%

60%

48%

25%

12%

What is the overall value of taxexempt properties in your city?

--

--

$643,849,200

$331,840,030

$408,408,100

How many lane miles of street
did you maintain in 2016?

443

134

98.7

262

304

What is the percentage of
streets with a least one side of
sidewalk?

--

21%

90%

30%

30%

How many lane miles of bicycle
lanes did you maintain in
2016?

25

2

2.19

2

15

How many traffic calming
projects did you undertake in
2016?

0

0

0

2

0

Special Events

Taxes

Transportation

H-8 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Greer

La Vista

Mooresville

Piqua

Suwanee

Decatur

Median

Average

8.56

4.75

6.03

--

7

1.53

5.4

5.3

5.15

4.6

4.56

6.02

--

2.59

4.6

5

18%

15%

14%

3%

24%

28%

15%

16%

12%

10%

7.14%

--

15.20%

48%

10%

13.20%

69

35

--

30

41

61

41

46.1

46

35

--

1

22

33

26.5

25.1

651

304

--

120

8,739

7,333

830.5

3,026.20

35%

63%

46%

67%

50%

85%

62%

60%

45%

21%

28%

31%

49%

15%

28%

31.60%

$918,730,000

$922,520

$34,143,378

$193,603,403

$90,430,000

$201,811,300

$193,603,403

$211,769,629

207.2

211

139

5

126

62

139

181.1

42.80%

97%

89.40%

70%

--

82%

70%

61.40%

0

0

2.06

13

1.9

2.6

2.1

6

33

0

0

0

0

10

10

15

CITY OF DECATUR

H-9

Bettendorf, Iowa
Population: 30,000+
Area: 22 sq. miles
Incorporated: 1903
Bettendorf, Iowa is a city on the Mississippi river near Davenport. The community is within
175 miles of both Chicago, Illinois and Des Moines, Iowa and a part of the Quad Cities
Metropolitan Area. Bettendorf is home to the largest hotel in Iowa – The Isle Casino & Hotel. Along with 500 rooms, The Isle boasts 4 dining experiences, shows and entertainment,
and a brand new gaming floor which opened Summer 2016. The City also includes over
700 acres of park land throughout 24 different park sites.
Forty-eight percent of Bettendorf residents hold a bachelor’s degree or higher. The City’s
per capita income is $38,577 and the median property value is $182,900. The City employs
approximately 300 people. The many departments provide a wide variety of community
service opportunities such as police and fire protection, park and recreation, community
development, economic development, museum, library, public works and administration.
Metric
Number of acres of greenspace maintained
Number of online services offered
Employee training expenditures in FY15-16
Percentage of female employees

H-10 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Decatur

Bettendorf

123.7

730

24

5

$252,469

$287,757

46%

30%

Cartersville, Georgia
Population: 20,000+
Area: 23.5 sq. miles
Incorporated: 1872
Cartersville, Georgia is located 42 miles northwest of Atlanta in the rolling hills of North
Georgia. The City’s vision is “to provide dependable service while preserving an exceptional quality of life for its residents.” Cartersville was the first city to adopt the city manager
form of government in the state of Georgia. The City has a low property tax base (less
than 1.5 mills) because it is not dependent on property tax because of large industrial base.
Anheuser Busch Brewery is based in Cartersville.
Twenty-one percent of Cartersville residents hold a bachelor’s degree or higher. The City’s
per capita income is $24,350 and the median property value is $137,700. The City has the
following departments: Economic Development; Electric; Communications; Finance; Fire;
Parks and Recreation; Police; Water and Public Works.
Metric

Decatur

Cartersville

Number of live public meetings broadcasted

27

24

Year citywide strategic plan was adopted

2010

2007

Fire response time FY15-16 in minutes

2.59

4.45

Number of city-organized special events

61

74

CITY OF DECATUR

H-11

Clayton, Missouri
Population: 16,000+
Area: 2.48 sq. miles
Incorporated: 1913
The county seat of St. Louis County, Clayton, Missouri is just 8.1 miles from St. Louis.
While 81% of Clayton’s land is dedicated to residential or park use, the City’s central business district combines 7,000,000 square feet of office space (with a 90% occupancy rate)
with 1,000,000 square feet of retail space. The City’s public school district is one of the
nation’s best, with 95% of its high school graduates going on to college.
Seventy-nine percent of Clayton residents hold a bachelor’s degree or higher. The City’s per
capita income is $56,530 and the median property value is $597,500. The City has the following departments: Parks & Recreation; Economic Development; Public Works; Planning
& Development; Fire and Police. The Center of Clayton, the City’s 124,000 square-foot
community recreation center, offers sports, fitness, swimming, recreational, educational and
lifestyle enhancing programs.
Metric
Lane miles of streets maintained in 2016
Tons of recyclable materials collected in 2016
Number of citizen education classes hosted in 2016
Percentage of online based communications

H-12 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Decatur

Clayton

62

98.7

2,540

1,429

26

95

60%

88%

Decatur, Georgia
Population: 20,000+
Area: 4.4 sq. miles
Incorporated: 1823
Decatur, Georgia is an urban city six miles east of Atlanta. Decatur is the county seat of
DeKalb County, one of the most densely populated counties in the state. The City strives
“to assure a high quality of life for its residents, business and visitors both today and in the
future.” Decatur’s downtown attracts people from all over the Atlanta metro area due to its
diverse selection of restaurants, pubs and shops. Riding on a Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid
Transit Authority (MARTA) train or bus, it’s easy to get here. Just step off the train at one of
three stations located inside the City. The Decatur Cemetery is a stroll through history and
the oldest part of the cemetery is listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
Decatur is home to Agnes Scott College, a small liberal arts college for women; DeVry
University; and, Columbia Seminary. Seventy-two percent of residents hold a bachelor’s
degree or higher. The City’s per capita income is $44,572 and the median property value
is $365,900. The City has 220 full-time employees and 260 part-time employees. The City
has the following departments: Administrative Services; Community & Economic Development; Children & Youth Services; Active Living, Public Works, Design, Environment &
Construction; Police and Fire.
Metric
Number of hours volunteers worked during special events

Decatur
7,333

Number of traffic calming projects in 2016

10

Average response time for Police calls in FY15-16?

1.53

Employee wellness program participation rate

72%

CITY OF DECATUR

H-13

Dover, New Hampshire
Population: 30,000+
Area: 29 sq. miles
Incorporated: 1855
Dover is located in the seacoast area of New Hampshire, and is only a one hour drive to
Boston, Massachusetts; Portland, Maine and the New Hampshire Lakes Region and White
Mountains. Dover is the oldest permanent settlement in New Hampshire and the 7th oldest
in the US. It is a suburban community that strives “to be a city with an emerging urban
vibrancy guided by a small town sense of community.” The restored and updated Cochecho
Falls Millworks, a focal point since the early 19th century, hums with 900 office workers
and their computers rather than rows of whirring machinery.
Forty-one percent of Dover residents hold a bachelor’s degree or higher. The City’s per
capita income is $32,865 and the median property value is $240,600. The City has the following departments: Schools; Finance; Planning & Economic Development; Police, Fire &
Rescue; Community Services; Public Library; Public Welfare and Recreation.
Decatur

Dover

Number of acres of greenspace maintained

123.7

181

Year City strategic plan was adopted

2010

2017

Number of traffic calming projects in 2016

10

2

Average response time for Fire calls in FY15-16

2.59

4.3

Metric

H-14 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Elk River, Minnesota
Population: 24,000+
Area: 10 sq. miles
Incorporated: 1838
Elk River, where two beautiful rivers converge, is about 30 miles northwest of Minneapolis
and where Highways US10 and 169 intersect. Elk River residents enjoy beautiful natural
amenities, including the Elk and Mississippi Rivers, Lake Orono, and more parks and trails
per resident than almost any other city in Minnesota.
Thirty-two percent of Elk River residents hold a bachelor’s degree or higher. The City’s per
capita income is $32,326 and the median property value is $213,300. Elk River has been
known as “Energy City” since 1997 when the Minnesota Environmental Initiative chose it
from over 30 other applying communities to act as a geographical focal point for the demonstration of efficient and renewable energy products, services and technologies.
Decatur

Elk River

Number of live public meetings broadcasted

27

100

Average years of service for FT employees

10

11.95

Number of citizen education classes hosted in 2016

26

90

Police response time FY15-16 in minutes

1.53

7.2

Metric

CITY OF DECATUR

H-15

Greer, South Carolina
Population: 26,000+
Area: 20.64 sq. miles
Incorporated: 1876
One of South Carolina’s fastest-growing cities, Greer is located in the foothills of the Blue
Ridge Mountains — in the heart of the state’s bustling upstate region. Greer, South Carolina is located 12 miles from Greenville. Greer’s Central Business District, also known as
Greer Station, is 12 square blocks of retail, dining, entertainment, and professional service
organizations. Greer Station has more than 40 buildings on the National Historic Register.
In addition to the BMW manufacturing plant, Greer is the longtime home of the North
American Headquarters for Michelin North America and Mitsubishi Polyester, Inc. In 2013,
South Carolina Ports opened its Inland Port at Greer, just the second facility of its kind on
the East Coast.
Over 30% of Greer residents hold a bachelor’s degree or higher. The City’s per capita
income is $24,360 and the median property value is $143,800. Greer’s City Hall includes
an entire floor dedicated to public space, with a 4,500-square-foot events hall available for
conventions, receptions and galas.
Decatur

Greer

Employee wellness program participation rate

72%

93%

Number of acres of greenspace maintained

123.7

96.69

Employee training expenditures in FY15-16

$252,469

$136,845

Number of traffic calming projects in 2016

10

33

Metric

H-16 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

La Vista, Nebraska
Population: 17,000+
Area: 10 sq. miles
Incorporated: 1960
La Vista, incorporated in 1960, is a relatively young and progressive city situated southwest
of the Omaha metropolitan area contiguous to the cities of Bellevue, Ralston, Papillion and
Omaha. Strategically located only minutes from Offutt Air Force Base, Eppley Airfield and
the interstate system, La Vista has grown quickly to a community of nearly 17,000. La Vista
is Spanish for “The View”, which described the scenic panorama of the Big Papio Creek
Basin that was enjoyed by the City’s first residents.
Thirty-two percent of La Vista residents hold a bachelor’s degree or higher. The City’s per
capita income is $28,989 and the median property value is $140,000. The City has 141 fulltime employees The City has the following departments: Administrative Services; Economic Development; Financial Services; Planning and Public Works.
Decatur

La Vista

Percentage of streets with at least one sidewalk

82%

97%

Average years of service for full-time employees

10

12.8

48%

15%

$201,811,300

$922,520

Metric

Percentage of minority Public Safety staff
Overall value of tax-exempt properties

CITY OF DECATUR

H-17

Mooresville, North Carolina
Population: 36,000+
Area: 14.7 sq. miles
Incorporated: 1873
Mooresville is a town in southern Iredell County of North Carolina, approximately 25 miles
north of Charlotte. Mooresville is best known as the home of many NASCAR racing teams
and drivers, along with an IndyCar team and its drivers, as well as racing technology suppliers, which has earned the city the nickname “Race City USA.” Also located in Mooresville is the corporate headquarters of Lowe’s Company and Universal Technical Institute’s
NASCAR Technical Institute. For nine times in 11 years, Mooresville had been named the
“No. 1 Micropolitan Area in the Nation” by Site Selection magazine.
Thirty-four percent of Mooresville residents hold a bachelor’s degree or higher. The City’s
per capita income is $27,595 and the median property value is $190,200. The City has
the following departments: Administrative Services; Cultural & Recreation; Engineering;
Finance; Fire-Rescue; Human Resources; Information Technology; Planning & Community
Development; Police; Public Works; Risk & Safety Management; and Sanitation.
Decatur

Mooresville

Percentage of streets with a least one side of sidewalk

82%

89.4%

Percentage of residential tax base

85%

46%

10

7.82

123.7

554

Metric

Average years of service for full-time employees
Number of acres of greenspace maintained

H-18 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

Piqua, Ohio
Population: 20,906
Area: 11.62 sq. miles
Incorporated: 1807
Piqua is less than 30 miles north of Dayton located on I-75 and 75 miles from Cincinnati
and Columbus. Piqua’s roots are established in the beauty and elegance of the Midwestern
countryside. In Piqua, you can enjoy the charm of a small town with historic canal-era
architecture loaded with amenities and attractions such as the Great Miami River, specialty
shops, McCulloch Square, and national award-winning community treasure, Fort Piqua
Plaza. Top notch education facilities including the Piqua School District, Upper Valley
Career Center, and Edison Community College, along with a vibrant, attractive downtown,
makes Piqua a desired place to live, work and play.
Almost 10% of Piqua residents hold a bachelor’s degree or higher. The City’s per capita
income is $19,629 and the median property value $83,900. The City has the following
departments: Administration; Development; Information Technology; Human Resources;
Fire; Law; Health; Police; Utilities; Power and Engineering.
Decatur

Piqua

2.59

6.02

$252,469

$107,203

Number of online services offered

24

5

Number of lane miles of bicycle lanes maintained in 2016?

2.6

13

Metric
Fire response time FY15-16 in minutes
Employee training expenditures in FY15-16

CITY OF DECATUR

H-19

Suwanee, Georgia
Population: 18,000+
Area: 10 sq. miles
Incorporated: 1838
Suwanee, Georgia is a suburban community located about 30 miles north of Atlanta. The
City’s vision is to be a “a diverse and forward-looking community actively engaged in
shaping its own future.” The City has more than 500 acres of parkland and miles of walking
and biking trails. Residents appreciate public art, special events and their town center.
Fifty-one percent of Suwanee residents hold a bachelor’s degree or higher. The City’s per
capita income is $33,623 and the median property value is $239,400. The local transit
system in Suwanee is the Gwinnett County Transit system. The City has the following departments: Administrative Services; Economic Development; Financial Services; Planning
and Public Works.
Decatur

Suwanee

26

163

Number of hours volunteers worked during special events

7,333

8,739

Percentage of commercial tax base

15%

49%

Average response time for Police calls in FY15-16

1.53

7

Metric
Number of citizen education classes hosted in 2016

H-20 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2017-2018

A big thank you goes out to the following individuals who so graciuously shared their
city’s data:
Rebecca Bohlander – Cartersville, GA
Jason Schadt — Bettendorf, IA
Andrea Muskopf – Clayton, MO
Christopher Parker – Dover, NH
Brian Bennet –Mooresville, NC
Cal Portner – Elk River, MN
Mike Sell – Greer, SC
Jeff Calentine – La Vista, NE
Brittany Van Horn – Piqua, OH
Susan Van Nus – Suwanee, GA
Special thanks to Local Government Management Fellow Olivia Burrell-Jackson for her
assistance in writing this report.

i

Municipal Benchmarks: Third Edition, David Ammons, 2012

ii

Source: Information self reported by participating city; All other information gathered from the
U.S. Census Bureau Quick Facts tool – https://www.census.gov/quickfacts;

iii

Social Media Platforms: FB – Facebook; TW – Twitter; YT – YouTube; IN – Instagram; ND – NextDoor; PT
– Pinterest; VM – Vimeo; LI – LinkedIn; TU - Tumbler

CITY OF DECATUR

H-21

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts
