1401 W. Herbison Road, DeWitt, MI 48820
November 13, 2023 Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes

The Regular Meeting of the DeWitt Charter Township Board of Trustees was called to order by Supervisor
Galardi at 7:00 PM with the Pledge of Allegiance.
MEMBERS PRESENT Supervisor Rick Galardi, Clerk Adam Cramton, Treasurer Sandy Stump, and Trustees
David Seeger, Brian Ross, David Fedewa, and Steven Smith.
MEMBERS ABSENT None.
ALSO PRESENT

Manager Andrew Dymczyk, Police Lieutenant Jason Jones, Fire Chief Dave DeKorte, and
several citizens.

AGENDA

Fedewa moved, Galardi seconded, to approve the agenda as presented.
AYES: Stump, Seeger, Cramton, Ross, Smith, Fedewa, Galardi.
NAYS: None.
ABSENT: None.
Motion carried.

CONSENT AGENDA Smith moved, Galardi seconded, to approve the Consent Agenda which included the
following: Board of Trustees regular meeting draft minutes, October 23, 2023; and
General Vouchers 76190-76257.
AYES: Smith, Stump, Seeger, Fedewa, Ross, Cramton, Galardi.
NAYS: None.
ABSENT: None.
Motion carried.

PUBLIC COMMENT None.
PRESENTATION
DeWitt Area
Recreation Authority
2024 Budget

DeWitt Area Recreation Authority (DARA) Director, Chad Stevens, gave a brief
presentation outlining the proposed 2024 DARA budget. Director Stevens presented a
balanced budget. There is a slight increase in the requested municipal contribution that is
the result of the addition of an additional program coordinator. A consultation budget of
$1,000 has been added with the possibility of using these funds to evaluate and update job
descriptions. Director Stevens thanked the Board for their support and vision, the Board
reaffirmed their confidence in Director Stevens’ leadership. Treasure Stump noted that
Director Stevens, along with the DARA Board, are looking at the staffing structure to
determine if there is a need for more resources and more programs. Director Stevens
affirmed that it is a DARA priority to keep the cost of programs low.
Cramton moved, Stump seconded, to receive and place on file the DeWitt Area
Recreation Authority 2024 Budget.
AYES: Smith, Cramton, Fedewa, Seeger, Stump, Ross, Galardi.
NAYS: None.
ABSENT: None.
Motion carried.

DeWitt Charter Township Board Minutes
November 13, 2023
Page 2

Sanitary Sewer Master Throughout 2022 and 2023, the Township has been working with Tetra Tech and Southern
Plan
Clinton County Municipal Utilities Authority (SCCMUA) administration to update and
establish a Sanitary Sewer Master Plan. The intent of this study is to evaluate the system
for deficiencies, review current infrastructure and develop a long-term plan for
growth/updates to the system. Manager Dymczyk recommends receiving and filing the
2023 Sanitary Sewer Master Plan from Tetra Tech.
Dan Christian from Tetra Tech was present at the meeting to present an executive
summary and answer any questions. He informed the Board that the entire collection
system was evaluated and the total cost to replace the system in today’s money would be
approximately $124M. There is a small amount of infiltration and inflow (I/I) of storm
waters and this is perfectly normal. There would be growing concern as the size and
frequency of storm events increase, and an effort should be made to limit the I/I. There is
system growth opportunity along Clark Rd. and Stoll Rd., as well as a second pipeline into
the sewer plant from the south. There was discussion about the age of the pipes and lift
stations. It is recommended to begin a routine lining program that, along with routine
inspection and cleaning, can extend the life of underground piping by approximately 60
years. The Board thanked Mr. Christian for his concise and informative presentation.
Galardi moved, Ross seconded, to receive and place on file the 2023 Sanitary Sewer
Master Plan from Tetra Tech.
AYES: Fedewa, Stump, Ross, Smith, Seeger, Cramton, Galardi.
NAYS: None.
ABSENT: None.
Motion carried.

PUBLIC HEARING

None.

COUNTY
COMMISSIONER
REPORT

Commissioner Ken Mitchell provided an emailed update to the Board. A printed copy was
provided to each Board member at the meeting. He was present to answer any questions
regarding the following:
• Presentation from Community Mental Health
• Capital Regional Airport development
• County recycling program
• County broadband initiative
• Capital improvements at the jail
• 2024 County budget
• Assistant Prosecutor new hire
• Deputy Treasurer new hire
• Friend of the Court Caseworker new hire
• Emergency Operations Center meeting with Watertown Township
• Juvenile Justice changes
• Jail and County lawsuit
• ORV ordinance approval

CORRESPONDENCE Correspondence included the following: Q3 2023 Cash and Investments; Q3 2023
Financial Reports; DARA November 2023 Newsletter; Clinton County Board of
Commissioners October 10, 2023 minutes; US-127/I-496 Revitalization map and

DeWitt Charter Township Board Minutes
November 13, 2023
Page 3
schedule; Detroit News – Michigan renewable energy project legislation update; and
Consumers Energy Notices of Hearing.
UNFINISHED
BUSINESS
NEW BUSINESS
Sanitary Sewer Board
of Appeals

None.

The Township received a sanitary sewer appeal request from Avalon Place Apartments.
Sanitary Sewer Board of Appeals board met on October 31st to hear the appeal. Per the
sanitary sewer ordinance Sec. 40-48 Miscellaneous provisions, the Board of Trustees is
the final step of the appeal process. Manager Dymczyk recommends concurring with the
Sanitary Sewer Board of Appeals recommendation to deny the request by Avalon Place
Apartments to reduce their REU rate.
The appellant was not present at the meeting.
Ross moved, Cramton seconded, to concur with the Sanitary Sewer Board of Appeals
recommendation to deny the request by Avalon Place Apartments to reduce their
REU rate.
AYES: Ross, Cramton, Fedewa, Smith, Seeger, Stump, Galardi.
NAYS: None.
ABSENT: None.
Motion carried.

Salary Compensation
Commission
2024/2025 Report

Clerk Cramton advised that the Salary Compensation Commission 2024/2025 Report was
filed with the Township on October 13, 2023.
MCL 42.6a(1)(b) provides: that the Commission shall determine the salary of each
elected Township official which determination shall be the salary unless the
Township Board by resolution adopted by 2/3 of the members elected to and
serving on the Board rejects the determination. A determination of the
commission shall be effective 30 days following its filing with the Township
Clerk unless rejected by the Township Board. If rejected, the existing salary shall
prevail.
If the Board takes no action to reject the report within 30 days, the report will be effective
as written.
Supervisor Galardi thanked the commission for their considered approach toward setting
Board salaries, and the importance of having an independent and uncompensated body
making the determination on behalf of the residents.
Trustee Smith doesn’t feel that he needs to be compensated to serve on the Board.
Trustee Fedewa expressed mild discomfort with a percentage increase that is one point
higher than Township staff. Clerk Cramton pointed out that Township staff compensation
is adjusted for cost of living every year, whereas the Salary Compensation Commission
last met in 2021 on the leading edge of significant cost of living increases post-COVID.
The commission is attempting to catch up and 1% over staff is a reasonable adjustment.

DeWitt Charter Township Board Minutes
November 13, 2023
Page 4
Rob Mack, and Robert VanDyk, both members of the Salary Compensation, commented
favorably about the process utilizing both historical Township data, as well as comparable
data from other communities.
Cramton moved, Stump seconded, to receive and concur with the report as
submitted from the Salary Compensation Commission
AYES: Fedewa, Ross, Seeger, Stump, Smith, Cramton, Galardi.
NAYS: None.
ABSENT: None.
Motion carried.

Wage Compensation
and Classification
Study Final Report

The Manager’s Office has been working with GovHr on a Wage Compensation and
Classification Study since April of this year. After many conversations and due diligence
from staff and GovHr, the study has been concluded. The Personnel Committee met on
October 23rd to discuss a draft study and considerations surrounding implementation.
Manager Dymczyk recommends implementing all reclassifications, the 60th Percentile
Pay Ranges, and a 4% COLA. The proposed changes are to be implemented on January
1, 2024.
Once implementation is approved, payroll will take steps towards this transition and
GovHr will conclude the study with a final implementation meeting will all staff. We
estimate that this implementation will add close to $51,118 of expense to the 2024 Budget.
Manager Dymczyk provided the Wage Compensation and Classification Study Final
Report, a copy of the original 2024 Wage Schedule, and the 60th Percentile Proposed Pay
Ranges.
Rachel Skaggs from GovHr attended the meeting via ZOOM to present details of the study
and address any questions. Of particular interest were the 19 comparable communities that
were selected and weighted based upon their similarity to DeWitt Township. Ms. Skaggs
and Manager Dymczyk also explained that an all-staff meeting will be held to explain the
implementation process, and to also outline an appeals process.
Jamie Boyle, Deputy Treasurer, commented that she has worked at the Township for 26
years and is currently at top of scale. Her placement on the new scale would have her just
below halfway, and she feels that she should be placed higher.
Fred Koos, 14201 DeWitt Rd., feels that the Township should ensure that the Fire Chief
compensation is commensurate with that of the Police Chief. He feels this agreement was
established a long time ago and was never achieved.
Brett Wittenberg, Community Development Director, is looking forward to learning about
the appeal process as he has some concerns about the comparative compensation levels
between the Planner position and the Community Development Director position.
Galardi moved, Fedewa seconded, to direct the Manager’s Office to implement all
employee reclassifications, the 60th Percentile Pay Ranges, and a 4% COLA on
January 1, 2024.
AYES: Cramton, Smith, Ross, Stump, Seeger, Fedewa, Galardi.

DeWitt Charter Township Board Minutes
November 13, 2023
Page 5
NAYS: None.
ABSENT: None.

Supervisory Division
POLC Letter of
Agreement

Motion carried.

Recent federal case law regarding the election of remedies provisions in collective
bargaining agreements (CBA) led to discussions between the Police Officers Labor
Council (POLC) Supervisory Division and the Employer. It is believed that to account for
these changes, a Letter of Agreement between the two parties eliminating Article 8
Election of Remedies is the best way to address the federal case law. Manager Dymczyk
recommends entering into a Letter of Agreement with POLC eliminating Article 8
Election of Remedies in the current and successor 2024-2027 CBAs as of December 1,
2023.
Manager Dymczyk provided the Letter of Agreement and 2024-2027 POLC Supervisory
Contract.
Smith moved, Fedewa seconded, to Direct the Manager’s Office to execute the Letter
of Agreement between the Police Officers Labor Council (POLC) Supervisory
Division and DeWitt Township, eliminating Article 8 Election of Remedies in the
current and successor 2024-2027 collective bargaining agreements (CBAs) as of
December 1, 2023.
AYES: Seeger, Cramton, Ross, Fedewa, Smith, Stump, Galardi.
NAYS: None.
ABSENT: None.
Motion carried.

EXTENDED PUBLIC, Fire Chief Dave DeKorte updated the board on recent vehicle crashes and structure fires.
STAFF, & BOARD
The Department attended the RESA Career Expo at DeWitt High School.
COMMENTS
Police Lieutenant Jason Jones was extremely complimentary of the recruit program and
the Department’s first candidate. He also informed the Board that there is potential for a
couple of lateral hires that would bring staffing up to a good level. The Department has
been extremely busy and Lieutenant Jones called on residents to be vigilant in light of
recent stolen vehicles and vehicular larcenies.
Manager Andrew Dymczyk provided updates on the following:
• Wage study implementation
• Sewer Board of Appeals meeting
• Sidewalk repair program
• Meeting with new East Lansing Manager
• MAFF Negotiations upcoming
• Benefits Committee meeting
• Mechanical / Plumbing inspector resignation
• City village and township revenue sharing
• MBS bid opening, interviews, and references
Trustee Smith was complimentary of the Township newsletter. He also congratulated Fire
Captain Tom Stone on 30 years with the Township, as well as Detective Derreck Schaberg
on 25 years with the Police Department.

DeWitt Charter Township Board Minutes
November 13, 2023
Page 6
Trustee Seeger reminded the Board that there is an open house at the new Clinton County
Road Commission building next Tuesday.
Trustee Fedewa was complimentary of Williams Architects who have been working with
the Township to design the new Fire Station.
ADJOURNMENT

Seeger moved, Ross seconded, to adjourn 8:50 PM.
Motion voted and carried.

Respectfully submitted,

Adam Cramton, Clerk

Rick Galardi, Supervisor
