AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE BOARD OF EDUCATION
OF SCHOOL DISTRICT NO. 65
EVANSTON, ILLINOIS
AND
DISTRICT 65 EDUCATIONAL SECRETARIAL AND CLERICAL ASSOCIATION,
ILLINOIS EDUCATION ASSOCIATION-NEA

FOR

SCHOOL YEARS, 2022-2023, 2023-2024, 2024-2025, 2025-2026, and 2026-2027

3304105.1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE I RECOGNITION ........................................................................................................ 1
ARTICLE II DUES DEDUCTION ............................................................................................... 2
ARTICLE III EMPLOYEE AND ASSOCIATION RIGHTS....................................................... 3
ARTICLE IV EMPLOYEE DISCIPLINE .................................................................................... 8
ARTICLE V EMPLOYEE EVALUATION ................................................................................. 9
ARTICLE VI PERSONNEL FILES............................................................................................ 11
ARTICLE VII GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ............................................................................. 12
ARTICLE VIII LEAVES ............................................................................................................ 15
ARTICLE IX MANAGEMENT RIGHTS .................................................................................. 21
ARTICLE X NO STRIKE OR WORK STOPPAGE .................................................................. 22
ARTICLE XI WORKING CONDITIONS.................................................................................. 23
ARTICLE XII SENIORITY ........................................................................................................ 29
ARTICLE XIII VACANCIES, PROMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS ....................................... 31
ARTICLE XIV COMPENSATION AND FRINGE BENEFITS ............................................... 33
ARTICLE XV INSERVICE AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT ................................. 43
ARTICLE XVI NEGOTIATION PROCEDURES ..................................................................... 45
ARTICLE XVII SCOPE AND EFFECT OF AGREEMENT ..................................................... 46
2022-2023 ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL SALARY SCHEDULE ............................. 48
2023-2024 ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL SALARY SCHEDULE ............................. 49
2024-2025 ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL SALARY SCHEDULE ............................. 50
2025-2026 ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL SALARY SCHEDULE ............................. 51
2026-2027 ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL SALARY SCHEDULE ............................. 52
HEALTH CLERK SALARY SCHEDULES 2022-23 through 2026-27 ..................................... 53
FOOD SERVICE SALARY SCHEDULE 2022-23 through 2026-27 ......................................... 54
TECHNOLOGY SPECIALIST SALARY SCHEDULES 2022-23 through 2026-27 ................. 56

i

3304105.1

ARTICLE I
RECOGNITION
The Board of Education of Evanston Skokie Community Consolidated School District #65,
Cook County, Illinois (hereinafter the “District”), hereby recognizes the Illinois Education
Association-NEA, and its affiliated local the District 65 Educational Secretarial and Clerical
Association (hereinafter “DESC” or the “Association”), as the sole and exclusive bargaining
representative for all full-time and regular part-time Administrative Assistants, clerical employees,
health clerks, nutrition service employees, technology specialists, library media assistants,
registered nurse and the bilingual transportation specialist employed by the District. Such
representation shall exclude the Superintendent’s executive assistant, Assistant Superintendent’s
executive assistant, Assistant Superintendent of Business Services’ executive assistant, Assistant
Superintendent of Human Resources’ executive assistant, Communication Director’s executive
assistant, and the Assistant Superintendent of Special Services’ executive assistant, the personnel
documents specialist, confidential, managerial and supervisory employees as defined in the Illinois
Educational Labor Relations Act, and all other employees.

“Bargaining unit member,”

“employee,” or “administrative/clerical employee” when used hereinafter in this Agreement shall
refer to all employees represented by the IEA- NEA/DESC, in the bargaining unit as above
defined. The term “District” or “employer” when used hereinafter in this Agreement shall refer to
the District or its administrative or supervisory personnel.

1

3304105.1

ARTICLE II
DUES DEDUCTION
A.

Any member of the bargaining unit who is a member or has applied for membership in the
Association may sign and deliver to the District a written authorization for continuous or
annual dues deduction. The appropriate authorization forms shall be provided by the
Association. The continuous authorization shall remain in effect from year to year unless
the employee revokes said authorization in writing between the start of the school year and
October 1 of any year.

B.

The District shall deduct from each employee’s pay the current dues of the Association
provided the District has received an official written notification of the dues amount or
increase thereof. Pursuant to such authorization, the District shall deduct such dues from
the regular salary check of the bargaining unit member each month beginning in October
and ending in June of each year. The District shall remit said deducted dues to the
Association within fifteen (15) days following the pay period deduction. The District shall
deduct the dues authorized for those employees who are employed after the
commencement of the school year in as equal installments as possible to insure the proper
dues are deducted for those employees by June of the school year.

2

3304105.1

ARTICLE III
EMPLOYEE AND ASSOCIATION RIGHTS
A.

Notice of Board Meetings/Right to Appear
When practicable, the president of the Association or the president’s designee shall be sent
written notice of all regular and special meetings of the Board together with a copy of the
agenda or statement of purpose of each meeting at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the
scheduled time of the meeting. In keeping with Board policy, the Association president or
designee shall be given the opportunity to express the Association’s views and make
recommendations to the Administration or Board on issues which impact all bargaining
unit employees.

B.

Official Board Minutes
One (1) copy of all official Board minutes shall be emailed to the Association President
within three (3) days after they are posted on the District’s website.

C.

New Employees
1.

Names and addresses of newly hired bargaining unit employees shall be made
available upon request to the Association President within fourteen (14) days of
their employment. Further, an updated list of the names and addresses of all
bargaining unit employees will be sent to the Association President by October 1
of each year.

2.

The District will notify the Association President of bargaining unit employment
status changes within ten (10) working days of Board approval.

D.

Meeting on District Property
The Association and its representatives shall have the right to hold a reasonable number of
official meetings per year on District property, related to the Association’s role as
3

3304105.1

bargaining agent for bargaining unit employees, provided that such meetings in no way
interfere with District use of said property and provided that when special, custodial service
is required, the Association will reimburse the District for the cost of same.
E.

Use of District Equipment
The Association and its representatives shall have the right to use District telephones for
non-toll calls only, typewriters, personal computers, calculators, audiovisual and
duplicating equipment, and other available District technology, to the extent that such use
pertains to the Association’s role as bargaining agent for bargaining unit employees,
provided that such use in no way interferes with District use of said equipment and
provided that the Association will reimburse the District for any additional costs related to
the Association’s use of this equipment.

F.

Association Bulletin Board Space
In keeping with Board policy, the Association shall have the right to post notices of
activities and matters of Association concern on an Association-supplied bulletin board for
support staff, of reasonable size, to be located at each work site. The Association may use
the District mail service and employee mailboxes, in keeping with Board policy, for a
reasonable volume of materials pertaining to the Association’s representation of bargaining
unit employees.

G.

Staff Directory
The DESC and its President shall be listed in the Staff Directory which is prepared annually
by the District, provided the information is supplied to the District by October 1st.

4

3304105.1

H.

Authorized Agreement - Copies
Upon completion of negotiations, an authorized agreement shall be signed by the Board of
Education President and the President of DESC. A copy of this agreement will be
distributed to all employees, including employees upon initial hire. The cost of providing
these copies shall be borne equally by the District and DESC.

I.

Association Leave
The District will permit employees from the bargaining unit to be absent from work without
loss of pay for up to a maximum total for the entire bargaining unit of ten (10) days per
school year for official Association business on the following conditions:
1.

the Association shall reimburse the District for the cost of substitute(s) if
employed;

2.

the Association President shall deliver to the Superintendent written
notification of the leave at least ten (10) calendar days (and make every
reasonable effort to do so at least fourteen (14) calendar days) in advance
of the commencement of the leave; and

3.

no more than seven (7) employees (one (1) of whom can be a technology
specialist and two (2) of whom can be nutrition service employees) shall be
on such leave at the same time.

J.

Employee Indemnification
The Board shall agree to indemnify and protect all bargaining unit employees against death
and bodily injury and property damage claims and suits, including defense thereof, when
damages are sought for negligent and wrongful acts allegedly committed during the scope
of employment or under the direction of the Board. There shall be no deduction in salary

5

3304105.1

for time lost as a result of legal or administrative proceedings held pursuant to the Board’s
commitments for indemnification and defense in this section.
K.

Complaint Against Employee
Any complaint deemed by any administrator or Board member to justify investigation
and/or disciplinary action shall be brought to the attention of the employee involved within
five (5) working days. Except in cases of extreme emotional instability or alleged criminal
action, when the safety and health of the pupils and/or other person(s) are in jeopardy, no
action shall be taken until such information has been supplied to the employee.

L.

Student Medication
Under no circumstances will employees be required to administer medication to students;
however, those employees who voluntarily assist in self-administered medication or
provide emergency assistance to students within the scope of their employment will be
indemnified as provided in Article III, §J of this Agreement. The District and the
Association recognize that health clerks do voluntarily assist in self-administered
medication within the scope of their employment.

M.

Information Requests
When the Association requests information from the District which the Association needs
in order to intelligently perform its function as bargaining representative for the bargaining
unit employees, and which the District is required to furnish under the Illinois Educational
Labor Relations Act, the District will respond within fourteen (14) days of the submission
of the request. The Association President and Assistant Superintendent of Human
Resources shall agree on an extension of this deadline due to extenuating circumstances.

6

3304105.1

N.

Job Classifications
All bargaining unit employees shall be given a copy of their job description upon initial
employment.

O.

Courtesy and Professionalism in Relationships
The parties recognize that the basis of professional relationships among bargaining unit
employees, administrators and Board members shall be one of common courtesy and
mutual respect, and free from bullying behavior at all times. Disputes regarding this
provision shall be resolved solely with the Superintendent at Step II of the grievance
procedure in Article VII of this Agreement.

7

3304105.1

ARTICLE IV
EMPLOYEE DISCIPLINE
A.

Right to Representation
Upon request, a bargaining unit employee shall be entitled to have present a representative
of the Association during any meeting relative to disciplinary action.

B.

Probationary Period, Suspension and Discharge
New hires will be in a probationary period for ninety (90) work days. The probationary
period provides a new employee an opportunity to demonstrate they have the skills and
capacity to fulfill their job responsibilities. The probationary period also provides the
District adequate time to determine whether or not a new employee has the skills and
capacity to complete the duties and responsibilities they were hired to fulfill. The
supervisor shall meet with the new employee within one (1) week of hire to review the
evaluation tool that will be used to assess the employee’s performance, as well as to set
expectations related, but not limited to, performance, professionalism, policies, and
procedures. After employees have satisfactorily completed their probationary period with
the District, they shall not be suspended without pay, demoted, or discharged without just
cause.

8

3304105.1

ARTICLE V
EMPLOYEE EVALUATION
A.

Evaluation
Upon initial employment, bargaining unit employees shall be advised of the District’s
evaluation procedures by the Human Resources Office. No formal evaluation shall take
place until this has been done. Each employee shall have a conference with their immediate
supervisor at least every other year and will be provided a written evaluation of their job
performance using the educational support personnel evaluation form. All employees will
be notified at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to their evaluation. Every reasonable
effort will be made to evaluate

twelve (12) month bargaining unit employees and

technology specialists by July 1 but no later than July 15, and by the end of school
attendance days for ten (10) month and eleven (11) month employees of any year in which
the employee is formally evaluated. The evaluation period for bargaining unit employees
DESC members assigned to twelve (12) month positions in the Business Office will be
November 1 through October 31, but no later than November 15. The primary evaluator
of the employee shall request input from the building principal/building administrator
before completing the evaluation and provide a copy of any such input received to the
employee before or at the time of the evaluation. The primary evaluator and/or building
principal/building administrator shall be encouraged by the Assistant Superintendent of
Human Resources to incorporate any feedback received from parents and community
members regarding employees’ job performance.

Each employee shall have the

opportunity to respond in writing to the evaluation. Each evaluation will become a part of
the employee’s personnel file.

9

3304105.1

B.

Multiple Assigned Employees
All employees who have multiple building/work locations shall be assigned a primary
evaluator.

C.

Association Input
The District will provide the Association with a copy of any evaluation instrument related
to administrative employees prior to the adoption of such an instrument and will consider
comments of the Association concerning such instrument.

D.

Notice of Non-Reemployment
Except in situations involving serious misconduct, no non-probationary administrative
assistant/clerical employee or technology specialist will be dismissed without first having
been formally evaluated in the school year of the dismissal. All accrued vacation time, or
pay in lieu thereof, shall be granted within fourteen (14) days of employment termination.

E.

Change of Evaluation Instrument
When the District changes evaluation instruments, it will provide employees with a copy
of the new instrument by November 1 in the school year in which the instrument is to be
used.

10

3304105.1

ARTICLE VI
PERSONNEL FILES
There shall be one official personnel file only. Employees shall have the right, upon
reasonable notice, to review the post-employment contents of their own file. Employees shall have
the right to a copy of any such item(s), provided they shall reimburse the District for the cost of
such reproduction. Employees shall have the right to respond to any critical or derogatory material
contained in their personnel file and to have such response placed in their personnel file.
Employees shall be notified within ten (10) work days (days in which the Joseph E. Hill
Administration Center is open) of any disciplinary matters placed in their personnel file.

11

3304105.1

ARTICLE VII
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
A.

Definitions
1.

Any claim by the Association or any employee that there has been a violation,
misinterpretation or misapplication of the terms of this Agreement shall be a
grievance.

2.

The failure of an employee or the Association to act on any grievance within the
prescribed time limits will act as a bar to any further appeal. An administrator’s
failure to give a decision within the prescribed time limits shall permit the grievance
automatically to proceed to the next step. These time limits may be extended by
mutual written agreement.

3.

All time limits shall consist of days when the District’s Joseph E. Hill
Administration Center is open.

B.

Procedures
The parties hereby acknowledge that it is usually most desirable for an employee and the
employee’s immediately involved supervisor to resolve problems through free and
informal communications.

When requested by the employee, an Association

representative may accompany the employee to assist in the informal resolution of the
grievance.

If, however, the informal process fails to satisfy the employee or the

Association, a grievance may be processed as follows:
1.

Step I—Within twenty (20) days following the occurrence of the event giving rise
to the grievance, the employee or the Association may present the grievance in
writing to the immediate supervisor, who will arrange for a meeting to take place
within ten (10) days after receipt of the grievance.
12

The Association’s
3304105.1

representative, the grievant, and the immediate supervisor shall be present for the
meeting. Within ten (10) days of the meeting, the grievant and the Association
shall be provided with the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources’ written
response, including the reasons for the decision.
2.

Step II—If the grievance is not resolved at Step I, then the Association may refer
the grievance to the Superintendent or the Superintendent’s official designee within
ten (10) days after the Step I answer. The Superintendent or designee shall arrange
with the Association representatives for a meeting to take place within ten (10) days
of the Superintendent’s receipt of the appeal. Each party shall have the right to
include in its representation such witnesses and internal representatives as it deems
necessary. Within ten (10) days of the meeting, the Association shall be provided
with the Superintendent’s or designee’s written response, including the reasons for
the decision.

3.

Step III—If the Association is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at
Step II, the Association may submit the grievance to arbitration through the
American Arbitration Association (“AAA”), which shall act as the administrator of
the proceedings. If a demand for arbitration is not filed within twenty (20) days of
the date for the Step II answer, then the grievance shall be deemed withdrawn. The
arbitrator shall follow the standard rules of the AAA, and shall have no authority
or jurisdiction to add to, subtract from, alter, or modify the terms of this Agreement.
Arbitration awards, in keeping with the preceding sentence, shall be final and
binding upon the parties. The arbitrator’s fees and expenses shall be borne equally
by the parties. If the parties agree, the arbitrator may follow AAA’s expedited rules.

13

3304105.1

C.

Bypass to Step II
If the Association and the immediate supervisor agree, Step I of the grievance procedure
may be bypassed and the grievance brought directly to Step II.

D.

Bypass to Arbitration
If the Superintendent or his designee and the Association agree, a grievance may be
submitted directly to arbitration.

E.

Association Participation - Employee Representation
The Board acknowledges the right of the Association’s grievance representative to
participate in the processing of a grievance at any level, and no employee shall be required
to discuss any grievance if the Association’s representative is not present.

F.

Released Time
Should the investigation or processing of any grievance require that employees be released
from their regular assignment, such employee shall be released without loss of pay or
benefits.

G.

Grievance Withdrawal
A grievance may be withdrawn at any level without establishing a precedent.

H.

Grievance Documents
Grievances and documents pertaining solely to the processing of grievances shall be kept
separate from employee personnel files.

14

3304105.1

ARTICLE VIII
LEAVES
A.

Sick Leave
At the beginning of each school year, each full-time employee (and contracted nutrition
service employee) shall be credited with ten (10) days of sick leave (eleven (11) for elevenmonth employees and twelve (12) for twelve-month employees) — equal to the number of
hours the employee regularly works each day — the unused portion of which shall
accumulate from year to year without limitation. Sick leave days will be prorated for
eligible employees who are hired during the school year. Sick leave shall be interpreted to
mean personal illness, mental or behavioral health complications, quarantine at home, or
serious illness or death in the immediate family or household. Sick leave shall also be
interpreted to mean birth, adoption, placement for adoption, and the acceptance of a child
in need of foster care. For purposes of this section the immediate family or household
includes parents, spouse, domestic partner, brothers, sisters, children, grandparents,
grandchildren, in-laws and legal guardians. Sick leave taken because of serious illness in
the immediate family or household shall not exceed one (1) calendar month in any school
year. Special exceptions may be made by approval of the Board.

B.

Funeral Leave
Full-time employees and nutrition service contracted employees shall be granted up to
three (3) days of funeral leave which may be used in connection with the death of a member
of the employee’s immediate family or household as defined in Paragraph A above, or
member of the employee’s domestic partner’s immediate family. This is apart from sick
leave and is non-cumulative.

15

3304105.1

C.

Workers’ Compensation
Absence due to injury or illness incurred in the course of employment and which qualifies
for workers’ compensation under the Illinois Workers’ Compensation Act shall not be
charged against the employee’s sick leave days, provided that the employee shall pay to
the District the salary insurance received under the Illinois Workers’ Compensation Act
for the duration of such absence.

D.

Personal Business Leave
At the beginning of each school year, each employee shall be credited with two (2) days to
be used for personal business. Employees planning to use a personal business leave day
who have attendance issues may be asked for an explanation for the absence by their
immediate supervisor. The granting or denial of a personal business leave day request will
not be made in an arbitrary or capricious manner. An employee planning to use a personal
business leave day or days shall notify their supervisor at least two days in advance, except
in cases of emergency. Personal business leave days shall be available for the practice of
individual religious preferences regardless of the day of the week. However, the day
preceding or following a legal holiday or school recess shall not be recognized as a personal
business leave day except upon the approval of the Assistant Superintendent of Human
Resources.

Such leave shall be non-cumulative as personal business days, but will be

added to the accumulated sick leave days available to the employee.
E.

Jury Duty
Any employee called for jury duty during working hours shall be paid their full salary for
such time and suffer no loss of benefits or contractual advantage.

16

3304105.1

F.

Statement of Available Leave
The District shall furnish each employee with a statement available electronically setting
forth the total unused leave day credit available under this Article.

G.

Unpaid Maternity/Parental Leave for Administrative Assistants, Clerks, Technology
specialists and Full-Time and Contracted Nutrition Service Employees
1.

Unpaid Maternity Leave
a.

If an unpaid maternity leave in connection with child-birth is desired, the
employee shall arrange for a meeting with the Assistant Superintendent of
Human Resources, or their designee. The purpose of the conference shall
be to determine a mutually agreeable plan for the maternity leave.

b.

Employees shall notify the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources
in writing if they desire to return after the leave is completed. The written
notification shall be accompanied by a physician’s written statement that
the returning employee is physically able to resume full duties.
Employees who wish to return from maternity leave as soon as they are
physically able shall be allowed to do so. Otherwise, employees shall return
within six (6) months (three (3) months for contracted nutrition service
employees), except that ten (10) month and eleven (11) month employees
may postpone their return until commencement of the next school year even
if doing so results in a leave of greater than six (6) months. Any employee
returning from maternity leave shall be returned to a position comparable
(“equal pay”) to that which she held prior to the maternity leave, provided
that nothing contained herein shall be interpreted to insulate employees on
maternity leave from reductions in force.
17

3304105.1

c.

Employees whose maternity leave exceeds six (6) months shall submit the
written notice of intention to return referred to in subparagraph b. above, no
later than March 1st.

Failure to comply with the notice-to-return

requirements for maternity leave shall be treated as an election not to return
to employment and shall be considered a voluntary resignation from the
District.
d.

Any insurance benefits under the provisions of this Agreement which would
otherwise accrue to an employee shall be suspended on the first day of the
month immediately following the beginning of the leave of absence. Except
as provided in Paragraph I (FMLA), any employee on maternity leave may
make arrangements during said leave to continue insurance coverage as
provided in this Agreement at her own expense. Any employee granted
maternity leave who has completed ninety (90) days or more of the school
year prior to said leave shall be considered to have completed a full year for
purposes of any applicable advancement on a salary schedule.

e.

Any employee desiring maternity leave as a result of becoming an adoptive
parent shall notify the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, in
writing, upon the initiation of such adoption proceedings. Leave shall be
granted

upon

satisfactory

written

notification

to

the

Assistant

Superintendent of Human Resources of the date the child is expected to be
received. It shall be the responsibility of the applying employee to keep the
Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources informed on the status of the
proceedings, and, as soon as known, the expected date of the delivery of the

18

3304105.1

child. This subparagraph shall not be applicable if the adopted child is ten
(10) or more years of age at the time the child is received.
2.

Unpaid Parental Leave
Unpaid parental leave shall be granted to an employee, upon request, to begin any
time between the birth or adoption of their child and three (3) calendar months
thereafter. Subparagraphs a. through e. above shall apply to parental leaves except
for the disability language of subparagraph b. and the first sentence of
subparagraph c.

H.

Unpaid Leave of Absence for Administrative Assistants and Clerks
A leave may be requested in writing for a period not to exceed one (1) year from the date
of leaving. Whether or not to grant an unpaid leave of absence shall be at the complete
discretion of the Board of Education.

An employee shall notify the Assistant

Superintendent of Human Resources in writing two (2) months prior to the expiration date
of the leave if they desire to return after the leave period is completed. The employee shall
be returned to as comparable a job as is practicable, but not necessarily the same position
held prior to the leave of absence. Notwithstanding the foregoing, employees on unpaid
leave shall not be insulated from reductions in force.
I.

Family and Medical Leave Act (“FMLA”)
The District shall coordinate the benefits provided under this Agreement with those
provided under the FMLA. To the extent required by the FMLA, the District will continue
to provide hospitalization insurance to eligible employees on Family and Medical Leave
for up to twelve (12) weeks in a rolling twelve (12) month period, on the same basis and
contribution level as if they were on the active payroll. Any concerns related to the

19

3304105.1

application of this section may be brought to the attention of the Assistant Superintendent
of Human Resources but may not be the subject of a grievance under this Agreement.

20

3304105.1

ARTICLE IX
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
The Board retains the right to manage the District and its administrative/clerical employees
and direct the work of the administrative/clerical employees in the manner it determines to be in
the best interests of the District. Such right includes, but is not limited to, the right to: hire,
discipline, and discharge employees; relieve employees from duty because of lack of work or other
legitimate reasons; determine the duties, responsibilities, and qualifications of employees, and the
manner in which the work is to be performed; determine the size of the work force; and establish
and enforce rules and regulations applicable to employees, so long as such rules and regulations
do not conflict with the express terms and conditions of this Agreement.

21

3304105.1

ARTICLE X
NO STRIKE OR WORK STOPPAGE
During the term of this Agreement there shall be no strike, work stoppage, picketing, or
any other form of concerted activity by the administrative/clerical employees, the purpose of which
is to cause District employees to render less than full and complete services to the District, by the
Union, its members, or any employees covered by this Agreement. This prohibition applies to
strikes and work stoppages for any reason, whether grievable or not.

22

3304105.1

ARTICLE XI
WORKING CONDITIONS
A.

Work Year
The official work calendar will be established yearly and will become an Appendix to this
Agreement. Prior to the establishment of the work calendar, DESC will be given an
opportunity to provide input. The work year for bargaining unit employees shall be as
follows:
●

The work year for twelve (12) month administrative/clerical employees shall not
exceed 261 days: 226 work days, 12 paid holidays and 20 paid vacation days.

●

The work year for eleven (11) month administrative/clerical employees shall not
exceed 261 days: 214 work days, 12 paid holidays and 18 paid vacation days.

●

The work year for ten (10) month administrative/clerical/health clerk employees
shall not exceed 216 days: 188 work days, 11 paid holidays and 17 paid vacation
days.

●

The work year for technology specialists shall be eleven (11) months. The work
year for technology specialists will consist of 212 work days, 12 paid holidays and
18 paid vacation days, 10 of which are discretionary and 8 of which are designated
for Winter Break.

●

The work year for full-time and part-time contracted nutrition service employees
shall be 190 days: 175 work days, 10 paid holidays and 5 vacation days.

●

The work year for full-time Head Start contracted nutrition services employees
shall be 206 days: 186 work days, 10 paid holidays, and 10 vacation days.

23

3304105.1

B.

Work Day
1.

Administrative/Clerical
Each full-time employee is entitled to two (2) non-paid breaks per work day. For
employees working seven (7) hours or more per day, the breaks shall be fifteen (15)
minutes each—one AM and one PM. For employees working between six (6) and
seven (7) hours, the non-paid breaks shall be ten (10) minutes each—one AM and
one PM. Half-time employees are entitled to one (1) non-paid ten (10) minute break
per day. All full-time employees will have at least a thirty (30) minute non-paid
duty-free lunch period.

2.

Health Clerks and Registered Nurses
The normal workday for elementary school health clerks shall be six (6) hours and
fifty (50) minutes, which includes two (2) non-paid breaks that shall be ten (10)
minutes each – one AM and one PM and one (1) thirty (30) minute non-paid dutyfree lunch period.
The normal workday for middle and magnet school health clerks shall be seven (7)
hours and twenty (20) minutes, which includes two (2) non-paid breaks shall be ten
(10) minutes each—one AM and one PM and one (1) thirty (30) minute non-paid
duty-free lunch period.
The normal workday for elementary, magnet and middle school LPNs/Registered
Nurses shall be seven (7) hours and fifty (50) minutes, which includes two (2) nonpaid breaks that shall be ten (10) minutes each – one AM and one PM and one thirty
(30) minute non-paid duty-free lunch period.

24

3304105.1

The normal workday for Head Start health clerk and registered nurse shall be eight
and one-half hours (8 ½) hours. The non-paid fifteen minute breaks shall be fifteen
(15) minutes each—one AM and one PM and one (1) thirty (30) minute non-paid
duty-free lunch period.
3.

Technology Specialists
Each full-time technology specialist normally works seven and one-half (7-1/2)
hours or more per day, and has a one (1) hour non-paid duty-free lunch period.

4.

Nutrition Service Employees
Each employee who works six (6) or more hours per day shall be entitled to two
(2), non-paid ten (10) minute breaks, one in the morning and one in the afternoon.
Employees who work between four (4) and six (6) hours per day shall be entitled
to one (1), non-paid ten (10) minute break.

C.

Flexible Hours
Unless otherwise specified by the Administration, normal work hours are from 8:00 a.m.
to 4:30 p.m. for full-time, seven and one-half (7½) hours per day Administrative Assistants.
However, if any Administrative Assistant or technology specialist wishes to apply for
flexible hour consideration a written request should be made to the employee’s immediate
supervisor; such written request should include the new schedule requested, the impact on
the employee’s work responsibilities, and the rationale for the change. If tentatively
approved by the immediate supervisor, the request will be forwarded to the Assistant
Superintendent of Human Resources for consideration and a final decision. Decisions
regarding flexible hours will be made at the sole discretion of the Administration on a caseby-case basis in keeping with the needs of the District. Nothing contained in this section

25

3304105.1

shall restrict the Administration’s right to establish and revise work schedules as necessary.
Upon request, the Association president will be informed of approved flexible hour
requests.
D.

Overtime
Overtime shall be at the request of the immediate supervisor and subject to the prior
approval of the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources unless in case of an
emergency. Time and one-half will be paid for all time over forty (40) hours. The regular
hourly rates will be paid through forty (40) hours. Payment for Sundays and/or holidays
will be double the regular hourly rate after forty (40) hours at the regular rate. In a given
work week, when a paid holiday occurs, the paid holiday will be considered as actual hours
worked for purposes of overtime compensation (according to the number of hours in the
employee’s normal work day) and as such, those hours will be considered a portion of that
forty (40) hour work week.

E.

Substitution for Administrative Assistants and Health Clerks
An effort will be made to identify one or more people (especially retired former staff) who
would be able to serve as a substitute when the need arises. In addition, inquiries will be
made to all part-time Administrative Assistants and health clerks regarding their
willingness to substitute during those hours when they are not working for the District.
The building administrator(s) may request a substitute following the normal request
procedure established by the District.

F.

Summer School Responsibilities
Every reasonable effort will be made to post known or anticipated administrative/clerical
positions at least thirty (30) days prior to the first day of summer school. If summer school

26

3304105.1

sessions are held in a building where no twelve-month Administrative Assistant is
employed, the summer school Administrative Assistant will normally only be expected to
perform duties for the immediate summer school administrator.

On occasion,

circumstances may necessitate an exception to this; however, the supervising administrator
will strive to keep such exceptions to a minimum. In a building where a twelve-month
Administrative Assistant is employed, if it is necessary for that Administrative Assistant to
assist with the summer school program, allowances will be made with respect to the work
load and time needed for completion of normal non-summer school duties. Summer school
registration and pre-summer school duties will be assigned to the individual for that
purpose. The summer school salary for ten-month Administrative Assistants will be
$1,400.
The District shall give full-time employees with absenteeism rates of 3% or less
preference for summer employment opportunities for positions with functions similar to
their regular job. The District will notify summer employment applicants of confirmed
employment no later than ten (10) days after the final enrollment count is submitted. The
final summer school pay check will be issued on the first regular pay day at least two weeks
after the last day of the summer school program.
G.

Safety
The Administration shall promptly review and respond to any safety concerns about the
work environment which are communicated by the Association to the Administration.

H.

C.P.R. Certification
As a condition of continued employment, all health clerks will be required to obtain and
maintain C.P.R. certification by the District or an appropriate agency.

27

3304105.1

I.

Good Attendance Bonus
If an employee is absent no more than two (2) sick days per semester (July 1 – December
31 and January 1 – June), the employee shall receive a bonus of $250 for a total of $500
for the school year. For purposes of this paragraph, absences caused by vacation, personal,
holiday, funeral leave, and jury duty do not count, but absences caused by sick days do
count.

J.

Labor Management Meetings
The parties agree to hold monthly labor/management meetings. The Association and
Administration each shall select up to four (4) employees to participate.

K.

Workplace Storage and Cell Phones
The parties agree to provide a secure storage space for technology specialists to store

equipment and personal belongings and to provide a secure workplace in at least one of the
buildings that a technology specialist services. If needed, the District will provide a building health
clerk with a smartphone to monitor students who are diabetic.

28

3304105.1

ARTICLE XII
SENIORITY
Length of service with the District is one of the factors which the District will consider
when laying off and recalling employees. To the extent required by law, the District will provide
full-time employees with a written notice of layoff or dismissal due to a reduction in force or hours
at least thirty (30) days in advance of said action, or five (5) days for a reduction in hours when
the student population is reduced, together with a written statement of honorable dismissal, if
applicable, and the reason therefor. Laid off employees will be considered for recall under this
section for up to one year, except that ten-month employees who are laid off at the conclusion of
the school year may be recalled until the commencement of the second ensuing school year. An
administrative employee who was laid off from a position within Classification E, F, G, or H, who
so elects, may displace the least senior administrative employee in either Classification C or D, if
that employee has less seniority than the laid off employee. A health clerk who has been laid off
from a position, who so elects, may displace the least senior health clerk, if that employee has less
seniority than the laid off employee. A nutrition service employee who is laid off from a position
within Classification B or C who so elects, may displace the least senior nutrition service employee
in either Classification A or B, if that employee has less seniority than the laid off employee. A
Technology specialist II who is laid off, who so elects, may displace the least senior Technology
specialist I, if that employee has less seniority than the laid off employee. Employees who displace
a least senior employee must have the required skills and training as determined by the
administrator of the building and the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources.
If, however, during the up to one year (or one year plus a summer for ten-month and elevenmonth employees) during which a bargaining unit employee may be on layoff, the position from
which the employee was laid off reopens, that employee will have recall rights to that position.
29

3304105.1

Moreover, if while an employee is on layoff, a vacancy exists in any position of equal
Classification or less, the laid off employee will be given a priority interview to establish his/her
qualifications for the position and, if qualified, will normally receive preference for the position.
When employees are recalled, they retain all rights they had when they were laid off except to the
extent that they used them when on layoff.

30

3304105.1

ARTICLE XIII
VACANCIES, PROMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS
A.

Posting
When a permanent vacancy occurs within the bargaining unit or a new position within the
bargaining unit is created, under normal circumstances such vacancy shall be posted online, in the Administration Center, and a copy will be sent to the DESC President.
Applications will be accepted from employees within the bargaining unit for all posted
District vacancies, including promotional opportunities.

B.

Application for Transfer
An employee may at any time notify their immediate supervisor in writing if they are
interested in a change in assignment to an existing vacancy within the same
department/building. All applications for a transfer to a vacancy shall be referred to the
Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources.

C.

In-District Preference/Seniority
The District shall consider all bargaining unit employees when bidding for job openings
within the bargaining unit. Among the factors the District shall consider are qualifications,
length of service with the District and performance.

D.

Involuntary Transfers
Should an involuntary transfer of a bargaining unit employee be necessary, seniority shall
be considered as part of the involuntary transfer process and the involved employee(s) shall
be provided with written notice a minimum of ten (10) workdays of the involuntary transfer
to ensure proper training and transition of both positions are done seamlessly and
successfully. In the event there are emergencies or special circumstances, DESC shall be
notified in writing with a subsequent meeting to discuss the need and change being
31

3304105.1

submitted. An earlier transition will be mutually agreed upon between the District and
DESC and shall be handled in a timely and efficient manner. Training needed specific to
the new role/assignment will be provided to involuntary transfers to support a successful
transition to meet the needs of the students.

32

3304105.1

ARTICLE XIV
COMPENSATION AND FRINGE BENEFITS
A.

Salary Schedule
1.

Employees shall be paid in accordance with the applicable salary schedules set forth
in Appendix A, as set forth below w:

2.

a.

FY23, FY24, FY25: increase of 3.0% on base, with step movement each
year, with FY23 increase retroactive to July 1, 2022.

b.

FY26: increase of 2.5% on base, with step movement.

c.

FY27: increase of 2% on base, with step movement.

d.

Increase first step on Food Nutrition Services Staff Salary Schedule to
$18.00, with all Food Nutrition Services Staff brought to a minimum hourly
rate of $18/hour.

Full-time employees who do not move on the salary schedule in a particular year
because they have reached the top step shall receive a one-time, gross lump sum
bonus of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2500) in December of any such year.
Such part-time administrative/clerical employees shall receive a bonus that is
proportionate to their load (e.g., a part-time employee who has a one-half load who
has reached the top step prior to the year in question would receive a gross payment
of one thousand two hundred dollars ($1200)).

3.

All newly hired bargaining unit employees shall start at Step 1 of the salary
schedule. Experience outside the District shall be taken into consideration for a
higher salary step placement, but in no event shall exceed ten (10) steps or ten (10)
years.

33

3304105.1

B.

Definition of Full-Time Employee
For all purposes under this Agreement, including benefit eligibility, “full-time employee”
shall mean an employee who regularly is scheduled to work at least thirty (30) hours per
week.

C.

Pay Periods
Employees will be paid on the fifteenth (15th) and thirtieth (30th) of each month in which
they are working. At the employee’s option, the District shall distribute paychecks to each
employee at their workplace, or directly deposit the employee’s paycheck. Ten- month
administrative/clerical employees who so elect may have their pay spread out over twelve
(12) months.

D.

Vacation for Administrative Assistants, Health Clerks
1.

Ten-month Administrative Assistants/health clerks will receive seventeen (17) days
of vacation in each full school year. The seventeen (17) days for Administrative
Assistants shall include two (2) institute days and the days of winter and spring
break during which the schools are closed. The seventeen (17) days for health clerks
shall include the days of winter and spring break during which the schools are
officially closed.

2.

Eleven-month administrative/clerical employees will receive eighteen (18) days of
vacation in each full school year. The eighteen (18) days shall include two (2)
institute days and the days of winter and spring break during which the schools are
closed.

3.

Twelve-month employees will receive twenty (20) working days of vacation.
Those employees who earned five (5) weeks of vacation under the Agreements in
effect prior to July 1, 1980, will be allowed to retain the full five weeks. The twenty
34

3304105.1

days shall be scheduled upon agreement between the employee and the
administrator and shall include the days during which the offices are officially
closed.
4.

In their first year of employment, twelve-month employees will earn pro-rated
vacation time for each month they are employed prior to July 1st.

5.

Any unused vacation days for twelve-month bargaining unit employees shall be
non-accumulative as vacation days but will be added to the accumulated sick days
available to the employee.

E.

Vacation for Technology Specialists
Full-time technology specialists will receive eighteen (18) days of vacation in each full
school year as established by the District. Ten (10) of the vacation days for technology
specialists will be discretionary. Vacation days will be requested in advance for approval.
The remaining eight (8) vacation days will be non-discretionary.

F.

Service Recognition
The District will pay during the last year of employment service recognition stipends to
full-time employees pursuant to the following schedules, provided that the employee
notifies the District of their intent to retire by January 1 of the year in which they plan to
retire:

35

3304105.1

1.

2.

All Full-Time Bargaining Unit Employees
Years of Service

Lump Sum Payment

15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

$2,200
$2,300
$2,400
$2,500
$2,600
$2,700
$2,800
$2,900
$3,000
$3,100
$3,200
$3,300
$3,400
$3,500
$3,600
$3,700
$3,800
$3,900
$4,000
$4,100
$4,200

To the extent that receipt of the stipend will result in an employee receiving more
than a six percent (6%) increase in total salary over the previous year’s salary, the
remaining portion shall be paid to the employee in the second calendar month
after the effective date of the employee’s retirement.

G.

Longevity Bonus
A one-time, lump sum payment of $1,500 will be made upon completion of twenty years
of service in District 65.

H.

Payment for Unused Sick leave
Upon retirement or honorable dismissal of a full-time bargaining unit employee, the Board
of Education will pay one hundred dollars ($100) per day for up to a maximum of one
hundred eighty (180) days of accumulated sick leave, excluding days which the employee
36

3304105.1

chooses to credit for IMRF purposes. To the extent that receipt of the stipend will result
in an employee receiving more than a six percent (6%) increase in total salary over the
previous year’s salary, the remaining portion shall be paid to the employee in the second
calendar month after the effective date of the employee’s retirement.
I.

Hospitalization Insurance
1.

Coverage
All full-time employees will be eligible for coverage under the District’s medical
insurance plan. The District will not change its medical insurance plan without first
providing notice to the Association as well as an opportunity for Association input.
Employees who elect coverage under one of the District’s health insurance plans
shall pay the applicable percentage of the insurance cost set forth below:
FY23-26
BA HMO
HMO IL
Single
Employee + 1
Family
Employee
Family

PPO

11%
27%
27%

11%
18%
18%

HMO Dental
19%
50%

PPO Dental
19%
60%

42%
42%
36%

FY27
Single
Employee + 1
Family

Employee
Family

HMO IL
6%
22%
22%

BA HMO
6%
13%
13%

HMO Dental

PPO Dental

14%
45%

14%
55%

37

PPO
37%
37%
31%

3304105.1

Insurance coverage shall be based on a plan year of September 1 through
August 31.
The District will offer an expanded §125 plan for employee pre-tax
contributions for insurance premiums, out-of-pocket medical expenses, and
dependent care expenses consistent with the Internal Revenue Code and IRS
Regulations. The District will pay all of the administrative costs. Terms of the plan
will control.
An employee shall be allowed to enroll their domestic partner for medical
and dental coverage on the same basis that employees may enroll their spouse,
provided that the domestic partner is eligible pursuant to the District’s eligibility
criteria in effect as of the effective date of this Agreement and the applicable
Affidavit of Domestic Partnership is completed and executed.
2.

Joint Insurance Committee
A Joint Insurance Committee will be established for the purpose of reviewing
avenues and options to contain or decrease the cost of current and future health
insurance.
The Committee will be comprised of, but not limited to, the Assistant
Superintendent of Human Resources, the Chief Financial Officer, one (1) member
of the DEC Council, the DEC President, and one member of each ESP bargaining
unit appointed by each unit’s President.

As Chair, the District’s Assistant

Superintendent of Human Resources shall be responsible for scheduling meetings
and preparing the written information for each meeting. The Committee will meet
as necessary but at least three (3) times per year.

38

3304105.1

The work of the Committee shall be collaborative in order to promote a
wide range of views and opinions as insurance options are reviewed. It shall have
access to necessary information in order to do this. The Committee chair will
provide these materials to the Committee members. However, the Chair will
protect the confidentiality of individual plan participants as required by the ADA
or other applicable law. Further, the Committee may meet with the District broker
and an IEA approved consultant who may provide recommendations concerning
the plan design and options, interpret data generated from reports of carriers, and
provide projections of future plan experience. It shall be the responsibility of the
District’s broker to contact all potential providers.
Recommendations of the Insurance Committee will be forwarded to the
Board of Education. The Board shall review and consider the recommendations as
it determines plan options for District employees.
The Board and Council are free to use information, reports and
recommendations generated by the Committee in formulating proposals for use in
collective bargaining.
J.

Long-Term Disability Insurance
The District will provide a long-term disability insurance policy to cover all full-time
employees. This plan provides for 60% of salary (up to a maximum of $6,000 per month)
if the employee is disabled from sickness or an accident and is effective on the ninety-first
(91st) day of disability. This benefit is payable until the employee’s disability ends, but no
later than the later of age 65 or Social Security Normal Retirement Age.

39

3304105.1

K.

Term Life Insurance
The District will provide term life insurance coverage of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000)
for each full-time employee up to age seventy (70), at which age the benefit is reduced in
accordance with the carrier’s reduction schedule.

L.

Physical Exam Reimbursement
The District will reimburse each full-time employee up to one hundred fifty dollars ($150)
every other year toward the cost of an annual physical exam.

M.

Paid Holidays
Full-time and contracted nutrition service employees will receive ten (10) paid holidays.
Ten-month Administrative Assistants and clerks will receive eleven (11) paid holidays. In
addition, twelve-month Administrative Assistants and clerks shall receive July 4 -Independence Day, as a paid holiday. Technology specialists shall receive twelve (12) paid
holidays. All holidays will be established by the District.

N.

Retirement Contributions for Administrative Assistants and Clerks
Given enactment of appropriate enabling legislation and approval by the IRS, the District
will “pick up” and pay the 4½% employee contributions to IMRF and designate them as
employer contributions for the purposes of Section 414(H) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code.

O.

Additional Assignment(s)
If a bargaining unit employee assumes all of the duties of another, higher paid bargaining
unit position within their department or school for more than five (5) working days, said
employee shall be paid for such time at the rate they would be paid for assuming that
position on a permanent basis.

40

3304105.1

P.

Retirement Incentive
The District will provide for a one-time gross retirement incentive of two thousand four
hundred dollars ($2,400) to a maximum of three (3) Administrative Assistants/clericals and
twelve hundred dollars ($1,200) to a maximum of two (2) health clerks, one (1) technology
specialist, one (1) library media assistant and one (1) full-time nutrition service employee
who are eligible for IMRF retirement and who notify the Board of their decision to retire
by January 1 (or at least six months in advance for 12-month employees). This bonus will
be paid in four (4) monthly installments in such an employee’s last four (4) months of
employment, except that to the extent that receipt of the incentive will result in an employee
receiving more than a six percent (6%) increase in total salary over the previous year’s
salary, the remaining portion shall be paid to the employee in the second calendar month
after the effective date of the employee’s retirement.
Applicants shall be granted the retirement incentive bonus on a first-come, firstserved basis as indicated by the date stamped on their written request. If more than one
employee applies on the same date, the employee with the greatest District seniority shall
be granted the retirement stipend, unless otherwise agreed upon by the District and the
Association. The Association Executive Board shall serve as an advisory board regarding
any matter that may arise regarding the administration of this program.
Any unused monies allocated for this program shall be applied in a manner agreed
to by the District and the Association. This early retirement incentive bonus program shall
remain in effect for the duration of this Agreement as long as allocated funds exist.

Q.

Employee Assistance Plan
The District will offer an Employee Assistance Plan (EAP) to full-time employees.

41

3304105.1

R.

Section 457 Plan
The Board will offer an approved Section 457 Plan to all employees.

S.

Job Reclassification
The District and the Association agree that the classification for each job shall continue in
effect unless there is an authorized change in job content significant enough to justify a
review and reclassification. Either the District or the Union may request a reclassification
review. Job reclassification is defined as a significant change in duties of a job over time
and reclassification requests shall be referred to the Association. The Association will
review and submit the request, along with information to support the request, to the
Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources.
When moving to a higher classification, an employee will move to that step which
is nearest to, but more than, the present salary in the former classification. If the move to a
higher classification does not result in a minimum 5% increase, the employee will then be
moved to the next step in the new classification.

42

3304105.1

ARTICLE XV
INSERVICE AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
A.

Administrative Assistants and Clerks
A full inservice day will be established yearly and will be part of the official calendar. This
will be a release-time inservice, attendance will be mandatory, and shall include training
on professional behavior and workplace relationships. Exceptions will only be made when
an emergency prohibits attendance and/or if the employee has a personal or vacation day
pre-approved by their immediate supervisor. A copy of the written approved request must
be submitted to the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources prior to the planned
inservice. The Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources will notify all administrators
of the planned inservice in writing at least one week in advance.
Release time for an additional inservice may be granted, if requested, by the
President of DESC. The Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources will assume the
responsibility for notifying all department heads.
DESC officers will be given an opportunity to recommend inservice program
content at the beginning of each school year. All employees will be notified in writing of
the inservice content, time and place at least one week in advance.
The Board of Education continues to support the concept of professional growth.
Efforts will be made to expand the level of inservice beyond the minimum established
above. In addition, the Administration will consider requests for staff to attend seminars
that are job-related.
An amount of up to $250 per bargaining unit employee will be made available on
an annual basis for job-related professional development that occurs outside of the District.
The expenditure of these funds will be authorized through consultation with the immediate
43

3304105.1

supervisor and approved by the Superintendent, or their designee. Funds not expended in
one year may not be carried over to the next year.
Occasionally District 65 receives tuition waivers from nearby colleges in exchange
for accepting student teachers. When the college regulations permit, employees covered
by the DESC Agreement will be eligible to participate in lottery drawings held to distribute
such tuition waivers. The District shall notify employees of the date of the lottery drawing.
B.

Technology Specialists and Nutrition Service Employees
The Board recognizes the need to provide employees with appropriate educational
programs that will enhance job performance and development. Employees shall be
required to attend in-service programs to maintain appropriate certifications. Inservice
training shall include training on professional behavior and workplace relationships.

C.

Professional Learning Committee
The District values the input of all DESC bargaining unit employees and will conduct a
survey of all bargaining unit employees regarding professional development opportunities
and training. The survey data will be provided to the Joint Professional Learning
Committee to serve as guidance as professional learning is planned for the 2021-2022
school year. The Association may select two DESC bargaining unit employees to serve on
the Joint Professional Learning Committee.

44

3304105.1

ARTICLE XVI
NEGOTIATION PROCEDURES
A.

The parties agree to fulfill whatever obligations they may have under the Illinois
Educational Labor Relations Act regarding the negotiation of a successor agreement.

B.

Each party in negotiations shall select its respective representatives, provided that neither
party’s team shall consist of more than eight (8) members. Within thirty (30) days,
following the first bargaining meeting, complete proposals as to all non-economic matters
shall be made by both parties.

45

3304105.1

ARTICLE XVII
SCOPE AND EFFECT OF AGREEMENT
A.

This Agreement constitutes the entire and complete commitment and agreement between
the parties concerning wages and terms and conditions of employment for the duration of
the Agreement. The parties hereby agree that this Agreement is in full settlement of all
outstanding issues between the parties, and that this Agreement may be altered, changed,
added to, deleted from, or modified only through the mutual consent of the parties in a
written, executed amendment of this Agreement.

B.

If any provision of this Agreement is declared by the proper judicial or legislative authority
to be unlawful, unenforceable, or unconstitutional, all other provisions of this Agreement
shall remain in full force and effect for the duration hereof.

C.

This Agreement shall become effective upon the approval by the Board of Education and
the Association. This Agreement shall continue in effect until the commencement of the
2027-2028 school year, unless it is extended for a specific period by the written agreement
of the parties hereto.

46

3304105.1

2022-2023 ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL SALARY SCHEDULE

48

3304105.1

2023-2024 ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL SALARY SCHEDULE

49

3304105.1

2024-2025 ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL SALARY SCHEDULE

50

3304105.1

2025-2026 ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL SALARY SCHEDULE

51

3304105.1

2026-2027 ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL SALARY SCHEDULE

52

3304105.1

HEALTH CLERK SALARY SCHEDULES
2022-23 through 2026-27

53

3304105.1

FOOD SERVICE SALARY SCHEDULE
2022-23 through 2026-27

54

3304105.1

FOOD SERVICE SALARY SCHEDULE
2022-23 through 2026-27

55

3304105.1

TECHNOLOGY SPECIALIST SALARY SCHEDULES
2022-23 through 2026-27

56

3304105.1
