COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board
IN THE MATTER OF THE EMPLOYES OF

LOWER SWATARA TOWNSHIP

:
:
:
:
:

Case No. PF-R-23-59-E

FINAL ORDER
A Petition for Representation was filed with the Pennsylvania
Labor Relations Board (Board) on July 10, 2023, by the Lower Swatara
Police Officers Association (Petitioner) seeking to represent a
bargaining unit of police officers employed by Lower Swatara Township
(Employer). The Petitioner further requested that a hearing be
scheduled and an Order be issued for an election to determine the
exclusive representative for collective bargaining pursuant to the
provisions of Section 7(c) of the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Act
(PLRA) and Act 111 of 1968. The Petition also alleged that the
employes in the petitioned-for unit are currently represented by
Teamsters Local Union No. 776 (Incumbent Union) and that the collective
bargaining agreement covering said employes expires on December 31,
2023. The Petition was accompanied by a showing of interest that
consisted of copies of authorization cards.
On August 2, 2023, the Secretary of the Board declined to direct
a hearing on the Petition because the Petition was not accompanied by
an original showing of interest as required by the Board’s Rules and
Regulations. 34 Pa. Code §§ 95.1 and 95.14(8). The Secretary further
noted that the Petition was not filed in the appropriate window-period
30-60 days prior to the time bargaining must commence under Act 111 for
a successor agreement, citing to O’Hara Township, 9 PPER ¶ 9073 (Order
Fixing Time and Place of Election, 1978), 10 PPER ¶ 10313 (Final Order,
1979), aff’d, 14 PPER ¶ 14107 (Court of Common Pleas, 1983). On August
21, 2023, the Petitioner filed timely exceptions and a supporting brief
challenging the Secretary’s dismissal of the Petition for
Representation.
On exceptions, the Petitioner argues that the Secretary erred in
dismissing the Petition for failure to provide an original signed and
dated showing of interest because the language of the PLRB-13 petition
form does not indicate that an “original” showing of interest must be
attached, only that the showing of interest be signed and dated. The
Petitioner further argues that Section 95.14 of the Board’s Rules and
Regulations concerning the contents of an election request does not
state that an “original” showing of interest is required.
Section 95.1 of the Board’s Rules and Regulations provides that a
showing of interest “shall consist of written authorization cards or
petitions, signed by employes and dated….” 34 Pa. Code § 95.1. The
Board’s interpretation of its promulgated Regulations, to require
original signed authorization cards or petitions, is designed to
further the purposes and policies of the PLRA of ascertaining the
employes’ desires for a representation election. In that respect, the
Board’s longstanding policy requires that a showing of interest must

contain original signatures and not merely copies of signatures. Bucks
County, 27 PPER ¶ 27027 (Final Order, 1995); Neshannock Township School
District, 17 PPER ¶ 17153 (Final Order, 1986). Here, the Petitioner’s
showing of interest only contained copies of the signatures of the
employes. Therefore, the Secretary did not err in dismissing the
Petition because it did not include an originally signed showing of
interest.
The Petitioner further asserts that the Petition was filed within
the appropriate window-period 30-60 days prior to the time bargaining
must commence for a successor agreement. The Petitioner’s reliance on
Somerset Borough, 41 PPER 61 at 210 (Order, 2010), to support its
assertion that the Petition was timely filed is misplaced. The
language quoted by the Petitioner concerns the timeframe for when
collective bargaining should commence in order for a timely request for
interest arbitration to be made by the employe representative.
However, the Board’s 30-60-day window-period set forth in O’Hara
Township for representation petitions is designed to accommodate an
election in time for the prevailing union to meet the bargaining
timetable under Act 111 and, therefore, must of necessity require the
filing of a representation petition 30-60 days prior to the
commencement of bargaining.
In O’Hara Township, the Board created a window-period for the
filing of petitions under the PLRA and Act 111, holding that such
representation petitions must be filed with the Board not sooner than
sixty days, and not later than thirty days, prior to the date when
collective bargaining is required to commence. Section 3 of Act 111
provides that collective bargaining “shall begin at least six months
before the start of the fiscal year of the political subdivision….” 43
P.S. § 217.3. Under the requirements of O’Hara Township, it was
necessary for the Petitioner to file the Petition between May 2, 2023,
and June 1, 2023, i.e., 30-60 days prior to the date bargaining should
commence on July 1, 2023. The Association’s Petition was filed on July
10, 2023. Accordingly, the Petition was not filed within the 30-60-day
window-period and is untimely.
The Petitioner additionally alleges that, even if the Petition
was not filed within the window-period, the uncontested Petition, with
alleged support from the Incumbent Union and the Employer, waives any
objection to timeliness articulated in O’Hara Township and does not
diverge from the principle of labor stability espoused in Act 111.
However, the Petition did not include any letter or statement from the
Employer indicating its support of the Petition, nor was the Petition
filed jointly by the Petitioner and Employer.
More importantly, the alleged disclaimer of interest from the
Incumbent Union attached to the Petition is not sufficient to establish
the Incumbent Union’s intent to disclaim interest from representing the
police officers. What was attached is an email to the Petitioner
allegedly from the Incumbent Union merely stating that the Incumbent
Union “does not object” to the Petitioner’s request to send an email or
a letter to the Board disclaiming interest in the petitioned-for unit.
However, no such letter directly from the Incumbent Union to the Board
was filed wherein the Incumbent Union expressly disclaimed interest in
representing the employes, as is required by the Board’s Rules and
Regulation. 34 Pa. Code § 95.15. Therefore, the Secretary properly
2

determined that the Petition for Representation was not timely nor
properly filed.
After a thorough review of the exceptions and all matters of
record, the Board shall dismiss the Petitioner’s exceptions and affirm
the Secretary’s decision not to direct a hearing on the Representation
Petition.
ORDER
In view of the foregoing and in order to effectuate the policies
of the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Act and Act 111, the Board
HEREBY ORDERS AND DIRECTS
that the exceptions filed by Lower Swatara Police Officers Association
are hereby dismissed, and the August 2, 2023 decision of the Secretary
declining to direct a hearing on the Petition for Representation be and
hereby is made absolute and final.
SEALED, DATED, and MAILED at Harrisburg, Pennsylvania pursuant to
conference call meeting of the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board,
James M. Darby, Chairman, Albert Mezzaroba, Member, and Gary Masino,
Member, this nineteenth day of December, 2023. The Board hereby
authorizes the Secretary of the Board, pursuant to 34 Pa. Code
95.81(a), to issue and serve upon the parties hereto the within order.

3
