Agreement
between
The Village of Bridgeview
and
Service Employees
International Union Local 73
For the
Department of Public Works
May 1, 2024 - April 30, 2028
September 3, 2025

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE / SECTION

SUBJECT

PAGE

TABLE OF CONTENTS

i-iv

ARTICLE 1

PREAMBLE

1

ARTICLE 2 RECOGNITION
Section 2.1 Recognition
Section 2.2 Fair Representation
Section 2.3 Gender

1
1
1

ARTICLE 3

1

NON-DISCRIMINATION

ARTICLE 4 DUES DEDUCTIONS
Section 4.1 Dues Deductions
Section 4.2 Indemnity
Section 4.3 Revocation
Section 4.4 COPE Deduction

2
2
2
2

ARTICLE 5

SUBCONTRACTING

2

ARTICLE 6

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

3

ARTICLE 7 NO-STRIKE - NO LOCKOUT
Section 7.1 No Strike
Section 7.2 No Lockout
Section 7.3 Judicial Restraint
Section 7.4 Discipline of Strikers

3
3
3
3

ARTICLE 8

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

4

ARTICLE 9 NORMALWORK DAY / WORK WEEK
Section 9.1 Application
Section 9.2 Normal Workweek and Workday
Section 9.3 Compensatory Time
Section 9.4 Lunch Break

5
5
5
6

ARTICLE 10 OVERTIME
Section 10.1 Overtime Pay
Section 10.2 Sundays and Holidays
Section 10.3 No Pyramiding
Section 10.4 Call-Back Pay

6
6
6
6

i

ARTICLE / SECTION

SUBJECT

Section 10.5 Seniority for Overtime
Section 10.6 On-Call Duty

PAGE
6
6

ARTICLE 11 HOLIDAYS

8

ARTICLE 12 VACATION
Section 12.1 Vacations
Section 12.2 Vacation Pay
Section 12.3 Vacation Pay When Terminated
Section 12.4 Vacation Credit During Leaves

9
9
9
10

ARTICLE 13 SICK LEAVE
Section 13.1 Sick Leave
Section 13.2 Earning and Accumulation
Section 13.3 Non-Paid Days Off
Section 13.4 Family and Medical Leave Act

10
10
10
10

ARTICLE 14 SENIORITY
Section 14.1 Definition
Section 14.2 Termination of Seniority
Section 14.3 Probationary Period

10
11
11

ARTICLE 15 LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Section 15.1 Bereavement Leave
Section 15.2 Short Term Military Leave

11
12

ARTICLE 16 LAYOFF AND RECALL
Section 16.1 Layoff
Section 16.2 Recall

12
12

ARTICLE 17 DISABILITY POLICY
Section 17.1 Employee Disability
Section 17.2 Pregnancy
Section 17.3 Disability Termination
Section 17.4 Waiting Period
Section 17.5 Gross Salary
Section 17.6 Years of Continuous Employment
Section 17.7 Year of Usage
Section 17.8 Policy Prohibitions
Section 17.9 Sick Leave / Disability Policy, Vacation Time and Sick Days

12
12
13
13
13
13
14
14
14

ii

ARTICLE / SECTION

SUBJECT

PAGE

ARTICLE 18 INSURANCE
Section 18.1 Hospitalization
Section 18.2 Life Insurance
Section 18.3 Dental Insurance
Section 18.4 Prescription Card
Section 18.5 Retirement Insurance Benefits
Section 18.6 Insurance Committee

15
15
15
15
15
15

ARTICLE 19 EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE

16

ARTICLE 20 BULLETIN BOARDS

16

ARTICLE 21 CLASSIFICATIONS
Section 21.1 Full-Time Employees
Section 21.2 Temporary Employees
Section 21.3 Seasonal Workers
Section 21.4 Job Assignments
Section 21.5 Promotional Vacancies
Section 21.6 Toyota Park
Section 21.7 Part-Time Employees

16
16
17
17
17
17
19

ARTICLE 22 CLOTHING ALLOWANCE

19

ARTICLE 23 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 23.1 Employee Eyeglasses
Section 23.2 Inoculation or Immunization
Section 23.3 Funeral/Burial Expenses
Section 23.4 Commercial Drivers License
Section 23.5 Residency
Section 23.6 Training Classes

19
19
19
19
20
20

ARTICLE 24 UNION BUSINESS

20

ARTICLE 25 WAGE RATES
Section 25.1 Wage Rates for Current Employees
Section 25.2 Wage Rates for Newly Hired Employees
Section 25.3 Step-Up Pay

21
21
21

ARTICLE 26 SAFETY COMMITTEE

21

ARTICLE 27 EMPLOYEE DISCIPLINE
Section 27.1 Inspection of Personnel Records
Section 27.2 Purge of Personnel File

21
21

iii

ARTICLE / SECTION

SUBJECT

PAGE

ARTICLE 28 SEIU NATIONAL INDUSTRY PENSION FUND
Section 28.1 Coverage
Section 28.2 Term
Section 28.3 Contributions
Section 28.4 Trust Agreement
Section 28.5 Cooperation
Section 28.6 Approval by Trustees
Section 28.7 Miscellaneous

21
22
22
22
22
22
22

ARTICLE 29 COMPLETE AGREEMENT

23

ARTICLE 30 SAVINGS CLAUSE

23

ARTICLE 31 DURATION
Section 31.1 Term of Agreement
Section 31.2 Continuing Effect

23
23

APPENDIX A

WAGE SCHEDULE

APPENDIX B

JOB DESCRIPTIONS & ASSIGNMENTS

APPENDIX C

ON-CALL RULES

APPENDIX D SNOW LIST RULES

iv

ARTICLE 1

PREAMBLE

This Agreement is entered into by and between the Village of Bridgeview, an Illinois
municipal corporation (the "Employer" and/or the "Village"), and the Service Employees
International Union Local 73, Public Works Division (the "Union").
It is the purpose of this Agreement and it is the intent of the parties hereto to establish and
promote mutual harmonious understanding and relationships between the Employer and the Union
to promote departmental efficiency and effectiveness, to establish wages, hours, standards and
other terms and conditions of employment of employees covered by this Agreement, and, to
provide for the equitable and peaceful adjustment and resolution of differences which may arise
from time to time over the negotiations, interpretation and application of this Agreement.
In consideration of the mutual promises, covenants and agreements contained herein, the
parties hereto, by their duly authorized representatives and/or agents, do mutually covenant and
agree as follows:
ARTICLE 2

RECOGNITION

Section 2.1. Recognition. The Village hereby recognizes the Union as the sole and
exclusive bargaining representative for all employees in the bargaining unit. The bargaining unit
shall include all full-time employees in the Public Works Department, EXCLUDING: Clericals,
short-term and seasonal employees, supervisors, managerial and confidential employees as defined
by the Illinois Labor Relations Act and all other employees of the Village.
Section 2.2. Fair Representation. The Union recognizes its responsibility as
bargaining agent and agrees fairly to represent all employees in the bargaining unit, whether or not
they are members of the Union.
Section 2.3. Gender. Wherever the male gender is used in this Agreement, it shall be
construed to include both males and females equally.
ARTICLE 3

NON-DISCRIMINATION

The Village, in compliance with Illinois constitutional and statutory provisions and in
compliance with both the letter and intent of the United States Civil Rights Act of 1964, hereby
explicitly affirms its Equal Employment Opportunity Policy.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Policy ensures that employment opportunities within
the Village are free from discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, political affiliation
or beliefs, age and national origin or ancestry.
The employer shall not discriminate against employees, and employment-related decisions
will be based on qualifications in a given position without regard to the race, color, sex. age,
religion, or national origin of the employee; nor shall the employer discriminate against employees
as a result of activities on behalf of the Union or membership in the Union, or the exercise of
constitutional rights.
1

The legal basis and rationale for such a policy are compelling. Article I, Section 17 of the
Illinois Constitution of 1970 guarantees freedom from employment discrimination in the following
manner:
All persons shall have the right to be free from discrimination on the basis of race, color,
creed, national ancestry and sex in hiring and promotion practices of any employer or in
the sale or rental of property.
The Village hereby recognizes that the absence of overt discrimination does not in itself
assure equal opportunity to women and minority groups, and that other factors such as poverty,
inferior education, and traditional recruitment or employment practices also hinder the minority
applicant. Furthermore, through the efforts of the Village, there will be a continuing process of
review of the hiring practices, the administrative procedures and the promotion structure of the
Village of Bridgeview.
ARTICLE 4

DUES DEDUCTIONS

Section 4.1. Dues Deductions. Upon receipt of proper written authorization from an
employee, the Employer shall deduct each month's Union dues in the amount certified by the
Treasurer of the Union from the pay of all employees covered by this Agreement who, in writing.
authorize such deductions. Such money shall be submitted to the Union within fifteen (15) days
after the deductions have been made.
Section 4.2. Indemnity. The Union hereby indemnifies and agrees to save the Employer
harmless against any and all claims, demands, suits or other forms of liability that may arise out
of or by reason of, any action taken or not taken by the Employer for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this Article.
Section 4.3. Revocation. A Union member desiring to revoke the dues checkoff may
do so by written notice to the Employer and the Union Secretary/Treasurer. This authorization
shall be irrevocable for a period of one (1) year from the date of execution or until the termination
dated of the Collective Bargaining Agreement, whichever occurs sooner.
Section 4.4. COPE Deduction. The Village will allow all employees to voluntarily
request a COPE deduction to be withheld from wages and submitted to the Union.
ARTICLE 5

SUBCONTRACTING

The Village has no present intention to contract out for any services customarily provided
by the bargaining unit employees. The Village will not contract out any of those customarily
provided services that will result in a layoff of bargaining unit employees. However, the Village
may consider contracting out in order to improve efficiency, reduce costs, or respond to work load
changes. In such event, the Village will provide the Union with not less than thirty (30) days
written notice of such contracting out and negotiate with the Union prior to any implementation
that would lead to a layoff of bargaining unit members. If no agreement can be reached through
negotiation after sixty (60) days, then the Village may unilaterally implement such contracting.
2

ARTICLE 6

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Except as specifically limited by the express provisions of this Agreement to the extent and
permitted by the law, the Village retains all traditional rights to manage and direct the affairs of
the Village in all of its various aspects and to manage and direct its employees, including but not
limited to the following: to plan, direct, control and determine the budget and all the operations,
services and missions of the Village; to supervise and direct the working forces; to establish the
qualifications for employment and to employ employees; to schedule and assign work; to establish
objective work and productivity standards and, from time to time, to change those standards; to
assign voluntary and mandatory overtime; to contract out for goods and services; to determine the
methods, means, organization and number of personnel by which such operations and services
shall be made or purchased; to make, alter and enforce reasonable rules. regulations, orders,
policies and procedures; to evaluate employees; to discipline, suspend and discharge nonprobationary employees for just cause (probationary employees without cause); to change or
eliminate existing methods, equipment or facilities or introduce new ones; to determine training
needs and assign employees to training; to determine hours of work; to take any and all actions as
may be necessary to carry out the mission of the Village and the Department in the event of civil
emergency as may be declared by the Mayor, or his authorized designees, it is the sole discretion
of the Mayor to determine that civil emergency conditions exist which may include, but not be
limited to, riots, civil disorders, tornado conditions, floods or other catastrophes. These rights shall
not be exercised in an arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable manner.
ARTICLE 7

NO STRIKE - NO LOCKOUT

Section 7.1. No Strike. Neither the Union nor any employees, agents or employees will
instigate, promote, sponsor, engage in or condone any strike slowdown, speed-up, sit-down,
concerted stoppage of work, or picketing which in any way results in the interruption or disruption
of the operations of the Village, regardless of the reason for so doing. In addition, in the event of
a violation of this Section of this Article, the Union agrees to inform its members of their
obligations under this Agreement and to direct them to return to work.
Section 7.2. No Lockout. The Village will not lock out any employees during the term
of this Agreement as a result of a labor dispute with the Union.
Section 7.3. Judicial Restraint. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the Village or
the Union from obtaining judicial restraint and damages in the event the other party violates this
Article.
Section 7.4. Discipline of Strikers. Any employee who violates the provisions of
Section 6.1 of this Article shall be subject to immediate discharge. Any action taken by the
Employer against any employee who participates in any action prohibited by Section 6.1 above
shall not be considered as a violation of this Agreement and shall not be subject to the provisions
of the grievance procedure. Whether or not the employee actually participated in a strike shall be
subject to the grievance procedure.

3

ARTICLE 8

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

It is mutually desirable and hereby agreed that all grievances shall be handled in accordance
with the following steps. For the purposes of this Agreement a grievance is any dispute or
difference of opinion raised by an employee or the Union against the Employer involving the
meaning, interpretation or application of the provisions of this Agreement. Any time period
provided for under the steps in the grievance procedure may be mutually extended or contracted.
Any disciplinary action not subject to the jurisdiction of the Village's Personnel Board shall be
subject to the provisions of this provision.
Step One. The employee should discuss the problem with his or her immediate
supervisor with or without a Union representative present.
Step Two. If the immediate supervisor cannot or does not provide the employee
within ten (10) calendar days, a reasonable answer, the employee may submit to the
Director a grievance in writing within ten (10) calendar days from the response of the
immediate supervisor. The Director shall then respond to the employee in writing within
ten (10) calendar days.
Step Three. If the Director fails to produce an answer, solution, or recommendation
agreeable to the parties and consistent with approved policies and procedures, the employee
may appeal the decision to the Mayor by filing an appeal within ten (10) calendar days
after receiving the response of the Director.
All grievances shall be dated when received and shall be issued a number for recording
purposes. The Mayor shall render a decision and shall notify the employee and Director within ten
(10) calendar days after receiving the grievance appeal.
Step Four. If the grievance is not settled in any of the preceding steps, the matter
may be progressed to final and binding arbitration by the Union only in accordance with
the procedures set forth below:
(1)
The Employer and the Union shall pick an arbitrator from a list
provided by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service. Upon receipt of such
list, the party requesting the arbitration shall first strike a name and then alternating
until there is one name remaining who shall be the arbitrator.
(2)
The arbitrator shall promptly review the grievance and the
information and decisions rendered at the various steps of the grievance procedures.
The arbitrator shall confer with the parties to this grievance as necessary and shall
hold a hearing unless otherwise mutually agreed to by the parties. The scope of the
hearing shall be agreed upon by the parties. If possible, otherwise, the arbitrator
shall determine the scope of the hearing. The hearing shall only be open to all
parties in interest.
(3)
The arbitrator shall issue a decision not later than thirty (30) calendar
days from the date of closing of any conference or hearing, if necessary, or if no
4

conference or hearings are required, then from the date when the final grievance
documents are submitted to them.
(4)
The decision of the arbitrator shall be in writing and shall set forth
the findings of fact, reasoning and conclusions of the issues submitted.
(5)
The decision of the arbitrator shall be binding upon the parties
concerned in the grievance.
(6)
The cost of the arbitration procedure shall be borne equally by the
Union and the Employer.
(7)
If the arbitrator calls for meetings or hearings, and these meetings
cannot be held during the normal working hours of the grieved employee, then no
additional compensation or overtime payment shall be made by the Employer to
either the grieved employee, witnesses or representatives of the Union.
(8)
The arbitrator may interpret the Agreement but shall have no right
to ignore, add to, take from, or modify any of the provisions of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 9

NORMAL WORKDAY / WORKWEEK

Section 9.1. Application. This Article is intended to define the length of normal hours
of work per day or per week in effect at the time of execution of this Agreement. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed as preventing the Village from restructuring the normal workday or
workweek for the purpose of promoting the efficiency of municipal government; from establishing
the work schedules of employees; and establishing part-time positions.
Section 9.2. Normal Workweek and Workday. The normal workweek shall be
Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Employees shall call in before 6:45 a.m. if
they are to be late or absent. Employees may be scheduled to begin work at any time with the
employees consent. The Village may schedule employees to work an eight (8) hour shift beginning
at a time other than 7:00 a.m. in the event of emergency, public events, bad weather or snow
conditions, or in order to allow adequate rest from working overtime.
Employees shall be afforded two (2) fifteen (15) minute breaks each day, but in no event
shall a crew leave a job site except that one employee may leave the job site to retrieve
refreshments. Village vehicles and/or equipment shall not be left unattended during any break
period.
If an employee works more than 3 hours of overtime, then the employee shall be provided
a paid 15-minute break for each 3 hours of overtime worked.
Section 9.3 Compensatory Time. Employees may elect to accumulate up to 480 hours
of compensatory time. Requests for use of compensatory time shall be made with at least three (3)
days notice, unless waived by the Village. Compensatory time will be granted if it does not cause
an undue burden or shortage of personnel. The Village is not required to pay employees at an
overtime rate in order to allow for the use of compensatory time.
5

Section 9.4
paid lunch.

Lunch Break. Employees will receive a thirty (30) minute uninterrupted
ARTICLE 10

OVERTIME

Section 10.1 Overtime Pay. All hours worked in excess of the regular schedule in a
work week shall be paid at time and one-half (either in excess of 8 hours in a day or 40 hours for
the week). Worked hours include all hours for which compensation is paid such as sick time,
personal time, compensatory time and vacation time; provided that sick time may only be counted
as hours worked for the first three (3) times in a calendar year that an employee calls in sick in the
same week as working overtime.
Section 10.2. Sundays and Holidays. All hours worked on a Sunday or holiday (as
defined in Article 11) shall be paid at double time, provided that the employee does not call in sick
if scheduled the day before or the day after a holiday.
Section 10.3. No Pyramiding. Compensation shall not be paid more than once for the
same hours under any provisions of this Article or Agreement.
Section 10.4. Call Back Pay. An employee called back to work after having left work
shall receive a minimum of two (2) hours pay at the time and one-half rate and will be paid for all
additional time actually worked after the first two hours except when the call back is a result of a
water main break of six-inch or greater size in which event an employee shall receive a minimum
of three (3) hours pay at the time and one-half rate, except that an employee responding to a water
main break on a weekend or holiday shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours pay.
Section 10.5. Seniority for Overtime. For purposes of call-outs for overtime
assignments, seniority in classification shall govern. Employees with the highest seniority will be
offered overtime opportunities first, and where necessary, lower seniority employees will be
required to report for overtime assignments. However, the bottom employee on the "callout" list
will be rotated on a posted list. The bottom employee will be rotated each time the bottom person
is called out pursuant to the procedure, or after thirty (30) days on the list, even if not called out.
Section 10.6. On-Call Duty. Both parties accept that certain circumstances may arise
outside of the course of the regular work day; accordingly this section is intended to define
bargaining unit members’ responsibilities in dealing with those situations. A minimum of six (6)
and a maximum of eight (8) senior employees in the bargaining unit who do not currently have
responsibilities in their current job classifications which require them to work outside of the regular
work hours defined in this Agreement with regularity will be eligible for on-call duty.
With the ratification of this Agreement, and on May 1 of each following year, members
will be eligible to both volunteer for and/or to seek replacement members to relieve them of oncall duties. Employees who are on-call duty prior to each May 1, shall have the right of first refusal
to be assigned to on-call duty for the next twelve (12) months. Employees who are working oncall duty will not be allowed to opt out unless an appropriate number of volunteers meet the
minimum of six (6) employees on the on-call duty roster. Should there be a conflict between
6

members who either seek to volunteer for or to opt out of on-call duties, the member with higher
departmental seniority will prevail. A schedule of the responsible members shall be posted
quarterly indicating which member is responsible for specific time periods of the on-call duty.
The employees who have accepted on-duty call assignments may trade with one of the
other members who are also performing on-call duty so long as the time trade is documented with
specific details of the trade (stating which member has assumed the responsibility for which dates,
for example). Any member seeking to trade on-call duty must inform management of said trade
which shall be approved.
On-call duty shall be rotated amongst those eligible members who have volunteered for the
assignment from Monday at 7:00 A.M. for a period of seven (7) consecutive days until 7:00 A.M.
the following Monday. The employee responsible for this time period will be given fourteen (14)
hours of compensation, either in actual pay or in time due, at that employee’s discretion; and shall
respond to any situation which requires their intervention during those on-call hours. If a worker
is on-call during a holiday, the employee responsible for that time period will be given an extra
one (1) hour of compensation per holiday worked.
The following procedures shall provide an outline for how the employee will deal with
situations which require the attention of the person who is on call.
1. The member who is on call shall respond to after-hour calls for service and determine
if there is in fact a need for other members of the bargaining unit to intervene. The
member on call will determine what course of action is needed to mitigate the problem
including calling back other members who are trained to mitigate or repair the problem.
If more than three personnel are needed, then a call shall be made to the Director of the
Department of Public Works prior to assignment.
2. Situations other than jobs which require digging and specific specialties will be offered
to members of the maintenance worker classification. Those members will be called
back to work by using the mandatory overtime call back system provided that the
member performing the on-call duty has the first right to work the overtime for the call
back. All members called back for overtime will be compensated as defined in Sections
10.1 and 10.4 of this Agreement.
3. Should the job require emergency digging, the on-call person shall contact J.U.L.I.E.
prior to beginning the repair. In the event that the dig involves or may involve locating
street light or traffic signal supply lines, it may also be necessary to contact the
appropriate vendor, (currently Meade or Pinner Electric) to assist in locating those
supply lines. The second call goes to the senior Heavy Equipment Operator (HEO) who
has the right of first refusal, and the next senior HEO will be contacted until one accepts
the assignment. Seniority in classification will dictate who gets the first opportunity to
accept the assignment. The appropriate number of members in the Maintenance Worker
classification shall be called back using the mandatory call back system. The on-call
person shall give a complete description of the details of the situation which prompted
the call back to assist the HEO in working the repair. The on-call person will than either
leave, (if not in position to work the overtime) or assume a position on the dig team at
7

the on-call person’s option. Should the on-call person accept the call back,
compensation for the call back will be paid as provided in Sections 10.1 and 10.4 of
this Agreement.
This section on the distribution of and responsibilities for on-call duty shall remain in
effect until either party gives written notification of their intent to modify this section or
until both parties commence negotiations toward a successor Agreement. Both parties
agree to meet and begin negotiations for a different procedure within thirty (30) days of
receiving said notice from the other party. In the event that the parties are unable to reach
an agreement on a different procedure within a sixty (60) day negotiating period, the parties
agree to follow the terms of the prior Section 10.6 of the Agreement which expired on April
30, 2008.
ARTICLE 11

HOLIDAYS

All full-time employees on the active payroll shall be accorded the following paid
holidays:
New Year's Day
Good Friday

Independence Day
Thanksgiving Day

President's Day
Memorial Day

Labor Day
Friday After Thanksgiving

When Christmas Day and New Year’s Day is on a Sunday, the employee shall receive the
following Monday as a paid holiday. When Christmas Day and New Year’s Day is on a Monday,
the employee shall receive that Monday as a paid holiday. When Christmas Day and New Year’s
Day is on a Tuesday, the employee shall receive the prior Monday and that Tuesday as paid
holidays. When Christmas Day and New Year’s Day is on a Wednesday, the employee shall
receive the Tuesday before and that Wednesday as paid holidays. When Christmas Day and New
Year’s Day is on a Thursday, the employee shall receive the following Friday and that Thursday
as paid holidays. When Christmas Day and New Year’s Day is on a Friday, the employee shall
receive the prior Thursday before Christmas and that Friday as paid holidays and shall receive that
Friday for the New Year’s Day paid holiday. When Christmas Day and New Year’s Day is on a
Saturday, the employee shall receive the prior Friday as a paid holiday. When employees are not
scheduled to work on the above-mentioned holidays, eight (8) hours at the employees' normal
compensation will be paid, provided they work on the day before and on the day after the holiday,
if scheduled to do so, or are excused for absence for just cause by the Director.
All full-time, employees whose normal workweek is Monday through Friday shall, when
a holiday falls on Saturday, observe the preceding day (Friday) as a holiday and when a holiday
falls on a Sunday, observe the following day (Monday) as a holiday.
Employees, to receive holiday pay, must not be receiving sick pay, disability pay or
workman's compensation.
ARTICLE 12

VACATION

Section 12.1. Vacations. Vacations with pay shall be granted to all employees by the
8

head of the Department in accordance with the following schedule:
One Week:

One full year of service to the Village of Bridgeview in the year in which
the vacation is to occur.

Two Weeks: Two or more full years of service to the Village of Bridgeview in the year
in which the vacation is to occur.
Three Weeks: Five or more full years of service to the Village of Bridgeview in the year
in which the vacation is to occur.
Four Weeks: Ten or more years of service to the Village of Bridgeview in the year in
which the vacation is to occur.
Five Weeks: Fifteen or more full years of service to the Village of Bridgeview in the year
in which the vacation is to occur.
Six Weeks:

Twenty-five or more full years of service to the Village of Bridgeview in
the year in which the vacation is to occur.

Years of full-time service are to be continuous. The above designated vacation periods
shall not be considered cumulative and no vacation periods shall be allowed in any year in excess
of the periods above established. The prohibition on carrying over vacation time from one calendar
year to the next shall also apply to employees who have been on workers compensation leave
during the year.
Vacation requests for 50% of the employees earned vacation shall be submitted prior to
December 1 of the prior year. Preference shall be given in line with relative seniority. The Village
may deny any vacation request which would allow the Water Plant Operator and the Assistant
Water Plant Operator or the Head Mechanic and Assistant Mechanic to be on vacation at the same
time. The Village is not obligated to allow more than 3 employees on vacation during the same
period of time.
The head of each department may designate by rule the time when each employee under
his supervision may take a vacation.
Section 12.2. Vacation Pay. Vacation pay as herein provided shall be in addition to any
holiday pay to which an employee may be entitled. Allowances for vacation pay shall be in
addition to any recognized holidays that may fall during an employee's vacation period.
Section 12.3. Vacation Pay When Terminated. When an employee's service with the
Village is terminated, he/she shall receive compensation for unused vacation leave accumulated.
Any employee who leaves the Village's service before completing six (6) months of full and
continuous service will receive no vacation pay.
Section 12.4. Vacation Credit During Leaves. Vacation credit will not be accumulated
during any type of leave of absence without pay.
9

ARTICLE 13

SICK LEAVE

Section 13.1. Sick Leave. Sick leave is provided to employees to safeguard income
during periods of illness, injury or disability. Sick leave may be granted for any of the following
reasons:
(a) Incapacitation due to illness, injury or disability.
(b) Personal medical or dental appointments that cannot be scheduled during nonworking hours.
(c) Absence required by serious illness or disability of a member of the employee's
immediate family. Immediate family is defined as the employee's spouse, children, parents,
parents-in-law, sisters and brothers. Other relatives living in the employee's household are
also included.
(d) Use of sick leave for reasons related to pregnancy shall be subject to the same
provisions and reporting requirements as for any other illness or disability.
Section 13.2. Earning and Accumulation. Sick leave shall be earned at a rate of twelve
(12) days per year. At the option of the employee, at the end of each calendar year, all unused sick
days not in excess of fifty (50) will be paid to the employee or may be accumulated. The total of
accumulated sick days may not exceed two hundred forty (240) sick days for each employee,
provided that any sick days over fifty (50) may be accumulated only for conversion to IMRF
unpaid sick leave service credit. No sick leave can be earned during an unpaid leave of absence.
Employees have the option of using six (6) of their sick days as personal days subject to scheduling
by the Director of Public Works.
Section 13.3. Non-Paid Days Off. Employees will be allowed three (3) unexcused nonpaid days off to avoid disciplinary action in the event all sick days and time due has been used up.
Section 13.4. Family and Medical Leave Act. Employees shall be covered by the
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 as amended and leave shall be granted pursuant to the
Family and Medical Leave Policy promulgated by the Village on July 5, 2000.
ARTICLE 14

SENIORITY

Section14.1. Definition. Seniority is the length of an employee’s continuous
employment within the bargaining unit from the date of last hire except that employees who
worked for the Department of Public Works prior to joining the bargaining unit shall carry their
original date of hire in the Department for purposes of determining the amount of vacation time
they are due. Layoffs shall not terminate the seniority of any employee except as provided in
Section 14.2 below.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, seniority for overtime shall be determined
by the provisions of Section 10.5 of this Agreement.
Section 14.2. Termination of Seniority. The seniority of an employee shall terminate
10

under any of the following conditions:
(a)

When laid off for a period of more than three (3) years.

(b)

When an employee resigns his employment with the Employer.

(c)
When an employee fails to return to work within one (1) week after a written
notice is mailed by the Village by certified mail, to his last known address, requesting such
return.
(d)
When an employee fails to report for work on three (3) successive workdays
without notifying the employer, and without showing just cause for the failure to so report.
(e)

When an employee is discharged for cause and not reinstated.

Section 14.3. Probationary Period. New employees shall serve a twelve (12) month
probationary period of employment with the Employer and shall immediately thereafter become
regular, full-time employees. They shall be credited with seniority from their original date of
employment solely for the purpose of determining the amount of vacation benefit they are due. In
all other regards, their seniority shall be from the date they become regular, full-time employees
as defined in Section 14.1 of this Agreement. The Employer may extend the probationary period
for any such new employee who has been off for one month or more with an illness or non-job
related injury. The extended probationary period shall be equal to the period of time said employee
was off work.
During the probationary period, employees may be disciplined or discharged by the
Employer without cause and without employees so affected having recourse to the grievance
procedure.
ARTICLE 15

LEAVES OF ABSENCE

Section 15.1. Bereavement Leave. Time lost from scheduled work due to a death in the
immediate family of a regular employee shall be paid at the employee's regular base rate. Such
time off shall not exceed five (5) consecutive scheduled workdays, one of which being date of
death. The immediate family is defined as the employee’s spouse, civil union partner, the child or
stepchild, the sibling, the parent, and grandchild of the employee.
In the event of death of an employee's mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-law, brotherin-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, or grandparents, the employee shall be allowed time off with
pay as provided above, but not to exceed three (3) consecutive days.
If necessary, an employee may use additional sick time or leave without pay, if they are
out of sick time, at the time of death of an immediate family member and such request shall not be
unreasonably denied.
Section 15.2. Short Term Military Leave. Any employee covered by the terms of this
agreement who is a member of a reserve force of the Armed Forces of the United States, or the
11

State of Illinois, and who is ordered by the appropriate authorities to attend training programs or
perform assigned duties shall be granted a leave of absence, without pay, for the period of such
activity and shall suffer no loss of seniority rights. Employees who are called up for two weeks
active duty training may take a leave of absence without pay or take the option of using their earned
vacation time.
ARTICLE 16

LAYOFF AND RECALL

Section 16.1. Layoff. If it is determined that layoffs are necessary due to reasons of
economic necessity or lack of work, employees covered by this Agreement will be laid off in
reverse seniority in accordance with their length of service with the Village.
Section 16.2. Recall. Employees who are laid off shall be placed on a recall list for a
period of one (1)(2) year. If there is a recall, employees who are still on the recall list shall be
recalled, in the inverse order of their layoff, provided they are fully qualified to perform the work
to which they are recalled without further training.
Employees who are eligible for recall shall be given twenty-one (21) calendar days' notice of recall.
Notice of recall shall be sent to the employee by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, with a copy to the Union. The employee must notify the Superintendent or his designee
of his intention to return to work within seven (7) days after receiving notice of recall. The Village
shall be deemed to have fulfilled its obligations by mailing the recall notice by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, to the mailing address last provided by the employee, it
being the obligation and responsibility of the employee to provide the Superintendent or his
designee with his latest mailing address. If an employee fails to timely respond to a recall notice,
his name shall be removed from the recall list.
ARTICLE 17

DISABILITY POLICY

Section 17.1. Employee Disability. Any employee who works thirty-two (32) hours per
week or more, non-retired and health insurance covered who receives a sickness or injury and
whose injury or sickness is not covered by Workman's Compensation shall be eligible for disability
pay.
Section 17.2. Pregnancy. Pregnancy, childbirth and related medical conditions shall be
treated the same under this policy as any other injury or sickness. Benefits and requirements of
childbearing leave shall be coordinated with the benefits and requirements of the policy so that
any mental or physical disability arising out of pregnancy, childbirth and related medical
conditions is treated the same as any mental or physical disability arising out of other sickness or
injury. The procedure and requirements to obtain paid leave of absence or other leave for
childbearing or child-rearing, not based upon the physical and/or mental disability arising out of
pregnancy, childbirth and related medical conditions, shall be as set forth.
Section 17.3. Disability Termination. The employee's attending physician shall initially
determine disability. Such determination shall be submitted to the Department Heads and
Personnel Committee in writing prior to the employee receiving any pay from the Village. The
employee may be required to undergo a second examination by a physician or any other specialist
12

the Department Head may designate.
The Department Head shall, if he/she deems necessary, make an appointment to obtain a
second opinion of the disability fourteen (14) days after the initial notice of disability from the
physician or employee.
It shall be the responsibility of the Department Head to update the status of the disability
of every employee. The Department Head shall review the matter a minimum of once per month.
The Department Head shall document all comments with the employee for review by the Personnel
Committee.
Additional disability determination shall be made on a monthly basis until the disability
benefits are exhausted or the employee returns to work.
Section 17.4. Waiting Period. There shall be a twenty (20) working day waiting period
in which the employee will be responsible for providing for his/her own welfare using available
or accumulated off work time (vacation, time-due, sick days, personal days, etc.). If no such time
is available, the employee must still wait the required amount of days prior to disability protection
implementation.
If an employee so chooses, he/she may use their own accumulated sick time prior to
requesting the sick leave/disability policy. After such use of personal accumulated sick time, the
employee may request policy coverage for the remaining time of the illness or injury.
The waiting period shall begin on the first day the employee notifies his/her Department
Head of such illness or injury. If the employee returns to work any time during the waiting period,
the continuous sequence is broken and the employee must begin the waiting period again prior to
being considered eligible. The employee, a member of his/her immediate family or physician must
notify the Department Head if a prolonged absence is anticipated.
Section 17.5. Gross Salary. Gross salary shall be determined by establishing the average
gross pay the employee has received over the prior six (6) months before the disability occurred.
Gross pay includes base pay and other items which may alter the base pay rate. No overtime will
be included in base pay.
Section 17.6. Years of Continuous Employment.
First 18 Months

No Disability

19 Months through

First 30 Days 70% of Salary

7 Years

Second 30 Days 60% of Salary
Third 30 Days 50% of Salary

8 Through 12 Years

First 30 Days 80% of Salary
Second 30 Days 70% of Salary
Third 30 Days 60% of Salary
13

Fourth 30 Days 50% of Salary
13 Through 20 Years

First 30 Days 90% of Salary
Second 30 Days 75% of Salary
Third 30 Days 60% of Salary
Fourth 30 Days 50% of Salary

21 Years

First 30 Days 90% of Salary
Second 30 Days 80% of Salary
Third 30 Days 70% of Salary
Fourth 30 Days 60% of Salary
Fifth 30 Days 50% of Salary

Section 17.7. Year of Usage. Year of use for an employee shall mean any consecutive
twelve(12) -month period.
Every employee who uses the Disability Insurance Program may retain any unused portion
of the benefit for any other illness occurring within a twelve (12) month period. The waiting period
for the additional uses is as described in Section 17.4, Waiting Period. The employee will be
entitled to use that portion of the benefit under the same terms as described in this policy for an
initial use. Receipt of benefits is limited to those described in Section 17.6, Years of Continuous
Employment. The Department head shall maintain accurate records of disability payments and use
by all employees in that department.
Section 17.8. Policy Prohibitions. No employee may work for any business, private
enterprise or non-profit organization while receiving disability benefits.
Any employee who is found to be in violation of performing outside work for pay shall
forfeit his/her right to continue on the disability and the Department Head shall begin job
termination action against the employee as defined by the policy, rules and regulations of the
appropriate Department.
Section 17.9. Sick Leave / Disability Policy, Vacation Time and Sick Days. Any
employee on disability who has a scheduled vacation during the time of disability shall receive
their normal pay during those scheduled weeks or vacation. Disability pay will cease during that
time and resume at the conclusion of the employee's vacation time. Disability protection shall not
be extended to compensate for lost vacation time.
No employee shall accumulate sick days while receiving disability/sick pay.
ARTICLE 18

INSURANCE

Section 18.1. Hospitalization. During the term of this Agreement, the Village shall
provide comprehensive health benefits for employees, their spouses and their dependents including
medical insurance and prescription drug coverage, which benefits shall be the same for all
employees of the Village. The Village will pay the full premium cost of health insurance benefits
14

except to the extent that all employees of the Village with the same type of coverage are required
to participate in premium payment.
New employees shall be eligible for this insurance coverage immediately.
Section 18.2. Life Insurance. The Village shall supply each full-time employee covered
by the terms of this Agreement with Fifteen Thousand Dollars ($15,000.00) of term life Insurance.
Upon retirement, if allowed by the insurance carrier, the employee shall have the option of
continued coverage or conversion at the employee’s expense.
Section 18.3. Dental Insurance. The Village’s present dental benefit program covering
all full-time employees, their spouses and dependents shall continue in effect. The Village will
pay the full premium cost of dental insurance benefits except to the extent that all employees of
the Village with the same type of coverage are required to participate in premium payment.
Section 18.4. Prescription Card. Employees will be provided with a prescription card
subject to any modifications made by the Village.
Section 18.5. Retirement Insurance Benefits. The Village will provide medical
insurance benefits upon retirement as provided for in its Medical Insurance Benefit Policy
approved July 5, 2000.
Section 18.6. Insurance Committee.
The Village shall establish an Insurance
Committee for the purpose of achieving good medical coverage at a reasonable cost. The Public
Works Division SEIU Local 73 bargaining unit shall have one voting member on this Committee.
The Union shall receive notice one (1) month prior to the Insurance Committee meeting.
ARTICLE 19

EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE

During the term of this Agreement any employee who enrolls in an accredited course of
study in a work-related field and subject to approval by the Director will be reimbursed for the
cost of the classes, if budgeted by the Village. Employees desiring to obtain a degree such as
Associates or Bachelor’s Degrees will be reimbursed for all classes needed to complete the degree.
Tuition reimbursement will be calculated to reflect the grades earned as described below:
Grade of A, B, or Pass (in a Pass/Fail only course) = 100% of tuition.
Grade of C
= 75% of tuition.
Grade of D or less, Fail or incomplete
= 0% of tuition.
All requests for reimbursements under this Section are to be made immediately upon
completion of course. The Village agrees that there will be no limit to tuition reimbursement for
classes taken to obtain an Associate’s Degree provided that courses are taken at an Illinois
community college. Tuition reimbursement for a Bachelor’s degree shall be based on the actual
hourly rate of tuition paid, but not greater than the hourly tuition rate at the Governors State

15

ARTICLE 20

BULLETIN BOARDS

The Employer shall provide the Union with designated space on available bulletin
boards, upon which the Union may post its official notices.
ARTICLE 21

CLASSIFICATIONS

Section 21.1. Full-time employees. The bargaining unit includes the following full-time
classifications whose duties are included in the Collective Bargaining Agreement and are attached
hereto as Appendix B.
A. Senior Water Plant Operator
B. Water Plant Operator
C. Senior Maintenance Worker
D. Senior Heavy Equipment Operator
E. Heavy Equipment Operator
F. Maintenance Worker
G. Senior Building Engineer
H. Building Engineer
I. Senior Mechanic
J. Mechanic
K. Maintenance Worker I
L. Senior Laborer
M. Laborer
No member of the bargaining unit may hire, fire, discipline nor effectively recommend
discipline of any other member of the unit. It is the responsibility of the Leadman to exercise
certain supervisory authority, and to report any rules violations to the Director of Public Works.
Section 21.2. Temporary Employees. No more than four (4) temporary workers shall be
employed to do unit work at any one time, including temporary employees filling unit positions
for employees on workers’ compensation, disability or medical leave and excluding seasonal
workers. If temporary employees are retained past their twelve (12) month probationary period
they shall become regular, full-time employees entitled to all benefits under this Collective
Bargaining Agreement.
Temporary employees are not members of the collective bargaining unit and shall not be
paid any benefits other than an hourly wage rate.
Section 21.3. Seasonal workers. Seasonal workers may be employed only during the
months of May through October and shall only perform work cutting grass and weeds, painting,
litter pickup, general cleaning and gardening. Seasonal employees are not members of the
collective bargaining unit and shall not be paid any benefits other than an hourly wage rate.

16

Section 21.4. Promotional Vacancies. Provided that a position is budgeted, the village
agrees to fill any vacancies within ninety (90) days so that the minimum number of positions in
the following Job Classifications shall be:
Senior Water Plant Operator - 1
Water Plant Operator - 1
Senior Maintenance Worker - 1
Senior Heavy Equipment Operator - 1
Heavy Equipment Operator - 2
Maintenance Worker - 1
Senior Building Engineer - 1
Building Engineer - 1
Senior Mechanic - 1
Mechanic - 1
A vacancy shall not be caused by the reason of an employee being assigned as a
Maintenance Worker is assigned to Bridgeview(SEATGEEK) Stadium. In the event of a vacancy,
the most senior, qualified employee shall be awarded the job. Qualifications shall include
experience, ability, examination, and other relevant factors, as determined by the Director of Public
Works. The Director shall interview the top three candidates for the job before making his
decision.
The Village may use an outside assessment center in the process of filling
promotional vacancies or the Village may use the Personnel Board for promotional testing falling
within their jurisdiction.
Section 21.5. Bridgeview(SEATGEEK) Stadium. On a yearly basis, the Village may
assign up to five (5) full-time employees to the “Stadium”) duties. Before assigning personnel,
the Village shall seek volunteers by posting a notice and providing employees 7 days to request a
yearly assignment to Stadium duties. In the event that more employees request such assignment
than there are available positions, the Village shall assign the most senior employees to Stadium
duties. In the event that there are insufficient volunteers, then the Village may either hire new
personnel for such Stadium assignments or may assign existing personnel on the basis of reverse
seniority. Assignment to Stadium duties shall be made on a yearly basis, provided that any
employee who is assigned to Stadium duties shall have a priority right to such assignment in the
subsequent year.
Employees who accept Stadium work assignments shall maintain their classification,
seniority and pay rate during all times they work at the Stadium; however, for purposes of seniority
for overtime under Section 10.5, such employees shall be placed on the bottom of the callout list
and are not subject to mandatory overtime assignments.
Newly hired employees assigned to Stadium work shall be hired into the Laborer
classification. They shall be paid in accordance with Article 25 of the contract and shall be
required to meet all employee requirements in the contract.
Stadium work duties shall be as assigned by management in accordance with the work
17

required to be performed at the Stadium. Work performed may be substantially different than
customary job assignments for the Department of Public Works.
Stadium employees shall be assigned to a work schedule on not less than a quarterly basis.
Stadium employees may be assigned to one of the following work schedules during the period of
time that they are assigned to work at the Stadium:
(a)

Five consecutive eight-hour days, which may include Saturday and Sunday; or

(b)

Four consecutive ten-hour days, which may include Saturday and Sunday.

All work hours shall be consecutive. Once established, employees’ work schedules shall not be
changed without the mutual agreement of the Village and the employee, provided that the Village
may change the schedule on a quarterly basis.
All scheduled hours of work, up to and including forty (40) in a work week, shall be paid
at the straight-time hourly rate. Hours worked in excess of forty (40) in a work week shall be paid
at the rate of time and one-half (1 ½).
As provided in Section 10.2, employees who are required to work on a holiday shall be
paid at double time or may elect compensatory time pursuant to Section 9.3. Employees working
on a four (4) ten (10)-hour day schedule shall receive ten (10) hours pay for any holiday provided
in Article 11 of the contract.
In the event of a reduction in Stadium work, Stadium employees shall be assigned,
volunteers first and then by reverse seniority, to the Department of Public Works. When
performing traditional Department of Public Works assignments, the provisions of the Agreement,
and not this Section, shall apply.
In the event that a reduction in Stadium work necessitates a layoff, the provisions of Article
16 of the Agreement shall apply.
21.6 Part-time Employees. Part-time employees, defined as those who work less than
twenty-six (26) weeks within a calendar year may be employed and shall perform only the
following work: cutting grass and weeds, painting, litter pickup, general cleaning, picking up litter,
gardening, shoveling snow, operating snow blowers, spreading salt on sidewalks, and pruning
bushes and trees. Part-time employees are not members of the collective bargaining unit and shall
not be paid any benefits other than an hourly wage rate.
ARTICLE 22

CLOTHING ALLOWANCE

The Village will provide each unit employee with a $475.00 clothing allowance for each
contract year for the duration of this Agreement. Employees will purchase their clothing at a
Village approved vendor. There will be no uniform rental service during the term of this
Agreement.
In addition to the clothing allowance, the Village shall reimburse each employee each year
18

up to a maximum of $225.00 for the purchase of safety-toed boots and waterproof leather gloves
upon presentation of receipts. The selection and purchase of the safety-toed boots shall be at the
employee’s discretion provided the boots meet required safety standards and are a color acceptable
to the Director.
ARTICLE 23

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 23.1. Employee Eyeglasses. The Employer agrees to repair or replace as
necessary an employees' eye glasses, and prescription sun glasses, if such are damaged or broken,
if during the course of the employee's duties the employee is required to exert physical force or is
attacked by another person. Incident is to be documented with immediate supervisor.
Section 23.2. Inoculation or Immunization. The Employer agrees to pay all expenses
for inoculation or immunization shots for members of an employee's family when such becomes
necessary as a result of said employee's exposure to contagious diseases where said employee has
been exposed to said disease while on the job.
Section 23.3. Funeral/Burial Expenses. The Employer agrees to defray all reasonable
funeral and burial expenses of any employee of the Public Works Department killed in the line of
duty, as determined by the Village.
Section 23.4. Commercial Drivers License. A commercial Driver’s License (CDL) with
air brake endorsement is required to be maintained by all employees, except that Laborers shall
not be required to maintain a CDL. The Village shall reimburse all employees for the cost of
obtaining and renewing a CDL, including the cost of any required endorsements.
Employees may be required to submit evidence of possessing a valid CDL, provided that
the cost of such shall be paid by the Village. In the alternative, an employee may authorize the
Village to obtain such information at the sole cost of the Village.
Employees who lose their CDL due to medical reasons shall not be automatically
discharged if they can be assigned work which they can perform in another available classification.
An employee whose CDL is suspended as a result of a violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code and
is in the process of appealing the suspension shall be allowed seven (7) months from the date of
the suspension to have his CDL reinstated, assuming he can be assigned work which can be
performed in another available classification. The employee shall receive the rate of pay applicable
to the classification of Laborer during the seven (7)-month period. In addition to the seven (7)
months, the employee shall be allowed to use all accrued sick time, vacation time and
compensatory time in order to secure the reinstatement of his CDL. Once the employee’s accrued
benefit time is exhausted, the employee shall be entitled to an unpaid leave of absence. In no event,
however, shall the leave of absence extend beyond one year from the date the employee’s CDL
was suspended, and the employee is subject to automatic discharge if his CDL is not reinstated
within one year of the date of suspension.
An employee possessing a valid CDL with a “Passenger Endorsement” shall be paid an incentive
of seven hundred dollars $700 in November of each calendar year. The employee must possess
certification on January 1 of that calendar year to qualify for payment in November.
19

Section 23.5. Residency. All employees must live within a twenty-five (25) mile radius
of the Public Works Garage.
Section 23.6. Training Classes. Off-site training shall be posted in the Public Works
Garage and offered to applicable, full-time, regular employees prior to being offered to temporary
or seasonal employees. The Village has the right to restrict the number of employees attending
the training.
Section 23.7. On-Call Rules. The on-call rules attached hereto as Appendix C shall
govern the assignment of on-call duties. The on-call rules are subject to revision by the mutual
agreement of the Director of the Department of Public Works and the Union.
Section 23.8 Snow List Rules. The snow list rules attached hereto as Appendix D shall
govern the assignment of snow call duties. The snow list rules are subject to revision by the mutual
agreement of the Director of the Department of Public Works and the Union.
Section 23.9 Certified Arborist. An employee possessing a valid Illinois Arborist
Association ISA Certified Arborist or ISA Certified Arborist Municipal Specialist certification
shall be paid an incentive of seven hundred dollars $700 in November of each calendar year. The
employee must possess certification on January 1 of that calendar year to qualify for payment in
November. There is a limit of one (1) certified arborist stipend, however, the Village has the option
to grant additional stipends at its discretion.
Section 23.10 Inspector Stipend.
-

The following stipends are available to employees:

Site Inspector
Building Inspector
Plumbing Inspector
Property Inspector
Electrical Inspector
HVAC Inspector
Occupancy Inspector

A maximum of one (1) employee per stipend. Effective May 1, 2024, thBuilding Inspector,
Plumbing Inspector and HVAC Inspector shall receive four hundred dollars ($400) per month as
a stipend. The remaining Inspector’s stipends, $400 per month, shall be effective October 1, 2024.
No additional compensation, including overtime, shall be received for any additional hours. The
Village will make its best efforts to allow the work to be performed during regularly scheduled
work hours, but the employee understands off-schedule hours of work, at no additional
compensation, may be required. The inspectors shall be appointed on an annual basis by the Board
of Trustees.
ARTICLE 24

UNION BUSINESS

General Union business shall not interfere with the Stewards' regular working hours and
any request by other employees for the services of Stewards shall be based on an emergency that
cannot be transacted before or after normal working hours. The Union shall appoint one Steward
20

for each division. A Union Steward will be permitted to leave work during regular working hours
for the purpose of dealing with emergencies and holding scheduled meetings with management to
adjust grievances. One Union Steward may be present when requested by an employee during an
interview or interrogation by management which may result in disciplinary action against that
employee, provided that such request does not unduly delay the interview or interrogation.
Non-employee officers and representatives of the Union shall have reasonable access to
the premises of the Employer during working hours with advance notice to the appropriate
Employer representative. Such visitations shall be for the sole purpose of the administration of this
Agreement. The Union agrees that such activity shall not interfere with the work duties of
employees. The Employer reserves the right to designate a meeting place or to provide a
representative to accompany a Union officer where operational requirements do not permit
unlimited access.
The Village agrees to make available to the Union a list of all new employees hired within
the bargaining unit. The District also agrees to furnish the Union with a new hire’s home address,
date of hire and telephone number. Reasonable time (up to one (1) hour) shall be granted for one
(1) Union Representative and one (1) Union Steward to make a presentation at a new employee’s
orientation on behalf of the Union for the purpose of identifying the organization’s representation
status, organizational benefits, facilities, related information, and for distributing and collecting
membership applications. This time is not to be used for discussion of labor/management disputes.
The Union Steward shall be given time off with pay for the time required to make the presentation.
The Employer will provide the Union with reasonable notice of the time and place of meetings for
the orientation of new employees. All new employees shall be offered the opportunity to attend a
new employee orientation.”
ARTICLE 25

WAGE RATES

Section 25.1. Wage Rates for Current Employees. All full-time employees in the
bargaining unit shall be paid the rates set forth on the Wage Schedule attached hereto as Appendix
A.
Section 25.2. Wage Rates for Employees Hired after May 1, 2024. Wage rates for
employees hired after May 1, 2024 are provided for in Appendix A.
Section 25.3. Step-Up Pay. An employee assigned to work in a higher rated job
classification when employee normally scheduled to perform this work is off shall be paid at the
higher classification’s wage rate for all hours worked in the higher classification.
ARTICLE 26

SAFETY COMMITTEE

The Village agrees to the formation of a Safety Committee comprised of three (3) members
of the SEIU Local 73 bargaining unit selected by the Union. The Committee shall meet once
monthly during working hours.

21

ARTICLE 27

EMPLOYEE DISCIPLINE

Section 27.1. Inspection of Personnel Records. The Village's personnel files shall be
open to that employee for inspection by the affected employee during regular business hours of
the Village. Employees shall give reasonable notice of their desire to inspect their personnel file.
Only one official personnel file shall be kept for each employee.
Section 27.2. Purge of Personnel File. Any written reprimand shall be removed from
the employee's record, if, from the date of the last reprimand, twelve (12) months have passed
without the employee receiving an additional reprimand or discipline for such offenses.
ARTICLE 28

SEIU NATIONAL INDUSTRY PENSION FUND

Section 28.1. Coverage. The Village agrees to make periodic contributions on behalf of
all employees covered by this Agreement to the Service Employees International Union National
Industry Pension Fund ("Fund") in the amounts specified in Section 28.3 below.
Contributions for newly hired employees shall commence after ninety (90) calendar days
of employment.
Section 28.2. Term. The Employer agrees to become and remain a participating
employer in the Fund throughout the term of this Collective Bargaining Agreement, including any
extensions thereof.
Section 28.3. Contributions.
(a)
Commencing May 1, 2020, the Village shall contribute to the Fund in the
amount of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per paid hour for all employees covered by
this Agreement.
(b)
Contributions shall be transmitted together with a remittance report
containing such information, in such manner, and on such form as may be required by the
Fund or their designee.
Section 28.4. Trust Agreement. The Employer hereby agrees to be bound by the
provisions of the Agreement and Declaration of Trust establishing the Fund, as it may from time
to time be amended, and by all resolutions and rules adopted by the Trustees pursuant to the powers
delegated to them by that agreement, including collection policies, receipt of which is hereby
acknowledged. The Employer hereby designates the Employer members of the Fund's Board of
Trustees, or their duly selected successor(s), as its representatives on the Board
Section 28.5. Cooperation. The Employer and Union agree to cooperate with the
Trustees of the Fund in distributing Plan booklets, literature, and other documents supplied by the
Fund Administrator and in obtaining and providing such census and other data as may be required
by the Fund's Administrator or Trustees to enable them to comply with the applicable provisions
of the Employee Retire Income Security Act.

22

Section 28.6. Approval by Trustees. The undersigned parties acknowledge that the
provisions of this Article and the participation of the employees covered by it are subject to
approval by the Trustees of the Fund and that the Trustees reserve the right to terminate, at their
sole and unreviewable discretion, the participation of the employees covered by this Agreement
and to establish the level(s) of benefits to be provided. Termination may be directed by the
Trustees for reasons including, but not limited to, failure of the Employer to timely pay
contributions and expiration of a Collective Bargaining Agreement. The parties further
acknowledge that the Trustees' acceptance for participation in the Fund of the employees covered
by the Collective Bargaining Agreement is limited only to the categories of employment covered
by the Collective Bargaining Agreement at the time application for acceptance occurs and the
admission of other categories of employment to participate in the Fund will require specific
acceptance by the Trustees.
Section 28.7. Miscellaneous. In the event of any inconsistency between this Article and
the remainder of this Collective Bargaining Agreement, the terms of this Article shall prevail.
ARTICLE 29

COMPLETE AGREEMENT

The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which preceded this Agreement, each
had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with respect to any subject
or matter not removed by law from the area of collective bargaining. The understandings and
agreements arrived at by the parties after the exercise of that right and opportunity are set forth in
this Agreement Except as may be stated in this Agreement, each party voluntarily and
unqualifiedly waives the right, and each agrees that the other shall not be obligated to bargain
collectively with respect to any subject or matter referred to, or covered in this Agreement or with
respect to any subject or matter not specifically referred to or covered in this Agreement, even
though such subjects or matters may not have been within the knowledge or contemplation of
either or both of the parties at the time they negotiated and signed this Agreement.
ARTICLE 30

SAVINGS CLAUSE

If any provision of this Agreement or any application thereof should be rendered or
declared unlawful, invalid or unenforceable by virtue of any judicial action, or by any existing or
subsequently enacted Federal or State legislation, or by Executive Order or other competent
authority, the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect In such
event, upon the request of either party, the parties shall meet promptly and negotiate with respect
to substitute provisions for those provisions rendered or declared unlawful, invalid or
unenforceable.
ARTICLE 31

DURATION

Section 31.1. Term of Agreement. This Agreement shall be effective from May 1, 2024
and shall remain in full force and effect to and through April 30, 2028. It shall continue in effect
from year to year thereafter unless notice of termination is given in writing by mail by either party
no earlier than ninety (90) days preceding expiration and no later than sixty (60) days preceding
expiration. The notices referred to shall be considered to have been given as of the date shown on
the postmark. Written notice may be tendered in person, in which case the date of notice shall be
23

the written date of receipt.
No employees who have left the Village before the date of execution of this Agreement,
except those who have retired after May 1, 2024 and are receiving IMRF retirement pension, shall
be entitled to any of the increased compensation or benefits provided herein. Retroactive pay shall
be based upon the employee’s job classification at the time this Agreement is approved by the
Village Board of Trustees.
Section 31.2. Continuing Effect. Notwithstanding any provision of this Article or
agreement to the contrary, this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect after any expiration
date while negotiations are continuing for a new Agreement.
In witness whereof, the parties hereto have affixed their signatures this _______ day of
October , 2024.
VILLAGE OF BRIDGEVIEW

SERVICE EMPLOYEES
INTERNATIONAL UNION LOCAL 73

____________________________________
Steven M. Landek, Mayor

___________________________________
Union Representative

___________________________________
John C. Altar, Village Clerk

___________________________________
Bargaining Committee
___________________________________
Bargaining Committee
___________________________________
Bargaining Committee

24

APPENDIX A
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
WAGE SCALE
MAY 1, 2024 THROUGH APRIL 30, 2028
CURRENT
Senior Water Plant Operator
Water Plant Operator
Senior Maintenance Worker
Senior Heavy Equipment Operator
Heavy Equipment Operator
Maintenance Worker
Senior Building Engineer
Building Engineer
Senior Mechanic
Mechanic

5/1/2024
45.40
42.14
43.14
42.14
41.14
40.14
43.43
40.14
46.60
41.73

5/1/2025
3.50%
47.99
44.00
45.30
44.21
43.08
41.55
45.20
41.55
48.23
43.19

5/1/2026
3.25%
50.55
45.93
47.42
46.25
44.98
42.90
46.67
42.90
49.80
44.59

5/1/2027
3.25%
52.19
47.42
48.96
47.75
46.44
44.29
48.19
44.29
51.42
46.04

WAGE SCALE FOR CERTAIN CLASSIFICATION FOR EMPLOYEES HIRED AFTER MAY 1, 2024
5/1/2024

5/1/2025
3.50%

5/1/2026
3.25%

5/1/2027
3.25%

Building Engineer

34.00

35.19

36.33

37.51

Maintence Worker I

31.15

32.24

33.28

34.36

Senior Laborer

27.00

27.94

28.84

29.77

Laborer

19.92

20.61

21.27

21.96

* Laborers possessing a CDL shall receive Maintenance Worker wages for snow plowing.

APPENDIX B - 001

VILLAGE OF BRIDEGVIEW
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS

JOB CLASSIFICATION: Senior Water Plant Operator

GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES:
Identifies and tracks village water system maintenance and repair work. Oversees and optimizes
the operations of the water pumping station, its equipment and confirms completion of Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA), Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR),
United States of Homeland Security (DHS) and other regulatory agency requirements Registered
with the IEPA as one of the village’s responsible water plant operators in charge. Provides safe
and clean water to all users.

ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS:
•

Coordinate daily system needs with the Senior Maintenance Worker and Senior Heavy
Equipment Operator.

•

Develop long term plans for the Village Administration to ensure water infrastructure
stability.

•

Daily inspections, including Saturday and Sunday testing as needed.

•

SCADA monitoring, including phone access.

•

Collect and submit potable water samples.

•

Plan triennial hydrant flow testing cycle and monitor yearly preventive maintenance
reporting.

•

Maintain all water system use and repair records.

•

Respond to IEPA, IDNR, DHS, Illinois survey and any other potable water or facility
related needs, including annual reports and follow-up requests.

•

Plan water system assignments and projects, also establishing Purchase Orders (PO) for
all water system expenses.

•

Inspection of contractor work connected to public water system.

•

Investigate and remedy community service concerns.

APPENDIX B - 002

•

Competency in using support and regulatory programs/sites such as, but not limited to
Trimble Unity, Brycer’s the Compliance Engine, Neptune 360, Bellwether Purchasing
Manager, CCX, SCS, IWIP etc.

•

Update ERP as necessary

•

Continue to train in the field and collect Continuing Education Units to maintain
necessary IEPA licensing.

•

Village liaison with other governmental agencies.

EXAMPLES OF DUTIES:
•

Maintain records.

•

Maintain a clean and orderly pump station.

•

Monitor village’s water meter program.

•

Annual scheduling of third-party inspections of village RPZs/Back-checks and water
meters.

•

Schedule and maintain annual valve turning records.

•

Schedule biannual water surveys.

•

Assists Fire Department personnel with ISO submission.

•

Maintain all RPZ/Backflow records.

•

Maintain all public fire hydrant records.

•

Weekly inspections of pumping equipment.

•

Write, present and submit reports.

•

Change out and adjust water plant chemicals, to monitor and maintain desired free
chlorine residual throughout the village.

•

Manage proper protective equipment PPE availability.

•

Manage scheduling of training in use of PPE and other training courses.

•

Trains Public Works employees in proper operation of the pumping station and assists
interested parties with working towards obtaining an IEPA Class C license.

•

Manages water plant operator activities and assignments.

APPENDIX B - 003

•

Request building permits from Building Dept. if applicable.

•

Oversee the completion of the stadium’s annual RD-925 reporting and submittal to the
MWRD and separate payment if applicable.

•

Annual submittal of I & I report to MWRD.

•

Annual submittal of MS4 to IEPA

•

Annual creation of the Consumer Confidence Report (CCR).

•

Review RPZ submittals and monitor compliance.

EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS:
Knowledge and training in:
•

Current principles and practices of the water distribution system.

•

Federal and State laws, regulations and standards relating to the village infrastructure.

•

Effective techniques of written and verbal communication and organizational
development.

•

Email protocol and response.

•

SCADA, Bellwether, Brycer, Trimble Unity and Neptune 360 or the likes connection and
operations.

Ability to:
•

Establish and maintain effective work relationships with those contacted in the
performance of required duties.

•

Write clear and comprehensive reports.

•

Orally communicate information to individuals and groups.

•

Read and interpret engineering and architectural plans and drawings.

•

Safely and effectively operate pumping station equipment.

•

Plan and organize time for the day.

•

Maintain organized records.

•

Basic computer knowledge to work through changing applications.

APPENDIX B - 004

•

Ability to adapt.

•

Open-minded to alternative viewpoints and methods.

•

Meet the physical requirements necessary to safely and effectively perform required
duties.

EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE:
•

Employees for this position must possess a Class “C” public water supply operator
certificate of competency from the Environmental Protection Agency of the State of
Illinois. Employees are required to have a High School diploma or a G.E.D. along with
a combination of sufficient training, experience, and education to demonstrate the
knowledge and abilities above. Experience in operation of light equipment and other
tools used at the pumping station along with planning water related projects
required.

APPENDIX B - 005

VILLAGE OF BRIDGEVIEW
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
JOB CLASSIFICATION: Water Plant Operator
GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES:
Assists with identifying and tracking Village water system maintenance and repair work. Day-today functions are fluid between the divisions of the Public Works, but with a main concentration
related to potable water system. Works with Senior Water Plant Operator to assist in all facets of
supplying clean water to all Bridgeview customers.

ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS:
•

Assists with daily operation of pumping station.

•

SCADA monitoring, including phone access.

•

Collect and submit potable water samples.

•

Assist with maintaining all water system use and repair records.

•

Investigate and remedy community service concerns.

EXAMPLES OF DUTIES:
•

Assist with maintaining all public fire hydrant records.

•

Assist with annual valve turning program.

•

Assist with monitoring the biannual water surveys.

•

Maintain a clean and orderly pump station.

•

Assist with maintaining the Village’s water meter program.

•

Inspection of contractor work connected to public water system.

•

Assist with maintaining all RPZ/Backflow records.

•

Maintain records.

APPENDIX B - 006

•

Write, present, and submit reports.

•

Competency in using support and regulatory programs/sites such as, but not limited to,
Trimble Unity, Brycer’s the Compliance Engine, Neptune 360, Bellwether Purchasing
Manager, CCX, SCS, IWIP, etc.

•

Change out and adjust water plant chemicals, to monitor and maintain desired free
chlorine residual throughout the Village.

•

Assists the completion of the stadium’s annual RD-925 reporting and submittal to the
MWRD and separate payment if applicable.

•

Assists with completion of the I & I report to the MWRD.

•

Assists with completion of MS4 to IEPA.

EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS:
Knowledge and training in:
•

Current principles, practices and of the water distribution system.

•

Federal and State laws, regulations, and standards relating to Village infrastructure.

•

Effective techniques of written and verbal communication and organizational
development.

•

Email protocol and response.

•

SCADA, Bellwether, Brycer, Trimble Unity, and Neptune 360 or the likes connection and
operations.

Ability to:
•

Write clear and comprehensive reports.

•

Orally communicate information to individuals and groups.

•

Read and interpret engineering and architectural plans.

•

Safely and effectively operate pumping station equipment.

•

Plan and organize time for the day.

•

Maintain organized records.

APPENDIX B - 007

•

Basic computer knowledge to work through changing applications.

•

Ability to adapt.

•

Open-minded to alternative viewpoints and methods.

•

Meet the physical requirements necessary to safely and effectively perform required
duties.

•

Establish and maintain effective work relationships with those contacted in the
performance of required duties.

EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE:
•

Employees for this position must obtain a Class “D” public water supply operator
certificate of competency within one year of accepting this job classification. Thereafter,
it is expected that the Senior Water Plant operator will train and mentor the employees
to enable them to test and pass a Class “C”, water supply operator certificate of
competency. It is mandatory that the employee of the classification will obtain a Class “C”
certificate, within 5 years of accepting the initial position.

APPENDIX B - 008

VILLAGE OF BRIDGEVIEW
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
JOB CLASSIFICATION: Senior Maintenance Worker
GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES:
To maintain and repair the municipal infrastructure which includes the roadway, construction of
public improvements, repairs to Village facilities and utilities, and work assignments. The Senior
Maintenance Worker works on the job site in various situations while coordinating job site
activities. When not working as Senior Maintenance Worker, job duties are that of Maintenance
Worker.
ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS:
•

Coordinates daily work and crew assignments with Village leadership input.

•

Works with Senior Heavy Equipment Operator on daily tasks and projects.

•

Directs the work of other employees on specific jobs.

•

Handles resident complaints.

•

Examines streets and other public facilities to determine what maintenance is required,
types of materials necessary, and amount of work involved, and recommends a plan of
action to the Director/Mayor.

•

Works with Senior Water Plant Operator identifying water system maintenance repairs
and needs.

•

Order and maintain water and sewer parts inventory.

•

Performs other related functions as assigned.

•

Oversees water and sewer permits and inspections.

EXAMPLES OF DUTIES:
•

Create daily work and crew assignments.

APPENDIX B - 009

•

Communicate with Village residents and businesses to solve community service inquiries.

•

Maintain records related to essential functions.

EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS:
Knowledge and training in:
•

Materials, methods, techniques, and equipment used in constructing, maintaining,
repairing, and cleaning streets, sidewalks, curbs, and gutters, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, water mains, fire hydrants, water system, retention basins, snow plowing, village
owned street lighting, street signing, traffic control painting.

Ability to:
•

Lead and perform through proper delegation.

•

Understand and respond to SCAPA alarms, when called upon.

•

Direct, assign, and instruct other employees in the performance of work duties.

•

Establish and maintain effective work relationships with those contacted in the
performance of required duties.

EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE:
•

High School diploma or G.E.D. with some as a supervisor for construction and
maintenance of streets or other public facilities. Attend training required or directed.

APPENDIX B - 010

VILLAGE OF BRIDGEVIEW
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
JOB CLASSIFICATION: Senior Heavy Equipment Operator
GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES:
To coordinate and implement street maintenance activities, construction of public improvements,
repairs to Village facilities and utilities, and work assignments. To perform specialized
maintenance, repair, and construction work in the completion of street department and public
works projects; to perform a variety of semiskilled and skilled construction and maintenance
work; to operate and maintain equipment related to assignment; and to monitor operation of
water system. Positions in this classification are assigned to a work crew and are responsible for
the successful completion of specialized work projects. When not working as Senior Heavy
Equipment Operator, job duties are that of Heavy Equipment Operator.

ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS:
•

Directs, assigns, and instructs other employees in the performance of work duties.

•

Works with Senior Water Plant Operator and Senior Maintenance Worker on daily tasks.

•

Ability to perform specialized and skilled maintenance and construction work such as
custom concrete work; sets up forms, calculates concrete to be used, pours, and finished
concrete.

•

Ability to operate, inspect, and lubricate a variety of automotive and specialized
equipment such as loader, patch truck, dump truck, and lift truck which may include three
axles or more.

•

Coordinate job tasks and staff to perform a variety of heavy construction, maintenance,
and repair work in support of special public works projects as assigned.

•

Maintains records related to duties performed and equipment used, includes vehicle,
personnel safety, and water system maintenance forms.

•

Trains personnel on the safe and proper operation of equipment.

•

Implement work plans for personnel on a daily basis.

•

Performs related duties similar to the above in scope and function as required.

APPENDIX B - 011

EXAMPLES OF DUTIES:
•

Installs, maintains, and removes sidewalks, streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and
water mains.

•

Maintains and clears storm drains.

•

Installs, repairs, and maintains traffic regulation signs.

•

Operates power and hand tools.

•

Delineates traffic at work areas following established guidelines.

EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS:
Knowledge and training in:
•

Methods, tools, equipment, and procedures used in public works maintenance and
construction work with additional knowledge in highly specialized areas as appropriate to
assignment.

•

Safety procedures used in public works construction and maintenance projects.

Ability to:
•

Lead and perform through proper delegation.

•

Safely and effectively perform specialized and highly skilled maintenance and construction
work.

•

Safely and effectively operate automotive and specialized equipment utilized in public
works maintenance and construction work.

•

Maintain routine records.

•

Understand and follow oral and written instructions in an independent manner.

•

Meet the physical requirements necessary to safely and effectively perform required
duties.

APPENDIX B - 012

•

Establish and maintain effective work relationships with those contacted in the
performance of required duties.

•

Contact Julie prior to municipal utility dig projects.

EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE:
•

High School diploma or G.E.D. and any combination equivalent to sufficient experience,
union training program, or other recognized form of education to demonstrate the
knowledge and abilities listed above. Experience in the operation of heavy equipment,
light equipment, and other tools used by Department of Public Works. Attend additional
training as required or directed.

APPENDIX B - 013

VILLAGE OF BRIDGEVIEW
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
JOB CLASSIFICATION: Heavy Equipment Operator
GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES:
To perform specialized maintenance, repair, and construction work in the completion of street
department and public works projects; to perform a variety of semiskilled and skilled construction
and maintenance work; to operate and maintain equipment related to assignment. Positions in
this classification are assigned to a work crew and are responsible for the successful completion
of specialized work projects. When not working as Heavy Equipment Operator, job duties are that
of a Maintenance Worker, with no loss of pay.

ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS:
•

Works with Senior Maintenance Worker and Senior Heavy Equipment Operator on daily
tasks.

•

Ability to operate all equipment related to water main repairs, installations, and
reconstructions.

•

Operates, inspects, and lubricates a variety of automotive and specialized equipment such
as loader, patch truck, dump truck, and lift truck which may include three axles or more.

•

Performs a variety of heavy construction, maintenance, and repair work in support of
special public works projects as assigned.

•

Maintains records related to duties performed and equipment used.

EXAMPLES OF DUTIES:
•

Installs, maintains, and removes sidewalks, streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and
water mains.

•

Maintains and clears storm drains.

•

Installs, repairs, and maintains traffic regulation signs.

•

Operates power and hand tools.

APPENDIX B - 014

•

Delineates traffic at work areas following established guidelines.

EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS:
Knowledge and training in:
•

Methods, tools, equipment, and procedures used in public works maintenance and
construction work with additional knowledge in highly specialized areas as appropriate to
assignment.

•

Safety procedures used in public works construction and maintenance projects.

Ability to:
•

Safely and effectively perform specialized and highly skilled maintenance and construction
work.

•

Safely and effectively operate automotive and specialized equipment utilized in public
works maintenance and construction work.

•

Maintain routine records and water system maintenance forms.

•

Understand and follow oral and written instructions in an independent manner.

•

Meet the physical requirements necessary to safely and effectively perform required
duties.

•

Establish and maintain effective work relationships with those contacted in the
performance of required duties.

•

Work with the DPW Director, subordinates, and the public.

•

Notify Julie prior to utility dig projects.

EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE:
•

High School diploma or G.E.D. and any combination equivalent to sufficient experience,
training, and education to demonstrate the knowledge and abilities listed above. Attend
training as required or directed.

APPENDIX B - 015

VILLAGE OF BRIDGEVIEW
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
JOB CLASSIFICATION: Maintenance Worker

GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES:
To maintain and repair the municipal infrastructure which includes the roadway, storm sewer
system, sanitary sewer system, water system, and any other public works projects; and to operate
automotive and specialized equipment related to assignment. Positions in this classification are
assigned to a work crew or may be responsible for a specialized function.
EXAMPLES OF DUTIES:
•

Participates in the installation, maintenance, and removal of sidewalks, streets,
streetlights, drainage system, storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system, water meter
repairs, mosquito abatement, ISO program and water system.

•

Maintains and clears storm drains.

•

Plows snow, spreads salt and shovels snow

•

Picks up garbage, cuts grass, maintain landscaping, paint, and clean streets.

•

Installs, repairs, and maintains traffic regulation signs.

•

Inspects and operates a variety of automotive and specialized equipment such as loader,
patch truck, dump truck, lift truck, sweeper, and chipper.

•

Proper operation of power and hand tools including blow-pack, jackhammer, concrete
finishing tools, concrete saw, chainsaw, sandblasters, and paving tools.

•

Operates vehicles to transport material and debris.

•

Delineates traffic at work areas following established guidelines.

•

Performs a variety of heavy construction, maintenance, and repair work in support of
special public works projects as assigned.

•

Maintains records related to duties performed and equipment used.

•

Performs related duties similar to the above in scope and function as required.

APPENDIX B - 016

EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS:
Knowledge and training in:
•

Methods, tools, equipment, and procedures used in public works maintenance and
construction work.

•

Safety procedures used in public works construction and maintenance projects.

Ability to:
•

Safely and effectively perform maintenance and construction work.

•

Safely and effectively operate automotive and specialized equipment utilized in public
works maintenance and construction work.

•

Maintain routine records.

•

Understand and follow oral and/or written instructions.

•

Meet the physical requirements necessary to safely and effectively perform required
duties.

•

Establish and maintain effective work relationships with those contacted in the
performance of required duties.

EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE:
•

High School diploma or G.E.D. or any combination equivalent to sufficient experience,
training, and education to demonstrate the knowledge and abilities listed above. Attend
training as required or directed.

APPENDIX B - 017

VILLAGE OF BRIDGEVIEW
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
JOB CLASSIFICATION: Senior Building Engineer
GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES:
Performs a variety of semi-skilled and skilled functions in the upkeep and maintenance of Village
buildings and facilities; performs general maintenance, repair, and construction work to assigned
Village buildings and facilities; operates and maintains specialized equipment related to
assignment. Performs after hour repairs or may respond to electrical alarms or alerts. Employees
perform a wide variety of routine to complex technical and mechanical duties in support of Village
facilities. The job assignment requires a high degree of specialized technical knowledge related
to a variety of operations as well as the ability to perform semiskilled general maintenance tasks.
When not working as a Senior Building Engineer, job duties are that of a Maintenance Worker,
without loss of pay.
ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS:
•

Performs skilled electrical work with the ability to install, troubleshoot and repair systems
and components, including circuit wiring, conduit, lighting fixtures, receptacles, switching
controls, fans, circuits, time clocks, low and high voltage power supplies, controls systems,
etc.

•

Performs skilled carpentry work with the ability to install and maintain structural and
finish elements. Maintains and operates a variety of tools and power equipment including
hand saw, drill, router, belt sander, table saw, band saw, planer, jointer, portable generator,
etc.

•

Performs skilled mechanical work with the ability to install, troubleshoot, rebuild, and
repair furnaces, waste and water lines, boilers, compressors, ventilation fans, and
filtration equipment, piping, valves, hot water heaters, pumps, feeder and circulation
pumps, general power, and control systems.

•

Maintains an inventory of construction and other general supplies; orders parts and
supplies as needed and maintains them in a safe manner.

•

Ability to communicate and coordinate with each municipal building representative and
municipal vendor of all departments and vendors.

EXAMPLE OF DUTIES:

APPENDIX B - 018

•

Performs tasks such as replacing bearings, filters, belts, integrated circuit board, and other
associated system components.

•

Performs miscellaneous arranging, moving, reconfiguring, transporting, and storing of
furnishings, equipment, and supplies.

•

Maintains records related to duties performed and equipment used.

•

Performs related duties similar to the above in scope and function as required.

EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS:
Knowledge and training in:
•

Proper construction trade methods, procedures, code requirements, and quality
craftmanship techniques.

•

Proper use of construction trade tools, products, and testing equipment.

•

Fundamentals of electrical, mechanical and control systems associated with buildings.

•

Rules and regulations applicable to safe performance of building operations.

Ability to:
• Safely and effectively perform skilled and semi-skilled building and housekeeping work as
assigned.
•

Read and interpret gauges, meters, blueprints, sketches, and diagrams.

•

Effectively communicate in both oral and written forms

•

Accurately perform mathematical calculations

•

Perform corrective action based on experience and test results.

•

Organize, prioritize, and coordinate assigned tasks to successfully meet timelines; direct
other employees assigned to assist him/her.

•

Safely and effectively operate automotive and specialized equipment utilized in facility
maintenance and general construction work.

•

Maintain routine records including accurate time and material documentation for
assigned projects.

APPENDIX B - 019

•

Understand and carry out a variety of complex instructions in an independent manner.

•

Quickly and effectively diagnose maintenance and repair problems and take appropriate
corrective action.

•

Work safely and effectively on ladders, scaffolding, rigging, and roofs of various heights.

•

Meet the physical requirements necessary to safely and effectively perform required
duties.

•

Establish and maintain effective work relationships with those contacted in the
performance of required duties.

EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE:
•

High School diploma or G.E.D. some experience in building trades or an equivalent
combination of education, training, and experience. Attend training as required or
directed.

APPENDIX B - 020

VILLAGE OF BRIDGEVIEW
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
JOB CLASSIFICATION: Building Engineer
GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES:
Performs a variety of semi-skilled functions in the upkeep and maintenance of Village buildings
and facilities; performs general maintenance, repair, and construction work to assigned Village
buildings and facilities; operates and maintains specialized equipment related to assignment.
Performs after hour repairs or may respond to electrical alarms or alerts. Employees perform a
wide variety of routine to complex technical and mechanical duties in support of Village facilities.
The job assignment requires a basic knowledge related to a variety of operations as well as the
ability to perform semiskilled general maintenance tasks. When not working as Building Engineer,
job duties are that of Maintenance Worker, without loss of pay.

ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS:
•

Performs minor electrical work with the ability to install, troubleshoot and repair systems
and components, including circuit wiring, conduit, lighting fixtures, receptacles, switching
controls, fans, and circuits.

•

Performs minor carpentry work with the ability to install and maintain structural and finish
elements. Maintains and operates a variety of tools and power equipment including hand
saw, drill, router, belt sander, table saw, band saw, planer, jointer, portable generator, etc.

•

Performs minor mechanical work with the ability to install, troubleshoot, rebuild, and
repair furnaces, boilers, compressors, ventilation fans, and filtration equipment, piping,
plumbing valves, hot water heaters, pumps, feeder and circulation pumps, general power,
and control systems.

•

Maintains an inventory of construction and other general supplies; orders parts and
supplies as needed and maintains them in a safe manner.

EXAMPLE OF DUTIES:
•

Assists Senior Building Engineer with maintaining building systems.

•

Performs miscellaneous arranging, moving, reconfiguring, transporting, and storing of
furnishings, equipment, and supplies.

APPENDIX B - 021

•

Maintains records related to duties performed and equipment used.

•

Performs related duties similar to the above in scope and function as required.

•

Be willing to further education and knowledge with training and or schooling / seminars.

EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS:
Knowledge and training in:
•

Proper construction trade methods, procedures, code requirements, and quality
craftmanship techniques.

•

Proper use of construction trade tools, products, and testing equipment.

•

Basic fundamentals of electrical, mechanical and control systems associated with
buildings.

•

Rules and regulations applicable to safe performance of building operations.

Ability to:
• Safely and effectively perform skilled and semi-skilled building and housekeeping work as
assigned.
•

Read and interpret gauges, meters, blueprints, sketches, and diagrams.

•

Effectively communicate in both oral and written forms

•

Accurately perform mathematical calculations

•

Perform corrective action based on experience and test results.

•

Organize, prioritize, and coordinate assigned tasks to successfully meet timelines; direct
other employees assigned to assist him/her.

•

Safely and effectively operate automotive and specialized equipment utilized in facility
maintenance and general construction work.

•

Maintain routine records including accurate time and material documentation for
assigned projects.

•

Understand and carry out a variety of complex instructions in an independent manner.

APPENDIX B - 022

•

Quickly and effectively diagnose maintenance and repair problems and take appropriate
corrective action.

•

Work safely and effectively on ladders, scaffolding, rigging, and roofs of various heights.

•

Meet the physical requirements necessary to safely and effectively perform required
duties.

•

Establish and maintain effective work relationships with those contacted in the
performance of required duties.

EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE:
•

High School diploma or G.E.D. some experience in building trades or an equivalent
combination of education, training, and experience. Attend training as required or
directed.

APPENDIX B - 023

VILLAGE OF BRIDGEVIEW
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
JOB CLASSIFICATION: Senior Mechanic
GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES:
To inspect, diagnose, maintain, and repair the Village’s automotive, construction, and other
power-driven equipment. This job class performs skilled mechanical maintenance and repair
work on a variety of heavy equipment to include both gasoline and diesel-powered engines. If
there is no mechanic work to perform, may be assigned other duties with no loss of pay.

ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS:
•

Performs skilled maintenance and repair work on gas- and diesel-powered vehicles and
other equipment to include automobiles, trucks, tractors, street sweepers, backhoes,
lawn mowers, and other construction and maintenance equipment.

•

Keep current with new equipment and system trends, make recommendations to keep
shops diagnostic and tool supply up to date.

•

Inspects and diagnoses automotive and mechanical defects and determines corrective
action required to repair such defects.

•

Ability to make decisions quickly based on all factors; cost, time, and efficiency.

•

Use various types of equipment to repair vehicles and equipment.

•

Ability to multitask across many jobs if needed to keep shop running smoothly.

•

Ability to perform repairs on hydraulic, pneumatic, and electrical systems.

•

Ability to direct assistant mechanics in an effective manner.

•

Train Mechanic.

•

Perform administrative duties of record keeping, generating P.O.’s, and working with
Village administration to manage the Municipal fleet.

APPENDIX B - 024

EXAMPLE OF DUTIES:
•

Keep track of potential warranty claims on previously repaired equipment.

•

Completes and maintains vehicle and equipment service records, including time spent,
materials used, and schedule of future work.

•

Uses various power equipment to construct, repair, and modify parts and equipment.

•

Performs emergency road service on Village vehicles and equipment.

•

Inspects, diagnoses, tunes up and repairs automobile, trucks, sweepers, rollers, and
Village equipment.

•

Repairs transmissions, differentials, carburetors, distributors, fuel pumps, steering
systems, portable generators, universal joints, sirens, and hydraulic systems.

•

Installs batteries, tires, wiring and glass.

•

Drives and operates equipment being repaired.

•

Monitor municipal fuel tank levels and IEPA records related to oil and time removal.

•

Performs related duties similar to the above in scope and function as required.

EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS:
Knowledge and training in:
•

Standard practices, methods, materials, and tools used in automotive mechanical trade.

•

Design, operation, and repair of light and heavy-duty gasoline and diesel equipment.

•

Ability to build and maintain working relationships with vendors and municipal
employees.

•

Basic computer skills.

•

Safe work practices.

APPENDIX B - 025

Ability to:
•

Inspect light and heavy gasoline and diesel equipment to locate malfunctions and make
proper repairs in a timely manner.

•

Perform minor and major mechanical repairs on automotive, construction, and other
power-driven equipment.

•

Use mechanic tools and diagnostic equipment with skill and safety.

•

Maintain shop repair and service records.

•

Understand and follow oral and written instructions.

•

Meet the physical requirements necessary to safely and effectively perform required
duties.

•

Establish and maintain effective work relationships with those contacted in the
performance of required duties.

•

Supervise and instruct the Mechanic.

EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE:
•

High School diploma or G.E.D. and three years experience in the repair and maintenance
of automotive equipment, medium duty trucks, gasoline, and diesel (class 6), including
four years of heavy construction equipment. Attend training as required or directed.

•

An equivalent combination of education and experience. Extra training classes, if needed,
supplied by the Village.

APPENDIX B - 026

VILLAGE OF BRIDGEVIEW
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
JOB CLASSIFICATION: Mechanic
GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES:
To inspect, diagnose, maintain, and repair the Village’s automotive, construction, and other
power-driven equipment. This job class performs skilled mechanical maintenance and repair
work on a variety of heavy equipment to include both gasoline and diesel-powered engines.
When not working as Mechanic, job duties are that of Maintenance Worker or Laborer.

ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS:
•

Assists the Senior Mechanic and performs semi-skilled maintenance and repair work on
gas- and diesel-powered vehicles and other equipment to include automobiles, trucks,
tractors, street sweepers, backhoes, lawn mowers, and other construction and
maintenance equipment. Performs duties as directed by the mechanic.

•

Assists in inspecting and diagnosing automotive and mechanical defects and determines
corrective action required to repair such defects.

•

Assists in repairing gasoline and diesel engines, transmissions, and differentials.

•

Assists in using various types of equipment to repair vehicles and equipment.

•

Assists in performing repairs and modifications on hydraulic, pneumatic, and electrical
systems.

EXAMPLE OF DUTIES:
•

Uses various power equipment to assist in constructing, repairing, and modifying parts
and equipment.

•

Substitutes for mechanic when he/she is absent.

•

Completes assigned jobs correctly and safely in a timely manner.

•

Assists in performing emergency road service on Village vehicles and equipment.

•

Assists in inspecting, diagnosing, tuning up and repairing automobile, trucks, sweepers,
rollers, and Village equipment.

APPENDIX B - 027

•

Maintain records as directed by the Senior Mechanic.

•

Assists in repairing transmissions, differentials, carburetors, distributors, fuel pumps,
steering systems, portable generators, universal joints, sirens, and hydraulic systems.

•

Assists in installing batteries, tires, wiring and glass.

•

Drives and operates equipment being repaired,

•

Performs related duties similar to the above in scope and function as required.

EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS:
Knowledge and training in:
•

Standard practices, methods, materials, and tools used in automotive mechanical trade.

•

Design, operation, and repair of light and heavy-duty gasoline and diesel equipment.

•

Basic record keeping procedures.

•

Basic computer skills.

•

Safe work practices.

Ability to:
•

With assistance, inspect light and heavy gasoline and diesel equipment to locate
malfunctions and make proper repairs in a timely manner.

•

Perform minor mechanical repairs on automotive, construction, and other power-driven
equipment.

•

Use mechanic tools and diagnostic equipment with skill and safety.

•

Maintain shop repair and service records.

•

Understand and follow oral and written instructions.

•

Meet the physical requirements necessary to safely and effectively perform required
duties.

APPENDIX B - 028

•

Establish and maintain effective work relationships with those contacted in the
performance of required duties.

EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE:
•

High School diploma or G.E.D. and three years experience in the repair and maintenance
of automotive equipment, including one year of heavy construction equipment. Attend
training as required or directed.

•

An equivalent combination of education and experience. Extra training classes, as needed,
supplied by the Village.

APPENDIX B - 029

VILLAGE OF BRIDGEVIEW
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
JOB CLASSIFICATION: Laborer

GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES:
To maintain and repair the municipal infrastructure which includes the roadway, storm sewer
system, sanitary sewer system, water system, and any other public works projects. Positions in
this classification are assigned to a work crew or may be responsible for a specialized function.
EXAMPLES OF DUTIES:
•

Participates in the installation, maintenance, and removal of sidewalks, streets,
streetlights, drainage system, storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system, water meter
repairs, mosquito abatement, ISO program and water system.

•

Maintains and clears storm drains.

•

Plows snow, spreads salt and shovels snow

•

Picks up garbage, cuts grass, maintain landscaping, paint, and clean streets.

•

Installs, repairs, and maintains traffic regulation signs.

•

Proper operation of power and hand tools including blow-pack, jackhammer, concrete
finishing tools, concrete saw, chainsaw, sandblasters, and paving tools.

•

Delineates traffic at work areas following established guidelines.

•

Performs a variety of heavy construction, maintenance, and repair work in support of
special public works projects as assigned.

•

Performs related duties similar to the above in scope and function as required.

EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS:
Knowledge and training in:
•

Methods, tools, equipment, and procedures used in public works maintenance and
construction work.

APPENDIX B - 030

•

Safety procedures used in public works construction and maintenance projects.

Ability to:
•

Safely and effectively perform maintenance and construction work.

•

Maintain routine records.

•

Understand and follow oral and/or written instructions.

•

Meet the physical requirements necessary to safely and effectively perform required
duties.

•

Establish and maintain effective work relationships with those contacted in the
performance of required duties.

EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE:
•

High School diploma or G.E.D. or any combination equivalent to sufficient experience,
training, and education to demonstrate the knowledge and abilities listed above. Attend
training as required or directed.

APPENDIX C - 001

ON CALL RULES
1.
On call employees can have any employee cover them regardless of
seniority as long as the employee has someone from the on call group cover them.
If an employee is off for a full work week they may not work during that
2.
work week but may work both or either of the weekends prior to or after the week off.
3.
An employee cannot be called into work until 7:00 a.m. the next working
day if employee called in sick.
4.
Mandatory service is a full 30 days and must be made up unless the
employee is off for bereavement or injuries with a physician's note.
5.
seniority.

An employee may have anyone cover their mandatory regardless of

6.
If there is a call out, employees shall be called starting from the top with
the most senior employee working your way down the list to the least senior employee.
If a mandatory is required you shal I mandatory from the bottom of the list
7.
making your way up through the appropriate groups.
8.
The list will consist of four groups. An operator group on the top then
three maintenance worker groups which shall consist of three employees at the top list,
four employees in the middle list and four employees at the bottom list. Lists will be
adjusted accordingly to new hires.
9.
An employee must find someone else to cover their mandatory if off for
any reason other than that employee being off for injuries, bereavement or calls off sick,
or an approved vacation which would then in tum go to then next employee in line in that
group.
I 0.
An employee has 30 minutes to anive for work after being called in,
except for a mandatory call back when the employee must report within 30 minutes. If
an employee cannot report with 30 minutes, the employee must pass the on call duty.
11.
An employee must call back for overtime immediately and only can work
if the positions required for that job are not filled.

APPENDIX D - 001

SNOW LIST RULES
In an effort to have the Village and its employees thrive in a safe atmosphere, to achieve
a fair and equitable way to distribute overtime, and keep the cost of snow removal down
in this economic climate that currently befalls the Village, the parties involved agree to
adhere to the following rules:
l. Split shifts will begin at 7:00 a.m. and last until 7:00 p.m. The second shift
will begin at 7:00 p.m. and last until 7:00 a.m. or until the snow event ends, if it is sooner.
Employees on the second shift will have the option to start at l 0:00 a.m. that day.
2. A two (2) hour show up pay will be given to an employee who is sent home
in the event of a split shift if no prior notice is given at least one hour prior to the
scheduled start time.
3. Weather related split shifts will be used for emergency purposes only, based
upon the discretion of the Director.
4. Any employee who works a split shift that would end at 3:30 a.m. would have
the option to start work between 7:00 a.m. to I 0:00 a.m. the following day, and end eight
(8) hours after their start time.
5. In the event of a split shift, the second crew will always work the second shift.
This will be in effect unless a second snow event that requires a split shift happens within
a seven (7) day period. If this occurs, the first crew will then work the second shift.
6. If all staff completes a normal eight (8) hour shift and is called back within
the four (4) hour rest period, they will be able to snow plow four (4) hours plus hours of
rest time off
7. If a snow event occurs, the top six snow plow drivers are required to work. If
an employee fails to work a snow event twice in a snow season, the employee will be
dropped down to the second tier of snow plow drivers.
