#712

INTEREST ARBITRATION BEFORE
ARBITRATOR BRIAN CLAUSS

COUNTY OF DUPAGE, ILLINOIS

Employer
And
METROPOLITAN ALLIANCE OF POLICE
CHAPTER 126
Union

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)

FMCS Case #160816-56713-1
Case No. S-MA-15-374

INTEREST ARBITRATION AWARD

For the Union:
Joseph Mazzone, Esq.
Metropolitan Alliance of Police
Joliet, Illinois
For the Employer:
Michael Durkin, Esq.
Adam Durkin, Esq.
Storino, Ramello & Durkin
Rosemont, Illinois

Location of Hearing:

DuPage County Building

Date of Hearing:

February 17, 2017

Date of Mediation:

May 16, 2017

Date of Briefs:

August 14, 2017

INTRODUCTION
Pursuant to Section 14(c) of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (“IPLRA” or “Act”),
the parties selected the undersigned as the Arbitrator to decide unresolved impasse issues for the
parties’ successor collective bargaining agreement. (“CBA,” “Contract,” or “Agreement”) for the
DuPage County deputy sheriffs.
The parties agreed to prehearing stipulations, including waiving time limits and waiving
appointment of delegates. The parties agreed that the case would be decided by the Arbitrator. The
hearing was held at the DuPage County Administration Building on February 17, 2017. The parties
presented documentary evidence and oral testimony on twenty-seven open issues and that hearing
was transcribed.
On May 16, 2017, the parties reconvened for a mediation session. After mediation, the
parties reached tentative agreements (“TAs”) on twelve items that had been at issue during the
February hearing. They memorialized their agreement in an email to the Arbitrator dated July 5,
2017. The parties reached tentative agreement on two more at-issue items and memorialized that
agreement in an email to the Arbitrator dated July 25, 2017. The parties stipulated that TAs should
be incorporated into the final award.
The parties submitted briefs on August 14, 2017. It is on the above record that this Interest
Arbitration Award is issued.
FACTS
DuPage County is located in the northeast corner of the State of Illinois and lies within the
Chicago Metropolitan Statistical Area. DuPage is bordered by Cook, Will, and Kane County.
Kendall County’s northeast corner meets DuPage County’s southwest corner. Approximately
933,700 people reside in DuPage County.
DuPage County (“County” or “Employer”) and the DuPage County Sheriff (“Department”
or “Employer”) are Joint Employers of county peace officers appointed under the authority of a
county sheriff pursuant to 5 ILCS 315/3(o). On March 23, 2006, the Illinois Labor Relations Board
certified the Metropolitan Alliance of Police, Chapter 126, (“MAP” or “Union”) as the sole
representative of all deputy sheriffs below the rank of sergeant, within the Sheriff’s Administrative
Bureau, Law Enforcement Bureau, Fugitive Apprehension Unit within the Corrections Bureau,

2

School Liaison Unit, Gang Suppression/Problem Investigation Unit, and the DuPage County
Metropolitan Enforcement Group (DUMEG). The bargaining unit currently consists of
approximately 175 deputies. The parties’ initial collective bargaining agreement became effective
on June 1, 2011.
The County and the Sheriff are parties to two other collective bargaining agreements – one
with Policemen’s Benevolent Labor Committee Local #501 (“PBLC”) for Corrections deputies,
and the other with the Illinois Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council and the telecommunicators.
The County has three other internal bargaining units: International Union of Operating
Engineers, Local 399 for craft employees; International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 150
for transportation employees; and International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 150 for
Public Works employees. The County is also a joint employer with the DuPage County Coroner
and has a contract with the Metropolitan Alliance of Police, Chapter 174 for deputy coroners.
STATUTORY FACTORS
The statutory provisions in pertinent part governing this arbitration are found in Section 14
of the Act. All the statutory factors were considered by the undersigned when analyzing the issues
presented in this Interest Arbitration. The statute does not provide for a ranking of the statutory
factors according to importance and it is therefore up to the arbitrator to determine the importance
of the statutory factors. City of Decatur and IAFF, (Eglit 1986). Nonetheless, all the statutory
factors were considered in the instant matter. They are:
(g) As to each economic issue, the arbitration panel shall adopt the last offer of
settlement which, in the opinion of the arbitration panel, more nearly complies with
the applicable factors prescribed in subsection (h). The findings, opinions and order
as to all other issues shall be based upon the applicable factors prescribed in
subsection (h).
(h) Where there is no agreement between the parties ... the arbitration panel shall
base its findings, opinions and order upon the following factors, as applicable:
(1) The lawful authority of the employer.
(2) Stipulations of the parties.
(3) The interests and welfare of the public and the financial ability of the unit
of government to meet those costs.
(4) Comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of employment of the
employees involved in the arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours and
conditions of employment of other employees performing similar services and
with other employees generally:
(A) In public employment in comparable communities.

3

(B) In private employment in comparable communities.
(5) The average consumer prices for goods and services, commonly known as the
cost of living.
(6) The overall compensation presently received by the employees, including direct
wage compensation, vacations, holidays and other excused time, insurance and
pensions, medical and hospitalization benefits, the continuity and stability of
employment and all other benefits received.
(7) Changes in any of the foregoing circumstances during the pendency of the
arbitration proceedings.
(8) Such other factors, not confined to the foregoing, which are normally or
traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of wages, hours and
conditions of employment through voluntary collective bargaining, mediation, factfinding, arbitration or otherwise between the parties in the public service or in
private employment.
OPEN ISSUES
The parties agreed to the following open issues: with the proposed changes noted in blue:
Issue 1.

Section 12.2 – Sick Leave Accrual
Employers’ Proposal

Union Proposal
Status Quo.

Sick leave credits do not accrue during the initial probationary period of
employment after the date of hire with the office. All deputies covered by
this agreement shall accrue paid sick leave at the following rate:
YEARS OF
COMPLETED
CONTINUOUS
SERVICE

ACCRUED
SICK
HOURS PER
YEAR FOR
8 HOUR
SHIFTS

ACCRUED
SICK
HOURS PER
YEAR FOR
10 HOUR
SHIFTS

ACCRUED
SICK
HOURS PER
YEAR FOR
12 HOUR
SHIFTS

1 through 5
years of
completed
service

48 hours per
year

60

72

6 through 10
years of
completed
service

56 hours per
year

70

84

4

11 through 15
years of
completed
service

64 hours per
year

80

96

16 through 20
years of
completed
service

72 hours per
year

90

108

21 years or
greater of
completed
service

80 hours per
year

100

120

All employees covered by this agreement shall be allowed up to a
maximum of 2000 hours of sick leave accumulation.
Sick leave does not accrue during any personal leave of absence.

Issue 2.

Section 12.4 – Annual Sick Leave Payout

Employers’ Proposal

Union Proposal
Status Quo.

Section 12.4 –Sick Leave Payouts, Annual
and at Separation

T

Effective January 1, 2018, all sick time hours
thereafter accrued under this Agreement shall
be placed into a second sick leave bank (“Bank
B”). Bank B sick leave shall be used and
exhausted prior to the use of sick leave hours
accrued and unused prior to January 1, 2018
(“Bank A”). Effective January 1, 2018, all sick

5

time hours accrued, unused, and banked in
Bank A will be frozen for purposes of
eligibility for monetary compensation. This
accrued sick time will continue to be eligible
for payouts based on years of service, as set
forth below:

1.
Sick Leave Payouts for employees
hired prior to November 1, 2005:

a) Once an employee accrues thirty
(30) days of sick time, they have the
option to continue to accumulate
sick leave or to cash in up to five (5)
days of sick time, one time per
calendar year, at the payout
percentage based on their length of
service, as indicated in the Payout
Table below:
Payout Table

YEARS OF
COMPLETED

MONETARY
COMPENSATION

CONTINUOUS
SERVICE

PERCENTAGE RATE

11 through 15 years

75%

16 years or greater

100%

b) Employees who sign a formal
notice of separation may receive
payment for accrued, unused sick
time from Bank A up to twelve (12)
months prior to their separation
date, according to the Payout Table
set forth hereinabove.
c) Upon voluntary termination of
employment, members will receive

6

monetary
compensation
immediately following thirty (30)
calendar days from their date of
separation of employment, for
accumulated Bank B sick leave
hours, according to the Payout
Table set forth hereinabove.
d) In lieu of a payout for accrued,
unused sick leave, employees shall
have the option to obtain service
credit to the full extent allowed by
Illinois law and IMRF policies, if
any.
2.
Sick Leave Payouts for employees
hired after November 1, 2005:
Once an employee has completed eight
(8) years of service, upon separation or
layoff, the employee will have the
option to either:

a) Receive monetary compensation for
all remaining accrued, unused sick
time at 50% of the value as set forth
below:
i.

ii.

Employees who sign a
formal notice of separation
may receive such payment
for accrued, unused sick
time from Bank A up to
twelve (12) months prior to
their separation date.
Upon voluntary termination
of employment, members
will
receive
monetary
compensation immediately
following
thirty
(30)
calendar days from their
date of separation of
employment,
for

7

accumulated Bank B sick
leave hours.
b)

In lieu of a payout for accrued,
unused sick leave, employees shall
have the option to obtain service
credit to the full extent allowed by
Illinois law and IMRF policies, if
any.

As a quid pro quo for such modifications to
Section 12.4 hereinabove, as necessitated by
P.A. 97-0609, which became effective August
26, 2011, and was not applicable to collective
bargaining agreements entered into,
amended or renewed before January 1,
2012, the Employer agrees to modify Section
13.10 as follows:

Section 13.10 – Benefit Continuation
Amend as follows:

While an employee is on a Family Medical
Leave (FMLA), the County will provide
medical and dental insurance coverage at the
current employee rate. If an employee
continues to be off of work after exhausting
their twelve (12) weeks of FMLA, the
employee will be responsible for the entire
amount of the premium as stated in the
County’s Personnel Manual, Chapter 4, Policy
4J, Guideline E, attached as Appendix L.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, employees who
are absent from work due to an injury in the line
of duty shall continue to be provided medical
and dental insurance coverage at the thencurrent rate for employee premium co-

8

payments, so long as such employee is
receiving compensation pursuant to the Public
Employee Disability Act (5 ILCS 345/0.01 et
seq.).

During an absence of longer than thirty (30)
consecutive days, the employee will not accrue
vacation or sick time, nor will the employee be
eligible for holiday pay, after the 30th day of an
occupational or non-occupational disability
leave.

[Along with the Employers’ proposal for
Section 12.4, a modified Appendix L would
be provided, as follows:]
APPENDIX L – BENEFIT
CONTINUATION

D. In most circumstances, an employee
may be required to use any accrued
vacation, personal days, and sick time
during any unpaid portion of Family
Medical Leave granted, providing this
does not interfere with Workers’
Compensation benefits or eligibility
for IMRF disability benefits. FMLA
leave will run concurrently with any
other applicable leave. For instance,
IMRF
disability
or
Workers’
Compensation
leave
will
be
simultaneously designated as FMLA
leave as well, if the leave is also FMLA
qualifying.
E. The County will provide basic life,
medical and dental insurance coverage
to an employee who is on Family
Medical Leave at the current employee

9

rate. If an employee is off work after
exhausting their twelve (12) weeks of
Family Medical Leave, the employee
will be responsible for the entire
premium, from that point forward.
Notwithstanding
the
foregoing,
employees who are absent from work
due to an injury in the line of duty shall
continue to be provided medical and
dental insurance coverage at the thencurrent rate for employee premium copayments, so long as such employee is
receiving compensation pursuant to
the Public Employee Disability Act (5
ILCS 345/0.01 et seq.). If an employee
fails to pay their share of the premium,
coverage may be canceled.
F. Under certain circumstances, an
employee may take Family Medical
Leave intermittently, which means
taking leave in blocks of time, or by
reducing the employee’s normal
weekly or daily work schedule.
G. If Family Medical Leave is for birth
and infant care, or placement for
adoption or foster care, use of
intermittent leave is subject to the
employer’s approval. The County’s
approval is not required for
intermittent leave during which the
mother has a serious health condition
in connection with the birth of her
child or if the newborn child has a
serious health condition.
H. When leave is needed for planned
medical treatment, the employee must
make a reasonable effort to schedule
treatment
during
non-working
business hours so as not to unduly
disrupt the operation of the
department.

10

I. Spouses employed by the County may
be limited to a combined total of
twelve (12) weeks of Family Medical
Leave for birth and care of a newborn
child, for placement of a child for
adoption or foster care, or to care for a
parent who has a serious health
condition. In the situation where the
husband and wife have both used a
portion of the total twelve (12) weeks
of Family Medical Leave, for birth and
care of a newborn child or for
placement of a child for adoption or
foster care, each would be entitled to
the difference between the amount
they have taken individually for other
purposes.
J. An expectant mother is entitled to
FMLA leave for incapacity due to
pregnancy, for prenatal care, or for her
own serious health condition following
the birth of the child. Circumstances
may require that FMLA leave begin
before the actual date of birth of a
child. An expectant mother may take
FMLA leave before the birth of the
child for prenatal care or if her
condition makes her unable to work.
The mother is entitled to leave for
incapacity due to pregnancy even
though she does not receive treatment
from a health care provider during the
absence, and even if the absence does
not last for more than three (3)
consecutive calendar days.
K. A husband is entitled to FMLA leave
if needed to care for their pregnant
spouse who is incapacitated or if
needed to care for her during her
prenatal care, or if needed to care for
the spouse following the birth of a

11

child if the spouse has a serious health
condition.

Issue 3.

Section 12.5 - Sick Leave Payout at Separation

Employers’ Proposal

Delete, as this topic is addressed
in Section 12.4, as proposed by
the Employers.

Issue 4.

Union Proposal

Status quo.

Section 13.10 - Benefit Continuation

Employers’
Proposal

Status Quo.

Union Proposal

While an employee is on a Family Medical Leave (FMLA), the County
will provide medical and dental insurance coverage at the current
employee rate. If an employee continues to be off of work and is not
qualified for Workmen’s Compensation benefits or benefits under PEDA
(Public Employees Disability Act) that employee shall be afforded all light
duty considerations as described in Paragraph 19.9 herein. Medical
insurance shall continue to be provided to all employees on light duty or
who are qualified for PEDA at the same rate of contribution as other
members of the Chapter.

During an absence of longer than thirty (30) consecutive days, the
employee will not accrue vacation or sick time, nor will the employee be

12

eligible for holiday pay after the 30th day of a non-occupational disability
leave, except employees qualifying for PEDA shall be allowed to continue
to accrue vacation and sick leave for so long as they qualify for those
benefits (typically one year).

If covered under Worker’s Compensation, all benefits (medical and dental
insurance, sick leave and vacation accrual and holiday pay) will continue
uninterrupted, as they are part of the member’s compensation.

Issue 5.

Section 14.2 – Normal Work Hours
Employers’ Proposal

Union Proposal

The current normal work hours in effect for
employees are described in the paragraphs
which follow. The normal work schedule for
Detectives, FIU Detectives, Civil Unit,
Warrant Unit, Community Resource Unit, and
Court Security Deputies shall consist of eight
(8) hour shifts, as specified in the following
paragraphs, such that the employee is normally
scheduled for eighty (80) hours of work in a
14-day work period, in accordance with the
provisions of Section 7(k) of the Fair Labor
Standards Act. The normal work schedule for
Patrol Deputies shall consist of twelve (12)
hour shifts, as specified in the following
paragraphs, such that the employee is normally
scheduled to work one hundred sixty (160)
hours in a twenty-eight (28) day work period,
in accordance with the provisions of
Section 7(k) of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
The normal work schedule for Gang
Suppression/ Problem Solving Unit (SR-22)
shall consist of ten (10) hour shifts, as specified
in the following paragraphs, such that the
employee is normally scheduled for eighty (80)

13

The current normal work hours in effect for
employees are described in the paragraphs
which follow. The normal work schedule for
Detectives, FIU Detectives, Civil Unit,
Warrant Unit, DUMEG, Community Resource
Unit, BATTLE and Court Security Deputies
shall consist of eight (8) or ten (10) hour shifts,
as specified in the following paragraphs, such
that the employee is normally scheduled for
eighty (80) hours of work in a 14-day work
period, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 7(k) of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
The normal work schedule for Patrol Deputies
shall consist of twelve (12) hour shifts, as
specified in the following paragraphs, such
that the employee is normally scheduled to
work one hundred sixty (160) hours in a
twenty-eight (28) day work period, in
accordance with the provisions of Section 7(k)
of the Fair Labor Standards Act. The normal
work schedule for Gang Suppression/ Problem
Solving Unit (SR-22) shall consist of ten (10)
hour shifts, as specified in the following
paragraphs, such that the employee is normally

hours of work in a 14-day work period, in
accordance with the provisions of Section 7(k)
of the Fair Labor Standards Act. The normal
schedule for DUMEG shall consist of either
eight (8) hour or ten (10) hour shifts, such that
the employee is normally scheduled for eighty
(80) hours of work in a fourteen (14)-day work
period, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 7(k) of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Except in an emergency, changes in the current
normal work days, work schedules or work
period may only be made by the Sheriff or his
designee(s) as provided in this Article and such
changes shall not be made to solely avoid the
payment of overtime; provided that changes
necessary to accommodate training shall be
deemed not to be made solely to avoid the
payment of overtime.

Issue 6.

scheduled for eighty (80) hours of work in a
14-day work period, in accordance with the
provisions of Section 7(k) of the Fair Labor
Standards Act. Except in an emergency,
changes in the current normal work days, work
schedules or work period may only be made by
the Sheriff or his designee(s) as provided in
this Article and such changes shall not be made
to solely avoid the payment of overtime.

Section 14.3 - Work Schedules by Unit

Employers’ Proposal

Union Proposal

PATROL: Work twelve (12) hour shifts.
Available current shifts for Members
assigned to the patrol division, based on shift
bidding as outlined below, are:

PATROL: Work twelve (12) hour shifts.
Available current shifts for Members assigned
to the patrol division, based on shift bidding as
outlined below, are:

DAYS:
0500 – 1700 AND 0600
– 1800
POWER:
1500 – 0300 (which may
be modified by the Employers to 1700-0500)
MIDNIGHT:
1800 – 0600

DAYS:
1800
POWER:
MIDNIGHT:

The current 12-hour schedule is based on 84
hours worked during a two (2) week period
and allows for four (4) hours of duty reduction
time (DRT time). The DRT time may be taken
in one (1) hour increments, unless otherwise
approved by the employee’s supervisor,
during the period earned, subject to approval
by the shift Watch Commander and may not
be taken in the middle of a scheduled shift.

0500 – 1700 AND 0600 –
1500 – 0300
1800 – 0600

The current 12-hour schedule is based on 84
hours worked during a two (2) week period and
allows for four (4) hours of duty reduction time
(DRT) time. The DRT time may be taken in one
(1) hour increments, unless otherwise approved
by the employees supervisor, during the period
earned, subject to approval by the shift Watch
Commander and may not be taken in the middle
of scheduled shift. Availability of time off will
be based on LEB seniority. In the event an

14

Availability of time off will be based on LEB
seniority. In the event an affected Deputy is
not able to take his/her DRT time off, said
deputy shall be paid those DRT hours at the
Deputy’s straight time rate of pay. DRT hours
are not subject to roll over from pay period to
pay period. In the event a Deputy is mandated
to stay during scheduled DRT time, the
Deputy shall be paid at their overtime rate for
the time that they actually were mandated to
work and the DRT time shall not be carried
over.

affected Deputy is not able to take his/her DRT
time off said deputy shall be paid those DRT
hours at the Deputy’s straight time rate of pay.
DRT hours are not subject to roll over from pay
period to pay period. In the event a Deputy is
mandated to stay during scheduled DRT time,
the Deputy shall be paid at their overtime rate
for the time that they actually were mandated to
work and the DRT time shall not be carried
over.

TOWNSHIP: Employees in the patrol
division may be assigned to work hours in
specific Townships, as designated by the
contract agreements with those Townships.
Currently the Sheriff’s Office has Township
assignments that have 8 or 12 hour shifts,
subject to agreement with the Township.
Deputies assigned to these townships shall
work the shift lengths that are agreed upon by
the Office and the Township for operational
needs.

TOWNSHIP: Employees in the patrol division
may be assigned to work hours in specific
Townships as designated by the contract
agreements with those Townships. Currently
the Sheriff’s Office has Township assignments
that have 8 or 12 hour shifts, subject to
agreement with the Township. Deputies
assigned to these townships shall work the shift
lengths that are agreed upon by the Office and
the Township for operational needs.

DETECTIVE:
Work eight (8) hours
shifts. Mon – Fri. Normal schedule is 0800DETECTIVE: Work eight (8) hours shifts. 1600 or 1500-2300 or, as deemed necessary for
Mon – Fri
the operational needs of the Office.
Normal schedule is 0800-1600 or 1500-2300 Detectives’ work hours may be changed if
or, as deemed necessary for the operational mutually agreed upon by division management
needs of the Office.
and unit members. This includes changing to a
10 hour work day.
FIU DET:
FIU Detectives will
work a rotating schedule consisting of five (8) DETECTIVES AND FIU DETECTIVES
hour shifts. The work schedule will be When “called out” shall be paid from the time
developed by the FIU members in order to of the call out until the time signed off. A
provide 24 hour a day seven days a week minimum of three (3) hours compensatory or
coverage, including a Detective on call for the overtime shall be paid for each “call out”.
County Coroner, and a Detective on call FIU DET:
between 0001 hours and 0700 hours. The FIU detectives will work a schedule developed
number of weeks in rotation will depend on by the members of the FIU unit and their
the number of FIU Detectives in the Unit. The supervisor in order to provide adequate
Unit Supervisor and/or the LEB Chief will coverage for that unit.
approve the schedule.

SR22- Gang
Normally scheduled to
SR22 / Gang
Normally scheduled to ten (10) hour shifts with rotating days off and
ten (10) hour shifts with rotating days off
subject

15

Suppression Unit:
1500-0100.

Normal work shift of Suppression Unit: to flexibility in hours.
Normal work shift of 1500-0100.

CIVIL UNIT (Paper Service), WARRANT
UNIT, DUMEG & COMMUNITY
RESOURCE UNIT
Typically these positions are working an eight
(8) hour shift and their schedules vary,
depending on their position.

CIVIL UNIT (Paper Service), WARRANT
UNIT,
DUMEG,
COMMUNITY
RESOURCE UNIT & BATTLE
Typically these positions are working an eight
(8) hour shift and their schedules vary
depending on their position.

JOB ASSIGNMENTS WITHIN COURT
SECURITY
Screening (including juvenile transport)
Master Control/Prisoner Escort
Courtrooms (including field courts)
Explosive Detection K9 Handler(s)

JOB ASSIGNMENTS WITHIN COURT
SECURITY
Screening (including juvenile transport)
Master Control/Prisoner Escort
Courtrooms (including field courts)
Explosive Detection K9 Handler(s)

Work Schedules within the Court Security
Unit
Screening/Explosive Detection 1st shift:
0630-1430
0700-1500
0730-1530
0800-1600
0830-1630

Work Schedules within the Court Security
Unit
Screening/Explosive
Detection
1st
shift:
06301430
07001500
0730-1530
0800-1600
0830-1630

Screening/Explosive Detection 2nd shift
1100-1900
1200-2000
1130-1930
Master Control/Prisoner Escort
0500-1300
0600-1400
0730-1530
0830-1630
0800-1600
Courtrooms
0800-1600
0830-1630

Screening/Explosive Detection 2nd shift
1100-1900
1200-2000
1130-1930
Master Control/Prisoner Escort
05001300
0600-1400
0730-1530
0830-1630
0800-1600

Meal and rest breaks shall be taken in Courtrooms
accordance with current policy and procedure, 0800-1600
and as are currently enjoyed by the bargaining 0830-1630
unit members.

16

Meal and rest breaks shall be taken in
accordance with current policy and procedure,
and as are currently enjoyed by the bargaining
unit members. Members are allowed to use
their meal/rest breaks for personal activities as
long as they are able to respond to a call for
service in an appropriate time frame.

Issue 7.

Article XV – Automobiles

Employers’ Proposal
Status quo.

Union Proposal
The Sheriff may provide to employees an automobile for
use on official Sheriff Business. If provided, such
automobile must be used in accordance with rules and
regulations established by the Sheriff in affect [sic] at the
time of ratification/award of this agreement and those
rules and regulations shall remain in full force and effect
until changes are negotiated in good faith between the
parties or, in the case of impasse, arbitrated to resolution.
, which may be changed at any time by the Sheriff.
Members that have been assigned a squad car shall be
allowed to operate a squad car assigned to a different
member as long as that member allows it, and the vehicle
is operated in accordance with the rules and regulations
established by the Sheriff, radio [sic] shall be
immediately notified of such changes and usage. When
detectives are on call they may take their assigned vehicle
to their residence.

Issue 8.

Section 18.5 – Stipends

Employers’ Proposal
A.

Union Proposal

Pager Stipend – Members in the
Special Pager Stipend – Members in the Special
A.
Operations Unit / Hazardous Devices Unit / Operations Unit / Hazardous Devices Unit /
Explosive Detection K9 Unit / Detective Explosive Detection K9 Unit / Detective
Division / F.I.U. shall receive a stipend of Division / F.I.U.shall receive a stipend of
$25.00 ($30.00, effective 12/1/17) for each $25.00 ($50.00) for each week on call.
week on call.
Additionally, detectives and FIU members will
be compensated at two (2) hours of
1. Payment shall be for actual restricted compensatory time or overtime for each day on
time only
call.

17

B.

2. Member may only be paid one stipend
for the same period of restricted time
1. Payment shall be for actual restricted
3. Payment shall be made annually on time only
the member’s anniversary date.
2. Member may only be paid one
stipend for the same period of restricted time
Collateral Assignment Pay – Designated Patrol
3. The stipend payment shall be made
Evidence Technicians shall receive a stipend of annually on the member’s anniversary date.
$25.00 a week. Payment shall be made annually
on the member’s anniversary date.
B. Collateral Assignment Pay – Designated
Patrol Evidence Technicians shall receive a
stipend of $25.00 a week. Payment shall be
made annually on the member’s anniversary
date.
Issue 9.

Section 18.6 (NEW) - Deputy in Charge Pay/FTO Stipends

Employers’ Proposal

Union Proposal
Members that are “Acting Corporal” (A/C),
that are performing the functions of a Corporal,
who are not a Corporal, whether assigned to
JOF (Courthouse) or LEB (Patrol), shall
receive one and one-half hours (1.5) overtime
pay or compensatory time, at the members
discretion, for each shift worked in that
capacity.

Status quo.

Unit Training Officers in court security shall
receive 2 additional days off each calendar
year, as outlined in CTS 8-73.1.2, from the
Sheriff’s general orders.
Issue 10. Article XXV- Entire Agreement
Employers’ Proposal
Status quo.

Union Proposal
This Agreement, upon ratification, constitutes
the complete and entire agreement between the
parties, and concludes collective bargaining
for its term unless otherwise expressly
provided herein.
The parties acknowledge that, during the
negotiations which resulted in this Agreement,
each had the unlimited right and opportunity to
make demands and proposals with respect to

18

any subject or matter not removed by law from
the area of collective bargaining, and that the
understandings and agreements arrived at by
the parties after the exercise of that right and
opportunity are set forth in this Agreement.
Therefore, except as otherwise specifically
provided herein, the Employer and the Union,
for the duration of this Agreement, each
voluntarily and unqualifiedly waives the right,
and each agrees that the other shall not be
obligated to bargain collectively with respect
to any subject or matter referred to or covered
by this Agreement, or with respect to any
subject or matter not specifically referred to or
covered in this Agreement, including the
impact of the Employer’s exercise of its rights
as set forth herein on wages, hours of work or
terms and conditions of employment.

Issue 11. Appendix G – PER 1-1 Sick Leave
Employers’ Proposal

Union Proposal

Issue 12. Appendix J – Occupational Disability/Workers Compensation
Employers’ Proposal
Status quo.

Union Proposal
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION

POLICY
It is the policy of DuPage County to follow State and Federal laws
that provide Workers’ Compensation for employees who
experience job related injuries or illnesses.
ELIGIBILITY


All employees regardless of employment status.

GUIDELINES
A. Workers’ Compensation is a statutory requirement
provided by law to all eligible workers who sustain jobrelated injuries or illnesses. Guidelines and procedures are

19

in accordance with state and federal requirements of the
Workers’ Compensation Act.
B. Eligible employees are entitled to receive benefits for
compensable work-related injuries or illnesses. Benefits
include payment for all medical and rehabilitative care
and, in cases that involve lost time, Temporary Total
Disability benefits (TTD).
C. n employee who is unable to work as the result of a workrelated injury or illness will be placed on Family Medical
Leave and shall continue to receive all employer provided
benefits including, but not limited to, health insurance.
D. The Human Resources Department works with a third party
administrator to administer Workers’ Compensation
Benefits.

PROCEDURES
1.

An employee who sustains a work-related injury is
required to notify their supervisor immediately. If the
supervisor is not immediately available, the employee
must contact the Department Head or the Human
Resources Department to record the work related incident.
If necessary, the employee will be sent for medical
treatment. A post-accident drug and/or alcohol test may be
required of all employees requiring medical treatment.
Positive drug and/or alcohol tests will be subject to
disciplinary action, not to exclude termination for a first
offense in compliance with Personnel Policy 6E: Drug
Free
Workplace.

2. The employee will complete the Employee Statement of
Injury/Illness as soon as possible. The supervisor will
complete the Supervisor’s Statement of Injury/Illness, and
in cases where medical services are rendered will also
complete the Form 45. If an employee refuses medical
treatment, the supervisor should document the employee’s
refusal. Forms are available from the Human Resources
Department and on the County intranet under Human
Resources/Worker’s Compensation.
3. The employee is responsible for informing the treating
physician that the injury is work-related and that all claims

20

should be forwarded to the Human Resources Department.
The claim is then submitted to the third party administrator
for review.
4. Follow up visits, physical therapy, etc., should be
scheduled during working hours when practical. . The
employer will make reasonable accommodations to flex
work hours to allow follow-up medical care.
5. Employees who receive Temporary Total Disability
(TTD) benefits are not eligible for IMRF disability
benefits. However, the employee should contact IMRF if
they will be unable to work for thirty (30) or more days in
order to maintain service credits and death benefits.
(Personnel Policy 3C: Illinois Municipal Retirement
Fund/IMRF)
6. The employee is responsible for notifying their supervisor
or the Human Resources Department when they are
released to return to work from a work-related injury or
illness. Written notice from the physician, specifying work
restrictions, if any, is required before the employee can
return to work.
7. The Human Resources Department can be contacted at any
time to obtain necessary forms or to receive clarification
of Workers’ Compensation procedures.
[The Union also adds the provisions of the Public Safety
Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 330/1 et seq.) and the
provisions of the Public Employee Disability Act (5 ILCS
345/1 et seq.). (Actual language omitted.)]
Issue 13. Appendix L – Benefit Continuation
Employers’ Proposal
Status quo.

Union Proposal
A.

21

In most circumstances, an employee may
be required to use any accrued vacation,
personal days, and sick time during any
unpaid portion of Family Medical Leave
granted, providing this does not interfere
with Workers’ Compensation benefits or
eligibility for IMRF disability benefits.
FMLA leave will run concurrently with
any other applicable leave. For instance,

IMRF
disability
or
Workers’
Compensation
leave
will
be
simultaneously designated as FMLA
leave as well, if the leave is also FMLA
qualifying.
. The County will provide basic life, medical
and dental insurance coverage to an
employee who is on Family Medical
Leave at the current employee rate, at the
same level as was previously given to the
affected employee. . The County shall
continue to provide such insurance
benefits that the affected employee was
receiving until said employee qualifies
for disability benefits or is returned to
work.
C. Under certain circumstances, an employee
may take Family Medical Leave
intermittently, which means taking leave
in blocks of time, or by reducing the
employee’s normal weekly or daily work
schedule.
D.

If Family Medical Leave is for birth and
infant care, or placement for adoption or
foster care, use of intermittent leave is
subject to the employer’s approval. The
County’s approval is not required for
intermittent leave during which the
mother has a serious health condition in
connection with the birth of her child or
if the newborn child has a serious health
condition.
E. When leave is needed for planned medical
treatment, the employee must make a
reasonable effort to schedule treatment
during non-working business hours so as
not to unduly disrupt the operation of the
department.
F.

22

Spouses employed by the County qualify
for twelve (12) weeks of Family Medical
Leave. .

G. An expectant mother is entitled to FMLA
leave for incapacity due to pregnancy, for
prenatal care, or for her own serious
health condition following the birth of the
child. Circumstances may require that
FMLA leave begin before the actual date
of birth of a child. An expectant mother
may take FMLA leave before the birth of
the child for prenatal care or if her
condition makes her unable to work. The
mother is entitled to leave for incapacity
due to pregnancy even though she does
not receive treatment from a health care
provider during the absence, and even if
the absence does not last for more than
three (3) consecutive calendar days.
H. A husband is entitled to FMLA leave if
needed to care for their pregnant spouse
who is incapacitated or if needed to care
for her during her prenatal care, or if
needed to care for the spouse following
the birth of a child if the spouse has a
serious health condition.

I. Any member who sustains any injury while
performing any law enforcement related
activity, training, regardless of location
or duty status and including any actions
taken against an officer, shall continue to
receive healthcare coverage and shall not
be required to pay for continuing
healthcare coverage beyond the amount
of any employee contribution that the
injured member paid before the injury.
The County shall continue to pay its
contribution for continuing health
coverage for any member who sustains
any such injury during the duration of the
disability.

23

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES
Although the parties did not agree on which were the economic and non-economic issues,
the Employer asserts twelve economic and one non-economic issue. Section 14 requires that a
Final Offer be selected on the economic issues. The Employer contends that its Final Offers should
prevail because they are closest to what the parties would have negotiated had negotiations not
reached an impasse.
The Employer reminds that the statutory factors are neither ranked nor assigned a value.
Further, the hearing was held on February 17, 2017 and the record was closed. Although a
mediation occurred on May 16, 2017, the record was not re-opened and new evidence should not
be considered.
As external comparables, the Employer and Union proposed six and four counties
respectively. The agreed counties are Kane, Lake, Will, and McHenry. The parties disagree about
Kendall and DeKalb counties. The Employer determined their six counties by selecting counties
within twenty miles of DuPage and with over 100,000 inhabitants and examining seven economic
factors. These criteria focused on annual county revenue and residents’ wealth. The Employer
continues that although it is not arguing an inability to pay, there is a significant amount of deficit
spending in DuPage County. Further, the CPI is an important factor and has been below 2%.
The Employer also argued that the Agreement and subsequent arbitration decision prohibit
a past practice argument from either side and urge rejection of any claims to a past practice.
The Union maintains that four statutory factors do not apply. There is no question about
lawful authority, there has been no substantial change in either parties’ circumstances, there is no
claimed inability to pay, and the CPI has been so low as to be inconsequential. The remaining five
factors are: stipulations of the parties; interest and welfare of the public; comparison of wages,
hours, and condition of other employees; overall compensation of affected employees; and the
other normal factors considered in interest arbitrations.
There are four comparable counties upon which the parties agree. The Employer’s
additional two counties, DeKalb and Kendall, should be rejected because they are too small, too
far away, and have a different cost of living.

24

The Union continues that the only internal comparables are the public safety units. The
civilian bargaining units have no right to strike and arbitrators agree that they are not comparable
to law enforcement bargaining units.
SUMMARIES OF ARGUMENTS ON THE OPEN ISSUES
Comparable Communities
Kane, Lake, Will and McHenry County are undisputed. The parties dispute whether Kendal
and DeKalb are comparable communities. City of Peru and Illinois Fraternal Order of Police,
(Berman, 1995), stands for the proposition that “[g]eographic proximity and comparable
population are the primary factors used to determine comparability. But these factors only establish
the baseline from which comparisons may be drawn.” Citing these criteria, the Employer identified
counties within twenty miles of DuPage.
The Employer prepared the following chart based upon census data.
Population of Counties within 20 miles of DuPage County
County
Lake
Will
Kane
McHenry
Kendall
DeKalb
Grundy

Population
703,910
687,263
530,847
307,343
123,355
104,352
50,437

Grundy County was eliminated by the Employer due to only having a sliver of area within
twenty miles of DuPage. The six remaining counties were categorized by the Employer using
seven economic criteria on a per capita basis. Highlighted categories indicate being within +/- 50%
of DuPage for the respective category. The Employer offers no explanation for +/- 50% of DuPage
County’s value.

25

Employer Chart on Comparable Economic Data
County (pop.)

DeKalb (104,352)
DuPage (933,736)
Kane (530,847)
Kendall (123,355)
Lake (703,910)
McHenry (307,343)
Will (687,263)

General
Fund
Revenue
Per Capita
$258.18
$189.55
$159.11
$184.89
$227.39
$277.92
$276.14

General
Fund
Balance
Per Capita
$78.68
$74.88
$115.80
$143.27
$178.58
$155.42
$123.71

Sales Tax
Revenue
Per Capita
$45.25
$104.27
$60.72
$106.96
$84.78
$65.03
$35.64

Property
Tax
Revenue
Per Capita
$204.53
$72.71
$101.04
$164.77
$220.48
$246.62
$170.78

Equalized
Assessed
Valuation
Per Capita
$16,245
$34,811
$21,919
$20,498
$32,173
$22,561
$26,234

Per Capita
Income

Median
Household
Income

$24,025
$39,336
$31,056
$31,053
$39,299
$33,735
$31,310

$54,101
$79,658
$70,696
$84,385
$78,026
$77,222
$76,101

DuPage has approximately 933,700 residents. DeKalb County has slightly more than
100,000 residents making DuPage County nearly nine times the population of DuPage. Applying
the Employer’s +/-50% used for economic factors, DuPage County’s population size does not
compare to DuPage County. Further, DeKalb County is largely rural. Moreover, DeKalb only
comes within 50% of DuPage on four of the seven criteria – and comes in significantly behind
DuPage in the two critical criteria of per capita income and median household income. The Union’s
argument of being too far away and having a different cost of living is a valid argument. DuPage
County is not a comparable community.
Kendall County has geographic proximity to DuPage County because it is an adjacent
county. It is a lightly populated rural county compared to DuPage County with approximately 15%
the population of its non-rural neighbor. However, when the criteria for Kendall County are
compared to Kane County, the criteria are close, with Kendall eclipsing Kane in five of the criteria,
tying on one, and being slightly behind on per capita EAV. Although lightly populated, Kendall is
the southwest neighbor of DuPage and betters most of the criteria of agreed comparable Kane
County. Kendall County is a comparable community.
The comparable counties are Kane, Kendall, Lake, McHenry and Will Counties.
Open Issues
Issue 1.

Section 12.2 - Sick Leave Accrual

The Employer argues that this section should be eliminated due to the Employer’s
breakthrough Section 12.4 proposal that addresses, among other things, sick leave accrual. The
Union’s status quo Final Offer should be rejected.

26

The Union contends that the status quo should be maintained because the Employer cannot
satisfy the breakthrough test. The Employer has not established (1) the old system and procedure
has not worked as anticipated when originally agreed to; or (2) that the existing system or
procedure has created operational hardships for the employer or equitable due process problems
for the union, and (3) the party seeking to maintain the status quo has resisted attempts at the
bargaining table to address these problems.
Issue 2.

Section 12.4 - Sick Leave Payout

The Employer contends that their breakthrough Final Offer should be adopted because: (1)
the existing system is not working as anticipated; (2) the existing system has created operational
hardship for the employer or equitable hardship for the union; (3) the party opposing the change
has resisted attempts to negotiate the issue; and (4) the Employer has offered a quid pro quo.
The Employer explains that a change in Illinois law has created a substantial liability for
the County. Under the June 2011 arbitrated Agreement, pre-2005 hires could receive payment for
unused sick days up to 2,000 hours. This redemption could occur during the twelve months prior
to retirement. That payment was then used to calculate employee pay for pension purposes and
produced, what the Employer calls, a pension spike. Post-2005 hires with at least eight years of
service would receive a payment upon separation.
The Employer states at Brief p. 48:
[U]pon the effective date of the parties’ initial contract in June 2011, the Employers
were not required to make any specific payments to IMRF that were attributed to
the increases in members’ pensions caused by the sick leave payouts.
However, effective August 26, 2011, Public Act 97-609 amended 40 ILCS 5/7-172,
by adding paragraph (h), which required employers to pay to IMRF an additional
lump sum, if the amount of a retiree’s income for any of the 12 month periods used
to determine his pension exceeded that employee’s 12 month reported earnings for
the previous year by the greater of 6% or 1.5 times the annual increase in the
Consumer Price Index-U. (40 ILCS 5/7-172(k)). (Ers.Ex. 45). (Since the increase
in the CPI-U has not exceeded 6% since 2011, for purposes of brevity, this shall
simply be described as the increase in pensionable earnings above 6%.) In other
words, if the employee’s pension was spiked by more than 6%, the employer would
have to make an additional lump sum payment to IMRF. If an employee was the
recipient of a pension spike, then the public employer would be required to pay an
amount equal to the present value of the increase in the pension that is in excess of
the 6% increase (“accelerated payment”). Id.

27

The Employers did not have to immediately begin paying this accelerated payment,
since Public Act 97-933, which became effective August 10, 2012, amended the
effective date of Public Act 97-609 to January 1, 2012. This amendment also
provided public employers a temporary safe harbor, by adding language that
paragraph (k) did not apply to earnings increases paid to individuals under
collective bargaining agreements entered into, amended, or renewed before January
1, 2012. Id.
According to the Employer, the CBA expired and as a result, they are now liable for the
increased pension payments for employees who redeem their sick time in the last year of
employment or upon separation. In short, including the sick leave payout in final year earnings has
resulted in a substantial liability for the County that was not part of the law when the parties entered
into the prior CBA.
In order to remedy this situation, the Employer proposes a two-tiered Sick Leave payout
that other Sheriff’s bargaining units currently have. Under that new system, the payout for sick
leave accumulated after January 1, 2018, would occur thirty days after retirement or separation. It
would still remain at a maximum of 2,000 accumulated hours. The delayed sick leave payout
would not be included in the pay calculation for pension purposes and would therefore not
implicate the IMRF accelerated payment liability.
Recognizing this as a breakthrough proposal, the Employer states:
As a quid pro quo for the delay of paying out Bank B sick leave, the Employers
have offered to modify both Sections 13.10 and Appendix L, by adding language
that will extend the Employers’ obligation to pay a portion of the health insurance
premiums for the entire period that an employee is off duty on Public Employee
Disability Act (PEDA) leave. (5 ILCS 345/1 et seq.). This could result in the
Employers continuing to pay their share of the health insurance premium for 40 or
more additional weeks, depending on when FMLA leave is exhausted.
The Employer points out that the Union seeks changes to Section 13.10 and Appendix L,
as well as Section 16.1 and Appendix J, to extend Employer health insurance payments. The
Employer also cites the PBLC unit as the comparable internal unit. The PBLC agreed to the A-B
Sick Leave bank in their CBA with a limitation of 960 accumulated hours.
The Employer also contends that the health insurance obligation will begin immediately
whereas the Sick Leave payout will not realize any substantial savings for years. Twenty-two

28

members have more than 1,000 accumulated Sick Leave hours and 35 have more than 500 hours.
These would be held in the A bank and new hours would be in the B bank.
The Employer contends that the Union has resisted attempts to negotiate an A-B bank with
the following statement by the Union attorney: “we had talked about trading off a grandfathered
A/B Bank for some sort of light duty, but that never came to fruition. Light duty is an issue that’s
coming up. . . .” (Tr. 46). The Employer continues that the parties reached agreement on a light
duty Union proposal for Section 19.9 following mediation.
The Employer predicts that the Union will argue that the PBLC members received a
substantial amount of retroactive pay as a quid pro quo for agreeing to the A-B bank. According
to the Employer, the PBLC filed for mediation in 2012 and were paid backpay to that date.
The Employer also argues that their mistake or oversight resulted in substantial backpay
payments for six or seven employees because the Sheriff’s Department hire date was used to
calculate seniority-based placement on the wage schedule. Former telecommunicators who
became sworn members had significant movement on the wage scale and account for the large
backpay amounts for certain PBLC members.
The Employer cites the statutory factors in support of its breakthrough Final Offer. The
external comparables all have much lower Sick Leave payouts upon retirement with the maximum
being less than half of DuPage’s payout. The internal comparables include the PBLC unit
discussed above and the telecommunicators. The telecommunicators’ initial contract followed the
County policy of freezing Sick Leave prior to 2011 into an A Bank and post-2011 Sick Leave into
a B bank that can be used but has no value. Unlike the other County bargaining units, the PBLC
and MAP units B Bank would have monetary value and could be paid out – albeit 30 days after
separation.
The Employer also argues that the interests and welfare of the citizens favor the Employer’s
Final Offer. Prior to the new legislation, there were no consequences for a “pension spike” from
paying out sick leave up to 2.000 hours. However, there is now an enormous liability for the
Employer to continue as it had previously operated.
The Union counters that the status quo must be maintained. This is a breakthrough issue
and the Employer cannot meet the standards for a breakthrough offer to be awarded. The Union

29

cites Village of Skokie & IFOP Labor Council S-MA 12-124 (Perkovich 2013) and other awards
for the proposition that the party advocating for a breakthrough must show: (i) a substantial and
compelling need; (ii) a demonstration that the status quo has failed to work; (iii) a demonstration
of inequity to the bargaining unit; (iv) whether the other party has resisted attempts to bargain the
issue; and (v) whether the breakthrough party has offered a quid pro quo.
The breakthrough analysis must be applied before the Section 14(h) factors can be
considered. The Union reminds of the caveat that a party should not get in interest arbitration what
they would not get in traditional labor negotiations.
The Union continues that the non-public safety bargaining units are improper comparables.
Further, the Corrections unit is also inappropriate because they agreed to the A-B Sick Bank and
it was not an arbitrated issue decided in an interest arbitration. The Corrections unit also got
additional retroactive pay to which they were not entitled.
The Union also maintains that the Employer’s proposal would adversely affect the pension
benefits and payout for sick days of employees that has been the status quo for decades.
The Union further argues that the breakthrough criteria have not been met by the Employer.
First, there has been no showing that the current system does not work. Second, the Union places
strong emphasis on the Employer’s inability to show the Union resisted attempts to bargain the
issue of Sick Leave Payout. The Union argues that it did not resist attempts to argue the issue.
Rather, the Employer engaged in bad faith bargaining by simply demanding the change and
offering extended health insurance coverage to a small number of deputies. The Union contends
that the health insurance coverage would not be an issue if the Employer had not changed the
availability of light duty assignments and excluded most members of the bargaining unit who
would previously have qualified for light duty.
The Union continues that the Employer cannot show the Union as resisting attempts to
bargain the Sick Leave Payout issue because the Employer never discussed the costs with the
Union. Instead, the Employer waited until the arbitration hearing to provide cost estimates about
the Sick Leave payout but not the cost to the retiring employee. The Employer is not arguing an
inability to pay, just a desire not to pay.

30

The Union offered a negotiated concession to the Employer for a wage TA – a concession
not mentioned by the Employer. The Union offered the replacement of Court Deputies with Court
Security Officers thereby saving the Employer nearly $25.00 an hour in payroll.
The Union concludes that there is no quid pro quo. All the Employer offers is a health
insurance continuation to a small group of employees in return for adversely affecting the pension
benefits of every member of the bargaining unit.
Issue 3.

Section 12.5 - Sick Leave Payout at Separation

The Employer seeks to delete this section due to incorporating it into their breakthrough
offer for Issue 2. The Union adopts the same argument for Section 12.4, 12.5, and Appendix G.
Issue 4.

Section 13.10 - Benefit Continuation

This section is part of the quid pro quo for the Employer’s breakthrough Final Offer. The
Employer argues for the status quo unless their breakthrough Final Offer is adopted. Further, the
Union’s Final Offer satisfies neither the breakthrough analysis nor the requirements of Section 14.
The Union maintains that, for the first two years of the CBA, no bargaining unit member
was ever denied light duty when they were cleared for light duty. However, the Union now seeks
this change to the benefit continuation due to the Employer’s change to light duty. The Union
wants light duty offered to those with non-duty injuries and also wants those qualified for Workers
Comp or PEDA to have the same contribution as working Department members – benefit
continuation being something the members would not need to use if Light Duty options were
restored.
Issue 5.

Section 14.2 - Normal Work Hours

The Employer argues that their Final Offer contains minor changes that reflect which units
work eight hours, which units work ten hours, and the elimination of references to a disbanded
unit. The Employer should be allowed to change work assignments for training – as is done in all
the comparable counties. The Employer continues that the Union’s Final Offer is a breakthrough
proposal and that the breakthrough criteria have not been satisfied.
The Union argues that its proposal seeks to maintain the status quo to include ten hour
assignments for those who currently work them. The Union also seeks to avoid language that

31

allows the Department to move assignments for training and thereby eliminate overtime
opportunities.
Issue 6.

Section 14.3 - Work Schedules by Unit

The Employer argues that their proposal is the more reasonable. According to the
Employer, the Final Offer allows the Sheriff to change the start time of the Power Shift. The Sheriff
already possesses the authority pursuant to Section 14.4. The Employer continues that the Union’s
Final Offer should be rejected because it introduces new payments for detectives and does not
satisfy the breakthrough analysis.
The Union argues that there proposal is the more reasonable because it would allow the
detectives and their supervisors to agree upon a work schedule. Detectives would receive either
three hours comp time or overtime pay for every callout. The Union also seeks to codify the current
courthouse schedule and allow for deputies to use meal breaks for personal business if they remain
available to respond to calls.
Issue 7.

Article XV - Automobiles

The Employer seeks the status quo because the right to manage Department vehicles is a
management right of the Employer. The Union’s Final Offer should be rejected because it restricts
the Sheriff’s ability to assign and manage Department property.
The Union seeks to have deputies trade squads when needed and to notify dispatch of the
change. The Union states that this was the prior practice of the Department.
Issue 8.

Section 18.5 - Stipends

The Employer proposes increasing the pager stipend from $25 to $30 per week. The
Employer cites their Final Offer as the more reasonable than the Union’s proposal to double the
pager stipend and pay on-call FIU and on-call Detectives a two-hour daily stipend of overtime or
comp time. According to the Employer, the Union’s Final Offer would raise the annual cost of the
stipend from $1300 to between $30,000 and $48,000. The statutory factors favor the Employer’s
proposal.
The Union proposes increasing the Special Operations Unit, Hazardous Devices, and
Canine Unit from $25 a week to $50 week, on call detectives and members of FIU would receive
two hours of comp time or overtime pay when on call, and patrol ETS would receive $25 a week.

32

This proposal compares to stand-by pay for Courthouse deputies and is similar to the comparable
communities.
Issue 9.

Section 18.6 (NEW) - Deputy in Charge Pay/FTO Stipends

The Employer’s Final Offer is status quo. The Union has not established a need for this
new section because deputies do not act up as FTOs in the absence of an FTO. Further, courthouse
deputies assume the lunch and break scheduling function of the corporal in the corporal’s absence.
It is one small task and does not warrant acting up pay because courthouse deputies have less duties
than LEB deputies. The Employer also argues that the courthouse corporals already get two days
off per year and there is no valid reason for two more. Those two days are preserved in the General
Orders and cannot be removed.
The Union’s Final Offer seeks to pay deputies when they are acting-up as corporals.
Corporals have a separate pay scale. The Department has the discretion to assign deputies to
assume the duties of a corporal. Acting-up deputies are responsible for managing the deputies at
their posts, ensuring adequate deputy coverage of assignments, act as the first line of supervision,
and follow the orders of the sergeant.
The Union’s Final Offer also seeks to preserve the two days the FTOs receive. Although
they are in the GOs, the Union seeks them added to the CBA.
Issue 10. Article XXV - Entire Agreement
The Employers seek the status quo citing internal and external comparables in support of
this non-economic permissive subject of bargaining. The Employer states that the implications of
past practice is at the core of this Section.
The Union wants to cite past practice and the Employer does not. In support, the Union
points to the contentious relationship between the parties.
Issue 11. Appendix G, PER 1-1 – Sick Leave
The Employers seek to delete Appendix G as part of their quid pro quo offer on Sick Leave
payout as discussed above. The Union seeks status quo and cites their deconstruction of the
Employer’s breakthrough proposal cited above.

33

Issue 12. Appendix J – Occupational Disability/Worker’s Compensation
The Employer conditions its offer on the quid pro quo. If the Employer’s Final Offer on
Section 12.4 is awarded, then employee health benefits will be paid by the County through the
FMLA and PEDA periods. If the Employer’s offer is not awarded for the Section 12.4
breakthrough, then status quo should remain.
The Union’s Final Offer inserts PSEBA and PEDA language, continues health care for
employees on workers comp, continues benefits for members on a worked-related illness or injury,
and provides flex hours for employees for follow-up medical care.
Issue 13. Appendix L – Benefit Continuation
The Employer argues for status quo unless the Final Offer for Section 12.4 is awarded. If
so, then the Employer’s new Appendix L is included. The Employer continues that the Union’s
Final Offer must be rejected due to internal conflicts and unreasonable extensions of benefit
coverage.
The Union seeks benefit continuation for members injured whether on or off-duty.
ANALYSIS
In interest arbitration, significant gains are meant to be the rarity. It is generally accepted
that parties should not make gains at arbitration that they could not get at the bargaining table via
face–to–face negotiations. As Arbitrator Bierig recently noted in 2013:
If an arbitrator awards either party a wage package which is significantly superior
to anything it would likely have obtained through the collective bargaining process,
that party is not likely to want to settle the terms of its next contract through goodfaith collective bargaining. The temptation and political pressures will be very great
to try one’s luck again in arbitration in hopes of getting a better deal than is likely
available at the bargaining table. City of Chicago & PBLC Unit 156, (Bierig, 2013)
at 56.
The statutory factors that must be considered in Illinois public sector interest arbitration
are:
(g) As to each economic issue, the arbitration panel shall adopt the last offer of
settlement which, in the opinion of the arbitration panel, more nearly complies with
the applicable factors prescribed in subsection (h). The findings, opinions and order
as to all other issues shall be based upon the applicable factors prescribed in
subsection (h).

34

(h) Where there is no agreement between the parties ... the arbitration panel shall
base its findings, opinions and order upon the following factors, as applicable:
(1) The lawful authority of the employer.
(2) Stipulations of the parties.
(3) The interests and welfare of the public and the financial ability of the unit
of government to meet those costs.
(4) Comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of employment of the
employees involved in the arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours and
conditions of employment of other employees performing similar services and
with other employees generally:
(A) In public employment in comparable communities.
(B) In private employment in comparable communities.
(5) The average consumer prices for goods and services, commonly known as the
cost of living.
(6) The overall compensation presently received by the employees, including direct
wage compensation, vacations, holidays and other excused time, insurance and
pensions, medical and hospitalization benefits, the continuity and stability of
employment and all other benefits received.
(7) Changes in any of the foregoing circumstances during the pendency of the
arbitration proceedings.
(8) Such other factors, not confined to the foregoing, which are normally or
traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of wages, hours and
conditions of employment through voluntary collective bargaining, mediation, factfinding, arbitration or otherwise between the parties in the public service or in
private employment.
While all the statutory factors must be considered, there are four key factors to the analysis:
(i) the impact of inflation on the employees’ purchasing power – generally measured by the
Consumer Price Index; (ii) the pay and benefits received by other similarly situated employees –
the “comparables;” (iii) the effect of the final offers on the interests and welfare of the public, and
the government’s ability to meet the costs after the final offers; and (iv) the effect on the overall
compensation of the employees at issue.
Issue 1. (Section 12.2), Issue 2. (Section 12.4) and Issue 3. (Section 12.5) The Employer’s
Breakthrough Proposal on Sick Day Related Final Offers
The Employer acknowledges that the Final Offer on sick days is a breakthrough proposal.
The Employer continues that it has offered a sufficient quid pro quo for the breakthrough proposal
on sick days. The Union counters that the breakthrough analysis has not been satisfied because the
Employer cannot satisfy the elements of the breakthrough analysis.
If a party is proposing a breakthrough proposal, the breakthrough analysis must be satisfied
prior to the application of the 14(h) statutory factors. In order to satisfy the requirements of a

35

breakthrough proposal, a party seeking a breakthrough must prove: (i) that the existing system is
not working as anticipated; (ii) that the existing system has created operational hardship for the
employer or equitable hardship for the union; (iii) that the party opposing the change has resisted
attempts to negotiate the issue; and (iv) that a quid pro quo has been offered. City of Countryside
and Illinois Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council, at 11 (Clauss, 2013) citing County of
Kankakee and Illinois Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council, at 27 (Kohn, 2013).
In the instant matter, the Employer argues that it has satisfied the first element of the
breakthrough analysis because it established that the existing system is not working as anticipated.
The existing system is not working as anticipated because the statutory payment requirements were
not contemplated when the parties executed their first CBA. The Employer agreed to the
accumulation of 2,000 hours of sick leave that could be redeemed for cash and applied to the wage
basis for pension calculations. In short, the Employer states that it did not mind agreeing to a
“pension spike” when it did not cost the Employer any additional money. The Employer is
confronting the reality of paying for the “pension spike” – an additional payment that the Employer
did not contemplate. Now, the legislature is requiring Employers to pay for “pension spikes” and
that payment could be significant.
The Employer also argues that it has satisfied the second element because it will now be
responsible for large payments to the IMRF when employees retire. The statutory change has
changed the pension landscape and the Employer will have to bear the brunt of that change with
significant payments.
The Employer has devoted a substantial portion of its 118 page brief seeking to establish
that the first and second elements are satisfied. Assuming, strictly for the purpose of the analysis,
that the Employer has established the first two elements, the inquiry then turns to the third element:
that the party opposing the change has resisted attempts to negotiate the issue. Arbitrator Perkovich
recently addressed this issue as follows:
First, it is important to remember that Illinois law allows that parties to collective
bargaining have the right to engage in hard bargaining so long as they bargain in
good faith. Thus, this breakthrough test requires that when one views the parties’
course of bargaining he or she must ask whether the party whose conduct is under
scrutiny has bargained hard or, has it bargained in such a way that the very premise
underlying the breakthrough analysis, i.e., that a breakthrough should be adopted
in interest arbitration only when bargaining was futile, is applicable? City of Peoria

36

& PBPA, S-M-13-144 (Perkovich 2016), citing, City of Highland, S-MA-06-159
(2007)).
The third element examines the bargaining history of the parties. In order to satisfy this
element in the instant matter, the Employer needs to show that the Union resisted Employer
attempts to bargain the issue. In support of their position on the third element, the Employer’s brief
states at p. 51:
The first opportunity that the Employers had to bargain with the Union over the
effects of the legislation that implemented subsection (k) was the negotiations for
the agreement at issue. The Employers have raised this topic repeatedly in
negotiations, but to no avail.
The Employer’s brief continues at pp 55-56:
The record demonstrates that the Union has resisted the Employers’ attempts to
negotiate a resolution to the newly-imposed financial burden that accelerated
payment obligations pose. The record reveals that the Employers made several
attempts to bargain a change in the timing of the payout of a portion of sick leave,
by creating the A and B Banks. In fact, counsel for the Union testified at the
arbitration hearing, “we had talked about trading off a grandfathered A/B Bank for
some sort of light duty, but that never came to fruition. Light duty is an issue that’s
coming up. . . .” (Tr. 46). This demonstrates that the parties attempted to bargain a
change in the sick leave payouts by attempting to establish A and B Banks for
accumulated sick leave, and by guaranteeing that the timing for payouts of sick
leave that had already been accumulated would be grandfathered, so that those
payouts would continue to increase pension payouts.
The Employer admits that it raised sick leave payout issue in negotiations and attempted
to bargain a change to sick leave payout. Union counsel’s statement that “we talked about trading
off a grandfathered A/ B Bank for some sort of light duty” is offered in support of the Employer’s
position that the Union resisted negotiating the change.
An examination of the evidence does not support the Employer’s position that the Union
refused to negotiate the sick leave payout issue. As shown above, the Employer admits that the
parties bargained the issue. However, the parties did not reach agreement. Even taking the evidence
in the light most favorable to the Employer for the purpose of this analysis, the most that the parties
can show is that they reached impasse on this issue.
The parties being at impasse on an issue does not establish that one party resisted attempts
to negotiate the issue – a required element in the breakthrough analysis. Here, the record is devoid

37

of any evidence that the Union resisted attempts to negotiate the issue. To the contrary, the
admissions of the Employer indicate that the Union negotiated, but that no TA was reached on the
sick leave payout issue.
The Employer cannot prove the Union’s refusal to negotiate and the Employer’s
breakthrough Final Offer must be rejected. Further, even if the Employer had established that the
Union resisted attempts to negotiate the issue, the Employer has not been able to establish the
value of the offered quid pro quo. Under the current system, employees are able to redeem up to
2,000 hours of sick leave time and that redeemed time is counted towards pay in the final year of
employment. Adding approximately a year of income to the calculation window has a significant
effect upon a retiree’s pension payment. Although the Employer devotes a substantial portion of
their brief to the costs of the sick leave payout to the Employer, the Employer does not discuss the
A/B Bank implications for retiree pension monthly payments. Absent evidence of the impact of
the quid pro quo on pension payments to retirees, the value of the quid pro quo cannot assessed.
The record is clear on the costs to the Employer, the record is inadequate on the costs to the
Employee. Accordingly, the quid pro quo cannot be valued.
The Employer has failed to satisfy the breakthrough analysis for the Employer’s Final Offer
on sick leave payout. Therefore the Union’s Final Offer of Status Quo for Issue 1, Issue 2, and
Issue 3 must be awarded.
Issue 4. Section 13.10 - Benefit Continuation
The Employer argues for the status quo unless their breakthrough Final Offer is adopted,
then this quid pro quo should be awarded because the Union’s Final Offer is an unsupported
breakthrough. The Union’s Sick Leave proposal was not awarded and their Final Offer is therefore
status quo.
The Union seeks a change to healthcare premium payments because the Employer made
light duty assignments unavailable. The changes would not need to be awarded if light duty were
restored. The Union also seeks benefit continuation for Workers Comp or PEDA and to have the
same contribution as working Department members.
The Union seeks to extend Employer-paid healthcare benefits beyond the twelve week
FMLA period for employees on PEDA. The Employer characterizes this as a game changer and
therefore a breakthrough.

38

Even if the Union were to satisfy the breakthrough analysis, it would not prevail when the
Section 14(h) factors are applied. There is little to no support among the external comparables for
the Union Final Offer. Further, the internal comparables favor the Employer’s Final Offer of status
quo. The evidence establishes that the other public safety bargaining units, as well as the civilian
bargaining units, have the same Employee responsibility to pay for healthcare benefits when
FMLA is exhausted. The employees are responsible for 100% of the contribution after FMLA
ends.
This section was part of the initial CBA. When considering healthcare final offers,
arbitrators cite the internal comparables as being the most persuasive. See e.g., City of South Beloit
and Illinois FOP Labor Council, (Perkovich, 2009). The same holds true in the instant matter. An
examination of the internal comparables shows that there are no other comparable employees in
the County who would get the benefit continuation that the Union now seeks. The internal
comparables support the Employer’s Final Offer. When all the other statutory factors are applied,
those factors also support the Employer’s Final Offer of status quo.
The Employer’s Final Offer of status quo is awarded.
Issue 5. Section 14.2 – Normal Work Hours
The Employer argues for what it terms “minor changes” for hours of work, length of
workday, a disbanded unit, and work hour changes for training. The Employer maintains that it
has the right to move assignments for training. The Union argues that its offer reflects the practice
of some Department members working eight and some ten-hour shifts.
Both parties propose changes to the existing language. The Employer claims “minor
changes” and the Union argues that its changes reflect existing work schedules. As the Employer
admits, the SR-22 assignment works ten-hour days and deputies assigned to DUMEG may work
ten-hour days if DUMEG decides to incorporate a ten-hour schedule. The Union’s offer limits the
ability of the Department to contribute deputies to DUMEG if the days are limited to eight hours
or requires the Department to pay overtime for ten-hour days.
The critical issue for this issue is the Employer’s Final Offer language for Section 14.2
regarding schedule changes being made only in an emergency:

39

[S]uch changes shall not be made to solely avoid the payment of overtime; provided that
changes necessary to accommodate training shall be deemed not to be made solely to avoid
the payment of overtime.

The Department seeks to have a blanket provision that allows schedule changes solely for
training with its blanket proposal about how training these assignments must be considered. The
Employer seeks to insert a conclusion that when a schedule is changed to accommodate training,
that the schedule change “shall be deemed not to be made to avoid overtime.” The Union’s offer
does not address the topic of schedule changes for training.
The Employer does not define a schedule change “to accommodate training.” Schedule
changes are dependent upon many variables and one can easily imagine situations that would allow
for an overly expansive reading of the above-cited provision. For example, if a day-shift deputy
were moved to nights during a period when the night-shift deputy were assigned to a training,
would the provision apply to that day-shift deputy who was moved to cover the night shift deputy’s
absence for training?

The Employer’s proposal offers no limits to “changes necessary to

accommodate training.”
The Employer’s proposal is too expansive and too undefined. When the appropriate Section
14(h) factors are considered, the Union’s offer is the more reasonable.
Issue 6. Section 14.3 - Work Schedules by Unit
The Employer argues for a simple change to recognize the authority of the Sheriff to change
the start time of the Power Shift. The Union argues that their Final Offer is more reasonable
because it would allow detectives and their supervisors to agree upon a work schedule, codify the
courthouse schedule, and provide either three hours comp time or overtime pay for Detective
callouts.
The Union’s offer includes a pay provision in a section that is otherwise devoted to work
schedules. It also seeks to eliminate the FIU schedules in favor of one that is agreed between the
detectives and their supervisors.
The Section 14(h) factors exist to weight the merits of each party’s final offer and assign a
value to the respective criteria. In the instant matter, the Union proposes a significant change to
the FIU detectives’ compensation when called out. Detectives are paid at a higher rate than
deputies. The Union’s explanation for why the FIU Detectives’ compensation should now include

40

call-out pay is insufficient to satisfy the Section 14(h) criteria. Because the Union’s proposal
contains an unsupported wage increase, it fails.
Taking the Section 14(h) factors into consideration, the Employer’s Final Offer is the more
reasonable. The Employer’s Final Offer for Section 14.3 is awarded.
Issue 7. Article XV – Automobiles
The Employer seeks the status quo because the right to manage Department vehicles is a
management right of the Employer. The Union’s Final Offer should be rejected because it restricts
the Sheriff’s ability to assign and manage Department property.
The Union seeks to have deputies trade squads when needed and to notify dispatch of the
change. The Union states that this was the prior practice of the Department.
Department vehicles are the property of the Department. The Department has the right to
determine how to assign vehicles and to establish rules regarding the assignment of Department
equipment. The evidence suggests that although some deputies dislike how squads are assigned,
the Department is within its management right to assign squads in the manner it has chosen.
When the Section 14(h) statutory factors are considered, it leads to the conclusion that the
Employer’s offer is the more reasonable offer. Status quo is awarded.
Issue 8. Section 18.5 – Stipends
The Employer proposes increasing the pager stipend from $25/week to $30/week. The
Union proposes increasing the pager stipend to $50/week for specialized units and additional pay
to detectives and FIU of two hours comp or OT when on call. The Union cites the stand-by pay
for court deputies and external comparables in support.
The Employer points out that the Union’s new on-call payment in effect increases the
stipend by a factor of more than twenty and is therefore unreasonable. The Union points out that
the stipend has been $25/week for decades and makes it very difficult to trade assignments.
The parties agree on increasing the on-call stipend but differ on whether to increase it to
$30/week or $50/week. If that were the sole issue, then the decision would be straightforward. It
is not the only issue – the Union has proposed an on-call pay for detectives and FIU that would
add two hours of comp or OT payments for every detective or FIU on call. This type of payment
was not part of the prior Agreement.

41

The Union proposes a substantial increase to the stipend for FIU or detectives and the
Employer a small increase of $5/week. This is an economic issue and one parties’ Final Offer must
be selected. Numerous interest arbitration decisions discuss the purpose of interest arbitration and
explain how it is a conservative process designed to avoid big changes – hence the “breakthrough”
analysis discussed in the above section. A significant increase is sought by the Union, but it is not
supported by the evidence or the record.
A comparison of the Final Offers and application of the Section 14(h) factors indicates that
the Employer’s offer is the more reasonable.
Issue 9. Section 18.6 - Deputy in Charge Pay/FTO Stipends
The Employer’s Final Offer is status quo arguing both that deputies do not act up as FTOs
and admitting that courthouse deputies perform the scheduling functions of a corporal in the
corporal’s absence. The Union argues that corporals have a separate pay scale and a separate job
description and deputies should be paid when they work as corporals. Further, the Union continues
that courthouse training officers already receive two extra comp days for working as training
officers. The Union seeks to add the guarantee to the Agreement.
The evidence establishes that corporals are not deputies. They have additional duties and a
separate pay scale. The witnesses testified that deputies do not perform the FTO work of an absent
corporal. The Employer controls whether deputies would be assigned to act-up as a corporal. If
deputies are not assigned to act up as an FTO, then it is not an issue. The Courthouse is another
matter. Although the Employer argues that the deputies who are assuming the duties of an absent
courthouse corporal perform a minimal amount of scheduling work, they are nonetheless doing
the work of a corporal in ensuring appropriate coverage at the various posts in the courthouse.
The Union’s Final Offer seeks to pay deputies when they are acting-up as corporals – a
practice they argue is ongoing. The Department has the discretion to assign deputies to assume the
duties of a corporal. If the Department does not assign deputies to perform corporal functions in
the courthouse, then this section will not be implicated.
Court house training officers are guaranteed two comp days per year for working as
training officers. Memorializing those existing two days in the Agreement does not alter the
existing relationship between the parties.

42

A comparison of the Final Offers and application of the Section 14(h) factors indicates that
the Union’s offer is the more reasonable.
Issue 10. Article XXV Entire Agreement
The Employers seek the status quo citing internal and external comparables in support of
this non-economic permissive subject of bargaining. The Employer states that the implications of
past practice is at the core of this disputed provision and that the CBA should continue to govern
in a conflict between past practice and the CBA terms. The Union states that is seeks to eliminate
the zipper clause and provide for the inclusion of past practice when analyzing contract disputes.
The Union wants to cite past practice and the Employer does not want to cite it in
subsequent grievance arbitrations. In support, the Union points to the contentious relationship
between the parties and the need to cite past practice in order to prevail with a recalcitrant
Employer.
An examination of the evidence indicates that corrections and telecommunicators have
similar language to the status quo in their Agreements. Further, the Employer cites similar
language among the external comparables in support of its position.
The Union’s reliance on the contentious relationship between the parties does not support
the change to the status quo that the Union seeks. The parties do not agree on interpretations of
various sections of the Agreement. As the Union argues, they have had to resort to grievance
arbitration in order to prevail. The Union points out that many of the victories have been hardfought and lengthy. However, lack of agreement does not necessarily indicate that the Employer
has been acting in bad faith or ignoring the Agreement. Absent more, the Union cannot establish
a compelling reason to alter the status quo.
A comparison of the Final Offers and application of the Section 14(h) factors indicates that
the Employer’s status quo offer is the more reasonable.
Issue 11. Appendix G, PER 1-1 – Sick Leave
The Employer seeks to delete Appendix G as part of its quid pro quo offer on sick leave
payout as discussed above. The Union seeks status quo.
As discussed above, the Union’s Final Offer on sick leave prevailed. Therefore the Union’s
Final Offer of status quo prevails for this issue.

43

Issue 12. Appendix J – Occupational Disability/Worker’s Compensation
The Union prevailed on the Section 12.4 Sick Leave Final Offer. Because the Employer’s
quid pro quo was rejected, the Employer seeks status quo.
The Union’s Final Offer inserts PSEBA and PEDA language, continues health care for
employees on workers comp, and provides flex hours for employees for follow-up medical care.
The subject of benefit continuation has been a significant issue between the parties. The
Union argues that benefits have been paid for employees on workers compensation and now seeks
to include PSEBA and PEDA language into the Appendix. The Union also seeks to add language
that allows for flex time to accommodate follow-up medical care. The Employer sees no need to
include PSEBA or PEDA language into the Appendix. Similarly, the Employer sees no need to
remove existing FMLA language and include flex time language. The Employer reminds that sick
leave is intended for medical care.
The testimony and evidence indicate that benefits are paid for employees on workers
compensation. Further, the Union has shown no reason to include the PSEBA and PEDA language
in the Appendix. Moreover, the Union has not identified an issue with follow-up medical care.
Employees have sick time available to them and, as discussed above, can accumulate a significant
number of hours.
Neither party had identified a significant problem with the current way Workers
Compensation is addressed by the County. The Union has identified no need to deviate from the
status quo - there are no external or internal comparables that support their Final Offer and the
other Section 14(h) factors also do not support the Union’s Final Offer. The Employer’s Offer is
the more reasonable offer.
Issue 13. Appendix L – Benefit Continuation
The Employer argues for status quo unless the Final Offer for Section 12.4 is awarded. If
so, then the Employer’s new Appendix L is included. The Employer continues that the Union’s
Final Offer must be rejected due to internal conflicts and unreasonable extensions of benefit
coverage.

44

The Union seeks benefit continuation for members injured whether on or off-duty. The
Union’s Final Offer seeks to strike existing language that an employee will be responsible for the
entire health insurance premium when FMLA expires at twelve weeks.
The Employer argues for status quo and asserts that the Union’ Final Offer contains an
unworkable internal conflict between Paragraph B and Paragraph I. One paragraph requires
continuation of healthcare payments until the deputy returns to work or qualifies for disability
benefits and the other paragraph requires healthcare payments during the duration of a disability.
The Union’s Final Offer contains the following:
B.

The County will provide basic life, medical and dental insurance coverage
to an employee who is on Family Medical Leave at the current employee
rate, at the same level as was previously given to the affected employee.
The County shall continue to provide such insurance benefits that the
affected employee was receiving until said employee qualifies for disability
benefits or is returned to work.

I.

Any member who sustains any injury while performing any law
enforcement related activity, training, regardless of location or duty status
and including any actions taken against an officer, shall continue to receive
healthcare coverage and shall not be required to pay for continuing
healthcare coverage beyond the amount of any employee contribution that
the injured member paid before the injury. The County shall continue to pay
its contribution for continuing health coverage for any member who sustains
any such injury during the duration of the disability. (emphasis added)

The Employer argues that the proposal requires payment until an employee qualifies for
disability benefits and then requires Employer payments to continue to cover healthcare for the
length of the disability.
This is an economic issue and one parties’ Final Offer must be chosen. This section is related
to the benefit continuation question of Issue 4. Here, the evidence establishes that the County
policy has not changed. Under that policy, Employees are responsible for healthcare premiums
after FMLA is exhausted. What has changed is the availability of light duty assignments – an issue
that was TA’d during the pendency of this matter. Healthcare benefit continuation is not implicated
if a light duty assignment is available for a recuperating deputy. The testimony indicated that there
are fewer light duty assignments available than previously available.

45

As discussed in the analysis of Issue 4, arbitrators cite the internal comparables as being the
most persuasive for healthcare final offers. See e.g., City of South Beloit and Illinois FOP Labor
Council, (Perkovich, 2009). An examination of the internal comparables shows that there are no
comparable employees in the other County bargaining units who would get the benefit
continuation that the Union now seeks.
The internal comparables support the Employer’s Final Offer of status quo. When all the
other statutory factors are applied, those factors also support the Employer’s Final Offer of status
quo. The Employer’s Final Offer of Status Quo is awarded.
TENTATIVE AGREEMENTS
All prior tentative agreements are incorporated into this Award by reference.
RETROACTIVITY
Payments are retroactive and apply to all hours worked or paid during the CBA period.
JURISDICTION
Jurisdiction is retained for 90 days from issuance of this Award to resolve any issues that
may arise regarding implementation.

46

AWARD
Having considered the parties stipulations, the documentary evidence, the testimony, the
parties’ oral presentations, and the written arguments in accord with the all applicable statutory
factors, the following terms apply:
Issue 1.

Section 12.2 - Sick Leave Accrual: Union Offer

Issue 2.

Section 12.4 - Annual Sick Leave Payout : Union Offer

Issue 3.

Section 12.5 - Sick Leave Payout at Separation: Union Offer

Issue 4.

Section 13.10 - Benefit Continuation: Employer Offer

Issue 5.

Section 14.2 - Normal Work Hours: Union Offer

Issue 6.

Section 14.3 - Work Schedules by Unit: Employer Offer

Issue 7.

Article XV – Automobile: Employer Offer

Issue 8.

Section 18.5 – Stipends: Employer Offer

Issue 9.

Section 18.6 - Deputy in Charge Pay/FTO Stipends: Union Offer

Issue 10.

Article XXV - Entire Agreement: Employer Offer

Issue 11.

Appendix G – PER 1-1 Sick Leave: Union Offer

Issue 12.

Appendix J - Workers Compensation: Employer Offer

Issue 13.

Appendix L - Benefit Continuation: Employer Offer

Date of Award: January 17, 2018

Brian Clauss, Arbitrator

47
