AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
TOWN OF MERRIMACK, NEW HAMPSHIRE
AND
LOCAL #12 OF THE (NEPBA) NEW ENGLAND
POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION

July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2027

ARTICLE I: AGREEMENT ...................................................................................................................... 1
ARTICLE II: PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................ 1
ARTICLE III: RECOGNITION ................................................................................................................ 1
ARTICLE IV: EXCLUSIONS ................................................................................................................... 1
ARTICLE V: NON-DISCRIMINATION ................................................................................................. 2
ARTICLE VI: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS ............................................................................................... 2
ARTICLE VII: UNION BUSINESS .......................................................................................................... 3
ARTICLE VIII: NO STRIKE .................................................................................................................... 3
ARTICLE IX: CONSULTATION ............................................................................................................. 3
ARTICLE X: SENIORITY ........................................................................................................................ 4
ARTICLE XI: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME .......................................................................... 5
ARTICLE XII: WAGES AND SALARIES .............................................................................................. 6
ARTICLE XIII: LONGEVITY .................................................................................................................. 7
ARTICLE XIV: HOLIDAYS ..................................................................................................................... 8
ARTICLE XV: EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE ...................................................................................... 8
ARTICLE XVI: SUPPLEMENTAL COMPENSATION (BENEFITS) ...............................................10
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

HEALTH INSURANCE ..........................................................................................................10
LIFE INSURANCE ................................................................................................................11
DISABILITY INSURANCE.....................................................................................................11
WORKER'S COMPENSATION ...............................................................................................11
RETIREMENT......................................................................................................................12
DENTAL INSURANCE ..........................................................................................................12
WELLNESS PROGRAM ........................................................................................................12
MILITARY LEAVE ..............................................................................................................12
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE ......................................................................................................13

ARTICLE XVII: LEAVE OF ABSENCE ................................................................................................14
ARTICLE XVIII: CLOTHING ALLOWANCE .....................................................................................14
ARTICLE XIX: EARNED TIME .............................................................................................................17
1.
2.

PERSONAL LEAVE ACCOUNT (PLA): .................................................................................17
DISABILITY LEAVE ACCOUNT (DLA). ...............................................................................17

ARTICLE XX: DUES WITHHOLDING .................................................................................................20
ARTICLE XXI: DISCIPLINE AND TERMINATION FOR CAUSE ..................................................20
ARTICLE XXII: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE .....................................................................................21
ARTICLE XXIII: MISCELLANEOUS ...................................................................................................22
ARTICLE XXIV: SEPARABILITY.........................................................................................................22
ARTICLE XXV: EFFECT OF AGREEMENT .......................................................................................22
ARTICLE XXVI: DURATION OF AGREEMENT ...............................................................................23
APPENDIX A: WAGE SCHEDULE .......................................................................................................A1

ARTICLE I: AGREEMENT
This agreement between the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire (hereinafter called the "town," and Local
#12, New England Police Benevolent Association (hereinafter called the "union), is made and entered into
this 1st day of July, 2024.

ARTICLE II: PURPOSE
The general purpose of this contract is to set forth agreements reached between the town and the union with
respect to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment for police officers in the bargaining
unit described in Article III.

ARTICLE III: RECOGNITION
1. The town recognizes the union as the exclusive bargaining agent for the following regular
(permanent) members of the town's Police Department to include the ranks/assignments of:
Detective Sergeant
Police Sergeant
Master Patrol Officer
Community Service Officer (CSO)
Detective
Detective First
Patrol Officer
School Resources Officer (SRO) First
School Resources Officer (SRO)
Juvenile Officer
2. The term "employee" as used in this contract refers to the members of the bargaining unit listed
above.
3. It is understood that nothing contained in this article shall be construed so as to prevent the town or
appropriate representatives thereof from meeting with any individual or organization to hear views
on any matters, except that as to matters so presented which are proper subjects of collective
negotiations, and covered by a term of this agreement, any changes shall be made only through
negotiations and agreement with the union.

ARTICLE IV: EXCLUSIONS
1. This agreement excludes the ranks of:
Chief of Police
Deputy Chief of Police
Captain

A1

Detective Lieutenant
Lieutenant
2. The inclusion or exclusion in the bargaining unit of new personnel classifications established by the
town subsequent to the effective date of this agreement, or the exclusion of members from the unit
for the purpose of assuming confidential status, shall be preceded by discussion with the union.
Any impasse in this area shall be submitted to the Public Employees Labor Relations Board for
resolution.

ARTICLE V: NON-DISCRIMINATION
The town and the union agree not to discriminate against a member of the unit based on the individual’s
age, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, gender identity, race, color, marital status, genetic
information, physical or mental disability, religious creed, national origin, veteran status or any other
characteristic protected by local, state or federal law or membership or non-membership in the union.

ARTICLE VI: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
1. The parties agree that all of the rights and responsibilities of the town which have not been
specifically provided for in this agreement are retained in the sole discretion of the town whose
right to determine and structure the goals, purposes, functions, and policies of the town without
prior negotiation with the union and without being subject to the grievance and arbitration
procedures of this agreement shall include but not be limited to the following:
a) the right to direct employees; to determine qualifications, promotional criteria, hiring criteria,
standards for work, and to hire, promote, transfer, assign, retain employees in positions; and to
suspend, discharge or take other disciplinary actions against an employee for proper and just
cause, subject to the other provisions of this agreement, including grievance and arbitration;
b) the right to relieve an employee from duty because of lack of work or other legitimate reasons;
c) the right to take such action as in its judgment it deems necessary to maintain the efficiency of
police department operations;
d) the right to determine the means, methods, budgetary, and financial procedures, and personnel
by which the police department operations are to be conducted;
e) the right to take such actions as may be necessary to carry out the missions of the police
department in case of emergencies;
f) the right to make rules, regulations, and policies not inconsistent with the provisions of this
agreement and to require compliance therewith; and
g) the right to subcontract.
2. The exercise of the management rights and responsibilities of the town set forth hereby, except
discipline and discharge, shall not be subject to the grievance procedures set forth in this agreement,
2

except that where a management right is specifically required to be exercised in accordance with a
specified procedure as provided in this agreement, grievances alleging a failure to comply with such
procedure will be subject to Article XXII, Grievance Procedure, of this agreement.
3. Nothing in this agreement shall be construed so as to limit the right of the Chief of Police or his
designee to command the police department as their judgment directs them in any and all
emergency situations as they deem to be appropriate.

ARTICLE VII: UNION BUSINESS
1. The union officers and representatives are president, vice president, and/or secretary/treasurer and
steward.
2. The union shall advise the town of the names of the employees holding union offices within thirty
days of their election.
3. Union officers as described above shall be permitted to process grievances during their scheduled
hours of duty, provided that they have prior permission from the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee and the amount of time in which officers are engaged in such activities is reasonable.
4. Every effort will be made to schedule negotiating sessions at a time which does not conflict with the
scheduled duty of employees who are members of the union's collective bargaining team. Should a
collective bargaining session be scheduled during a time when members of the union's negotiating
team are scheduled for duty, a maximum of two unit members will be permitted to participate in the
negotiations without loss of pay.
5. The union shall be permitted to meet at the Merrimack Police Station or the town meeting rooms to
conduct business matters so long as the meetings are scheduled at a convenient time, so as to
minimize any inconvenience to the regular functions of the police department or the town. Proper
notice shall be given and permission granted prior to the use of these facilities.

ARTICLE VIII: NO STRIKE
1. The union and its members agree not to cause, condone, sanction or participate in any strike,
walkout, slowdown, or work stoppage.
2. The union and its members agree that each and every employee violating this article shall be subject
to disciplinary action by the town.

ARTICLE IX: CONSULTATION
1. Representatives of the union may meet with the Chief of Police or a designee once a month to
discuss matters of mutual concern, including those matters necessary to the implementation of this
agreement. A written agenda shall be submitted by the union to the Chief of Police no less than five
days before the scheduled date of the meeting. At the discretion of the Chief of Police or the
3

designee, additional matters for discussion may be placed on the agenda. Nothing contained herein
shall prevent the Chief of Police or the designee and the union from meeting more or less frequently
upon mutual agreement.
2. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the union from consulting with the Chief of Police or the
Chief's designee at any time if urgent or emergency matters of mutual concern arise. However,
grievances must be submitted in accordance with the procedure specified in this agreement.

ARTICLE X: SENIORITY
1. Patrol Officers shall not acquire seniority during their probationary periods. The probationary
period is considered to be a temporary appointment. The probationary period shall be not less than
six months nor more than one year.
2. Seniority shall mean the length of full-time service within the police department, beginning with
the first day or hire, and/or length of service by rank.
3. For purposes of computing length of service in grade as it applies to the wage schedule for patrol
officer, service shall be counted from the day of employment within that rank.
4. The Chief of Police shall establish a seniority list containing the names and seniority of all
employees in the unit. The list will indicate:
I. the date of employment;
II. seniority within the department;
III. seniority by rank.
5. A current list must be posted at least once a year. Any objections to the seniority list as posted shall
be reported in writing to the Chief of Police within ten days, or the list will stand approved.
6. If more than one Patrol Officer is hired on the same date, the Chief shall designate seniority based
upon each officer’s final ranking in the Police Academy at NHPSTC. If officers are sent to
different academy classes, the officer who attended and successfully completed the earlier academy
class will have seniority over the other officer(s) hired upon the same date. In the event that two
officers are hired on the same date and only a single space is allotted to the Department, the Chief
shall determine who attends the academy at NHPSTC based upon which officer scored the highest
on the written exam during the hiring process.
7. Probationary employees shall have no rights based upon seniority; however, they shall, insofar as
applicable, be subject to all other clauses of this agreement.
a) In the event of downsizing and/or layoffs of member of Local 12, those members with the least
amount of seniority within the local will be the first to be released.
b) Seniority will be the only consideration in laying off members.
c) Laid off members shall be eligible for recall for a period of 12 months from the date of the
layoff. Rehiring for the vacant position will be done by rehiring the laid off member with the
most seniority at the time of the layoff.
4

d) This in no way indicates that the local will be the first location of downsizing and/or layoffs; ie.,
other unionized and/or non-unionized personnel.

ARTICLE XI: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME
1. The normal work schedule shall be four consecutive eight-hour days on duty followed by two
consecutive days rest. Exceptions: detective, community service officer, school resource officer,
and juvenile unit personnel work a consecutive five-day, 40-hour work week schedule.
2. The work day is defined as 12:01 a.m. until 12:00 midnight. The work week is defined as 12:01
a.m. Sunday until 12:00 midnight on the subsequent Saturday.
3. Employees will be paid at 1.5 times their base hourly rates for any hours worked in excess of their
normal work schedules. Time spent on outside or private work detail will not be counted in
determining the number of hours worked for overtime purposes.
4. Employees will be given seven calendar days notice when their tours of duty are to be changed,
except in emergency situations as determined by the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, or
except when the one-week notice is waived by the employee.
5. For each and every call back, a minimum of three hours at 1.5 times the base hourly rate will be
paid.
6. Exchange of shifts, squads or rotations may be granted by the Chief/designee upon the request of an
employee. No additional cost to the town should result from this policy.
a) Shift swaps must be completed within the current posted schedule rotation. Shift swap
requests that occur outside of the current posted schedule rotation must be previously
approved by the Police Chief/Designee. To be considered, written requests must include
both initial and completing swap dates. Shift swaps between Patrol Sergeants and a Master
Patrol Officer will be allowed so long as the affected Master Patrol Officer has been
previously authorized by the Police Chief/Designee to supervise shifts.
7. All unit members scheduled to appear in court or at an administrative license suspension (ALS)
proceeding will receive a minimum of four hours pay at 1.5 times their normal hourly rates,
provided that the court or ALS appearance is not scheduled during the members' regularlyscheduled shifts. Members will also be paid this minimum rate if they receive less than a one-hour
notification of a change in the court or ALS schedule. Any State of New Hampshire
reimbursements for court appearances will be payable to the Town of Merrimack.
8. Outside Details
a) The town shall pay each member of the bargaining unit a 4 hour minimum for outside details.
There will also be a 4 hour minimum for the 2nd half of a scheduled 8 hour or more detail if the
detail is split in blocks of 4 hours or more. Further, if the second half of a split detail is canceled
5

with less than two hours notice, the member shall receive a 4 hour minimum for the canceled
second half of the split detail. If the second half of the detail is canceled with more than two
hours notice, no payment shall be made for the canceled second half of the split detail. If a
detail is split, and either member working the split detail works more than 4 hours, such member
will be paid for actual time worked in excess of the 4 hour minimum.
b) Officers who work an outside detail shall receive a minimum of 4 hours pay at the designated
rate. After 4 continuous hours of work, on the same non-split detail, by the same Officer, said
Officer shall receive a minimum of 8 hours pay at the designated rate. After 8 continuous hours
of work on the same non-split detail, by the same Officer, said Officer shall receive 10 hours
pay at the designated rate. After 10 continuous hours on the same non-split detail, by the same
Officer, said Officer shall receive 12 hours pay at the designated rate. Should a detail go past 12
continuous hours with the same Officer, said Officer shall continue to be paid in 2 hour
increments.
c) For bargaining unit members hired before 7/1/2011, the rate of pay for outside details shall be
calculated as follows: ((Base Hourly Rate + Applicable Article XV Incentives + Applicable
Longevity) x 1.5).
d) For bargaining unit members hired on or after 7/1/2011, the rate of pay for details shall be
calculated as follows: ((Base Hourly Rate + Applicable Article XV Incentives + Applicable
Longevity) x 1.5) + $12.50), unless RSA 100-A is amended in a manner that provides
employees who commenced service, as defined by that law, on or after 7/1/2011 with “earnable
compensation” credit, as defined by that law, for detail-related compensation. In the event of
such an amendment, this subsection shall be automatically void with regard to employees
affected by the amendment and have no further force or effect without the need for further
bargaining related to such employees, and such affected employees shall be paid for details at
the same rate provided for employees hired before 7/1/2011.
e) Time spent on outside details will not be counted in determining the number of hours worked
for overtime purposes nor is the time spent on details considered hours worked in excess of an
employee’s normal work schedule as outlined in Article XI(3).
9. FTO Stipend - For each shift that they have a trainee with them, officers that are actively training
new hires will be authorized to stay and work directly after their shift for up to ½ hour to complete
associated paperwork. Employees will be paid overtime rate for any time worked during this time
period for this purpose.

ARTICLE XII: WAGES AND SALARIES
1. Effective July 1, 2024, all wages shall be paid in accordance with the 7/1/2024 schedule attached to
this contract as “Appendix A” (NEPBA 12 Wage Schedule). Effective July 1, 2025, all wages shall
be paid in accordance with the 7/1/2025 schedule as shown in “Appendix A.” Effective July 1,
2026, all wages shall be paid in accordance with the 7/1/2026 schedule as shown in “Appendix A.”

6

Upon promotion to the rank of Sergeant, or upon assignment to Detective First/SRO First/CSO
from Master Patrol, an employee will be initially placed on the scale in the applicable grade on the
first step that will provide the employee with an increase in base hourly rate.
2. When a pay increase for promotion or step has been approved, it shall become effective on a
Sunday for payroll purposes. If the date of the increase falls on Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday,
the preceding Sunday shall be the effective date of the raise. If the date falls on Thursday, Friday,
or Saturday, the following Sunday shall be the effective date.
3. Upon termination, layoff, retirement, or death, employees or their beneficiaries shall receive all
wages due on the next regular payday or as soon as possible.
4. The Union agrees that the Town may convert to bi-weekly payroll once all other Unions have
agreed to convert to bi-weekly pay.
5. At the Chief’s discretion, employees hired as a lateral transfer from another community may be
placed at up to the step 30 months in the appropriate classification based on their experience,
education and skills. Once placed, movements between steps in that classification will still be
separated by 6 months until the employee reaches the top of the step scale for that position. For
promotions and benefits, any time-in-service requirements will be counted from the employee’s
full-time hire date with the Town.
6. Differential Pay
a) Patrol Officers, Master Patrol Officers, and Sergeants regularly scheduled to work “B Shift”
shall receive an additional $.75 per hour for such work actually performed.
b) Patrol Officers, Master Patrol Officers, and Sergeants regularly scheduled to work “C Shift”
shall receive an additional $1.00 per hour for such work actually performed.
c) Shift differential shall not be paid to an employee who takes a “swap” into a shift that would
regularly qualify for a shift differential.
d) Shift differential will be used in calculation of an employee’s regular rate for overtime
purposes, but will not be stacked on top of an employee’s calculated overtime rate.

ARTICLE XIII: LONGEVITY
1. Employees shall receive an increase in base salaries/wages in recognition of years of service to the
town, except between July 1, 2025 and June 30, 2027 during which time no member of the
bargaining unit shall be eligible for longevity of any amount under this Article. When applicable,
the increases shall be effective upon the anniversary of employment (hire date) within the
department in accordance with the following schedule:
5 through 9 years:
10 through 14 years:
15 through 19 years:
20 or more years

$.36/hour
$.48/hour
$.60/hour
$.72/hour

2. No employee shall be eligible for a longevity increase who has not achieved the rank/rating of
7

Master Patrol Officer, Sergeant, or Detective First Class, whichever is applicable.
3. When applicable, the annual longevity increase shall be paid in hourly installments as part of the
regular pay check.

ARTICLE XIV: HOLIDAYS
1. The following shall be paid holidays for unit members:
New Year's Day (January 1)
Presidents' Day (third Monday in February)
Martin Luther King (Civil Rights) Day (third Monday in January)
Memorial Day (May 30)
Independence Day (July 4)
Labor Day (first Monday in September)
Veterans' Day (November 11)
Thanksgiving (fourth Thursday in November and the following Friday)
Christmas (December 25)
2. If a holiday falls on a regularly scheduled day off, the affected employees shall receive straighttime pay for the day in addition to their regular weekly pay. Notwithstanding, the School Resource
Officer and the Community Service Officer shall take observed Holiday off and shall not receive
additional compensation unless required to actually work on the observed Holiday.
3. If employees work on a paid holiday as part of their regular work schedule, they shall be paid their
normal hourly rate for the regular shift plus eight hours holiday pay at 1.5 times normal hourly rate.
4. If employees are required to work on a holiday which is their regularly scheduled day off,
compensation shall be at the rate of 1.5 times their normal hourly rates for the hours worked, plus
eight hours holiday pay at their normal hourly rates.
5. The conditions described above shall be applied to any extraordinary holiday proclaimed by the
Town Council.

ARTICLE XV: EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE
1. The purpose of this article is to encourage police officers in the unit to obtain relevant education
beyond high school which will significantly assist them in the performance of their duties.
2. Each police officer who has earned credits in accordance with the requirements of this article and
who has successfully passed their trial period shall receive during the term of this agreement an

8

additional hourly stipend based on the schedule below.
Educational Credit

Hourly Stipend

30 semester hours
Associate's Degree
Associate's Degree plus 30 semester hrs.
Bachelor's Degree

$.19
$.29
$.39

Master's or Law Degree

$.58

$.48

3. A semester hour is defined as an hour of credit earned toward a baccalaureate or an associate degree at
an accredited institution within a course of study recognized by the town as having relevance to police
work (such as Criminal Justice).
a) It shall be the responsibility of the police officers requesting consideration for an educational
incentive stipend to present proof of earned credit to the Chief of Police before August 1 of the
first year they are eligible to receive the stipend. Each year after, the officers shall receive a
stipend based on the above schedule and shall not have to reapply unless additional qualifying
credit hours have been earned.
b) The Town shall pay 100% of the cost of any employee education or training that is required by
the Town to assist him in maintaining his minimum job requirements or in adequately
performing the tasks to which he is regularly assigned.
c) The Town shall reimburse full-time union employees for 100% of the tuition relating to college
courses so long as: a certificate of course completion with a grade of "C" (not C-) or better for
undergraduate degree courses and “B” (not B-) or better for graduate degree courses is
presented to the department head; the course or its associated degree program, in the opinion of
the department head and the Town Manager, is related to the employee's job and will enhance
the employee's value to the department; tuition reimbursements to all full-time employees
during the fiscal year in which the course will be completed will not exceed $30,000; and preapproval has been obtained in writing prior to commencement of the course. The Town must
render its decision on a course approval request within seven calendar days after receipt of such
request. Course approval requests will be approved in the order that they are received by the
Town Manager until the maximum annual amount has been reached. In order to be eligible for
consideration for approval and to be deemed “received” for the purposes of the timelines
outlined herein, all requests must include proof of: (1) registration; (2) the start and end date of
the course; and, (3) the tuition for the course.
d) New hires shall not be eligible for tuition reimbursement until after satisfactory completion of
their trial periods.
e) Tuition payments to colleges on behalf of a full-time employee will be made in advance of
course completion if an employee so requests by completing a pre-authorized payroll deduction
form for repayment to the Town of all payments made on behalf of the employee to be
processed in the event that the employee does not complete said approved courses with a grade
of “C” (not C-) or better for undergraduate degree courses or a grade of “B” (not B-) or better
for graduate degree courses. The employee must present evidence of completion to the
department head within thirty calendar days after course completion.
9

f) For employees who receive tuition money in advance under paragraph 3(e) of this article, if the
employee fails to earn required grades two (2) times, the employee will no longer be eligible for
advance tuition payment under this Article.
4. An hourly stipend of $.24 shall be paid to all members who have attained the rank of Sergeant and
who have successfully completed a law enforcement management school as approved by the Chief
of Police.

ARTICLE XVI: SUPPLEMENTAL COMPENSATION (BENEFITS)
1. Health Insurance
a) Full-time employees shall be eligible for group health insurance on the first day of the month
following date of hire.
b) The primary plan HMO shall be Anthem’s AB SOS20/40/1KDED plan with RX Plan
R10/20/45 and M10/20/45. This is a Site of Service Plan with deductible of $1,000 per
member, per year and $3,000 per family, per year.
c) The Town shall pay 100% of the premiums for the primary plan HMO in b) above.
d) The Town will offer an optional 125 Plan Flexible Spending Account to be funded solely by the
employee. The contribution will be limited to $2,000 per year. The 125 Plan Flexible Spending
Account may be eliminated if legislation is passed that would have a financial impact the Town
due to offering the FSA plan.
e) The town shall pay the premiums for this primary coverage as provided in a), b) and c) above,
and employees who select any other plan option, if offered, shall be required to pay the
difference in Town’s premium contribution premiums through payroll deduction. Employees
who elect any other insurance plan option offered by the Town shall be required to pay the
difference between the plan’s premium and the amount the Town would contribute towards the
primary (HMO) plan. The aforementioned shall not preclude the town from eliminating any
plan option, which is currently offered by the town, nor from discontinuing the optional
duplicate health insurance incentive, which is currently offered by the town HMO option (such
as Matthew Thornton), nor from eliminating any indemnity plan option (such as Blue
Cross/Blue Shield), and shall permit the town to provide primary coverage for all employees
through the current HMO plan or an equivalent HMO plan, or through the current Blue
Cross/Blue Shield plan or an equivalent indemnity plan. The designated primary plan shall be
accessible within the local area (Manchester-Merrimack-Nashua).
f) During a leave of absence caused by illness or accident, but not covered by workers'
compensation, the town will continue all of the employees coverage and benefits, including
Health Insurance, in accordance with the town’s Family and Medical Leave Act Policy.
g) For other leaves of absence, or beginning with the thirteenth week of an absence caused by nonworkers' compensation illness or accident, employees shall be required to pay 100% of all of
their monthly insurance premiums to keep the coverage in force. Such payments must be made
10

not later than the last week of the month preceding the month for which the premiums are being
paid. Employees' failure to pay shall be grounds for cancellation of the coverage.
2. Life Insurance
Employees shall receive the following term life insurance coverage, and the Town shall pay 100%
of the related premiums.
Employee life
Employee accidental death
and dismemberment
Spouse life
Child life under 6 months
Child life 6 months and older

1X base yearly wage on July 1 of the given fiscal
year (rounded to the nearest $1,000)
1X base yearly wage on July 1 of the given fiscal
year (rounded to the nearest $1,000)
$10,000
$5,000
$5,000

3. Disability Insurance
a) The town shall provide, and pay 100% of the premium for, disability insurance for 70% of an
employee's salary to a maximum of $700.00 per week for a 26-week period. Benefits are
payable from the first day of an accident and from the eighth day of an illness.
b) During an approved absence covered by the disability insurance, an Employee shall be paid
100% of their regular weekly pay by the Town, and such payments shall be charged against the
Employee's accrued DLA balance until exhausted and then, if necessary, against their accrued
PLA balance, unless the Employee opts not to use their accrued PLA, in writing, before their
DLA balance is exhausted. While the Town is making such payments to the Employee, all
related disability benefit checks from the insurance carrier shall be endorsed to the Town and
credited back to the Employee’s applicable accrued leave balances. Town payments shall be
discontinued when both accrued leave balances have been exhausted or, if the Employee has
opted out of using PLA, when the Employee’s DLA is exhausted.
c) The town will provide to unit members any long-term disability insurance benefit that may be
initiated for non-union town employees during the duration of this contract.
4. Worker's Compensation
a) The town shall provide, and pay 100% of the premiums for, workers' compensation coverage
and benefits as prescribed by and to the extent required by New Hampshire law.
b) Employees receiving worker’s compensation benefits shall use DLA to augment the workers'
compensation benefits so that the members continue to receive 100% of their average take-home
pay (including overtime unless the employee elects in advance to gross up only to their regular
weekly pay) during the absence until the DLA is exhausted. The period to be averaged for pay
shall be the 26 weeks preceding the date of the illness or injury. Should the DLA become
exhausted, members shall use their PLA balance to augment their pay until the PLA is also
exhausted, unless the member opts not to use their accrued PLA, in writing, before their DLA
balance is exhausted. While the Town is making such payments to the Employee, all related
workers compensation benefit checks from the insurance carrier shall be endorsed to the Town
and credited to the Employee’s accrued leave balances. Town payments shall be discontinued
11

when DLA and PLA balance has been exhausted, or if the Employee has opted out of using
PLA, when the Employee’s DLA is exhausted.
c) The town and/or its workers' compensation carrier retain the right to request updates of medical
information during the absence. The town shall have the right to designate a physician of its
choice for any medical examination, and shall pay the cost of such examination.
d) Workers' compensation claims resulting in any lost time must be supported by a doctor's
statement outlining the nature of the disability and providing an estimated date of return to full
duty. Prior to returning to duty, employees shall provide to the town a doctor's statement
clearing their return to regular duty status.
e) Employees on a workers' compensation leave of absence may not accept nor perform other
employment of any kind.
5. Retirement
a) The town agrees to provide retirement coverage and benefits as prescribed and to the extent
required by the laws of the State of New Hampshire.
6. Dental Insurance
a) All full-time employees shall pay 10% of the dental insurance premiums.
b) Employees shall be covered by this insurance upon the first day of the first month following
completion of thirty days of continuous full-time service.
c) As an alternative to the plan described in paragraph (a), the town will provide a dental insurance
plan that additionally covers prosthodontics (Northeast Delta Dental's Coverage C or an
equivalent), provided that:
i.

The town's primary carrier agrees to offer such coverage to the bargaining unit
members;

ii.

Not later than June 1 each year, the bargaining unit elects this optional plan for all of its
members, and agrees to monthly payroll deductions to pay the difference in premiums
between this coverage and the coverage provided by the town's primary plan.

7. Wellness Program
a) The wellness program will be available to unit members at the same level and within the
conditions of availability for all other town employees.
8. Military Leave
a) Active Duty for Training.
i.

Regular employees who are members of the reserve components of the United States
Armed Forces will be granted non-chargeable leave up to seventeen (17) consecutive
calendar days for the purpose of attending annual training (AT). Application for the
leave must be accompanied by a copy of the military AT orders. Military leave may be
12

split for a split AT upon presentation of orders so stating, but in no case will military
leave exceed seventeen total days in a calendar year.
ii.

Upon presenting the military leave and earnings statements (LES) for the period, regular
employees will be paid any lost wages due to AT service. The pay will be calculated by
subtracting the taxable pay on the LES from the regular, normal straight-time wages the
employees would have received. No pay is due when military pay exceeds the town
wages/salary for the same period.

b) Recall to Active Duty for National Emergency.

9.

i.

Employees who are members of the reserve component, or on the retired rolls of the U.
S. Armed Forces, who are recalled voluntarily or involuntarily to active duty in time of
war or national emergency shall be granted five working days of administrative leave to
prepare for their extended absence.

ii.

This leave shall be the last five working days prior to the first day of active duty
according to the military orders, but it may be taken in conjunction with any Earned
Time (PLA) the employee has accrued if the employee so desires. During the first
seventeen days of active duty, the town shall pay the difference, if any, between the
town straight-time take home pay and the military pay under the procedures described
above for AT. While on active duty, employees shall be in a leave of absence status
after seventeen days unless the employee has elected to use accrued vacation time to
extend the period. During the leave of absence, all benefits shall be suspended unless
maintained at the employees' expense (active duty employees and their dependents will
be eligible for CHAMPUS health insurance through the military during the period of
active duty). Upon release from active duty, employees shall be granted full rights and
privileges under the Veteran's Reemployment Rights Act (38 U.S.C. s 2021, 2024, et.
sec.).

Bereavement Leave
a) All full-time employees shall be granted paid leave in the event of the death of an immediate or
extended member (See Definitions below) of his or her family or the death of one other person
that resides in the employee's household and that has been so identified by the employee in
advance and in writing to the Department Head. The bereavement leave period shall be four
consecutive calendar days and shall be used within 14 days of the date of the death.
i.

Extended Family - A relationship legally described as:
Grandparent
Brother/Sister-in-Law

ii.

Grandparent-in-Law
Grandchild

Immediate Family - A relationship legally described as:
Spouse
Son/Daughter-inLaw

Guardian

13

Parent/Step-parent

Child/Step-child
A relative currently
domiciled in the
employee’s
household

Brother/Sister
Step-brother/sister

Parent-in-Law

b) Normally, employees will be expected to use bereavement leave promptly after notification of
death as stated in paragraph 1 above. However, the Town Manager may approve a request,
with concurrence of the Department Head, for use of 4 consecutive calendar days of
bereavement leave to be delayed up to six months after notification of death if, at the time of
notification, the employee notifies the Town in writing of circumstances requiring delayed use
of bereavement leave.

ARTICLE XVII: LEAVE OF ABSENCE
1. Regular (permanent) employees with one year or more of continuous, full-time service may be
granted unpaid leave of absence for such reasons as personal illness, pregnancy, or other compelling
or urgent reasons. Such leave must be recommended in writing by the Chief of Police and approved
by the town manager. An employee who has been granted leave of absence shall not forfeit those
benefits appurtenant to seniority upon reinstatement to regular status.
2. Any employee who accepts employment or who conducts a business during a leave of absence shall
be immediately terminated unless said activities were previously approved by the Chief of Police
and the Town Manager/selectmen.
3. While in leave of absence status, employees will not accumulate DLA, receive holiday pay, accrue
PLA, or accrue additional seniority.

ARTICLE XVIII: CLOTHING ALLOWANCE
1. Upon beginning service as a full-time employee of the police department, employees shall receive a
free issue of the following:

1 HANDGUN (SEMI AUTO PISTOL)

2 magazine holders
3 magazines
1 holster
2 name tags
1 set handcuffs
1 cuff case
OC Spray
OC Pouch
1 Sam Brown belt
2 shields

2 long- sleeve shirts
3 short-sleeve shirts
2 pairs pants
1 hat
1 Hi Vis All Season Coat
with Soft Shell Liner
1 hat cover (rain)
1 spring jacket
1 traffic vest
1 traffic mittens/gloves

14

1 hat badge
1 hat braid

14 shoulder patches
1 black garrison belt
(worn under Sam Brown)

1 tie bar
2 MPD collar brass
Flashlight and holder

2 ties
Boots up to $250

a) Body Armor will be issued to all new hires, as stated in Article XVIII - 8
2. During all succeeding years of service, all employees will receive an annual clothing allowance of
$900.00. Business Suit items (suit jacket, slacks, tie, dress shirt) that can be purchased in a 3 year
period will be limited at the Chief’s discretion.
3. All employees assigned to SNHSOU, K-9, bicycle, color guard, ATV, or motorcycle duty will receive
an additional $100.00 in their annual clothing allowances. Union members shall be limited to a
maximum of $200.00 worth of allowance for special assignments.
4. All clothing allowances will be reimbursements for actual expenses incurred for only the appropriate
uniforms and equipment items listed in paragraph 1 of this section and will be based on the contract
year. Purchases for equipment other than those listed in paragraph 1 of this section will be reviewed by
the Police Chief/Designee to determine if it’s necessary for the effective performance of the officer’s
duty. Purchases that exceed $200.00 must be previously authorized in writing by the Police
Chief/Designee, however; Sun / Safety glasses that are compliant with ANSI standards will be
authorized for purchase. Employees will present itemized receipts, and prior written approval, if
applicable, to the Police Department Office Manager for processing.
5. Employees deemed by their supervisors to be exhibiting substandard appearance may be issued a
written warning. Employees may request a hearing with the Chief of Police within five days of receipt
of the warning, and may be accompanied to the hearing by a union representative. Upon receipt of a
third written warning for appearance in an anniversary year, the Chief of Police may place the
employee on the vendor charge account system and suspend cash payment to the employee. This
decision is not grievable. After one calendar year on the vendor system, the employee may request
consideration for reinstatement to the cash payment system.
6. Upon resignation or termination from the department, all employees appointed after September 1, 1985,
must return to the town all uniforms and equipment listed in paragraph 1 above. During the course of
their employment, these employees may return this equipment to the town in a piece-by-piece manner
as they upgrade their equipment.
7. Cleaning and Maintenance Subsidy
a) The town will pay a cleaning and maintenance subsidy to every employee who is authorized to
receive the clothing allowance or issue. An amount not exceeding $200 in a contract year will
be paid in two installments; an installment not exceeding $100 on the first payday in September,
and an installment not exceeding $100 on the first payday in March.
b) Employees hired after the subsidy payment date will receive an initial subsidy calculated at the
rate of $16.67 per month remaining until the next subsidy payment date. Employees will
receive full payment for the month in which they began work, regardless of the day of the
15

month.
8. The Town will provide replacement body armor on a replacement scheduled maintained by the
Department as recommended by the manufacturer. The replacement will be at the same level or greater
than Threat Level II A.
9. On duty officers are required to wear body armor, unless waived in writing by the Chief or his
designee.

16

ARTICLE XIX: EARNED TIME
1. Personal Leave Account (PLA):
a) Beginning on the effective date, the weekly accrual for the Personal Leave Account will be
calculated per this table:
Personal Leave Accrual Schedule
Years of
Service
Hire Date to 5th
5th to 10th
10th to 15th
Over 15

Weekly
Accrual
2.77 hours
3.54 hours
4.31 hours
5.08 hours

Annual
Accrual
144 hours
184 hours
224 hours
264 hours

b) An employee who reaches a higher years-of-service plateau will receive 40 additional hours of
Personal Leave "dropped in" on the Anniversary Date, and concurrently begin accruing PLA at
the higher rate.
2. Disability Leave Account (DLA).
Years of
Service

Weekly
Accrual

All employees

1.23 hours

Maximum
Accrual
500 hours

All employees, regardless of position or years of employment, shall accrue DLA at the same rate.
3. Concept of Operation.
a) Employees accrue both PLA and DLA hours simultaneously, at the rates described above.
Personal Leave (PLA) is unrestricted and available to employees for use as they may desire,
with a few limitations as described below. The Disability Leave Account (DLA) is restricted
and may only be used under certain prescribed circumstances.
b) Use of PLA:
i.

To use eight hours or less, the supervisor must be informed not later than one-half hour
before the start of the employee's next shift. If any employee calls in within less than the
eight hours prior to the shift, it is assumed that there is an illness or an emergency. This
use of Personal Leave is primarily intended to replace Sick Leave and Personal Time. It
is not necessary to offer a reason for the absence as long as the absence is for eight hours
or less, but it is understood that this use of the PLA is intended for situations that were
not pre-planned nor foreseen by the employee. To take short-notice PLA, then appear
for a paid outside detail, for example, would violate the spirit of this agreement.
17

Employees showing a pattern of frequent short-notice absences may be required to begin
providing medical documentation, such as a doctor's note, or other written justification
for such absences taken on less than 48 hours notice.
ii.

PLA may be used, after exhaustion of DLA, to augment short-term disability benefits
during an approved absence as described in Article XVI(3), Disability Insurance, and
may also be used after exhaustion of DLA to augment workers compensation benefits
during an approved absence as described in Article XVI(4), Workers Compensation.

iii.

To use more than eight consecutive hours (more than one work day, such as for a
vacation), employees must submit a request through their immediate supervisors to the
Chief of Police or a designee for approval at least 48 hours prior to the beginning of the
absence. No more than three (3) officers per day may be approved for this "Extended
PLA,” with no more than two (2) of such officers being from the same shift, unless the
additional request would not create the need for overtime as determined within the
Chief’s sole discretion. The Chief or designee have the authority to exceed these
maximums within their sole discretion.

iv.

Employees who are taking more than one consecutive day off due to illness or injury
may understandably be unable to provide 48 hours advance notice, but are expected to
give their supervisors an estimated date of return when they first notify the supervisor of
the absence.

v.

Members of the bargaining unit may voluntarily donate any amount of their accrued
PLA balance to other PLA participants who are absent under Family Medical Leave Act
(FMLA) not to exceed the guidelines of 12 weeks, set forth in FMLA, which is hereby
incorporated by reference.

c) Use of DLA:
i.

The DLA should be viewed as a form of long-term disability insurance. Time
accumulated in the Disability Leave Account (DLA) shall be used only in the event of
injury or illness resulting in an absence covered either by Workers' Compensation or by
the town's disability insurance policy, or when an employee has been absent due to
illness or injury for four (4) or more consecutive days and the absence is supported by a
doctor’s note.

ii.

DLA shall be used to augment short-term disability benefits during an approved absence
as described in Article XVI(3), Disability Insurance, and to augment workers
compensation benefits during an approved absence as described in Article XVI (4),
Workers Compensation.

iii.

Any absence due to illness or injury of three consecutive days or less shall be charged
against the PLA. Any absence due to illness or injury of four consecutive days or more
shall be charged against DLA retroactive to day one of the illness if the employee so
requests and presents a doctor's statement that the absence was required by illness. Any
accrued leave charges pertaining to an absence covered by Workers' Compensation shall
be charged against the DLA from day one.
18

iv.

Members of the bargaining unit may voluntarily donate any amount of their accrued
DLA balance to any other Earned Time participants who are absent on a workers'
compensation or disability covered leave, and who have reduced to zero their personal
balance of DLA and have not more than 80 hours of PLA.

v.

All FMLA leave shall be governed by the Town of Merrimack’s FMLA Policy.

d) Earned Time may be charged on the time sheet by the hour or quarter of an hour.
e) Cashing in Earned Time (Annually). Employees who meet the requirements described below
shall be paid in cash annually for their excess DLA balance.
i.

Minimum Annual Usage Requirement. Employees shall be required to use a minimum
number of hours of PLA each year, in accordance with this table:
Years of

Required Annual

Maximum Annual

SERVICE

PLA USAGE

PLA BALANCE

Hire to 5th
5th to 10th
10th to 15th
Over 15

40 hours
80 hours
120 hours
160 hours

160 hours
240 hours
320 hours
480 hours

ii.

The annual account review for all members of the bargaining unit shall occur each July
for the preceding fiscal year. The base rates of pay and the accrued Earned Time
balances in effect at the close of business on the last day of that fiscal year (normally
June 30) shall be used for all calculations. During this review, employees' PLA balances
will be audited to ensure that the required annual usage was accomplished. If the
employee's usage was below the minimum, the required additional hours to reach the
minimum shall be immediately forfeited. (Waivers of forfeiture shall be granted only
for extreme reasons, and shall require written application in advance by the employee
through the Chief of Police to the Town Manager.) The PLA balance shall be checked
also to verify that it is below the maximum annual balance allowed. Any accrued PLA
hours which exceed the maximum annual balance shall be transferred immediately to the
DLA.

iii.

The DLA shall then be immediately audited. Any DLA balance exceeding the
maximum of 500 hours as of the fiscal year end shall be purchased by the town at a rate
of .667 x the base hourly rate x the number of excess hours. Payment shall be made by
the town not later than July 31.

iv.

For the purposes of this annual audit, employees' "years of service" to establish
"minimum required use" shall be as of the first day of the fiscal year. The "years of
service" to establish the "maximum balance allowed" shall be the last day of the fiscal
year. The intent is to avoid subjecting a new hire, or an employee who has recently
reached a higher accrual level, from being subjected to higher minimum usage and
maximum balance requirements prematurely.

f) Cashing in Earned Time (Upon Separation). Upon separating from town employment for any
19

reason, employees shall be paid the entire accrued balance of their PLA at the rate of 1.00 x
their base hourly rates x the accrued number of hours on the day of separation.
i.

Employees in good standing who separate from employment with over 25 years of
service with the Town at the time of separation will be paid as follows: 80 hours of their
accrued DLA at the rate of 1.00 x their base hourly rate and the remainder of their DLA
at the rate of .25 x their base hourly rate.

ii.

Any employee in good standing who has less than 25 years of service with the Town at
the time of separation will be paid for all accrued DLA hours at the rate of .25x the
employee’s base hourly rate.

ARTICLE XX: DUES WITHHOLDING
1. The town agrees to withhold dues weekly from the pay checks of members of the union and to
submit a check at least once each month to the Comptroller, NEPBA, 7 Technology Drive,
Chelmsford, Massachusetts 01863.
2. The union shall submit authorization forms to the town Finance Department for each member who
requests payroll deduction of dues.
3. Any member of the bargaining unit who wishes to cancel the payroll deduction of dues must submit
a request to the union. The union will forward the request to the Finance Department within five
days.

ARTICLE XXI: DISCIPLINE AND TERMINATION FOR CAUSE
An employee may be disciplined or terminated/dismissed if there is found to be proper cause for such
action. Proper cause shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

medically diagnosed incapacity to perform assigned duties;
incompetence;
behavior incompatible with effective conduct of duty;
behavior detrimental to the town; or
failure to carry out assigned duties.

20

ARTICLE XXII: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
1. Definition
a) A grievance under this article is defined as an alleged violation of any of the provisions of this
agreement except Article VI (Management Rights). Commands or orders of ranking officers
shall not be grievable.
b) An employee who has a complaint must take up the complaint orally with the immediate
supervisor before processing the complaint as a formal grievance. The immediate supervisor
shall give the employee an answer within five days. It is anticipated that nearly all complaints
can be resolved informally without grievance.
c) Each grievance must be submitted in writing by the union and must contain a statement of the
facts surrounding the grievance, the provision(s) of this agreement allegedly violated, the relief
requested and the extent to which the grievant has sought an informal adjustment of the
grievance.
2. Procedure
a) Step One: An employee desiring to process a grievance must file a written statement of the
grievance to the Chief of Police no later than ten calendar days after the employee knew the
facts on which the grievance is based and, in no case, more than one month after the occurrence.
The Chief of Police shall meet with the employee within ten calendar days following receipt of
the notice and shall give a written decision within three days thereafter.
b) Step Two: If the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the Chief of Police, the
employee may file within five calendar days following the Chief's decision a written appeal to
the Town Manager or the manager's designee setting forth the specific reasons why the
employee believes that the agreement is being violated by the town action in question. Within
ten calendar days following receipt of the appeal, the town manager (or designee) shall either
issue a written decision or schedule a hearing. Said hearing shall be held no later than thirty
calendar days following receipt of the appeal, and a written decision shall be rendered within ten
calendar days thereafter.
c) Step Three: If the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the town manager, the union
may file, within twenty calendar days following receipt of the town manager’s decision, a
request for arbitration to the American Arbitration Association under its rules and regulations.
The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties. The total cost of the
arbitration shall be borne by the losing party.
3. All of the foregoing time limitations may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties.
4. Failure of the grievant to abide by the time limits set out in this article shall result in the grievance
being deemed settled on the basis of the last decision made by the appropriate “hearings officer” on
behalf of the town.
21

ARTICLE XXIII: MISCELLANEOUS
1. Intra-Unit Relations. Since it is to the benefit of all that harmonious fraternal relations prevail in the
department, any disputes which may arise between and among members of the unit and which have
major consequences upon their performance shall at the Chief of Police’s discretion be referred to
the bargaining agent for mediation and resolution.
2. Performance Evaluation. The Town of Merrimack’s Employee Performance Appraisal program
shall be used for evaluating the level of success of the employees’ on-the-job performance. The
annual Employee Performance Appraisal shall be a major part of the basis for discipline and
promotion. Employees will be provided a true copy of all completed Employee Performance
Appraisal forms. Any disciplinary action resulting from an Employee Performance Appraisal and
relating to Article XXI may be submitted to the grievance procedure.
3. Joint Safety Committee. The town and the union shall each appoint two members to the
Occupational Safety Committee. This committee shall meet every other month and discuss safety
and health conditions. Committee members will be granted time off with pay when meeting jointly
with management, and for any inspection or investigation of safety or health problems in the
department or authorized by the Chief of Police.
4. Employee Rights and Responsibilities. The Chief of Police shall appoint a committee including at
least one member of the bargaining unit to review current policy and to revise and publish same as
official departmental policy.

ARTICLE XXIV: SEPARABILITY
In the event any provision of this agreement in whole or in part is declared to be illegal, void, or invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction, or any administrative agency having jurisdiction, all of the other terms,
conditions, and provisions of this agreement shall remain in full force and effect to the same extent as if
that provision had never been incorporated into this agreement and, in such event, the remainder of this
agreement shall continue to be binding upon the parties thereto.

ARTICLE XXV: EFFECT OF AGREEMENT
1. This instrument constitutes the entire agreement between the town and the union, arrived at as a
result of collective bargaining negotiations except where such amendments hereto as shall have
been reduced to writing and signed by the parties.
2. The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which resulted in this agreement, each had
unlimited right and opportunity to make demands with respect to any subject or matter not removed
by law from the area of collective bargaining, and that the understandings and agreements arrived at
by the parties after the exercise of that right and opportunity are set forth in this agreement.
Therefore, the town and the union, for the life of this agreement, each voluntarily and unqualifiedly
waives the right and each agrees that the other shall not be obligated to bargain collectively with
respect to any subject or matter referred to or covered by this agreement, or with respect to any
subject or matter not specifically referred to or covered in this agreement, even though such subjects
22

Appendix A: NEPBA 12 Wage Schedule -

3% +3% + wage adjustment7/1/2024

Code

Start

6mos

12 mos

18mos

24mos

30mos

$ 32.75
$ 38.72
$ 40.94
$ 42.92

$ 34.06
$ 39.49
$ 41.75
$ 43.78

$ 35.42
$ 40.28
$ 42.59
$ 44.65

$ 36.83
$ 41.09
$ 43.44
$ 45.54

Classification
Patrol Officer

3001 $ 30.87

Master Patrol Officer

3002 $ 37.21

$ 31.49
$ 37.96
3005 $ 39.35 $ 40.13
3003 $ 41.25 $ 42.08

Detective First, SRO, CSO
Sergeant
Detective Patrol Officer Patrol Officer - SRO Patrol Officer
- CSO

3004

3% wage adjustment 7/1/2025

$ 33.64 $ 34.31 $ 35.00 $ 35.70 $ 36.41 $ 37.14
$ 42.84 $ 43.70 $ 44.57 $ 45.47 $ 46.38

3006 $ 42.00

Detective Sergeant

Code

Start

6mos

12 mos

18mos

24mos

30mos

$ 34.33
$ 40.63
$ 42.97
$ 45.12

$ 35.70
$ 41.44
$ 43.83
$ 46.02

$ 37.13
$ 42.27
$ 44.70
$ 46.94

$ 38.62
$ 43.12
$ 45.60
$ 47.88

Classification
3001 $ 32.36

$ 33.01
3002 $ 39.05 $ 39.83
3005 $ 41.30 $ 42.12
3003 $ 43.36 $ 44.23

Patrol Officer
Master Patrol Officer
Detective First, SRO, CSO
Sergeant
Detective Patrol Officer Patrol Officer - SRO Patrol Officer
- CSO

3004

$ 35.37 $ 36.08 $ 36.80 $ 37.53 $ 38.29 $ 39.05
3006 $ 44.14 $ 45.02 $ 45.92 $ 46.84 $ 47.78 $ 48.73

Detective Sergeant

3% plus wage adj 7/1/2026

Code

Start

6mos

12 mos

18mos

24mos

30mos

$ 36.07
$ 42.65
$ 45.11
$ 47.33

$ 37.51
$ 43.50
$ 46.02
$ 48.27

$ 39.01
$ 44.37
$ 46.94
$ 49.24

$ 40.57
$ 45.26
$ 47.87
$ 50.22

Classification
Patrol Officer

3001 $ 34.00

Master Patrol Officer

3002 $ 41.00

Detective First, SRO, CSO
Sergeant
Detective Patrol Officer Patrol Officer - SRO Patrol Officer
- CSO
Detective Sergeant

$ 34.68
$ 41.82
3005 $ 43.36 $ 44.23
3003 $ 45.49 $ 46.40
3004

$ 37.20 $ 37.95 $ 38.71 $ 39.48 $ 40.27 $ 41.08
3006 $ 46.29 $ 47.21 $ 48.16 $ 49.12 $ 50.10 $ 51.10

A1
