Holliston, Massachusetts
Annual Report
of the

FINANCE
COMMITTEE

N.R. Gustafson 2013

Fiscal Year
Beginning July 1, 2017 and ending June 30, 2018

Town Meeting
May 8, 2017

May Interrupt Debate
to make a Motion

Yes

Majority

No

No

2

Point of no quorum

No

No

No

None

No

Yes

3

Fix time and date to which to adjourn

Yes

Yes

Yes

Majority

Yes

No

4

Point of personal privilege

No

No

No

None

No

Yes

5

Reconsideration (see s. 15)

Yes

Yes

No

Majority

No

Yes

6

Lay on the table

Yes

Yes

No

Majority

Yes

No

7

Move the question (see s. 14)

Yes

No

No

Majority

No

No

8

Extend the speaker’s time (see s.11)

Yes

No

No

2/3

No

No

9

Postpone an article to a time certain

Yes

Yes

Yes

Majority

Yes

No

10

Commit or refer a matter

Yes

Yes

Yes

Majority

Yes

No

11

Amend (not amendable more than twice)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Majority

Yes

No

12

Postpone indefinitely (if not main motion)

Yes

Yes

No

Majority

Yes

No

None

Main Motion

Yes

Yes

Yes

Variable

Yes

No

None

Take from the table

Yes

No

No

Majority

No

No

None

Advance an article from order in Warrant

Yes

Yes

Yes

2/3

No

No

*

Point of order or procedural information

No

No

No

None

No

Yes

*

Appeal ruling of Moderator

Yes

Yes

No

3/4

No

Yes

*

Divide a question

Yes

Yes

Yes

Majority

Yes

No

* Same rank as motion out of which it arises.

Vote Required

Yes

Amendable

Yes

Debatable

Adjourn to a fixed time or recess

Town Meeting Motions or Points

Second Required

1

Rank of Motion in
Order of Precedence

May Reconsider

RULES FOR MOTIONS OR POINTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Town Meeting Motions and Points

Inside front cover

Extract from By-laws Regarding Town Meeting Procedure

1

Message to the Citizens of Holliston

3

Explanation of Terms

7

About Proposition 2 1/2

9

About the Finance Committee

9

Warrant for Annual Town Meeting

11

Omnibus Budget

29

Revenue Budget

36

Wage and Benefit Detail

37

Revolving Account Activity

38

Long Term Debt

39

Free Cash Analysis

40

Reserve Fund Analysis

40

Overlay Analysis

41

Water Surplus

41

Capital Expenditure Fund

42

Stabilization Fund

42

Community Preservation Fund

43

Golf Course Capital Account

43

OPEB Trust Fund

44

Open Space Acquisition Fund

44

Conservation Trust Fund

44

Maps and Notes

45

EXTRACT FROM BY-LAWS REGARDING TOWN MEETING PROCEDURES
QUORUMS. At all Town Meetings one hundred (l00) registered voters of the Town shall be
necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of Town business; but a lesser number may
from time to time adjourn any such Meeting. Notwithstanding the above, whenever an article at
a Special Town Meeting involves only the transfer of funds within Town accounts, forty (40)
registered voters of the Town shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of
such article or to postpone an article requiring a quorum of one hundred (100) to a time certain.
For the purposes of this Section "free cash" shall not be considered a Town account.
ORDER OF ARTICLES. All articles in the warrant shall be taken up in the order of their
arrangement unless otherwise decided by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the voters present and voting.
LENGTH OF SPEECHES. Except in the discretion of the Moderator, no person shall speak
more than two times or more than a total of fifteen (15) minutes upon any question without
obtaining leave of the Meeting unless to correct an error or answer a question.
MOTIONS. Any action taken by a Town Meeting shall be by vote upon a motion. All motions,
if required by the Moderator, shall be reduced to writing before being submitted to the Meeting.
Any motions included in the Finance Committee Report on the warrant shall be considered as
motions presented to the Meeting, but any registered voter may present a different motion on a
question and this motion shall take precedence over any prepared motion in the Finance
Committee Report.
MOVING THE QUESTION. A motion to move the question need not be recognized by the
Moderator unless the Moderator is satisfied that various views on the subject have had an
opportunity to be heard. A motion to move the question shall not be made by the last speaker on
the question under debate.
RECONSIDERATION. Any voter may make a motion to reconsider. No vote shall be
reconsidered unless the motion to reconsider is made at the same session and within one-half
hour of the original vote. No question shall be twice reconsidered except by a two-thirds (2/3)
vote of the voters present and voting. If a motion to reconsider passes, the subject question must
be voted upon at the same session as the original vote.
VOTING PROCEDURE. After the voters have had the opportunity to be heard on a motion,
the Moderator may call for a voice vote, hand vote and/or secret ballot. A hand vote shall be
used if requested by three (3) or more voters. Notwithstanding the above, a secret ballot shall be
used if so voted by a majority prior to the initial vote on the motion or if requested by three (3)
voters after a preceding hand vote on the motion is decided by five percent (5%) or less of the
total votes cast. Any vote tellers required shall first be selected from the members of the Board
of Registrars present and then from such other registered voters appointed by the Moderator who
have not previously spoken at the Meeting on the subject to be voted. The Town Clerk shall
have ready at each Town Meeting an up-to-date voter registration list and a sufficient supply of
ballots. All ballots used on any vote shall be identical. Ballots used on subsequent votes shall be
easily distinguishable from ballots used in a previous vote.
1

ADJOURNMENT. No new article or line item may be considered at any Town Meeting after
1l:00 p.m. unless two-thirds (2/3) of the voters present and voting, vote to continue the session.
Any adjournment shall be to a date, time and place specified by vote of the Meeting unless the
warrant is completely acted upon or unless otherwise provided by these By-laws.

NOTES

2

To the Citizens of Holliston:
The Finance Committee submits this warrant for your consideration of the FY18 Omnibus
Budget and associated articles.
Financial Overview
This report is based on current revenue and expense projections and a balanced understanding of
Holliston’s town services. As we look towards FY18, the biggest threat to Holliston’s finances
continues to be funding uncertainty at the state level. The state, facing its own funding
challenges, continues to underfund several key local aid accounts. For Holliston this translates
into continued low growth in general local aid and monies for statutory mandates—basically
continuing the shift of the financial burden from the state to the town. The Finance Committee
relied on strict budget controls and favorable growth of the tax base to develop a balanced budget
for FY18. As a result, the budget presented here results in no service reductions in FY18 while
addressing a small number of funding priorities.
The Finance Committee continues to focus on fiscal discipline and a series of fiscal objectives:
1. Encourage cost effective management while maintaining the quality and level of services
that the town’s residents expect, with a focus on fiscal sustainability.
2. Address ongoing capital needs. A comprehensive capital plan is being developed with
the help of funds received from a recently signed community compact.
3. Build the Town’s overall reserves (the sum of the stabilization fund and free cash) to a
level equal to or slightly exceeding 8% of the annual budget appropriation. This level is
considered ‘strong’ according to the credit rating agencies, provided the town is
addressing its long term liabilities.
4. Address the town’s future benefit liabilities (pensions, health care, etc).
The Finance Committee has made significant progress in each of these areas. There is now an
annual appropriation for capital expenditures ($1,000,000 for FY18) included in the budgeting
process to insure that capital needs can be at least partially addressed. Assuming Town Meeting
approval of the Finance Committee recommendations, reserves will remain just above the 8%
target, and we will be continuing funding of Holliston’s Other Post-Employment Benefits
(OPEB) liability by adding a total of $1,500,000 to our OPEB Trust Fund. Although not yet
complete, the town has made significant progress on the creation of a master capital plan.
Although there is still more work to do, based on these measures Holliston’s fiscal health
continues to improve.
At the start of the budget process, the Finance Committee, with the help of the Town
Administrator, reviewed the fiscal picture at the state level and determined that it is likely that
Holliston will be receiving the same amount in local aid for FY18 as we received in FY17. With
this backdrop, the Finance Committee set a budget guideline of 1% growth for each department,
with compensation adjustments of 1%. Over the past five months the Committee has met with
all Town departments and committees to consider how to best allocate our limited resources. We
have worked with them to understand how to respond to service needs. We have updated our
revenue modeling based on the latest information to give us the most accurate fiscal picture we
3

could have heading into Town Meeting. The omnibus budget recommendations in Article 14
reflect implementation of the funding guideline with limited exception.
The Finance Committee also recognizes that it is sometimes difficult to digest all the fiscal
information presented in this warrant, and that many citizens would like to understand more of
the financial details prior to Town Meeting. For this reason, the Finance Committee will hold a
question-and-answer meeting on May 2 at 7pm in Town Hall room 105 where anyone can come
to ask questions about the budget or the Finance Committee recommendations. Questions can
also be emailed from http://www.townofholliston.us/finance-committee (our page on the town’s
web site). Town Meeting runs more efficiently when we can answer questions in advance.
As always, we welcome and encourage public attendance at our meetings. Our meetings
(weekly during the budget season) are televised on HCAT whenever possible and are available
on-demand through the HCAT web site www.hcattv.org. We also have a web page with all the
department budget request information on the town’s web site; look for “Finance” under “Boards
and Committees” on www.townofholliston.us.
Capital Reserve/Stabilization/OPEB Trust Funds
The Finance Committee, in Article 15, is recommending an appropriation of $1,000,000 to the
Capital Reserve to meet the town’s ongoing capital needs. This year the recommended
appropriation has been raised due to initial projections that show an increased need for capital
replacement and several capital requests that require immediate funding. The recommendation
for the Employee Benefits budget includes the annual OPEB trust contribution and continues our
commitment to reach full funding by 2040. The recommendation for Article 27 uses funding
from the Capital Expenditure Fund to complete the demolition of the Flagg building as planned
last year. At this time no money is being added to the stabilization fund—the Finance
Committee expects to be reviewing our reserves in October when the revenue picture is clearer.
Capital Budget Highlights
The Finance Committee is currently recommending capital expenditures only for seasonallysensitive projects that require funding ahead of our normal fall capital reviews. These
recommendations are detailed in Article 17 and include replacement doors for Town Hall and
equipment needed by the DPW. Any other capital purchases will be addressed at the October
Town Meeting.
The Finance Committee is indebted to the many dedicated and talented Town employees whose
efforts make this process and report possible. We would like to commend the committees and
departments for their spirit of cooperation in formulating this budget. Their continued efforts on
behalf of the town are greatly appreciated. We would also like to express our thanks to Nancy
Farrell for her work as the committee’s recording secretary.
Respectfully submitted,
HOLLISTON FINANCE COMMITTEE
Kenneth S. Szajda, Chairman
Michelle F. Zeamer, Vice-Chairman
Timothy A. Maxwell

Daniel G. Alfred
Suzanne K. Nersessian
Vincent J. Murphy, Jr., Clerk
4

Revenue Planning
The Finance Committee annually reviews and analyzes historical revenue and expense
information through the current fiscal year and attempts to project out over the next three to five
years. Certain basic assumptions are used in this process:
•
real estate tax revenues will increase at the rate of 2.5% per year;
•
revenue from new growth will further increase real estate tax revenues at the rate of
approximately 1% to 2% per year (or less, depending on ongoing monitoring of construction
activity); and
•
State aid revenue will remain unchanged in many categories and the total of all State aid
will be adjusted upward or downward based on economic analysis and guidance from state
leaders.
In fact, general state aid decreased by 1.5% overall from FY02 to FY14. Since that time, state
aid has increased slightly and now exceeds the FY02 level. We built our budget assumptions for
FY18 on the best local aid estimates currently available from the Commonwealth. New growth,
as determined by the Board of Assessors, is highly variable since it is strongly dependent on
many macroeconomic factors. The Finance Committee uses a conservative approach to new
growth, and estimates new growth at $325,000 yearly; this number was the “low water mark” for
new growth in recent years.
Each year, the Committee also reviews projected available revenues from restricted funds such
as water surplus and the Capital Expenditure Fund. Water surplus funds are available to cover
capital projects specific to the water distribution system. The Capital Expenditure Fund can be
used for capital projects, acquisitions and improvements in general.
The use of the projected revenues to support expenditures was then based on a few general
assumptions:
•
employee benefit costs will increase 8%, primarily due to retirement system increases;
•
health insurance costs will increase 10% (based on available premium estimates);
•
at least $1,000,000 will be dedicated to capital projects;
•
current and proposed debt is fully funded; and
•
$1.5 million will be set aside for OPEB obligations.
This is a basic framework within which we began the annual budget deliberation process
FY18 Budget Requests
We issued an initial guideline for departmental budget requests suggesting an overall 1%
increase in expenses from FY17 to FY18. Departments were also asked to identify any changes
for FY18 in the schedule of capital projects which was originally developed in 1994 and has
been updated annually since then.

5

The Finance Committee reviewed the various capital and operating requests with the individual
departments from January through April. Our specific budget recommendations appear in the
column headed Recommended Fiscal Year 2018 in the Omnibus Budget. Our recommendations
concerning special article appropriations appear after each of the articles.
The following is a summary of our omnibus budget recommendations.

General Government

Operating Budget Comparison, FY17 to FY18
FY17
FY18
1,836,905
1,839,870

% Change
0.16

Public Safety

4,048,973

4,350,435

7.45

Local Schools

31,883,737 32,678,520

2.49

Keefe Technical School

840,586

978,807

16.44

Public Works

1,815,184

1,829,351

0.78

Solid Waste

1,045,156

1,055,608

1.00

Human Services

524,496

528,796

0.82

Culture & Recreation

579,195

596,139

2.93

Debt Service

5,533,450

5,468,076

- 1.18

Pensions & Benefits

8,776,795

9,412,174

7.24

Water Enterprise

2,248,350

2,268,014

0.87

Total

59,132,827

61,005,790

General Government
There were no significant changes in this category for FY18. General Government includes
Selectmen, Finance Committee, Town Accountant, Board of Assessors, Treasurer/Collector,
Other Financial Administration, Technology, Town Clerk, Elections, Conservation Commission,
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals and Public Buildings.
Culture and Recreation
Park and Recreation, Celebrations and Library budgets are all at or near the budget guideline.
The Parks budget includes $10,272 of funding for additional hours to expand program offerings.
Pensions and Benefits
The large increase in this category is primarily due to increases in the cost of group health
insurance. The Pensions and Benefits area also includes retirement, Medicare expenses,
unemployment benefits, disability insurance, life insurance, workers’ compensation,
6

unemployment benefits and sick leave reserves. The annual OPEB contribution of $1,500,000 is
also included in this category.
Public Safety
Public Safety includes Police, Auxiliary Police, Fire, Building Inspection, Sealer of Weights and
Measures, Emergency Management, Animal Control and Ambulance. For FY18, the above
guideline increase in this category is due to two items: additional funding to the police
department to support a School Resource Officer for the Adams Middle School, and additional
funding for the ambulance service to support adjustments to EMT compensation.
Debt Service
The decrease in the recommended debt service budget for FY18 reflects the benefits of a debt
refinancing. Reimbursements from the State for more than 60% of the school building project
started during FY01 for the Elementary school portion and in FY05 for the High School and
Middle School. These reimbursements for FY18 total $2,184,016.
Schools
The local school budget recommendation is the result of a collaborative process with School
Committee. The budget amount for Keefe Technical School is based on an increase in
enrollment from Holliston.
Public Works
This category includes Highway, Snow & Ice, Street Lighting, Wastewater Treatment and Motor
Vehicle Fuels.
Water Department
The entire cost of the DPW-Water Division budget is offset by revenue from water system
revenues.
Human Services
Human Services includes the Board of Health, Council on Aging, Youth and Family Services
and Veterans Services.

EXPLANATION OF TERMS
The following terms are frequently used in Finance Committee Reports, and during Annual and
Special Town Meetings. These definitions are provided in order to give everyone a better
understanding of these terms.
Capital Expenditure Fund B an account created by a special act of the legislature allowing
Holliston to set aside funds in reserve for capital expenditures. As of March 31, 2017, the
balance was $2,255,882 (see page 42).
Community Preservation Fund B a fund generated by a 1.5% surcharge on real estate taxes,
after allowable deductions, and matching grants from the state. This fund is administered by the
Community Preservation Committee for the purpose of preserving and expanding community
7

assets in open space, historic resources, recreational land and community housing. As of March
31, 2017, the undesignated Community Preservation Fund balance was $2,429,179.
Conservation Fund B a fund managed by the Conservation Commission which can be used to
purchase property or interests in property for conservation purposes or to prepare plans or
studies. As of March 31, 2017, the Conservation Fund balance was $11,557 (see page 44).
Free Cash B a fund certified annually by the Massachusetts Department of Revenue by
deducting from surplus revenue all uncollected taxes for prior years. As of March 31, 2017, the
Town's Free Cash was $0 (see page 40).
Golf Course Capital Account B funds realized from the operations at the golf course are placed
into this account for future improvements, after obligations for debt service and contributions to
the General Fund are met. As of March 31, 2017, the unencumbered balance in the Golf Course
Capital Account was $68,935 (see page 43).
OPEB Trust Fund B this fund was created through special legislation in 2013 for the purpose of
setting aside money to cover the future costs of other post-employment benefits for former Town
employees. As of March 31, 2017, the balance in the OPEB Trust Fund was $8,681,488 (see
page 44)
Open Space Acquisition Fund B this fund was created by the Town for the purpose of funding
acquisitions of property to be preserved as open space. As of March 31, 2017, the balance in this
fund was $54,933 (see page 44).
Overlay B the amount annually raised by the Assessors in excess of appropriations and other
charges for the purpose of creating a fund to cover abatements granted and to avoid fractions in
the tax rate. As of March 31, 2017, the balance in the FY17 Overlay was $329,832 (see page ).
Overlay Reserve B the accumulated amount of Overlay for various years not used or required to
be held in the specific Overlay accounts for a given year, and which may be used by a vote of the
Town for any lawful purpose. As of March 31, 2017, the balance of Overlay Reserve was
$837,711 (see page 41).
Reserve Fund B this fund is established by the voters at the Annual Town Meeting and may be
composed of (1) an appropriation not exceeding 5% of the tax levy of the preceding year; or (2)
money transferred from the Overlay Reserve. Transfers from the Reserve Fund are within the
exclusive control of the Finance Committee. The purpose of the Reserve Fund is to fund
extraordinary and unforeseen items. It is not intended as a supplement to departmental
budgets. As of March 31, 2017, the balance was $397,098 (see page 40).
Revolving Funds B these are raised primarily by the School and Park departments, and are kept
separate from all other funds received by the Town. Such funds are kept under exclusive control
(by state statute) of the receiving department, and are expended without further appropriation by
the Town. The total of all the Revolving Accounts as of March 31, 2017 was $6,499,721.
Please see page 38 for a breakdown of the funds.
8

Stabilization Fund B a special account created originally to provide a reserve for capital
expenditures but recently changed by State law to allow its use for any purpose. As of March 31,
2017, the Stabilization Fund balance was $4,816,628 (see page 42).
Water Surplus B Water Surplus is comprised of water department revenue, realized from fees,
found to be in excess of operating costs. Use of these funds is limited to water capital projects
and water system development. As of March 31, 2017, Water Surplus balance was $2,740,217 .
ABOUT PROPOSITION 2 1/2
Proposition 2 1/2 contains two separate, distinct levy limits. The first limits the tax levy to 2.5%
of the full and fair valuation of the Town each year. The second levy limit confines the annual
increase in levy authority to 2.5% of the prior year's authorized levy with new growth added.
Proposition 2 1/2 allows overrides to expand the annual increase in levy authority by more than
2.5% in a given year. The law does not allow an expansion of the overall levy limit of 2.5% of
the Town's valuation except by vote of the Town Election for past or future debt and one-time
capital exclusions.
ABOUT THE FINANCE COMMITTEE
The Finance Committee is an elected body, consisting of seven members. Its responsibilities,
functions, and organization are defined in Article IV of the Town's General By-laws. The
ultimate authority governing the conduct of the Committee is derived from Chapter 39 of the
General Laws of the Commonwealth. Section 16 of Chapter 39 sets forth the role of the
Committee. According to Chapter 39, the Committee shall consider any or all municipal
questions for the purpose of making budgets, recommendations and/or reports to the Town at all
town meetings.
Each department furnishes the Finance Committee with detailed estimates of expenses for the
ensuing year. After consideration, the Finance Committee determines the amounts which, in
their opinion, should be appropriated, and submits its recommendations, with such explanations
and suggestions as they may deem desirable, to the citizens of the Town. Final appropriation is
made by an action of town meeting.
The Finance Committee controls the Reserve Fund and may, from time to time, make transfers
from this fund to other accounts by vote of the Committee.
In addition to its own meetings, the Finance Committee is present at all town meetings, and,
when requested or necessary, the Committee or individual members attend meetings of other
Town boards, committees or departments.
The following is the text of Article IV of the Holliston General By-laws describing the duties and
responsibilities of the Finance Committee:
Section 1.
The town shall have a Finance Committee, consisting of seven members, elected
for a term of three years each, and so elected that the term of no more than three nor less than
two shall expire in any one year.
9

Section 2.
No person holding any other elected or appointed office and no person employed
by the town, shall be eligible to serve as a member of the Finance Committee, except that, any
member of the Finance Committee, who holds another appointed office on the effective date of
this amendment shall be allowed to continue in such appointed office for so long as he or she
remains a member of the Finance Committee.
Section 3.
The Finance Committee shall promptly after the Annual election and assumption
of office of new members, meet for the purpose of organization and shall elect from its members
a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Clerk.
Section 4.
The Finance Committee shall consider any and all municipal questions for the
purpose of making reports or recommendations to the town, including but not limited to matters
relating to the appropriation, the borrowing and the expenditure of money, municipal debt,
property valuations and assessments, and the administration of the town offices and departments.
Section 5.
The various town boards, officers and committees involved with the expenditure
of money shall, on or before a date specified by the Finance Committee, prepare detailed
estimates of the amounts deemed by them necessary for the administration of their respective
offices and departments for the ensuing fiscal year, with explanatory statements of the reasons
for any changes from the amounts appropriated for the same purpose in the preceding year.
Section 6.
All officers, boards, or committees of the town, elected or appointed shall on
request, furnish to the Finance Committee or to any delegated member or authorized agent
thereof, any desired information about town affairs and town funds under their control relevant
to financial decisions.
Section 7.
The Finance Committee shall submit, at least seven days prior to any town
meeting, a printed report of its recommendations to the voters including a copy of the warrant
and an explanation of its recommendations. The report submitted prior to the annual town
meeting shall also contain an appropriate form which would encourage citizen participation in
town boards and committees. No appropriation shall be made until a report thereon has been
received from the Finance Committee.

10

WARRANT
ARTICLE 1. HEAR REPORT OF THE BOARD OF SELECTMEN
To hear and act on the report of the Selectmen. (Board of Selectmen)
ARTICLE 2. HEAR REPORT OF THE FINANCE COMMITTEE
To hear and act on the report of the Finance Committee. (Finance Committee)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 3. AUTHORIZE THE TREASURER TO SELL FORCLOSED TAX TITLE
PROPERTIES
To see if the Town will vote to authorize the Town Treasurer, subject to the approval of the
Selectmen, to sell property acquired through foreclosure of tax titles by the Town and other real
estate, after first giving notice of the time and place of the sale by posting such notice of sale in
some convenient place in the Town, by publishing such notice of such sale in a newspaper
having general circulation in the Town and by posting such notice on a Holliston Cable Access
Television (HCAT) bulletin board and on the Town’s website at least fourteen (14) days before
the sale. The Treasurer shall also give notice of such sale to the Executive Director of the
Holliston Housing Authority, the Chair of the Holliston Housing Trust or its subsequent
equivalent by first class letter at least forty-five (45) days before the sale. The Treasurer may
hold a public auction and may reject any bid which she/he deems inadequate, and any such
advertisement, notice or indication that real property is to be offered for sale by the Town of
Holliston, or any department, commission, or other subdivision of the Town shall include the
following statement: “Buyers should be aware that the Town of Holliston does not guarantee this
property to be in conformity with existing zoning bylaws.” Whenever the proceeds of the sale or
other disposal of real estate, other than that acquired through tax title foreclosure, by the Town of
Holliston exceed five hundred dollars, the same shall be applied to the payment of indebtedness
incurred in acquiring such real estate or shall be added to the sinking fund, if any, from which
said indebtedness is payable, or if no such indebtedness is outstanding will be applied to the
Town’s Capital Expenditure Fund as established by Chapter 46 of the Acts of 1993. The
proceeds of a sale in excess of five hundred dollars of any park land by the Town shall be used
only by the Town for acquisition of land for park purposes or for capital improvements to park
land; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 4. AMEND THE CONSOLIDATED PERSONNEL BY-LAW SECTION 29
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Consolidated Personnel By-law Section 29, Job
Classification Plan, by reflecting those revisions, deletions and/or additions to be effective as of
July 1, 2017; or take any action relative thereto. (Town Administrator)
(There are no changes from last year)
SECTION 29, JOB CLASSIFICATION PLAN (Full-time permanent positions)
POSITION
GRADE
POSITION
Administrative Assessor
400
Dispatcher
11

GRADE
200

Assistant Clerk
200
Head Dispatcher
400
Assistant Director, Library
400
Head of Circulation, Library
400
Assistant Recreation Director
400
Library, Page
50
Assistant, Town Clerk
400
Matron, Police
100
Assistant, Treasurer/Collector
400
Outreach Coordinator
400
Cataloger, Library
300
Principal Clerk
300
Children’s Librarian
400
Program Coordinator
200
Clerk to a Board/Committee
100
Reference Librarian
400
Court Diversion/Community Therapist 400
Technician, Library
100
Crossing Guard
100
Van Driver
100
Custodian
100
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 5. AMEND THE CONSOLIDATED PERSONNEL BY-LAW SECTION 30
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Consolidated Personnel By-law Section 30, Job
Compensation Plan, to reflect the rates listed below, and the inclusion of any new rates resulting
from reevaluation or new or revised positions to be effective as of July 1, 2017; or take any
action relative thereto. (Town Administrator)
(This table reflects a 1% increase over FY17)
SECTION 30, JOB COMPENSATION PLAN, PART I, SCHEDULE B, HOURLY RATES
GRADE
50

STEP 1
10.88

STEP 2
11.56

STEP 3
12.05

STEP 4
12.35

STEP 5
12.65

STEP 6
13.17

STEP 7
13.44

100

16.15

17.18

17.90

18.34

18.71

19.49

19.91

200

19.16

20.38

21.23

21.75

22.19

23.12

23.61

300

19.76

21.02

21.90

22.43

22.89

23.84

24.35

400

22.75

24.20

25.20

25.82

26.35

27.45

28.04

500

24.68

26.26

27.35

28.02

28.59

29.78

30.43

THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 6. PAY UNPAID BILLS
To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate or transfer from available funds a sum of
money for unpaid bills from prior years; or take any action relative thereto.
(Board of Selectmen)
AMOUNT
TO
ACCOUNT
$1,613.88
01945-57400
Insurance
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS THAT THE TOWN RAISE AND
APPROPRIATE $1,613.88 FOR LATE BILLS (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 7. CURRENT FISCAL YEAR TRANSFERS
To see if the Town will vote to transfer from available funds a sum of money for the purpose of
supplementing various accounts of the Town’s Fiscal Year 2017 annual operating budget,
previously voted by the Town under Article 14, of the Warrant for the 2016 Annual Town
12

Meeting and under Article 1, of the Warrant for the October 24, 2016 Special Town Meeting; or
take any action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
AMOUNT
FROM
TO
ACCOUNT
$58,271

Reserve Fund (01132-57810)

01423-52901

Snow and Ice

THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 8. AUTHORIZE THE BOARD OF SELECTMEN TO SELL SURPLUS
EQUIPMENT
To see if the Town will vote to authorize the Board of Selectmen to hold a public auction for the
purpose of disposing of surplus departmental equipment; or take any action relative thereto.
(Board of Selectmen)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 9. AUTHORIZATION TO EXPEND CHAPTER 90 MONIES
To see if the Town will vote to authorize the Department of Public Works, with the approval of
the Board of Selectmen, to use and expend sums received from the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts as reimbursements under the Chapter 90 State Aid to Highways program for
further construction, reconstruction and improvements, including surface treatments of approved
public ways within the Town; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 10. PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
To see if the Town will vote to accept the provisions of Chapter 73 of the Acts of 1986, as
amended by Chapter 126 of the Acts of 1988, authorizing the Board of Assessors to grant an
increase of twenty percent (20%) to all exemptions from property taxes excluding those granted
under clause 18 of section 5 of Chapter 59 of the Massachusetts General Laws for the fiscal year
commencing July 1, 2017; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of Assessors)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 11. AMEND INTEREST RATES PER ANNUM
To see if the Town will vote to amend the interest rate per annum from 8% to 6% under the
provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 59, Section 5, clause 41A, which regulates
tax deferral for homeowners 65 years or older, pursuant to the authority contained in Chapter 136
of the Acts of 2005, thereby amending said clause 41A; or take any action relative thereto.
(Board of Assessors)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 12. AMEND INCOME REQUIREMENTS
To see if the Town will vote to accept the provisions of section 51 of Chapter 184 of the Acts of
2002, amending the income requirements under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 59, section
5, clause 41C; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of Assessors)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).

13

ARTICLE 13. CIRCUIT BREAKER INCOME ADJUSTMENT TO DEFFERAL
APPLICANTS
To see if the Town will vote to increase the gross receipts that seniors may have in the prior
calendar year to be eligible to defer property taxes under G.L. c.59 Section 5, Clause 41A from
$20,000 to the amount established annually by the Commissioner of Revenue as the income limit
to qualify for the “circuit breaker” state income tax credit for the proceeding state tax year
(single seniors who are not heads of households, head of household, and for married couples
filing a joint return), with such increase to be effective for deferrals granted for taxes assessed for
the fiscal year beginning on July 1, 2017. (Board of Assessors)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 14. FISCAL YEAR 2018 BUDGET
To see what money the Town will vote to raise and appropriate or transfer
from available funds to meet expenses and outlays to Town departments, salaries of Town
Officers, sundry and miscellaneous but regular expenditures, for a Reserve Fund, Conservation
Fund, Stabilization Fund, and to appoint trustees or caretakers or authorize the Selectmen to
appoint caretakers of the cemeteries of the Town not otherwise provided for, for the ensuing
year; or take any action relative thereto. (Omnibus Budget)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 15. CAPITAL EXPENDITURE FUND
To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate or transfer from available funds a sum of
money for the Capital Expenditure Fund; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of
Selectmen)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMEND THAT THE TOWN RAISE AND
APPROPRIATE $1,000,000 FOR THE CAPITAL EXPENDITURE FUND (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 16. CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate, transfer from available funds, or borrow a
sum of money for the purpose of capital expenditures, including replacement and new vehicles
and equipment, for the Schools, Police, Selectmen and Public Works departments, and authorize
the Board of Selectmen to trade or sell used equipment toward part of the purchase price; or take
any action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
Town Hall Doors

SELECTMEN

$25,000.00

Message Board

DPW HIGHWAY

$16,950.00

Message Board

DPW WATER

$16,950.00

Portable Air Compressor

DPW HIGHWAY

$20,400.00

2017 John Deere Front end loader

DPW HIGHWAY

$147,000.00

TOTAL
$226,300
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS THAT THE TOWN APPROPRIATE THE
FOLLOWING AMOUNTS FROM THE CAPITAL EXPENDITURE FUND: $25,000 FOR
TOWN HALL DOORS, $16950 FOR A MESSAGE BOARD, $20,400 FOR A PORTABLE
14

AIR COMPRESSOR, AND $147,000 FOR A 2017 JOHN DEERE FRONT END LOADER,
AND THAT THE TOWN APPROPRIATE $16,950 FROM THE WATER SURPLUS
ACCOUNT FOR A MESSAGE BOARD (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 17. REPORT OF THE COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
To see if the Town will vote to act on the report of the Community Preservation Committee on
the fiscal year 2018 community preservation budget and to appropriate or reserve for later
appropriation monies from Community Preservation Fund annual revenues or available funds for
the administrative expenses of the Community Preservation Committee, the payment of debt
service, the undertaking of community preservation projects and all other necessary and proper
expenses for the year; or take any action relative thereto. (Community Preservation
Committee)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 18. STABILIZATION FUND
To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate or transfer from available funds a sum of
money for the Stabilization Fund; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS INDEFFINITE POSTPONEMENT
(UNANIMOUS).
Articles 19-23 concern Zoning By-Law Changes. An explanation of these changes (with
zoning maps) can be found beginning on page XX.
ARTICLE 19. AMEND ZONING BY-LAW – DELETING SUBSECTION 4 FROM
SECTION IV-A (4)
To see of the Town will vote to amend the Town of Holliston Zoning By-Laws by deleting the
entirety sub-section 4 from Section IV-A (4) as it is in conflict with the language of Section I-C
(4) Non-Conforming Lots adopted in May 2016. The language to be stricken is as follows:
4. A lot or parcel of land having an area or frontage of lesser amounts than required in the
following schedule may be considered as coming within the area and frontage requirements of
this section provided such lot or parcel of land was shown on a plan or described in a deed duly
recorded or registered at the time of the adoption of this by-law or subsequent amendment here
to and did not at the time of such adoption or amendment adjoin other land of the same owner
available for use in connection with such lot or parcel. Lots specifically exempted
Under M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 6 are also exempted from this by-law, or take any action
relative thereto. (Planning Board/Zoning Board of Appeals)
ARTICLE 20. AMEND ZONING BY-LAW - DOWNTOWN CORRIDOR PLAN
AREA 3
To see of the Town will vote to amend Section II-B of the Zoning By-Laws to modify the zoning
map to reflect recommendations of Downtown Corridor Plan:
Area 3 – Woodland Street Industrial Remnants and #83 Elm Street – Change the existing
industrial district designation to Village Center Commercial. Area includes 310 – 360 Woodland
Street and 83 Elm Street; or take any action relative thereto. (Planning Board)

15

ARTICLE 21. AMEND ZONING BY-LAW- DOWNTOWN CORRIDOR PLAN
AREA 4
To see of the Town will vote to amend Section II-B of the Zoning By-Laws to modify the zoning
map to reflect recommendations of Downtown Corridor Plan:
Area 4 – Elm/Grove – Change the district designation from Agricultural-Residential B to Village
Residential. Area includes 602-696 Washington Street (even numbers), 27-131 Linden Street
(odd numbers), Hampshire Street (all), Avon Street (all), Irving Place (all), 18 – 95 Elm Street
(excluding 83)and 138 – 152 Railroad Street (even numbers). 83 Elm Street is proposed to
change from Agricultural-Residential B to Village Center Commercial to match adjacent parcels
on Elm and Grove Streets; or take any action relative thereto.
(Planning Board)
ARTICLE 22. AMEND ZONING BY-LAW - DOWNTOWN CORRIDOR PLAN
AREA 5
To see of the Town will vote to amend Section II-B of the Zoning By-Laws to modify the zoning
map to reflect recommendations of Downtown Corridor Plan:
Area 5 – Mudville/Washington Street/Green Street
a. Eliminate split zoning district lots and change Residential zoning district to Village
Residential. Area to include 864 – 960 Washington Street, 22 Pine, Pleasant Street (all),
School Street (all), Spring Street (all), Mechanic Street (8 – end), Union Street (65 –
end).
b. Clarify Industrial zoning district for 75 – 99 Exchange Street (odd numbers) and 13 – 18
Water Street as parcel based. Eliminate any Industrial zone on Winthrop Street lots.
c. Change zoning district of 31 -53 Green Street from Village Center Commercial to
Village Residential.
d. Eliminate split zoned parcels (Village Center Commercial and Agricultural-Residential
B) on 726, 736, 747 and 755 Washington Street, 8 Church Street and 20 Hollis Street and
838, 846 and 854 Washington Street, (Village Center Commercial), and 24 and 42 Hollis
Street (Agricultural-Residential B).: or take any action relative thereto. (Planning Board)
ARTICLE 23. AMEND ZONING BY-LAW - DOWNTOWN CORRIDOR PLAN
AREA 6
To see if the Town will vote to amend Section II-B of the Zoning By-Laws to modify the zoning
map to reflect recommendations of Downtown Corridor Plan:
Area 6 – Marked Tree Road – Change the split district lots along Marked Tree Road and Persis
Place (Ag-Res B and Res.) as well as 970 – 1002 (even numbers) and 1057 – corner of
Washington Street (odd numbers) and 1274 Highland Street to Residential; or take any action
relative thereto. (Planning Board)
ARTICLE 24. ACCEPT BARTZAK DRIVE
To see if the Town will vote to accept as a public way, Bartzak Drive (Sta. 0+00 to 12+00), as
shown on the following plan: “Acceptance Plan of Bartzak Drive (Stations 0+00 to 12+00), New
Englander Industrial Park, Section II” dated July 11, 2001 with revisions through April 14, 2017,
prepared by Dunn McKenzie, Inc. of Norfolk, MA, such way having been laid out as a Town
way by the Board of Selectmen, or take any action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)

16

ARTICLE 25. AMEND ZONING BY-LAW – PROHIBITED USES
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Town of Holliston Zoning By-Laws at Section I-D
Prohibited Uses (1) as follows:
1. In any district no use will be permitted which will produce a nuisance or hazard from fire
or explosion, toxic or corrosive fume, gas, smoke, odors, obnoxious dust or vapor, harmful
radioactivity, offensive noise or vibration, flashed, objectionable effluent or electrical
interference which may affect or impair the normal use and peaceful enjoyment of any property,
structure, or dwelling in the neighborhood. Neither shall there be permitted any wastes,
petroleum products, chemicals or pollutants unless the same are so treated before discharges to
render them harmless to life or vegetation of any kind.
In addition, the following uses are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts:
1. Commercial slaughtering;
2. Fat rendering or glue and gelatin manufacture;
3. Cement, lime and gypsum manufacture;
4. Fertilizer manufacture;
5. Asphalt and concrete batching plants;
6. Petroleum and kerosene refining or distillation and derivation of by-products.
7. Reclamation and re-processing of asphalt and/or concrete;
8. Commercial gravel, loam, sand or stone processing and removal; and
9. Outdoor storage of materials and parking of vehicles and equipment not associated
with a business operated in a building on the premises.
or take any action thereto. (By Petition)
ARTICLE 26. REVOLVING ACCOUNTS
To see if the Town will vote to re-authorize the following Revolving Accounts:
1.
a Wetlands Filing Fee account into which shall be deposited receipts received as payment
of filing fees for wetlands determinations and from which account expenditures for the cost of
wetland determinations may be may in an amount not to exceed $40,000;
2.
a Council on Aging fee Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts
received as payment of fees for the use of the Senior Center and from which account
expenditures for the Senior Center expenses may be made in an amount not to exceed $5,000;
3.
a Composting Kit Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received from
the sale of composting kits and from which account expenditures for purchasing composting kits
may be made in an amount not to exceed $3,000;
4.
a Response and Recovery Fee Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts
received as payment of fees and reimbursements for response to natural and man-made
emergencies and from which account expenditures for planning, response, recovery and
mitigation efforts by Town departments may be made in an amount not to exceed $25,000;

17

5.
an Abutter’s List Fee Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received
as payment of fees for abutter’s lists and from which fund expenditures for preparing and issuing
abutter’s lists, including technologies, may be made in an amount not to exceed $5,000;
6.
a Building Inspection Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received
as payment of all fees received by the Building Inspection department and for plumbing, gas and
wiring permits and from which account expenditures reasonably related to inspectional services
for plumbing, gas and wiring may be made in an amount not to exceed $100,000;
7.
a Town Hall Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received as
payment of all fees for rental of the Town Hall facility and from which account expenditures
reasonably related to maintaining the Town Hall for purposes of rental may be made in an
amount not to exceed $25,000;
8.
a Senior Center Van Services Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts
received as payment of all fees, reimbursements and contracted receipts for use of the Senior
Center van and transportation program and from which account reasonably related to maintain
the Senior Center van and transportation program may be made in an amount not to exceed
$10,000;
9.
an Agricultural Commission Programs Revolving account into which shall be deposited
receipts received as payment of all programs and activities of the Agricultural Commission from
which account expenditures reasonably related to the programs and activities of the Agricultural
Commission may be made in an amount not to exceed $10,000;
10.
a Sealer of Weights and Measures Revolving account into which shall be deposited
receipts received for Sealer of Weights and Measures services and from which account
expenditures related to the services of the Sealer of Weights and Measures may be made in an
amount not to exceed $5,000;
11.
a Fluorescent Bulb Recycling Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts
received from recycling fluorescent bulbs and from which account expenditures for recycling
fluorescent bulbs may be made in an amount not to exceed $3,000;
12.
a Banner Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received as payment
of fees for banners over Washington Street and from which account expenditures for placing the
banners may be made in an amount not to exceed $5,000;
13.
an Accident Fee Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received as
payment of fees for motor vehicle accident investigations and from which account expenditures
for investigating motor vehicle accidents may be made in an amount not to exceed $5,000;
14.
an Inoculation Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received for
reimbursement for inoculation and from which account expenditures for inoculations may be
made in an amount not to exceed $20,000;

18

15.
a Cost of Prosecution Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received
as payment of fees for court imposed penalties and from which account expenditures for the
costs of prosecution may be made in an amount not to exceed $30,000;
16.
a Nutrition Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received for
nutrition programs at the Senior Center and from which account expenditures for nutrition
programs at the Senior Center may be made in an amount not to exceed $10,000;
17.
a Pinecrest Golf Course Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts
received for golf course and restaurant fees and from which account expenditures for debt
payments and lease payments of the Pinecrest Golf Course may be made in an amount not to
exceed $200,000
18.
a Technology Repair and Replenishment Revolving account into which shall be
deposited receipts received for an optional insurance policy for families who have borrowed
student technology under the care and custody of the School Committee and from which account
expenditures for the cost of repair, replacement and future replenishment may be made with the
approval of the School Committee in an amount not to exceed $75,000;
Provided that expenditures from said accounts shall require the approval of the Board of
Selectmen (except for the School Committee) and expenditures in excess of the amounts stated
shall require the approval of the Board of Selectmen and the Finance Committee; or take any
action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 27. FLAGG BUILDING DEMOLITION
To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate, transfer from available funds or to borrow
a sum of money for the purpose of paying all costs associated with the environmental
remediation and/or demolition of the Flagg School building; or to take any action relative
thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS THAT THE TOWN APPROPRIATE
$425,000 FROM THE CAPITAL EXPENDITURE FUND TO COMPLETE THE
DEMOLITION OF THE FLAGG BUILDING (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 28. AMEND GENERAL BY-LAW – TAX COLLECTOR
To see if the Town will vote to amend General By-Law, XVI, “Tax Collector” with the
following revisions:
ARTICLE XVI
TAX COLLECTOR
Section 1. The Tax Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all
municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter
referred to as the Tax Collector shall annually, and may periodically, furnish to each
department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the licensing
authority, that issues licenses or permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any
person, corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has
neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal
19

charges and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement
of such tax or a pending petition before the Appellate Tax Board.
Section 2. The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said list
furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector; o r w i t h r e s p e c t t o
activity, event or other matter which is carried out or exercised or is
to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned by any
party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing
a u t h o r i t y f r o m t h e T a x C o l l e c t o r : provided, however, that written notice is given
to the party and the Tax Collector, as required by applicable provisions of law, and the party
is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen days after said notice. Said list shall
be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any
party. The Tax Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted
with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by
the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension
shall be made only for the purpose of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or
introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such denial,
revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this
Section shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensing authority receives a certificate
issued by the Tax Collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all
local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the
municipality as of the date of issuance of said certificate.
Section 3. Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations
to the license or permit and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon satisfactory
compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds
for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder
be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
Section 4. The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it
finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or
stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in section one of
chapter two hundred and sixty-eight A (C.268A) of the General Laws in the business or
activity conducted in or on said property.
Section 5. This a r t i c l e shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: open
burning under Section thirteen of Chapter forty-eight (S.l3, C.48); bicycle permits
under Section eleven A of chapter eighty-five (S.11A, C.85); sales of articles for
charitable purposes under Section thirty-three of chapter one hundred and one (S. 33, C.
101); children work permits under Section sixty-nine of chapter one hundred and fortynine (S. 69, C. 149); clubs and associations dispensing food or alcoholic beverages
under Section twenty-one E of Chapter one hundred and forty (S. 21E, C. 140); dog licenses
20

under Section one hundred and thirty-seven of Chapter one hundred and forty (S. 137,
C.140); fishing, hunting and trapping licenses under Section twelve of Chapter one
hundred and thirty-one (S.12, C. 131); marriage licenses under Section twenty-eight of
Chapter two hundred and seven (S.28, C. 207); and theatrical events and public exhibition
permits under Section one hundred and eighty-one of Chapter one hundred and forty (S.181,
C. 140). (Treasurer/Collector)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UANINMOUS).
ARTICLE 29. CURBSIDE REFUSE AND RECYCLING PICKUP AT CONDOMINIUMS
To see if the Town will vote to provide curbside refuse and recycling pickup to condominiums
provided their Board of Trustees request such service. (By Petition)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS UNFAVORABLE ACTION
(UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 30. DAM INSPECTIONS
To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate, or transfer from available funds, a sum of
money for the purpose of undertaking survey and engineering investigations and preparing a
construction design proposal for Houghton’s Pond Dam and inspections for additional town
dams as required by the Massachusetts Office of Dam Safety or take any action relative thereto.
(Conservation Commission/Board of Selectmen)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS THAT THE TOWN APPROPRIATE
$50,000 FROM THE CAPITAL EXPENDITURE FUND FOR DAM INSPECTIONS
(UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 31. AMEND THE GENERAL BY-LAW – TOWN MEETINGS
To see if the Town will vote to amend General By-Law, Article 1, Town Meetings by deleting
section 3 (e), as follows, “publishing notice of the Meeting in one or more newspapers having
substantial circulation in the Town at least seven (7) days before the date of the Meeting.”: or
take any action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION (UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 32. TRANSFER OF LAND - CONCORD STREET
To see if the Town will vote to allow the Board of Selectmen to transfer town owned property
located at 172 Concord Street to the Housing Trust; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of
Selectmen)
ARTICLE 33. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate or transfer from available funds a sum of
money for engineering services related to compliance with the EPA and Mass DEP Municipal
Storm Water Management Regulations. The scope of services include preparation of a Notice of
Intent, written storm water management plan, written Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination
Plan, annual Report and Training; or take any action relative thereto. (DPW and Planning
Board)

21

THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS THAT THE TOWN RAISE AND
APPROPRIATE $43,000 FOR THE PURPOSE STATED IN THE ARTICLE
(UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 34. AMEND THE GENERAL BY-LAWS – WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY
ARTICLE XXXVI
WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY
Section 1. AUTHORITY: This Article is adopted by the Town of Holliston under its home rule
powers, its police powers to protect public health and welfare and its specific authorization under
General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21(7), and 21D.
Section 2. PURPOSE: The purpose of this Article is to protect, preserve and maintain the public
health, safety and welfare, whenever there is in force a state of water supply emergency, by
providing for enforcement of duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or conditions
imposed by the Town of Holliston or by the Department of Environmental Protection and included
in the Town of Holliston plan approved by the Department of Environmental Protection to abate
the emergency or by any other duly authorized local, state or federal governmental body or officer.
Section 3. DEFINITIONS: For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY- The Town of Holliston Board of Water Commissioners and
Superintendent of Water having the responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the water
supply, the Health Department, the Town police, special police and any other locally designated
body having police powers.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY - A state of water supply emergency declared
by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to General Laws Chapter 21G, Section
15 and General Laws Chapter 40, Section 41A, or by the Governor or any other duly authorized
local, state or federal governmental body or official.
Section 4. EMERGENCY PROTECTIONS - The following shall apply to all users of water
supplies supplied by the Town of Holliston.
A. Following notification by the Town of Holliston of the existence of a state of water
supply emergency, no person shall violate any provisions, condition, requirements or restriction
included in a plan approved by Department of Environmental Protection which has as its purpose
of abatement of a water supply emergency.
B. Notification of any provisions, restrictions, requirements or conditions with which users
of water supplied by the Town of Holliston are required to comply to abate a situation of water
emergency shall be sufficient for purposes of this Article if it is published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Town of Holliston or by such other notice as is reasonably calculated to
reach and inform all users of the Town of Holliston water supply.
C.

Stage 1

Voluntary

2.5 M.G.D. pumping rate
22

Stage 2

Voluntary
Odd Even

When pumping rate reaches
2.6 M.G.D.

Stage 3

Mandatory
Odd Even

When pumping rate reaches
2.8 M.G.D.

Stage 4

Total Water Ban

When pumping rate reaches
3 M.G.D. with low tank levels

All conditions due to heat waves, drought, or other water emergency deemed necessary by Board
of Water Commissioners.
Section 5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. CRIMINAL COMPLAINT: Any person who violates any provision of this by-law
may be penalized by indictment or on complaint brought in the district court. Except as may be
otherwise provided by law and as the district court may see fit to impose, the maximum penalty
for each violation, or offense, brought in such manner, shall be three hundred dollars. Each day or
portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Each condition violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. NONCRIMINAL DISPOSITION. Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in General Laws Chapter 40,
Section 21D. If noncriminal disposition is elected, then any person who violates any provision of
this by-law shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of a warning for the first offense, one
hundred dollars ($100) for the second offense, and two hundred dollars ($200) for each subsequent
offense. Each day or portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Each condition violated
shall constitute a separate offense. This by-law may be enforced pursuant to General Laws Chapter
40, Section 21D, by any officer or board authorized pursuant to Section 4 of this Article.

NEW LANGUAGE
ARTICLE XXXVI
WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY
Section 1.
AUTHORITY: This Article is adopted by the Town of Holliston under its home
rule powers, its police powers to protect public health and welfare and its specific authorization
under General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21(7), and 21D.
Section 2.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this Article is to protect, preserve and maintain the
public health, safety and welfare, whenever there is in force a state of water supply emergency, by
providing for enforcement of duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or conditions
imposed by the Town of Holliston or by the Department of Environmental Protection and included
in the Town of Holliston plan approved by the Department of Environmental Protection to abate
the emergency or by any other duly authorized local, state or federal governmental body or officer.
23

Section 3.
DEFINITIONS: For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY- The Town of Holliston Director of Public Works or their
designee, having the responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the water supply, the
Health Department, the Town police, special police and any other locally designated body having
police powers.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY - A state of water supply emergency declared
by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to General Laws Chapter 21G, Section
15 and General Laws Chapter 40, Section 41A, or by the Governor or any other duly authorized
local, state or federal governmental body or official.
Section 4.
ACTIONS IN THE EVENT OF WATER EMERGENCIES - The following
shall apply to all users of water supplied by the Town of Holliston.
A. Following notification by the Town of Holliston of the existence of a State of Water
Supply Emergency, no person shall violate any provisions, condition, requirements or restriction
included in a plan approved by Department of Environmental Protection which has as its purpose
of abatement of a water supply emergency.
B. Notification of any provisions, restrictions, requirements or conditions with which users
of water supplied by the Town of Holliston are required to comply to abate a situation of water
emergency shall be sufficient for purposes of this Article if it is published on the Town of Holliston
web site, via the Town’s Emergency Notification System, or by such other notice as is reasonably
calculated to reach and inform all users of the Town of Holliston water supply. In the event of a
water emergency the Enforcement Authority may implement the following restrictions:
C. The following restrictions may be imposed:
Restriction level Compliance rule
Stage 1
Voluntary
Stage 2
Voluntary odd/even
Stage 3
Mandatory odd/even
Stage 4
Total water ban
*MGD = million gallons/day

Imposition level
2.5 MGD* pumping rate
2.6 MGD pumping rate
2.8 MGD pumping rate
3.0 MGD with low tank levels

All conditions due to heat waves, drought, or other water emergency deemed necessary by
the Director of Public Works or their designee.
D. The restrictions in section C may be imposed irrespective of pumping rate due to heat
waves, drought, or other water emergency deemed necessary by the Enforcement Authority.

Section 5.

VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
24

A. CRIMINAL COMPLAINT: Any person who violates any provision of this by-law
may be penalized by indictment or on complaint brought in the district court. Except as may be
otherwise provided by law and as the district court may see fit to impose, the maximum penalty
for each violation, or offense, brought in such manner, shall be three hundred dollars. Each day or
portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Each condition violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. NONCRIMINAL DISPOSITION. Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in General Laws Chapter 40,
Section 21D. If noncriminal disposition is elected, then any person who violates any provision of
this by-law shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of a warning for the first offense, one
hundred dollars ($100) for the second offense, and two hundred dollars ($200) for each subsequent
offense. Each day or portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Each condition violated
shall constitute a separate offense. This by-law may be enforced pursuant to General Laws Chapter
40, Section 21D, by any officer or board authorized pursuant to Section 4 of this Article; or take
any action relative thereto. (DPW Director)
ARTICLE 35. 8 ARCH BRIDGE
To see if the Town will raise and appropriate or transfer from available funds a sum of money for
modifications to the 8 Arch Bridge; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS INDEFINITE POSTPONEMENT
(UNANIMOUS).
ARTICLE 36. PROHIBIT RETAIL MARIJUANA SALES
To see if the Town will vote to prohibit the operation of marijuana retailers, as defined by G.J.
ch. 94G., Sect. 1
Summary: The proposal would prohibit retail businesses from selling marijuana to the public. It
would not prohibit the personal use of marijuana or growing of marijuana at a residence as
permitted by law. (By Petition)

25

And you are directed to notify and warn the inhabitants of said Town who are qualified to vote in
Town elections to vote at:
Voters in Precinct 1 vote at the High School gymnasium
Voters in Precinct 2 vote at the High School gymnasium
Voters in Precinct 3 vote at the High School gymnasium
Voters in Precinct 4 vote at the High School gymnasium
on TUESDAY, MAY 23, 2017
from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. for the following purpose:
To cast their votes in the Town Election for the election of candidates for the following offices:
SELECTMAN & HIGHWAY SURVEYOR (three year term)

Vote for ONE

ASSESSOR OF TAXES (three year term)

Vote for ONE

SCHOOL COMMITTEE (three year term)

Vote for NOT MORE THAN TWO

BOARD OF HEALTH (three year term)

Vote for ONE

TRUSTEES OF PUBLIC LIBRARY (three year term)

Vote for NOT MORE THAN TWO

FINANCE COMMITTEE (three year term)

Vote for NOT MORE THAN TWO

PARK COMMISSIONER (three year term)

Vote for ONE

PLANNING BOARD (five year term)

Vote for ONE

PLANNING BOARD (two year term)

Vote for ONE

Question 1. Shall the Town prohibit the operation of marijuana retailers, as defined in
Massachusetts General Law Chapter 94G, Section 1?

Summary:
This proposal would prohibit retail businesses from selling marijuana to the public.
This proposal would not prohibit the personal use of marijuana or growing of marijuana at a
residence as permitted by law. This proposal does not prohibit commercial businesses related to
marijuana cultivation, marijuana testing facilities, or marijuana product manufacturing.

YES

NO

26

And you are directed to serve this Warrant by posting true copies thereof, attested, on and within
the Town Hall seven days at least before the date of said meeting. Hereof fail not and make
return of this Warrant with your doings thereon at the time and place of said meeting.
Given under our hands this

day of April A.D. 2017.

_____________________________
Kevin P. Conley, Chairman
BOARD OF
____________________________
Joseph P. Marsden, Vice Chairman

SELECTMEN

_____________________________
John D. Leary, Jr, Clerk

I have this ______ day of April 2017 posted true copies, attested, of the within Warrant on and
within the Town Hall, as herein directed.

___________________________
Constable
A true record, ATTEST:

27

SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS:

OMNIBUS BUDGET

FINANCIAL TABLES

ADDITIONAL WARRANT ARTICLE INFORMATION

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

TOWN OF HOLLISTON
BUDGETED/PROJECTED REVENUES, FISCAL YEARS 2013 - 2018
:
FY12
: BUDGETED
PROPERTY TAX
:
Base levy
:
33,628,242
New growth
:
475,040
Excluded debt
:
2,766,893
Override
:
N/A
------------------------------ : ----------------TOTAL LEVY
:
36,870,175
:
STATE AID
:
General
:
7,844,649
:
Offsets
716,750
School Building Asst.
:
2,263,760
------------------------------ : ----------------TOTAL STATE AID
:
10,825,159
:
LOCAL RECEIPTS
:
MV excise
:
1,560,529
Interest
:
25,000
Water
:
2,380,526
Ambulance Fees
:
20,609
Other
:
1,280,000
------------------------------ : ----------------TOTAL
:
5,266,664

:
FY13
%chg : BUDGETED
PROPERTY TAX
:
Base levy
6.8 :
34,955,864
New growth
44.3 :
409,318
Excluded debt
-1.0 :
2,733,369
Override
N/A :
N/A
----------------------- ----------- : ----------------TOTAL LEVY
3.6 :
38,098,551
:
STATE AID
:
General
-1.2 :
8,403,315
Offsets
4.6 :
718,762
-3.0 :
2,263,760
School Building Asst
----------------------- ----------- : ----------------TOTAL STATE AID
-1.3 :
11,385,837
:
LOCAL RECEIPTS
:
MV excise
-3.5 :
1,660,529
Interest
-50.0 :
25,000
Water
6.9 :
2,536,390
Ambulance Fees
6.4 :
383,223
Other
-10.3 :
1,172,000
----------------------- ----------- : ----------------TOTAL
-1.0 :
5,777,142

FY14
:
%chg : BUDGETED
:
3.9 :
36,257,858
-13.8 :
464,129
-1.2 :
2,697,180
N/A :
N/A
---------- : ----------------3.3 :
39,419,167
:
:
7.1 :
8,487,275
0.3 :
710,306
0.0 :
2,260,046
---------- : ----------------5.2 :
11,457,627
:
:
6.4 :
1,700,000
0.0 :
25,000
6.5 :
2,556,914
1,759.5 :
558,702
-8.4 :
1,188,268
---------- : ----------------9.7 :
6,028,884

FY15
:
%chg : BUDGETED
:
3.7 :
37,640,037
13.4 :
650,163
-1.3 :
2,672,130
N/A :
N/A
-------- : ----------------3.5 :
40,962,330
:
:
1.0 :
8,612,086
-1.2 :
780,208
-0.2 :
2,260,046
-------- : ----------------0.6 :
11,652,340
:
:
2.4 :
1,850,000
0.0 :
22,000
0.8 :
2,426,301
45.8 :
465,254
1.4 :
924,220
-------- : ----------------4.4 :
5,687,775

FY16
:
%chg : BUDGETED
:
3.8 :
39,258,578
40.1 :
850,223
-0.9 :
2,652,489
N/A :
N/A
-------- : ----------------3.9 :
42,761,290
:
:
1.5 :
8,723,984
9.8 :
1,054,688
0.0 :
2,260,046
-------- : ----------------1.7 :
12,038,718
:
:
8.8 :
2,000,048
-12.0 :
20,000
-5.1 :
2,979,293
-16.7 :
484,028
-22.2 :
981,220
-------- : -----------------5.7 :
6,464,589

FY17
:
%chg : BUDGETED
:
4.3 :
41,111,521
30.8 :
757,068
-0.7 :
2,912,396
N/A :
N/A
-------- : ----------------4.4 :
44,780,985
:
:
1.3 :
8,917,803
35.2 :
1,093,799
0.0 :
2,184,016
-------- : ----------------3.3 :
12,195,618
:
:
8.1 :
1,900,000
-9.1 :
25,000
22.8 :
3,813,091
4.0 :
354,000
6.2 :
890,000
-------- : ----------------13.7 :
6,982,091

:
AVAILABLE FUNDS
:
Free Cash
:
1,084,078
Capital Expenditure Fd. :
350,000
Community Preservation :
0
Other
:
1,026,882
------------------------------ : ----------------TOTAL
:
2,460,960
:
TOTAL REVENUES
:
------------------------------ : ----------------Tax Levy
:
36,870,175
State Aid
:
10,825,159
Local Receipts
:
5,266,664
Available Funds
:
2,460,960
------------------------------ : ----------------TOTAL
:
55,422,957

:
AVAILABLE FUNDS
:
Free Cash
79.2 :
1,819,966
-21.2 :
670,246
Capital Expenditure F
564,584
Community Preservat -100.0
Other
-6.8 :
417,076
----------------------- ----------- : ----------------TOTAL
-0.3 :
3,471,872
:
TOTAL REVENUES
:
----------------------- ----------- : ----------------Tax Levy
3.6 :
38,098,551
State Aid
-1.3 :
11,385,837
Local Receipts
-1.0 :
5,777,142
Available Funds
-0.3 :
3,471,872
----------------------- ----------- : ----------------TOTAL
2.0 :
58,733,402

:
:
67.9 :
1,358,776
0.0 :
1,007,093
0.0
495,260
0.0 :
776,415
---------- : ----------------41.1 :
3,637,544
:
:
---------- : ----------------3.3 :
39,419,167
5.2 :
11,457,627
9.7 :
6,028,884
41.1 :
3,637,544
---------- : ----------------6.0 :
60,543,222

:
:
-25.3 :
0
0.0 :
987,464
0.0
1,395,500
0.0 :
3,802,515
-------- : ----------------4.8 :
6,185,479
:
:
-------- : ----------------3.5 :
40,962,330
0.6 :
11,652,340
4.4 :
5,687,775
4.8 :
6,185,479
-------- : ----------------3.1 :
64,487,924

:
:
-100.0 :
2,773,684
0.0 :
1,502,037
0.0
484,500
0.0 :
360,200
-------- : ----------------70.0 :
5,120,421
:
:
-------- : ----------------3.9 :
42,761,290
1.7 :
12,038,718
-5.7 :
6,464,589
70.0 :
5,120,421
-------- : ----------------6.5 :
66,385,018

:
:
:
2,005,149
0.0 :
1,412,570
0.0
653,000
0.0 :
466,000
-------- : -----------------17.2 :
4,536,719
:
:
-------- : ----------------4.4 :
44,780,985
3.3 :
12,195,618
13.7 :
6,982,091
-17.2 :
4,536,719
-------- : ----------------2.9 :
68,495,413

OPERTY TAX LEVY BY CLASS OF PROPER

%chg

FY18
PROJECTED

%chg

4.7
-11.0
9.8
N/A
-------4.7

42,915,304
325,000
2,607,115
N/A
----------------45,847,419

4.4
-57.1
-10.5
N/A
-------2.4

2.2
3.7
-3.4
-------1.3

8,917,803
1,093,799
2,184,016
----------------12,195,618

0.0
0.0
0.0
-------0.0

-5.0
25.0
28.0
-26.9
-9.3
-------8.0

1,950,000
25,000
2,270,748
354,000
930,000
----------------5,529,748

2.6
0.0
-40.4
0.0
4.5
--------20.8

-27.7
0
0.0
0
0.0
0
0.0
35,642
---------- -----------------11.4
35,642

-100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
--------99.2

-------4.7
1.3
8.0
-11.4
-------3.2

-------2.4
0.0
-20.8
-99.2
--------7.1

----------------45,847,419
12,195,618
5,529,748
35,642
----------------63,608,427

PROPERTY TAX LEVY BY CLASS OF PROPERTY

Residential (87.67%)
Commercial (3.03%)
Industrial (6.95%)
Personal (2.35%)

32,281,386
1,170,849
2,490,912
927,027

Residential (87.67%)
Commercial (3.03%)
Industrial (6.95%)
Personal (2.35%)

33,356,881
1,209,858
2,573,900
957,912

34,513,136
1,251,795
2,663,120
991,116

35,864,240
1,300,800
2,767,374
1,029,916

37,439,305
1,357,928
2,888,910
1,075,147

39,259,848
1,357,088
3,110,980
1,053,070

40,194,799
1,389,406
3,185,066
1,078,148

TOTAL

36,870,175

TOTAL

38,098,551

39,419,167

40,962,330

42,761,290

44,780,985

45,847,419

NOTES: Local Receipts Other includes revenues from permits, licenses, fines and solid waste and other fees. Available Funds Other includes Water Surplus, Stabilization Fund, Overlay Reserve,
Revolving Accounts, Golf Course Capital, Open Space and other special purpose funds.

Adjusted %

#VALUE!

7.21

2.49

2.37

NOTES:
This table reflects annual and special town meeting appropriations through FY17. The amount shown for Excluded Debt is net after SBAB
reimbursements. The amount shown for State Aid does not include the SBAB reimbursement.
Local Receipts figures reflect the amount estimated for budgeting purposes. The actual receipts collected each year are, overall, generally an amount greater than
budgeted. The Local Receipts Other line includes departmental receipts, the solid waste fee and contributions to the General Fund from the Water Department. The
Available Funds Other line includes Overlay Surplus, Stabilization Fund and miscellaneous sources which are most often used to fund special projects and therefore do
not affect the amount available for general operations. The adjusted % amount at the bottom indicates the percentage change in total revenue after removing the

36

10.43

3.04

FY16 WAGES AND BENEFITS

DEPARTMENTS
122‐SELECTMEN
135‐TOWN ACCOUNTANT
141‐ASSESSORS
145‐TREASURER/COLLECTOR
155‐TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT
161‐TOWN CLERK
162‐ELECTIONS
171‐CONSERVATION COMMISSION
175‐PLANNING BOARD
210‐POLICE DEPARTMENT
220‐FIRE DEPARTMENT
241‐BUILDING DEPARTMENT
265‐COMMUNITY PRESERVATION
293‐TAX CREDIT PROGRAM
420‐HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT
430‐DPW DIRECTOR
450‐WATER DEPARTMENT
512‐BOARD OF HEALTH
541‐COUNCIL ON AGING
542‐YOUTH/FAMILY SERVICES
543‐METROWEST VETERANS DISTRICT
610‐LIBRARY
650‐PAR/RECREATION

GROSS
WAGES
$244,532.87
$101,842.87
$174,948.00
$232,473.42
$87,166.62
$136,811.87
$4,552.13
$55,445.90
$82,961.36
$2,741,127.63
$846,937.52
$190,314.21
$221.98
$2,608.00
$779,576.09
$99,359.56
$469,944.68
$137,745.73
$203,923.82
$117,574.08
$68,572.02
$330,163.05
$155,308.33

DISABILITY
INSURANCE
$866.36
$355.96
$678.68
$1,049.12
$255.45
$473.32

HEALTH
INSURANCE
$19,244.40
$13,907.40
$15,102.60
$37,609.95
$5,764.80
$18,323.40

$137.40
$320.12
$9,062.93
$961.54
$515.69

$6,961.80
$131,486.30
$311,662.45
$17,667.60

$2,875.51
$402.71
$1,705.50
$411.75
$636.89
$481.49
$219.35
$917.93
$360.63

$115,184.85
$11,902.80
$50,273.40
$5,337.00
$11,057.40
$13,198.20

TOTAL TOWN

$7,264,111.74

$22,688.33

910‐MILLER ELEMENTARY
911‐PLACENTINO SCHOOL
912‐SUBSTITUTES/TUTORS
913‐HIGH SCHOOL
914‐ADAMS MIDDLE SCHOOL
915‐SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION
916‐SCHOOL CAFETERIA
917‐TEACHERS AIDES
918‐SCHOOL CLERICAL
919‐CUSTODIANS/MAINTENANCE DEPT.
920‐BUS DRIVERS
921‐EXTENDED DAY
922‐NURSES/MISC
923‐COACHES
924‐SUMMER LEARNERS PROGRAM

$4,778,131.86
$4,778,520.97
$633,417.24
$6,765,336.55
$5,086,273.05
$578,566.30
$297,716.80
$2,014,328.01
$349,694.67
$419,797.66
$131,922.49
$814,835.11
$329,708.70
$150,716.17
$21,356.91

TOTAL SCHOOL

$27,150,322.49

$0.00

RETIREES‐DIRECT BILL
RETIREES‐MIDDLESEX RETIREMENT
RETIREES‐TEACHERS RETIREMENT
TOTAL RETIREES
TOTAL TOWN, SCHOOL AND RETIREES

LIFE
INSURANCE
$129.50
$42.00
$42.00
$140.00
$42.00
$84.00

$135,953.39
$18,670.73
$80,633.07
$19,132.34
$25,342.85
$22,407.11
$10,207.97
$42,890.47
$9,547.33

WORKERS'
COMPENSATION
$174.86
$81.47
$135.84
$185.98
$69.73
$109.45
$3.64
$44.36
$66.37
$2,701.79
$5,282.88
$3,158.49
$0.18
$2.09
$22,962.12
$3,125.20
$12,971.81
$312.99
$3,317.01
$188.12
$54.74
$264.13
$3,308.07

$89,133.82

$1,053,691.33

$58,521.32

$1,441.65
$1,500.10
$3.50
$1,690.15
$1,112.30
$126.00
$52.50
$955.50
$165.55
$252.00
$101.50
$210.00
$126.00
$42.00

$65,512.99
$61,233.21
$8,914.22
$89,424.60
$66,546.46
$8,107.95
$3,747.40
$25,243.42
$4,319.28
$5,489.62
$1,809.25
$10,696.76
$4,616.16
$2,057.86
$305.44

$31,336.83
$46,886.57
$19,544.33
$78,069.67
$49,965.71

$5,243.92
$397.48

$32,013.48
$32,016.09
$4,282.24
$45,294.44
$34,071.84
$3,876.39
$9,936.44
$13,642.47
$2,304.96
$14,021.24
$5,263.71
$5,459.40
$2,209.05
$824.97
$143.09

$2,277,592.36

$7,778.75

$358,024.62

$925,228.67

$205,359.82

$140,722.92
$251,200.35
$660,962.84

$191.10
$794.85
$1,780.23

$27,814.80
$5,337.00

$308.00
$42.00
$336.00
$84.00
$101.50
$84.00
$42.00
$42.00
$42.00

MEDICARE
$2,853.72
$1,326.60
$2,353.60
$2,896.04
$1,208.23
$1,798.48
$62.10
$803.94
$1,135.63
$30,693.72
$10,632.33
$2,557.48
$3.22
$37.84
$9,322.10
$1,302.56
$6,257.41
$1,922.80
$2,825.62
$1,524.41
$994.53
$4,459.27
$2,162.19

$817,836.15

$3,906.00

$337,818.60
$388,927.32
$23,518.08
$504,372.30
$327,062.40
$19,206.00
$55,245.40
$365,836.50
$61,801.20
$57,715.20
$9,506.88
$106,700.88
$14,103.00
$5,337.00
$441.60

$819.00
$1,442.00
$84.00

CTY RETIREMENT
ASSESSMENT
$40,808.54
$16,541.76
$30,716.95
$44,274.48
$16,576.84
$22,159.58
$6,460.96
$14,920.06
$427,590.19
$44,805.33
$24,051.37

$47,949.61
$344,354.58
$65,553.19
$74,529.34
$21,738.66
$139,658.79

$122,248.15
$590,371.70
$140,685.59
$671,248.88
$8,475.70
$64,738.08
$182,353.21
$901,204.38
$118,253.61
$597,012.32
$6,966.04
$38,282.39
$19,925.90
$136,857.25
$132,168.87
$882,201.34
$22,328.94
$156,473.11
$20,887.75
$172,895.15
$3,462.26
$41,882.26
$38,523.99
$301,249.81
$5,127.24
$26,181.45
$1,938.25
$15,444.01
$159.12
$1,446.74
$0.00
$823,504.62 $4,597,488.85
$50,776.59
$90,803.29
$238,811.10

$0.00

$0.00

$1,052,886.11

$2,766.18

$0.00

$0.00

$0.00

$34,414,434.23

$22,688.33

$4,148,314.62

$14,450.93

$447,158.44

$1,978,920.00

$263,881.14

NOTES:
1. Employee wages and benefits are charged to the employee "home" department if they work in more than one location.
2. The Metrowest Veterans Districts wages and benefits are included in the above number as they are part of our payroll/accounting system.
3. The total Middlesex Retirement Assessment for FY16 is broken down as follows:
NORMAL COST
$375,888.00
PAYMENT OF MIDDLESEX RETIREMENT ON JULY 1: $1,861,516
UNFUNDED ACCRUED LIABILITY $1,443,760.00
PAYMENT ON 2002 ERI
$56,525.00
The amount of $85,414 was applied to our unfunded accrued liability
PAYMENT ON 2013 ERI
$20,957.00
TOTAL RETIREMENT ASSESSMENT $1,897,130.00
4. The total cost of workers comp for FY15 was $185,216.63 after departmental charge backs and credits from various vendors.
5. $3,338,626 was contributed by the Commonwealth of Mass on behalf of the Town for employees enrolled in the Mass. Teachers Retirement System for FY15
6. The OPEB allocation is based upon the total health and life insurance for active employees and retirees.

37

OPEB
TOTAL
ALLOCATION
BENEFITS
$6,981.14
$71,058.52
$5,026.49
$37,281.69
$5,457.17
$54,486.84
$13,602.72
$99,758.28
$2,092.41
$26,009.46
$6,632.87
$49,581.10
$0.00
$65.74
$0.00
$7,446.66
$2,508.60
$25,912.58
$47,674.54
$650,028.47
$112,823.23
$487,609.77
$6,396.56
$54,431.20
$0.00
$3.40
$0.00
$39.93
$41,616.39
$328,222.36
$4,304.16
$39,750.16
$18,236.46
$170,413.65
$1,953.39
$29,154.26
$4,020.97
$47,302.25
$4,786.07
$42,669.40
$15.13
$11,533.72
$10,037.85
$86,426.45
$1,938.25
$22,695.47
$0.00
$296,104.41 $2,341,881.35

$380,390.97

$0.00

$1,500,000.00 $6,939,370.20

38

39

FREE CASH ANALYSIS

CERTIFIED
JULY 1
------------------------

TRANSFERS
------------------------

% OF
TAX LEVY
-------------------

2008

882,642

882,642

2.87%

2009

582,828

582,828

1.82%

2010

206,643

206,643

0.61%

2011

604,887

604,887

1.70%

2012

1,084,078

1,084,078

2.96%

2013

1,819,966

1,819,966

4.81%

2014

1,358,776

1,358,776

3.46%

2015

690,000

690,000

1.70%

2016

2,083,684

2,083,684

4.87%

2017

2,005,149

2,005,149

4.52%

AVERAGE

1,131,865

1,131,865

2.93%

FISCAL YEAR
-------------------------------

RESERVE FUND ANALYSIS
ALL CURRENT YEAR BALANCES AS OF MARCH 31

FISCAL YEAR
-------------------------------

ATM
------------------------

STM
------------------------

TRANSFERS
OUT
-------------------

BALANCE
JUNE 30
-----------------------

2008

274,373

274,373

0

2009

249,373

249,373

0

2010

235,000

133,944

101,056

2011

235,000

212,562

22,438

2012

204,175

26,818

177,357

2013

212,675

71,144

141,531

2014

212,675

179,361

33,314

2015

212,675

209,436

3,239

2016

212,675

106,061

106,614

2017

215,000

220,000

37,902

397,098

AVERAGE

226,362

220,000

150,097

98,265

40

OVERLAY ANALYSIS

TOTAL
OVERLAY
-----------------133,953

% TAX
LEVY
----------------0.44%

TOTAL
EXPENDED
------------------156,396

EXPENDED
% OF LEVY
-----------------0.51%

TRANFERS
TO RESERVE
--------------------

2009

374,616

1.17%

338,063

1.06%

36,553

2010

132,477

0.39%

217,865

0.65%

0

2011

274,999

0.77%

169,880

0.48%

0

105,119

2012

294,249

0.80%

148,892

0.41%

145,357

0

2013

269,083

0.71%

172,263

0.46%

96,820

0

2014

282,584

0.72%

168,424

0.43%

0

114,160

2015

285,468

0.70%

165,420

0.41%

120,048

2016

393,125

0.92%

224,573

0.53%

168,552

2017

421,353

0.95%

91,521

0.21%

329,832

Totals:

2,861,907

1,853,297

N/A

278,730

107,831

837,711

Averages:

286,191

185,330

0.51%

27,873

10,783

83,771

FISCAL YEAR
--------------------2008

N/A
0.76%

TRANSFERS
TO OVERLAY
-------------------22,443

0
85,388

WATER SURPLUS
BALANCE
JULY 1
-----------------1,432,979

REVENUES
----------------2,771,513

EXPENSES
------------------2,660,444

TRANFERS
------------------296,092

BALANCE
JUNE 30
-------------------1,247,956

% TAX
LEVY
-------------------4.05%

2009

1,247,956

2,692,550

2,065,893

-638,792

1,235,821

3.86%

2010

1,235,821

2,038,715

2,197,318

-89,439

987,779

2.94%

2011

987,779

2,216,497

2,125,333

-247,085

831,858

2.34%

2012

831,858

2,306,699

2,328,482

-724,119

85,956

0.23%

2013

85,956

2,470,414

2,460,905

101,666

197,131

0.52%

2014

197,131

2,672,306

2,170,957

-52,319

646,161

1.65%

2015

646,161

3,098,464

2,911,482

-23,574

809,569

2.00%

2016

809,569

4,237,471

2,569,602

2,477,438

5.79%

2017

2,477,438

3,410,132

3,147,353

2,740,217

6.17%

Averages:

995,265

2,791,476

2,463,777

FY
------------2008

-196,975

41

1,125,989

BALANCE
JUNE 30
-----------------0

0

CAPITAL EXPENDITURE FUND

BALANCE
JULY 1
---------------772,937

TRANSFERS
IN
---------------------0

CELL TOWERS
AND
INTEREST
----------------------63,403

TRANSFERS
OUT
--------------------0

BALANCE
JUNE 30
---------------836,340

2009

836,340

350,000

47,549

0

1,233,889

2010

1,233,889

0

47,736

350,059

931,566

2011

931,566

686,000

57,666

444,179

1,231,053

2012

1,231,053

350,000

71,537

350,000

1,302,590

2013

1,302,590

920,246

76,557

670,246

1,629,147

2014

1,629,147

1,017,193

98,163

1,158,293

1,586,210

2015

1,586,210

625,000

88,430

1,801,464

498,176

2016

498,176

1,187,878

60,854

537,037

1,209,871

2017

1,209,871

2,410,149

48,432

1,412,570

2,255,882

AVERAGE

1,123,178

754,647

66,033

672,385

1,271,472

FISCAL YEAR
---------------------2008

STABILIZATION FUND

BALANCE
JULY 1
---------------420,291

TRANSFERS
IN
---------------------0

INVESTMENT
GAIN/LOSS
----------------------17,725

TRANSFERS
OUT
--------------------52,735

BALANCE
JUNE 30
---------------385,281

2009

385,281

467,860

4,593

0

857,734

2010

857,734

0

4,436

73,988

788,182

2011

788,182

258,887

1,976

0

1,049,045

2012

1,049,045

1,111,687

7,796

0

2,168,528

2013

2,168,528

1,795,479

5,214

0

3,969,222

2014

3,969,222

1,891,974

23,291

3,295,479

2,589,007

2015

2,589,007

900,000

7,684

474,000

3,022,691

2016

3,022,691

1,833,684

27,016

2017

4,883,391

150,000

-16,763

200,000

4,816,628

AVERAGE

2,013,337

840,957

8,297

409,620

2,452,971

FISCAL YEAR
---------------------2008

4,883,391

The Finance Committee has a goal of getting the Stabilization Fund balance to 8.1% of General Fund Expenditures (GFE).

42

COMMUNITY PRESERVATION FUND

BALANCE
JULY 1
---------------1,846,106

TAX
REVENUES
---------------------387,576

STATE
REVENUE
----------------------333,121

EXPENSES
--------------------674,852

BALANCE
JUNE 30
---------------1,891,951

2009

1,891,951

367,085

233,157

266,096

2,226,097

2010

2,226,097

374,768

123,058

518,360

2,205,563

2011

2,205,563

387,562

100,227

279,002

2,414,350

2012

2,414,350

404,168

102,570

524,866

2,396,222

2013

2,396,222

409,463

105,345

277,805

2,633,225

2014

2,633,225

429,599

213,999

278,770

2,998,053

2015

2,998,053

453,325

132,448

925,927

2,657,899

2016

2,657,899

488,493

132,667

868,372

2,410,687

2017

2,410,687

375,912

98,843

456,263

2,429,179

AVERAGE

2,368,015

407,795

157,544

507,031

2,426,323

ADJUSTMENTS
---------------------

BALANCE
JUNE 30
---------------39,498

FISCAL YEAR
---------------------2008

GOLF COURSE CAPITAL ACCOUNT

BALANCE
JULY 1
---------------62,091

REVENUES
---------------------253,598

EXPENSES
----------------------276,191

2009

39,498

222,875

245,190

17,183

2010

17,183

187,802

204,509

476

2011

476

188,250

186,050

2,676

2012

2,676

190,025

190,503

2013

0

182,335

178,454

2014

3,881

192,133

178,308

-17,603

103

2015

103

193,161

166,719

-17,778

8,767

2016

8,767

233,186

164,229

35,556

113,280

2017

113,280

140,780

185,125

AVERAGE

24,796

198,415

197,528

FISCAL YEAR
---------------------2008

43

-2,198

0
3,881

68,935
-202

25,480

44

ZONING ARTICLES EXPLANATION

Article 19. This is a deletion of Section IV-A General Requirements (4) per recommendation of
Special Land Use Counsel. We missed this issue last year when we amended Section I-C PreExisting Non-Conforming Uses, Structures and Lots. The language is in conflict with what was
adopted and is more liberal than provisions of MGL. c.40A, the Zoning Act as associated case
law. The Zoning Board of Appeals has had a specific case dealing with this section recently and
supports this deletion.
Articles 20 -23. These four articles (see maps in appendices) propose a series of changes in
downtown, expanding both the Village Residential and Village Center Commercial zones. It
includes a series of changes, eliminating most split-zoned lots and adjusting boundaries to the
property lines rather than set distances from streets and landmarks. For over 150 residential
properties, the Village Residential district would better reflect the existing dense village-style
historic homes and eliminate some or most non-conformities related to both structures and lots.
The articles are being proposed as part of a series of land use recommendations in the Downtown
Corridor Plan being developed by the Planning Board with technical assistance from the
Metropolitan Area Planning Council (MAPC). The changes are meant to meet the community
goals to: 1. reinforce the downtown as attractive, historic center of the town, 2. enhance the
economic value of the area as a place to live, shop, visit and work, and 3. encourage individual
investment, preservation of historic structures, and diversity of housing stock.

45

Article 20
46

Article 21
47

48

Article 23

49
