1. May 19, 2020 Agenda
Documents:
20200519.PDF
1.I. May 19, 2020 Workbook
Documents:
05-19-2020 WORKBOOK.PDF

MIDDLETOWN CITY COUNCIL AGENDA
TUESDAY, May 19, 2020

CITY COUNCIL BUSINESS MEETING – 5:30 PM – COUNCIL CHAMBERS – LOWER LEVEL
MOMENT OF MEDITATION/PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE TO THE FLAG/ROLL CALL
CITIZEN COMMENTS Citizen comments will be read into the record at the time set in the agenda.
Comments can be submitted to Clerk of Council Amy Schenck via email prior to the meeting until
4:30 p.m. Tuesday, May 19, 2020 at amys@cityofmiddletown.org.
COUNCIL COMMENTS
CITY MANAGER REPORTS
CONSENT AGENDA. . . Matters listed under the Consent Agenda are considered to be routine and will
be enacted by one motion and one vote of consent. There will be no separate discussion of these
items. If discussion is desired, that item will be removed and considered separately.
(a) To approve the City Council minutes of January 7, January 21, February 4, 2020
(b) To Receive and File Board and Commission Minutes from:
Board of Health- February 11 and March 10, 2020
(c) Receive and File Oaths of Office for Chris Xeil Lyons and Evan Skrobot
(d) To confirm the following personnel appointments:
Ryun Rawlins to the position of Patrol Officer in the Department of Public Safety, Division of
Police; and of Geoff Getter to the position of part-time Community Security Officer in the
Department of Public Safety, Division of Police.

MOTION AGENDA
(a) To approve a contract with various vendors for nuisance abatement services of vacant/cityowned properties and private properties that have failed to abide by the City’s codified
ordinances within the City of Middletown. The bid has been divided into five groups with the
intent to award to separate contractors since it is unknown how many work orders the City will
have for nuisance abatement services in each group. The groups were created based on
number of work orders completed in 2019. The contract is for the remainder of 2020 with an
optional renewal of two additional one-year periods. It is recommended to award the contract
to the following contractors (approximate annual cost based on 2019 work order statistics
assuming all groups have equal work orders):
Group 1 – Possum Hollar Designs, LLC $55,379.50
Group 2 – Results By Carroll LLC
$61,518.00
Group 3 – Possum Hollar Designs, LLC $55,379.50
Group 4 – Cams Lawn Care
$62,614.17
Group 5 – Julie’s Lawncare
$62,614.17

It is the policy of the City of Middletown to make all public hearings an meetings accessible to all persons, in accordance with state and/or
federal laws. If you have a disability which requires accommodation in order for you to attend and/or participate in this meeting, please
contact us at 425-7831 at least forty-eight hours prior to the time of the meeting to advise us of the need for accommodation, and
reasonable efforts shall be made to provide the same. This agenda may be accessed on the City of Middletown website @
http://www.cityofmiddletown.org.

MIDDLETOWN CITY COUNCIL AGENDA
TUESDAY, May 19, 2020

LEGISLATION
1. Ordinance No. O2020-22, an ordinance establishing a procedure for and authorizing an
amendment of the contract with CBM Managed Services now known as Summit Food Service for
jail food service and declaring an emergency.
2. Ordinance No. O2020-23, an ordinance authorizing a collective bargaining agreement with the
Fraternal Order of Police, Ohio Labor Council (Corrections Officers) for the years January 1, 2020
through December 31, 2022 and declaring an emergency.
3. Resolution No. R2020-12, a resolution authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement
with the Federal Aviation Administration for CARES Act grant funding and declaring an emergency.
4. Resolution No. R2020-13, a resolution authorizing an amendment to a contract with the state
of Ohio, Department of Transportation for the extension of the Great Miami River Trail and
declaring an emergency.
5. Resolution No. R2020-14, a resolution to make adjustments to appropriations for current
expenses and other expenditures of the City of Middletown, Counties of Butler and Warren, State
of Ohio, for the period ending December 31, 2020. (Municipal Garage Fund) (First Reading)
6. Resolution No. R2020-15, a resolution authorizing an employment agreement with James M.
Palenick to serve as City Manager of the City of Middletown and declaring an emergency.

It is the policy of the City of Middletown to make all public hearings an meetings accessible to all persons, in accordance with state and/or
federal laws. If you have a disability which requires accommodation in order for you to attend and/or participate in this meeting, please
contact us at 425-7831 at least forty-eight hours prior to the time of the meeting to advise us of the need for accommodation, and
reasonable efforts shall be made to provide the same. This agenda may be accessed on the City of Middletown website @
http://www.cityofmiddletown.org.

MIDDLETOWN CITY COUNCIL AGENDA
TUESDAY, May 19, 2020

CITY COUNCIL BUSINESS MEETING – 5:30 PM – COUNCIL CHAMBERS – LOWER LEVEL
MOMENT OF MEDITATION/PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE TO THE FLAG/ROLL CALL
CITIZEN COMMENTS Citizen comments will be read into the record at the time set in the agenda.
Comments can be submitted to Clerk of Council Amy Schenck via email prior to the meeting until
4:30 p.m. Tuesday, May 19, 2020 at amys@cityofmiddletown.org.
COUNCIL COMMENTS
CITY MANAGER REPORTS
CONSENT AGENDA. . . Matters listed under the Consent Agenda are considered to be routine and will
be enacted by one motion and one vote of consent. There will be no separate discussion of these
items. If discussion is desired, that item will be removed and considered separately.
(a) To approve the City Council minutes of January 7, January 21, February 4, 2020
(b) To Receive and File Board and Commission Minutes from:
Board of Health- February 11 and March 10, 2020
(c) Receive and File Oaths of Office for Chris Xeil Lyons and Evan Skrobot
(d) To confirm the following personnel appointments:
Ryun Rawlins to the position of Patrol Officer in the Department of Public Safety, Division of
Police; and of Geoff Getter to the position of part-time Community Security Officer in the
Department of Public Safety, Division of Police.

MOTION AGENDA
(a) To approve a contract with various vendors for nuisance abatement services of vacant/cityowned properties and private properties that have failed to abide by the City’s codified
ordinances within the City of Middletown. The bid has been divided into five groups with the
intent to award to separate contractors since it is unknown how many work orders the City will
have for nuisance abatement services in each group. The groups were created based on
number of work orders completed in 2019. The contract is for the remainder of 2020 with an
optional renewal of two additional one-year periods. It is recommended to award the contract
to the following contractors (approximate annual cost based on 2019 work order statistics
assuming all groups have equal work orders):
Group 1 – Possum Hollar Designs, LLC $55,379.50
Group 2 – Results By Carroll LLC
$61,518.00
Group 3 – Possum Hollar Designs, LLC $55,379.50
Group 4 – Cams Lawn Care
$62,614.17
Group 5 – Julie’s Lawncare
$62,614.17

It is the policy of the City of Middletown to make all public hearings an meetings accessible to all persons, in accordance with state and/or
federal laws. If you have a disability which requires accommodation in order for you to attend and/or participate in this meeting, please
contact us at 425-7831 at least forty-eight hours prior to the time of the meeting to advise us of the need for accommodation, and
reasonable efforts shall be made to provide the same. This agenda may be accessed on the City of Middletown website @
http://www.cityofmiddletown.org.

MIDDLETOWN CITY COUNCIL AGENDA
TUESDAY, May 19, 2020

LEGISLATION
1. Ordinance No. O2020-22, an ordinance establishing a procedure for and authorizing an
amendment of the contract with CBM Managed Services now known as Summit Food Service for
jail food service and declaring an emergency.
2. Ordinance No. O2020-23, an ordinance authorizing a collective bargaining agreement with the
Fraternal Order of Police, Ohio Labor Council (Corrections Officers) for the years January 1, 2020
through December 31, 2022 and declaring an emergency.
3. Resolution No. R2020-12, a resolution authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement
with the Federal Aviation Administration for CARES Act grant funding and declaring an emergency.
4. Resolution No. R2020-13, a resolution authorizing an amendment to a contract with the state
of Ohio, Department of Transportation for the extension of the Great Miami River Trail and
declaring an emergency.
5. Resolution No. R2020-14, a resolution to make adjustments to appropriations for current
expenses and other expenditures of the City of Middletown, Counties of Butler and Warren, State
of Ohio, for the period ending December 31, 2020. (Municipal Garage Fund) (First Reading)
6. Resolution No. R2020-15, a resolution authorizing an employment agreement with James M.
Palenick to serve as City Manager of the City of Middletown and declaring an emergency.

It is the policy of the City of Middletown to make all public hearings an meetings accessible to all persons, in accordance with state and/or
federal laws. If you have a disability which requires accommodation in order for you to attend and/or participate in this meeting, please
contact us at 425-7831 at least forty-eight hours prior to the time of the meeting to advise us of the need for accommodation, and
reasonable efforts shall be made to provide the same. This agenda may be accessed on the City of Middletown website @
http://www.cityofmiddletown.org.

CITIZEN
COMMENTS

COUNCIL
COMMENTS

CITY MANAGER
REPORTS

CONSENT
AGENDA

MIDDLETOWN, OHIO

January 7, 2020

At 5:30 p.m., Mayor Condrey called the City Council meeting to order in Council Chambers,
Lower Level of the City Building.
Mayor Condrey provided a brief history about the gavel.
ROLL CALL

City Council Members present: A. Vitori, M. Nenni, T. Moon, J. Mulligan, N. Condrey.

CITIZEN COMMENTS
Cynda Kash

Cynda Kash, 1325 First Avenue, spoke in favor of the Certified Local Government. She
stated that she has spent more than 10 years in historic preservation and is a proponent
of saving our historic buildings. This presents a good opportunity for growth and
development in Middletown because property owners can apply for historic tax credits.
She stated that 1/3 of landfills are filled with old buildings.

Detective Wargo

On behalf of the Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 36, Detective Jason Wargo congratulated
Mayor Condrey, Councilmember Nenni, and Councilmember Moon on their being elected
to serve Middletown and congratulated soon to be Chief Dave Birk. He stated that the
department was looking forward to working together with everyone.

Dora Bronston

Dora Bronston, 4817 Earl Avenue, spoke about Middletown being a Purple Heart City. Her
husband, Lafayette Bronston is a decorated Marine and also a Purple Heart Recipient.
She stated that Ohio is the 4th largest state populated by veterans and discussed the
suicide statistics for veterans due to lack of help for their physical, mental and emotional
needs. Veterans with traumatic brain injury are 60% more likely to develop dementia.
Many veterans are homeless and do not qualify for financial and health benefits. Mrs.
Bronston stated that these are public health issues and that she is seeking more support
for veterans in our community. She stated that when she thinks of the color purple, she
thinks of blue and red. Although you ran non-partisan, we are both democrats and
republicans, blue and red and together, we make purple to complete our tasks. We are
not fighting against one another, but fighting for one another. She is currently working to
address the home health care needs of veterans. As she left the podium, she declared,
“Semper Fi.”

CITY MANAGER REPORT

Acting City Manager Cohen thanked the City’s first responders that worked tirelessly at
the scene and expressed her appreciation for the help from surrounding communities at
the former Middletown Paperboard facility that caught fire on New Year’s Day. The large
fire was reported at 6:40 a.m. on January 1. More than 100 firefighters at a time battled
the blaze. Police arrested a man who was living in the building when a fire he started
spread to his bedding. She stated that Vickers Demolition estimated the cost to assist
firefighters with debris removal at $100,000, but Ms. Cohen added the City has not received the final bill. The demolition was necessary because the building was too unstable
for firefighters to get inside to put the fire out. Early on, there were concerns that a search
and rescue was necessary for human remains. Thankfully that turned out to be untrue
and no one was injured or killed in the fire. This property was owned by B. P. Logan Corporation but has been abandoned for years. Due to unpaid taxes, the property was foreclosed on by the Butler County Treasurer during 2018-2019. The property was offered at
Sheriff’s sale twice but no suitable buyers were found. The property was forfeited to the
state of Ohio in December 2019. There is a grey area because the tax records have not
been updated to show that the property was transferred to the state. There will be more
discussion about who was the property owner at the time of the fire. The City will be working to get the final bills for this fire and seeking legal remedy to recover any and all of the
costs incurred. She discussed applying for grant money to get the environmental remediation completed to clean up this site. She acknowledged that the site needs to be cleaned
up but that it will likely be a long process.

Middletown Paperboard
Fire

CONSENT AGENDA

Receive and File Board and Commission minutes:
Board of Zoning Appeals- June 5, 2019
Historic Commission- July 18, 2019
Planning Commission- August 14 & September 11, 2019
Confirm the personnel appointments of:
Adam Grindstaff to the position of Patrol Officer in the Department of Public Safety,
Division of Police; and
Erin Caito to the position of Police Records Clerk in the Department of Public
Safety, Division of Police.
Confirm the exceptional appointments of:
Andreas Eddy to the position of Process Control Supervisor in the Department of
Public Works & Utilities, Division of Water Treatment; and
Griffin Steffen to the position of Water Reclamation Operator in the Department
of Public Works & Utilities, Division of Water Reclamation Facility.
Receive and file Oaths of Office for Councilmembers Talbott Moon and Monica Nenni
and Mayor Nicole Condrey.

Receive and file a maintenance bond submitted by Sawyers Mill Project I, LLC guaranteeing public improvements constructed as part of Sawyers Mill Section 2 Subdivision.

PINNING CEREMONY
FOR CHIEF BIRK

COUNCIL COMMENTS
Ms. Nenni

Ms. Nenni moved to approve the issues and actions listed on the Consent Agenda. Mr.
Mulligan seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms.
Condrey, Ms. Vitori.
Ms. Cohen called David Birk to the podium and welcomed him as the Chief of Police. She
stated that he earned a bachelor’s degree in criminal justice and urban affairs from
Wright State University, graduated from the Criminal Justice Training Academy at Sinclair
Community College and graduated with honors from the Southern Police Institute at the
University of Louisville. He was hired as a Patrol Officer in 1997 and moved up the ranks
as a Field Training Officer, Special Operations Detective, Sergeant, Lieutenant and most
recently as Major and Deputy Chief. He has proven himself to be dedicated leader in the
department and in the community. He has improved efficiency, implemented cost saving
measures and applied for numerous grants to help the department. Ms. Cohen stated
that she was positive that the Department was heading in the right direction under Chief
Birk’s leadership. She welcomed his family to the podium for the Pinning Ceremony.
Chief Birk received a standing ovation from all of those in attendance at the meeting. He
thanked Council for the opportunity and thanked his wife and family for their support. He
thanked the former Chiefs in attendance for the opportunities that they provided to him
throughout his career and expressed his appreciation to his staff for their hard work and
dedication and their support for the numerous community events. He thanked everyone
for coming out and showing their support for him and the department. He stated that the
possibilities to shape the culture and the future of Middletown were wide open. Chief
Birk quoted hockey coach Herb Brooks “Great moments are born from great opportunity”
and that's what we have here in Middletown.
Ms. Nenni congratulated Chief Birk and thanked the citizens who came forward to make
comments.

Mr. Mulligan

Mr. Mulligan wished everyone a Happy New Year, welcomed the new Mayor and member
of Council, and congratulated Chief Birk. He commented that there is a lot of work to do
but that Middletown has an opportunity to grow as a city. He commended the great work
of the City’s first responders and stated that the fire highlighted the need to address the
abandoned commercial buildings in Middletown.

Ms. Vitori

Ms. Vitori congratulated Chief Birk and thanked everyone for their comments. She
welcomed the new Mayor and Councilmembers and remarked that at 45, she was the
oldest person on City Council. She stated that she is looking forward to working with
everyone. She agreed with Mr. Mulligan that the City needs to address the abandoned
commercial buildings in Middletown.

Mr. Moon

Mr. Moon congratulated and welcomed Mayor Condrey, Councilmember Nenni and Chief
Birk. He stated that with the outpouring of support demonstrated tonight that Chief Birk
will be very successful. He discussed House Bill 252 that is exploring state funding for
abandoned commercial buildings. He thanked the Middletown Division of Fire for their
great work and dedication and expressed his appreciation to the surrounding
communities that supplied a mutual aid response to the fire.

Ms. Condrey

Ms. Condrey congratulated Chief Birk on his promotion and thanked Chief Lolli and the
Fire Department for their hard work and dedication to the safety of the Middletown
community. She thanked everyone for the warm welcome that she has received since
becoming Mayor.

Ord. No. O2019-102
Amend Grounds
Maintenance Contracts

Ordinance No. O2019-102, an ordinance establishing a procedure for and authorizing
amendments to contracts for grounds maintenance for 2020 was read for the second
time.
Ms. Vitori moved to approve Ordinance No. O2019-102, an ordinance establishing a procedure for and authorizing amendments to contracts for grounds maintenance for 2020.
Mr. Mulligan seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms.
Nenni, Ms. Vitori.

Ord. No. O2019-103
Deny Zone Change
1407 Winona Drive

Ordinance No. O2019-103, an ordinance denying a request to change the zoning classification for one parcel located at 1407 Winona Drive from R-3 (Medium Density Residential District) to B-2 (Community Business District) was read for the second time.
Mr. Moon commented that he wanted to hear from property owners, he hates to say no
to a business development.

Ms. Vitori moved to approve Ordinance No. O2019-103, an ordinance denying a request
to change the zoning classification for one parcel located at 1407 Winona Drive from R3 (Medium Density Residential District) to B-2 (Community Business District). Mr. Mulligan seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms. Vitori, Ms. Nenni,
Mr. Moon.
Ord. No. 2019-104
Amend Development
Code

Ordinance No. O2019-104, an ordinance amending various sections the Middletown
Development Code of the Middletown Codified Ordinances was read for the second time.
Ms. Vitori moved to approve Ordinance No. O2019-104, an ordinance amending various
sections the Middletown Development Code of the Middletown Codified Ordinances. Mr.
Mulligan seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms. Condrey, Ms. Vitori, Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon,
Mr. Mulligan.

Ord. No. O2020-01
Extend Contract for
Gateway Maintenance

Ordinance No. O2020-01, an ordinance establishing a procedure for and authorizing the
extension of a contract with T.R. Gear Landscaping, Inc. for gateway maintenance was
read for the first time.

Ord. No. O2020-02
Parks Master Plan
Agreement

Ordinance No. O2020-02, an ordinance authorizing an agreement with V3 Companies to
develop a Parks Master Plan was read for the first time.

EXECUTIVE SESSION

At 6:05 p.m. Mr. Mulligan moved to adjourn to executive session under the authority of
O.R.C. 121.22 (G) (1) To consider the appointment, employment, dismissal, discipline,
promotion, demotion, or compensation of a public employee or official. Mr. Moon
seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms. Vitori, Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms.
Condrey.
At 6:47 p.m. Mr. Moon moved to return to regular session. Mr. Mulligan seconded.
Motion carried. Ayes: Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms. Vitori.

Board & Commission
Appointments

Ms. Vitori moved to approve the following Board and Commission appointments:
Hamilton-Middletown Task Force –Nicole Condrey, Mayor; Joseph Mulligan, Vice-Mayor
Airport Commission – Tal Moon
Architectural Review Board- Monica Nenni
Board of Health – Nicole Condrey
Board of Library Trustees – Ami Vitori
City Planning Commission – Joseph Mulligan (Alternate: Monica Nenni)
Convention and Visitors Bureau – Ami Vitori
Emergency Management Advisory Council – Nicole Condrey
Keep Middletown Beautiful – Monica Nenni
Master Plan Implementation Committee – Joseph Mulligan (Alternate: Ami Vitori)
Middletown Cemetery Board – Nicole Condrey
Middletown Moving Forward – Nicole Condrey, Tal Moon (Alternate: Joseph Mulligan)
OKI Regional Council of Governments – Talbott Moon (Alternate: Joseph Mulligan)
Park Board – Ami Vitori
SELF Board – Monica Nenni
Tax Incentive Review Committee – Nicole Condrey
Warren County Municipal League Representative- Talbott Moon
Mr. Mulligan seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms.
Nenni, Ms. Vitori.

ADJOURNMENT

At 6:49 p.m., the meeting was declared adjourned until January 21, 2020 at 5:30 p.m.
in Council Chambers.
______________________________
Nicole Condrey, Mayor
Attest: ___________________________

MIDDLETOWN, OHIO

January 21, 2020

At 5:30 p.m., Mayor Condrey called the City Council meeting to order in Council Chambers,
Lower Level of the City Building.
ROLL CALL

City Council Members present: A. Vitori, M. Nenni, T. Moon, J. Mulligan, N. Condrey.

PUBLIC HEARING:
Oakland Historic District

The Middletown Historic Commission is recommending approval to the Middletown City
Council the historic district designation of the Oakland Historic District that is generally
bounded by First Avenue to the North, Verity Parkway to the West, the Pioneer Cemetery
property, Cohen Brothers Inc. properties, and the west-side of Lamneck Street to the East,
and Calumet Avenue to the South. The City Council will review and have final decision
regarding the proposed Oakland Historic District.

Dan Barton

City Manager Cohen invited Dan Barton to the podium. Mr. Barton has been working with
the City of Middletown on the revitalization of the Oakland neighborhood since 2018. Mr.
Barton stated that the Oakland neighborhood is a great historic neighborhood that has
fallen on hard times. He explained that southwest Ohio has been successful in rebuilding
confidence in struggling neighborhoods by using a strategy of a combination of incentives.
He explained that confidence is essential; confidence to buy a house in the neighborhood
and confidence to invest money into the restoration of your house. He described the Oakland Historic Boundary:
A: Bound on the North by 1st Avenue, (Properties on both sides)
B: Bound on the West by Verity Parkway (Former Miami Erie Canal site)
C: Bound on the East by Pioneer Cemetery, Cohen Works Scrap Yard, and west-side of
Lamneck Street
D: Bound on the South by Calumet (Properties on both sides)

He explained that the incentives for the Oakland Neighborhood would come from a selfreplenishing TIF-Development Fund over a fifteen year period. New amenities in the Oakland neighborhood will include a beautiful new park, improved streetscapes, and improved lighting. He described the process of the historic designation. Once approved by

City Council, the historic district moves through the process to be recognized by the National Register of Historic Places; once approved, this will allow homeowners to apply for
historic tax credits. These tax credits are a powerful tool for homeowners and investors.
Banks are much more willing to invest in properties that are in historic districts. In historic
districts the property values increase because the property comps are matched to other
historic districts in the City. The strength of the other historic districts in the City will build
the strength of the Oakland Historic District.
Mayor Condrey opened the public hearing at 5:44 p.m. and asked for those who wished
to speak in favor of the historic district designation of the Oakland Historic District.
Debbie Coleman

Debbie Coleman, 1514 Forrest Avenue stated that she was in favor of the historic district
designation of the Oakland Historic District.

Jim Johnson

Jim Johnson stated that he owns rental properties in the Oakland neighborhood. He asked
what happens when a home goes from a valuation of $40,000 to $80,000? The people
who rent there cannot afford that kind of increase. He has been a real estate appraiser
for a number of years. He stated that quality of the homes in the Oakland neighborhood
don’t really compare to the homes on South Main Street. He stated that the foundations
of some of the Oakland neighborhood homes aren’t worth money putting into. Many of
the homes and lots in the Oakland neighborhood are very small. He said that if you cut it
off at Woodlawn, it would make more sense to him. He said that the area from Calumet
to 14th Avenue is a trashy neighborhood. He is not in favor of the historic district
designation of the Oakland Historic District.

Celeste Didlick Davis

Celeste Didlick Davis, 505 Garfield Street, stated that she was in favor of the historic
district designation of the Oakland Historic District. She stated that the City needs to make
a stronger effort to be more inclusive and bring people in from the community to develop
the homeowners’ association rules.

Wanda Glover

Wanda Glover, 1106 Calumet Avenue, stated that Calumet has always had large homes
and that she wouldn’t call it a trashy area. She stated that she was in favor of the historic
district designation of the Oakland Historic District but that she agreed that the City needs
to make a stronger effort to be more inclusive and bring people in from the community to
develop the homeowners’ association rules. She is looking forward to the improvements
to the neighborhood.

Anthony Thomas

Anthony Thomas, 533 Garfield Street, stated that he has lived there for 18 years and sits
on the porch in the morning and afternoon and watches what goes on in the neighborhood.
He stated that it is a good neighborhood, despite some of the riff-raff that comes and
goes. He plans on staying on Garfield Street as long as God gives him breath. He is in
favor of the historic district designation of the Oakland Historic District and the
improvements.

Dan Tracy

Dan Tracy, 4921 Oaks Court, stated that he has been an investor in properties in
Middletown for 32 years. He stated that he is in favor of the historic district designation
of the Oakland Historic District but he is not in favor of the parameters, they are too broad
and too long. He stated that you can’t take what’s on Main Street, which is special to
Middletown, and put it in the Oakland neighborhood, unless the neighborhood is leveled.
He stated that with the rising property values the tenants and the homeowners in the
Oakland neighborhood will be pushed out. He stated that the rules of the historic district
on Main Street are very strict.
Mayor Condrey asked for those who wished to speak in opposition to the historic district
designation of the Oakland Historic District; hearing none, the public hearing was closed
at 5:57 p.m.

CITIZEN COMMENTS
Dan Tracy

Dan Tracy, 4921 Oaks Court, asked who performed the appraisals on the school
properties and who paid for the appraisals? Why would the City want to buy a property if
there are investors? Let the investors do the investing, the City doesn’t need to get back
into the real estate business. He stated that there needs to be more transparency in the
City, a hand full of people are paid big dollars to decide what to do with these properties.
He suggested forming committees to advise the City Council before something is brought
to a vote. He stated all of the candidates of the recent election talked about improving the
streets in Middletown. He said that before the City pays $600,000 for these properties
from the school, it ought to put the $600,000 into improving the streets in Middletown.
He said if the City has a buyer for these properties then let the buyer purchase from the
school.

Kent Keller II

Kent Keller II, 2040 Wellington Road, commented on discussed Ordinance No. O2020-01,
an ordinance establishing a procedure for and authorizing the extension of a contract with
T.R. Gear Landscaping, Inc. for gateway maintenance. He stated that the $65,000
contract with T.R. Gear of Fairfield, Ohio was approved in 2017 and has been extended

twice before. This would extend it for the third time. He stated that during the election
people campaigned that they would keep money in Middletown, and make decisions in
the best interest of the citizens and businesses of Middletown. He asked why the City
would not allow a bid from a Middletown based landscaper to perform the gateway
maintenance. He stated that there are several reputable landscaping companies in
Middletown. He asked Council not to approve the contract extension with T.R. Gear and to
open the job up for bids. He suggested giving preference to Middletown businesses.
CITY MANAGER REPORT

Acting City Manager Cohen thanked everyone for coming out to speak about the Oakland
Historic District and stated that the Oakland revitalization will start to improve the most
disinvested neighborhood in the City. There will be a neighborhood association meeting
at 6:30 p.m. at St. Johns Church on January 30, 2020, everyone is encouraged to attend.

CONSENT AGENDA

Receive and File Board and Commission minutes:
Cemetery Board - October 16, 2019
Park Board - December 16, 2019
Receive and File Oaths of Office for: Laura Brown, Heather Deaton, Daniel Dickten, Gary
Ogden, Jesse Schulte, Sarah Thobe, and Griffin Steffen.
Confirm the personnel appointment of Cody Robertson to the position of Maintenance
Worker in the Department of Public Works and Utilities, Street Maintenance Division.
To authorize a professional services agreement with Jacobs Engineering Group, Inc. for
development of design drawings and specifications to add a pumping system to
a new production well (Well 20) in the City’s wellfield.

COUNCIL COMMENTS
Ms. Nenni

Mr. Mulligan moved to approve the issues and actions listed on the Consent Agenda. Ms.
Vitori seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey,
Ms. Vitori.
Ms. Nenni thanked everyone for coming out and speaking tonight. She thanked Mr.
Barton and Mr. Mayzum for all of the work they have done for the City to establish the
Oakland Historic District. She stated that at the end of the last meeting she was
appointed to serve on the SELF Board (Supports to Low Income Families). SELF has some
great programs which may benefit the homeowners in the Oakland neighborhood. As a
member of the Keep Middletown Beautiful Board she announced that they will be having
an Earth Day cleanup on April 18th from 8 a.m. until noon at the MetroParks River Center.

Mr. Moon

Mr. Moon thanked Mr. Barton and Mr. Mayzum for all of the work they have done for the
City. He encouraged homeowners in the Oakland neighborhood to stay engaged and to
help share the future of the neighborhood. He congratulated and thanked the Ministerial
Alliance for the Martin Luther King, Jr. Ecumenical Service; Steve Hightower was the main
speaker and he did an incredible job.

Ms. Vitori

Ms. Vitori thanked Mr. Barton and Mr. Mayzum for all of the creative and collaborative
work they have done on the Oakland Historic District. She acknowledged that change
can bring fear and encouraged everyone to communicate and work together. She stated
that this project could be one of the most important the City does over the next decade.

Mr. Mulligan

Mr. Mulligan stated that the Oakland neighborhood has struggled for decades and if we
want to see positive change, we need to try a different method. These methods have
proven to be successful in Dayton and Cincinnati. He thanked the Ministerial Alliance for
the Martin Luther King, Jr. events held to celebrate the spirit of Martin Luther King, Jr.

Ms. Condrey

Ms. Condrey stated that she was working with Ms. Quinlivan on improving
communications. She has established a Mayor Nicole Condrey Facebook page and
encouraged people to reach out to her.

Waive Charter

Mr. Mulligan moved to suspend the Charter provision that requires reading on two
separate days and to declare Ordinance No. O2020-03 an emergency measure to be
read one time only. Mr. Moon seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan,
Ms. Condrey, Ms. Nenni, Ms. Vitori.

Ord. No. O2020-01
Extend Contract for
Gateway Maintenance

Ordinance No. O2020-01, an ordinance establishing a procedure for and authorizing the
extension of a contract with T.R. Gear Landscaping, Inc. for gateway maintenance was
read for the second time.
Mr. Moon thanked Mr. Keller for his earlier comments and stated that although he was
in favor of this legislation, he was also supportive of going out for bids. He stated that a
Middletown business preference policy has also been discussed in the past but the execution is difficult. He is in support of using local contractors whenever possible. Ms. Cohen stated that in 2017 there were three bidders, none from Middletown. This extension
was recommended because the company has done a good job in the past and offered
2019 pricing. She will pass along Council’s desire to use local contractors to City staff.

Mayor Condrey stated that she would like to see contracts opened for bidders, unless
there is an exceptional reason to continue with a contractor.
Mr. Mulligan moved to approve Ordinance No. O2020-01, an ordinance establishing a
procedure for and authorizing the extension of a contract with T.R. Gear Landscaping,
Inc. for gateway maintenance. Mr. Moon seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Mr. Mulligan,
Ms. Vitori, Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon. Nays: Ms. Condrey.
Ord. No. O2020-02
Parks Master Plan
Agreement

Ordinance No. O2020-02, an ordinance authorizing an agreement with V3 Companies to
develop a Parks Master Plan was read for the second time.

Ord. No. O2020-03
Supplemental Agreement
Frost Brown Todd

Ordinance No. O2020-03, an ordinance authorizing a supplemental agreement with
Frost Brown Todd, LLC for legal services and declaring an emergency was read.

Mr. Mulligan moved to approve Ordinance No. O2020-02, an ordinance authorizing an
agreement with V3 Companies to develop a Parks Master Plan. Ms. Vitori seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms. Condrey, Ms. Vitori, Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan.

Mr. Mulligan moved to approve Ordinance No. O2020-03, an ordinance authorizing a
supplemental agreement with Frost Brown Todd, LLC for legal services and declaring an
emergency. Ms. Vitori seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms. Vitori, Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon,
Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey.

Ord. No. O2020-04
Phase I Lakeside
Redirection Project

Ordinance No. O2020-04, an ordinance establishing a procedure for and authorizing a
contract with Ulliman Schutte, LLC for progressive design-build procurement for Phase 1
of the Lakeside Redirection Project and declaring an emergency was read with no action
requested until February 4, 2020.

Res. No. R2020-01
Purchase Property from
Middletown City Schools

Resolution No. R2020-01, a resolution authorizing the purchase of real property from
the Board of Education of the Middletown City School District and declaring an emergency was read with no action requested until February 4, 2020.

Ord. No. O2020-05
Designating Properties in
Oakland Historic District

Ordinance No. O2020-05, an ordinance designating properties located in an area generally bounded by First Avenue to the North, Verity Parkway to the West, the Pioneer
Cemetery property, Cohen Brothers, Inc. and the west-side of Lamneck Street to the East
and Calumet Avenue to the South as the Oakland Historic District was read for the first
time.

Ord. No. O2020-06
Repeal Ord. No. O2019-94
315 Garfield Street

Ordinance No. O2020-06, an ordinance repealing Ordinance No. O2019-94, in part, as
it relates to the transfer of 315 Garfield Street to the Butler County Land Reutilization
Corporation was read for the first time.
Mayor Condrey added that five consultants submitted proposals for the Parks Master
Plan. Staff conducted interviews with the top three proposers based on qualifications
and recommended proceeding with V3 Companies. The proposal includes an evaluation
of the community’s desire for a new recreation center and/or aquatic center.

EXECUTIVE SESSION

At 6:25 p.m. Mr. Mulligan moved to adjourn to executive session under the authority of
O.R.C. 121.22 (G) (1) To consider the appointment, employment, dismissal, discipline,
promotion, demotion, or compensation of a public employee or official; and under the
authority of O.R.C. 121.22 (G) (8) To consider confidential information related to the marketing plans, specific business strategy, production techniques, trade secrets, or personal financial statements of an applicant for economic development assistance, or to
negotiations with other political subdivisions respecting requests for economic development assistance, provided that both of the following conditions apply:
(1) The information is directly related to a request for economic development assistance
that is to be provided or administered under any provision of Chapter 715., 725., 1724.,
or 1728. or sections 701.07, 3735.67 to 3735.70, 5709.40 to 5709.43, 5709.61 to
5709.69, 5709.73 to 5709.75, or 5709.77 to 5709.81 of the Revised Code, or that
involves public infrastructure improvements or the extension of utility services that are
directly related to an economic development project.
(2) A unanimous quorum of the public body determines, by a roll call vote, that the
executive session is necessary to protect the interests of the applicant or the possible
investment or expenditure of public funds to be made in connection with the economic
development project. Mr. Moon seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon,
Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms. Vitori.

ADJOURNMENT

At 6:49 p.m., the meeting was declared adjourned until the Council Retreat on February
1, 2020 at 9:00 a.m. at Verity Lodge at Miami University.

Attest: ___________________________

______________________________
Nicole Condrey, Mayor

MIDDLETOWN, OHIO

February 4, 2020

At 5:30 p.m., Mayor Condrey called the City Council meeting to order in Council Chambers,
Lower Level of the City Building.
ROLL CALL

City Council Members present: A. Vitori, M. Nenni, T. Moon, J. Mulligan, N. Condrey.
Mayor Condrey shared an old Cherokee parable. One evening, an elderly Cherokee brave
told his grandson about a battle that goes on inside people. He said "My son, the battle is
between two 'wolves' inside us all. One is evil. It is anger, envy, jealousy, sorrow, regret,
greed, arrogance, self-pity, guilt, resentment, inferiority, lies, false pride, superiority, and
ego. The other is good. It is joy, peace, love, hope, serenity, humility, kindness,
benevolence, empathy, generosity, truth, compassion and faith. The same fight is going
on inside you too, and every other person.” The grandson thought about it for a minute
and then asked his grandfather, "Which wolf wins?" The old Cherokee simply replied, "The
one that you feed."

EXECUTIVE SESSION

At 5:32 p.m. Mr. Mulligan moved to adjourn to executive session under the authority of
O.R.C. 121.22 (G) (1) To consider the appointment, employment, dismissal, discipline,
promotion, demotion, or compensation of a public employee or official. Ms. Vitori seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms. Vitori.
At 6:09 p.m. Mr. Mulligan moved to return to regular session. Ms. Vitori seconded. Motion
carried. Ayes: Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms. Nenni, Ms. Vitori.

CITIZEN COMMENTS
Tim Henry

Tim Henry, 3901 Long Lane, stated that he owns rental property at 3108 Illinois and
complained that that the neighboring property looks like a junkyard. He provided photos
on his phone. He said that the police have enacted many fines but the man has defaulted
several times. Ms. Cohen will follow up with Mr. Henry later this week.

Dan Tracy

Dan Tracy, 4921 Oaks Court, spoke against the land deal with the school at the last City
Council meeting. The Journal wrote an article about the issue and for two days after that
article ran in the newspaper his phone rang off the hook. He asked City Council to listen
to the people that put them in office. He urged City Council not to get in a big hurry and to
table the issue. He encouraged City Council to do this deal right and do our own thing.

CITY MANAGER REPORT

Acting City Manager Cohen provided an update on the Paperboard site. The City recently
received title to the property. She stated that very rough estimates for the remaining demolition of this building are between $1.5 and $2 million. The project will need to be broken
into phases and the City will seek grants and other funding to offset the cost. She and
Mayor Condrey met with State Representative Keller and discussed House Bill 252 which
could provide $50 million to state land banks to provide grants to communities to demolish blighted commercial properties over the next two fiscal years. Representative Keller
also suggested applying for capital grant funds from the unused state budget; Ms. Cohen
applied for those funds immediately. There will need to be brownfield remediation at this
site and she will apply for state grants later this week. She discussed the need for fence
around the property to help keep people out of the building. She stated that it is estimated
that it will take 1,900 linear feet of 6 foot fencing to secure the property. She wasn’t sure
how long the fencing would be needed. A rough estimate of the cost to purchase the fencing is approximately $37,500, the fence may be reused after it is no longer needed at this
site. The cost to rent the fence depends on how long it will be needed. She asked Council
to provide feedback on their preferences later this week.

Paperboard Site

Mayor Condrey asked for some rental scenarios such as the cost to install and maintain
for 1 year and the cost to install and maintain for 3 years. She asked for a break even
comparison between renting and purchasing the fence.
Mr. Moon commented that the amount of fence would not be around the entire property.
Ms. Cohen stated that the fence would tie into the existing building where possible.
Ms. Nenni asked if the City has purchased fence like this before; Ms. Cohen responded
not to her knowledge. Ms. Cohen stated that the fence could potentially be reused after
this project was complete.
Economic Development
Director Search

Ms. Cohen provided an update on the new Economic Development Director search. Thirtysix candidates applied. Staff is reviewing resumes and hopes to whittle down the list. The
City hopes to have a candidate ready for Council’s confirmation in the next few weeks.

CDBG

Ms. Cohen explained that each year, the City of Middletown receives an allocation of Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds from the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD). The City operates its CDBG program based on federal regulations informing the CDBG program as well as local input from residents, City staff and
elected officials. The City of Middletown provides CDBG funds to community organizations

Consolidated Plan

CONSENT AGENDA

PINNING CEREMONY
DEPUTY CHIEF CRANK

COUNCIL COMMENTS
Ms. Nenni

and city departments for a wide range of activities in accordance with the City’s Consolidated Plan. She explained that the Consolidated Plan (ConPlan) is developed by the City
every five years. The purpose of the ConPlan is to identify needs within the City, outline
objectives to address those needs, and serve as the basis for allocating funds between
program activities developed to meet those objectives. The Consolidated Plan is developed with citizen input, as outlined in the Citizen Participation Plan developed by the City
of Middletown and submitted to HUD for approval. The City Council adopts the ConPlan
by formal action and submits it to the Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) for approval. The ConPlan informs the annual action plans developed each year to
outline the City’s planned expenditure of CDBG funds. She requested work session to
discuss City Council’s priorities at 5 p.m. on March 3, 2020.
Receive and File the Board of Health minutes of December 10, 2019
Confirm the personnel appointment of appointment of:
Randi Newsom to the position of part-time Customer Service Lead in the Economic
Development Department, Airport Division; and
Jason Kershner, Justin Principato, Zachary Sharp, Joshua Lentz, Matthew Queen, and
Lincoln Weisman to the position of Firefighter-EMT in the Department of Public
Safety, Division of Fire; and
Nathan Morgan to the position of Corrections Officer in the Department of Public Safety,
Division of Police; and
Brandon Williams to the position of Maintenance Worker in the Department of Public
Works and Utilities, Street Maintenance Division; and
Kenneth Spears to the position of HVAC/Building Maintenance Technician in the
Department of Administrative Services, Building Maintenance Division; and
Ashley Schulte to the position of part-time Customer Service Lead in the Economic
Development Department, Airport Division; and
Steven Fugate to the position of part-time Line Service Lead in the Economic
Development Department, Airport Division.
Confirm the promotional appointment of Eric Crank to the position of Deputy Police Chief
in the Department of Public Safety, Division of Police.
Confirm the reappointment of Attorney David Kash to the Board of Zoning Appeals
Receive and File an Oath of Office for Erin Caito
Receive and File the final assessments for the 2019 Sidewalk, Curb & Gutter Program
Mr. Mulligan moved to approve the issues and actions listed on the Consent Agenda. Ms.
Vitori seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms. Vitori, Ms. Nenni,
Mr. Moon.
Ms. Cohen called Chief Birk to the podium. Chief Birk introduced Major Eric Crank, a 24year veteran of the department. Major Crank was promoted to sergeant in 2009 and has
served as a patrol supervisor and member of the Honor Guard. He is a veteran of the
U.S. Army and attended Eastern Michigan University. Crank is also a graduate of the
Southern Police Institute. Chief Birk stated that Major Crank stood out from the rest of
the five candidates during the panel discussion as he shared his vision for combining
code enforcement, traffic and community oriented policing into one unit that could have
a major impact on the Division of Police and the entire City. He welcomed Major Crank’s
family to the podium for the Pinning Ceremony.
Major Crank expressed his appreciation to the City, the department and his family.
Ms. Nenni congratulated Deputy Chief Crank on his promotion and thanked Ms. Cohen
and City staff for putting together the City Council Retreat. City Council discussed a
communication strategy, the new plans at the airport and heard Chief Birk’s plans for
Community Oriented Policing and other initiatives.

Mr. Moon

Mr. Moon congratulated Deputy Chief Crank on his promotion and thanked him for his
service to the City. He announced that on February 6th the Middle XL event is taking place
at Middletown High School and on February 13th the Kiwanis Club of Middletown is
hosting a Jim Breech speaker meet and greet event.

Ms. Vitori

Ms. Vitori expressed her appreciation for everyone’s time to put together and attend the
City Council Retreat; there was a great deal of information shared. She is looking forward
to joining a new county-wide homeless coalition that County Commissioner Carpenter is
starting. She encouraged people to get information via the City webpage or by phone or
email. She announced the First Friday downtown event of “I Love Middletown” is coming
up this Friday.

Mr. Mulligan

Mr. Mulligan congratulated Deputy Chief Crank and the others appointed to City positions.

Waive Charter

Mr. Mulligan moved to suspend the Charter provision that requires reading on two
separate days and to declare Ordinance Nos. O2020-04, O2020-07, O2020-08, O202009, O2020-10, and Resolution Nos. R2020-01, R2020-02, R2020-03 emergency

measures to be read one time only. Ms. Vitori seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms.
Condrey, Ms. Vitori, Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan.
Ord. No. O2020-04
Phase I Lakeside
Redirection Project

Ordinance No. O2020-04, an ordinance establishing a procedure for and authorizing a
contract with Ulliman Schutte, LLC for progressive design-build procurement for Phase 1
of the Lakeside Redirection Project and declaring an emergency was read.
Mr. Mulligan moved to approve Ordinance No. O2020-04, an ordinance establishing a
procedure for and authorizing a contract with Ulliman Schutte, LLC for progressive design-build procurement for Phase 1 of the Lakeside Redirection Project and declaring an
emergency. Mr. Moon seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms. Vitori, Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon,
Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey.

Res. No. R2020-01
Purchase Property from
Middletown City Schools

Resolution No. R2020-01, a resolution authorizing the purchase of real property from
the Board of Education of the Middletown City School District and declaring an emergency was read.
Mr. Mulligan thanked Mr. Tracy and others for their comments on this issue. He stated
that the City has been working with the Middletown City School District for months and
years on this project. The old Vail Middle School site has been identified as a strategic
property in the Oakland redevelopment. It is being sold to the City as a package, 4 properties in total. The City expects to be able to sell the property for development and to
recoup the taxpayer dollars in the future. The citizens will be made whole. He commented
that the since he has been on Council, the City has been judicious. He provided an example of the $200,000 - $300,000 invested in the properties acquired from the Perry
Thatcher Estate; the citizens have been made whole and a lot of good came from it. He
acknowledged that not every investment pans out. He stated that the risk is lower in this
instance because it is vacant land and not empty buildings. He felt that the purchase
was appropriate at this time.
Ms. Vitori stated that she would echo Mr. Mulligan’s comments. She stated that real
estate development is a responsibility of government. There are times when the City owning a strategic piece of land makes good economic sense and the development of that
property can become an economic engine and over time a significant source of income.
Mr. Moon commented that he also supports this legislation. These properties are in
neighborhoods that our housing study identified as in need of investment and are strategically located. He believes that this investment will pay dividends to the City.
Ms. Nenni echoed the comments of the other Council members and stated that it is an
important first step to take in the redevelopment of the Oakland neighborhood. She felt
that this investment would have a lasting positive effect on the City.
Mayor Condrey commented that she was all in on the concept of the Oakland Project but
that she was not comfortable because there were no separate appraisals for these properties. She stated that before the City spends more than a half a million dollars of taxpayer dollars, the City should have had the properties appraised. On the positive, one
Oneida property has a cell tower that generates $990 a month which should cover the
maintenance costs of all of the properties. She stated that there may be interest from
third parties to purchase some of the land that the City doesn’t really want. She requested an executive session to discuss potential buyers and end users of these properties. She stated that each of the appraisals list the development of industrial or multifamily as the highest and best use of the property; the appraisals also indicate that these
uses are not feasible at this time. She wanted the City to have its own appraisals of the
properties before it spends so much money.
Mr. Mulligan moved to approve Resolution No. R2020-01, a resolution authorizing the
purchase of real property from the Board of Education of the Middletown City School
District and declaring an emergency. Mr. Moon seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms.
Nenni, Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Vitori. Nays: Ms. Condrey.

Ord. No. O2020-06
Repeal Ord. No. O2019-94
315 Garfield Street

Ordinance No. O2020-06, an ordinance repealing Ordinance No. O2019-94, in part, as
it relates to the transfer of 315 Garfield Street to the Butler County Land Reutilization
Corporation was read for the second time.
Mr. Mulligan moved to approve Ordinance No. O2020-06, an ordinance repealing Ordinance No. O2019-94, in part, as it relates to the transfer of 315 Garfield Street to the
Butler County Land Reutilization Corporation. Ms. Vitori seconded. Motion carried. Ayes:
Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms. Nenni, Ms. Vitori.

Res. No. R2010-02
Advance Property Tax

Resolution No. R2020-02, a resolution requesting the Auditor of Butler County to advance to the Treasurer of the City of Middletown, Ohio, taxes assessed and collected for
and on behalf of the City of Middletown, Ohio and declaring an emergency was read.

Mr. Mulligan moved to approve Resolution No. R2020-02, a resolution requesting the
Auditor of Butler County to advance to the Treasurer of the City of Middletown, Ohio, taxes
assessed and collected for and on behalf of the City of Middletown, Ohio and declaring
an emergency. Mr. Moon seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms.
Vitori, Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon,
Res. No. R2020-03
Amend Appropriations

Resolution No. R2020-03, a resolution to make adjustments to appropriations for current expenses and other expenditures of the City of Middletown, Counties of Butler and
Warren, state of Ohio, for the period ending December 31, 2020 and declaring an emergency was read. (Community Development Act Escrow Fund & Community Development
Act 1974 Fund)
Mr. Mulligan moved to approve Resolution No. R2020-03, a resolution to make adjustments to appropriations for current expenses and other expenditures of the City of Middletown, Counties of Butler and Warren, state of Ohio, for the period ending December
31, 2020 and declaring an emergency. Mr. Moon seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Mr.
Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms. Nenni, Ms. Vitori.

Ord. No. O2020-07
Contract with Vickers
Demolition

Ordinance No. O2020-07, an ordinance establishing a procedure for and authorizing a
contract with Vickers Demolition for demolition of buildings at 300 South Verity Parkway
also known as the Middletown Paperboard site and declaring an emergency.
Ms. Cohen discussed the January 1st fire at 300 S. Verity Parkway, commonly known as
the Middleton Paperboard Site. The fire lasted over two days and decimated much of the
structural integrity of what was left on the otherwise abandoned factory site. In order to
safely put out the fire and allow emergency personnel to enter the site safely to confirm
there were no human lives in the building, the City needed to employ a demolition
professional to remove parts of the building. Vickers Demolition was contacted as a
contractor because they have the correct knowledge and ability and have done this type
of work previously. They agreed to perform demolition work to address the emergency
situation. Vickers initially estimated repair work to cost $100,000 and stayed true to that
estimate despite encountering additional problems at the scene. This demolition is
eligible for payment by CDBG funding.
Mr. Mulligan moved to approve Ordinance No. O2020-07, an ordinance establishing a
procedure for and authorizing a contract with Vickers Demolition for demolition of buildings at 300 South Verity Parkway also known as the Middletown Paperboard site and
declaring an emergency. Mr. Moon seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms. Vitori, Ms. Nenni,
Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey.

Ord. No. O2020-08
Contract with
Management Partners

Ordinance No. O2020-08, an ordinance authorizing a contract with Management Partners to facilitate the search for a new City Manager and declaring an emergency was
read.
Mr. Mulligan moved to approve Ordinance No. O2020-08, an ordinance authorizing a
contract with Management Partners to facilitate the search for a new City Manager and
declaring an emergency. Ms. Vitori seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Ms. Nenni, Mr. Moon,
Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms. Vitori.

Ord. No. O2010-09
Contract with Industrial
Scientific- Fire Dept.

Ordinance No. O2020-09, an ordinance establishing a procedure for and authorizing a
contract with Industrial Scientific for the use of air monitoring equipment for the Division
of Fire and declaring an emergency was read.
Mr. Mulligan moved to approve Ordinance No. O2020-09, an ordinance establishing a
procedure for and authorizing a contract with Industrial Scientific for the use of air monitoring equipment for the Division of Fire and declaring an emergency. Ms. Vitori seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Mr. Moon, Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms. Nenni, Ms. Vitori.

Ord. No. O2020-10
Amend Contract with Jess
Howard Electric- Airport

Ordinance No. O2020-10, an ordinance establishing a procedure for and authorizing an
amendment to a contract with Jess Howard Electric for the replacement of the airport
taxiway lighting system and declaring an emergency was read.
Mr. Mulligan moved to approve Ordinance No. O2020-10, an ordinance establishing a
procedure for and authorizing an amendment to a contract with Jess Howard Electric for
the replacement of the airport taxiway lighting system and declaring an emergency. Ms.
Vitori seconded. Motion carried. Ayes: Mr. Mulligan, Ms. Condrey, Ms. Nenni, Ms. Vitori,
Mr. Moon.

Ord. No. O2020-11
Property Tax Exemption
Parcel No.
Q6511026000021

Ordinance No. O2020-11, an ordinance consenting to real property tax exemption pursuant to R.C. 5709.08 applicable to property owned by the City of Middletown and more
particularly described as Butler County Auditor’s Parcel No. Q6511026000021 and declaring an emergency was read with no action requested until February 18, 2020.

Ord. No. O2020-12
Amend Chapter 892

Ordinance No. O2020-12, an ordinance amending Chapter 892 (Motor Vehicle License
Tax) of the Codified Ordinances was read for the first for the first time.

Res. No. R2020-04
Amend Appropriations

Resolution No. R2020-04, a resolution to make adjustments to appropriations for current expenses and other expenditures of the City of Middletown, Counties of Butler and
Warren, state of Ohio, for the period ending December 31, 2020 was read for the first
time. (Sewer Fund)

ADJOURNMENT

At 7:00 p.m., the meeting was declared adjourned until February 18, 2020 at 5:30 p.m.
in Council Chambers.
___________________________
Nicole Condrey, Mayor
Attest: ___________________________

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Human Resources

May 8, 2020

TO:

Susan Cohen, Acting City Manager

FROM:

Brittany Grimes, Human Resources Specialist

SUBJECT: APPOINTMENT – PATROL OFFICER
We are recommending the appointment of RYUN RAWLINS to the position of Patrol
Officer in the Department of Public Safety, Division of Police. Mr. Rawlins is currently a
Reserve Officer for the Division of Police. He was selected from the eligibility list as a result
of Civil Service testing procedures, and will fill the vacancy created by the retirement of
Rodney Muterspaw through the promotion process.
Mr. Rawlins will be assigned to Range PO1, Step A which provides a salary of $2,049.84
biweekly and $53,295.84 annually. The effective date of the appointment will be May 20,
2020.
/bg
c:

Amy Schenck, Clerk of Council
David Birk, Police Chief
Human Resources
Finance (Payroll)
file

ccmtg5/19/20
POLICE OFFICER
Authorized Strength – 56
Current Staff Level – 55
.

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Human Resources

May 7, 2020

TO:

Susan Cohen, Acting City Manager

FROM:

Brittany Grimes, Human Resources Specialist

SUBJECT:

APPOINTMENT – PT COMMUNITY SECURITY OFFICER

We are recommending the appointment of GEOFF GETTER to the position of part-time
Community Security Officer in the Department of Public Safety, Division of Police. Mr.
Getter is currently a Reserve Officer for the Division of Police. He will fill the vacancy
created by the resignation of Gary Ogdin.
Mr. Getter will be assigned to Range 228, Step A, which provides a salary of $15.68 hourly.
The effective date of the appointment is May 20, 2020.
/bg
c:

Amy Schenck, Clerk of Council
David Birk, Police Chief
Human Resources
Finance (Payroll)
File

Ccmtg5/19/20
PT COMMUNITY SECURITY OFFICER
Authorized Strength – 2 (Part Time)
Current Staff Level – 1

MOTION
AGENDA

STAFF REPORT
For the Business Meeting of May 19, 2020

May 8, 2020
TO:
FROM:

Susan Cohen, Acting City Manager
Samantha Zimmerman, Purchasing Agent

Bid Recommendation, Bid #20-8142-09,
Nuisance Abatement Services
PURPOSE
To request approval for a contract with various vendors for nuisance abatement services of
vacant/city-owned properties and private properties that have failed to abide by the City’s
codified ordinances within the City of Middletown.
BACKGROUND and FINDINGS
The nuisance abatement services contract was bid with five vendors responding in the following
amounts:
Car on Car off Semi on Semi off
Appliance
Half Load Full Load
Rim Tire Rim Tire Rim Tire Rim Tire
Yard Maint.
Removal
Transport Transport
NUISANCE ABATEMENT SERVICES
Removal Removal Removal Removal
per Hour Fee
Fee
Fee
Fee
Fee
Fee
Fee
Fee
Possum Hollar Designs, LLC - Middletown, OH $
35.00 $ 50.00 $ 15.00 $ 10.00 $ 25.00 $ 20.00 $ 20.00 $ 40.00
Results By Carroll LLC - Middletown, OH
$
40.00 $ 50.00 $ 10.00 $ 15.00 $ 20.00 $ 25.00 $ 20.00 $ 40.00
Julie's Lawncare - Middletown, OH
$
40.00 $ 75.00 $ 17.72 $ 13.25 $ 36.50 $ 21.25 $ 20.00 $ 40.00
Cams Lawn Care - Trenton, OH
$
40.00 $ 75.00 $ 17.72 $ 13.25 $ 36.50 $ 21.25 $ 20.00 $ 40.00
Trinity Quality Service - Middletown, OH
$
65.00 $ 200.00 $ 75.00 $ 70.00 $ 150.00 $ 90.00 $ 250.00 $ 350.00

The bid has been divided into five groups with the intent to award to separate contractors since it
is unknown how many work orders the City will have for nuisance abatement services in each
group. The groups were created based on number of work orders completed in 2019. See map
of groups attached.
The contract is for the remainder of 2020 with an optional renewal of two additional one-year
periods. It is recommended to award the contract to the following contractors (approximate
annual cost based on 2019 work order statistics assuming all groups have equal work orders):
Group 1 – Possum Hollar Designs, LLC
Group 2 – Results By Carroll LLC
Group 3 – Possum Hollar Designs, LLC
Group 4 – Cams Lawn Care
Group 5 – Julie’s Lawncare

$55,379.50
$61,518.00
$55,379.50
$62,614.17
$62,614.17

Annual totals are approximate and could be more or less based on the number of nuisance work
orders received.
ALTERNATIVES
1.

Award all five groups to the lowest bidder, Possum Hollar Designs, LLC. The
department does not recommend this as the number of nuisance work orders is
unknown. The intent when putting this out to bid was to award each group to a
different contractor, however, with the bids the City received we believe the
above is the best option for the City.

2.

Do the work in-house. The City would need to purchase equipment and hire
employees with benefits, which would be cost prohibitive.

FINANCIAL IMPACT
Funds have been appropriated in the 2020 budget.
EMERGENCY/NON EMERGENCY
Motion agenda
cc:

Jacob Burton, Finance Director
David Birk, Police Chief
Eric Crank, Deputy Police Chief

Group 5

Douglass

M id dl

South

d

er

R d

A v e

Group 4

Sherman

A v e

O x fo rd

lt

S ta t e

k

Group 1

Group 5

MADE/AK Steel

R d

n

t

ve

University

A

Group 4

Av

d

Springhill

R d

Group 5

Greenfields

Group 5

Lewis/Clifton
Farms

Group 4

Euclid
Heights/Runnymede

e

Group 1

El Dorado/Williamsdale

e

Group 1

an

t
es

R o s e d a l

L e f f e rson

Group 4

Mayfield

Barbara Park

V

Ty

us

Dixie Heights

Group 1

Riverside
Village

Wildwood

Group 4

B lvd

Group 4

Highlands

Group 5

Sunset/Park
Place

R o o s e v e

G r a n d

Amanda/Oneida

Group 5

t e

Group 5

Meadowlawn

L a f a y e t

Oakland

Av e

Prospect

Group 2

P

w

Group 1

k

A v e

1 s t

v d

P

w

y

Avalon

Group 3

Roselawn

Ve

t
ri

Group 3

Group 3

Group 3 N

Bl

Group 2

Church

i n a r tz

A ve

Downtown

Group 1

Re

d

Harlan Park

B lv

Group
Lakeside 3

C a rm o d y

Group 3

N

R d

Airport/Riverfront

1 4 t h

To d h u nt

R d

w n

et
o

2n

Group 3

S

M

S

en

Tr

a i
n

Fr

ton

t

l

ri

S Ve

y

an
k

ty

y

R d

G e r m a n t o w n

S t

S h a f o r

S t

H ig h la n d

L n

in

re

B

l

vd

ie

l

A v e

e r

Group 4

Sawyer's Mill

M a n c h e s t

Group 2

7

5

S R

Renaissance

Group 2

1 2 2

New England
Heights

G r e e n t r e e

n ce

B

Group 2

Thorny
Acres/Burnham
Woods

R d

Hwy

Group 4

7 3

Sawyer's Mill

S R

Towne Mall

Group 5

Far Hills

Group 2

Group 2

Creekview

C e n t ra l

Group 1

Group 2

Northeast

Group 1

Manchester Meadows

Rosedale/The
Oaks

in
n c
C i

H a m ilt o n

D

i
na
t

R d

Ya n k e e

lvd
R d

R

B re iel
N

T o

w n e

o n

J a c k s o n

e

R d

M a r s h a ll

N

y

Hw

xi

S

n
io
n
U

D i

I

d
R
e n aiss a

ay
t

S

R

H w y

Rd

B lv d

Bl v d

B

¯

Document Path: W:\City Services\Finance\Nuisance Map by Groups 042320\Nuisance Neighborhood Group Counts.mxd

User Name: chets Date: 4/24/2020

5

4

3

2

1

Group

Neighborhood Group Number

City Limits

Local

Collector-Urban

Secondary

Minor Arterial-Urban

Principal Arterial-Urban

Interstate

Streets
CLASS

Legend

Neighborhood Group Locations

LEGISLATION
ITEM 1

ORDINANCE NO. O2020-22
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A PROCEDURE FOR AND AUTHORIZING AN
AMENDMENT OF THE CONTRACT WITH CBM MANAGED SERVICES NOW
KNOWN AS SUMMIT FOOD SERVICE FOR JAIL FOOD SERVICE AND
DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, City Council authorized a three year contract with CBM Managed
Services, now known as Summit Food Service, by Motion on November 7, 2017, for
the period 2018 through 2020; and
WHEREAS, the original bid was based on a jail population of approximately 60
inmates per day and three meals per day; and
WHEREAS, during the current COVID-19 pandemic, the City’s jail population
has been significantly below normal at about 10 inmates per day; and
WHEREAS, the vendor has requested additional compensation to make up for
the drastic and unexpected decline in jail population; and
WHEREAS, City staff is satisfied with the performance of the vendor and
believes this amendment will be in the City’s best interest during the pandemic and is
not expected to cause an increase in the budget for jail food services;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the City Council of the City of
Middletown, Butler/Warren Counties, Ohio that:
Section 1
The City Manager, without complying with the procedures of Chapter 735 of
the Ohio Revised Code, is authorized to enter into an amendment of the contract with
Summit Food Service in a form to be approved by the Law Director. The amendment
to the agreement shall provide for food for 50 inmates at a flat fee of $2,520.00 per
week until the jail population goes back to normal and is retroactive to March 22, 2020.
The retro payments shall be off-set by any payments made since March 22, 2020. It
is City Council’s preference that any food in excess of what is needed for the day’s jail
population be donated to local non-profit organizations or entities.
Section 2
City Council hereby determines that the procedure to be followed in the award
and execution of the aforesaid contract shall consist solely of the procedure set forth
in this Ordinance and the provisions of Chapter 735 of the Ohio Revised Code shall
not be applicable to the award and execution of the aforesaid contract.

Section 3
This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, to wit: so that
the amendment can be signed as soon as possible, and shall be in full force and effect
from the date of its adoption.
_______________________________
Nicole Condrey, Mayor
Adopted: _____________

Attest: _____________________
Clerk of City Council
H:/Law/leg/2020 Leg/O Summit Food Service – Jail Food Amendment - REVISED

STAFF REPORT
For the Business Meeting of May 19, 2020

May 14, 2020

TO:
FROM:

Susan Cohen, Acting City Manager
Samantha Zimmerman, Purchasing Agent

Recommendation for Jail Food Service
PURPOSE
To request an amendment to the contract for Jail Food Service with Summit Food Service
(formerly CBM Managed Services), in the amount of $2,520 per week while the jail population
is under fifty (50) inmates retroactively to March 22, 2020 when the jail population decreased
drastically due to COVID-19.
BACKGROUND and FINDINGS
In 2017, the City took bids to find a contractor to provide the service of purchasing, receiving,
preparing, and serving the food necessary to meet the nutritional needs of the inmates. Summit
Food Service was awarded the three year contract as the only bidder.
The Middletown City Jail provides three meals per day to approximately sixty (60) inmates
under normal conditions. Due to the national pandemic we are currently experiencing, Summit
is requesting additional payment while the City’s jail population is significantly below normal at
only approximately ten (10) inmates.
The City would pay a flat payment of $2,520 per week while the jail population is fifty (50)
inmates or less. This payment is equivalent to the cost of fifty (50) inmates. Once the jail
population goes back up to normal, the City would pay the normal amount of $2.40 per meal.
Summit will prepare enough food for fifty (50) inmates; any additional food will be donated.
The City will work with non-profit organizations to figure out the logistics.
ALTERNATIVES
The alternative is to not approve this additional payment to Summit. However, Summit has
expressed that due to the COVID-19 and the current inmate population dropping substantially
without additional payment they would be incurring a substantial financial loss.
The City needs food service to maintain operation of the City Jail; without the additional
payment we run the risk of Summit exercising the 90-day notice of contract cancellation.

FINANCIAL IMPACT
Funds have been appropriated in the 2020 budget for this purchase.
The exact amount to be spent with this additional payment depends on how long the City’s
inmate population is below normal. Overall, there will not be a significant financial impact since
we will be paying Summit as if inmate population is normal.
EMERGENCY/NON EMERGENCY
1st reading emergency. A 1st reading emergency is requested in order to start additional payment
to Summit Food Service.
cc:

Jacob Burton, Finance Director
David Birk, Police Chief
Leanne Hood, Deputy Police Chief

LEGISLATION
ITEM 2

ORDINANCE NO. O2020-23
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
WITH THE FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, OHIO LABOR COUNCIL
(CORRECTION OFFICERS) FOR THE YEARS JANUARY 1, 2020 THROUGH
DECEMBER 31, 2022 AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
BE IT ORDAINED, by the City Council of the City of Middletown, Butler/Warren
Counties, Ohio that:
Section 1
The collective bargaining agreement for three years, January 1, 2020 through
December 31, 2022, between the City and the Fraternal Order of Police, Ohio Labor
Council (Correction Officers) is hereby approved, and the City Manager is authorized
to execute said agreement, in a form substantially similar to Exhibit A”, attached hereto.
Section 2
This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, to wit: in order
to allow the collective bargaining agreement to be implemented as soon as possible,
and shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption.

_____________________
Nicole Condrey, Mayor
Adopted:______________

Attest:_______________________
Clerk of the City Council
H:/Law/leg/2020 Leg/O Correction Officers 2020-2022

EXHIBIT "A"

AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE CITY OF MIDDLETOWN
AND
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE,
OHIO LABOR COUNCIL, INC.
(CORRECTIONS OFFICERS)

January 1, 2017 – December 31, 2019
January 1, 2020 – December 31, 2022

PAGE NUMBERS WILL BE UPDATED IN THE FINAL VERSION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE

ARTICLE

TITLE

ARTICLE 1

Recognition-the Collective Bargaining Unit ........................... 1

ARTICLE 2

No Discrimination .................................................................. 1

ARTICLE 3

Union Activity, Visitation & Bulletin Boards ........................... 2

ARTICLE 4

No Strike or Lockout.............................................................. 2

ARTICLE 5

Management Rights .............................................................. 3

ARTICLE 6

Employee Rights ................................................................... 5

ARTICLE 7

Probationary Employees ....................................................... 6

ARTICLE 8

Dues Deduction & Fair Share Fee ........................................ 6

ARTICLE 9

Discharges, Suspensions and Penalties ............................... 7

ARTICLE 10

Grievance Procedure ............................................................ 8

ARTICLE 11

Arbitration .............................................................................. 9

ARTICLE 12

Paid Leave ........................................................................... 10

ARTICLE 13

Holidays ............................................................................... 10

ARTICLE 14

Vacation ............................................................................... 11

ARTICLE 15

Longevity .............................................................................. 13

ARTICLE 16

Funeral Bereavement Leave ............................................... 13

ARTICLE 17

Sick Leave ........................................................................... 14

ARTICLE 18

Injury Leave ......................................................................... 16

ARTICLE 19

Unpaid Leave ....................................................................... 18

ARTICLE 20

Insurance ............................................................................. 19

ARTICLE 21

Miscellaneous Benefits ........................................................ 20

ARTICLE 22

Wages .................................................................................. 20

ARTICLE 23

Hours of Work and Overtime ................................................ 22

ARTICLE 24

Labor–Management Meetings.............................................. 23

ARTICLE 25

Drug Testing ........................................................................ 24

ARTICLE 26

Modification and Separability ............................................... 27

ARTICLE 27

Seniority ............................................................................... 27

ARTICLE 28

Layoff and Recall ................................................................. 29

ARTICLE 29

Disability Leave .................................................................... 30

ARTICLE 30

Termination .......................................................................... 30
Signatures ............................................................................ 30

AGREEMENT
AGREEMENT made and entered into by and between THE CITY OF
MIDDLETOWN, OHIO (hereinafter called the "City" or "Employer" or “Management") and
THE FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, OHIO LABOR COUNCIL, INC. (hereinafter
referred to as "Labor Council" or "Union" or "FOP") acting herein on behalf of the
employees of the City, as hereinafter defined, now employed and hereafter to be
employed and collectively designated as the "Employees."
WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, the City recognizes the Union as the collective bargaining
representative for the employees covered by this Agreement as hereinafter provided; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent and purpose of the parties hereto that this Agreement
protect against interruptions and interferences with services to the citizens of Middletown
and surrounding communities and to set forth herein their Agreement covering wages,
hours, and conditions of employment;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants herein contained,
the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE 1 – Recognition – The Collective Bargaining Unit
1.
The City recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive bargaining
representative of a bargaining unit consisting of all permanent, full-time Corrections
Officers, formerly known as Civil Jail Matrons, employed by the Employer, but excluding
all other employees of the Employer. The SERB certification number is 99-REP-05-0109
and it was certified June 3, 1999.
2.
Whenever the word "Employee" is used in this Agreement, it shall be
deemed to mean the employees in the bargaining unit covered by this Agreement, as
defined in Article 1, Section 1 hereof.

ARTICLE 2 – No Discrimination
Neither the Employer nor the Union shall discriminate against or in favor of any
employee on account of race, color, religion, creed, national origin, sex or handicap.
Words used in this Agreement in the masculine gender will be read and construed in the
feminine gender as well.

1

ARTICLE 3 – Union Activity, Visitation and Bulletin Boards
1.
Upon reasonable notification to a management representative on the
premises, a non-employee representative of the Union may have access to the
Employer's premises for the purpose of conferring with Management, delegates of the
Union and/or employees for the purpose of administering this Agreement, providing that
the Employer's operation shall not be impaired. This request shall not be unreasonably
denied.
2.
The Employer shall provide bulletin boards which shall be used for the
purpose of posting proper Union notices, including official Union publications or official
communications. Such bulletin boards shall be placed conspicuously in the Jail Office.
Any Union notices other than above which are considered inflammatory, political or
devoted to Union organizing or grievance matters other than stated above are not
permissible for posting on City bulletin boards or property and shall be removed by
Management.
3.
No insignia which has not been authorized by the Employer shall be worn
on employee uniforms.
4.

Representation.
(a)
Negotiations. The Union shall select from the bargaining unit two (2)
negotiators.
(b)
Union representatives and/or alternates, on duty only, shall be paid
their full pay for hours spent in contract negotiations.
(c)
Union representative and/or alternate shall be entitled to 72 hours of
paid Union business leave each year for the term of this agreement. The
Union representative and/or alternate shall receive their full pay for Union
business leave. Union business leave will be used for the purpose of
participation in conventions, pension business, educational conferences,
grievance handling, negotiation preparation, and to attend to the normal
operating functions of the Union, excluding contract negotiations.

ARTICLE 4 – No Strike or Lockout
1.
No member shall engage in any strike, slowdown, sit-down, sit-in,
cessation, stoppage or refusal to perform work.
2.
The Union, its officers and agents, shall not in any way authorize, assist,
encourage or participate in any strike, slowdown, sit-down, sit-in, cessation, stoppage or
refusal to perform work.

2

3.
In addition to any other liability, remedy or right provided by applicable law
or statute, should a strike, slowdown, sit-down, sit-in, cessation, stoppage or refusal to
perform work occur, the Union, within twenty-four (24) hours of a request by the Employer,
shall:
(a)

Publicly disavow such action by the employees;

(b)

Advise the Employer in writing that such action by employees has
not been caused or sanctioned by the Union;

(c)

Notify employees of its disapproval of such action and instruct such
employees to cease action and return to work immediately;

(d)

Post notices at locations approved by the Employer, advising that it
disapproves of such action, and instructing employees to return to
work immediately.

4.
The Employer agrees that it will not lockout employees during the term of
this Agreement and the Union and employees agree that no picketing or handbilling
against the Employer will occur during the term of this Agreement.
5.
In addition to other rights and remedies provided by applicable law or
statute, the Employer shall have the right to discharge or otherwise discipline any member
violating the provisions of this Article if the strike has been found to be unauthorized under
Section 4117.23 of the Ohio Revised Code.

ARTICLE 5 – Management Rights
1.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Agreement, it shall be the
Employer's sole and exclusive right and responsibility to:
(a)

determine matters of inherent managerial policy which include, but
are not limited to areas of discretion or policy such as the functions
and programs of the Employer, standards of services, its overall
budget, utilization of technology, and organizational structure;

(b)

direct, supervise, assign, reassign, schedule, evaluate, and subject
to applicable civil service rules and regulations, hire, suspend,
discipline, demote, discharge for just cause, or lay off, transfer,
promote or retain employees;

(c)

maintain and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Employer’s operations;

3

(d)

determine the overall methods, process, means, or personnel by
which the Employer's operations are to be conducted;

(e)

determine the adequacy of the work force, as well as to make,
amend, and enforce work rules, regulations, and standard operating
procedures and general and special orders;

(f)

determine the overall mission of the Employer as a unit of
government;

(g)

effectively manage the work force;

(h)

take actions to carry out the mission of the Employer as a
governmental unit.

2.
It is agreed that the above listing of management rights shall not be deemed
to exclude other proper functions not specifically listed herein or traditionally exercised by
the Employer.
3.
It is intended by the parties that the terms of this Agreement shall be
consistent with that legislative authority which devolves upon the City Commission of the
City of Middletown, the statutes and, in so far as applicable, the rules and regulations of
the Civil Service Commission and the Chief of Police. Furthermore, it is understood by
the parties that no provision of this Agreement is intended to abrogate the duties,
obligations, or responsibilities of any agency or department of the City which is now
expressly provided for respectively by State Statute, Ordinances, Administrative
Regulations, Charter or Resolution, of the City of Middletown.
4.
In the event the Employer determines to abandon its current practice of
rotating shifts, the Employer agrees that it will meet and confer with the Labor Council
regarding the implementation of its decision regarding new schedules and the effects of
such new schedules on unit employees.
5.
The Employer shall not hereafter subcontract work which will adversely
affect unit employees without first notifying the Labor Council of such intention to
subcontract and bargaining with the Union about its intention to subcontract. If, after
notifying and bargaining with the Union about such subcontracting, an agreement is not
reached, the Employer shall discuss with the Union the effects of such subcontracting on
its employees and carry out any agreements which may be reached during the course of
such discussions.
6.
The Employer shall not permit part-time employees to work a number of
hours in a calendar week exceeding twenty percent (20%) of the product of 40 hours
times the number of full-time Corrections Officers authorized in the annual budget (e.g.,
40 hours x 12 officers = 480 hours x 20% = 96 hours per week). Hours worked by part-

4

time employees, which were refused by full-time employees, shall not be considered in
applying this limitation.

ARTICLE 6 – Employee Rights
1.
During the course of an investigation of employee misconduct where
discipline may result, an employee may request the presence of a Union representative
and/or another unit employee to be present during the investigating interview.
2.
The employee being interviewed shall be informed verbally of the nature of
the investigation before the interview commences.
3.
employee.

Copies of all reprimands, disciplinary actions will be given to the affected

4.
(a)
Each employee may inspect their personnel file maintained by the
Employer in the presence of a management representative designated by the Chief of
Police, during the employee's non-working hours, at a reasonable time, and shall, upon
request, receive a copy of any or all documents contained therein, provided the employee
pays any reasonable charge for the copies. An employee shall be entitled to have a
representative of his/her choice to accompany him/her during such review. Said
representative of the employee shall not be compensated by the City. An employee's
personnel file shall be made available for review and/or copying to the employee when
the employee is preparing for a grievance or disciplinary hearings. In responding to
requests for Employees’ personnel files the City shall comply with Federal and State law.
(b)
The employee is entitled to place a letter of rebuttal or explanation to
be attached to any such entry relating to disciplinary action or performance so long as
said explanation or rebuttal does not exceed 200 words in length and is submitted within
7 working days of the date the employee is provided with the entry.
(c)
Written reprimands may be kept in an employee's personnel file for
2 years. After 2 years, if no further similar disciplinary action has been taken against the
employee the written reprimand shall be expunged from his/her file not be considered
in additional discipline.
5.
Preliminary investigations and disciplinary hearings shall be held either
during the employee's scheduled working hours, or at a time in reasonable proximity to
his/her shift.
6.
All contacts verbal or written be it disciplinary or any other between an
employee and a superior shall be conducted in a calm and professional manner.
7.
If the Employer chooses to tape record a preliminary investigation or
disciplinary hearing, the employee will, upon request be provided a copy of said tape
5

recording. If an Employee wishes to tape record a preliminary investigation or disciplinary
hearing, upon the request of the employee, the City will tape record such preliminary
investigation or disciplinary hearing and provide a copy of the tape to the employee.
8.

The employee may take notes of any proceeding.

ARTICLE 7 – Probationary Employees
1.
Newly hired employees shall be considered probationary for a period not to
exceed one (1) year as set forth and defined in the rules, regulations, general orders, and
policies and procedures of the Employer.
2.
During the probationary period, the Employer may discharge any
probationer at will and such discharge or other discipline shall not be subject to the
grievance and arbitration procedure of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 8 – Dues Deduction and Fair Share Fee
1.
The Employer agrees to deduct from the wages of all bargaining unit
employees, all Labor Council membership dues uniformly required. Employees
authorizing dues deduction shall submit an individual written authorization card bearing
their signature. The Labor Council will notify the Employer from time to time of the dues
it charges.
2.
Bargaining unit employees shall either become dues paying members of
the F.O.P., Ohio Labor Council, Inc. or, remit to the Labor Council monthly, through payroll
deduction, a fair share fee in an amount not to exceed the monthly dues of a dues paying
member and in accordance with the provisions of O.R.C. 4117.09(c). This amount shall
be deducted from the wages of all such non-member(s) of the Labor Council and shall
commence 60 days after initial employment in the bargaining unit.
1.
The Employer agrees to deduct FOP/OLC dues from any member of
the bargaining unit who signs an authorized dues deduction card. Such card shall
be furnished by the FOP/OLC. It is agreed by the Employer that within two (2)
weeks of signing the dues deduction card, or the next payday, whichever is later,
said deductions shall commence.
2.
The Employer shall notify the FOP/OLC of any new hires within the
bargaining unit. Such notification shall be in writing to the FOP/OLC within 30 days
of their hire date.
3.
The Labor Council agrees to indemnify and to save the Employer harmless
from any action commenced by an employee arising as a result of the deductions made
under this Article.
6

4.

The Employer shall be relieved from making such "check off" deductions

upon:
(a)

termination of employment, or

(b)

transfer to a job other than one covered by the bargaining unit, or

(c)

lay off from work, or

(d)

an agreed leave of absence, or

(e)

written revocation of the check off authorization by the employee.

5.
The Employer shall not be obliged to make dues deductions of any kind
from the wages of any employee, who, during any dues month involved, shall have failed
to receive sufficient wages to equal the dues, initiation fees or assessment deductions.
6.
All dues and fair share fees collected shall be paid over by the Employer
once each month and sent to the F.O.P. Ohio Labor Council, Inc., 222 East Town Street,
Columbus, Ohio 43215-4611.
7.
During the first pay period in July of each year, the Employer shall
provide the FOP/OLC with a roster of all bargaining unit employees. Additionally,
should the Employer receive a notice from a bargaining unit member wishing to
cease dues deductions and withdraw from FOP/OLC membership, the Employer
shall notify the FOP/OLC in writing within 14 days of the request.

ARTICLE 9 – Discharges, Suspensions and Penalties
1.
The Employer shall have the right to discharge, suspend or discipline any
employee for just cause. Discipline will be administered in a fair and equitable manner.
2.
The Employer will endeavor to notify the Union in writing of any discharge
or suspension without pay within forty-eight (48) hours from the time of such discharge or
suspension. If the Union desires to contest the discharge or suspension without pay, it
shall give written notice thereof to the Employer within a period not to exceed seven (7)
calendar days from the date of notice of discharge or suspension. In such event, the
dispute shall be submitted and determined under the grievance and arbitration
procedures hereinafter set forth, commencing at Step 2 of the grievance procedure. An
employee shall mitigate any backpay liability resulting from his discharge or suspension
pending resolution of the grievance and arbitration procedure hereinafter set forth.
3.
Upon request of the Employer, an employee who has been absent from
work (other than vacation, holiday or an approved leave of absence which are covered
7

in other Articles herein) must furnish satisfactory proof justifying the reason for the
absence or be subject to disciplinary action.
4.
The City shall endeavor to issue written reprimands within thirty (30) days
from the date of the City’s knowledge of the offense. Written reprimands shall be subject
to the grievance procedure set forth in this Agreement up to and including the 2nd step
only.
5.

A disciplinary suspension or discharge requires:
(a)

Written notice is given to the employee of the charges against him
and the evidence upon which they are based within twenty (20)
calendar days of Management's knowledge of the alleged incident
and within a reasonable amount of time before the hearing referred
to below so the member can prepare an explanation.

(b)

A pre-suspension hearing be held, unless waived by the employee,
before the Chief of the Division of Police. The employee shall be
afforded, at the hearing, the right to question witnesses and a fair
opportunity to be heard in opposition to the charges against him.
The member has a right to have with him an employee or Union
representative of his choosing and any such meeting shall be
continued at the request of the employee for a reasonable period of
time, not to exceed ten calendar days, to permit the attendance of
the representative.

(c)

(d)

In special cases the employee may be suspended pending a
meeting; the suspended employee may request a hearing to be held
by the close of the next succeeding workday.

(e)

The employee shall be informed of the Chief’s decision and the
reasons for it in writing.

6.
Anonymous complaints with no corroborative evidence shall not be cause
for disciplinary action(s).

ARTICLE 10 – Grievance Procedure
1.
A grievance shall be described as a dispute or complaint arising between
the parties hereto under or out of this Agreement or the interpretation, application,
performance, termination, or any breach thereof, and shall be processed and disposed of
in the following manner:
Step 1:
Within a reasonable time, not to exceed five (5) calendar days
following the date of occurrence, or when the employee or the Union should have
8

had knowledge of the occurrence, an employee having a grievance and/or his
Union representative shall put the grievance in writing and present it to the Deputy
Chief assigned to jail operations or his designee. The Employer shall give its
answer to the employee and/or his Union representative within five (5) calendar
days after the presentation of the grievance in Step 1. Within this ten (10) calendar
day period, the employee is encouraged to seek to resolve this grievance on an
informal basis. Grievances based on disciplinary action shall proceed immediately
to Step 2 of this grievance procedure.
Step 2:
If the grievance is not settled in Step 1, the grievance may, within five
(5) calendar days after the answer in Step 1, be presented in Step 2 in writing to
the Chief of Police, or his designee. A grievance so presented in Step 2 shall be
answered by the Employer within five (5) calendar days after its presentation.
Step 3:
If the grievance is not settled in Step 2, the grievance may, within five
(5) calendar days after the answer in Step 2, be presented in Step 3 in writing to
the City Manager or his designee. At this time a Local or State Representative of
the Union may be in attendance at a meeting where, if both parties agree,
witnesses and/or evidence may be presented which may relate to a resolution of
the grievance. A grievance so presented in Step 3 shall be answered by the
Employer within five (5) calendar days after its presentation.
2.
Any disposition of a grievance from which no appeal is taken within the time
limits specified herein shall be deemed resolved and shall not thereafter be considered
subject to the grievance and arbitration provisions of this Agreement. If the Employer fails
to respond within the time limits herein provided, the grievance will proceed to the next
step unless the parties have mutually agreed, in writing, to extend the time within which
to answer or appeal. Any step in the grievance procedure may be skipped on any
grievance by mutual consent.
3.
Filing a grievance by an employee or the Union under this Article concerning
any matter otherwise appealable to the Civil Service Commission shall be deemed an
election by the employee and the Union to use the provisions of this Agreement rather
than an appeal to the Civil Service Commission, as the sole and exclusive remedy for
resolution of the said grievance or complaint.

ARTICLE 11 – Arbitration
1.
A grievance as defined in Article 10 which has not been resolved thereunder
may, within ten (10) calendar days after the completion of Step 3 of the Grievance
Procedure, be referred for arbitration by either party to this Agreement. The arbitrator
shall be selected from a panel of arbitrators furnished by the Federal Mediation
Conciliation Service (FMCS) or any other arbitration service provider mutually agreed to
by the parties. of 12 arbitrators who have offices located within the State of Ohio or
within 125 miles of Middletown, Ohio furnished by the Federal Mediation
9

Conciliation Service (FMCS). The arbitration shall be conducted in conformity with
FMCS rules, as applicable.
2.
The fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the
parties.
3.
The award of the arbitrator hereunder shall be binding upon the Employer,
the employee and the Union.
4.
The arbitrator shall not have the power to add to, subtract from, or modify
any of the terms of this Agreement. Furthermore, in explanation of the Employer's right to
promulgate rules and regulations, general orders and standard operating procedures set
forth in the Management Rights clause, the Union or grievant shall not have recourse
through the grievance and arbitration procedure to challenge the reasonableness and
appropriateness of the Employer's existing or future rules and regulations, general orders
or standard operating procedures. This provision does not prevent an employee
disciplined by any such existing or future rule to grieve the application of that rule to his
or her particular circumstances. It is further understood that the said rules and regulations,
general and special orders and standard operating procedures shall not be interpreted so
as to conflict with the explicit written terms of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 12 – Paid Leave
1.
Employees shall be entitled to holiday pay, vacation leave, sick leave, and
injury leave, as provided in Articles 13, 14, 17 and 18 of this Agreement.
2.
Employees who are called (not volunteered) to serve as jurors, will receive
their regular pay less their pay as a juror.
3.
Employees will be granted paid leave at their regular rate of pay less their
pay as a witness, if they are subpoenaed as a witness in work related court proceedings.
4.
A paid leave of absence may be granted to attend seminars or conferences
which are work related. The method for approval shall be the same as set forth in Article
19 herein regarding Unpaid Leave.
5.
The Employer shall have the right to demand proof of all items listed above
regarding paid leave. Falsification of information with respect to any paid leave shall be
grounds for discipline.

ARTICLE 13 – Holidays
1.

(a)

Holidays. The following days shall be celebrated as paid holidays:
New Year's Day

Labor Day
10

Martin Luther King Day
President’s Day
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Independence Day

Thanksgiving Day
Day After Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve Day
Christmas Day
Employee’s Birthday*

*(b) Employees may take this holiday on their birthday or anytime during
the year, subject to the approval of the Chief of Police.
2.

All holiday leave shall be subject to the following terms:
(a)

Employees shall not be excused from work on the above holidays
unless otherwise scheduled.

(b)

Loss of Holiday. An employee who is off without pay because of an
unexcused absence either the work day before or the work day after
a holiday, or, if scheduled, on the holiday itself, shall forfeit holiday
pay. An unexcused absence is defined as an absence not covered
by approved vacation, sick leave, unless accompanied by a doctor's
certificate, approved leaves with pay or approved leaves without pay.
In addition, holiday pay ceases during any period an employee is not
being paid his regular salary or wage.

(c)

During Vacation. If a holiday falls during an employee's vacation
period, it shall not be charged to vacation time, except where division
policy is to grant additional vacation time in lieu of granting regular
holidays off.

(d)

Holiday Pay. Employees who work on a holiday will be entitled to
“bank” a holiday (up to eight hours) in addition to their regular work
pay, except that employees working on New Year’s Day,
Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day shall be entitled to an additional
1/2 hour’s pay for each hour worked between the hours of 7 a.m. the
morning of the holiday and 7 a.m. the following day, in addition to
their regular work pay.

(e)

Banking of Holiday. Each employee shall be able to accumulate
(bank) holidays up to 150 days. Once an employee accumulates 150
banked holidays, any holidays over and above that amount will be
paid in the current pay period at current holiday rate. An employee
who resigns, retires with (2) weeks notice, or dies will be paid at the
employee’s current regular rate of pay for holidays which have been
accumulated but not taken.

(f)

Personal Day. All employees covered by this contract shall be
granted one (1) personal day each year. This day will be scheduled
11

in the same manner as vacation and longevity days. A personal day
cannot be accumulated, carried over to the next year or banked.
(g)

Conversion to Pay. In accordance with the first payrolls in February,
April, June, August, October and December of each year, an
employee shall have the option to request the exchange of a total of
up to twenty (20) holidays annually for their equivalent in salary,
provided: (1) approval must be given by the Chief of Police and the
City Manager, and (2) there are unused funds available in the police
salary budget for payment. Any member with fifteen (15) years of
service or more may cash in an additional forty (40) hours per year
of holiday time earned, but not taken, for pay at the member’s current
hourly rate.

ARTICLE 14 – Vacation
1.
(a)
Each employee will accrue vacation credit at a rate of 5/6 of a day
for each calendar month employed in the vacation year, to a maximum of 10 working days
in one year. During and after 7 years of service, each employee will earn vacation credit
at the rate of 15 working days per year. After 15 years of service, each employee will
earn vacation credit at the rate of 20 working days per year. An employee appointed
effective the 16th of the month or earlier, earns vacation credit for that month.
(b)(a) Vacation Year and Accrual. The vacation year begins on January 1
of each year and ends on December 31. Vacation taken in any year is based upon
vacation credit earned in the previous year.
(c)
One Year Minimum Service. After one year of service, an employee
may take that portion of his vacation earned in the previous vacation year.
(b)

Vacation Credit. Employees shall receive vacation credit as

follows:
1 - 4 Years – 10 days
5 - 9 Years – 13 days
10 - 14 Years – 18 days
15 - 19 Years – 20 days
20 - 24 Years – 25 days
25+ Years – 28 days
Employees who as of January 1, 2020 receive more vacation leave than provided
in this schedule shall continue to receive their current level of vacation benefits
until they progress to the next step in the schedule.

12

(c)
Employees may take vacation during their first calendar year of
employment after they have been employed for 90 days in accordance with the
schedule below. Scheduling of vacation during the first year of employment will
be at the discretion of the Chief of Police.
Month of Hire:
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

# Days of Vacation:
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
0

(d)
(1)
First Full Year of Service. On January 1st of the first full
calendar year of employment, employees will be deemed to have earned their
vacation credit in accordance with this provision, in full, which may be scheduled
at any time during such first full year of employment in accordance with the terms
of this agreement. If an employee terminates their employment with the City prior
to reaching January 1st of the first full calendar year of employment no terminal pay
will be made for such vacation time.
(2)
Subsequent Years of Service. On January 1st of an
eligible employee’s second year of service and in each year thereafter, employees
shall receive vacation credit in accordance with the schedule set forth herein,
based upon the length of service to be obtained in that year. Vacation credit will
be deemed to have been earned in the employee’s prior year of service. Upon
termination or retirement, or in the case of leave without pay, vacation shall be prorated on the basis of monthly accrual. When calculating vacation credit earned in
the present year for purposes of terminal leave, the credit earned will be based on
the employee’s date of hire.
(de) Non-Accrual. An employee on leave without pay for more than two
(2) consecutive weeks in any calendar month for any reason shall not accrue vacation
benefits.
(ef) Scheduling. Vacations shall be scheduled on a seniority basis with
the approval of the Chief of Police. In general, The Chief of Police will give as much
consideration as possible to the employee’s preference, while at the same time,
maintaining the staff necessary to meet operational requirements. Vacation may be taken
in increments of not less than four (4) hours.
13

(fg) Vacation Carryover. Vacation credit must be used by year-end,
subject to departmental rules and regulations. Requests to carryover vacation must be
approved by the City Manager in writing in order to be deferred to the next year.
2.

Terminal Vacation Provisions.
(a)
Vacation from Previous Year. An employee who voluntarily resigns
with two weeks notice, or who dies, shall be paid for vacation credit earned
in the previous year, but not yet taken.
(b)
Vacation for Year of Termination. An employee who voluntarily
resigns or retires with two weeks notice, must be paid for vacation credit
earned in the present year, provided such is recommended by the Chief of
Police, In the case of death of an employee, vacation for the present year
will be paid.
(c)
Vacation Upon Dismissal. An employee who has been employed for
more than five (5) years and is dismissed will receive payment for his
vacation which he has earned in the previous year and not yet taken. He
may receive vacation credit earned in the present year as determined by
the Chief of Police. Total vacation credit will be calculated to the nearest
full day.

ARTICLE 15 – Longevity
1.

Longevity Vacation Provision.
(a)
An employee will be entitled to two (2) longevity vacation days
annually after the first full five (5) years of service; thereafter, each
employee shall be entitled to one (1) additional longevity vacation day
annually for each additional full five (5) years of service.
(b)
Eligible employees may take longevity vacation days as of his or her
appropriate anniversary date subject to the approval of the Chief of Police.
Example:

5 years - 2 longevity days
10 years - 3 longevity days
15 years - 4 longevity days
20 years - 5 longevity days, etc.

(c)
Longevity vacation credit may not be advanced from one vacation
year to the next, nor can it be deferred.
(d)

Longevity vacation days may be taken in four (4) hour increments.
14

2.
Longevity Pay Provision. Each employee will receive longevity pay
calculated and paid in the following manner:
After 20 years of service with the Employer - 3%
After 15 years of service with the Employer - 2%
After 10 years of service with the Employer - 1%
Longevity pay is due by the first payday in December of the year in which it is due and
shall be paid in a separate check.

ARTICLE 16 – Funeral Bereavement Leave
1.
In the event of death in the immediate family, an employee shall qualify for
funeral leave with pay up to 3 consecutive work days (24 hours) for participation in funeral
services or arrangements. For purposes of this Section, immediate family is defined as
the employee’s spouse, child or step-child, grandchild, parent, step-parent, grandparent,
brother, sister, parents or step-parents of spouse, and grandparents of spouse.
1.
Bereavement leave shall be granted to full-time employees, including
probationary employees, in the amounts listed below:
Relationship to Employee

Number of Work Days

Spouse, child, step-child, parent, step-parent or
someone standing in loco parentis

5

Immediate family: Grandchild, grandparent, brother,
sister, step-brother, step-sister, brother or sister-inlaw, parents or step-parents of spouse and
grandparents of spouse

3

2.
Funeral Bereavement pay will be provided to accommodate absences
occurring only on regularly scheduled workdays at the employee’s base rate of
pay. Funeral Bereavement leave will not be granted for any period during which the
employee is already in a paid or unpaid leave status, (unpaid leave status is interpreted
as being military leave, disciplinary suspension, or voluntary unpaid leave of absence).
3.
(a)
Eligibility is further conditioned upon submission by the employee to
his supervisor of a certificate as to the purpose and validity of leave usage and, if required
by the Employer, proof of death and relationship.
(b)
Requests for funeral bereavement leave with pay will not be
approved for absences not taken within a seven (7) calendar day period of the date of
death or funeral services. Leave requests meeting the conditions of Sections 1 and 2 of
this Article must be approved by the employee’s shift commander or shift supervisor.
15

4.
In the event of the death of a relative in other than the immediate family, as
defined above, leave time with pay of up to one eight (8) hour work day may, at the sole
discretion of the Chief of Police, be taken for participation in funeral services.
5.
In the event an employee should require additional time in excess of the
allowances established in the above provisions, such additional time may be charged
against sick leave time with the approval of the Chief of Police.

ARTICLE 17 – Sick Leave
1.
Eligibility. Each employee is credited with 10 hours of sick leave for each
full calendar month of service.
2.
Accumulation.
that may be accumulated.
3.

There will be no limit on the amount of sick leave credits

Approval of Usage.
(a)
An employee may use sick leave, upon approval of the Chief of
Police, for absence due to illness, injury, exposure to contagious disease
which could be communicated to other employees, participation in funeral
service or arrangements, and for illness in the employee’s immediate family
requiring the employee’s presence at home. Immediate family is defined as
the father, mother, sister, brother, spouse, child or stepchild of the member.
(b)
Upon the request of the Employer, an employee must furnish
satisfactory proof of his or her illness or disability before a day of sick leave
is paid. In the case of an illness or disability for three (3) or more
consecutive days, an employee may not return to work without a statement
from the employee’s physician.
(c)
In cases of illness in the employee’s immediate family requiring him
to be at home, the employee may be required to submit a certificate from
the attending physician attesting to the need, before sick leave will be
allowed.

4.
Computation of Sick Leave. An employee shall be charged for sick leave
usage on a half hour basis in increments of not less than one-half hour.
5.
Reporting Off Sick. Sick leave will be paid only when the employee or a
member of his immediate family notifies the employee’s immediate supervisor of his
absence one hour prior to the start of the employee’s shift.

16

6.
Non-Accrual. An employee on leave without pay for any reason for more
than two (2) consecutive weeks in any calendar month shall not accrue sick leave
benefits.
7.
Employee’s Claim for Sick Leave. An employee shall submit those forms
and follow those procedures specified in the Division of Police Rules and Regulations for
sick leave claims.
8.
Conversion to Vacation Credit. Employees may convert sick leave credit to
vacation once a year on the following basis:

9.

(a)

An employee with more than 280 sick leave hours credit may convert
all those hours over 280 hours to vacation credit at the rate of 24 sick
leave hours for one vacation day, providing that not more than 96
sick leave hours are so converted in any one vacation year.

(b)

An employee with more than 800 sick leave hours may convert all
those hours over 800 to vacation credit at the ratio of eight (8) sick
leave hours for one (1) vacation day, providing that not more than 40
sick leave hours are so converted in any one vacation year.

(c)

The employee must have accumulated these hours prior to January
1 of the year in which these days are to be converted and must have
sufficient hours at the time of conversion.

Conversion to Terminal Leave.
(a)
Upon the death or retirement of an employee with less than 25 years
of service, all unused sick leave credit will be converted to terminal leave
pay on the basis of 24 sick leave hours for one day’s pay, to a maximum of
5 weeks pay (25 working days).
(b)
Upon the death or retirement of an employee with 25 or more year’s
service, unused sick leave credit will be converted to terminal leave pay on
the basis of 16 sick leave hours for one day’s pay, to a maximum of 10 12
weeks pay (50 60 working days).
(c)
Upon the retirement of a member with twenty-five (25) or more years
service, and at least 48 years old, all unused sick leave credit will be
converted to terminal leave pay on the basis of sixteen (16) sick leave hours
for eight (8) hours pay to a maximum of 500 hours, provided, the member
gives six (6) months notice. The notice must be in writing with a specific
date, with the understanding that this is a valid resignation date, which the
City is not obligated to extend.

17

(d)
If a member chooses to take a disability retirement, due to injury or
illness, the same procedures will apply if the member files for the disability
pension within 60 days of the injury or illness, and the disability retirement
is granted within 120 days of the injury or illness.
(e)
Any hours left over after the conversion set forth in the immediate
preceding paragraphs shall be banked to be available for use for a member
who suffers a catastrophic illness and whose sick leave time has run out.
Catastrophic illness is defined as an unusual serious health disorder or
injury of a duration of three months or more. In no event shall these banked
hours be available to any member who has used or has available 12 months
or more of sick leave.
10.
If accumulated sick leave is exhausted, an employee may request an
advance of sick leave credit in accordance with Administrative Regulation 2-27.

ARTICLE 18 – Injury Leave
Employees are entitled to receive injury leave for on-the-job injuries, in accordance
with the conditions and limitations set forth in this article. Such leave shall be in addition
to all other leaves provided in this agreement.
A.
An on-the-job injury is a physical injury that an employee suffers during the
course and scope of his/her employment for the City of Middletown. On-the-job injury
does not include pre-existing injuries, injuries suffered at the workplace that are not in the
course and scope of the employee's work activity, psychological or psychiatric injuries or
conditions. However, any member who suffers a heart attack or stroke, is over forty (40)
years of age and has been employed by the City of Middletown for a period of ten (10)
consecutive years as a corrections officer shall be presumed to have suffered an
on-the-job injury.
B.
An employee who suffers an on-the-job injury shall receive up to one
hundred and thirty (130) working days of injury leave.
1.
Injury leave shall be used consecutively from the date of injury,
except that if an employee has not exhausted the leave for an injury, he/she
may take such leave for the same injury at anytime within two (2) years of
the on-the-job injury. However, any such non-consecutive use of injury
leave shall be available only after the employee uses five (5) consecutive
days of sick leave before each such non-consecutive use of injury leave. In
no event shall injury leave be available more than two years after the initial
date of the injury.
C.
In order to be eligible for injury leave, the employee must submit, within
twenty-four (24) hours of the on-the-job injury, a report, in a form established by the
18

employer, to the appropriate supervisor. In addition, the employee must submit to the
employer, within five (5) days of the on-the-job injury, a physician’s statement, describing
the nature of the injury, limitations on the employee’s ability to work, and an expected
date of return to work. If an employee is hospitalized immediately following the injury, he
shall submit the physician’s statement within five days after his dismissal from the hospital
to the employer.
1.
If the employee fails to comply with the requirements of paragraph C
of this article, the first ten (10) days of leave shall be charged as sick leave
and subtracted from the injury leave balance, unless the employee fails to
submit either the report or the physician's statement within thirty (30) days
of the injury, in which case, the employee shall lose his/her entitlement to
any injury leave.
D.
An employee claiming the right to receive, or who is receiving injury leave
compensation, may be required by the employer from time to time to submit himself for a
medical examination by a licensed physician, selected by the employer. The employer
will pay any legitimate cost for examination that the employee's medical insurance or
workers' compensation does not cover, including travel expenses.
If an employee refuses to submit to a medical examination, or if the report from the
physician conducting the medical examination, provides that the employee is either not
injured or is able to return to work, further injury leave compensation may be suspended
or denied.
If the report from the physician selected by the city is in conflict with the report
submitted by the member's physician regarding the nature of the injury, limitations on the
member's ability to work or the expected date of return to work, the member shall be
examined by a third physician selected by the employer from a list of physicians to be
mutually agreed to by the parties. The opinion of said third physician shall be
determinative.
E.
An aggravation or re-injury of an existing injury or condition shall be treated
as part of the original injury, and shall be subject to the limitations in paragraph B of this
Article. The employer retains the right to require written evidence of the aggravation or
re-injury from the employee's physician. This provision is subject to paragraph D of this
Article.
F.
A member who is injured and unable to perform his regularly assigned
duties may be assigned at the sole discretion of the Chief of the Division to perform duties
not requiring great physical exertion in lieu of receiving injury leave compensation, with
the approval of the member's physician or the employer's physician as set forth in
paragraph (D) above.

19

ARTICLE 19 – Unpaid Leave
Employees shall be eligible for unpaid leave in accordance with the following:
1.
Maternity Leave. Upon exhaustion of sick leave and all other paid leave
that the employee is entitled to, a member who is off of work due to maternity leave shall,
subject to the requirements of the insurer, have continued the health insurance provided
by this agreement, with the City and the employee paying their respective amounts for a
period not to exceed a maximum of 9 months.
2.
Military Leave. Leaves of absence, for the performance of duty with the
United States Armed Forces or with a Reserve component thereof, shall be granted in
accordance with applicable City ordinances and the Policy and Procedures Manual.
3.
Other Leaves. Leaves of absence without pay or benefits for other reasons
may be granted at the sole discretion of the Employer.
4.
When an employee returns to work following a leave of absence, he shall
be returned to his former classification without the loss of seniority and with all across the
board wage increases, unless otherwise provided in this Agreement.
5.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, benefits and insurance will
not accrue during any period of unpaid leave exceeding two (2) consecutive weeks,
except that during such leave of absence, upon the employee’s request, the Employer
will continue group health insurance coverage at the expense of the employee.
6.
An employee desiring to apply for a leave of absence without pay must
submit an application to his immediate supervisor outlining the reason for the request.
Leave requests of five (5) days or less will be acted upon by the Chief of Police. Leave
requests exceeding five (5) days will be forwarded to the City Manager by the Chief of
Police, together with his recommendations. Approval of all such leaves of absence
without pay will be in writing with a copy to the employee and the Director of Employee
Relations Human Resources Division.
7.
Family and Medical Leave. An employee may take Family and Medical
Leave in accordance with the provisions of the Family and Medical Leave Act and the
appropriate City policy and procedures as promulgated by the City Manager governing
such leave.

ARTICLE 20 – Insurance
1.
Members shall be entitled to participate in the City's health insurance
program as recommended by the Health Care Committee and described in the
documents on file in the Finance Department.

20

(a)
The City agrees to maintain a City Health Care Committee for the
purpose of regularly reviewing employee health care needs, and
implementing a health care program for its employees. The Committee
shall act in accordance with the Final Report of the Health Care Task Force
Report dated July 10, 2006, and further amendments by the Committee. If
the Committee is not maintained by the City, the City will provide the health
care benefits in place at the time of the dissolution of the Committee for the
remainder of the Agreement and health insurance shall be a mandatory
subject of collective bargaining in successor agreements unless otherwise
agreed to by the parties.
(b)
The Union agrees to participate in the City Health Care Committee
and to adhere to the recommendations of the Committee regarding all
aspects of health issues, including, but not limited to, the selection of carrier,
determination of coverage and determination of co-payments, deductibles,
and employee contributions. The City agrees to adhere to
recommendations of the Committee as such recommendations apply to the
members. The Union shall have one (1) designee that serves on the
Committee and may exercise voting rights on behalf of the Union. Any
member appointed as the Union’s designee shall be paid for attending the
Committee meetings. Any overtime incurred by a member while attending
meetings of the committee shall be paid at one and one-half times their
regular rate of pay.
(c)
All coverage shall be subject to the insurance company’s
requirements and eligibility.
2.
All employees shall receive $15,000 group life insurance coverage paid by
the City. Double Indemnity premiums shall be paid by the City on all coverage.
3.
Members retiring from the City who were hired prior to January 1, 2011 shall
receive $5,000 life insurance coverage paid by the City. Double indemnity will not be
provided on such coverage.

ARTICLE 21 – Miscellaneous Benefits
1.
Influenza Shots. Employees may receive free annual immunization against
influenza, at such times as may be scheduled by the Health Department, at the discretion
of the City Manager.
2.
Skin Tests for Tuberculosis. So long as there is no cost to the City, an
employee and his family living in Butler County, may obtain skin tests at the Butler County
Clinic, 701 North University Boulevard, Middletown, Ohio.

21

ARTICLE 22 – Wages
1.
Officers:

There are hereby established the following pay ranges for Corrections

(a)

All employees hired before March 1, 2020 shall follow Wage
Scale 1, attached hereto. All employees hired before March 1,
2020, if transferred to another City of Middletown bargaining
unit, shall be placed in the wage schedule in effect with the
lowest number of steps.

(b)

Members hired March 1, 2020 or later shall follow Wage Scale 2,
attached hereto.

(c)

Effective January 1st of each contract year there shall be wage
increases as follows:
2020 – 2.5%

2021 – 2.5%

2022 – 2.5%

Prior Contract – Effective January 1, 2016:
Pro

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

Annual

$31,453.76

$32,933.68

$34,479.12

$36,107.76

$37,800.88

$39,582.40

$41,436.72

$43,494.88

Bi-Weekly

$1,209.76

$1,266.68

$1,326.12

$1,388.76

$1,453.88

$1,522.40

$1,593.72

$1,672.88

Hourly

$15.1220

$15.8335

$16.5765

$17.3595

$18.1735

$19.0300

$19.9215

$20.9110

Effective January 1, 2017 – 1.5% increase:
Pro

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

Annual

$31,925.92

$33,427.68

$34,997.04

$36,649.60

$38,368.72

$40,176.24

$42,058.64

$44,148.00

Bi-Weekly

$1,227.92

$1,285.68

$1,346.04

$1,409.60

$1,475.72

$1,545.24

$1,617.64

$1,698.00

Hourly

$15.3490

$16.0710

$16.8255

$17.6200

$18.4465

$19.3155

$20.2205

$21.2250

Effective January 1, 2018 – 2% increase:
Pro

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

Annual

$32,564.48

$34,096.40

$35,696.96

$37,382.80

$39,136.24

$40,980.16

$42,900.00

$45,030.96

Bi-Weekly

$1,252.48

$1,311.40

$1,372.96

$1,437.80

$1,505.24

$1,576.16

$1,650.00

$1,731.96

Hourly

$15.6560

$16.3925

$17.1620

$17.9725

$18.8155

$19.7020

$20.6250

$21.6495

The current wages shall be increased by the following rates: year one (2017),
increase wages 1.5 %; year two (2018), increase wages by 2.0%. Article 22 shall be
reopened for the negotiation of wage rates to be effective January 1, 2019, as well as the
22

rate of uniform allowance, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4117 of the Ohio
Revised Code. No other issue in Article 22 or any other article of this Agreement shall be
subject to negotiation by the parties, except as agreed by the parties.
(d)

Members
shall
participate
in
the
“Performance-Based
Compensation” set forth in the Pay & Benefits Ordinance, as adopted
by the City Council of Middletown each year.

(e)

Members shall receive a signing bonus of $1,000.00 to be paid
as follows: $500.00 on the first payroll following the execution
of this agreement and $500.00 on the first payroll following
January 1, 2021.

2.
Shift Differential. For any regularly assigned shift commencing between the
hours of 2:45 p.m. and 6:44 a.m. of the following day, differential pay shall be as follows:
(a)

For any shift starting at 2:45 p.m. or after, but not later than 7:44 p.m.
$0.80 per hour effective January 1, 2017
shall be:
$1.00 per hour effective January 1, 2018

(b)

For any shift starting at 7:45 p.m. or after, but not later than 6:44 a.m.
$0.60 per hour effective January 1, 2017
shall be:
$0.75 per hour effective January 1, 2018

3.
Salary Adjustment. The salary of each member in the bargaining unit shall
be reviewed annually by the Chief of Police for the purpose of determining which member
may be entitled to a step increase. Upon reaching Step C, the salary of each member in
the bargaining unit shall be reviewed every 6 months. All personnel records, performance,
and length of service shall be considered in making recommendations with major
emphasis placed on the evaluation of services rendered. On the recommendation of the
Chief of Police, the City Manager may advance an employee until the maximum step
has been reached.
4.
(a)
Clothing and Equipment Maintenance Allowance. Each member
shall receive a clothing and equipment maintenance allowance in the amount of $700
$1,100.00 to be paid in two equal installments on January 15 and July 15 of each year.
(b)
All monetary allowances under Section 4(a) of Article 22 of this
contract should be prorated with no allowance paid for periods prior to hire, or after
resignation, retirement, death, dismissal or during leaves of absence without pay. Said
allowance shall be paid during disability leaves of absence. All allowances shall be paid
on the 15th of the payment month and the pro-rations shall be calculated by looking back
retroactively for the six month period before the payment date to determine the above
prorated factors. Partial allowance payment shall be paid in accordance with the above
prorated factors.

23

5.
When a trainee is assigned to a shift, all non-probationary employees on
that shift shall receive a Field Training Officer (FTO) adjustment of one dollar and twentyfive cents ($1.25) per hour for all hours that the trainee is working. The length of an
employee’s training period shall be determined by the City.
6.
Employees will be granted paid leave at their regular rate of pay, less their
pay as a witness, if they are subpoenaed as a witness in work related court proceedings.
If the court proceedings are during an off-duty period for the employee, the employee will
be paid for court time, which is three (3) hours pay at time and one-half. If the employee
is required to be at the court proceedings for longer than three (3) hours, the employee
will be paid at time and one-half for the time spent in court. In the event less than three
(3) hours has elapsed between a scheduled court appearance and the scheduled
beginning of work on a particular day, the employee will be compensated for the elapsed
time between the scheduled court appearance and the scheduled beginning of work on
that day.
7.
Members agree that all payroll payments will be direct deposited in an
account of their choice in compliance with the guidelines established by the City of
Middletown Finance Department.

ARTICLE 23 – Hours of Work and Overtime
1.
Effective January 1, 1990, the workweek of all employees covered by this
Agreement will be forty (40) hours per week with work schedules and starting times to
remain flexible based on the needs of the Employer.
2.
(a)
An employee working in excess of forty (40) hours in one week, as
defined by the Fair Labor Standards Act, as amended, (provided that holidays for which
the employee is paid, injury leave and funeral bereavement leave, are counted in the 40
hours) shall be paid time and one half his/her regular rate or receive compensatory time
off on the basis of one and one half hours off for each hour of overtime worked. Each
employee shall have the right to request payment of overtime work in compensatory time
off at a rate equal to the rate of pay to which he would be entitled for the overtime. Time
off to use earned compensatory time will be granted within twenty (20) days of the request
made by the employee. When compensatory time is used, it shall not count as hours
worked during the applicable work period for purposes of determining overtime.
No employee shall be permitted to accrue more than four hundred and eighty (480)
300 hours of unused compensatory time. Members that have more than 300 hours at
execution of this agreement shall be allowed to draw down their balance to below
300 hours before being subject to the new limit. Once members go below 300 hours
their limit cannot go back over 300 hours. and aAny member who has accrued unused
compensatory time to the four hundred and eighty (480) 300 hours limit shall be paid in
cash for additional overtime worked. If an employee is paid in cash for accrued
compensatory time, he/she shall be paid at the employee’s regular rate at the time of
24

payment. Upon termination of employment, unused compensatory time shall be paid at
the employee’s average regular rate for the last three (3) years of employment or the
employee’s final regular rate, whichever is higher.
Any member may request to receive pay for accrued compensatory time in
excess of 300 hours at the member’s current hourly rate for up to 40 hours in each
year. The request is subject to the availability of funds in the budget to pay such
request and must be approved by the Chief of Police, Finance Director and City
Manager.
(b)
It is the intention of the parties, for reasons of efficiency and
economy, that the Employer be permitted to utilize work scheduling and compensatory
time to minimize its overtime liability.
(c)
An employee shall not be ordered to work two (2) consecutive
calendar days of overtime. An employee voluntarily working overtime on their day off
shall not be ordered to work any time over the amount the employee has volunteered to
work on that day.
3.

Shift differential shall be paid for any and all overtime worked.
(a)
An employee who is already in overtime status will not be subject to
an involuntary holdover. Employees who are involuntarily held over shall
receive pay at the rate of 1 1/2 times their regular rate of pay.

ARTICLE 24 – Labor–Management Meetings
1.
In the interest of sound labor/management relations, labor management
meetings will be held. The meetings will not be held more frequently than every 90 days
unless mutually agreed upon. The meetings will be held on a mutually agreeable day
and time for approximately 1 hour. The Employer or his designee shall meet with one (1)
Union representative from each bargaining unit, to discuss pending problems and to
promote a more harmonious labor/management relationship.
Upon request by an FOP/OLC Union representative, one (1) Ohio Labor Council
Representative may be present at the above-mentioned meetings.
2.
An agenda will be exchanged by the parties at least (5) working days in
advance of the scheduled meeting with a list of matters to be taken up in the meeting and
the names of those who will be attending. The committee will alternately consider items
of each party’s agenda during the meetings. The purpose of such meeting shall be to:
(a)

Discuss the administration of this agreement.

25

(b)

Notify the FOP of changes made by the Employer which affect
bargaining unit employees of the FOP.

(c)

Discuss grievances which have not been processed beyond the final
step of the grievance procedure when such discussions are mutually
agreed to by the parties.

(d)

Disseminate general information of interest to the parties.

(e)

Discuss ways to increase productivity and improve effectiveness.

(f)

To consider and discuss health and safety matters relating to
employees.

(g)

To discuss changes in work orders, regulations, standard operating
procedures, and/or general orders.

3.
Any issue unresolved at the labor-management meeting may be appealed
to the City Manager or his designee.

ARTICLE 25 – Drug Testing
1.

PURPOSE OF DRUG TESTING PROGRAM
(a)
The Police Department has a legal responsibility and management
obligation to ensure a safe work environment; as well as paramount interest in
protecting the public by ensuring that its employees have the physical stamina and
emotional stability to perform their assigned duties. A requirement for employment
must be an employee who is free from drug dependence or illegal drug use.
(b)
A reasonable drug-testing program must establish a balance between the
rights of the employee and the compelling governmental interest in maintaining a
police agency free of illegal drugs. Liability could be found against the Department
and the employee if we fail to address ourselves or the public.
(c)
There is sufficient evidence to conclude that use of illegal drugs and/or drug
abuse (whether illegal or prescription drugs) seriously impairs an employee’s
performance and general physical and mental health. The illegal use of drugs by
police employees (therefore, possession) is a crime in this jurisdiction, and clearly
unacceptable. There are unique corruption hazards with drug use by the police.

2.

DEFINITIONS

26

(a)
Drug Test – A urinalysis test administered under approved conditions and
procedures to detect drugs by a laboratory certified no later than 12/31/90 in
accordance with Department of Health and Human Services rules and regulations.
(b)
Reasonable Suspicion – An apparent state of facts and/or circumstances
found to exist upon inquiry by the supervisor, which would warrant a reasonable,
prudent person to believe the employee was under the influence of
drugs/narcotics.
3.

GENERAL RULES
(a)
Department employees shall not take any narcotic or other dangerous drug
unless prescribed by a person licensed to practice medicine. Employees who are
required to take prescription medicine shall notify their immediate supervisor if the
medication prescribed has the potential to impair the employee’s performance.
The specific medication prescribed need not be identified, but the employee shall
provide a statement from the prescribing physician that medication is prescribed
for a physical, mental or psychological condition, and any potential side effects of
the medication which may impact on the employee’s ability to perform his or her
job. If side effects exist, which are not certified by the physician, the employee
shall present such side effects to his/her supervisor in writing. Any statutorily
defined illegal use of drugs by an employee, whether on or off duty, is prohibited.
(b)
All property belonging to the Department, including the entire premises of
the department, is subject to inspection at any time without notice as there is no
exception of privacy.
1.
Property includes, but is not limited to, City owned vehicles, desks,
files, and storage lockers.
2.
Employees assigned lockers (including those that may be locked by
the employee) are subject to inspection by the employee’s supervisor after
accepted reasonable advance notice (unless the requirement for notice is
waived by the Chief of Police) and in the presence of the employee.
(c)
Failure of any police employee to comply with the intent or provisions of this
article of the contract is grounds for disciplinary action, including dismissal or other
action determined appropriate by the Chief of Police. Refusal by a police
employee to take a required test, i.e., a test that is ordered based upon reasonable
suspicion as defined in paragraph 2 (B) above, or under circumstances described
in paragraphs 4, (A) and (B), below, or follow this article of the collective bargaining
agreement, will result in immediate relief from police duties pending disposition of
any administrative personnel action. A refusal occurs if the employee fails to agree
to submit to a required test within two (2) hours of receiving the order.

4.

POLICY-DRUG TESTING/URINALYSIS

27

(a)
Employees of the department shall be required to submit to a test for drug
or narcotic use as outlined below:
1.
The Chief of Police or a police supervisor may order a drug test when
he or she has reasonable suspicion that an employee is using, or is under
the influence of drugs or narcotics.
2.
The employee shall be advised of circumstances surrounding the
order to test.
3.
Whenever practical, prior approval should be obtained from the Chief
of Police before the Supervisor orders the test.
4.
A supervisor who orders a drug test when he has reasonable
suspicion of an employee’s usage or possession, or that an employee is
under the influence of drugs, shall forward a report containing the facts and
circumstances directly to the Chief of Police. The report shall be made
available to the employee upon request. The employee may provide the
report to the Union if he/she so chooses.
5.
Test results reporting illegal drugs, narcotics, the use of controlled
substances without a lawful prescription, or the abuse of prescribed drugs,
will be submitted as a part of a written complaint by the supervisor ordering
the test.
(b)
In the event that an employee is required to submit to a drug test, the
following guidelines should be observed:
1.
The employee shall be granted enough time to change from uniform
to civilian clothing.
2.
The employee will be transported to the designated testing center by
a supervisor.
3.
The employee may request that a police department employee of
his/her choice be present for the transportation and test, provided said
individual is off duty and reasonably available.
4.

A controlled test will be conducted by personnel of the testing site.

5.
The sample will be properly labeled, sealed, and turned over to the
site personnel by the employee.
6.

All parties involved will be transported back to the police department.

28

7.
If the employee is held over his/her assigned time, he/she will be
compensated for that time.
(c)
A negative test result shall bar the City from further discipline, for refusing
to submit to a test, and the use or abuse of drugs, in violation of this policy, as it
relates to the test in that instance. Nothing in this provision is intended to limit the
ability to test an employee under this policy, either randomly or under other facts
establishing a basis for a test under this policy.
(d)
A positive result, after a second qualifying test, may serve as a basis to refer
the employee to the Employee Assistance Program maintained by the City of
Middletown. If the employee refuses or fails to attend the EAP or to follow any and
all recommendations of the EAP, the employee shall be subject to disciplinary
action. The Employer shall have the option to have a third test performed. The
third test shall be performed by the designated test center, or a laboratory
designated by the test center. The third test shall be a G.C. Mass spec. or a test
of equal or greater accuracy (at the designating test center’s option). A positive
result on the third test may result in discipline.

(e)
Employees who have found to be using illegal drugs or narcotics, or abusing
prescription drugs, shall be provided a hearing before the City Manager or his
designee where evidence is presented and preserved, before final action is taken
against the employee.
5.

RANDOM DRUG TESTING

Random drug testing will be implemented in accordance with a General Order to
be issued by the Chief of the Division of Police. The General Order implementing random
drug testing for Corrections Officers shall not be amended without the agreement of the
parties.

ARTICLE 26 – Modification and Separability
1.
The Employer and the Union acknowledge that during the negotiations which
resulted in this Agreement, each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands
and proposals with respect to any subject matter not removed by law from the area of
collective bargaining, and that the understandings and agreements arrived at by the
parties after the exercise of that right and opportunity are set forth in this Agreement. The
Employer and the Union for the term of this Agreement each further agree that the other
shall not be obligated to bargain collectively with the respect to any subject matter referred
to or governed by this Agreement unless the Employer and the Union mutually agree to
alter, amend, supplement, enlarge, or modify any of its provisions.

29

2.
The parties to this contract agree that, where the contract deals with a
particular subject, the contract takes precedence over sections of Ohio law, City
ordinances, administrative regulations, including the policies and procedures manual, and
rules of the Chief of Police, unless specifically prohibited by Ohio law, court decision, or
a decision by the State Employment Relations Board. Where this contract does not speak
to a particular subject, then the relevant section of Ohio law, City ordinance,
administrative regulations, including the policies and procedures manual, or the rules of
the Chief of Police shall prevail.
3.
If a Court of competent jurisdiction finds any provision of this Agreement to
be contrary to any applicable statute, such provision shall be of no further force and effect,
but the remainder of the Agreement shall remain in full force and effect. The parties
agree that should any provision of this Agreement be found to be invalid, they will
schedule a meeting within thirty (30) days at a mutually agreeable time to negotiate
alternative language on the same subject matter.

ARTICLE 27 – Seniority
1.
Seniority shall be defined as total length of service in a permanent full-time
position(s) with the City.
2.
Classification seniority shall be defined as the uninterrupted length of
service in any one classification. If two or more employees have the same classification
seniority, employment seniority shall be used to establish seniority among those
employees. The length of any temporary demotion shall be excluded from the length of
service of that employee for purposes of calculating classification seniority.
3.

Seniority shall be broken, i.e., interrupted, when an employee:
(a)

resigns, unless reinstated within one (1) year;

(b)

is discharged for just cause;

(c)

is laid off and not recalled within the time limits;

(d)

retires;

(e)

engages in a strike or work stoppage during the term of this
agreement;

(f)

fails to return to work after a leave of absence.

4.
The City shall establish and post a seniority list no later than December 1
of each calendar year, and such list shall be effective the following January 1. The list
shall contain the following information:
30

(a)

names of bargaining unit members;

(b)

classification;

(c)

date of original City hiring;

(d)

date of classification appointment.

Employees shall have the right to challenge their seniority listing for fifteen
(15) days after the date of posting. Thereafter, the list shall remain unchanged until the
next yearly posting. A copy of the list shall be given to the Union on the date of posting.
5.
Seniority, as defined in this Article, shall be used for all seniority applications
specifically set forth in other Articles this Agreement. If those Articles do not specifically
apply to seniority, the City shall not be required to consider seniority in applying the
provisions of that Article. Seniority does not apply and shall not be required to be used
as a factor in assigning particular types of work to employees with a position classification,
or in assigning employee’s machines, equipment or places of work.

ARTICLE 28 – Layoff and Recall
1.
Layoff. In the event the City should decide to layoff personnel in the job
classifications covered by this collective bargaining agreement, the following procedure
shall be followed:
(a)

The employee(s) with the least continuous classification seniority
shall be laid off first from the affected classification.

(b)

Before a bargaining unit employee is laid off from their position all
seasonal, part-time and government funded program employees in
the same classification subject to the lay off shall be laid off prior to
the layoff of any full-time bargaining unit employee in the affected
classification. The City will not negate this provision by transferring
seasonal, part-time and government funded program employees to
other classifications prior to laying off bargaining unit employees.

(c)

In the event an employee is laid off, the employee shall receive
payment for earned but unused vacation, birthday, personal day and
sick leave conversion, with the employee’s termination pay.

2.
Recall. Employees who are on layoff shall be placed on a recall list by
classification for a period of twelve (12) months and shall be recalled in reverse order of
their layoff by position in the affected classification with the last employee laid off being

31

the first to be called back and continuing in like manner until the required number of
employees has been obtained.
3.
Recall Notification. No new employee shall be hired in a classification until
all employees who have been laid off in that classification in the previous twelve (12)
months have been given the opportunity to return to work. Laid off employees will be
notified by registered mail at their last known address to return to work within twenty-one
(21) calendar days. Failure to report within the time limit removes them from the recall
list. In addition, no seasonal, part-time, or government funded program employees shall
be hired in the affected classification(s) until all employees on the layoff list have been
recalled to the affected classification or until after the twelve (12) month recall period
expires.
4.
Layoff/Termination. An employee who is on layoff for a period of twelve
(12) months is automatically terminated and loses all seniority.
5.
Insurance. To the extent that applicable Federal law permits such
coverage, an employee on layoff shall have the opportunity to continue health insurance
coverage at the sole expense of the employee.

ARTICLE 29 – Disability Leave
The City shall comply with State law in regards to disability leave.

ARTICLE 30 – Termination
This agreement shall become effective January 1, 2017 2020 and shall remain in
force until December 31, 2019 2022.
SIGNATURES
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE,
OHIO LABOR COUNCIL, INC.

CITY OF MIDDLETOWN

_____________________________
Tom Fehr
Staff Representative, FOP
Ohio Labor Council, Inc.

________________________________
Susan H. Cohen
Acting City Manager

_____________________________
Candi Stultz
Bargaining Team Member

________________________________
Major Leanne Hood
Deputy Police Chief
32

________________________________
Alexander Ewing, Esq., Chief Negotiator
and on behalf of the Law Director

33

STAFF REPORT
For the Business Meeting – May 19, 2020

______________________________________________________________________________
May 11, 2020
REVISED: May 18, 2020
TO:

City Council

FROM:

Susan Cohen, Acting City Manager
Prepared by: Julie Owsley, Paralegal
FOP, OLC, INC. (CORRECTION OFFICERS)
LABOR CONTRACT
JANUARY 1, 2020 – DECEMBER 31, 2022

PURPOSE
The objective of this staff report is to present to City Council a tentative bargaining agreement
between the City of Middletown and the Correction Officers (FOP/OLC) bargaining unit.
BACKGROUND AND FINDINGS
The present collective bargaining agreement between the City and this unit expired on December
31, 2019. The City was represented by Frost Brown Todd during the negotiations. The parties have
been actively negotiating the terms of the new contract since last fall. The tentative agreement
includes the following:
(1)

The term of the contract is for three years – 2020, 2021 and 2022.

(2)
Wages. Increase of 2.5% for each year of the contract; two lump sum signing bonuses of
$500 per member (upon signing and in January 2021); and a new 12-step wage scale for employees
hired March 1, 2020 or later. Additionally, accrued compensatory time will be decreased from 480
to 300 hours. Employees currently having in excess of 300 hours will be able to receive pay for up
40 hours in each year of the contract, as long as funds are budgeted for this purpose. Once the
accumulated hours are 300 or less, the accrual cannot go back above 300. Currently, there are
only 2 CO’s with more than 300 hours.
(3)

Uniform allowance. This benefit will be increasing from $700.00 to $1,100.00.

(4)

Bereavement leave. Modified to be consistent with other bargaining units.

(5)
Vacation. Vacation credit was increased slightly to match the amounts for current nonunion employees that receive vacation.
(6)
Sick Leave. Upon death or retirement of an employee with 25+ years of service, unused
sick leave can be converted to terminal pay at a rate of 16 hours to 8 hours pay (2:1), up to 12
weeks/60 working days. Currently, this is 10 weeks/50 working days.

(7)
There are some additional non-economic changes to the articles for Dues Deduction,
Employee Rights and Arbitration.
RECOMMENDATION
City Staff recommends that City Council approve this tentatively agreed upon collective
bargaining agreement and authorize the City Manager to enter into this agreement.
ALTERNATIVES
City Council could choose not to approve the agreement. In that case, the City would proceed into
the fact-finding process. If at the completion of the fact-finding process both parties accept the
decision of the fact-finder, that decision become the contract between the parties. However, either
party can reject the fact-finder’s report, which moves the process forward. The CO’s unit is eligible
for binding conciliation. A conciliator could issue an award that the City simply cannot afford.
While the risk of a substantial award is small, the risk nonetheless exists.
FINANCIAL IMPACT
The wages for the proposed collective bargaining agreements are consistent with the 2020 budget.
The new costs of implementation of the agreement is $5,500.00 in 2020 for the signing bonus
($500/member) and $4,400.00 per year for the increased uniform allowance ($400/member). If
the City chose to go through the statutory process, there would be significant costs, including the
time of our negotiator and City Staff to prepare and present the information at the necessary
hearings and the City share of the appointed third parties. In the end, the costs would certainly
exceed the estimated costs associated with this agreement.
EMERGENCY/NON-EMERGENCY LEGISLATION
The present contract expired December 31, 2019. Emergency legislation is requested so that the
new contract can be signed and back pay can be issued as quickly as possible.

LEGISLATION
ITEM 3

RESOLUTION NO. R2020-12
A RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING THE CITY MANAGER TO ENTER INTO AN
AGREEMENT WITH THE FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION FOR CARES
ACT GRANT FUNDING AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is providing grant funding
to airports due to the coronavirus pandemic to be used for operational or capital needs;
NOW. THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, by the City Council of the City of
Middletown, Butler/Warren Counties, Ohio that:
Section 1
The City Manager is authorized to enter an agreement with the Federal Aviation
Administration to receive CARES Act grant funds to be used for operational or capital
needs at Middletown Regional Airport (MWO). The City Manager is further authorized
to submit any other documentation or application that may be required. The agreement
is subject to the review and approval of the Law Director.
Section 2
It is hereby determined that the subject matter of this legislation is not a general
and permanent nature, does not provide for a public improvement and does not assess
a tax or payment.
Section 3
This resolution is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, to wit: to
permit the application and agreement to be submitted so that funds can be distributed
as soon as possible to facilitate the CARES Act program goals, and shall take effect
and be in force from and after its adoption.

_____________________
Nicole Condrey, Mayor
Adopted: __________________

Attest:_______________________
Clerk of the City Council
H:/Law/Leg/2020 Leg/r FAA CARES Act Grant

STAFF REPORT
For the Business Meeting of: May 19, 2020

May 5, 2020
TO:

Susan Cohen, Acting City Manager

FROM:

Chris Xeil Lyons, Economic Development Director
Submitted by Matt Eisenbraun, Assistant Economic Development Director

Federal Aviation Administration
CARES Act Grant Application/Acceptance
PURPOSE
To authorize the City Manager to enter into a grant agreement with the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) to accept $69,000 in CARES Act Grant funding for the 2020
program year.
BACKGROUND AND FINDINGS
Due to the impact of the Corona Virus on the aviation industry, the FAA has been
authorized to provide CARES Act Grant Funding to airports that are part of the National
Plan of Integrated Airports System (NPIAS). Funding levels were determined by the role
and classification within the system.
Middletown Regional Airport (KMWO) has been tentatively awarded $69,000. CARES
Act funds can be utilized for a variety of operational needs that are described within the
NPIAS Grant Assurances and has no deadline for use. CARES Act funds do not need to be
expended on capital projects normally supported by annual NPIAS grant funding but can
be if desired. No Local Match is required to accept or expend the funds.
FINANCIAL IMPACT
None – no local match is required.
Grant must be used within the Airport Fund.
ALTERNATIVES
The alternative would be to turn down the grant funding.
EMERGENCY/NON-EMERGENCY
Emergency – the FAA has asked that the CARES Act Grant funds be distributed as soon as
possible to facilitate the CARES Act program goals.
DEPARTMENTAL CLEARANCES
Law
Finance

LEGISLATION
ITEM 4

RESOLUTION NO. R2020-13
A RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING AN AMENDMENT TO A CONTRACT WITH THE
STATE OF OHIO, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION FOR THE EXTENSION
OF THE GREAT MIAMI RIVER TRAIL AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, City Council authorized a contract with the State of Ohio,
Department of Transportation for the extension of the Great Miami River Trail in
Resolution No. R2020-07, adopted April 7, 2020; and
WHEREAS, after bids were opened by ODOT on April 23, 2020, ODOT
determined that the project costs exceeded their estimate and the previously approved
contract would need to be amended; and
WHEREAS, the City of Middletown’s share of the project cost will be increasing
from $436,900.00 to $606,740.00;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the City Council of the City of
Middletown, Butler/Warren Counties, Ohio that:
Section 1
The City Manager is hereby authorized to enter into an amendment to the
contract with the State of Ohio, Department of Transportation for the extension of the
Great Miami River Trail. The amendment to the contract shall be in a form approved
by the Law Director.
Section 2
For said purpose the Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to pay
a sum not to exceed $606,740.00 from the Capital Improvement Fund (Fund #220).
Section 3
This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, to wit: in order
to meet state deadlines and assure the availability of funding, and shall take effect and
be in force from and after its adoption.
__________________________
Nicole Condrey, Mayor
Adopted:________________
Attest:

_______________________
Clerk of City Council

H:\Law\leg\2020 Leg\r Amend ODOT Contract Bike Path

STAFF REPORT
For Business Meeting: May 19, 2020

DATE

May 6, 2020

TO:

Susan Cohen, Acting City Manager

FROM:

Scott Tadych, Public Works and Utilities Director
Prepared by Rob Nicolls, City Engineer

CITY/ODOT FINAL LEGISLATION-BIKE PATH EXTENSIONADDITIONAL FUNDING
PURPOSE
Authorize the City Manager to amend the contract with the Ohio Department of
Transportation (ODOT) for the extension of the bike path (But/War GMR Trail Extension) to
include additional funding due to higher than anticipated bids.
BACKGROUND AND FINDINGS
City Council approved the original contract at the April 7 meeting. The funding in that
contract was based on ODOT’s estimated project cost. Bids were opened by ODOT on
April 23, 2020 and the costs exceeded their estimate. Therefore, the contract needs to be
amended.
ODOT attributed the increase mainly due to the retaining wall item. All twelve bidders were
higher than ODOT’s estimate on this particular item which is a substantial portion of the
project. Otherwise the bids were consistent with the ODOT estimate.
The large retaining wall is 706 feet long and up to seven feet tall. The retaining wall is
necessary due to the elevation difference and narrow horizontal separation between State
Route 73 and the Great Miami River through this corridor.
This project is a joint project between Middletown and Franklin. Franklin has an additional
share also and has indicated they want to proceed.
ALTERNATIVES
1. Delay the project and request ODOT rebid. ODOT indicated they prefer not to rebid
because the bulk of overages were due to the retaining wall and rebidding would
unlikely result in lower overall costs.
2. Cancel the project and reapply for funding at a later date. Staff has concerns that
future funding may be impacted by the current COVID-19 issue. There is no

1

guarantee future funding would be available. This would put Franklin’s funding in
jeopardy as well. OKI funds are typically programmed four years in advance.
FINANCIAL IMPACTS
The original approved financial impacts were as follows:
Estimated Construction Cost:

$2,486,495.63

Estimated Middletown Share:

$1,038,380.00

Funding for Middletown Share:

$601,480.00
$436,900.00

OKI Grant
Local Match

Due to the higher than expected bids, an additional $169,840 is required.
Funds are appropriated in the General Capital Fund (220) for this expenditure.
EMERGENCY/NON EMERGENCY
Emergency legislation is requested to pay ODOT the additional amount as soon as
possible to maintain the project schedule.
ATTACHMENTS
None

2

LEGISLATION
ITEM 5

RESOLUTION NO. R2020-14
A RESOLUTION TO MAKE ADJUSTMENTS TO APPROPRIATIONS FOR
CURRENT EXPENSES AND OTHER EXPENDITURES OF THE CITY OF
MIDDLETOWN, COUNTIES OF BUTLER AND WARREN, STATE OF OHIO, FOR
THE PERIOD ENDING DECEMBER 31, 2020. (GARAGE FUND)
BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council of the City of Middletown, Butler/Warren
Counties, Ohio that:
Section 1
The following sums are hereby appropriated from the Garage Fund of the City
to accounts of the City for the purposes herein described as follows:
FROM: Unappropriated Garage Fund (Fund #605)
TO:
Purchase of Equipment, Accounts of 550 (605.550.54350)
TOTAL GARAGE FUND

$23,224.86
$23,224.86
$23,224.86

Section 2
The Finance Director is hereby authorized to draw his warrants on the City
Treasurer for payments from any of the foregoing appropriations upon receiving proper
certificates and vouchers therefor, approved by the Board of Officers authorized by law
to approve the same, or an ordinance or resolution of the City Council to make
expenditures provided that no warrants shall be drawn or paid for salaries or wages
except to persons employed by authority of and in accordance with law or ordinance.
Section 3
All legislation inconsistent herewith is hereby repealed.
Section 4
This resolution shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption as
provided by law.
______________________________
Nicole Condrey, Mayor
1st Reading: May 19, 2020
2nd Reading:_______
Adopted:________
Effective:________

Attest:_______________________
Clerk of City Council
H:\Law\leg\2020 Leg\r Supp Approp (Garage)

STAFF REPORT
For the Business Meeting of May 19, 2020

DATE:

April 28, 2020

TO:

Susan Cohen, Acting City Manager

FROM:

Jacob Burton, Finance Director

Supplemental Appropriations – Garage Fund
PURPOSE
To request a supplemental appropriation for the Middletown Division of Fire, Municipal Garage
Fund budget in the amount of $23,224.86 for payment to Stryker for a previously delivered
power load cot.
605.550.54350 (Purchase of Equipment) - $23,224.86
BACKGROUND and FINDINGS
Council approved the purchase of a power load cot and associated equipment for a fire medic
from Stryker in the amount of $43,931.56 on the Consent Agenda at the March 19, 2019
Council meeting. Due to some issues with the billing when the ownership of Stryker changed,
the City was issued an inadvertent credit and never received an invoice for the cot portion of the
charges. After all invoicing issues were resolved between the vendor and the Division of Fire,
the City still owes Stryker $23,224.86 for the previously delivered equipment. Because this was
unknown when preparing the 2020 budget, a supplemental appropriation is necessary in order
to pay the vendor the remaining balance.
FINANCIAL IMPACT
This legislation will reduce the Municipal Garage Fund by $23,224.86.
ALTERNATIVES
The alternative would be not to appropriate the funds which would prevent the Division of Fire
from paying this invoice that should have been paid in 2019.
EMERGENCY/NON EMERGENCY
Non-Emergency

LEGISLATION
ITEM 6

RESOLUTION NO. R2020-15
A RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING AN EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT WITH JAMES M.
PALENICK TO SERVE AS CITY MANAGER OF THE CITY OF MIDDLETOWN AND
DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, by the City Council of the City of
Middletown, Butler/Warren Counties, Ohio that:
SECTION 1
The City of Middletown enter into an employment agreement with James M.
Palenick to serve as City Manager of the City of Middletown in the form attached hereto
and marked Exhibit “A”.
SECTION 2
That this resolution is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, to wit: the
immediate need to establish a relationship with said employee, and shall take effect
and be in force from and after its adoption.

___________________________________
Nicole Condrey, Mayor
Adopted:______________

Attest:_________________________
Clerk of City Council
H:/Law/leg/2020 Leg/r Palenick City Manager Agreement

EXHIBIT “A”

EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT
This Employment Agreement (hereinafter "Agreement" or "Contract") is entered into this ____ day
of _________, 2020, by and between the City of Middletown, One Donham Plaza, Middletown,
Ohio 45042, a chartered municipal corporation organized under the laws of the State of Ohio,
(hereinafter "City") and James M. Palenick (hereinafter “City Manager”).
WHEREAS, the Charter of the City vests the administrative powers of government in the
position of City Manager; and
WHEREAS, the City desires to employ City Manager to serve as the City Manager of the
City; and
WHEREAS, both parties desire to express their mutual intent to commit to a continuing
employment relationship, in accordance with the parameters of the City Charter.
NOW, THEREFORE, the parties enter into this Agreement in exchange for and in
consideration of the mutual promises and covenants contained herein.
SECTION I – EMPLOYMENT
A.

The City employs City Manager on the terms and conditions stated below to act as City
Manager for the City of Middletown. City Manager shall satisfactorily perform the duties
of City Manager as more fully described in Article III, Section 3 of the Charter of the City
of Middletown, Ohio. ("Powers and Duties of City Manager").

B.

Except as otherwise provided herein, City Manager shall devote his full time to conducting
the business of the City and shall not directly or indirectly, during his employment, engage
in any activity adverse to the City's business or welfare, whether alone or as a partner,
officer, director, manager, advisor, agent, or investor in any corporation, partnership, joint
venture, association or other entity. City Manager shall act in compliance with the
reasonable and lawful direction of City Council and in accordance with the City Charter.
City Manager shall not be permitted to perform consulting or similar services for
compensation unless approved in writing by City Council.

C.

City Manager’s hours of work shall be governed by the applicable provisions of City
ordinance governing hours of work and the Policy and Procedure Manual of the City.
SECTION II – TERM OF EMPLOYMENT

The term of employment shall begin on July 13, 2020, and shall continue until terminated by: 1)
the mutual agreement of the parties; or, 2) action by City Council in accordance with Article III,
Section 4 of the Charter of the City of Middletown ("Removal of City Manager"); or, 3) written
notice from City Manager of his intent to terminate this Agreement given not less than sixty (60)
days, of which no more than thirty (30) days may be vacation or holidays; or, 4) City Manager’s

death or disability, rendering him unable to perform his duties under this contract for a period of
one hundred and twenty (120) consecutive calendar days (subject to the applicable state and
federal laws).
If City Manager is terminated in accordance with subsection 2 above, the city will, in lieu of
paying the compensation required by the City Charter, as well as any earned and accrued benefits,
provide City Manager a severance payment in accordance with the following schedule:
Length of Service

Severance Benefit

0-4 years

6 months’ salary (paid out in equal monthly intervals) with 6
months continued coverage under the City’s health insurance plan

4+ years

9 months’ salary (paid out in equal monthly intervals) with 9
months continued coverage under the City’s health insurance plan

The City manager shall not receive this severance benefit if he is terminated for just cause. “Just
cause” shall mean malfeasance, official misconduct, dishonesty, moral turpitude,
insubordination, neglect of duty, and/or any breach of the City Manager’s duties under this
Agreement. Nothing in this paragraph shall alter the at-will nature of the City Manager’s
employment by the City as described in Article III, Section 4 of the Charter of the City of
Middletown or subsection 2 above. Any dispute concerning whether the City Manager was
terminated for just cause shall be determined in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Section VIII of this Agreement.
Any severance benefit shall become effective following the adoption of the preliminary
resolution for the City Manager’s removal. Continued health insurance coverage is conditioned
upon the City Manager paying the employee contribution required by City ordinance.
SECTION III – COMPENSATION
In consideration of the services rendered under this Agreement, the City shall pay City Manager
as follows:
A.

Base Salary
Effective July 13, 2020 - $160,000
Effective July 1, 2021 - $165,000* (*conditioned on a satisfactory performance
evaluation, as determined by the City Council).

B.

The City agrees, during the term of this Agreement, to pick up and pay as a “fringe benefit”
City Manager’s statutorily required contributions to the Ohio Public Employees
Retirement System in accordance with Resolution No. R2016-15, adopted August 16, 2016
by City Council.

2

C.

The City will also, during the term of this Agreement, pay an amount equal to two percent
(2%) of City Manager’s base salary into an account with the International City
Management Association Retirement Corporation on behalf of Palenick.

D.

Nothing in this Section III is intended to alter or limit the parties to this Agreement to
exercise their rights under SECTION II - TERM OF EMPLOYMENT of this Agreement,
nor is the recitation of a base salary in this Section III a promise or commitment to pay to
City Manager all or any portion of that base salary if this Agreement is terminated, except
as to the payment of severance detailed in Section II herein.
SECTION IV – BENEFITS

During the term of this Agreement, City Manager shall be entitled to such benefits as are provided
by the applicable ordinances of the City of Middletown and the Policy and Procedure Manual,
except as specifically provided herein.
A.

Car allowance. In lieu of the allowance provided in the City ordinance, the City shall pay
City Manager a monthly car allowance of four hundred and fifty dollars ($450.00) to be
used to purchase, lease, own, operate and maintain a personal vehicle. City Manager shall
be responsible for all expenses for such vehicle, including, but not limited to fuel,
maintenance and insurance.

B.

Moving Expenses. The City will pay City Manager the amount of fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) for expenses incurred in relocating his residence to Middletown. City
Manager shall begin to reside within the City on or before December 1, 2020 and shall
continue to reside within the City during his tenure of office, as required by Article III,
Section 2 of the Charter of the City of Middletown ("Qualifications of City Manager").

C.

Membership Expenses. The City agrees to budget for and pay for professional dues and
subscriptions reasonably necessary for City Manager’s continuation and full participation
in national (ICMA), regional, state, and local associations and organizations necessary
and desirable for City Manager’s continued professional participation, growth and
training, and for the good of the City. Further, City agrees to budget for and pay for
reasonable travel and subsistence expenses of City Manager for professional and official
travel, meetings, and occasions to adequately continue his professional development, and
to pursue necessary official functions of the City.

D.

Paid Time Off. The City Manager shall receive all paid time off benefits as set forth in
the City’s Paid Time Off policy as adopted from time to time by the City Council.

E.

Health Insurance. The City shall provide to the City Manager health and dental insurance
coverage in accordance with the coverage in effect for other employees of the City. The
City reserves the right to change carriers or its method of insurance during the term of
this Agreement.

3

SECTION V – INDEMNIFICATION
The city shall defend, save harmless and indemnify City Manager against any tort, professional
liability claim or demand or other legal action, whether groundless or otherwise, arising out of an
alleged act or omission occurring in the performance of City Manager’s lawful duties as city
Manager or resulting from the exercise of judgement or discretion in connection with the
performance of program duties or responsibilities, unless the act or omission involved willful,
wanton, or criminal conduct. City Manager may request and the City shall not unreasonably refuse
to provide legal representation at City’s expense. Such legal representation, as provided by City
on behalf of City Manager, shall extend until a final determination of the legal action including
any appeals brought by either party.
City shall indemnify City Manager against any and all losses, damages, judgements, interest,
settlements, fines, court costs, and other reasonable costs and expenses of legal proceedings
including reasonable attorney’s fees for attorneys retained by the city under this paragraph and any
other liabilities incurred by, imposed upon, or suffered by City Manager in connection with or
resulting from any claim, action, suit, or proceeding actual or threatened, arising out of or in
connection with the performance of his lawful duties. Any settlement of any claim must be made
with prior approval of the City in order for indemnification, as provided in this Section, to be
available.
City Manager recognizes that City shall have the right to compromise and settle any claim or suit.
Further, City agrees to pay all reasonable litigation expenses of City Manager throughout the
pendency of any litigation to which City Manager is a party, witness, or advisor to the City. Such
expense payments shall continue beyond City Manager’s service to the City as long as litigation
is pending.
SECTION VI – MODIFICATIONS
This Agreement may be modified at any time, by mutual consent of the City Manager and the City.
SECTION VII – SAVINGS CLAUSE
Should any Article, Section or portion of this Agreement be held unlawful and unenforceable by
any court, legislative or administrative tribunal or competent jurisdiction, then such decision or
legislation shall apply only to the specific Article, Section or portion of the Agreement. The parties
will meet and discuss the abrogated provision. The remainder of the Agreement shall remain in
full force and effect.
SECTION VIII – RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES
Any dispute between the parties will be settled by arbitration conducted by the American
Arbitration Association. The arbitration would be conducted in Butler County, Ohio, by a single
arbitrator to be chosen by mutual agreement of the parties. The City shall pay the fees and costs
charged by the arbitrator. Any award rendered in arbitration shall be limited to those remedies
available in any court of competent jurisdiction. The award will be final, and judgment thereon
may be entered in any court of competent jurisdiction.

4

SECTION IX – LEGAL REPRESENTATION
The parties each separately acknowledge that they have carefully read this Agreement, that each
is satisfied with all of the terms, that each has had adequate time to review and consider this
Agreement and to consult with their respective legal counsel, and that each has agreed to all the
provisions contained herein. Neither party shall be considered the drafter of this document.
SECTION X – ENTIRE AGREEMENT
This contract constitutes the entire agreement between the parties. The parties agree that no other
promises or inducements have been made unless contained in writing, attached or incorporated
by reference into this Agreement.
SECTION XI – APPLICABLE LAW
This Agreement and any amendments hereto shall be governed by and construed in accordance
with the laws of the State of Ohio.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this Agreement on the date first written
above.
CITY OF MIDDLETOWN
By:

____________________
Mayor

______________________
James M. Palenick

___________________
Vice Mayor
__________________
Council Member
__________________
Council Member
Council Member
ATTEST:
__________________
Clerk of City Council
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
_______________________
Law Director
5
