Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

STATE OF OHIO
STATE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS BOARD
IN THE MATTER OF FACT-FINDING
BETWEEN

Case No. 2013-MED-10-1396

INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF
TEAMSTERS, LOCAL 377,
"Employee Organization/Union"
and
BOARDMAN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF
TRUSTEES,
"Employer"

REPORT OF FACT-FINDER
AND RECOMMENDATIONS
DATE OF REPORT AND DATE OF TRANSMISSION: June 16, 2014

Representatives on Behalf of Employee
Organization I Union:
Gregg Shaddle, Vice President and Trustee
Teamsters Local 377
1223 Teamster Drive
Youngstown, Ohio 44502
Telephone: 330.743.3111
Email: ibt3 77trusteegs@aol.com

Representative on Behalf of Employer:
Robin L. Bell, Regional Manager
Clemans, Nelson and Associates, Inc.
2351 South Arlington Road, Suite A
Akron, Ohio 44319-1907
Telephone: 330.785.7700
Telecopier: 330.785.4949
E-mail: rbell@clemansnelson.com

Susan D. Jansen, Esq.
Doll, Jansen, Ford & Rakay
Ill West First Street, Suite 1100
Dayton, OH 45402-1156
Telephone: 937.461.5310
Email: sjansen@djflawfirm.com

FACT-FINDER:
DONALD N. JAFFE, ESQ.
The Tower at Erieview
1301 East 9th Street, Suite 1900
Cleveland, Ohio 44114-1862
Telephone No.: 216.687.3262
Telecopier No.: 216.621.8369
E-mail: djaffelaw@aol.com

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

I.

INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................. 1

II.

BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................... 3

III.

INCLUSION OF CURRENT CONTRACT................................................................... 4

IV.

UNRESOLVED ISSUES .................................................................................................. 4
Article 10, Section 6 (Discipline) ........................................................................... 4
Article 10, Section 7 (Discipline) ........................................................................... 5
Article II (Grievance Procedure) ........................................................................... 5
Article 12 (Seniority) I Article 16 (Part-Time Employees) .................................... 7
Article 13 (Reduction in Force and Recall) ............................................................ 8
Article 21 (Hours of Work/Overtime/Call-Out) ..................................................... 9
Article 22 (Snow/Ice Control Overtime) .............................................................. II
Article 23 (Meal Tickets). .. .. .. .. . ... .. .. .. .. .. .. ... . .. .. . ... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ... .. ... .. .. .... ... ... .. .... ... 14
Article 24 (Compensation). ....... .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. .. .... ..... .... .. .. .. .. .. ... .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
Article 25 (Insurance) ........................................................................................... 19
Article 2 7 (Longevity) .......................................................................................... 20
Article 28 (Out of Class Compensation) ............................................................... 20
Article 29 (Clothing Allowance) .......................................................................... 21
Article 30 (Vacations) ........................................................................................... 23
Article 33 (Sick Leave) ......................................................................................... 24
Article 34 (Injury on Duty) ................................................................................... 25
Article 37 (Bereavement Leave) ........................................................................... 26
Article 45 (Perfect Attendance Incentive) ............................................................ 26

- I -

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

Article 46 (Attendance Incentive Program) .......................................................... 27
Article 47 (Commercial Driver's License) ........................................................... 27
Article 48 (Duration) ............................................................................................. 28
Appendix A (Reduction and Recall List) .............................................................. 29

II

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

I.

INTRODUCTION.

This matter comes before the Fact-Finder as a result of a notification dated March 25,
2014 advising the State Employment Relations Board ("SERB") and this Fact-Finder of his
mutual selection by the parties to serve as Fact-Finder. The fact-finding protocol is between the
Boardman Township Board of Trustees and the International Brotherhood of Teamsters,
Local 377, which are the respective employer and collective bargaining representative.
On May 22, 2014, the parties met with the Fact-Finder, however, both prior to the FactFinder's appointment and prior to the scheduling of fact-finding, the parties had engaged in
negotiations pertaining to the Collective Bargaining Agreement on November 8, November 26,
and December 13,2013, January 8, February 28, March 7 and May 2, 2014.
A fact-finding hearing was held on May 22, 2014 at the Holiday Inn located at 7410
South Avenue, Boardman, Ohio 44512. The facilities originally suggested for fact-finding were
either unsuitable or unacceptable and, thus, ultimately, the hotel site was agreed upon by the
parties. In that context, Administrative Code 4117 -9-05(H) provides in pertinent part: "The
fact-finding panel may not choose a hearing location at a cost to the parties unless the parties fail
to agree to an alternate cost free location. Costs associated with a meeting room shall be the
obligation of the parties."
The Fact-Finder received and has taken into consideration the numerous exhibits and
materials presented by both parties, including the parties' respective pre-hearing position
statements and the current Collective Bargaining Agreement between the parties effective
January I, 20 II through December 31, 2013.

In that context, it should be noted that the

collective bargaining representative in the prior agreement was a union referred to as "Township
Workers' Association of Boardman," which the parties also periodically referred to as the
"Association." The present collective bargaining representative, Teamsters Local Union 377, is
- l -

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

the new collective bargaining representative and, thus, was not involved in the prior agreement.
Although not every exhibit or document has been enumerated or analyzed in this Report, the
Fact-Finder has reviewed each and, in some instances, will be addressing the issues in summary
fashion.

In that context, the Fact-Finder would be remiss if he did not commend the

representatives of both the Union and the Township for their presentation, their efforts and the
materials presented.
In addition to the representatives identified on the face sheet of this Report, the following
were also present and participated:
On Behalf of Teamster Local377:
Richard Sandburg, President, Teamsters Local Union 377
Michael Moran, Truck Driver
Keith Mead, Mechanic
Michael J. Hardie, Worker
William Costello, Mechanic
On Behalf of the Township:
Stephanie Landers, Deputy Administrator
Brenda Metzger, Administrative Assistant, Road Department
Larry Wilson, Road Superintendent
Jason Loree, Township Administrator
In addition to the material presented and the arguments of the parties, the Fact-Finder has
also taken into consideration the statutory guidelines enunciated in Revised Code
§4117.14(C)(4)(a) through (f). In particular, Subsection (e) states in pertinent part: "In making
its recommendations, the fact-finding panel shall take into consideration the factors listed in
divisions (G)(7)(a) to (f) of this section." Subsection (G)(7) identifies the considering factors as:
"(a)

Past collectively bargained agreements, if any, between the parties;

(b)

Comparison of the issues submitted to final offer settlement relative to the
employees in the bargaining unit involved with those issues related to
other public and private employees doing comparable work, giving
consideration to factors peculiar to the area and classification involved;

-2-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

(c)

The interests and welfare of the public, the ability of the public employer
to finance and administer the issues proposed, and the effect of the
adjustments on the normal standard of public service;

(d)

The lawful authority of the public employer;

(e)

The stipulations of the parties;

(f)

Such other factors, not confined to those listed in this section, which are
normally or traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of
the issues submitted to final offer settlement through voluntary collective
bargaining, mediation, fact-finding, or other impasse resolution procedures
in the public service or in private employment."

Consistent with the provisions of Revised Code §4117.14(C)(4)(e) and (G)(7)(a)-(f),
SERB has set forth similar standards in Administrative Code 4117-9-0S(J) and (K)(l) through
(6).

II.

BACKGROUND,
Boardman Township is a governmental entity of a population of approximately 40,000

located in the northeast portion of Ohio, approximately southeast of Youngstown, Youngstown
being the county seat in Mahoning County.
In addition to the instant bargaining unit, the Township also has five other collective
bargaining units, to wit:
{I)

OPBA (Ohio Patrolmen's Benevolent Association), Dispatch;

(2)

OPBA Rank (Officers);

(3)

OPBA Patrol;

(4)

AFSCME; and

(5)

IAFF (International Association of Fire Fighters).

The instant bargaining unit consists of 17 road employees in the Road Department
consisting of the following: foreman (2); inspector (1); utility man(!); mechanic (3); operator
(4); driver (4); and laborer (2). Article I provides that the previous association, now Teamsters

- 3-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

Local 377, is the sole and exclusive bargaining agent "on behalf of all the employees of the Road
Department, including mechanics, with respect to wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment." Excluded from recognition are the superintendent, assistant superintendent, all
management, confidential, supervisory, temporary, seasonal, part-time and employees not
certified by SERB as being included within the bargaining unit. (Article 1, Section 2)
III.

INCLUSION OF CURRENT CONTRACT.

Except as otherwise set forth in this Report and Recommendations, or as agreed to by the
parties in writing, the Fact-Finder recommends retention of current contract language.
IV.

UNRESOLVED ISSUES.
Article 10, Section 6 (Discipline). The Union has proposed a modification to Section 6.

Under current Section 6, if an employee is charged with a felony and subsequently the charges
are reduced to a misdemeanor or the employee is found not guilty of the charges, the employee
may still be subject to discipline within the scope of Article 10. The Union has proposed that
Section 6 provide that if the reduction or dismissal is made that the employee "may not" be
subject to discipline. The Township has argued that notwithstanding a criminal disposition, the
employee might still be subject to administrative sanctions. The Fact-Finder notes that if a
criminal charge is reduced from a felony to a misdemeanor, there is still the criminal charge
involved. If an individual is found "not guilty" then it is treated as if the offense did not occur in
the first place. However, it is common knowledge and frequently used throughout the legal
system that a disposition in a criminal case is not necessarily a disposition in a civil case. one of
the more famous examples of this is the "O.J. Simpson trial" wherein he was acquitted of the
criminal case but was found monetarily liable in a subsequent civil action. At a minimum, a
criminal matter requires proof of guilt "beyond a reasonable doubt," whereas a civil action
requires a lesser standard of "proof by preponderance." Rather than providing that if there is
-4-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

some criminal disposition and that the employee could not be subject to the Township's
discipline is overly broad and this Fact-Finder believes that the question of Township discipline
should be pursued on an individual fact-driven basis. Accordingly, the Fact-Finder recommends
current contract language.
Article 10, Section 7 (Discipline). Section 7 provides a retention time period of the

disciplinary action of 12 months where letter of instruction or written reprimand is involved and
12 months for suspensions or demotions and that if there has been no intervening discipline after
that period of time, the disciplinary action "shall cease to have force and effect or be considered
in future discipline matters." The Union proposes that those 12 month periods be reduced to
nine months. The Township counters that all of the other unions in the Township have a 12
month suspension period. Although the Fact-Finder recognizes that a reduction from 12 months
to nine months is certain appealing, there is no evidence which overrides the necessity of
reducing the present 12 month period to a nine month period. Accordingly, the Fact-Finder
recommends that current contract language be retained.
Article 11 (Grievance Procedure).

In this article, m what is referred to as new

Section 5 (old Section 4), the CBA provides, in essence, for a seven day time period within
which a grievance should be submitted at Step I. The Union has proposed a language change to
read: "The aggrieved member will within seven (7) days of knowledge of the violation will
schedule a meeting with a steward and himself with the department head to discuss the
violation." The Township has proposed a slight modification indicating its willingness to extend
the seven days to ten days from "date on which the grievant knew or should have known of the
incident giving rise to the grievance, but in no event more than thirty (30) days after the actual
incident .... " In essence, the Township is proposing a sunset time period of 30 days whereas the

-5-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

Union contends that if the grievant is to file the grievance within seven days of knowledge that
there have been instances of non-union supervisors taking out pieces of equipment which
suggestive! y should be union work and that the member does not become aware of the situation
for a couple weeks and, thus, could miss the time period to grieve. The Fact-Finder appreciates
the suggestion of the Union that a 30 day sunset provision would foreclose a grievance being
filed. However, in the matter of harmonious labor relations, it does not behoove a grievance to
"be hanging" for a substantial period of time.

The Road Department, in this case, is not

exceedingly large, and it would seem that if a grievance existed, such issue might well be known
or discussed within a sunset time period. It is not reasonable to have a grievance filed months
and months after an alleged grievance had occurred when, by that time, memories and
recollections may fade. However, the Fact-Finder is also of the view that a 30 day snnset may
arguably be too short a time. Accordingly, the Fact-finder recommends that Step I of new
Section 5 (old Section 4) be amended to read:
"Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as discouraging or prohibiting
informal discussions of a dispute by the employee and the employer prior to the
filing for starting of a grievance. The following steps are to be followed in the
processing of a grievance:
Step I within ten (1 0) calendar days of the date on which the grievant knew or
should have known of the incident giving rise to the grievance, but in no event
more than sixty (60) days after the actual incident, the aggrieved employee shall
submit the written grievance to the department head/designee, who shall indicate
the date and time of receipt of the grievance and affix his signature to the
grievance form. The department head shall schedule a meeting to discuss the
grievance and respond to the grievant/Union within seven (7) calendar days of
receipt of the grievance."
Step 2 of the grievance procedure shall be retained in current language except for the first
sentence thereof which is amended to read as follows: "A grievance unresolved at Step I may be
submitted by the grievant to the Administrator or his designee within ten (I 0) calendar days of
receipt of the Step I answer."
- 6-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

Section 6 (old Section 5) of Article II deals with arbitration. In essence, the Fact-Finder
recommends retention of current contract language except that Section 6(A) (notice of intent to
arbitrate) which presently provides for a ten day period shall be changed to a 14 day period.
Likewise, in Section 6(B), the present provision for ten day action is amended to read "fourteen
(14) days."
Article 12 (Seniority) I Article 16 (Part-Time Employees). Current Article 12 provides

that seniority is computed by length of accumulated, uninterrupted, full-time Road Department
service, with part-time employees receiving seniority credit pro-rated to the amount of hours
worked by a regular full-time employee. For example, a part-time employee working 1,040
hours during a year is credited with one-half year's seniority credit. The Union proposes the
addition of a Section 3 to state:
"There will be no use of any part-time employees while there are members on
layoff status. Any work that would be deemed 'part-time work' will be done by
laid off members who will enjoy full-time status in any and all articles of this
Agreement."
This article is related to Article 16 (Part-Time Employees) and, to that extent, will be
considered and discussed together. The Union proposes that the last sentence of Article 16,
Section 1, be amended to read: "Those members called back from layoff for part-time work
shall be considered recalled and receive the same rate of pay equal to their co-workers." Current
contract language provides in part:
"The Employer agrees that it shall not utilize part-time employees for bargaining
unit work while members are on lay off until first offering the opportunity for
work to bargaining unit members on the recall list. Those members called back
from layoff for part-time work will receive the same rate of pay equal to their rate
of pay at the time of layoff."
The Fact-Finder does not feel that the proposed new Section 3 to Article 12 is necessary
in that the Township cannot use part-time employees if there are members on layoff because that

- 7-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

issue appears to be addressed in Article 16, which presently provides that the Township will not
use part-time employees for bargaining unit work while members are on layoff unless the laid off
individuals do not wish a part-time position or to be recalled at that time. The Fact-Finder,
however, does have concern with the last sentence of Section 1 of Article 16 that members called
back from layoff for part-time work would receive "the same rate of pay equal to their rate of
pay at the time of layoff." The problem here is that it is not known what the period of layoff
would be and, possibly, there might be a pay differential arising during the layoff period. If a
bargaining unit member is on layoff and then recalled, it seems to be the equitable thing to do
that such employee should receive the rate of pay equal to the pay existing at the time of recall
from layoff for part-time work. Accordingly, the Fact-Finder recommends that the last sentence
of Article 16, Section 1, be amended to read as follows:
"Those members called back from layoff for part-time work shall receive the rate
of pay equal to the rate of pay for the part-time work position existing at the time
of being called back from layoff for part-time work."
Article 13 (Reduction in Force and Recall).

The Jssue m this Article pertains to

Section 3 dealing with "recall." Under Section 3 of Article 13, it is provided that an employee
who is laid off remains in a layoff status for a period not to exceed five years from date oflayoff.
The Union raises the issue that when an employee is called back from layoff to do part-time
work that such employee should be considered recalled.

The essential issue is that if

performance of part-time work while on layoff constitutes a recall, then each time such laid off
employee is recalled, he would get a new five year recall right. Conceivably, the five year right
could then extend to ten years, fifteen years or longer each time the employee is called back to
work. The Township rejects that contention and proposes simply current contract language. The
Fact-Finder, however, is of a view that the recalled employee for part-time work should have a

- 8-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

right to extend his eligibility on the recall list. Without belaboring this issue, the Fact-Finder
recommends that Section 3 of Article 13 be amended to read as follows:
"Employees who are laid off shall remain in layoff status for a period not to
extend five (5) years from the date of layoff, however, any work performed by an
employee who is on layoff and called back from layoff for part-time work shall
have the period of part-time work extend the five (5) year provision contained
herein."

Article 21 (Hours of Work/Overtime/Call-Out).

Current Section 2 provides for

overtime being paid at one and one-half times the hourly rate, figured on a one-tenth hour
increment. The Union had initially proposed that the one-tenth increment be deleted and that the
overtime simply be paid at one and one-half times the hourly rate. Discussion on this issue
reflected that there may be some timekeeping/administrative difficulties involved and,
ultimately, the parties have agreed on current contract language, which the Fact-Finder likewise
approves and recommends. Current contract language shall be retained.
There was some brief discussion about Section 5 dealing with road inspector callout, but
without belaboring that issue, suffice to indicate that current contract language shall be retained.
As to Section 3 (Holiday Overtime), the current contract provides for time and a half but
if the overtime occurs on Christmas Day or New Year's Day, the employee is paid regular
holiday pay plus two times the hourly rate. The Union has proposed that Section 3 be amended
to provide for two times hourly pay for a regular holiday and three times hourly rate if overtime
falls on Christmas Day or New Year's Day. The Fact-Finder notes that the holiday rates vary
with a number of different governmental entities, which generally are time and a half or two
times hourly rate. The Fact-Finder does not find evidence supporting a three times hourly rate
although it is recognized that there are some governmental entities which do pay two times
hourly rate for holidays. Considering the discussion that ensued during fact-finding, the FactFinder recommends that Section 3 be retained as current contract language.
- 9-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

As to Section 4 (Compensatory Time), the current contract provides that the employee is
allowed a pay or compensatory time election after earning overtime and before payroll is
submitted to the clerk's office. Under current contract language, once that election is made, it
cannot be changed, whereas the Union proposes to delete that election provision thus permitting
the employee to change his election almost at will. The Fact-Finder appreciates the suggestion
of the employee having the right of election and the right to change the election but such actions
could arguably cause constant administrative recalculations or additional administrative time
administering this compensatory time provision.

Accordingly, the Fact-Finder recommends

retention of current contract language.
As to Section 7 (Compensatory Time Usage), suffice to indicate that as a result of
discussions and negotiations occurring during fact-finding regarding this particular section of
Article 21, the Fact-Finder finds that the parties have come to an agreement and considers that
Section 7 (Compensatory Time Usage) will not be considered by the Fact-Finder but, rather, will
be considered as the parties' tentative agreement ("TA") on this section.
As regards Section 9 (Call Out Pay), the current contract provides that if an employee is
called out to work outside of his regular work shift, he is paid a minimum of two hours at the
overtime rate. The Union proposes that the two hour minimum be increased to a four hour
minimum arguing, in part, that the Collective Bargaining Agreement between Canfield
Township and Local377 provides for three hour minimum call out, the Collective Bargaining
Agreement between Green Township and Green Township Maintenance Employees Association
provides for time and a half normal rate of pay with a minimum of a three hour call out, and the
Collective Bargaining Agreement between the Mahoning County Engineer and Teamsters
Local 377 provides that if an employee is called out to work, he receives a minimum of two

- 10-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

hours at overtime rate, but if the employee is called out for ice and snow control purposes, he
receives a minimum of four hours pay, however, the call out minimum does not apply to hours
immediately preceding or following the scheduled work shift unless the employee has been sent
home and recalled. The Township proposes current contract language. In reviewing the various
proposals dealing with call out pay, the Fact-Finder is of the view that there is a difference, as
relates to this bargaining unit, when an employee is called out to work under regular or normal
circumstances versus a call out for snow and ice control purposes. The Fact-Finder believes that
the Mahoning County Engineer's proposal attempts to address this differentiation. Accordingly,
the Fact-Finder recommends that Article 21, Section 9, be amended to read as follows:
"Any employee called out to work outside of his regular work shift shall be paid a
minimum of two hours at the overtime rate. If the employee is called out for
snow and ice control, he shall receive pay for a minimum of three hours pay. This
call out minimum does not apply to hours immediately preceding or following the
scheduled work shift unless the employee has been sent home and recalled."
Article 22 (Snow/Ice Control Overtime). Section 2 of Article 22 sets forth a snow/ice
call out policy, including the assessment of points for a failure to respond to an overtime call out.
Current contract language provides, in part, that "no bargaining unit member shall receive more
than two (2) points, during each individual call out for snow and ice control." Subsection B goes
on to provide that once an individual accrues eight absence points, he is subject to eight hours
loss of pay, with successive accruals of eight absence points resulting in additional loss oftime.
Subsection C provides that if a bargaining unit member responds to an overtime call out, then
any absence points previously assessed can be removed at the rate of one point per response.
The Union has proposed that Section 2(A) be amended by providing: "No bargaining union
member can be penalized for being ill or fatigued as long as they notify the person calling out the
drivers of such a situation." The Union argues, in part, that no bargaining unit member should be
penalized if he is ill or so fatigued that he is unable to perform which the Union contends is

- 11 -

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

consistent with Ohio Revised Code §4511.79 dealing with commercial drivers which provides
that a commercial driver should not drive if ill or fatigued. Certainly, it is difficult to perceive
that the Township would require an employee to work under any circumstances if that employee
was ill or so fatigued that he is unable to perform his regular work. The Township contends that
current contract language should be retained as it would give too much latitude to a union
member to simply notify the dispatcher or supervisor that he is will or so fatigued.

This

condition is undoubtedly that raises concerns and should not be so abused as to obstruct or limit
the Township's road and ice clearing activities, particularly at a time when it is most needed. On
the other hand, it is not unreasonable for an individual not to be penalized if that individual is so
ill or unable to perform his work. In that context, the Fact-Finder is of the view that there are

sufficient and reasonable administrative controls to ascertain whether the individual member is
so ill or fatigued that he is unable to perform his work.

Accordingly, the Fact-Finder

recommends that Section 2(A) be amended by adding at the end of that section the following:
"No bargaining unit member can be penalized for being ill or fatigued as long as
they notify the person calling out the driver of such a situation, subject to the
Township reserving the right to verify the nature and extent of the illness or
fatigue."
Article 22, Section 2(C) of the current contract provides that if a bargaining unit member
responds to an overtime call out, any previously assessed absent points are removed at the rate of
one point per response. The Union has proposed that the one hour point credit be amended by
increasing it to two points per response. The Fact-Finder is of the view that the Union's proposal
is not unreasonable, particularly since the bargaining unit member can be assessed two absent
points for a failure to respond. It would seem, in equipoise, that if a failure to respond can result
in two absence points, then equally so an actual response to an overtime call by one who has had
points assessed should be removed at the same rate of two points per response. Accordingly, the

- 12-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

Fact-Finder reconnnends that Section 2(C) of Article 22 be amended to state as follows: "As any
bargaining unit member responds to overtime call outs, absence points shall be removed at the
rate of two (2) points per response."
Article 22, Section 2(E) presently provides for distribution of pagers but that the pagers
would not be distributed before October 151h or turned in after Aprill5 1h

The Township has

proposed that Section 2(E) be deleted in its entirety on the basis that it is proposing to provide
mobile telephones to employees which they would be required to carry all year. This is a policy
change apparently consistent with more modern technology of mobile telephones having digital
capabilities replacing forn1er pager systems.

Accordingly, the Fact-Finder recommends that

Article 22, Section 2(E) be retained in current contract language until such time as the Township
proceeds to initiate and provide mobile telephones, at which time the Fact-Finder reconnnends
that current Section 2(E) be deleted.
Article 22, Section 2(F) presently provides a "pager bonus" of $400.00 with the provision
that it is paid in October to each bargaining unit employee for carrying the pager through
Aprill5 1h of the following year. The Union has proposed that the $400.00 pager bonus be
increased to $600.00, whereas the Township proposes current contract language. Reviewing this
situation and the fact that under the Township's proposed cell phone system requiring the
employee to carry the cell phone for the entire year rather than for a period of approximately six
months, it arguably justifies some adjustment in the pager/cell phone bonus. Accordingly, the
Fact-Finder recommends that current contract language in Section 2(F) be retained until such
time as the Township initiates and distributes a cell phone system. At such time as a cell phone
system is initiated, the Fact-Finder reconnnends that Section 2(F) be amended to read:

- 13 -

"A

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

$500.00 bonus will be paid in October to each bargaining unit employee in return for carrying a
cell phone throughout the year."
Article 23 (Meal Tickets). Current Article 23 provides that an employee is reimbursed
at the rate of $10.00 for each meal payable on a quarterly basis, one meal ticket each time an
employee is called out to work before normal work hours, one meal ticket each time an
employee remains on duty two hours after scheduled workday and one meal ticket for the first
four hours when called from off duty and each four hours thereafter regardless of the length of
the call out. The Union proposes that the meal ticket allowance of $10.00 be increased to
$15.00, whereas the Township contends that a meal ticket allowance is not provided in other
governmental entities around Boardman, such as Poland, Austintown and Canfield. The FactFinder recognizes that this is purely an economic issue and a single increase from $10.00 to
$15.00 might arguably be insignificant and certainly would not bankrupt the Township.
However, there is no indication that a meal ticket allowance is an item uniformly given in the
communities surrounding Boardman or that the $10.00 meal allowance should economically be
increased. Accordingly, the Fact-Finder recommends retention of current contract language.
Article 24 (Compensation).

Not unlike most CBAs, Article 24, pertaining to

compensation, was the one issue discussed most extensively and consumed the most time. On its
face, the issue of compensation might seem to be somewhat simplistic compared with the
administrative and legal complexities of some of the other issues but the contrary is what
actually results.

The Union has argued that the last "pay raise" was in 2007, although the

employees did receive "signing bonuses." At the present time, the Union, after having modified
some of its previous positions, ultimately proposed, at fact-finding, an II% increase allocated
4% commencing in 2014, 4% commencing in 2015 and 3% commencing in 2016.

- 14-

The

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

Township submitted a proposal providing for a lump sum signing bonus of $650.00 to be paid in
2014, a I% cross the board pay increase commencing in 2015 and a $650.00 lump sum bonus to
be paid in 2016.
The Union had countered with the argument that some non-Union employees were
allegedly receiving increases of I 0%, some were receiving 2% increases and that another
employee had received a 21% increase. Without going into detail, at fact-finding, the Township
had argued that the 21% increase pertained to an employee whose position was being changed
and, in effect, had received a promotion.

Raises regarding non-Union employees were

contended to be consistent with compensation adjustments. The Fact-Finder is not going to
dwell on the compensation interrelationships between Union and non-Union employees since
such an endeavor would require extensive analysis of virtually every employee.
The Township did present a number of documents addressing compensation or
compensation-related matters but no one document is necessarily determinative of this issue.
The Township indicated that in comparing it with other goverrnuental entities in the same
general geographical error, such as Poland and Austintown, Boardman does rank first with a
population of 40,889, ranks first in total revenue of$22,376,613, ranks third in per capita income
of $28,533, compared to Poland which is second with per capita income of $32,270 and Canfield
which is first with per capita income of $37,075. As to median family income, again, Canfield
ranks first at $84,800 and Boardman ranks fourth at $63,108.
The Township also provided comparable wage settlements for the period 2004 to 2013
prepared by the State Employment Relations Board. The statistical data addresses city, county,
township, school districts and collective bargaining units. State-wide, however, it notes a wage

- 15-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

increase of 1.47% and also notes that for the first year of the contract commencing in 2013, an
average wage increase of 1.46%, 1.48% for a second year and 1.58% for the third year.
The Township also argued that again comparing Boardman with surrounding areas such
as Poland, Mahoning County Engineer, Austintown, Canfield and others, it comes up with a
maximum at $21.20, whereas as to Boardman, a maximum at $22.65, thus, contending that
Boardman's present compensation is well within the acceptable range for the general Mahoning
County area.

The Township also provided a breakdown for each of the major work

classifications, i.e., maintenance worker, foreman, supervisor of helpers and laborers and
mechanic.
The Township had also argued, again comparing Boardman with some of the surrounding
goverrunental entities, regarding the operator position, indicating, for example, the maximum for
an operator with Boardman was $52,624 compared with a total maximum in Austintown of
$51,674, Canfield of $48,757 and the Mahoning County Engineer of $52,392. For the position
of mechanic, the Township contends that Boardman's maximum is $52,853 compared with
$52,232 for the Mahoning County Engineer's office or $49,707 for Austintown. For the position
of foreman, again, the Township argues that total maximum for such position is $57,314
compared with an overall average of other Mahoning County entities, including the Mahoning
County Engineer, of $53,128.
One document of some significance was the Township's comparable reviews internally,
as relates to the other bargaining units within the Township.

For example, the Township

indicated that the OPBA dispatchers for 2014 received lump sum $1,250, a 2% increase for 2015
and a lump sum of $1 ,250 in 2016. This was likewise the pay increases with AFSCME for its
three year contract (2013-2015). No wage information for the other units was presented for the

- 16-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

full three year period projected herein except as to the OPBA dispatchers. The Fact-Finder is not
unmindful of the fact that at the beginning of the century in apparently a more affluent or
comfortable time, the Township was giving pay increases of 4%/4%/4% but that significantly
changed by 2010, arguably as a result in some economic decline of the general Mahoning Valley
economic picture and also the national economic downturn in 2008-2009. The Fact-Finder notes
that the OPBA rank had received lump sum payments of$950 in each of the years 2012 to 2014,
and the OPBA patrol received lump sum payments of$750 for each year from 2012 to 2014. A
review of the compensation history seems to reflect a posture by the Township to pay
compensation in terms of lump sum signing bonuses or similar lump sum type compensation
rather than a wage percentage rate which, ultimately, constitutes a wage freeze, although there is
an increase in compensation.
Although the Township has not argued a financial inability to pay or financial hardship, it
has contended that it has suffered a monetary decline, for example, arguing that because of the
elimination of the Ohio estate tax and its allocable distributions to local government, the
Township, for example, received $609,000 in 2013 compared to approximately $2.5 million in
2012, $1 million in 2011, $872,000 in 2010 and $920,000 in 2009. Also, as to local government
funds which has been reduced by the General Assembly, the Township argued that in 2013, it
received $345,000 compared to $454,000 in 2012, $650,000 in 2011, $639,000 in 2010 and
$643,000 in 2009.
Further, the Township argues that although not poverty stricken, its General Fund from
property taxes has been relatively stable over the last several years, for example, $4.6 million in
2013, $4.6 million in 2012, $4.7 million in 2011, $4.7 million in 2010 and $4.6 million in 2009.

- 17-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

The Township also contended that a $650 lump sum bonus was equivalent from a range
of 1.26% as to the foreman, 1.37% as to a mechanic, 1.47% as to a driver and 1.63% as to a
laborer. Further, the Township has argued that a compensation increase of $65011%/$650 would
result in a total cost of $41,520. A wage increase of 2%/2%/2% would result in a total cost of
$118,470, whereas a wage increase of $1,250/2%/$1,250 would result in a cost of$8!,350.
The Fact-Finder is not unmindful of the arguments by the Union and its presentation for
some compensation increase. However, the Fact-Finder also must take into consideration the
other bargaining units within the Township and does not believe that it is healthy, either from a
morale viewpoint or from union infighting for one union to be "outbidding" another union when
there is some relative proximity among the various unions. The Fact-Finder is of the view that it
is unhealthy for effective labor relations for one union to be fighting with or against another
union on the basis, as to basic wages, that one union was treated more favorably or less favorably
than another.
Looking at the most recent compensation packages, the Fact-Finder is left with a singular
conclusion that an appropriate compensation disposition is $1,250 lump sum/2%/$1,250 lump
sum. Accordingly, the Fact-Finder recommends that Article 24 be amended to read as follows:
"Bargaining unit members' wage rates shall remain unchanged for the year 2014
as set forth in the current Collective Bargaining Agreement.
For the year 2014, each full-time member of the bargaining unit shall receive a
lump payment in the amount of $1 ,250.00. Said payments shall be in lieu of any
wage increase, except as otherwise provided in this Report, and shall be paid no
later than the second full pay period after execution of the Agreement.
Commencing with the year 2015, bargaining unit members' wages shall be
increased by two percent (2%) computed on the wages as set forth in the present
Collective Bargaining Agreement.
Commencing with the year 2016, each full-time member of the bargaining unit
shall receive a lump sum payment in the amount of $1 ,250.00. Said payment

- 18-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

shall be in lieu of any wage increase and shall be paid no later than the second full
pay period after January I, 2016."
Article 25 (Insurance). The Union has submitted several proposals regarding insurance

coverage, namely, as to Section 2, as to the contribution rate, the Union proposes that employees
would pay 5% toward the insurance premium. This provision would thus result in a deletion of
current Section 3 which addresses the matter of contributions regarding cost increases or
decreases. In part, current Section 3 provides that should the plan cost exceed base contribution
as set forth in Section 2, the Township contributes the first $30.00 of the increase and employees
contribute the next $20.00 and that any amount in excess of the initial $50.00 is then shared on a
60/40 basis with the Township paying 60% of the cost.
Additionally, the Union proposes an adjustment to Section 6 increasing the current level
of life insurance from the present $25,000 to $!00,000. Although not in dispute, it should be
indicated that there is a further provision that if the insurance is available from the insurance
carrier, members also have the option to purchase an additional $15,000 without a physical
requirement.
The Township has opposed these changes essentially on the basis that current contract
language is the same provision applicable to the other Unions within the Township and, for
purposes of consistency and arguable fairness, the instant contract should not be significantly
altered as to what presently applies to all the units.
The Township has proposed a new Section 9 addressing the issue of an employee
possibly having a right of contribution adjustment because of the employee's eligibility under the
Affordable Care Act ("ACA"), who might believe that his contribution exceeds the applicable
percentage of household income so as to be eligible for credit assistance and also having the right

- 19-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

of appeal regarding that issue. After some discussion between the parties, the following new
Section 9 is proposed:
"The parties recognize that employee affordability under the Affordable Care Act
(ACA) will be measured based upon the cost of the single-only coverage and the
employee's household income (as defined by rules and regulations implementing
the ACA). Any employee who believes his contribution exceeds 9.5% of his
household income for the lowest level single-only coverage plan offered by the
Employer should submit a written request for review to the Fiscal Officer. Should
an employee request a review, the employee agrees to provide the employer with
financial documentation of the employee's household income."
The Fact-Finder recommends that the proposed new Section 9 be included in the next
contract and that current Section 9 (Loss of Benefits) be renumbered as new Section 10. As
amended and renumbered as recommended herein, the Fact-Finder recommends that, except as
otherwise set forth herein, current contract language should be retained.
Article 27 (Longevity). Without belaboring discussion on this Article, suffice to indicate

that during the course of fact-finding, the Fact-Finder finds that the parties have come to a
mutual agreement regarding this Article, to which the parties have reached a tentative agreement
("TA") and, thus, the Fact-Finder makes no recommendation pertaining to this Article and defers
to the parties' TA.
Article 28 (Out of Class Compensation). The current contract provides that when a

bargaining unit member is assigned to perform work in a higher pay classification, such
individual will be paid one hour of overtime at the employee's normal pay classification. The
Township proposes a change to that section essentially providing that when the work is
performed in a higher pay classification, the employee would be paid "for all hours worked in
the higher classification at the wage rate of the higher classification, provided the employee
works a minimum of one hour in the higher classification." The Union proposes maintaining
current contract language.

The Fact-Finder recognizes that the current contract and the

-20-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

Township's proposals are arguably two different ways of measnring how payment is to be
computed when a bargaining unit member is performing work in a higher pay classification. The
Fact-Finder is of the view, however, that if an employee is assigoed to perform work in a higher
pay classification, why should that assigoment result in overtime pay when the employee who is
regularly assigoed to perform such work would not be receiving any overtime compensation, but,
rather, would be receiving his pay classification. Overtime pay has a justification but the FactFinder does not feel that overtime pay should be used as the vehicle for paying an employee who
is performing work in a higher classification. The bottom line is that when performing work in a
higher pay classification, that employee should be paid at whatever that higher pay classification
so provides. The Fact-Finder, however, does not believe that there is a logical or rational basis
for requiring the employee to work a minimum of one honr in the higher classification in order to
be entitled to the wage rate for that higher classification. Once assigoed, no matter what the
amount of time may be involved, the Fact-Finder believes that such employee should be entitled
to the wage rate of the higher classification as soon as that employee has commenced work, even
if it results in 15 minutes of work. Certainly, the usual employee at the higher classification
would be receiving compensation immediately and there is no rationale for a one hour delay.
Accordingly, the Fact-Finder recommends that Article 28 be amended to read as follows:
"Whenever a bargaining unit member is assigned to perform work by the Road
Superintendent or Assistant Road Superintendent in a higher pay classification, he
shall be paid for all honrs worked in the higher classification at the wage rate of
the higher classification."
Article 29 (Clothing Allowance).

Current contract language regarding clothing

allowance provides in Section 1 that after six months employment, an employee receives a
clothing allowance of $600.00 during the first year of the CBA, $500.00 dnring the second year
of the CBA and $400.00 during the third year of the CBA, said amounts to be paid by the end of

- 21 -

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

the first pay period in April of each year. In that regard, the Union has proposed that a level
amount of $600.00 be paid in each of the three years of the CBA. The Township proposes that
Section I be modified to provide that $400.00 be paid for each year of the CBA. The FactFinder believes that it is more consistent from an economic view point for an allowance of the
same amount to be used in each of a proposed three year contract rather than using the current
contract language of differing amounts in each year of the contract. The Fact-Finder recognizes
that although the parties are in agreement as to a clothing aJ!owance, the difference is, perhaps,
one of degree, as to the amount of money to be provided. The Fact-Finder also notes that the
Township's proposal of $400.00 for each year is less than what is allowed under the current
contract. The Fact-Finder also notes that the uniform allowance of other governmental entities
are in varying amounts from no uniform allowance because uniforms are provided up to $500.00
by Austintown, $525.00 by Poland and $675.00 by Howland.
Upon consideration, the Fact-Finder recommends that Article 29, Section 1, be amended
to read as follows:
"All full-time employees of the Road Department, after six (6) months
employment, shall receive a clothing allowance of $500.00 per year for each year
of a proposed three year agreement, said amount to be paid by the end of the first
pay period in April of each year."
Article 29, Section 2, sets forth "uniform guidelines" wherein the appropriate clothing is
set forth. The Union proposes a change to Item 5, which presently states "blue jean shorts when,
in the opinion of the Road Superintendent and with his approval, weather and job conditions
permit." The Union does not oppose the possible use of blue jean shorts but, rather, wants that
clothing item simply left as part of an acceptable clothing without the necessity of the
Superintendent's approval. Obviously, the wearing of shorts is contingent on weather and job
conditions, and the Fact-Finder believes that unlike other matters, the wearing of this clothing

-22-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

should be with supervisory knowledge and, thus, their approval in the event that a member of the
general public might inquire as to why employees are wearing shorts in the performance of their
work. Accordingly, as to Section 2, the Fact-Finder recommends current contract language.
Article 30 <Vacations). Article 30 sets forth, in some detail, the eligibility and use of

vacation time. Without going into detail regarding the parties' negotiations on this Article,
suffice to indicate that the parties have agreed to current contract language but as otherwise
amended by a "Memorandum of Understanding" (MOU) or a "Letter of Understanding" (LOU)
addressing this issue.
Additionally, the Township had proposed a new Section 8 to Article 30 dealing with the
matter of an employee selling vacation time. In that context, it should also be noted that the
proposed Section 8 would result in the deletion of present Article 46 (Attendance Incentive
Program). Accordingly, the Fact-Finder makes no recommendation as to Article 30, except as
noted below, and defers to the parties' agreed side letter or memorandum of understanding.
Further, the Fact-Finder recommends that a new Section 8 to Article 30 be added to read
as follows:
"Selling One (I) Week Vacation Time. An employee may submit in writing, no
later than December I, of each year, a request to sell one (I) week of vacation
time (five (5) days). The vacation sold back to the employer shall be that which is
earned during the calendar year and shall be paid to the employee by January 30
of the following year. The maximum amount of converted vacation leave that can
be considered earnable salary under OPERS regulations is the amount the
employee earns in the calendar year, less any amounts taken during the calendar
year, with the maximum being one (I) week of vacation time."
As noted above, in light of the recommendations set forth herein, the Fact-Finder
recommends that current Article 46 (Attendance Incentive Program) be deleted and further
recommends that except as otherwise set forth herein, current contract language be retained.

-23-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

Article 33 (Sick Leave). Current contract Article 33 sets forth the provisions of sick

leave eligibility, usage and disposition of unused sick leave at the time of retirement under Ohio
Public Employees Retirement System (OPERS).
Section 3 of Article 33 presently sets forth the circumstances when sick leave can be
granted.

Suffice to indicate that, based on discussions occurring during the course of fact-

finding, the Fact-Finder finds that the parties are in agreement regarding some language change
to Section 3 which the Fact-Finder now recommends be accepted and that the first sentence of
Section 3 read as follows:
"Usage. Upon approval of the Employer, which shall not be arbitrarily denied,
sick leave shall be granted to members for absence from regularly scheduled
hours of employment for the following reasons:"
The Union has also proposed a modification to Section 5 which sets forth a provision
allowing, at the time of retirement, that an employee is eligible to receive payment for 30% of
his unused, accumulated sick leave earned with the Township, up to a maximum of 60 days pay
(480 hours). The Union has proposed a modification to that section to increase the payment
from 30% to 50% and to increase the maximum of computable days from 60 to 240 days. The
Township has contended that the current contract language is that which is applicable to all of
the other unions within the Township, although the percentage and eligibilities are different
figures with other surrounding governmental entities. The Fact-Finder is of the view that based
on the representation that current Section 5 is similarly applicable to the other Unions within the
Township, the Fact-Finder does not find a compelling or overriding justification to vary the
conversion right for members of the instant bargaining unit.
recommends that current contract language be retained.

-24-

Accordingly, the Fact-Finder

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

Article 34 (Injury on Duty). The Township has proposed certain procedural changes

not currently set forth.

Based on discussions occurring during fact-finding, the Fact-Finder

recommends that Section I be amended to read as follows:
"Purpose. The intent and purpose of the injury leave policy herein is for the
Township to assist employees with work-related injuries in obtaining the
necessary maintenance and care during the short period of time following the
work-related injury.
A.

Injurv on Duty Reporting and Procedures. When a bargaining unit
employee is injured in the scope of employment while actually working
for the Township on regular assigurnent, the injured employee shall
immediately comply with the following:
I.

Follow the Township's Incident Reporting Policies.

2.

Submit a completed and signed internal incident report containing
the nature of the injury, the date of the occurrence, the identity of
all witnesses and persons involved, the facts surrounding the injury
and nay other information supporting the granting of injured on
duty leave.

3.

Furnish the Township with a signed Boardman Township
Authorization(s) to Release Medical Information relevant to the
claim.

4.

In the event the employee needs immediate medical care, he shall
be referred to the Township's preferred medical provider for workrelated injuries, or transported to a hospital as the injury warrants."

The Fact-Finder further recommends that present Section 3 be deleted in its entirety and,
in lieu thereof, the following Section 3 be inserted:
"Eligibility Requirements. To be eligible for injured on duty leave, the employee
shall:
A.

Follow the Injury on Duty Reporting Procedures set forth in Section I.

B.

File for Workers' Compensation benefits with the Ohio Bureau of
Workers' Compensation and be approved for the receipt of benefits.

C.

Provide a medical certification and seek treatment from a physician on the
list of Township approved providers opining that the claimant is disabled
from employment in excess of seven (7) consecutive days as a result of the
work-related injury and specifying the injury, recommended treatment,

-25-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

and the employee's inability to return to work as a result of the injury
along with an estimated return to work date."
Further the Fact-Finder recommends that Section 5(E) be amended by adding at the end
of present subsection, the following language:
"As soon as an employee is released to work, with or without restrictions, at any
time after injury or during any period of disability directly related to the workrelated injury, the employee shall timely contact his department head or other
appropriate personnel to advise of his status and to schedule his return to work. If
the employee fails to timely advise his department head or other appropriate
personnel of his return to work status, then the employee may be subject to
discipline, including but not limited to for being absent without leave."
Except as otherwise recommended for amendment herein, the Fact-Finder recommends
current contract language.
Article 37 (Bereavement Leave). Without belaboring discussion on this issue, suffice to

indicate that based on discussions occurring dnring fact-finding, the Fact-Finder recommends
retention of current contract language.
Article 45 (Perfect Attendance Incentive). The current contract provides a quarterly

incentive award of $150.00, which, if perfect attendance is maintained for the entire year, wonld
amount to $600.00. The Union has proposed that this provision be increased to $250.00 per
quarter.

The Township has contended that the $150.00 quarterly incentive award under

Article 45 is the same that is granted under the collective bargaining agreements with the other
Township nnions (AFSCME; patrol dispatch; OPBA patrol and OPBA rank).

Further, the

Township argues that a number of the surrounding governmental entities, including the
Mahoning County Engineers' Office, do not provide any perfect attendance incentive, although
the City of Poland grants $200.00 for each half year period. The Fact-Finder believes that it
would be appropriate to maintain the same incentive award applicable to the other unions being

-26-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

equally applicable to the instant bargaining unit. Accordingly, the Fact-Finder recommends that
current contract language be retained.
Article 46 (Attendance Incentive Program). For the reasons discussed in connection
with Article 30 (Vacations), and the recommended changes to Article 30, together with the FactFinder's comments set forth in that Article, the Fact-Finder recommends that current Article 46
be deleted.
Article 47 (Commercial Driver's License). The issue involved in this Article deals
with Section 2 which presently provides that a bargaining unit employee who holds a current
commercial driver's license ("CDL") and maintains same in good standing is eligible to receive
an annual payment of $600.00 for a Class A license and $575.00 for a Class B license. The
Union has proposed that the Class A CDL bonus be increased to $700.00 and the Class B CDL
bonus be increased to $675.00. The Township has requested continuation of current contract
language, arguing, in part, that the surrounding governmental entities, such as Austintown,
Canfield, Liberty and Poland, do not provide for any bonus but they do reimburse an employee
for the costs of the individual's CDL renewal fee. The Union, however, notes that under the
CBA with the Mahoning County Engineer, a CDL bonus of $700.00 for a Class A license and
$600.00 for a Class B license if given. The Township also argues that a CDL bonus should not
be provided because it is akin to paying a police officer for being able to fire his or her firearm.
The Township contends that it is a job requirement, i.e., maintenance of a CDL license in good
standing, and should not receive separate compensation. The Fact-Finder notes, however, that
there are governmental entities which do pay a specific firearm qualification bonus or similarly
designated provision to police officers.

The Fact-Finder recognizes that for the appropriate

individuals, the maintenance of a CDL is a job requirement in that without the license, the

-27-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

employee obviously could not operate the particular Township vehicle or equipment. The FactFinder is of the view that a measure of continued training and proficiency is necessary for the
maintenance of a CDL and that there is an incentive to maintain a CDL in good standing as there
is always the potential risk that the employee may have his CDL suspended by the Bureau of
Motor Vehicles for matters not even arising in the course of employment for which the
individual could face suspension or revocation of his CDL. The Fact-Finder is of the view that a
modest increase in the CD L bonus is appropriate and, accordingly, recommends that Article 47,
Section 2 be amended to read as follows:
"CDL Bonus. All employees holding current CDLs and maintaining in good
standing shall receive the following annual payment: Class A - $650.00; Class B
- $625.00."
Article 48 (Duration).

The current contract is presently in effect for the period

January I, 2011 through December 31, 2013. After some discussion during fact-finding, the
Fact-Finder finds that the parties are in agreement that a new Collective Bargaining Agreement
should be effective for a new three year period, however, there is a disagreement as to when the
Agreement should commence. In simple terms, the Union proposes that the contract should be
effective January I, 2014 through December 31, 2016.

The Township, on the other hand,

proposes that the CBA would be "effective upon execution and shall continue in full force and
effect through December 31, 2016."
Although the Fact-Finder recognizes that very often contracts do not become effective
until they are actually executed with no retrospective provision and, further, that SERB has
interpreted to the effect that when there is a collective bargaining agreement which has expired
and the parties are in negotiations, the contract still continues during the hiatus. The Fact-Finder
is of the view that the effective date of the contract should, logically, follow immediately after
the termination of the prior contract. Additionally, to the extent that there may be eligible
-28-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

monetary benefits provided in this Report or under the recommended retained contract language,
an employee should not be placed "in the middle" of potentially losing some such benefit simply
because his employer and his collective bargaining representative have not concluded a contract
immediately upon expiration of the old contract. This Fact-Finder does not wish to engage in
analyzing or determining such niceties.

Accordingly, the Fact-Finder recommends that

Article 48 be amended to read as follows:
"This Agreement shall be effective January I, 2014 through December 31, 2016
and shall continue in full force and effect unless either party gives timely written
notice to the other of their intent to commence negotiations. Notice shall be given
no sooner than one hundred twenty (120) days, nor later than sixty (60) days prior
to the expiration of this Agreement, unless a different notice requirement period is
set forth under provisions of the Ohio Revised Code and/or the regulations of the
Ohio State Employment Relations Board as set forth in the Ohio Administrative
Code. If such notice is given, negotiations shall commence and the provisions of
this Agreement will be maintained until such time as a successor agreement is in
effect."
Appendix A (Reduction and Recall List). The issue in this matter relates to a Union

request that "List A" provide for the position of "janitor" which the Union asserts was a Union
position and should now be returned as a bargaining unit position and thereafter having the
position filled. The Township, on the other hand, opposes the Union proposal on the basis that it
contends that the janitor position was "previously negotiated away" and further states in its
Position Statement:
"The position no longer exists; nor is any rate of pay stated in Article 24,
Compensation. Furthermore, the position was eliminated when the gentleman
who previously held the position was promoted. He was laid off from the
promoted position, not the janitor position."
There was no evidence presented that the janitor position is one which is included within
the bargaining unit for which the collective bargaining representative is required to address. The
Fact-Finder notes that in Article I, Section I, of the current contract, it is stated:

-29-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

"Township agrees to recognize and does hereby recognize the Association [now
the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Local377] and its designated agents
and representatives as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent on behalf of all the
employees of the Road Department, including mechanics, with respect to wages,
hours and other terms and conditions of employment."
There was no evidence presented during the fact-finding which substantiates that at the
present time the janitor position is a position encompassed within Article I, Section I, of the
CBA. Also, it is noted that in Article I, Section 2, it is stated in pertinent part:
"Additionally, as set forth in the Act, all management, confidential, supervisory,
temporary, seasonal, part-time, and employees not certified by SERB as being
included in the bargaining unit are excluded."
As noted, there was no evidence presented during fact-finding that the janitor position is
one which has been certified by SERB as being included in the bargaining unit. The absence of
inclusion constitutes an exclusion.

This Fact-Finder does not believe that it is within his

jurisdiction or authority to, sua sponte, make a determination that a particular position, not
otherwise specifically identified, is included in the bargaining unit. For the reasons set forth
herein, therefore, the Fact-Finder denies the Union's request that the janitor position be
reinstated and included within Appendix A (Reduction and Recall List).

***** **
Executed at the City of Cleveland, Cuyahoga County, Ohio, this 161h day of June, 2014.
Respectfully submitted,

DONALD N. JAFFE
Fact-Finder

-30-

Mon, 16 Jun 2014 09:50:45 AM - SERB

CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

The undersigned hereby certifies that a copy of the foregoing Report of Fact-Finder and
Recommendations has been forwarded, via email transmission, this 16th day of June, 2014, on
the following:
Gregg Shaddle, Vice President and Trustee
Teamsters Local 377
1223 Teamster Drive
Youngstown, OH 44502
Email: ibt377trusteegs@aol.com
Susan D. Jansen, Esq.
Doll, Jansen, Ford & Rakay
Ill West First Street, Suite II 00
Dayton, OH 45402-1156
Email: sjansen@djflawfirm.com
Robin L. Bell, Regional Manager
Clemans, Nelson and Associates, Inc.
2351 South Arlington Road, Suite A
Akron, Ohio 44319-1907
E-mail: rbell@clemansnelson.com
Administrator, Bureau of Mediation
State Employment Relations Board
65 East State Street
Columbus, Ohio 43215-4213
Email: MED@serb.state.oh.us

DONALD N. JAFFE
Fact-Finder

- 31 -
