ILLINOIS LABOR RELATIONS BOARD
INTEREST ARBITRATION BEFORE
ARBITRATOR BRIAN CLAUSS

COUNTY OF EFFINGHAM, ILLINOIS and
THE EFFINGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF,
Employers,

and

ILLINOIS FRATERNAL ORDER OF
POLICE LABOR COUNCIL
Union.

For the Union:
John Weathers
Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council
Western Springs, Illinois
For the Employers:
Richard Stewart, Jr.,
Hesse Martone, P.C.
Springfield, Illinois

)
)
)
)
)
)
)|
)
)
)
)
)
)
)

Nos.

S-MA-14-332
S-MA-14-333

INTEREST ARBITRATION AWARD

INTRODUCTION
Effingham County and the Effingham County Sheriff’s Department (the “County” and
each an “Employer” and collectively, the “Employers”) are co-employers pursuant to the Illinois
Public Labor Relations Act and are parties to a Collective Bargaining Agreement (“CBA” or
“Contract”) with the Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council (“FOP” or “Union”).
The parties reached impasse during negotiations and the undersigned was selected to
decide the interest arbitration pursuant to the procedures of the Illinois Labor Relations Board. The
arbitrator was selected and accepted this appointment pursuant to IPLRA Section 14 impasse
procedures for protective service bargaining units.
Resolution Procedure
The interest arbitration session was held at the County Building on January 12, 2016, and
was attended by the Sheriff, members of the County Board, the County Manager, members of the
bargaining team, the Union Business Representative, and counsel for the Union and the
Employers.
Term of Agreement
The CBA at issue in the instant Award shall be effective September 1, 2014 and shall
continue in full force and effect until August 31, 2017. Wages will be paid retroactively on all
hours worked.
EFFINGHAM COUNTY
Effingham County, Illinois is a rural county approximately 75 miles southeast of the state
capitol of Springfield. According to US. Census data, the County had 34,242 inhabitants in 2010.
Population growth is predicted to be .4% for 2015. There are 13,515 households and 9,302 families
residing in the county. There were 14,570 housing units at an average density of 30.4 per square
mile.
Effingham County has an elected County Board. There are a number of positions mandated
by Illinois law, including a County Sheriff. The Effingham County Sheriff has a Sheriff’s
Department that is responsible for law enforcement. The Sheriff’s Department is also responsible
2

for the administration of the County Jail and providing security and prisoner transportation for the
Circuit Court of Effingham County. The Sheriff’s Department is also responsible for civil process.
The Sheriff’s Department website provides a useful summary of population and geography
of the County:
The largest concentration [of inhabitants reside] in Effingham, Teutopolis, Altamont, and
the Lake Sara area. There are 10 incorporated cities and villages, and the county is divided
into 15 townships. Effingham County covers 482 square miles and is located in the
southeast part of the State of Illinois.
Within Effingham County, there are approximately 972 miles of roadways, including 51
miles of interstate, 71 miles of state highways, 148 miles of county roads, and 702 miles
of township roads.
Highways and interstates serving Effingham County are State Routes 33 and 40, running
east and west; State Routes 32, 37 and 45, running north and south; Interstate 57 running
north and south, and Interstate 70 running east and west.
The Effingham County Sheriff’s Office is the primary Law Enforcement agency
responding to calls for service throughout the County. Effingham City and Altamont have
a 24 hour police force and the City of Teutopolis has a part time force. The Sheriff’s Office
patrols and handles all crashes which occur on the 850 miles of rural roadways and most
of the crashes along the 71 miles of State Highways. They are assisted by the Illinois State
Police on State Highways and Troopers handle most calls and crashes on the Interstates.
The parties had been in negotiations regarding the terms of the collective bargaining
agreements for the Effingham County Deputies, Peace Officers, Corporals and Sergeants, as well
as Effingham County Correctional Officers and Telecommunicators. Upon reaching impasse, the
parties selected the undersigned under the process of the Illinois Labor Relations Board.
Prior to the hearing, the parties engaged in a discussion to refine the issues, offers, and seek
possible resolution. The record was left open for the parties to submit Final Offers after the
hearing.

3

INTEREST ARBITRATION
Jurisdiction
This interest arbitration comes before the Arbitrator pursuant to Section 14 of the Illinois
Public Labor Relations Act.

The subject CBA covers sworn Deputies/Peace Officers and

Corporals, Sergeants and Correctional Officers.
STATUTORY FACTORS
The statutory provisions governing this arbitration are found in Section 14. All of the
statutory factors were considered by the undersigned when analyzing the issues presented in this
Interest Arbitration Award. The statute does not provide for a ranking of the statutory factors
according to importance and it is therefore up to the Arbitrator to determine the importance of the
statutory factors. City of Decatur and IAFF Local (Eglit 1986).
(g) As to each economic issue, the arbitration panel shall adopt the last offer of
settlement which, in the opinion of the arbitration panel, more nearly complies with
the applicable factors prescribed in subsection (h). The findings, opinions and order
as to all other issues shall be based upon the applicable factors prescribed in
subsection (h).
(h) Where there is no agreement between the parties ... the arbitration panel shall
base its findings, opinions and order upon the following factors, as applicable:
(1) The lawful authority of the employer.
(2) Stipulations of the parties.
(3) The interests and welfare of the public and the financial ability of the unit
of government to meet those costs.
(4) Comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of employment of the
employees involved in the arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours and
conditions of employment of other employees performing similar services and
with other employees generally:
(A) In public employment in comparable communities.
(B) In private employment in comparable communities.
(5) The average consumer prices for goods and services, commonly known as
the cost of living.
(6) The overall compensation presently received by the employees, including
direct wage compensation, vacations, holidays and other excused time,
insurance and pensions, medical and hospitalization benefits, the continuity and
stability of employment and all other benefits received.
4

(7) Changes in any of the foregoing circumstances during the pendency of the
arbitration proceedings.
(8) Such other factors, not confined to the foregoing, which are normally or
traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of wages, hours and
conditions of employment through voluntary collective bargaining, mediation,
fact-finding, arbitration or otherwise between the parties in the public service
or in private employment.
ECONOMIC IMPASSE ISSUES
The parties agreed that the only disputed economic issues that were mandatory subjects of
bargaining within the meaning of Section 14(g) of the IPLRA were:
(2)(a) What shall the wage increases for the Deputies Bargaining Unit be for
September 1, 2014, September 1, 2015 and September 1, 2016?
(2)(b) What shall the wage increases for the Corrections Bargaining Unit be for
September 1, 2014, September 1, 2015 and September 1, 2016?
(3)(a) What shall the language in Article 12 of the Deputies Collective Bargaining
Agreement be in regards to Health Insurance?
(3)(b) What shall the language in Article 12 of the Corrections Collective
Bargaining Agreement be in regards to Health Insurance?
(1)

What, if any, changes shall be made to the current system of Corporal and
Sergeant compensation?
POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

The Employers’ Final Offer
Wages: Deputies Bargaining Unit
The Employers propose:




a 2.00% across-the-board increase effective September 1, 2014
a 2.00% across-the-board increase effective September 1, 2015
a 2.00% across-the-board increase effective September 1, 2016

Wages: Corrections Bargaining Unit
The Employers propose:




a 2.00% across-the-board increase effective September 1, 2014
a 2.00% across-the-board increase effective September 1, 2015
a 2.00% across-the-board increase effective September 1, 2016

5

Health Insurance
The Employers’ proposal was the same for both units:
ARTICLE 12 – INSURANCE
Section 12.1 – Coverage
The Employer shall continue for the duration of this Agreement to provide
health insurance for full time employees. The Employer will not change the
insurance carrier without advising the Union, and offering opportunity for input.
Union representatives may attend and participate in the insurance committee
meetings regarding insurance options. If the Employer changes carriers during the
term of this Agreement such coverage shall be the same as available to members of
the Effingham County Board and other employees in Effingham County.
Effective January 1, 2016 the County shall offer the employees’ health
insurance coverage in the form of the current Health Savings Account. The Union
and the County recognize that insurance costs are likely to increase over time and
that the County may during the lifetime of this Agreement find it to be in the best
interests of the County to change the plan of insurance. The Labor Council and
County shall have the right to impact bargain over the effects of any significant or
substantive changes in benefits or a significant change to the premium during the
term of this Agreement. Impasses in such bargaining shall be resolved in
accordance with 5 ILCS 315/14, as amended.
Employees currently on the Traditional Plan that change to the Health
Savings Account, shall have a one-time deposit of $2,600 put into their Health
Savings Account during the first pay period after their account is established.
Employees currently participating in the Health Saving Account Plan shall have a
one-time deposit of $800 put into their Health Savings Account during the first pay
period following execution of this Agreement.
Section 12.2 – Contributions
The Employer shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the contribution of
coverage for full time employees (but not dependents) for the term of this
Agreement, with the following provisions:
1.

The Employer shall pay 100% of the monthly premium for health insurance
up to $400.00 per month effective December 1, 2012.

2.

If the monthly per employee insurance for single insurance premiums
exceeds $400.00 per month, the premium over $400.00 per month shall be
paid equally between the Employer and Employee, with a cap on Employee
contribution of $75.00 per month effective December 1, 2012.

3.

Effective upon execution of the Agreement, the County shall pay 100% of
the monthly premium for health insurance up to $603.34 per month. If the
monthly per employee insurance for single insurance premiums exceeds
$603.34 per month, the premium over $603.34 per month shall be paid
6

equally between the Employer and Employee. In exchange for removal of
the cap, the County agrees to forgive any back premium contributions of
employees that were on the Health Savings Account Plan in 2014 and 2015.
There shall be no insurance contribution for part-time employees.
Corporals and Sergeants Pay:
The Employers proposed status quo for both ranks.
Employers’ Position
In support of the Employers’ position, the following are cited:
Internal Comparables
There are a number of bargaining units within the County. Employees in the Clerk of the
Circuit Court of Effingham County, Effingham County Clerk, Effingham County State’s Attorney,
Sheriff’s Maintenance Employees, and the Effingham County Treasurer are represented by
Laborers Local 1197.

Probation Officers and clerks in the Effingham County Probation

Department and the Effingham County Public Defender’s Office are covered by collective
bargaining agreements with the Chief Judge for the Fourth Judicial District and Laborers Local
1197. Employees of the Effingham County Highway Department are represented by Teamsters
Local 326.
External Comparables
The parties stipulated to the following external comparables:
Christian County
Clinton County
Fayette County
Jefferson County
Marion County
Montgomery County
The Employers maintain that the wages and healthcare final offers are consistent not only
with the internal comparables, but also the external comparables. Further, the Employers argue
that the Union’s offers be rejected because they violate the law and the parties’ pre-hearing
agreement. According to the Employers, the Union has offered two final offers. Neither should
be considered.

7

The Union’s Final Offer
The Union's final proposals, for both the deputies unit and corrections unit, for wages and
insurance are set forth below:
Quid Pro Quo Offer:
1) The Union, in an effort to create additional savings for the County, offer to, at the first
conceivable point in time, have any members currently enrolled in what has been
commonly referred to as the "traditional health insurance plan" switch to what has been
commonly referred to as the "health savings account (HSA) plan" in its current
iteration. In doing so, the Union will agree that its members, for the first time since the
implementation of the HSA plan, will be responsible to pay premiums for said plan
under the below basic structure:
a. The Employer will pay the first $600.00 per month of premium, after which the
Employer and Employee will share costs above $600.00 premium at a ratio of 50/50
to a total Employee outlay of $100.00, effectively capping monthly Employee
health insurance outlay at $100.00.
2) In return, the Union will receive the following as a quid pro quo:
a. Annual Wage Increase: Retroactive for all hours worked.
L Year 1:
ii. Year 2:
iii. Year 3:

2.5%
2.5%
2.5%

b. Health Savings Accounts Funded:

I

Individuals that are transferred from the Traditional plan to the HSA plan are
provided with $1250.00 in funds into their new account.

II Individuals that are already participating in the HSA plan are provided with
$250.00 in funds to their already existing account.
Union’s Position
The Union contends that the Employers’ argument of a statutory bar on dual Union offers
borders on bad faith. In support, the Union emphasizes the importance of the pre-hearing and posthearing negotiations between the parties. The Union reminds the Employers that the parties had
closed-door discussions prior to the hearing in an effort to reach an amicable agreement. Further,
the Arbitrator left the record open for the parties to clarify their final offers prior to the close of
the record. The Union’s offer is that clarified offer. However, despite a series of discussions, the
Employers did not clarify their offer. The Employers cannot participate in the agreed process and
then later complain that that process was unfair.
8

The Union points to the internal and external comparables in support of its position.
According to the Union, the internal comparables are not as relevant to the instant inquiry as the
Employer suggests. Rather, the Union’s offer reflects that the Union has offered to voluntarily
move to the HSA healthcare program. None of the other Unions volunteered to move all
bargaining unit members to the HSA. The Union’s agreement to move to the HSA is part of a
quid pro quo offer. Because none of the internal comparables involve bargaining units that
voluntarily moved to the HSA, their reference value is reduced.
Regarding the external comparables, the Union contends that the reference points in the
Employers’ exhibit do not provide an accurate frame of reference for consideration. The Union
uses customary reference points of 1, 5, 10, 15 and 20 years of service. When the Union’s proposal
is considered against the comparable Sheriff’s Departments, it is clear that the Union’s proposal
places the instant employees in the proper position.
Finally, the Union continues that it withdrew the issue of rank differential for corporals and
sergeants within the deputies unit. Accordingly, the Employers’ arguments on the issue are
irrelevant.
ANALYSIS
The statutory factors that must be considered are:
(g) As to each economic issue, the arbitration panel shall adopt the last offer of settlement
which, in the opinion of the arbitration panel, more nearly complies with the applicable
factors prescribed in subsection (h). The findings, opinions and order as to all other issues
shall be based upon the applicable factors prescribed in subsection (h).
(h) Where there is no agreement between the parties ... the arbitration panel shall base its
findings, opinions and order upon the following factors, as applicable:
(1) The lawful authority of the employer.
(2) Stipulations of the parties.
(3) The interests and welfare of the public and the financial ability of the unit of
government to meet those costs.
(4) Comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of employment of the employees
involved in the arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours and conditions of
employment of other employees performing similar services and with other employees
generally:
(A) In public employment in comparable communities.
(B) In private employment in comparable communities.
9

(5) The average consumer prices for goods and services, commonly known as the cost
of living.
(6) The overall compensation presently received by the employees, including direct
wage compensation, vacations, holidays and other excused time, insurance and
pensions, medical and hospitalization benefits, the continuity and stability of
employment and all other benefits received.
(7) Changes in any of the foregoing circumstances during the pendency of the
arbitration proceedings.
(8) Such other factors, not confined to the foregoing, which are normally or
traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of wages, hours and
conditions of employment through voluntary collective bargaining, mediation, factfinding, arbitration or otherwise between the parties in the public service or in private
employment.
Whether the Union Made a Final Offer
The Employers argue that the Union’s offers should not be considered because they violate
the law and the agreed ground rules for the instant interest arbitration. The Union counters that
the record was kept open to clarify issues left open during the pre-hearing discussions.
The Union’s position prevails. An examination of the record indicates that record was left
open to clarify the Employers’ and Union’s positions in light of the pre-hearing and post-hearing
discussions. Both parties were able to clarify their final offers based upon the pre-hearing and
post-hearing discussions.
The Act requires that eight statutory factors be considered. However, interest arbitration
awards consistently point to four critical considerations: pay and benefits received by similarly
situated employees; overall compensation of the bargaining unit members; impact of inflation; the
effect of the final offers on the interests and welfare of the public and the employer’s ability to
pay.
INSURANCE
The Union agrees to move to the HSA healthcare program, but with a cap on cost increases
that are split with the employees. The basic difference between the Employers’ healthcare offer
and the Union’s healthcare offer is the effect of an insurance premium increase upon the employee
and whether the split costs will be capped (Union Offer) or not be capped. (Employers Offer).

10

The Union reminds that the internally comparable units have not voluntarily moved to the
HSA plan. Therefore, the Union contends that comparison of their healthcare costs to the instant
HSA healthcare costs is an inappropriate comparison. The Union fears that the Employers’
healthcare plans will end up costing the employees more than the current healthcare plan. Because
it will cost more, the Union maintains that the instant employees should have a cap on premium
increases.
When considering health care offers, internal consistency has been historically recognized
as critical to the analysis. Although internal consistency is not dispositive, it must be considered.
Arbitrator Peter Feuille analyzed the issue in City of Peoria and IAFF (1992) and that analysis is
instructive in the instant matter. Responding to a union final offer that sought a separate health
care plan from other municipal employees, he stated:
. . . the health insurance issue in dispute here is a city-wide issue, in that the City
is trying to continue to maintain City-wide uniformity in its health insurance plan
whereby all employees will receive the same medical and dental benefits and also
make contributions according to the same contribution formula. In other words,
health insurance is not an issue that is somehow unique to this City bargaining unit.
Instead, it is most usefully addresses from a city-wide perspective.
Accordingly, the Panel believes that the internal comparability evidence deserves
considerable weight. Unlike some other labor-management issues, this health
insurance issue is the type of issue where comparisons with other City
employees are imminently appropriate and useful. In this instance, other city
employees constitute healthy appropriate comparison groups within the meaning
of Section 14(h) of the Act. This internal evidence provides much stronger
support for the City's offer than for the Union's offer.
In the instant matter, the movement to an HSA has been agreed to by the Union, with a cap
on increases. None of the internal comparables have a cap on the increase on health insurance
premiums. Contrary to the Union’s argument, the comparables are inopposite.
That distinction is critical to the instant inquiry in light of Arbitrator Feulle’s above-cited
analysis. Here, the healthcare plan is a county-wide matter. Like every other employer, providing
for affordable healthcare is a critical issue – particularly so in the continuing uncertainty
surrounding the Affordable Care Act and increasing costs of healthcare.
It is no secret that the Employers seek to move all County employees to the same HSA
plan with similar premiums and provisions for addressing premium increases. The Employers

11

devote a considerable amount of their brief arguing that the County has the authority to alter the
healthcare plan to achieve that goal after seeking input from the Union.
Given the Union’s final offer, the inquiry involves a cap or without a cap. The Employers
have offered justification for the cap - including a payment of $2600 into an HSA. However, the
Union has offered no compelling reason that it should not only have an increase in the Employers’paid premium to $600.00, but also have a cap on premium increases that none of the other
bargaining units enjoy. Moreover, while the instant bargaining unit members may face increased
healthcare costs in the future, the Employers’ final offer on health care also includes $2600.00 per
employee contribution to the HSA account.
The Employers’ offer seeks to bring continuity to the County’s healthcare plan and
represents a more reasonable approach than the Union’s proposal. The compelling factor of
internal comparability clearly dictates that the Arbitrator award the Employers’ Final Offer on
health insurance. Moreover, the Employers’ offer includes significant concessions, including a
guarantee of the current insurance provider; impact bargaining and interest arbitration for
significant cost increases; and paying for out-of-pockets costs by a deposit of $2600.00 into the
employees’ HSA accounts during this CBA.
For the foregoing reasons, the Employers’ Final Offer on Healthcare is awarded.
WAGES
In interest arbitration, significant gains are meant to be the rarity. It is generally accepted
that parties should not make gains at arbitration that they could not get at the bargaining table via
face–to–face negotiations. As Arbitrator Bierig noted in 2013:
If an arbitrator awards either party a wage package which is significantly superior
to anything it would likely have obtained through the collective bargaining process,
that party is not likely to want to settle the terms of its next contract through goodfaith collective bargaining. The temptation and political pressures will be very
great to try one’s luck again in arbitration in hopes of getting a better deal than is
likely available at the bargaining table. City of Chicago & PBLC Unit 156, at 56.
The Union seeks 2.5% wage increases for each of the three years of the CBA that are
retroactive. The Union withdrew the issue of corporal and sergeant compensation due to a

12

Tentative Agreement. The Employers seek a 2% wage increase for each of the three years of the
CBA.
The Union argues that the statutory factors support its position. According to the Union,
it has agreed to something that no other bargaining unit has also done – voluntarily moved to the
HSA program. According to the Union, this voluntary move is reason enough to award the Union’s
wage offer. Further, the Union continues that when the statutory factors are considered, the
Union’s offer must prevail.
The four key factors are: the pay and benefits received by other similarly situated
employees; the impact of inflation on the employees’ purchasing power; the effect of the final
offers on the interests and welfare of the public and the government’s ability to meet the costs after
the final offers and on the overall compensation of the employees at issue.
Pay and Benefits of Similarly Situated Employees:
The Employers and the Union both point to the external comparables in support of their
positions. The internal comparables are seen differently – the Employers argue the 2% annual
increases of other bargaining units are key to the instant matter and the Union dismisses those
comparisons because there is no evidence of a “me too” or “lockstep” history, and also because
the other unions did not volunteer to move to the HSA program for healthcare.
Here, an examination of the Union’s position indicates that it is persuasive. While not
dispositive, it should be noted that the Union has given up the traditional healthcare plan in favor
of the HSA plan sought by the Employers. Nothing in the record shows that any other internal
bargaining unit moved to the HSA plan. Further, the Union’s five year benchmarks are a better
indicator of the position of the instant bargaining unit members.
Internal Comparables and the Deputies Final Wage Offer
The internal comparables are consistent with the Employers’ 2% annual increase.
Internal Comparables and the Corrections Final Wage Offer
The internal comparables are consistent with the Employers’ 2% annual increase.

13

External Comparables and the Deputies Wage Final Offer
The Deputies’ wages under the Employers’ offer keep them at their current rank among
comparable departments. As seen from Employers’ Exhibit 8, the Deputies rank starts out at
second and slips after the first year. The Union’s offer seeks to lessen the degree of rank slippage.
Exhibit 8 – Deputies Rank Among Comparables
Years of
Service

Current
Rank

Start
After 1
After 2
After 4
After 9
After 14
After 19

2
2
3
4
4
3
4

FOP
Proposal
2
2
3
3
3
2
3

2016 Offers
County
Gain
Proposal
2
2
3
+1 “Position”
4
+1 “Position”
4
+1 “Position”
3
+1 “Position”
4

Gain
-

The Union’s final offer places the Deputies in the more reasonable position compared to
the external comparables.
External Comparables and the Corrections and Telecommunications Final Offer
The Employers and the Union agree that the Correctional Officers have been paid below
the average for a number of years. The Employers maintain that their offer gets the Correctional
Officers closer to the average than prior CBAs. The Employers continue that a jump to the average
is not something that should be done in one CBA. The Union’s evidence indicates that their offer
would still result in the Correctional Officers and Telecommunicators below average, only less
below average than the Employers’ offer.
The Union’s final offer places the Correctional Officers and Telecommunicators in the
more reasonable position comparable to the external comparables.
Overall Compensation of the Bargaining Unit Members
When considering the Union’s 5-year comparison intervals, the 2.5% annual increase
maintains the bargaining unit members’ position relative to the other County Sheriffs Departments.
Further, under the Employers’ proposed healthcare plan, the caps are removed and the employees
split the cost increase with the respective Employer in excess of $600 a month. Although neither
14

party has the ability to predict when costs will increase, there can be no doubt that healthcare costs
will eventually increase. While it is true that the Employers’ proposal includes a one-time HSA
contribution and forgiveness of back premiums, that does not eliminate potential future costs. That
future increased healthcare cost will be borne equally by the Employers and the employees.
As the Union correctly states, no other bargaining unit has agreed to move to the HSA plan.
There will be increased costs to the bargaining unit employees. The 2.5% increase will address
those increased costs.
The Union’s proposal is the more reasonable.
The Consumer Price Index
The Union does not address the CPI in its brief. The Employers maintain that the Union
cannot provide an argument in favor of the CPI supporting its wage final offer. According to the
Employers, the CPI favors the Union in 2015 because it shows a .41 increase in wages due to a
lack of inflation.
A closer inspection of the Employers’ position indicates a change in CPI driven, almost
exclusively, by a drastic price drop in oil – energy being a major component of the CPI. Arbitrator
Cox’s recent Award in Village of Oak Brook and IFOP Labor Council (2015) is instructive:
I give Police Officer Salaries in the same employment area greater weight when
making a decision of how much a Police Officer should be paid rather than
changes in the cost of living that the Village stresses here. Many of those
surveyed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and reported here have no specific
relevance to Police salaries in the Oak Brook Area. I find it a non sequitur that
Oak Brook Officer Salaries should be determined by increases in the CPI over
the term of the 2012-2014 Labor Agreement to their detriment when wages of
Officers in comparable communities are higher.
Here, the CPI does not inform on the wage issue.
The Effect on the Interests and Welfare of the Public and the Employer’s Ability to Pay
The County is in a much better economic position than it was during the economic
downturn. Many arbitrators have commented on the conservative nature of interest arbitration and
its goal of producing what could have been produced at the bargaining table. The arbitrators have
also stated that a simple ability to pay does not mean that a municipal employer should pay. There

15

are a number of considerations in determining whether the County should pay the Union’s final
offer.
Here, unlike many interest arbitration awards in the post-2008 crash period, the Employers
do not argue an inability to pay. The County appears to be slowly emerging from the recession
and acknowledges that it is healthier than five years ago. But, the County warns that gloom is on
the horizon in the form of deadlock in Springfield. The County General Fund receives over 60%
of its funding from the LGD Fund and that fund, like all state finances, is mired in doubt and delay.
According to the Employers, this uncertain future for state reimbursement casts the County’s
future to the fates. The Employers continue that fiscal continuity cannot be guaranteed and this
unpredictable future warrants awarding the Employers’ proposal.
The Union sees the fiscal picture of Effingham County in a much different light than the
Employers. The Union counters that the County's financial health is strong, citing that from 2011
to 2016, the County's General Revenue Ending Fund Balance nearly doubled from $1,171,623.00
to $2,157,859.00 unrestricted funds. The Union continues that annual revenue is expected to be up
just over $1 million during the same time period. The Union also states that the County's End
Fund Balance has outpaced County Expenditures, rising to 23.70% in 2014 from 4.92% in 2010.
Moreover, County Sheriff s Office Expenditures are expected to reach a recent low as a ratio of
total County Expenditures FY 2016.
The County is emerging from the Recession. Like every other municipal employer in the
State of Illinois, it fears that the continued deadlock in Springfield will further erode its fiscally
responsible approach to administering county government. However, that fear and potential for
fiscal turmoil does not negate the sound picture of county fiscal health.
Under the Union’s final offer, the Deputies will maintain their position relative to other
external comparables and the County will also get the positive outcome of moving the Sheriff’s
department to the HSA healthcare plan. The Correctional and Telecommunicators unit will get
closer to average in an incremental manner that does not place an undue burden on County
finances.

16

The Remaining Statutory Factors
In addition to the above-cited statutory factors, the undersigned has considered all the
remaining statutory factors. The remaining statutory factors favor the Union’s Wage offers for
both bargaining units.
TENTATIVE AGREEMENTS
All prior tentative agreements are incorporated into this Award by reference.
RETROACTIVITY
Payments and benefits are retroactive as stated in the Award.
JURISDICTION
Jurisdiction is retained for 90 days from issuance of this Award to resolve any issues that
may arise regarding implementation.
AWARD
Having considered the evidence and argument in accord with the applicable statute, I find
the following:
(2)(a) What shall the wage increases for the Deputies Bargaining Unit be for
September 1, 2014, September 1, 2015 and September 1, 2016?
Union’s Final Offer is Awarded.
(2)(b) What shall the wage increases for the Corrections Bargaining Unit be for
September 1, 2014, September 1, 2015 and September 1, 2016?
Union’s Final Offer is Awarded.
(3)(a) What shall the language in Article 12 of the Deputies Collective Bargaining
Agreement be in regards to Health Insurance?
Employers’ Final Offer is Awarded.
(3)(b) What shall the language in Article 12 of the Corrections Collective
Bargaining Agreement be in regards to Health Insurance?
Employers’ Final Offer is Awarded.

17

(1)

What, if any, changes shall be made to the current system of Corporal and
Sergeant compensation?
The Question is Moot.

Date of AWARD: August 5, 2015

Respectfully submitted,

By: __________________________________
BRIAN CLAUSS, Arbitrator

18
