COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
BY AND BETWEEN

CITY OF HAMILTON, OHIO
AND

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
LODGE 38
RANK AND FILE UNIT
(POLICE OFFICERS AND DETECTIVES)

EFFECTIVE MARCH 1, 2018 THROUGH FEBRUARY 28, 2021

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Article

Acting Officer Compensation

16

Page
19

Appendix A (Wages)

38

Appendix B (Random Drug Testing Procedures)

44

Attendance Incentive Award

20

21

Back Up Weapon

14, Section 3

17

Canine Officers

36

34

Clothing Allowance

14

16

Clothing Maintenance Allowance

14, Section 7

17

Compensation for Hazardous Duty

18

20

Compensatory Time Off

31

31

Court Appearances, Compensation for Officers

17

19

Discipline & Responsibility

23

24

Discrimination, Equal Employment Opportunities

2

1

Dispute Settlement

29

30

Drug Screening

33, Section 4

32

Dues Deduction, Fair Share Fee

3

1

Duration of Agreement

38

35

Duty Weapon and Uniform Badge

33, Section 5

32

F.O.P. Leave

30

31

Funeral Leave

15

18

Grievance Procedures

24

25

Group Life Insurance

12

13

Holidays

9

9

Hospitalization, Medical-Surgical Coverage

11

13

Labor-Management Committee

28

30

i

Lay Off Procedures

27

30

Miscellaneous Procedures

33

32

No Lay-offs, No Attrition

34

33

No Strike or Lockout

35

33

Overtime

8

7

Physical Fitness Tests

21

22

Police Academy

33, Section 1

32

Probation

37

35

Promotional Examinations

5

3

Protest Period

5, Section 4

4

Recognition

1

1

Retirement Planning

32

31

Rights and Limitations

4

3

Savings Clause

25

29

Short Term Military Leave

19

20

Sick Leave

10

10

Accrual

10, Section 1

10

Administration

10, Section 2

10

Special Provisions

10, Section 3

11

Line of Duty Injury

10, Section 4

12

8, Section 7

8

Travel Time
Statement of Policy

1

Unemployment Compensation

22

24

Vacancies

5, Section 5

5

Vacation

13

14

Wages

6

5

ii

Waiver

26

29

Workday and Work Period

7

7

iii

STATEMENT OF POLICY
12th
This collective bargaining agreement made and entered into on the _______
day of
November
_____________ 2018, in the City of Hamilton, County of Butler, State of Ohio, by and between
the City of Hamilton, hereinafter called the “CITY”, and the Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge 38,
hereinafter called “FOP 38.”

ARTICLE 1.

RECOGNITION

CITY agrees to recognize, and does hereby recognize FOP 38, its agents and representatives, as
the exclusive bargaining representative for all unit members, hereinafter defined to mean
permanent sworn police personnel in the classifications of Police Officer and Detective.

ARTICLE 2.

DISCRIMINATION, EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES

CITY and FOP 38 agree that for the duration of this Agreement neither shall discriminate against
any employee because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, handicap, ancestry or
marital status; nor shall CITY, its agents or representatives, nor FOP 38, its agents,
representatives or members discriminate against any employee because of his or her
membership or non-membership in FOP 38.
Both CITY and FOP 38 recognize their respective responsibilities under applicable federal, state,
and local laws and executive orders relating to civil rights and employment practices.

ARTICLE 3.

DUES DEDUCTION, FAIR SHARE FEE

Section 1: It is agreed between CITY and FOP 38 that CITY will deduct periodic dues, initiation
fees and assessments of unit members of FOP 38 from the paycheck of all unit members who
have signed proper written legal deduction authorizations and who are covered by this
Agreement. The Treasurer of FOP 38 will promptly issue a receipt to CITY for all dues, fees and
assessments as provided to him.
FOP 38 will provide proper written legal deduction authorization forms for the deduction of
dues, initiation fees and assessments.
A.

FOP will provide CITY with at least two (2) calendar weeks’ advance notice of a
pending increase in dues.

1

B.

CITY’s remittance will be deemed correct if FOP 38 does not give written notice
within two (2) calendar weeks after a remittance is forwarded, of its belief, with
reasons therefore, that the remittance is incorrect.

C.

FOP 38 shall indemnify and hold CITY harmless from any and all claims arising
from CITY’s deduction and payment of said dues, fees and assessments to FOP
38.

Section 2. Fair Share Fee: For any period in which fair share fees are illegal, the provisions in
Section 2 of Article 3 shall have no force and effect.
A.

All employees within the bargaining unit who elect not to join the Union shall pay
to the Union an amount of money known as the Fair Share Fee to reimburse FOP
38 for the costs of representation for the purposes of collective bargaining and
for no other purpose, consistent with Ohio Revised Code, Section 4117.09. The
Treasurer of the Union shall certify to the CITY the amount of the Fair Share Fee
and that the fee is to reimburse FOP 38 for the costs of providing representation
for collective bargaining and for no other purpose. Upon such certification by
FOP 38, the CITY shall automatically and without requiring further authorization,
deduct that amount from the pay of each employee obligated to pay the fee and
remit the fee to FOP 38 in the same manner as dues.
For existing non-probationary employees, such payments shall commence upon
the date of the execution of this Agreement. For probationary or new employees,
such payments shall commence at the conclusion of the first sixty (60) days of
employment.

B.

FOP 38 shall prescribe an internal procedure to determine a rebate, if any, for
nonmembers which conforms to both federal law and Ohio Revised Code,
Chapter 4117.

C.

Employees having religious objection to payment of said Fair Share Fee are
subject to the provisions for exemption contained in Ohio Revised Code, Section
4117.09.

D.

FOP 38 will provide the CITY with at least thirty (30) calendar days advance
notice of a pending increase in dues.

E.

The CITY’s remittance will be deemed correct if FOP 38 does not give written
notice within two (2) calendar weeks after a remittance is forwarded, of its belief,
with reasons therefore, that the remittance is incorrect.

F.

FOP 38 agrees to indemnify and hold the CITY harmless against any and all
claims or forms of liability arising out of its deduction from an employee’s pay of
FOP 38 dues, fees, or assessments. FOP 38 assumes full responsibility for the
disposition of the deductions so made once they have been forwarded by the
CITY.
2

ARTICLE 4.

RIGHTS AND LIMITATIONS

Section 1. Unless otherwise modified by this Agreement, the following include, but are not
limited to, the exclusive rights of CITY:
A.

Determine matters of inherent managerial policy which include, but are not
limited to, areas of discretion or policy such as the functions and programs of the
employer, standards of services, its overall budget, utilization of technology, and
organizational structure;

B.

Direct, supervise, evaluate or hire employees;

C.

Maintain and improve the efficiency or effectiveness of governmental operations;

D.

Determine the overall methods, process, means or personnel by which
governmental operations are to be conducted;

E.

Suspend, discipline, demote, or discharge for just cause, or lay off, transfer,
assign, schedule, promote, or retain employees;

F.

Determine the adequacy of the work force;

G.

Determine the overall mission of the CITY as a unit of government;

H.

Effectively manage the work force;

I.

Take actions to carry out the mission of CITY as a governmental unit;

J.

The right to make and enforce reasonable work rules.

It is agreed that the above listing of management rights shall not be deemed to exclude other
inherent rights and responsibilities which shall remain vested exclusively with CITY.
Section 2. The conduct and grading of civil service examinations for the position of Police
Officer, the rating of candidates for the position of Police Officer, the establishment of eligible
lists from the examinations for the position of Police Officer, and the original appointment from
the eligible lists are not appropriate subjects for collective bargaining.

ARTICLE 5.

PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATIONS

The following rules apply regarding promotions:
Section 1. Eligibility and Service:

3

A.

When a promotional examination is held for the promoted rank of Detective, no
person shall be eligible to take the examination unless he or she has served
three (3) years beyond the successful completion of the one (1) year probation
period in the rank of entry level Police Officer with the City of Hamilton prior to
the actual date of the expiration of the current promotional list for the rank of
Detective.

B.

When a promotional examination is held for the promoted rank of Sergeant, no
person shall be eligible to take the examination unless he or she has served in
the rank of Detective twelve (12) months prior to the actual date of the expiration
of the current promotional list for the rank of Sergeant.

C.

Service as a Police Officer as defined above in Section 1 shall earn appropriate
seniority credit.

Section 2. Efficiency: No credit for efficiency shall be added to any test grade when the
competitors are members of this bargaining unit.
Section 3. Eligibility Lists:
A.

All Promotional Lists shall stay in effect for a two (2) year period unless all
individuals on the list have been certified for promotion.

B.

In case of a vacancy in a rank for which no promotional list exists, individuals on
lists of all sequential lower ranks who would have been eligible for promotion if
lists had existed at that time for each rank, shall immediately be certified for
appointment. Said certification shall be used to fill the first vacancy occurring in
the appropriate rank. In case of multiple certifications for the same rank, the
Appointing Authority shall appoint by priority of certification.

Section 4. Protest Period: Notwithstanding Ohio Revised Code, Section 124.44, the FOP 38
and the CITY hereby establish certain basic conditions for a Protest Period following any
promotional examination.
The following basic conditions shall apply:
A.

There shall be a defined period following promotional examination.

B.

A protest right shall be defined by the Commission.

C.

The mechanism shall be established to permit anonymous challenge to an
examination question and/or proposed key answer.

D.

No protest shall be permitted as to the appropriateness of, or selection of,
reference or study material.

4

E.

There shall be some list available to all competitors showing what questions have
been contested by candidates.

F.

There shall be a period, defined as five (5) workdays (exclusive of Saturday,
Sunday and holidays), following resolution of protests, when each candidate may
review his or her examination paper only for the purpose of assuring that the test
was mathematically graded properly.
The Commission’s decision regarding protests is final.

G.
H.

The sole and exclusive remedy for challenge of any test question, issue test
eligibility, or test-related matter shall rest with the Civil Service Commission, and
appeals therefrom by law, and no grievance may be filed in relation to such
issues.

Section 5. Vacancies:
A.

The Training Committee shall provide at least three (3) potential rank specific
source materials appropriate to the upcoming vacancy to the Director of Civil
Service and Personnel not less than 120 days prior to the expiration of the
current eligibility list. If said list of potential source materials is not provided
within this time frame, the Director of Civil Service and Personnel shall have full
discretion to select materials without training committee input.

B.

The bibliography for the promotional examination for the promoted rank of
Detective shall be published thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the current
promotional list for the rank of Detective. The promotional examination for the
rank of Detective shall be administered no sooner than forty–five (45) days after
the expiration of the current promotional list for the rank of Detective and no
later than sixty (60) days after the expiration of the current list for the rank of
Detective.

C.

The bibliography for the promotional examination for the promoted rank of
Sergeant shall be published thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the current
promotional list for the rank of Sergeant. The promotional examination for the
rank of Sergeant shall be administered no sooner than forty–five (45) days after
the expiration of the current promotional list for the rank of Sergeant and no later
than sixty (60) days after the expiration of the current list for the rank of
Sergeant.

ARTICLE 6.

WAGES

Section 1.
Wage rates for unit members of FOP 38 shall be in accordance with Appendix A, which shall
reflect a three percent (3%) across the board wage increase effective from the beginning of the
pay period that includes March 1, 2018, a three percent (3%) wage increase effective from the
5

beginning of the pay period that includes March 1, 2019, and a three percent (3%) wage
increase effective from the beginning of the pay period that includes March 1, 2020.
The top base pay for the rank of Detective shall be fifteen percent (15%) above the top base pay
for the rank of Police Officer as shown in Step 6 of Appendix A.
Section 2.
A.

Consideration for merit adjustments may be delayed in those instances in which
work time has been lost as a result of unpaid leaves of absence unless such
leave has been for the purpose of military service or arising out of the employee’s
disability caused in the course of employment.

B.

Unit members in the classification of Police Officer shall originally be placed in
Step 1 of Pay Range 27-P and shall be eligible for consideration for progression
to Step 2 following twelve (12) months from date of employment. Unit members
in the classification of Police Officer shall be eligible for consideration for
progression from Step 2 to Step 3 and for consideration for progression from
Step 3 to Step 4 at twelve (12) month intervals. Unit members in the
classification of Police Officer will be eligible for consideration for progression
from Step 4 to Step 5 after six (6) months at Step 4 and will be eligible for
consideration for progression from Step 5 to Step 6 after six (6) months at Step
5.
Unit members promoted to the Detective classification will originally be placed in
Step 4 of Pay Range 30-P and will be eligible for consideration for progression to
Step 5 after six (6) months at Step 4. Detectives will be eligible for consideration
for progression from Step 5 to Step 6 after six (6) months at Step 5.
It is understood that each merit adjustment shall be premised upon defined
standards of merit and not simply upon duration of service in a given step. The
most recent Performance Evaluation Report form shall be considered as well as
information contained on the Personnel, Payroll Change Notice.
A copy of any suggested changes in standards to be used shall be forwarded to
the FOP at least thirty (30) days prior to a Labor Management Committee
meeting and suggested changes shall be discussed, and mutually agreed upon
during the Labor Management Committee meeting.
Any merit adjustment shall be implemented at the beginning of the pay period in
which authorization of said adjustment is made.

Section 3.
Pay at Steps 7 through 11 in Appendix A shall not be considered merit-based and shall be
based on the following percentages, utilizing the pay rate for the Police Officer classification in
Step 6 of Appendix A:
6

Step
7
8
9
10
11

Years of Continuous Service

% of Stipulated Salary

5-7 years
8-11 years
12-15 years
16-19 years
20+ years

2%
4%
7%
9%
11%

The step raises at Steps 7 through 11 shall be effective beginning with the pay period next
following the particular member’s anniversary date.

ARTICLE 7.

WORKDAY AND WORK PERIOD

Section 1. A ‘day’ for the purpose of this Agreement is defined as a twenty-four (24) hour period
beginning with the start of the employee’s scheduled shift.
Section 2. The normal workday shall be eight (8) consecutive hours of work inclusive of a thirty
(30) minute lunch period within a twenty-four (24) hour period beginning at the regular hour of
shift start in a particular assignment or classification within the Division.
Section 3. The above provisions shall not constitute a guarantee of any specific number of
hours of work per day or week.
Section 4. The work schedule for persons assigned to a rotating shift schedule shall be known
as a “straight 4/2 schedule.” It shall consist of four (4) work days followed by two (2) pass days.
Section 5. The CITY will give thirty (30) days written notice prior to a change of shift. However,
such notice shall not be required in cases of promotion (and related necessary changes), or
emergency which includes, but is not limited to, injury or extended illness, or in cases of
voluntary change of assignment.
In consideration of work scheduling changes negotiated herein, FOP 38, on behalf of itself and
the members thereof, jointly and severally promises, covenants, and agrees that as a result of
the work scheduling changes negotiated herein, neither FOP 38 nor any member thereof, nor
anyone claiming through either, will raise as an issue, file any grievance or initiate any other
form of administrative or legal action concerning any alleged reduction in work force due to the
scheduling changes negotiated within this contract.

ARTICLE 8.

OVERTIME

Section 1. Overtime is defined as hours worked in excess of the normal workday or period as
set by Article 7 of this agreement.
7

Section 2. In accordance with existing ordinance provisions, the use of overtime shall be on an
emergency basis. Compensation for hours worked on an overtime basis shall be at a rate of
one and one-half times the compensation regularly paid for an equal amount of time.
Section 3. Unit members assigned to the Detective function and those other officers who are
called to duty following the completion of their normal work shift and prior to the start of their
next work shift, shall receive a minimum of four hours’ call-in-pay at time and one-half the
employee’s rate.
Section 4. Overtime shall be approved in advance by a Shift Supervisor so designated by the
Division Chief. The Shift Supervisor will be responsible for reporting overtime authorization
directly to the Chief of Police for approval.
Section 5. The minimum four (4) hour call-in pay provision shall not apply in those instances
wherein the employee’s work schedule has been changed or in which overtime commences two
(2) or fewer hours prior to and runs continuously into the employee’s regular shift or
commences immediately upon termination and follows on a continuous basis the employee’s
regular work shift. In such instances, the employee shall be compensated for the exact hours
worked at the appropriate rate.
Section 6. Pyramiding of Rates
In no event shall the overtime or premium pay provided under this policy be pyramided. Thus, if
two (2) or more overtime or premium pay provisions are applicable to the same hours of work,
only the applicable provision yielding the largest amount shall satisfy the requirements of all
other pay provisions
Section 7. Travel Time
Time spent traveling to sites more than forty (40) miles outside the City of Hamilton, at the
onset or at the end, of a training program which is required by initiation of the Hamilton Police
Division shall be considered work time and shall be paid:
Be paid at a regular straight time rate for any hours which are included within the
officer’s regular eight (8) hour work day; and
No call-in pay shall be applicable in any situation; and,
Travel to/from the Officers’ residence to the HPD Headquarters shall not be considered
as travel time in any manner.
No payment shall be made for travel time for any officer initiated school. Travel to or from a
multi-week school shall be paid on weekends (including long holiday weekends) only.
Section 8. Special Call-In Provisions for Detectives

8

A.

Detectives assigned to the Investigations Section who are called in will receive
either compensatory time off or overtime in accordance with established
departmental procedures and existing contractual provisions.

B.

On a weekday (Monday through Thursday) when they are assigned as the primary
call-in detective, detectives assigned to the Investigations Section shall receive
one (1) hour of straight compensatory time whether or not they are called in.
On a Friday when they are assigned as the primary on-call detective, detectives
assigned to the Investigations Section shall receive one and one-half hour of
straight compensatory time whether or not they are called in.

C.

On a weekend (Saturday and/or Sunday) or holiday (as defined in Article 9,
Section 1 of this Agreement, excluding floating holidays), when they are assigned
as the primary call-in detective, detectives assigned to the Investigations Section
shall receive two (2) hours of straight compensatory time whether or not they are
called in.

D.

“Mandatory” time period is defined as only those hours when no Investigations
Section detectives are normally scheduled to be on duty.

E.

To reduce paperwork, only one Record of Overtime (DP-65) slip will be completed
at the end of the mandatory call-in period. The dates and hours reported will be
marked in the “Explanation” field of the report.

F.

Straight compensatory time, as described in subsections (B) or (C) above, shall
be credited to the unit member’s Compensatory Time Bank.

ARTICLE 9.

HOLIDAYS

Section 1. Unit members assigned to a 4/2 work schedule shall be eligible for a total holiday
leave of sixty–four (64) hours with pay per calendar year. Said leave shall be composed of eight
(8) eight (8) hour leave tours with pay.
Unit members assigned to a 5/2 work schedule shall be eligible for a total holiday leave of 144
hours with pay per calendar year. Said holiday leave for unit members assigned to a 5/2 work
schedule shall be composed of the following eight (8) hour leave tours with pay: New Year’s
Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, day after Thanksgiving
Day, Christmas Eve Day, Christmas Day, New Year’s Eve Day, Employee’s Birthday, (seven
personal leave holidays and Martin Luther King Day as floating holiday).
In the event that a unit member’s work schedule is changed from a 5/2 to a modified 4/2 plan
or vice versa, total holiday leave eligibility shall be prorated such that, for each month or part
thereof of active service on the appropriate schedule in question, the employee shall be eligible
for 1/12 of the total holiday allowance.

9

Section 2. Holidays shall be scheduled in accordance with established division practices.
Approval of holiday leave requests shall be conditioned upon the availability of adequate
personnel.
Section 3. Employees newly appointed or who separate shall be eligible for a proration of the
annual holiday leave benefit such that for each month or part thereof of active service, the
employee shall be eligible for one-twelfth (1/12) of the total holiday allowance.
Section 4. Holiday leave shall not be approved in those instances where no holiday eligibility
exists. Holiday leave taken, but not earned, shall be subject to recovery.
Section 5. Holiday leave, as provided for herein, may be requested in increments of four (4)
hours. Such requests shall be submitted in accordance with established Division practices for
approval by the appropriate supervisor.
Section 6. Officers who are scheduled to work any of the seven (7) defined premium holidays
will be paid either three (3) times the regular rate of pay and will receive no time off for the
holiday, or the officer, at his option with supervision approval, shall receive double time pay for
the holiday worked and then an additional eight (8) hours off at some other date.
An officer called in on any of the seven (7) defined premium holidays will be paid double time at
the appropriate call-in hours.
The recognized days for this benefit will be only: New Year’s Day, Easter Sunday, Independence
Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve Day, Christmas Day and New Year’s Eve Day.
Section 7. Accrued but unpaid holiday pay shall be forfeited by an employee who is terminated
for disciplinary reasons. However, such funds shall be paid if the employee is reinstated by the
Civil Service Commission or a Court of Law and all appeals are exhausted.

ARTICLE 10.

SICK LEAVE

Section 1. Accrual
Each unit member covered by this Agreement shall be entitled to a sick leave accrual of one
and one-quarter (1.25) days or ten (10) hours for each month in which the employee has
actively worked. Unused sick leave accumulation shall accrue without maximum.
Section 2. Administration
A.

Sick leave may be used only in accordance with the provisions of the sick leave
policy as established by Administrative Directive 306, which may be updated
from time to time.
Sick leave usage for the purpose of illness/injury of a member of the employee’s
immediate family (wherein the employee’s presence is required) shall be limited
10

to a total of sixteen (16) hours per calendar year. Such usage may be taken in
increments of as few as one (1) hour per incident. In the event an employee
should require additional time in excess of the allowance established or for
reasons other than those noted above, such additional time may be charged
against vacation or holiday credit with the approval of the employee’s supervisor.
Immediate family as used above shall mean spouse, child, stepchild or other
relative if that relative actually resides in the home of the employee.
B.

Each employee who has been absent for three (3) or more consecutive workdays
due to personal injury or illness must submit a physician’s certificate as proof of
illness or injury and as medical support that he or she is sufficiently recovered to
return to work.
The employee may be required to present a physician’s certificate for sick leave
absences of less than three (3) consecutive workdays if such is deemed
necessary based upon the employee’s record of usage or the circumstances
attendant to a specific absence or series of absences.

Section 3.
A.

Special Provisions
Upon retirement, unit members hired before 1-1-95 shall be eligible to receive a
cash payment based upon seventy-five percent (75%) of the value of the
accumulated sick leave, which for purposes of this benefit, shall not exceed a
total of twelve hundred (1,200) hours or one hundred fifty (150) days.
Upon retirement, unit members hired on/after 1-1-95 shall be eligible to receive
a cash payment based upon twenty-five percent (25%) of the value of his or her
accumulated sick leave. For members hired on or after January 1, 1995, sick
leave accumulation shall be unlimited.

B.

In the event a unit member hired prior to 1-1-95 dies from causes determined
not to be duty-related or directly associated with his or her employment, a cash
benefit based upon seventy-five percent (75%) of the value of the deceased
member’s accumulated sick leave will be paid to the surviving spouse and if the
employee leaves no surviving spouse, then to the estate of the deceased
employee or heir(s) at law. For purposes of this benefit, the sick leave
accumulation shall not exceed a total of twelve hundred (1,200) hours or one
hundred fifty (150) days.
In the event a unit member hired on/after 1-1-95 dies from causes determined
not to be duty-related or directly associated with his or her employment, a cash
benefit based upon seventy-five percent (75%) of the value of the deceased
member’s accumulated sick leave will be paid to the surviving spouse and if the
employee leaves no surviving spouse, then to the estate of the deceased
employee or heir(s) at law. For purposes of this benefit, there shall be no
maximum accumulation.
11

C.

In the event of the death of a unit member hired prior to 1-1-95 resulting from or
caused by his or her employment, payment in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of the value of his or her accrued sick leave shall be made to the
surviving spouse or heir(s) at law or estate of the deceased employee. For
purposes of this section sick leave shall accumulate to a maximum of one
hundred fifty (150) days or one thousand two hundred (1,200) hours.
In the event of the death of a unit member hired on/after 1-1-95 resulting from
or caused by his or her employment, payment in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of the value of his or her accrued sick leave shall be made to the
surviving spouse or heir(s) at law or estate of the deceased employee. For
purposes of this benefit, there shall be no maximum accumulation.

D.

Each unit member who has accumulated at least 240 hours of sick leave at the
commencement of an extended illness shall be entitled to additional sick pay
when his or her regular accumulation has expired. Additional sick pay shall be an
amount equivalent to one-half his or her sick leave accumulation at the time the
extended illness or injury commenced thereby causing continuous absence from
work. Such additional sick pay shall be paid in a manner similar to payment of
regular sick leave but at one-half the normal sick leave rate for a period of time
equal to the employee’s regular sick leave accumulation at the time the disabling
illness or injury caused his or her continuous absence from work.

Eligibility for extended benefits is subject to the following provisions:
(1)

Employee must have fully utilized his or her regular sick leave accumulation.

(2)

Eligibility for extended or supplemental benefits requires a physician’s certificate.

(3)

In instances of work-related injury, extended sick leave benefits would not be
applied when the employee is eligible to receive or is receiving loss of pay
benefits under the Ohio Worker’s Compensation Law.

(4)

The provisions of this policy do not affect the City’s right to initiate disability
retirement.

(5)

Monies for extended sick leave benefits are not payable upon retirement, death,
or work-related fatality.
For purposes of this benefit, maximum sick leave accumulations shall be limited
to twelve hundred (1,200) hours.

(6)

Section 4. Line of Duty Injury
Leave of absence with pay in the event of injury received in the performance of a police officer’s
duties shall be provided in accordance with provisions of Section 181.08 of the Codified
Ordinances of the City of Hamilton, Ohio, et. seq.; provided, however, that the officer is
12

diagnosed and treated by a doctor on a preferred provider list of Workers’ Compensation
doctors approved by the CITY and that should a leave of absence due to injury extend beyond
120 calendar days, the affected employee shall not be entitled to accrue vacation or holiday pay
or credit.

ARTICLE 11.

HOSPITALIZATION, MEDICAL-SURGICAL COVERAGE

Section 1. The City shall provide a network plan of medical/hospital/surgical protection, in
accordance with the recommendations of the Health Benefits Committee.
The City and the employees shall share in the overall premium cost of the insurance plan in the
following manner: the City shall contribute 85% of the total premium cost and the employees
shall contribute 15% of the total premium cost through payroll deduction.
Section 2. Employee eligibility for medical/surgical/dental/ prescription care coverage shall
commence relative to the employee’s date of hire. If the employee is hired on or before the
fifteenth of the month, coverage shall go into effect on the first of the next month. If the
employee is hired after the fifteenth of the month, coverage shall commence on the first of the
following month.
Section 3. The Union agrees to participate in a Health Benefits Committee and to adhere to
Committee recommendations of cost-saving administration of benefits suggestions made by the
Committee.
Section 4. The CITY will pay its portion of premiums for hospitalization/health care and life
insurance for a period not to exceed six (6) months beyond the expiration of the respective
employee’s accumulated sick leave.
Section 5. In those instances in which the City employs both spouses of the family unit, the City
will provide only one (1) family plan of coverage and that plan shall be applied to the spouse
whose birthday occurs earlier in the calendar year.

ARTICLE 12.

GROUP LIFE INSURANCE

A.

CITY will arrange for a policy of group life insurance for unit members who have
completed six months’ service with CITY.

B.

The amount of life insurance coverage eligibility, up to a $50,000 maximum,
shall be an amount equal to one times the employee’s annual wage or salary as
provided in the current Classification and Compensation Plan but rounded to the
next lower one thousand dollar increment.

C.

If the employee’s annual wage or salary increases, the amount of his or her
insurance shall be redetermined on an annual basis in accordance with Section

13

B above, effective July 15 next following the day of such increase in annual
earnings.
D.

A double indemnity provision for accidental death and an accidental
dismemberment clause will be provided.

E.

CITY will pay the total cost of the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000) coverage
which shall be known as the non-contributory portion of the benefit eligibility.
Optional group life coverage of up to one times the employee’s annual salary,
rounded to the next lowest one thousand dollars ($1,000) increment, as shown
in the Classification and Compensation Plan, will be made available at a cost to
the employee of fifteen cents ($0.15) per one thousand dollars ($1,000) in
optional coverage per month.

The employee will contribute by payroll deduction for optional coverage costs.
F.

Unit members who retire on or after March 1, 1977 will be provided a maximum
of four thousand dollars ($4,000) death benefit. The cost of said benefit for
retirees shall be paid in full by CITY.

ARTICLE 13.

VACATION

Section 1. Unit members shall receive vacation leave with pay as follows:
Years Continuous Service
Less than one (1) year
1 year but less than 8 years
8 years but less than 16 years
16 years
17 years
18 years
19 years
20 years
21 years
22 years
23 years
24 years
25 years
26 years

Vacation Leave Allowance
None
10 workdays
15 workdays
20 workdays
21 workdays
22 workdays
23 workdays
24 workdays
25 workdays
26 workdays
27 workdays
28 workdays
29 workdays
30 workdays

The maximum leave period will be 30 workdays.
All service with CITY shall be continuous with respect to vacation leave eligibility.
Section 2. When officers working the 5/2 or 4/2 schedule reach 17-18-19 years of service,
they may elect to put the extra 8 hour vacation in 17th year, 16 hours in 18th year or 24 hours
in the 19th year in the Compensatory Bank, if they do not have the maximum of 200 hours.
14

These extra vacation hours then can be taken as compensatory time when scheduling permits
and is approved in advance by the supervisor, but are not eligible to be cashed in as pay.
Section 3. Officers reaching the 20th year of service may elect to take the extra vacation days
as vacation or pay. To take it as vacation, it must be approved by a supervisor in advance.
Section 4. Vacation scheduling shall be subject to division scheduling practices and manpower
needs. Actual vacation selection by officers will be uniform in each organizational unit.
Selection shall be based first on rank, and then on seniority within the rank in accordance with
the provisions of departmental General Orders.
Vacation selected in one week increments during the initial vacation selection process shall be
guaranteed, and shall not be changed or canceled except in the event of a State of Emergency
declared by the Mayor or the City Manager.
In those instances, wherein a unit member has accrued vacation eligibility, a maximum of ten
(10) days of accrued leave may be taken, upon request and approval, on a one (1) day leave
basis. The scheduling of such vacation leave shall be contingent upon the availability of
adequate personnel.
Section 5. Accrued vacation or holiday hours not taken by January 1 of each calendar year
shall be removed from the employee’s credit unless such balance is approved in writing by the
City Manager.
Requests for carryover of accrued vacation leave shall be made in writing through the Chief of
the Division of Police to the City Manager who shall approve such carryover in the event either
that job-related disability has caused the employee’s absence from duty for a period of six (6) or
more calendar months of the calendar year or operational necessities have prevented the
employee’s utilization of the vacation leave during the calendar year.
Approval of vacation leave for purposes other than noted above shall be at the discretion of the
City Manager.
Section 6. Vacation Worked - An officer may, if he so chooses, be allowed to convert up to a
maximum of five (5) days of vacation, or holidays per year at the officer’s permanent class rate.
An officer may also select, if he so chooses, to convert these same five (5) days of vacation or
holidays per year in the compensatory bank if he does not have the maximum of two hundred
(200) hours. A total of five (5) days per year shall be the maximum paid or converted to the
compensatory bank, or any combination thereof, not to collectively exceed five (5) days
maximum.
Pay for vacation or holidays converted shall be paid in the next overtime check. The employer
shall not carry over any vacation or holiday time at the end of the calendar year.

15

ARTICLE 14.

CLOTHING ALLOWANCE

Section 1. Each unit member shall be entitled to a clothing allowance of $1,000.00 annually. A
first-year officer may elect to receive $600.00 of his or her second year allowance in the first
year. If the officer chooses to receive $600.00 of his or her second year allowance in the first
year, the balance of his or her second year allowance ($400.00) will be paid in year two.
A unit member promoted to the rank of Detective shall receive a one-time additional clothing
allowance check of $400.00 upon being promoted.
An officer promoted from plain-clothes duty to a higher level position requiring the wearing of a
uniform will be entitled to the same allowance as a first-year officer, provided the officer has
served in plain clothes duty more than three (3) years at the time of promotion to uniform duty.
Clothing allowance funds to be expended for uniform and wearing apparel or duty-related
accessory items to include brief case, off-duty badge, thermal underwear, insulated boots and
rubber boots.
The use of clothing allowance funds for the purchase of duty-related accessory items will be
subject to the following provisions:
A.

Items may be purchased from either a bid supplier or other vendor.

B.

Items purchased must be in compliance with established applicable standards of
the Division.

Unit members may purchase authorized black, plain-toe low quarter, laced uniform-style shoes
from a vendor other than the normal uniform supplier to assure the health and comfort of the
officer.
The City of Hamilton, Ohio shall pay to each member on or about March 15 of each calendar
year, that amount of money which has been agreed to in this section for uniform purchases in a
given year.
This payment will be in check form, paid directly to each unit member. The Chief of Police shall
authorize, in writing, the names of members and the amount(s) to which each is entitled for
uniform purchase.
In lieu of the clothing allowance specified above, Detectives will be provided a clothing
allowance of $1,000.00 per year, issued by payroll check, with all applicable taxes and
deductions taken.
Section 2. Uniform Dress Coats - Except upon administrative approval, or upon administrative
notification of promotion to the rank of Sergeant, members holding the rank of Detective shall
not be permitted to purchase a dress uniform coat. Upon being invoiced by the vendor, The City
will pay for the dress uniform coat for those members facing promotion.

16

Section 3. Back Up Weapon - An Officer who has completed four (4) years of service with the
City of Hamilton shall additionally be permitted to use the uniform allowance provided in this
contract to purchase a back up weapon and holster for that weapon subject to the following
stipulations:
A.

The weapon must be purchased from the approved weapon list which is
specified for carrying as a back up weapon.

B.

Each officer must complete departmental forms which are required to allow
the officer to carry that back up weapon.

C.

This purchase will be permitted one (1) time only during an officer’s career.

D.

If, after purchase of the back up weapon using uniform allowance funds, an
officer’s uniform is found to be unacceptable by department standards, the
officer will be subject to discipline as specified in the General Orders Manual.

Section 4. Inspections The Chief of the Division shall make periodic inspections of uniforms
and wearing apparel to members of the Division and shall order the members to purchase new
uniforms and wearing apparel at the expense of the member if and when found necessary.
Any member who, upon inspection, is found to be wearing a uniform which is unkempt, unclean,
noticeably worn or frayed, stained or in other disrepair shall be ordered to change into a proper
uniform. Inability to produce, or obtain as shown in the first paragraph of this section may be
grounds for discipline.
Section 5. Dry Cleaning CITY will, by bid contract, provide for the cleaning and pressing of
certain uniform apparel to be limited to three-hundred (300) items annually at locations
specified by the CITY. Such service will further provide for the mending and alteration of
authorized apparel. Officers are responsible for payment of items exceeding the three-hundred
(300) items annually.
Section 6. Termination Any employee who terminates employment with the City during the
initial probationary period shall be required to return to the City all items which were purchased
with uniform allowance monies.
Section 7. Clothing Maintenance Allowance A Clothing Maintenance Allowance shall be
established with the following provisions:
A.

Unit members assigned and working a schedule providing for five (5) consecutive
workdays followed by two (2) pass days shall be eligible for a payment for the
purpose of maintenance of the uniform or required work clothing at the following
rate:
$500 per year/$41.67 per month

17

B.

In the event of a schedule or assignment change from the modified 4/2 to a 5/2
schedule or vice versa, or as a result of promotion or for any hired or retiring
personnel, the uniform maintenance allowance shall be prorated on a monthly
basis.

C.

The uniform maintenance allowance shall normally be payable on or about the
first payroll date in the month of December.

D.

The above payments are established for the purpose of uniform or work clothing
replacement or maintenance and shall be in addition to the eligibility for cleaning
and servicing of uniforms under contract let for bid for such purposes by CITY.

E.

A unit member who has at least fifteen (15) years of service shall, in his final year
of service prior to retirement, be permitted to use a portion of his annual clothing
allowance to purchase his issued firearm for fair market value from the
designated vendor.

ARTICLE 15.

FUNERAL LEAVE

Section 1.
A.

In the event of death in the immediate family, a permanent unit member shall
qualify for funeral leave with pay for up to three (3) consecutive workdays (24
hours) for participation in funeral services or arrangements.

B.

For the purpose of this section, “immediate family” is defined as: spouse, child or
stepchild, grandchild, parent, stepparent, grandparent, brother, sister, parents or
stepparents of spouse, brother-in-law or sister-in-law, and grandparents of spouse.

Section 2.
A.

Funeral pay will be provided to accommodate absences occurring only on regularly
scheduled workdays at the employee’s base rate of pay. Funeral leave will not be
granted for any period during which the employee is already in a paid or unpaid
leave status (unpaid leave status is interpreted as being military leave, disciplinary
suspension, voluntary unpaid leave, absence without leave).

B.

Eligibility is further conditioned upon submission by the employee of a certificate
as to the purpose and validity of leave usage.

C.

Leave requests meeting the conditions of these sections will be approved by the
employee’s immediate supervisor and, if requested, the employee shall further
submit proof of death and relationship.

D.

Requests for funeral leave with pay will not be approved for absences not taken
within a seven (7) calendar day period of the date of the funeral.
18

Section 3.
A.

In the event of the death of an employee’s relative and not in the immediate
family, as defined above, leave time with pay up to one eight (8) hour workday may
be taken for funeral purposes, which shall mean attendance at funeral, at
memorial services or for the visitation which occurs during a scheduled work time.
No more than twenty-four (24) hours may be taken in any one calendar year as
funeral leave in keeping with this section.

B.

In the event a unit member should require additional time in excess of the
allowances established in the above provisions, such additional time may be
charged against vacation credits, with the approval of the supervisor.

Section 4. Use of funeral leave will not be charged against accumulated sick leave balances.
Section 5. In addition to funeral leave, in the event of the death of a spouse and/or a child of
the employee, two (2) days’ sick leave may be used by the employee as additional bereavement
leave.

ARTICLE 16.

ACTING OFFICER COMPENSATION

Section 1. A person temporarily performing the duties of an officer in an acting capacity shall
receive acting pay for the next higher rank after three (3) consecutive workdays in that position
for a maximum of sixty (60) days when approved in advance by the Chief of Police. Exception is
a patrol officer in the patrol division working as an acting Sergeant.
Section 2. Employees assigned on an acting basis will be paid in the first step of the next
higher rank but not less than 3%.

ARTICLE 17.

COMPENSATION FOR POLICE OFFICERS FOR COURT APPEARANCES

Section 1. For each day a police officer subject to this agreement is required to appear in Court
during off duty hours, he or she shall be paid on the basis of four (4) hours’ pay for the morning
sessions, and four (4) hours’ pay for the afternoon sessions for a maximum of eight (8) hours’
pay regardless of the number of hours worked in a particular day. For the purpose of this
section, morning sessions are defined as any session that begins between 7:00 a.m. and 11:59
a.m. For the purpose of this section, afternoon sessions are defined as any session that begins
at 12:00 p.m. or after.
Section 2. The above sections shall not apply where the officer is on duty. However, when a
court appearance begins during a regularly scheduled shift and extends beyond that shift’s end,
he or she shall be compensated at an overtime rate for hours beyond the end of the shift.

19

Section 3. Unit members who are required to appear in court during an afternoon session and
that session lasts longer than four (4) hours shall be compensated at the overtime rate of 1½
times their rate of pay for the actual time over four (4) hours.
Section 4. Witness fees received or mileage allowances paid to a unit member who has been
required to appear before a Court shall be returned to the Director of Finance in accordance
with established Police Division procedures.
Section 5. Unit members who are off duty and are subpoenaed by the City for a Civil Service
case shall receive four (4) hours’ pay; unit members who are on duty and who are required to
remain past their regularly scheduled hours shall be paid at 1-1/2 x for actual hours worked
past the regular ending time if subpoenaed by the City.
Section 6. Regardless of any provisions of this Agreement to the contrary, no individual shall
receive more than a total of two (2) court slips for any one day.
Section 7. An officer required to attend a pre-trial conference with a prosecutor on a day when
that case is not scheduled for a hearing or at a time on the day that the case is scheduled for
hearing that is more than four (4) hours prior to the scheduled hearing and while on an off-duty
status shall get a court slip for four (4) hours’ pay.
Section 8. Up to eighty (80) hours of court time can be turned in for compensatory time from
November 1 through October 1 of the following year. A request for permission to convert court
time from pay to earned compensatory time only shall be turned into the officer’s supervisor
listing the court dates requested to be converted to earned time only. The dates requested will
be verified by the officer’s supervisor, the Bureau Commander, and the Chief of Police. Such
compensatory time shall be on an hour for hour basis and shall be added to the officer’s
compensatory time bank.

ARTICLE 18.

COMPENSATION FOR HAZARDOUS DUTY

Officers who are called out on SWAT activities (other than drug warrant service) shall be paid
double time, at the appropriate rate, for hazardous work as a SWAT component. It is intended
that such double time rate will apply to work of unusual hazard such as hostage situations and
barricaded suspects.

ARTICLE 19.

SHORT TERM MILITARY LEAVE

Section 1. Each unit member who either is or who hereafter becomes a member of the Ohio
National Guard, the Ohio Defense Corps, the Ohio Naval Militia, or a reserve component of the
Armed Forces of the United States and who is ordered to active service for purposes of training
or duty in an emergency shall be granted a leave of absence not to exceed thirty-one (31)
workdays in any one (1) calendar year.

20

Section 2. Such leave shall be granted upon presentation by the unit member to his or her
appointing authority a copy of the military orders effecting call to active service.
Section 3. In those instances where the gross military pay, excluding compensation for travel,
food, lodging, as earned by the employee while on military duty is less than the pay he or she
would have received as a City employee for the same period of time, the employee will be
eligible to receive payment from CITY equal to the difference between the gross military and
civilian pay as shown in the Classification and Compensation Plan. Military gross pay will be
computed from the first to the last calendar day inclusive of such active duty service. The gross
pay adjustment will be made upon the employee’s return to City employment with the
submission of his or her military pay voucher to the Director of Finance and will be subject to
deductions required by law or authorized by the employee.
Section 4. The employee’s length of service standing and fringe benefit eligibility will not be
adversely affected by military leave. Such leave time will not be charged to accrued vacation
credits. Sick leave credits shall continue to accumulate during the military leave of absence for
training or emergency duty.
Section 5. Required leave for military training and/or duty in an emergency in excess of thirtyone (31) workdays in any calendar year may be charged to accrued vacation, holiday or
compensatory time credits.
Section 6. Payments made in excess of allowances provided for in this section shall be subject
to recovery.

ARTICLE 20.

ATTENDANCE INCENTIVE AWARDS

Section 1. Each full time unit member shall be paid an annual incentive award for work
attendance as follows:
Perfect Attendance December 1 through March 31
Perfect Attendance April 1 through July 31
Perfect Attendance August 1 through November 30

4 hours Comp Time
4 hours Comp Time
4 hours Comp Time

Each full time member who has perfect attendance for the year from December 1 through
November 30 shall receive an additional twelve (12) hours of Compensatory Time.
Section 2. The period for determining the Attendance Incentive Award will commence on the
first day of December of each year and end on the 30th day of November of the next
succeeding year.
Section 3. Employee absence from work due to vacation, holiday, funeral leave, jury duty,
approved non-pay leave status, such as military or pregnancy leave, attendance at seminars,
training functions, or other duty-related absences from the normal work schedule shall not be
considered an absence from work for the purpose of this section.

21

Section 4. Employees who report for duty and work in excess of four (4) hours of their daily
work schedule and then leave work for reasons of illness or injury shall be considered to have
worked a full day for the purposes of this section. Employees who report for work and work four
(4) hours or less of their daily work schedule and then leave for reasons of illness or injury shall
be considered absent for the purposes of this section.
Section 5. Notwithstanding Section 4 above, annual cumulative sick leave usage of eight (8)
hours shall constitute a day of absence. Annual cumulative sick leave usage of sixteen (16)
hours shall constitute two days of absence, and so on.
Section 6. An absence from work due to a duty-related injury or illness for which an employee
receives Workers’ Compensation benefits or injury leave pay pursuant to ordinance provisions
shall not be considered an absence for purposes of these sections.
The attendance incentive program is designed as a plan to reward persons who appear for work
each day. Absences under this section, which shall diminish an employee’s eligibility for that
award shall include approved use of sick leave, unauthorized time off, disciplinary suspensions
finally sustained through appeal proceedings, injury leave except as noted above, layoff, or
separation from employment.
Section 7. New or separating employees shall receive a prorated benefit award based upon
one-twelfth (1/12) of the total eligibility for each month of service or part thereof.
Section 8. For purposes of these sections, a workday is defined as an eight (8) hour tour of
duty.
Section 9. Accrued, but unpaid attendance bonus is waived by an employee who is discharged
or terminated for disciplinary reasons. Said monies may later be recovered if the employee is
later reinstated by the Civil Service Commission or a Court of Law and all appeals are
exhausted.

ARTICLE 21.

PHYSICAL FITNESS TESTS

Upon execution of this Agreement, the following rules apply regarding physical fitness tests:
Section 1. Participation:
A.

All bargaining unit members will be required to complete a physical fitness test
once per year during a Police Division training session at a date and time
determined by the Police Chief with no less than thirty (30) days notice to
members.

B.

Members who are injured, on light duty, or pregnant will complete the physical
fitness test ninety (90) days after they are released to full duty at a date and time
determined by the Police Chief.

22

Section 2. Standards for Tests: The annual physical fitness test will include the following three
(3) assessments from the Cooper Institute Standards for Police Officers September 1, 2013
Edition (“Standards”): (1) run; (2) pushups; and (3) sit-ups. All bargaining unit members hired
after the execution of this Agreement are required to pass the test by receiving a score at or
above the fifteenth (15th) percentile of the Standards based on their age and gender. The
Police Chief shall have the sole discretion to determine if an exception shall be made for a
member to substitute an alternative exercise for an exercise set forth in the Standards. If an
alternative exercise is substituted, the member will not be eligible for an incentive under Section
3, Paragraph A of this article.
Section 3. Incentives and Penalties:
A.

B.

A bargaining unit member will be eligible for a physical fitness incentive if he or
she completes all three (3) required assessments (run, pushups, and sit-ups) at
or above the thirtieth (30th) percentile of the Standards based on their age and
gender. The incentive will be awarded based on the lowest passing percentile of
all three (3) required assessments. The incentives shall be as follows:
30th percentile

$300

35th percentile

$350

40th percentile

$400

45th percentile

$450

50th percentile

$500

Members hired after execution of this Agreement will be subject to the following
consequences for failing the test with a score below the fifteenth (15th) percentile
of the Standards.
1st fail – Member must retake the test after thirty (30) days when he or she is off
duty and without pay.
2nd fail – Member not eligible for extra duty assignments; must retake the test
after ninety (90) days when he or she is off duty and without pay.
3rd fail – Member not eligible for extra duty assignments and subject to
suspension without pay of at least one (1) day and up to five (5) days per the
Police Chief’s sole discretion.
No additional consequences other than those indicated in this Paragraph B shall
be administered and will not be considered as discipline in personnel matters
unrelated to this article.

23

Section 5. Alternative Standards:
A.

The parties may mutually decide to establish a committee to review the Cooper
Institute Standards for Police Officers and the use of the Standards for the
physical fitness test. If mutually agreed upon, the parties may modify the
Standards for the test where appropriate.

ARTICLE 22.

UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION

Unit members shall be entitled to Unemployment Compensation under the laws of the State of
Ohio for any period of unemployment due to lay off for lack of work or lack of funds.

ARTICLE 23.

DISCIPLINE AND RESPONSIBILITY

Section 1. Disciplinary Procedure
A.

The Union recognizes the right of the employer to take disciplinary action against
employees for just cause. Penalties for disciplinary action may include: verbal
and written counseling, written reprimands, suspension, reduction of pay to the
next lower step within the pay range, demotion or dismissal. Any employee
disciplined will receive a copy of all disciplinary action.

Section 2. Expungement
A.

After twelve (12) months from the date of issue, any and all verbal or written
letters of counseling and any associated documentation shall not be considered
in subsequent determination of appropriate disciplinary action so long as no
additional discipline is incurred within the time frame listed. Such documents
will be purged by the CITY from all employees’ personnel files, consistent with
Police Division’s current Records Retention Schedule (RC-2) established under
the Ohio Public Records law and the Hamilton Records Commission, upon the
employee’s written request.

B.

After twenty-four (24) months from the date of issue, any and all written
reprimands and any associated documentation shall not be considered in
subsequent determination of appropriate disciplinary action so long as no
additional discipline is incurred within the time frame listed. Such documents
will be purged by the CITY from all employees’ personnel files, consistent with the
Police Division’s current Records Retention Schedule (RC-2) established under
Ohio Public Records law and the Hamilton Records Commission, upon the
employee’s written request.

C.

After forty-eight (48) months from the date of issue, any and all discipline above
a written reprimand to include but not limited to suspensions, reductions in pay,
or demotions and any associated documentation shall not be considered in
24

subsequent determination of appropriate disciplinary action so long as no
additional discipline is incurred within the time frame listed. Such documents
will be purged by the CITY from all employees’ personnel files, consistent with
Police Division’s current Records Retention Schedule (RC-2) established under
the Ohio Public Records law and the Hamilton Records Commission, upon the
employee’s written request.
D.

Any of the time lines set forth in this article may be extended or shortened by
mutual agreement of the parties.

E.

When additional discipline is incurred any pending discipline will continue in
force until the term of any and all concurrent discipline expires.

F.

In the event that an officer has failed to request removal of discipline
documentation as provided above, but has not incurred any additional discipline
of any nature in the prescribed time period, then the documentation shall cease
to have any force and effect with regard to any future discipline and its removal,
when requested in writing, shall be accomplished.

G.

An administrative restriction or suspension from overtime, Extra Duty
Employment, or a restriction or suspension from any functions outside the
normal workday as defined in Article 7 Work and Work Period will not be
considered discipline for the purposes of this section.

ARTICLE 24.

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES

Section 1. Should differences arise between the CITY and FOP 38 concerning alleged
violations, misinterpretations or misapplications of specific terms of this Agreement, such
differences shall be settled in the manner herein. The term “grievance” as used herein is so
defined as to limit its applicability to terms and conditions of this Agreement.
Grievances as herein defined shall be processed in the following manner:
Step 1. Whenever an employee believes he or she has a grievance, he or she shall
present the matter verbally to the Lieutenant in charge within ten (10) days of
occurrence of alleged violation of this Agreement. A verbal response to the grievance
shall be made by the Lieutenant within five (5) days of verbal presentation by the
employee.
Step 2. If the grievance is unresolved, the employee may appeal the grievance in
writing to the Captain in charge. The grievance must be forwarded to the Captain
commanding the employee’s bureau within five (5) days of the Lieutenant’s verbal
response. The Captain must issue a written response to the grievance within ten (10)
days of receipt of the written grievance.

25

Step 3. If the grievance is unresolved, the employee may appeal the grievance in
writing to the Chief. The grievance must be forwarded to the Chief within ten (10) days
of the receipt of the Captain’s written decision. The Chief must issue a written response
within ten (10) days of receipt of the grievance.
Step 4. If the grievance is unresolved, the employee may appeal the grievance in
writing to the Director of Public Safety. The grievance must be forwarded to the Director
of Public Safety within ten (10) days of receipt of the Chief’s written decision. The
Director of Public Safety or his authorized representative shall issue a written response
within twenty (20) days of receipt of the grievance.
INTERIM LANGUAGE PENDING CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION ACTION:
The parties are agreed to jointly petition the Hamilton Civil Service Commission to place
into its “Rules and Regulations” language exactly mirroring that contained in Article 5 of
this agreement:
A.

In the event that the Civil Service Commission has enacted such language into its
Rules and Regulations, then any matter alleging any violation of Article 5 only shall
have as its sole and exclusive remedy, appeal to the Civil Service Commission and
thus not subject to the grievance procedure. Applicable time frames and
procedures for appeal shall be those contained in Civil Service Commission Rules
and Regulations.
Unless specified otherwise, a day shall mean a calendar day. In the event that the
final date for any action falls on a date which is not a regularly scheduled workday
for the Office of Civil Service, then the final date for the act shall be deemed to be
the next regular workday of that office.

B.

In the event that the Civil Service Commission has not enacted such language into
its Rules and Regulations, then the grievance procedure culminating in Binding
Arbitration language which pertains to all other articles within this contract shall
also apply to Article 5. In such instances, the time frames and procedures to be
used shall be those contained within this contract.

Step 5. Arbitration:
A grievance which involves the misapplication or misinterpretation of this Agreement or
which involves the disciplinary suspension, demotion, or dismissal of an Employee which
has been properly and timely processed through the above procedure may be appealed
to arbitration by the Union or the CITY. Notice of the request for arbitration must be
served on the CITY, in writing, within forty-five (45) calendar days from the date of the
decision of the Director of Public Safety’s Step 4 decision, or within seven (7) calendar
days following the next regular Lodge meeting after receipt of the Step 4 decision
whichever is sooner.

26

Arbitration: The party initiating arbitration shall direct a written demand therefore to the
American Arbitration Association (AAA), with a copy of said notice to the other party.
Copies of notices to the CITY should be directed to the Office of the Director of Public
Safety, and to Labor Relations, and copies of notices to the Union should be sent to the
Union President or his designee. The arbitrator shall be selected from a panel of
arbitrators furnished by AAA. The arbitration and selection of the arbitrator shall be
conducted in conformity with AAA rules. Selection of binding arbitration in cases
involving disciplinary suspension, demotion or dismissal, as set forth above, shall
preclude and supersede any right of appeal by the Employee or the Union to Civil Service
or to Court.
A grievance not so appealed from the fourth step (by either the procedures A or B above
or by Step 5, Binding Arbitration) shall be considered resolved and the written
determination of the Director of Public Safety shall be final and binding upon the
aggrieved Employee, the Union and the CITY.
In the event that several arbitration cases are pending, they will be heard according to
the following priorities: 1) discharge cases, 2) suspension cases, 3) demotion cases, 4)
grievances involving back pay issues and 5) the filing date of the grievance.
ARBITRATOR’S JURISDICTION:
The arbitrator shall take such evidence as in his judgment is appropriate for resolution of the
dispute; however, he shall confine himself to the issues for arbitration and shall have no
authority to determine any other issue not so submitted which is not directly essential to
reaching a determination on the dispute at hand.
The arbitrator shall have no power to recommend any right or relief for any period of time prior
to the effective date of the Agreement under which the grievance was initiated.
In those issues wherein the grievant’s relief sought involves back pay or lost wages covering a
period of an Employee’s payroll separation due to suspension or discharge, the amount of the
award shall be less any unemployment compensation or interim earnings, received by the
aggrieved Employee. Second jobs or sources of income which the Employee received while
under employment will not be considered interim income and will not be deducted when
awarding lost wages or back pay.
The decision of the arbitrator shall be submitted in writing to the parties within thirty (30)
calendar days of the hearing’s conclusion unless the deadline is mutually extended by the
parties.
The decision and award of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the Union, its members,
the aggrieved Employee(s) and the CITY.
With respect to grievances involving misapplication or misinterpretation of this Agreement, the
grievance and arbitration procedure contained in this Article shall be the sole and exclusive
27

remedy available to employees, and the parties hereto as this procedure is intended to
supersede all conflicting provisions of the Ohio Revised Code regarding any and all matters
subject to the grievance procedures of this Contract or otherwise made subject to this
Agreement. With respect to grievances involving disciplinary suspensions, demotions or
dismissals the election of remedies, as set forth above, shall be mutually exclusive. Choice of
binding arbitration shall thereafter preclude appeal to Civil Service or to Court. Appeal to Civil
Service shall preclude access to binding arbitration.
With respect to cases of suspension, demotion and discharge, the arbitrator shall decide:
(1)

Whether there was just cause for discipline or demotion.

(2)

Whether the severity of the discipline was warranted considering:
a.
b.
c.
d.

the Employee’s length of employment,
the Employee’s past history,
the nature and circumstances which caused the discipline,
similar disciplinary actions taken in similar circumstances.

Fees and Expenses:
Each party shall pay its own expenses as to record transcription costs and for the costs
associated with producing its own witnesses. The fees and expenses of the arbitrator
shall be borne equally by the parties. If a grievance is withdrawn from arbitration by the
Union, the employee, or the employer prior to the arbitration hearing but after arbitration
expenses have been incurred, such expenses shall be paid by the party withdrawing the
grievance. If the grievance is settled by agreement of the parties after arbitration
expenses have been incurred, but prior to an arbitrator’s award being issued, such
expenses shall be shared equally by the CITY and the Union.

GRIEVANCE GUIDELINES FOR EFFECTIVE PROCESSING:

Representation: The aggrieved officer within the bargaining unit has a right to

representation by FOP 38 during the processing of the grievance including any
adjustment of the grievance. Employees within the bargaining unit covered by this
Agreement have the right to present grievances and have them adjusted without
the intervention of the bargaining representative as long as the adjustment is not
inconsistent with the terms of the Agreement then in effect and as long as the
bargaining representatives have the opportunity to be present at the adjustment
of the grievance.

Time Frames: For purposes of this procedure, a “day” is any weekday except Sunday,
Saturday or a fixed date holiday as recognized by this Agreement.

28

All written grievances and responses shall be dated and signed by the appropriate
Union or City representative.
Time limit extensions beyond those stipulated in this Agreement may be
established by mutual agreement of the parties concerned.
In the event no appeal of a grievance is taken within the time limit specified
herein, including any extensions to which the parties agree, the grievance shall be
deemed resolved. Any grievance not answered by the CITY within the prescribed
time limit, including any agreed extensions, shall be considered to have been
answered in the negative and may be advanced immediately to the next Step. No
grievance award shall be made to a person other than the specific individual(s) so
entitled as eligible under appropriate section(s) of the Agreement. A grievance
may be entered in or advanced to any Step of the Grievance Procedure if the
parties jointly agree to do so.

Civil Service and Appeal to the Court: If the Civil Service and Appeal to the Court

means for final determination is selected as the sole an exclusive remedy for
suspension, demotion and dismissal, all rights under this Article for Binding
Arbitration are voided.

Meetings: Grievance hearings are not open to the public.
Exemptions: Matters exempt from consideration for processing under this grievance
procedure shall include the following:
A.

Actions appealable to the Civil Service Commission under appropriate
Commission rules and regulations.

B.

Matters properly the subject of collective bargaining.

ARTICLE 25.

SAVINGS CLAUSE

Should any provision of this Agreement be found to be in violation of any federal, state or
applicable municipal law, or Civil Service rule or regulation, or any order of or by a court of
competent jurisdiction, or federal or state administrative ruling, all remaining provisions in this
Agreement shall remain in full force and effect for the duration of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 26.

WAIVER

Section 1. The parties to this Agreement hereby acknowledge that during the negotiations
which preceded this Agreement, each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands
and proposals with respect to any subject and matter not removed by law from the area of
29

collective bargaining and that the understandings and agreements arrived at by the parties as
to the exercise of that right are set forth in this Agreement. Therefore, CITY and FOP 38, for the
life of this Agreement, each voluntarily and unqualifiedly waives the right and each agrees that
the other shall not be obligated to bargain collectively with respect to any subject or matter
referred to or covered in this Agreement.
Section 2. In consideration of the work scheduling changes negotiated herein, FOP 38, on
behalf of itself and the members thereof, jointly and severally promises, covenants and agrees
that neither FOP 38, nor any member thereof, nor anyone claiming through either, will hereafter
initiate, bring, commence, prosecute, maintain, participate in, or support in any manner,
financially or otherwise, or cause or permit to be brought, commenced, prosecuted or
maintained (1) any suit or action, either at law or in equity, in any court of the United States or
of any state thereof, or (2) any charge or complaint before any administrative agency of the
United States, or of any state thereof, against the City of Hamilton, Ohio, its elected officials,
officers, employees or agents, for, on account of, arising out of, or in any way connected with the
work scheduling changes negotiated herein at Article 7, Section 4.

ARTICLE 27.

LAY OFF PROCEDURES

Civil Service procedures relative to the lay off of employees are incorporated herein by
reference.

ARTICLE 28.

LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

Section 1. In the interest of furthering harmonious relations, a Joint Committee of not more
than twelve (12) members, half of whom shall be from Management and half as representatives
of FOP 38, will convene periodically at places mutually agreed upon for purposes of discussion
of work-related issues.
Section 2. Such meetings shall be arranged in advance and will convene at a time convenient
to both parties but not later than ten (10) calendar days from the date the request for such
meeting was made.
Section 3. An agenda of items intended for discussion can be submitted at the time the
conference is requested. Understandings or agreements reached in the course of such
meetings shall be reduced to writing if requested by either party.
Section 4. FOP 38 officials or members in attendance at such meetings will not be subject to
loss of pay for time so spent.

ARTICLE 29.

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

If the parties cannot reach agreement prior to thirty (30) days before the expiration of the
existing collective bargaining agreement the parties may then declare an impasse and the
30

dispute settlement procedures of mediation, fact-finding and conciliation as provided in the
Ohio Collective Bargaining Law with the time intervals designated therein shall then apply. The
parties may mutually agree to extend the time for negotiations and postpone by mutual
agreement the declaration of impasse.

ARTICLE 30.

F.O.P. LEAVE

Section 1. The Fraternal Order of Police will receive a maximum total of 104 hours per year of
paid leave time for FOP functions and/or educational programs in even-numbered years; in oddnumbered years, that maximum shall be 128 hours. The President and Secretary or a
designated FOP elected official shall be eligible for any part of this block of 104 or 128 hours.
Section 2. If any unit members are elected or appointed to a State FOP or National FOP
position, the FOP will be granted an additional twenty-four (24) hours per year of paid leave for
FOP functions and/or educational programs. FOP agrees to provide notice of the election or
appointment of any member to a State FOP or National FOP position.

ARTICLE 31.

COMPENSATORY TIME OFF

All accrued compensatory time carried by an employee, regardless of the method by which it
was earned, will be combined into one (1) comp time bank, which shall be subject to the
following provisions: Any officer may accumulate up to 200 hours of compensatory time off. No
officer will be allowed to carry over more than 200 hours of compensatory time into the next
calendar year. Officers must receive pay for all time above the maximum of 200 hours. Officers
may convert any portion of accumulated hours in the compensatory time bank to pay at any
time.

ARTICLE 32.

RETIREMENT PLANNING

Section 1. A unit member shall be permitted to travel to the Police Fire Disability and Pension
Fund offices in Columbus, Ohio for the purposes of planning for retirement from the Police
Division. Request for leave will be documented on a Leave Application Form (L.A.C.) as Police
Pension Leave, and will be considered the officer’s regular work time for that day. The following
provisions apply:
A.

The request to travel will be in the officers 24th or later year of service to the City.

B.

No overtime, per diem, or mileage compensation will be provided.

C.

The officer will advise his or her supervisor of the date requested. Once the L.A.C.
is approved by the supervisor, the authorization for leave will not be revoked due
to unforeseen absences.

31

D.

In the event that an officer in any year of service be advised by a Medical Doctor,
that due to a medical condition he is unable to perform the duties of a police
officer, that officer may use this benefit for the purpose of traveling to the pension
board for the purpose of applying for, or obtaining a disability pension.

E.

Travel to the Police Fire Disability and Pension Fund for regular retirement, or
disability retirement will be a one-time option only. Should the officer choose not
to retire, any additional trips to the fund offices shall be on the officer’s own time.

ARTICLE 33.

MISCELLANEOUS

Section 1. Officers Attending Recognized Police Academy.
Newly hired Police Officers will be assigned to a 4/2 schedule until admittance to a recognized
training school approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council. While attending the
academy, such recruit officers will be on the training school calendar for holiday purposes. After
successful completion of the academy, the recruit officers shall be placed on 4/2 patrol shift for
field training. They will retain eight (8) holidays or those that were not used prior to their
academy training as allowed in Article 9 due to proration.
Section 2. Parks Police.
The only function of the Parks Police will be to assist the HPD in the control of various activities
of all City-owned parks and playgrounds.
Section 3. Field Training Officers.
The Field Training Officer shall be compensated for training responsibilities in the amount of
one (1) hour of Compensatory Time for each day when he or she engages in field training duties
of four (4) hours or more.
Section 4. Drug Screening.
In addition to testing provided for under applicable City ordinances (HMC Chapters 180 and
186), unit members shall be subject to random drug testing procedures set forth in
Appendix B.
Section 5. Duty Weapon and Uniform Badge.
Upon service retirement in the Police and Fire Pension System or upon leaving in good standing
after at least twenty-five (25) years of service with the Hamilton Police Department, the City will
give to the officer his/her duty weapon and uniform badge.

32

ARTICLE 34.

NO LAY-OFFS, NO ATTRITION

Section 1. The total sworn complement is hereby defined as 104 officers.
A.

The above referenced total sworn department complement shall be reduced over
the term of this Agreement through attrition within the police officer rank. As the
department complement is reduced through attrition, the defined total sworn
department complement shall be automatically amended to reflect the reduced
number; provided, once sufficient attrition has taken place to reduce the
department complement to 104 officers (which number shall include any fully
grant funded positions), the City will maintain that complement, subject to any
reasonable delays in hiring due to administration of civil service exams.

ARTICLE 35.

NO STRIKE OR LOCKOUT

Section 1.
A.

B.

C.

No Employee, during the term of this Agreement, shall engage in any strike,
sympathy strike, slowdown, sit-down, sit-in, cessation, stoppage, refusal to
perform work, picketing (except informational hand billing or leafleting) or any
other interference with the work and statutory functions or obligation of the CITY.
The CITY agrees that there will be no lockout.
Neither the Union nor its officers or agents shall in any way authorize, institute,
aide, condone, or participate in any strike, sympathy strike, slowdown, sit-down,
sit-in, cessation, stoppage, refusal to perform, picketing (except informational
hand billing or leafleting), or any other interference with the work and statutory
functions or obligations of the CITY.
In addition to any other liability, remedy, or right provided by applicable law or
statute, should a strike, sympathy strike, slowdown, sit-down, sit-in, cessation,
stoppage, refusal to perform work, picketing (except informational hand billing or
leafleting), or other interference as stated above occur, the Union, within twentyfour (24) hours of a request by the CITY, shall:
(1)

publicly disavow such action by the Employees;

(2)

advise the CITY in writing that such action by Employees has not been
caused or sanctioned by the Union;

(3)

notify Employees, including its local officers and representatives, of its
disapproval of such action and instruct such Employees to cease action and
return to work immediately;

(4)

post notices on Union bulletin boards advising that it disapproves of such
action and instructing Employees to return to work immediately.

33

D.

Nothing contained herein shall preclude the CITY from obtaining judicial restraint
or any other legal remedies available to the CITY under State law in the event of a
violation of this Article.

Section 2.
In order to prevent the disruption of the essential services provided by the Division of Police, the
parties hereto agree that if an impasse is reached during negotiations for a successor collective
bargaining agreement, that said dispute(s) will be resolved by final and binding arbitration as
provided in Ohio Revised Code, Chapter 4117 or by a mutually agreed upon alternative dispute
resolution procedure, provided that procedure culminates in final and binding arbitration.

ARTICLE 36.

CANINE OFFICERS

Section 1.
In the event that the CITY, in its discretion, creates and implements a canine unit, Employees
assigned to this unit will be given the designated title of Canine Officer. Because of the unique
nature of this position, its duties and the specialized and individual nature of the care and
training of the assigned animal, special terms and conditions of employment shall apply to
Canine Unit Officers as set forth below and in Rules and Regulations to be issued by the
department.
Section 2.
An Officer who agrees to be assigned to this unit and to a specific dog expressly waives all
promotional rights under Ohio Revised Code, Chapter 124 and the Hamilton City Charter for a
period of the working life of the dog, to be determined by the veterinarian selected by the city to
treat the canine. Provided, however, that during this period of time, a Canine Officer will be
permitted to sit for any promotional examination he or she is otherwise qualified to take, and
the Officer may actually be placed on an eligibility list. However, such name is not eligible for
certification unless subsequent to placement on the list the assigned animal is removed from
service by the CITY, or the CITY, in its sole discretion, waives this rule. Upon assignment, the
Canine Officer will execute an acknowledgment of his or her understanding and agreement to
these terms.
Section 3.
Workdays and working hours will be assigned in accordance with the needs of the Department.
However, except in the case of an emergency, the CITY will endeavor to give reasonable notice
of a change in workdays or working hours. Emergencies will be treated under Article 7,
Overtime, of this Agreement.

34

Section 4.
Compensation for the time involved in maintaining facilities and the health and welfare of the
dog shall be in the form of compensation at 3.5 hours each week. Canine Officers shall be
issued a CITY credit card to cover expenses for food and supplies and other expenses covered
by appropriate regulations, including boarding of his or her dog for up to seven (7) consecutive
days one (1) time each year. The seven (7) days that the dog is boarded must coincide with the
Canine Officer using five (5) consecutive days of accrued paid leave. The Canine Officer will
submit to his or her canine supervisor a receipt for all purchases made on the CITY credit card.
The provisions of this Article 35, Section 4 shall be effective January 1, 2016.
Section 5.
Due to the unique nature of this position, scheduling the use of holiday and vacation leave is
subject to the needs of the department and the approval of the Canine Officer’s Senior
Commanding Officer.
Section 6.
Initial Officer Training will be treated under the terms of Article 32, Section 1 (Officers Attending
Recognized Police Academy) of this Agreement. Hours worked during periodic training sessions
for the dog assigned to the Canine Officer shall be compensated for at one and one-half (1-1/2)
the Officer’s regular rate of pay, provided that the training hours have been previously approved
by the Chief of Police.
Section 7.
Rules and Regulations and General or Special Orders may be issued by the Department
concerning reimbursement for expenses related to care, feeding and training of the dog
assigned to the Canine Officer, together with additional terms and conditions of employment not
specifically treated herein. Where any such rules, regulations, general or special orders
expressly conflict with this Agreement, such terms may not be implemented without meeting
and conferring with the Union.

ARTICLE 37.

PROBATION

The probationary period of a newly appointed Officer shall be extended by the number of days
the Officer attends Police Academy, is off duty due to sick, injury or other form of leave, or is on
a light duty assignment.

ARTICLE 38.

DURATION OF AGREEMENT

Except as otherwise provided herein, this Agreement shall be effective upon execution, and
shall remain in effect until midnight, February 28, 2021. A party wishing to terminate, modify or
negotiate a successor Agreement shall notify the other party in writing of its offer to bargain
collectively at least sixty (60) days before this Agreement expires. Said party must also notify the
35

State Employment Relations Board by sending it a copy of its offer to bargain and a copy of the
existing Agreement.

36

37

APPENDIX A
SCHEDULE B-2
POLICE DIVISION (F.O.P.)
Effective February 17, 2018
RANGE

CODE

CLASSIFICATION

27-P

430

Police Officer

30-P

434

STEP

Longevity Step
5 - 7 Years

7

Longevity Step
8 - 11

8

Longevity Step
12 - 15

9

Longevity Step
16 - 19

10

Longevity Step
20+

11

Police Detective

Longevity Step
5 - 7 Years

7

Longevity Step
8 - 11

8

Longevity Step
12 - 15

9

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

1

2

3

4

5

6

$23.84
$1,907.20
$49,587

$26.38
$2,110.40
$54,870

$27.72
$2,217.60
$57,658

$28.72
$2,297.60
$59,738

$29.77
$2,381.60
$61,922

$30.75
$2,460.00
$63,960

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$24.46
$1,956.80
$50,877

$27.00
$2,160.00
$56,160

$28.34
$2,267.20
$58,947

$29.34
$2,347.20
$61,027

$30.39
$2,431.20
$63,211

$31.37
$2,509.60
$65,250

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$25.07
$2,005.60
$52,146

$27.61
$2,208.80
$57,429

$28.95
$2,316.00
$60,216

$29.95
$2,396.00
$62,296

$31.00
$2,480.00
$64,480

$31.98
$2,558.40
$66,518

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$25.99
$2,079.20
$54,059

$28.53
$2,282.40
$59,342

$29.87
$2,389.60
$62,130

$30.87
$2,469.60
$64,210

$31.92
$2,553.60
$66,394

$32.90
$2,632.00
$68,432

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$26.61
$2,128.80
$55,349

$29.15
$2,332.00
$60,632

$30.49
$2,439.20
$63,419

$31.49
$2,519.20
$65,499

$32.54
$2,603.20
$67,683

$33.52
$2,681.60
$69,722

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$27.22
$2,177.60
$56,618

$29.76
$2,380.80
$61,901

$31.10
$2,488.00
$64,688

$32.10
$2,568.00
$66,768

$33.15
$2,652.00
$68,952

$34.13
$2,730.40
$70,990

Hour
Biweekly
Annual

$33.03
$2,642.40
$68,702

$34.05
$2,724.00
$70,824

$35.36
$2,828.80
$73,549

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$33.65
$2,692.00
$69,992

$34.67
$2,773.60
$72,114

$35.98
$2,878.40
$74,838

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$34.26
$2,740.80
$71,261

$35.28
$2,822.40
$73,382

$36.59
$2,927.20
$76,107

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$35.18
$2,814.40
$73,174

$36.20
$2,896.00
$75,296

$37.51
$3,000.80
$78,021

38

Longevity Step
16 - 19

10

Longevity Step
20+

11

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$35.80
$2,864.00
$74,464

$36.82
$2,945.60
$76,586

$38.13
$3,050.40
$79,310.00

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$36.41
$2,912.80
$75,733

$37.43
$2,994.40
$77,854

$38.74
$3,099.20
$80,579

Non Merit Based Pay Schedule
Step

Yrs. Continuous Service

Percent of Maximum Police Officer Salary

7

5–7

2%

$1,279.20

$0.62

8

8 – 11

4%

$2,558.40

$1.23

9

12 – 15

7%

$4,477.20

$2.15

10

16 – 19

9%

$5,756.40

$2.77

11

20+

11%

$7,035.60

$3.38

39

SCHEDULE B-2
POLICE DIVISION (F.O.P.)
Effective February 16, 2019

RANGE

CODE CLASSIFICATION

27-P

430

30-P

434

STEP

Police Officer

Longevity Step
5 - 7 Years

7

Longevity Step
8 - 11

8

Longevity Step
12 - 15

9

Longevity Step
16 - 19

10

Longevity Step
20+

11

Police Detective

Longevity Step
5 - 7 Years

7

Longevity Step
8 - 11

8

Longevity Step
12 - 15

9

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

1

2

3

4

5

6

$24.56
$1,964.80
$51,085

$27.17
$2,173.60
$56,514

$28.55
$2,284.00
$59,384

$29.58
$2,366.40
$61,526

$30.66
$2,452.80
$63,773

$31.67
$2,533.60
$65,874

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$25.19
$2,015.20
$52,395

$27.80
$2,224.00
$57,824

$29.18
$2,334.40
$60,694

$30.21
$2,416.80
$62,837

$31.29
$2,503.20
$65,083

$32.30
$2,584.00
$67,184

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$25.83
$2,066.40
$53,726

$28.44
$2,275.20
$59,155

$29.82
$2,385.60
$62,026

$30.85
$2,468.00
$64,168

$31.93
$2,554.40
$66,414

$32.94
$2,635.20
$68,515

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$26.78
$2,142.40
$55,702

$29.39
$2,351.20
$61,131

$30.77
$2,461.60
$64,002

$31.80
$2,544.00
$66,144

$32.88
$2,630.40
$68,390

$33.89
$2,711.20
$70,491

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$27.41
$2,192.80
$57,013

$30.02
$2,401.60
$62,442

$31.40
$2,512.00
$65,312

$32.43
$2,594.40
$67,454

$33.51
$2,680.80
$69,701

$34.52
$2,761.60
$71,802

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$28.04
$2,243.20
$58,323

$30.65
$2,452.00
$63,752

$32.03
$2,562.40
$66,622

$33.06
$2,644.80
$68,765

$34.14
$2,731.20
$71,011

$35.15
$2,812.00
$73,112

Hour
Biweekly
Annual

$34.02
$2,721.60
$70,762

$35.07
$2,805.60
$72,946

$36.42
$2,913.60
$75,754

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$34.65
$2,772.00
$72,072

$35.70
$2,856.00
$74,256

$37.05
$2,964.00
$77,064

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$35.29
$2,823.20
$73,403

$36.34
$2,907.20
$75,587

$37.69
$3,015.20
$78,395

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$36.24
$2,899.20
$75,379

$37.29
$2,983.20
$77,563

$38.64
$3,091.20
$80,371

40

Longevity Step
16 - 19

10

Longevity Step
20+

11

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$36.87
$2,949.60
$76,690

$37.92
$3,033.60
$78,874

$39.27
$3,141.60
$81,682

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$37.50
$3,000.00
$78,000

$38.55
$3,084.00
$80,184

$39.90
$3,192.00
$82,992

Non Merit Based Pay Schedule
Step

Yrs. Continuous Service

Percent of Maximum Police Officer Salary

7

5–7

2%

$1,317.47

$0.63

8

8 – 11

4%

$2,634.94

$1.27

9

12 – 15

7%

$4,611.15

$2.22

10

16 – 19

9%

$5,928.62

$2.85

11

20+

11%

$7,246.10

$3.48

41

SCHEDULE B-2
POLICE DIVISION (F.O.P.)
Effective February 29, 2020

RANGE

CODE

CLASSIFICATION

27-P

430

Police Officer

30-P

434

STEP

Longevity Step
5 - 7 Years

7

Longevity Step
8 - 11

8

Longevity Step
12 - 15

9

Longevity Step
16 - 19

10

Longevity Step
20+

11

Police Detective

Longevity Step
5 - 7 Years

7

Longevity Step
8 - 11

8

Longevity Step

9

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

1

2

3

4

5

6

$25.30
$2,024.00
$52,624

$27.99
$2,239.20
$58,219

$29.41
$2,352.80
$61,173

$30.47
$2,437.60
$63,378

$31.58
$2,526.40
$65,686

$32.62
$2,609.60
$67,850

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$25.95
$2,076.00
$53,976

$28.64
$2,291.20
$59,571

$30.06
$2,404.80
$62,525

$31.12
$2,489.60
$64,730

$32.23
$2,578.40
$67,038

$33.27
$2,661.60
$69,202

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$26.60
$2,128.00
$55,328

$29.29
$2,343.20
$60,923

$30.71
$2,456.80
$63,877

$31.77
$2,541.60
$66,082

$32.88
$2,630.40
$68,390

$33.92
$2,713.60
$70,554

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$27.58
$2,206.40
$57,366

$30.27
$2,421.60
$62,962

$31.69
$2,535.20
$65,915

$32.75
$2,620.00
$68,120

$33.86
$2,708.80
$70,429

$34.90
$2,792.00
$72,592

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$28.24
$2,259.20
$58,739

$30.93
$2,474.40
$64,334

$32.35
$2,588.00
$67,288

$33.41
$2,672.80
$69,493

$34.52
$2,761.60
$71,802

$35.56
$2,844.80
$73,965

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$28.89
$2,311.20
$60,091

$31.58
$2,526.40
$65,686

$33.00
$2,640.00
$68,640

$34.06
$2,724.80
$70,845

$35.17
$2,813.60
$73,154

$36.21
$2,896.80
$75,317

Hour
Biweekly
Annual

$35.04
$2,803.20
$72,883

$36.12
$2,889.60
$75,130

$37.51
$3,000.80
$78,021

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$35.69
$2,855.20
$74,235

$36.77
$2,941.60
$76,482

$38.16
$3,052.80
$79,373

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$36.34
$2,907.20
$75,587

$37.42
$2,993.60
$77,834

$38.81
$3,104.80
$80,725

$37.32

$38.40

$39.79

Hour
(40)

42

12 - 15

Longevity Step
16 - 19

10

Longevity Step
20+

11

Biweekly
Annual

$2,985.60
$77,626

$3,072.00
$79,872

$3,183.20
$82,763

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$37.98
$3,038.40
$78,998

$39.06
$3,124.80
$81,245

$40.45
$3,236.00
$84,136

Hour
(40)
Biweekly
Annual

$38.63
$3,090.40
$80,350

$39.71
$3,176.80
$82,597

$41.10
$3,288.00
$85,488

Non Merit Based Pay Schedule
Step

Yrs. Continuous Service

Percent of Maximum Police Officer Salary

7

5–7

2%

$1,356.99

$0.65

8

8 – 11

4%

$2,713.98

$1.30

9

12 – 15

7%

$4,749.47

$2.28

10

16 – 19

9%

$6,106.46

$2.94

11

20+

11%

$7,463.46

$3.59

43

APPENDIX B
1.8.5 RANDOM DRUG TESTING The Hamilton Police Department has instituted a random

drug testing program for all sworn personnel:
1. Program Purpose. The random drug testing program was instituted to:
1. Test for the presence of illegal drugs or controlled substances, the possession or use of
which is unlawful, pursuant to federal, state, or local laws and regulations:
2. Deter illegal or unlawful employee use of illegal drugs or controlled substances;
3. Protect the public, co-workers, and the involved employee from drug-related accidents;
4. Limit the potential for lawsuits against the city as a result of careless or negligent acts by
drug-involved employees;

2. Procedures:
1. Subject Selection:

1. At the beginning of each quarter, the Chief of Police may request up to ten
employees be randomly generated and provided to the appropriate bureau
commander. Additionally, the Chief of Police reserves the right to submit nonrandom names based upon complaints, information, or allegations received. The
submission of non-random names shall remain confidential between the
administrative officers and, if necessary, the internal affairs function;
2. The bureau commander will confidentially choose a day when the employee is
scheduled to work that coincides with the availability of a collection official;
3. On the date in question, the bureau commander will notify the employee’s
immediate supervisor of the random drug test and provide the supervisor with an
Order to Report form. The immediate supervisor will:
1. Notify the employee to respond to headquarters;
2. Sign, date, and indicate the time on the Order to Report form and provide it to
the employee;
3. Direct the employee to immediately report to the collection official;
2.
Testing Procedures. Random drug tests will be administered by a certified collection
official utilizing hair or urine testing as determined by the Chief of Police.
1. Hair Testing. In order to provide a suitable specimen, an employee must have at
least ½ inch of hair (head, chest, leg or underarm). Once a suitable hair specimen is
obtained, the collection official will:
1. Sign, date, and indicate the time on the Order to Report form;
2. Process the specimen in accordance with accepted laboratory procedures; and
3. Forward the Order to Report form to the appropriate bureau commander;
2. Urine Testing. Urine testing will be utilized by the collection official in accordance with
the following procedures:
1. The employee to be tested shall:
1. Remove extraneous clothing and personal items (coats, hats, etc); and
2. Remain in full view of the collection official, except when actually providing
the sample;
2. If the employee cannot produce a sample, the collection official will allow the
employee:
1. To consume up to 40 ounces of water;
2. Up to three hours to provide a suitable specimen. If the employee does not
44

provide a suitable specimen within the three-hour time period, the employee
will be considered to have refused the test;
3. Once a suitable urine specimen is obtained, the collection official will:
1. Sign, date, and indicate the time on the Order to Report form;
2. Process the specimen in accordance with accepted laboratory procedures;
and
3. Forward the Order to Report form to the appropriate bureau commander;

3. Positive Test Result/Refusals:

1. If the laboratory returns a positive test result, a second test is required and will
be immediately scheduled by the appropriate bureau commander:
1. An employee who is ordered to report for a second test may have a union
representative or counsel accompany them to serve as an observer;
2. Specimens obtained for a second test will be obtained and processed in
accordance with the procedures outlined in the subsection entitled Testing
Procedures, above;
3. The employee has the right to have the second specimen sent to another
certified laboratory at his or her own expense;
2. If a second positive test is indicated, the employee will be immediately
suspended with pay pending a pre-disciplinary conference;
3. An employee who refuses to take any ordered drug test will be immediately
suspended with pay pending a pre-disciplinary conference;
4. Record Maintenance. Once final tests results are received, whether positive or
negative, the results will be indicated on the original Order to Report form by the
appropriate bureau commander, and the form and laboratory report will be filed in
the employee’s personnel file. A copy will be returned to the employee.

45
