Illinois Labor Relations Board

2020
ANNUAL REPORT

To the Governor of the State of Illinois, the President of the Illinois Senate, the Speaker of the Illinois
House, and the Members of the Illinois General Assembly:
This is the 36th annual report of the Illinois Labor Relations Board (ILRB) giving an overview of decisions
rendered, statistics of case activity, relevant court decisions, our budget and staffing for the period of July
1, 2019 through June 30, 2020.
The ILRB has offices in Springfield and Chicago. The ILRB consists of two panels with five members on
the State Panel and three members on the Local Panel. The panels hold monthly meetings and meet jointly
at least twice a year. ILRB meetings are open to the public. Dates and locations can be found at
www.illinois.gov/ilrb.
The Illinois Labor Relations Board is grateful to Governor J. B. Pritzker, Mayor Lori E. Lightfoot, and
Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle for giving us the responsibility to help maintain a positive
relationship between public employers and their employees.
Sincerely,
/s/ William E. Lowry
William E. Lowry
Chairman

Table of Contents
Jurisdiction of the Board ..................................................................................................................1
Funding of the Board .......................................................................................................................2
Illinois Labor Relations Board Members .........................................................................................3
Illinois Labor Relations Board Staff ................................................................................................3
Functions of the Board .....................................................................................................................4
Petition Management (Representation Cases) ....................................................................4
Election Petitions .................................................................................................................5
Majority Interest Petitions....................................................................................................5
Unfair Labor Practice Charges.............................................................................................6
Other Issues before the Board ..............................................................................................6
Mediation/Arbitration Cases ................................................................................................6
Strike Investigations.............................................................................................................7
Declaratory Rulings .............................................................................................................7
Police Decertification Cases ................................................................................................7
Rulemaking .........................................................................................................................7
Referrals to other Agencies .................................................................................................8
Law Library/Contract Repository ........................................................................................8
Legislative Amendments .....................................................................................................9
Board and Court Decisions ...........................................................................................................11
I.
Representation Issues .............................................................................................11
II.
Employer Unfair Labor Practices ..........................................................................13
III.
Union Unfair Labor Practices ................................................................................19
IV.
Procedural Issues ...................................................................................................22
General Counsel’s Declaratory Rulings.........................................................................................23
Interest Arbitration Awards ...........................................................................................................25
Caseload Statistics .........................................................................................................................28
Representation Cases Certified ......................................................................................................29
Unfair Labor Practice Charges Workload......................................................................................29
Petition Management (Representation) Workload.........................................................................29
Case Actions in FY 2019 ...............................................................................................................30
Certifications of Representative.....................................................................................................31
Certifications of Voluntarily Recognized Representative .............................................................40
Amendment of Certification ..........................................................................................................41
Revocations of Prior Certifications ................................................................................................42
Organizational Chart ......................................................................................................................43

Jurisdiction of the Board
The Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (Act), 5 ILCS 315 (2014), enacted by Public Act 83-1012, effective July 1,
1984, and last amended effective December 20, 2019, governs labor relations between most public employers in
Illinois and their employees, along with the labor organizations that represent these employees. Throughout the State,
the Illinois Labor Relations Board (ILRB) regulates the designation of employee representatives; the negotiation of
wages, hours, and other conditions of employment; and resolves or, if necessary, adjudicates labor disputes.
The State Panel has jurisdiction over public, non-educational employers and employees throughout the State of Illinois.
Its jurisdiction includes state government, county governments, municipal governments covering populations not in
excess of two million persons, and the Regional Transportation Authority.
The Local Panel has jurisdiction over units of local government with a population in excess of two million persons.
This includes not only the County of Cook and the City of Chicago, but also other county- and city-wide governmental
entities such as the Forest Preserve District of Cook County, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater
Chicago, the Chicago Housing Authority, the Chicago Transit Authority, and the Chicago Park District.
Together with the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act, 115 ILCS 5 (2014), the Act provides comprehensive
statutory regulation of public sector collective bargaining in Illinois. It has many similarities to the National Labor
Relations Act, which regulates collective bargaining matters in the private sector, and to the laws of other states that
regulate collective bargaining in the public sector.
The Board's duties under the Act include the following:
1. Rendering determinations on all charges alleging unfair labor practices under the Act, after investigation and, where
necessary, hearing;
2. Processing petitions seeking the certification or decertification of collective bargaining representatives of public
employees, often conducting hearings and elections upon such petitions;
3. Processing petitions to modify or clarify bargaining units and certifications of bargaining units;
4. Providing rosters of mediators, fact-finders, and arbitrators to parties covered by the Act in order to assist in
resolving collective bargaining impasses and grievance disputes.
5. Conducting emergency investigations of public employee strikes and strike threats, upon demand, to determine
whether judicial proceedings are warranted to restrain or prevent strike activity imperiling the health and safety of the
public.

1

Funding of the Board
The Illinois Labor Relations Board received a budget appropriation of $1,734,000 for Fiscal Year 2020. The ILRB
received its funding through the General Revenue Fund (GRF). The ILRB had a lump sum rather than line item budget
for Fiscal Year 2020. The line item figures represented below reflect expenditures for those lines. Figures on each
line, including the total, were rounded to the nearest dollar.
FY 2020
Actual Expenditures
Regular Positions
Social Security/Medicare
Contractual Services
Travel
Commodities
Printing
Equipment
Electronic Data Processing
Telecommunication
Agency Ops/Lump Sum
Total

1,131,968
82,406
48,652
4,370
875
1,094
1,097
70,617
21,406
57
1,362,542

2

Illinois Labor Relations Board Members
STATE PANEL
William E. Lowry (Chairman)
Chicago
John S. Cronin
Mokena
Kendra Cunningham
Murrayville
Jose L. Guidino
Orland Hills
Thomas Willis
Addison
LOCAL PANEL
Robert M. Gierut (Chairman)
Darien
Charles E. Anderson
Chicago
Angela C. Thomas
Chicago

Illinois Labor Relations Board Staff
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Kimberly F. Stevens

GENERAL COUNSEL
Helen J. Kim

PERSONNEL OFFICER
Carla Stone

ASSOCIATE GENERAL COUNSEL
Anna Hamburg-Gal

CHIEF FISCAL OFFICER
Aaron M. Itulya

ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES
Donald W. Anderson
Matthew S. Nagy
Michelle N. Owen
Sharon A. Purcell

COMPLIANCE OFFICER/
INVESTIGATOR/MEDIATOR
Olivia Campbell
INVESTIGATOR
Tiara Mackins

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Jodi M. Marr
CASE MANAGER
Cody Huffines
3

Functions of the Board
Case Processing
The Board has two primary programs, Petition Management (Representation Cases) and Unfair Labor Practice
Charges. The following briefly describes the types of cases processed by the Board under each program and the
procedures used to process them. All references to the Board are applicable to either the State or Local Panel.

Petition Management (Representation Cases)
Petition management (representation) cases can be initiated in several ways. A labor organization seeking recognition
as the exclusive bargaining representative of a unit of employees in which no other labor organization has attained
recognition rights has two options: request that the employer voluntarily recognize it or file a representation petition
with the Board. If another labor organization is already recognized in accordance with the Act to represent the same
group of employees, a representation petition must be filed with the Board.
The following types of petitions initiate representation proceedings before the Board:
•

Representation/Certification Petitions (RC) are filed by employees, a group of employees, or labor
organizations seeking certification of an exclusive collective bargaining representative for certain positions.

Labor organizations seeking certification as the exclusive bargaining representatives of employees may seek
certification by filing a petition seeking an election or a Majority Interest Petition. Where a Majority Interest Petition
is filed, the Board determines whether the labor organization has presented evidence that a non-coerced majority of
employees in an appropriate unit signed valid cards or petitions indicating they want that labor organization to represent
them for the purpose of collective bargaining. The Board can then certify the labor organization as the exclusive
representative without an election.
In an Election Petition, a labor organization presents evidence that over 30 percent of the employees seek an election
to determine whether a majority desires representation by the petitioning labor organization. The Board then conducts
an election to determine the employees’ desires regarding representation.
•
•
•

Employer's Representation Petitions (RM) are filed by employers alleging that one or more labor organizations
have presented a claim to be recognized as an exclusive collective bargaining representative for a majority of
the employees in an appropriate unit.
Voluntary Recognition Requests (VR) are requests for certification of a unit, without an election, where the
labor organization demonstrates it has a majority showing of interest in an appropriate unit and the employer
voluntarily recognizes it as the unit's exclusive representative.

•

Decertification Petitions (RD) are filed by employees seeking an election by which they can indicate their
desire to no longer be represented by the existing exclusive collective bargaining representative.

•

Unit Clarification Petitions (UC) are filed by exclusive collective bargaining representatives or employers
seeking to clarify or amend an existing bargaining unit through the addition or deletion of a position without
an election.

•

Petitions to Amend Certification (AC) are filed by exclusive collective bargaining representatives or employers
seeking to amend a certification because of a change in name or structure.

4

•

Declaration of Disinterest Petitions (DD) are filed by exclusive collective bargaining representatives to declare
their disinterest in further representation of a bargaining unit.

Upon receipt of a representation petition, the Board provides the employer with a notice to be posted for the benefit of
affected employees. An investigation is initiated to determine the adequacy of the showing of interest - based on
employee authorization cards, petitions, or election results - and the appropriateness of the proposed bargaining unit.
Employees or competing labor organizations may file intervention petitions within specified time limits.
Petitions are dismissed by the Executive Director when they have been untimely filed, when the bargaining unit is
clearly inappropriate, when the showing of interest is not adequate, or when the employer and/or employees are not
covered by the Act.

Election Petitions
When an election petition is filed, and Board agent determines that the petition is consistent with the Act and its Rules,
the agent will prepare a stipulation for consent election to be signed by the petitioner, the employer, the labor
organization seeking to represent the employees, any incumbent, and any timely intervener. Upon approval of the
Executive Director, a Board agent will hold the election.
If the investigation of the petition discloses the existence of a question concerning representation, the matter is assigned
to an administrative law judge who may set it for hearing. Unlike unfair labor practice hearings, representation
hearings are non-adversarial in nature. Parties may file appeals from the Executive Director's dismissal or file
exceptions to an administrative law judge's recommended decision and order. The Board hears and rules on all appeals
and exceptions.
After an election is conducted, any party may file objections with the Board alleging that the result was not fairly and
freely chosen by a majority of the employees. If, after investigation and hearing, it is determined that the objections
are valid, a new election is conducted. If no objections are filed or if the Board determines after investigation or
hearing that filed objections are not well-founded, the Board either certifies the collective bargaining representative
that received a majority of the votes cast as the exclusive representative or certifies that the election resulted in no
representation. Subsequent elections cannot be conducted in the bargaining unit for one year following an election
that results in a Board certification.

Majority Interest Petitions
When a majority interest petition is filed, it is investigated to ensure that the labor organization has provided evidence
that a non-coerced majority of the employees in an appropriate unit want to be represented by it for the purposes of
collective bargaining. If the employer objects to the petition because it believes that specific positions are not eligible
to be represented in a bargaining unit (for example, because employees in the positions are supervisors, confidential
employees, or managerial employees as defined by the Act), the Board will nevertheless certify the labor organization
as the exclusive representative for the unit if the contested positions are not sufficient to affect the labor organization's
majority support. Whether the disputed positions should be included in the bargaining unit will be resolved by use of
the Board's unit clarification procedures.
If the majority interest petition proposes a bargaining unit that combines both professional and nonprofessional
employees, the Board will first conduct an election to determine whether both the professional and nonprofessional
employees want to be represented in a combined unit. If the professional and nonprofessional employees decline to
be represented in a combined unit, the Board will certify separate professional and nonprofessional units, provided the
labor organization has demonstrated majority support in each separate unit.
If a party or individual provides evidence demonstrating a material issue of fact or law that the labor organization's
majority support was obtained by fraud or through coercion, an administrative law judge will determine whether there

5

is clear and convincing evidence of fraud or coercion. This recommendation can be reviewed by the Board. If the
Board determines there is clear and convincing evidence of fraud or coercion, it will conduct an election to determine
majority support for the labor organization in the appropriate unit. If the Board finds that there is not clear and
convincing evidence of fraud or coercion, the Board will certify the unit based on the labor organization's evidence of
majority support.

Unfair Labor Practice Charges
Section 10 of the Act prohibits employers and labor organizations from engaging in certain labor practices. An
employer, a labor organization, or an employee may file a charge with the Board alleging such unfair labor practices.
There are two categories of unfair labor practice charges:
•

A Charge Against Employer (CA) alleges that an employer has violated one of the provisions under Section
10(a) of the Act; and

•

A Charge Against Labor Organization (CB) alleges that a labor organization has violated one of the provisions
under Section 10(b) of the Act.

Upon receipt of a charge, the case is assigned to an investigator. If the investigation reveals that there is no basis to
sustain the charge, the Executive Director dismisses the charge. If, on the other hand, the investigation reveals the
existence of a dispositive question of law or fact as to whether an unfair labor practice has been committed, the
Executive Director will issue a complaint and the case will be set for hearing before an administrative law judge. In
contrast to practices before the National Labor Relations Board, the Board does not perform the prosecutorial function
once a complaint is issued. Instead, the charging parties or their representatives prosecute unfair labor practice cases.
Because it does not prosecute, the Board's "issue of law or fact" standard for issuance of a complaint is less strenuous
than the reasonable cause standard used by the National Labor Relations Board.
At unfair labor practice charge hearings, charging parties and respondents produce and examine witnesses, adduce
evidence in support of their positions, and, typically, file written briefs. After considering the record and the parties’
briefs, the administrative law judge will subsequently issue a recommended decision and order.
Parties may file appeals from the Executive Director's dismissal or file exceptions to an administrative law judge’s
recommended decision and order. The Board hears and rules on all appeals and exceptions. Parties aggrieved by
Board decisions and orders may obtain judicial review in the Illinois Appellate Court. Parties may also seek to enforce
a Board order in the Illinois Appellate Court.
In FY2014, the Board designated one of its investigators to function as its in-house mediator. This move allows the
Board to provide mediation services to parties who have pending claims before the Board.

Other Issues Before the Board
In addition to cases that fall within the Board’s two major programs, other issues also come before the Board. Below
is an overview of various other ways the Board facilitates effective bargaining relationships between public employers
and their employees.

Mediation/Arbitration Cases
The Board maintains a roster of qualified mediators and arbitrators. Upon request, the Board provides a list of
mediators or arbitrators (MA) to parties who have reached an impasse in collective bargaining. The Act prohibits
protective services employees (security employees, peace officers, firefighters) from striking. Disputes over their
negotiations are subject to mandatory mediation and interest arbitration. Units of non-protective services
6

employees use mediation in the event of impasse and can use interest arbitration on agreement of the parties or in
certain instances in negotiating a first contract. The parties may request the Board's roster for other services as
well, such as fact-finding, grievance arbitration, and grievance mediation, which are provided at the request of
one or both parties.

Strike Investigations
If a unit of non-protective services employees engages in a strike that the employer believes presents "a clear and
present danger to the health and safety of the public," the employer may petition the Board for a strike investigation
(SI). The Board has 72 hours to determine whether such a clear and present danger exists. The employer may then
take the Board's findings to Circuit Court to seek to enjoin the work stoppage in a manner that would eliminate the
danger. When employees have been enjoined from striking pursuant to this procedure, interest arbitration is used to
resolve the issues in dispute.

Declaratory Rulings
Employers and labor organizations may also request that the Board's General Counsel issue a declaratory ruling (DR)
stating whether the Act requires bargaining over a particular subject. Such requests must be made jointly, unless it
involves a protective services employee unit where a request for interest arbitration has been made.

Police Decertification Cases
Amendments to Section 6.1 of the Illinois Police Training Act through Public Act 93-0655 instituted a process for the
decertification of a police officer when it has been proven that, while under oath, he or she has knowingly and willfully
made false statements as to a material fact going to an element of the offense of murder. There are two situations in
which the ILRB State Panel may be required to conduct hearings involving alleged police perjury. In the first scenario,
the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board (ILETSB) investigates verified complaints of police perjury
in cases where there has been an acquittal. Following an investigation, ILETSB will forward a report to the Executive
Director of the ILRB who will review the evidence to determine whether it is sufficient to warrant a hearing before an
administrative law judge of the ILRB. In these cases, the Executive Director may either issue a non-appealable
dismissal or order a hearing. In the second scenario, where there has been a finding of guilt on the offense of murder
but a new trial is granted on direct appeal or a state post-conviction evidentiary hearing is ordered based on a claim of
police perjury that goes to an element of the offense of murder, a request for hearing is filed directly with the ILRB
without an investigation by ILETSB. If any of these cases proceed to hearing, an administrative law judge will make
a recommendation to the ILRB State Panel as to whether certain police officers have committed perjury in homicide
proceedings such that they should be decertified. The administrative law judge’s decision may be appealed to the
Board and the Board decision may be further appealed to court.

Rulemaking
The Board is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations governing its activity. 5 ILCS 315/5(i), (j) & (k) (2012).
A vote of five of the eight Board members is necessary to enact or amend rules.
The Board has adopted regulations governing its internal structures (2 Ill. Adm. Code 2500), access to its records (2
Ill. Adm. Code 2501), general provisions applicable to all Board proceedings (80 Ill. Adm. Code 1200), procedures in
representation cases (80 Ill. Adm. Code 1210), procedures in unfair labor practice cases (80 Ill. Adm. Code 1220),
procedures for resolving collective bargaining impasses (80 Ill. Adm. Code 1230), procedures for police decertification
cases (80 Ill. Adm. Code 1240), and procedures for implementing the gubernatorial designations for exclusion (80 Ill.
Admin. Code 1300). The Board's rules are available at its offices or on its website at http://www.illinois.gov/ilrb.

7

Referrals to Other Agencies
The Board spends a considerable amount of time talking to members of the general public who either call or walk into
the Board's offices seeking information regarding their work-related problems. When, as often happens, a Board agent
determines that the Board has no jurisdiction to remedy the problem presented by the person, the agent directs the
person to the appropriate governmental agency.

Law Library/Contract Repository
Specialized public sector labor relations law libraries are maintained in the Board's Chicago and Springfield offices.
The libraries contain the Illinois Public Employee Reporter and are open to the public. The Board also serves as the
repository of public sector collective bargaining agreements for employees under the Board's jurisdiction.

8

Legislative Amendments
Public Act 101-620
On December 20, 2019, Governor J.B. Pritzker signed into law Public Act 101-620, amending the Illinois Public Labor
Relations Act (IPLRA) and the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act (IELRA) in addition to the Illinois Freedom
of Information Act. Public Act (FOIA). The IPLRA is amended as follows:
Section 6:
• Requires, on a monthly basis, public employers to provide the exclusive representative of public employees
specific information regarding employees who are members of the represented bargaining unit represented
by the respective union its represented employees within 10 days of hire of new employees.
•

Provides that an employer commits an unfair labor practice by improperly disclosing the required
information. Public Act 101-620 made concurrent changes to FOIA.

•

Grants labor organizations reasonable access to represented employees for grievances and union
business/meetings without loss of pay or charge to leave time; grants unions affirmative access to facility
bulletin boards/mailboxes to communicate with represented employees. Employers and unions may agree
to greater access through collective bargaining.

•

Eliminates the fair share provision.

•

Allows for a period of irrevocability of authorization of membership per agreement of the employer and
labor organization. Deems the irrevocability period reasonable if period lasts one year, may be
automatically renewed, and the authorization contains at least an annual 10-day period during which an
employee may revoke authorization. These provisions apply retroactively and prospectively to claims
regarding authorization periods.

•

Includes language governing timing and implementation of deductions by the employer. Employees no
longer represented by a union may elect to continue deductions.

•

Provides all employee requests regarding deductions (authorize, revoke, cancel, change) to be made to the
exclusive representative unless otherwise agreed by the parties, and requires the exclusive representative
to transmit such information to the employer. In such cases, the employer shall rely on the provided
information and process the deductions, and the union shall indemnify the employer.
Provides an employer’s failure to comply with dues deduction provisions to be a “violation of the duty to
bargain and an unfair labor practice”.

•

Grants ILRB exclusive jurisdiction over dues disputes under the Act. Provides for the ILRB to escrow
disputed dues where an exclusive representative does not have an account for the purpose of escrowing
such disputed dues.

New Section 6.5:
• Provides statement of defense to liability claims regarding fair share fees collected prior to the United
States Supreme Court decision in Janus v. AFSCME, Council 31 (June 27, 2018) that applies to existing
and future claims. Indicates that it is a declaration of existing law.
9

Section 10:
• Under new Section 10(a)(8), an employer engages in an unfair labor practice when it interferes with,
coerces, deters, or discourages public employees from becoming or remaining members of a union,
authorizing representation by a union, or authorizing dues or fee deductions. This section further prohibits
an employer from intentionally permitting outside third parties to use the employer’s email/communication
systems to engage in such conduct. Provides that an employer’s good faith implementation of a policy to
prohibit such use of communication/email systems is a defense to a ULP charge.
•

Under new Section 10(a)(9), an employer’s disclosure of employee information under Section 6 is an unfair
labor practice if the employer knows or should know it will be used to interfere with, coerce, deter, or
discourage public employees from becoming or remaining members of a union, authorizing representation
by a union, or authorizing dues or fee deductions.

•

Under new Section 10(d), an employer is prohibited from discouraging union membership or dues
deductions or otherwise interfere with the relationship between employees and their unions. Employers
are required to refer all inquiries about union membership to the union, except that the employer may
communicate with employees about payroll processes and procedures. Employers are also required to
establish email policies in order to prohibit use of the employer’s email system by outside sources.

10

Board and Court Decisions
I.

Representation Issues

07/10/19
ILRB LP
Confidential Employees
In American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, Council 31 and City of Chicago, 36 PERI ¶ 12
(IL LRB-LP 2019) (Case No. L-RC-16-035), AFSCME filed a majority interest representation petition seeking to
represent employees working in the title of Supervisor of Personnel Services (SPS) at various departments within the
City of Chicago in an existing bargaining unit. The Board accepted the ALJ’s recommended decision and order
dismissing the petition because the SPSs are confidential employees pursuant to Section 3(c) of the Act. The Board
agreed with the ALJ that the employees satisfied the authorized access test because the SPS had advanced knowledge
of contemplated discipline in the normal course of their duties. The Board declined to abandon recent Board precedent
as urged by AFSCME.
08/13/19
ILRB LP
Managerial Employees
In International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Local 700 and Chicago Transit Authority, 36 PERI ¶ 36 (IL LRB-LP
2019) (Case No. L-RC-18-021), the ALJ found that employees working in the classification of Project ManagerConstruction (“Project Manager”) at the Chicago Transit Authority (“CTA”) were not managerial employees
excluded from bargaining under Section 3(j) of the Act. Applying the traditional managerial test, the ALJ found the
Project Managers did not engage in executive and management functions because they served as part of a team,
playing a subordinate and advisory role, and thus lacked the requisite authority and discretion in carrying out their
duties. The ALJ also determined their recommendations on major policy issues were not generally accepted. The
Employer filed exceptions contending: (1) the ALJ disregarded the Employer’s evidence demonstrating that the
Project Managers are predominantly engaged in executive and management functions; (2) improperly relied on the
testimony of one witness; (3) improperly relied on or distinguished Board precedent; and (4) incorrectly determined
that Project Managers are public employees because they work as a team and improperly downplayed the significance
of the Project Managers’ recommendations as to day-to-day operations. The Board rejected the exceptions finding
that the portions of the record identified by the Employer did not outweigh the evidence relied on by the ALJ and
therefore did not compel rejection of the ALJ’s recommendations regarding the managerial test. The Board, however,
modified the RDO to exclude footnote 5 as noted in the Employer’s exceptions.

09/12/19
ILRB SP
Confidential Employees
In American Federation of State County and Municipal Employees, Council 31 and Chief Judge of the Circuit Court
of Cook County, 36 PERI ¶ 42 (IL LRB-SP 2019) (Case No. S-RC-18-003), the Board adopted the ALJ’s
Recommended Decision and Order dismissing the majority interest petition filed by Petitioner seeking to represent
employees in the title Investigator III working in the Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center. Following
the Board precedent in Ill. Dep’t of Central Mgmt. Servs. (Corrections), 33 PERI ¶ 121 (IL LRB-SP 2017), aff’d sub
nom. Metro. Alliance of Police, Chapter 294 v. Ill. Labor Relations Bd., State Panel, 2018 Il App (1st) 171322-U

11

(unpublished order), the ALJ determined the Investigator IIIs, who substantiated or unsubstantiated allegations of
misconduct, were excluded from collective bargaining as confidential employees because they had advanced
knowledge of discipline. Although the Board found some merit to the AFSCME’s contention that the decision in Ill.
Dep’t of Central Mgmt. Servs. (Corrections) relied on by the ALJ inappropriately expanded the authorized access test
to include advanced knowledge of discipline, it adopted the RDO because that decision was affirmed by the Appellate
Court in an unpublished order and to maintain consistency with the Board’s Local Panel decision in City of Chicago,
36 PERI ¶ 12 (IL LRB-LP 2019).

10/9/19
ILRB SP
Executive Director Election Order/Contract Bar
In Policemen’s Benevolent and Protective Association—Labor Committee and County of Marion and County Clerk,
Treasurer, Supervisor of Assessments, Coroner and Sheriff of Marion County, and Laborers International Union of
North America, 36 PERI ¶ 53 (IL LRB-SP 2019) (Case No. S-RC-19-060), the petitioning union filed a majority
interest petition seeking to represent employees at various offices within the County of Marion in a bargaining unit
previously certified by the Board. The incumbent union and the County had bargained two separate collective
bargaining agreements for the bargaining unit scheduled to expire on different dates. One agreement covered only the
employees of the County Highway Department and is set to expire on November 30, 2020, two years after the other
agreement covering the remainder of the bargaining unit which expired on November 30, 2018. The Executive Director
found no issues of representation exist and ordered an election. She determined the County and the incumbent union
improperly bargained separate agreements outside the Board’ representation proceedings and that contract bar did not
apply because the Board does not recognize a separate unit of Highway Department employees. The County appealed
the order for an election contending the CBA covering the Highway Department employees bars the election, pointing
to Section 1210.135(a)(1) of the Board’s rules which bars the filing of representation petitions filed outside the
designated window when a collective bargaining agreement is in effect covering “all or some of the employees in the
bargaining unit.” The petitioning union responded by contending the current arrangement creates the potential for
perpetual representation of the bargaining unit due to the staggered expiration dates. The Board found the
circumstances presented novel issues and notably, raised, at least, an issue of law regarding the effect of the “all or
some” phrase in Section 1210.135(a)(1) and remanded the case for hearing.
12/11/2019
ILRB SP
Bargaining Unit Appropriateness
In Laborers’ Int’l Union of North America and County of Clinton (Highway Dep’t), 36 PERI ¶ 88 (IL LRB-SP 2019)
(Case No. S-RC-19-018), the Laborers’ International Union of North America, Local 773 (Union) filed a majority
interest petition seeking to represent two employees working as Engineering Technicians in the Clinton County
(County) Highway Department in a stand-alone bargaining unit. The ALJ found the presumption of inappropriateness
did not apply because the Union was seeking only a portion of employees who perform similar duties. The ALJ then
found the petitioned-for stand-alone bargaining unit to be inappropriate under the factors set forth in Section 9(b) of
the Act. The Board rejected the ALJ’s recommendations with respect to the inappropriateness of the bargaining unit
and granted the majority interest petition. The Board found the 9(b) factors supported the appropriateness of the
petitioned for stand-alone unit, noting that the Act and precedent requires the Board to determine an appropriate unit
for bargaining, not a more or the most appropriate one.

12

II.

Employer Unfair Labor Practices

08/13/19
ILRB LP
Repudiation/Modification Under Section 7
In International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Local 700 and County of Cook and Sheriff of Cook County, 34 PERI ¶ 72
(IL LRB-LP 2019) (Case No. L-CA-15-042), Local 700 alleged the Employers violated Sections 10(a)(4) and 10(a)(1)
of the Act when Respondents required unit members—Correctional Officers in the Sheriff’s Department of Corrections
(DOC)—to pass a Physical Agility Test (PAT) as a condition of transfer to the Sheriff’s Court Services Department
(CSD). Local 700 alleges the PAT prerequisite to transferring out of DOC repudiated the collective bargaining process
by refusing to comply with the “Lunch Premium Award” and subsequent related arbitration awards and modified the
collective bargaining agreement without bargaining in good faith as required by Section 7 of the Act. The ALJ found the
“Lunch Premium Award,” inter alia, established a process by which unit members could transfer from the Department
of Corrections unit to the Court Services Department (CSD) bargaining unit which did not include the PAT
requirement, and that process was later incorporated in the parties’ collective bargaining agreement. This all occurred
at time when Local 700 represented deputy sheriffs working in DOC as well as CSD. Upon certification of the Illinois
Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council (IFOP) as exclusive representative of CSD deputies, the Employer negotiated
a collective bargaining provision with IFOP whereby the PAT requirement would be instituted for any employee
entering the CSD after September of 2014. A subsequent arbitration award determined the Respondents and Local 700
had agreed not to use the PAT as a transfer requirement for employees seeking to transfer from DOC into CSD, that
the Respondents had not amended their agreement with Local 700 so as to implement the PAT requirement, and that,
rather, the Respondents simply implemented the PAT requirement so as to apply after transferring employees were on
the CSD payroll as a way of evading the provisions of the Lunch Premium Award and subsequent awards. Based on
these facts, the ALJ found the Respondents repudiated and unlawfully modified, the collective bargaining agreement
with Local 700 in violation of Sections 10(a)(4) and 10(a)(1) of the Act.
The Respondents filed multiple exceptions to the ALJ’s Recommended Decision and Order (RDO), contending, inter
alia, that because Local 700 was decertified as the representative of the CSD unit and replaced as the bargaining
representative by the IFOP, it lacked standing to challenge the terms of the bargaining agreement between the
Respondents and the IFOP and that the arbitrator had no jurisdiction to evaluate the terms of the agreement between
the Respondents and the IFOP. On consideration of the Respondents’ exceptions, the Board found them to be without
merit. The Board accepted the ALJ’s recommendations and adopted them as the decision of the Board, determining
the allegations in the Complaint, as well as the ALJ’s findings, were tailored to the allegations regarding the terms of
the agreement covering the DOC bargaining unit and that the ALJ had considered the terms of the agreement between
the Respondents and IFOP only as evidence of the Respondents’ repudiation of their agreement with Local 700.
Moreover, the Board found that since the IFOP agreement called for DOC employees who transferred to the CSD unit
but who did not pass the PAT to be returned to the DOC unit, the Local 700 agreement still applied to those returning
members.
08/13/19
ILRB SP
Default/Grounds for Variance
In International Association of Fire Fighters, Local 50 and City of Peoria, 36 PERI ¶ 27 (IL LRB-SP 2019) (Case
No. S-CA-18-160), the ALJ found the Respondent in default for failure to answer the complaint for hearing and thus
found the allegations of the complaint—that the Respondent violated the Act by failing to give Local 50 a signed copy
of the memorandum of understanding (MOU) regarding the staffing of 17 machines and by violating the terms of the
MOU by unilaterally implementing a “brownout” policy—to have been admitted. In response to exceptions filed by
13

the Respondent, the Board’s State Panel determined that, although the Respondent claimed that it was not aware of
the complaint until it received the ALJ’s RDO, the grounds for granting a variance from the Board’s rule relating to
the time for answering a complaint were not present in this case. Citing an extensive list of communications to the
Respondent and its representative, as listed in the representative’s Notice of Appearance, including issuance by the
ALJ of an Order to Show Cause to which there was no response by the Respondent, the State Panel found that the
lack of a response to the complaint and the Order to Show Cause and the lack of persuasiveness of the reasons given
by the Respondent for this failure to respond warranted the denial of a variance. The matter is pending administrative
review in the Appellate Court, Third District.

09/12/19
ILRB LP
Executive Director’s Dismissal—Retaliation/Joint Employer Status/Definition of Employer
In Chicago Journeymen Plumbers’ Local 130, U.A., and City of Chicago, 36 PERI ¶ 37(IL LRB-LP 2019) (Case No.
L-CA-18-072), the Board reversed the Executive Director’s dismissal of a charge filed by Local 130 alleging the City
of Chicago retaliated against Stanley DeCaluwe for filing a grievance over his discharge from the City by directing
one of its contractors, NPL Construction, to terminate his employment. The charge was dismissed because the
Executive Director determined DeCaluwe was not a public employee at the time of the complained of conduct and
NPL Construction was not a public employer. Local 130 appealed contending the allegations raised issues of fact and
law regarding NPL Construction’s status as a joint employer. The Board reversed the dismissal observing the charge
raised several issues of law and fact regarding whether the City blacklisted DeCaluwe, whether City’s direction to
NPL Construction due to DeCaluwe’s grievance filing constitute an unlawful retaliation, and whether NPL
Construction itself can be considered an employer under the Act in addition to whether it can be considered a joint
employer. The Board then remanded the matter for further investigation into the relationship between the City and
NPL Construction.
09/12/19
ILRB LP
Executive Director’s Dismissal—Nexus/New Allegations on Appeal
In Bonnie K. Miller-Herron and State of Illinois, Department of Central Management Services (Financial and
Professional Regulation), 36 PERI ¶ 41 (IL LRB-SP 2019) (Case No. S-CA-19-065), the Board affirmed the
Executive Director’s dismissal of the charge filed by Bonnier Miller alleging her employer engaged in unfair labor
practices when it denied her request for a flexible schedule. The Executive Director determined that the available
evidence failed to indicate the employer took action against Miller because she participated in any activity protected
by the Act. In affirming the dismissal, the Board declined to consider the new allegations included in Miller’s appeal
because it found the investigation was designed to illicit information from Miller to substantiate an unfair labor
practice charge, but Miller failed to provide such information.

09/16/19
Illinois Appellate Court, First District Rule 23 Unpublished Order Retaliation/Threats/Protected Activity/Use
of Office Space
In Erik Slater v. Illinois Labor Relations Board, 2019 IL App (1st) 181007-U, in and unpublished order, the First
District affirmed the Board’s decision in Erik Slater and Chicago Transit Authority, 34 PERI ¶ 160 (IL LRB-LP)
(Case No. L-CA-16-017) finding the Chicago Transit Authority engaged in unfair labor practices within the meaning

14

of Sections 10(a)(1) and 10(a)(2) and (1) of the Act. The court affirmed the Board’s findings and conclusions that the
CTA violated Section 10(a)(1) and 10(a)(2) by threatening and taking several adverse actions against Slater for
engaging in protected activity but did not violated those sections of the Act when it denied Local 308, and
consequently Slater, use of office space, finding that such denial not an adverse action because neither Local 308 nor
Slater had a proprietary interest in the office space.
10/9/19
ILRB LP
Effects Bargaining/Unilateral Change/Layoffs
In Policemen’s Benevolent Labor Committee and County of Cook and Sheriff of Cook County, 36 PERI ¶ 54 (IL
LRB-LP 2019) (Case No. L-CA-18-037), the union alleged Respondents implemented the layoff of unit members,
Lieutenants in the Sheriff’s Department of Corrections, without first bargaining to impasse, the layoff decision and
its effects. The ALJ found Respondents were not obligated to first bargain the decision to layoff the Lieutenants but
were obligated to bargain the effects of the layoff. The ALJ found the effects the union wished to bargain included
the effective date, seniority of the laid off lieutenants, compensatory time, and the assignments of the remaining
Lieutenants, but Respondents implemented the layoffs before completion of bargaining over these subjects. The ALJ
thus concluded the Respondents violated Section 10(a)(4) and derivatively, Section 10(a)(1) of the Act. Respondents
filed exceptions. The Board rejected the ALJ’s recommendations and dismissed the complaint for hearing. The Board
found Respondents were not obligated to bargain over the effective date of the layoff as the effective date is an
inevitable consequence of the layoff decision. Regarding the remaining effects the union wished to bargain, the Board
determined the parties’ collective bargaining agreement indicated the parties had already bargained over seniority and
compensatory time, and the union waived bargaining over assignments.
10/9/19
ILRB LP
Executive Director’s Dismissal—Retaliation
In Derek B. Webb and City of Chicago, 36 PERI ¶ 55 (IL LRB-LP 2019) (Case No. L-CA- 19-095), the Executive
Director dismissed as untimely the charge filed by Derek Webb alleging the City of Chicago committed unfair labor
practices when it ceased to assign him to the City’s Warrant Desk. The Board affirmed the Executive Director’s
dismissal regarding the Warrant Desk allegation, but determined that Webb, a pro se litigant, amended his charge
during the investigation to include allegations that the City retaliated against him by denying overtime opportunities
because he engaged in protected activity and remanded the case for further investigation into the new allegations.
10/9/19
ILRB SP
Unilateral Change/Retaliation/Amendment to Complaint/Adequate Remedy
In North Riverside Fire Fighters, Local 2714 and Village of North Riverside, 36 PERI ¶ 56 (IL LRB-SP 2019) (Case
No. S-CA-18-108), the Board adopted the ALJ’s findings and conclusions that the Village of North Riverside
committed unfair labor practices in violation of Sections 10(a)(1), 10(a)(2), and 10(a)(4) but modified a portion of the
remedy. The complaint for hearing alleged the Village unlawfully changed the health insurance of newly-hired
firefighters during the pendency of impasse resolution proceedings and threatened to retaliate against the newly-hired
firefighters because the union filed a grievance over the change in their health insurance. The union moved to amend
the complaint to include the allegation that the Village terminated a probationary firefighter in retaliation for the union
filing the health insurance grievance and for pursuing the unfair labor practice charge. The ALJ amended the

15

complaint to include the retaliation allegation and concluded the union successfully proved the allegations and
supported recommending the Village’s conduct violated the Act. Regarding the remedy for the discharge firefighter,
the ALJ recommend the extension of the probationary period along with backpay and interest. The Board, however,
determined the extension of the probationary period inadequately remedied the Village’s unlawful conduct because
merely extending the probationary period would only serve to provide another opportunity to discharge the firefighter.
Thus, the Board ordered reinstatement as a permanent firefighter with backpay plus interest, finding such remedy
would best effectuate the purposes of the Act.
11/18/19
ILRB LP
Amended Complaint/Weingarten Rights/Retaliation/Adverse Action/Motive
In Isis Collins and Chicago Transit Authority, 36 PERI ¶ 70 (IL LRB-LP 2019) (Case No. L-CA-18-049), Charging
Party, a bus operator with the CTA, alleged the CTA violated the Act when it continued to question Charging Party
about her on-duty injury after she asked for union representation, threatened her with discipline for requesting union
representation, and then harassed her by threatening to call the police in retaliation for requesting union representation.
The ALJ amended the complaint to include allegations regarding Charging Party’s Weingarten rights and then
determined the CTA violated Section 10(a)(1) when it continued to question her after she invoked her Weingarten
rights and then retaliated against her for invoking them. The ALJ determined the interview regarding Charging Party’s
injury on duty was investigatory in nature because her manager advised that false statements given during the interview
could be used against the Charging Party and the hard drive would be reviewed. The ALJ concluded Charging Party’s
request for union representation during the interview amounted to her invocation of Weingarten rights. The ALJ next
found that the CTA unlawfully harassed and intimidated Charging Party by threatening to call the police to have her
arrested and documenting and reporting her unauthorized presence on CTA property. The Board rejected the ALJ’s
recommendations that the CTA violated the Act and dismissed the complaint for hearing in its entirety. The Board
rejected the ALJ’s recommendation to amend the complaint, reasoning the interview at issue was not investigatory in
nature such that Charging Party’s Weingarten rights were invoked. The Board then rejected the ALJ’s
recommendations with respect to retaliation, finding the complained of actions did not constitute adverse employment
actions and even if they could be considered to be adverse actions, there was no causal connection between the alleged
harassment and Charging Party’ call for union’s assistance.
12/11/2019
ILRB SP
Timeliness/Submission of Permissive Subject/Interest Arbitration
In Metropolitan Alliance of Police, Bolingbrook Chapter #3 and Village of Bolingbrook (Police Dep’t), 36 PERI ¶ 87
(IL LRB-SP 2019) (Case No. S-CA-18-092), the Board rejected the ALJ’s recommendation to dismiss the complaint
for hearing as untimely and remanded the case to the ALJ to issue a supplemental recommended decision and order
on the merits of complaint’s allegations. The underlying charge alleged the Village engaged in unfair labor practices
by submitting a permissive subject to an interest arbitrator who selected the Village’s status quo proposal containing
the permissive subject. The ALJ found the charge untimely based on his determination that the parties’ submission of
final offers to the interest arbitrator triggered the Act’s six-month limitations period rather than the date of the award
as argued by Charging Party. The Board, however, relying on the First District’s decision in Skokie Firefighters Union,
Local 3033 v. Illinois Labor Relations Board, State Panel, et al., 2016 IL App (1st) 152478, found the triggering event
to be the date the arbitrator issued his award and found the charge timely filed.

16

12/11/2019
ILRB SP
Repudiation/Employer Control/Jurisdiction
In Laborers’ Int’l Union of North America and Alexander County Housing Authority, 36 PERI ¶ 85 (IL LRB-SP 2019)
(Case No. S-CA-18-007), the Board accepted the ALJ’s Recommended Decision and Order dismissing the complaint
for hearing that alleged the Employer repudiated its collective bargaining agreement with Charging Party in violation
of Section 10(a)(4) of the Act. The ALJ found the Employer lacked the requisite control over the decision to abrogate
the parties’ collective bargaining agreement and decisions regarding the terms and conditions of employment due to
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s takeover of the Employer’s implementation of the HUD’s
Low Income Housing Program. The Board noted that it lacked authority to find HUD’s actions to have violated the
Act for the Act’s definition of “public employer” or “employer” does not include federal agencies. Charging Party
petitioned for administrative review of the Board’s decision. The petition is currently pending before the Illinois
Appellate Court, Fourth District.
12/11/19
ILRB LP
Executive Director Dismissal/Timeliness/Retaliation
In Derek Webb and City of Chicago, 36 PERI ¶ 86 (IL LRB-LP 2019) (Case No. L-CA-19-110), Charging Party
alleged the Employer engaged in unfair labor practices within the meaning of Section 10(a) of the Act by investigating
him for providing his union with confidential information related to grievances and denying his requests for
information under the Freedom of Information Act in retaliation for previously serving in union leadership roles. The
Executive Director dismissed portions of the charge on timeliness grounds and the remainder of the allegations on
grounds the available evidence failed to support a retaliation claim under either Section 10(a)(1) or Section 10(a)(2)
of the Act. Upon Charging Party’s appeal, the Board affirmed the Executive Director’s dismissal.
12/11/19
ILRB LP
Unilateral Change/Abeyance
In Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge #7 and City of Chicago, 36 PERI ¶ 84 (IL LRB-LP 2019) (Case No. L-CA-17034) FOP filed an unfair labor practice charge against the City of Chicago alleging the City unilaterally implemented
its CR Matrix CR Guidelines in violation of Sections 10(a)(4) and 10(a)(1) of the Act. The ALJ found the City violated
Sections 10(a)(4) and 10(a)(1) of the Act when it implemented the CR Matrix and Guidelines without first bargaining
such with the Union. The Board, in consideration of the parties’ ongoing negotiations for a successor agreement and
at the parties’ request, held the case in further abeyance with directions to the parties to report either the outcome, if
any, or the status of negotiations on or before November 8, 2020.
12/17/19
ILRB LP
Unilateral Change/Abeyance
In Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge #7 and City of Chicago (Department of Police), 36 PERI ¶ 91 (IL LRB-LP 2019)
(Case No. L-CA-16-079), the ALJ found the City did not engage in unfair labor practices by unilaterally implementing
a policy known as the “Transparency Policy” that provided for the release of video footage in connection with
investigations into police officer misconduct. The Union filed exceptions and the City filed a response. In light of the
parties continuing negotiations and at the request of the parties, the Board held the case in further abeyance and directed
17

parties to report either the outcome, if any, or the status of negotiations on or before November 8, 2020.
02/6/20
ILRB SP
Retaliatory Discharge/Reversal of Dismissal/Issuance of Complaint
In American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, Council 31, and County of DuPage (DuPage
Care Center), 36 PERI ¶ 114 (IL LRB-SP 2020) (Case No. S-CA-19-121), the Board’s Executive Director dismissed
a charge alleging the Employer retaliated against one of its employees by discharging him for serving as a Union
steward and for threatening to report a nursing supervisor to the Union regarding a dispute resulting from a voluntary
overtime assignment. The Executive Director dismissed the charge for lack of evidence of the Employer’s unlawful
motive. She found the Union failed to provide a nexus between the employee’s threat to report the nursing supervisor
to the Union and his discharge. She also found dismissal warranted because the evidence demonstrated that the
employee had in fact engaged in the conduct for which the Employer claimed he was discharged, and that the Employer
would have discharged the employee in the absence of the alleged protected activity. Moreover, the Executive Director
observed that Charging Party did not allege an independent Section 10(a)(1) claim. Nevertheless, she determined that
the evidence failed to indicate a violation under either Section 10(a)(1) or 10(a)(2). Upon appeal, the Board reversed
the dismissal and directed issuance of a complaint for hearing. The Board found the Union raised issues of both fact
and law as to the elements of a prima facie case on the ultimate issue of whether the employee was discharged because
of his protected union and concerted activity in violation of Section 10(a)(1) and 10(a)(2) of the Act.
02/6/20
ILRB SP
Unilateral Change/Mandatory Subject/Waiver
In Policemen’s Benevolent and Protective Association, Unit #5 and Springfield Firefighters, IAFF Local 37, and City
of Springfield, 36 PERI ¶ 113 (IL LRB-SP 2020) (Case Nos. S-CA-19-046, S-CA-19-066 Consol.), the Board adopted
the ALJ’s Recommended Decision and Order finding the City violated Sections 10(a)(4) and derivatively, 10(a)(1) of
the Act when it implemented a rule change approved by the City’s civil service commission which gave preference
points to promotional candidates for City residency. Applying the Central City test, the ALJ found the use of residency
preference points in the promotional process concerned a mandatory subject of bargaining and concluded the City was
obligated to bargain the decision to change the rule. The ALJ further concluded the Charging Parties did not waive
bargaining over residency preference points. Lastly, the ALJ determined the City unlawfully failed to maintain the
status quo during the pendency of Section 14 interest arbitration with Charging Parties.
In adopting the ALJ’s recommendations, the Board rejected the City’s exceptions on both procedural and substantive
grounds. Procedurally, the Board found one of the City’s exceptions failed to comport with Section 1200.135(b)(2)
of the Board’s rules because the exception was not supported by citations to the record or authority. The Board also
noted the City failed to contest many of the ALJ’s findings and determinations forming the basis for his conclusion
that the City engaged in unfair labor practices and thus, waived those exceptions. The Board then rejected the City’s
reliance on the Board’s decision in City of Springfield (IBEW et al.), 35 PERI ¶ 15 (IL LRB-SP 2018), in which the
Board reversed the ALJ’s finding that the City unlawfully changed its accrued vacation payout policy by adopting an
ordinance. The Board distinguished that case, finding that the parties had the opportunity to bargain, and in some
cases did so, before the effective date of the ordinance, whereas in the instant case, the rule change became effective
upon approval by the Commission and there was no indication in the record that Charging Parties were given notice
of or an opportunity to bargain, or bargained, the proposed change before it was approved by the Commission.

18

03/10/20
Illinois Appellate Court, First District Rule 23 Unpublished Order
Retaliation/Motive/Nexus
In Travis Koester v. Illinois Labor Relations Board, County of Sangamon and Sheriff of Sangamon County, 2020 IL
App (4th) 180754-U, the Fourth District, in an unpublished order, affirmed the Board’s decision in Travis Koester and
County of Sangamon and Sheriff of Sangamon County, 35 PERI ¶ 70 (IL LRB-SP 2018) (S-CA-16-133) dismissing
the complaint for hearing. Charging Party, a member of the Sangamon County Sheriff’s Tactical Response Unit (TRU),
had alleged the Sangamon County Sheriff removed him from the TRU because he filed grievances in violation of
Section 10(a)(1) of the Act. The grievances were filed over the promotion of three individuals, two of whom were
fellow TRU members. Claiming trust among TRU members to be vital to the successful operation of the highly
specialized law enforcement unit, Respondents removed Charging Party from the unit because the other TRU members
expressed a lack of trust in the Charging Party due to the nature of the grievances filed. Charging Party’s fellow TRU
members requested his removal after a meeting with TRU members. The ALJ concluded the Respondent retaliated
against Charging Party because he filed grievances in violation of Section 10(a)(1) of the Act. The Board rejected the
ALJ’s recommendation and dismissed the complaint, finding that the Charging Party had not established the requisite
causation, i.e., that the Charging Party’s filing of the two grievances was the motivating factor in the Sheriff’s decision
to remove him from the TRU, and finding instead, the evidence supported the conclusion that it was lack of trust in
Charging Party by his fellow team members that caused his removal from the unit.
06/19/20
ILRB LP
Dismissal/Retaliation
In Carmen Rentas and County of Cook, Health and Hospital System, 37 PERI ¶ 2 (IL LRB-LP 2020) (Case No. LCA-19-078), Charging Party, an Administrative Assistant IV at the County of Cook’s Stroger Hospital, which is a title
represented by the Retail, Wholesale, and Department Store, Local 200, filed an unfair labor practice charge which
alleged that the County retaliated against her because of her race and/or national origin. The Executive Director
dismissed the charge on grounds that Charging Party failed to allege the County took action against her for engaging
in activity protected by the Act, noting that the charge appeared to claim the County took action against Charging Party
because of her gender, national origin, and age. Upon appeal, the Board affirmed the dismissal.

III.

Union Unfair Labor Practices

07/10/19
ILRB LP
Executive Director’s Dismissal—Breach of Duty of Fair Representation
In Glenn E. Jones and Amalgamated Transit Union, Local 241, 36 PERI ¶ 11 (IL LRB- LP) (Case No. L-CB-19020), the Executive Director dismissed a charge alleging that the Respondent Union had engaged in unfair labor
practices when it allegedly breached its duty of fair representation by failing to seek enforcement on behalf of
employees in the classification of bus server of the wage provisions of a collective bargaining agreement and by
pursuing a grievance regarding those wage provisions on behalf of mechanics and car servers, but not bus servers.
On appeal, the Board affirmed the dismissal because the Charging Party failed to raise issues of fact or law
necessitating a hearing. In support of its decision, the Board noted it will not second guess a union’s administrative
decision regarding grievance handling unless there is compelling evidence of intentional misconduct, citing American
Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, Council 31 (Jackson), 33 PERI ¶ 34 (IL LRB-SP 2016). With
respect to the Charging Party’s additional contention that the Union breached its duty of fair representation by
19

entering into a contract that was unfair to bus servers, the Board declined to accept the Executive Director’s
determination that part of the charge was untimely but found that the Executive Director correctly determined that the
Charging Party had raised no issues of fact or law requiring a hearing on the merits as to that contention.
08/13/19
ILRB SP
Timeliness/Breach of Duty of Fair Representation
In Vincent Clemens and Wauconda Professional Firefighters, International Association of Firefighters, Local 4876,
36 PERI ¶ 28 (IL LRB-SP) (Case No. S-CB-18-036), the Executive Director dismissed a charge that the Respondent
Union had engaged in unfair labor practices when it allegedly retaliated against the Charging Party by conspiring
with the Employer (Wauconda Fire Protection District) to defeat his disability claim before the local pension board
and by allegedly refusing to represent him in disciplinary matters. The Charging Party alleged that the Union engaged
in such conduct in retaliation for the Charging Party’s having supported another union during efforts to organize the
Employer’s fire captains and lieutenants. The Executive Director dismissed the charge on timeliness grounds and
determined that, even if the charge were timely, it failed to raise issues warranting a hearing. On appeal, the Board
affirmed the dismissal, finding the Executive Director correctly found the time period began to run on the date that
the Union filed its petition to intervene in the hearing, rather than on the date of the hearing itself. With respect to the
Charging Party’s assertion that the Union’s action was a continuing violation, the Board noted that the continuing
violation doctrine cannot make actionable alleged unlawful conduct occurring outside the limitations period. In regard
to the merits of the charge, the Board found the available evidence failed to indicate the existence of issues for a
hearing, noting that although the Charging Party alleged that the Union was motivated against him in light of his
having encouraged support of a rival union, nothing in the appeal or supporting materials indicated that the Union took
the allegedly adverse action because of this alleged animus.
08/16/19
Illinois Appellate Court, First District Rule 23 Unpublished Order Timeliness/Breach of Duty of Fair
Representation/Motion for Sanctions
In Carlo J. Carlotta v. Illinois Labor Relations Board, 2019 IL App (1st) 182002-U, the First District in an
unpublished order affirmed the Board’s decision in Illinois Council of Police (Carlotta), 35 PERI ¶ 38 (IL LRB-SP
2018) (Case No. S-CB-18-021) sustaining the dismissal of Carlotta’s charge alleging the Union engaged in intentional
misconduct by refusing to arbitrate a grievance over his termination from employment. The court affirmed the Board’s
finding that Carlotta’s appeal lacked merit and the Executive Director properly dismissed the charge.
10/9/19
ILRB SP
Executive Director’s Dismissal—Timeliness/Breach of Duty of Fair Representation/Motion for Sanctions
In Thomas Tate and Carmelita Terry and Illinois Municipal Police Association #1, 36 PERI ¶ 53 (IL LRB-SP 2019)
(Case No. S-CB-19-016), the Board affirmed the Executive Director’s dismissal of the charge alleging the union
breached its duty of fair representation when it withdrew and refused to settle grievances filed by the charging parties
over their failure to be promoted. The Executive Director dismissed the charge because the available evidence failed
to raise issues of fact or law for hearing. The charging parties appealed contending the Executive Director did not
consider their claim that the union refused to settle their promotion grievance not to discriminate against charging
parties but to work against them so that members of the union leadership would be promoted instead. The Board

20

found no evidence indicating misconduct on the part of the union. The Board also denied the union’s motion for
sanctions on procedural and substantive grounds.
11/18/2019
ILRB LP
Dismissal/Breach of Duty of Fair Representation/Discrimination/Grievance Handling/Fair Share Status
In Derek B. Webb and American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, Council 31, 36 PERI ¶ 71
(IL LRB-LP 2019) (Case No. L-CB-19-038), Charging Party alleged his Union engaged in unfair labor practices within
the meaning of Section 10(b) of the Act by failing to respond to Charging Party’s inquiries regarding three previously
filed grievances, refusing to file an unfair labor practice charge against his employer, the City of Chicago, and refusing
to file additional grievances on his behalf, to retaliate against Charging Party for urging conversion to fair share
membership instead of full-fledged membership with the Union. The Executive Director dismissed portions of the
charge on timeliness grounds and the remainder of the allegations on grounds the available evidence failed to raise an
issue of fact or law to warrant a hearing. Noting that under Board precedent a union is afforded substantial discretion
in deciding to pursue grievances unless the union is motivated by vindictiveness, discrimination, or enmity, the
Executive Director observed the Union provided evidence indicating it had “legitimate reasons” for the actions at issue
and concluded the available evidence failed to indicate a causal connection between Charging Party’s advocacy of fair
share status. On appeal, the Board affirmed the dismissal.
01/9/20
ILRB LP
Dismissal/Breach of Duty of Fair Representation/Grievance Handling
In Anthony Weeden and Service Employees International Union, Local 73, 36 PERI ¶ 99 (IL LRB-LP 2020) (Case
No. L-CB-19-052), Charging Party, an employee of Cook County Facilities Management who is represented by
Respondent, alleged Respondent engaged in unfair labor practices within the meaning of Section 10(b) of the Act
when it failed to advance Charging Party’s discharge grievance to arbitration. The Executive Director dismissed the
charge on grounds the record contained insufficient evidence of Respondent’s intentional misconduct as there was
scant evidence that Respondent was biased against or harbored any hostility toward Charging Party. Furthermore, the
Executive Director found Charging Party failed to establish the necessary causal connection between the alleged bias
and Respondent’s decision not to pursue the grievance. On appeal, the Board affirmed the dismissal. The Board
declined to consider Charging Party’s evidence of the Union’s alleged animosity because he failed to submit such
evidence during the investigation and then failed to include such materials along with his appeal, citing Sections
1220.40(a)(1) and 1200.135(a)(1) of the Board’s rules.
01/9/20
ILRB SP
Dismissal/Timeliness/Breach of Duty of Fair Representation
In Tonette Elder and American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, Council 31, 36 PERI ¶ 101
(IL LRB-SP 2020) (Case No. S-CB-19-028), the charge alleged the Union engaged in unfair labor practices when it
inadequately handled her discharge grievance due to the Union’s bias against her. The Executive Director dismissed
the charge as untimely and on grounds Charging Party failed to identify any Union bias, hostility or motive against
Charging Party when it failed to acknowledge or accept documentation of Charging Party’s promotion in handling her
discharge grievance. The Executive Director also determined Charging Party failed to raise an issue for hearing as to
Union’s abuse of its discretion in handling grievances. On appeal, the Board affirmed the dismissal for the reasons

21

cited by the Executive Director.
01/9/20
ILRB SP
Dismissal/Breach of Duty of Fair Representation/Dues Payment Status
In James Cochran and American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, Council 31, 36 PERI ¶ 102
(IL LRB-SP 2020) (Case No. S-CB-20-008), Charging Party alleged Respondent engaged in unfair labor practices
when it failed to timely pursue his grievance because he was not a dues-paying member of the Respondent. The
Executive Director dismissed the charge finding Charging Party failed to identify any evidence Respondent failed to
pursue his grievance to discriminate against him. The Executive Director noted Charging Party failed to submit
evidence Respondent processed dues-paying members’ grievances more efficiently than those of non-dues paying
members and that Charging Party advised Respondent that he did not want the grievance filed when Respondent’s
steward attempted to file the grievance within the contractual time period. On appeal, the Board affirmed the dismissal
for the reasons stated by the Executive Director, observing there was no material difference in the way the Executive
Director construed the basis of the charge—discrimination based on dues payment status—and Charging Party’s
contention that his charge is based on the failure to fairly represent him due to his “non-paying member” status or his
status as a “non-fair share paying member.”

IV.

Strike Investigations

7/10/19
ILRB SP
Strike Investigation
In QComm and American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, Council 31, 36 PERI ¶13 (IL LRBSP 2019) (Case No. S-SI-20-001), QComm filed a Petition for Strike Investigation with the State Panel pursuant to
Section 18 of the Act and Section 1230.190 of the Board's Rules and Regulations, 80 Ill. Admin. Code Sections 1200
through 1240 (Rules). QComm, an intergovernmental emergency dispatch center, claimed that a strike threatened by
AFSCME, Council 31, the exclusive representative of a bargaining unit composed of QComm employees performing
telecommunications duties, constituted a clear and present danger to the health and safety of the public. After an
investigation and expedited hearing, the Board found that a clear and present danger to the health and safety of the
public would exist if the employees who are responsible for 911 emergency dispatch duties and perform functions
that impact public health and safety engaged in a strike. The Board also found there were no available, adequate
substitutes for the employees at issue in the event of a strike and observed that the parties failed to present any adequate
compromise that would permit some dispatchers to strike while requiring other dispatchers to remain on the job.

22

General Counsel’s Declaratory Rulings
S-DR-19-002 City of Litchfield and Illinois Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council, 36 PERI ¶ 22 (IL LRB GC)
7/24/19
The Employer filed a unilateral petition seeking a declaratory ruling regarding whether the Union’s
proposals to include the Patrol Dispatcher position in the recognition clause of the parties’ collective
bargaining agreement and to maintain reference to the rank of “sergeant” in the collective bargaining
agreement provision pertaining to hours of work concerned permissive or mandatory subjects of
bargaining.
Noting dispatchers are not part of the bargaining unit certified by the Board, the General Counsel
determined the terms and conditions of employment of non-unit employees are not mandatory
subjects of bargaining unless those terms and conditions “vitally affect” the terms and conditions of
employment of unit employees. In addition, the General Counsel observed, the Union’s
“recommendation” could also be viewed as a proposal to change the scope of the unit, which is a
permissive subject of bargaining. Regarding the “sergeant” reference in the workday provision of
the collective bargaining agreement, the General Counsel determined that it was a mandatory subject
of bargaining because it concerned the hours of a unit employee.
L-DR-20-002 Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge #7 and City of Chicago (Police Department) Illinois Fraternal Order
of Police Labor Council, 37 PERI ¶ 47 (IL LRB GC) (October 16, 2020)
The Union filed a petition seeking a determination on whether the City’s proposal to exclude
terminations and early, low-level discipline from the grievance process and designate certain safetyrelated arbitration decisions as non-binding, concerned permissive subjects of bargaining. The General
Counsel declined to defer the petition to the interest arbitration process as urged by the City and found
the City’s proposal to exclude terminations and early, low-level discipline from the grievance process
to be permissive subjects of bargaining. The General Counsel also found the City’s proposal to
designate certain safety-related arbitration decisions as non-binding, to be a mandatory subject of
bargaining.
L-DR-21-001 Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge #7 and City of Chicago (Police Department) Illinois Fraternal Order
of Police Labor Council, 37 PERI ¶ 48 (IL LRB GC) (October 16, 2020)
The Petition sought a determination as to whether three proposals offered by the City concern
permissive or mandatory subjects of bargaining. The City had proposed to remove the requirement
that a complaint against an officer alleging non-criminal conduct be supported by a signed affidavit
and instead allow for anonymous complaints and to remove the requirement that officers be advised of
the identity of the complainants prior to officer interrogations/interviews. It also proposed to remove
the time limits on retentions of officers’ disciplinary record so that the City could retain them
indefinitely.
The General Counsel found the City’s proposals to eliminate the affidavit requirement for complaint
register investigations of non-criminal conduct and to eliminate the obligation to inform officers of the
complainant’s name prior to the investigation, to be permissive subjects of bargaining but found its
proposal for the indefinite retention of disciplinary records to be a mandatory subject.

23

L-DR-20-001 Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge #7 and City of Chicago (Police Department) Illinois Fraternal Order
of Police Labor Council, 37 PERI ¶ 65 (IL LRB GC) (October 30, 2020)
The Union filed a petition seeking a determination on whether its proposal to exclude terminations and
early, low-level discipline from the grievance process and designate certain safety-related arbitration
decisions as non-binding, concerned permissive subjects of bargaining. The General Counsel declined
to defer the petition to the interest arbitration process as urged by the City and found the City’s proposal
to exclude terminations and early, low-level discipline from the grievance process to be permissive
subjects of bargaining. The General Counsel also found the City’s proposal to designate certain safetyrelated arbitration decisions as non-binding, to be a mandatory subject of bargaining.

24

Interest Arbitration Awards
Following is a list of Interest Arbitration awards. For each award, the ILRB Case number, Arbitrator and date of
issuance are noted. The issues and whose proposals were adopted follows.
S-MA-18-341

Village of Oak Lawn and Oak Lawn Professional Firefighters, Local
3405, IAFF
Martin H. Malin, #733
1. Wages/Salaries
2. Benefit Freeze
3. Overtime, Overtime Distribution, Working Out of Classification
4. Minimum Staffing
5. General Principals
6. Retiree Medical Benefits
7. Residency
8. Paramedic Certification
9. Retroactivity

7/3/2019

S-MA-17-100

St. Clair County (CENCOM) and Illinois FOP Labor Council
Mark W. Suardi, #735
1. Duration - Union's proposal
2. Wage Increases - Union's proposal
3. Funeral Leave - Employer's proposal

9/6/2019

S-MA-18-226
FMCS #: 191019-00680

Village of Shiloh and Illinois FOP Labor Council
Jerome A. Diekemper, #736
1. Base pay - Village's proposal
2. Longevity step pay

10/1/2019

S-MA-19-005
Arb. Ref.: 19-262

County of McHenry and McHenry County Sheriff and Illinois FOP
Labor Council
Edwin H. Benn, #738
1. Duration
2. Insurance
3. Wages
4. Fair Share
5. Uniform language
6. Tentative agreements
7. Retroactivity

10/21/2019

S-MA-19-203

City of Litchfield and Illinois FOP Labor Council
Michael Wojcik, #739
1. Vacation Days - Union's offer
2. Sick Days Accumulation - Employer's offer
3. Personal Leave Days - Employer's offer
4. Wages - Employer's offer
5. Take-Home Cars - Employer's offer

1/6/2020

25

S-MA-18-084

County of McLean and Sheriff of McLean County and Illinois FOP
Labor Council
James A. Murphy, #740
1. Wages - Employer's final offer
2. Demotions - Union's final offer as amended
3. Drug Testing - Union's final offer
4. Sick Leave - Employer's final offer

2/14/2020

S-MA-18-326

City of Springfield and Policemen's Benevolent and Protective
Association, Unit #5
Brian E. Reynolds, #741
1. Residency - Union's final offer
2. Wages - City's final offer
3. Sick Bonus Day Usage - Union's final offer

2/24/2020

S-MA-19-007
FMCS #: 190521-07339

County of Williamson and Williamson County Sheriff and Illinois
FOP Labor Council
Jerome A. Diekemper, #743
1. Wages - Union's proposal
2. Tentative agreements
3. Economic Terms retroactive to 12/1/2018

4/3/2020

S-MA-19-227

City of Wood River and United Steelworkers Local 9189
Peter R. Meyers, #742
1. Vacation Buy-Back/Carryover - Union's proposal
2. Treatment of Workers Compensation Leave for Purposes of
Premium Pay - Union's proposal
3. Sick Leave Buy-Back - Union's proposal
4. Work Schedule - Employers Proposal

4/16/2020

S-MA-18-345
S-MA-18-346
FMCS #: 190813-10014

County of Shelby and Sheriff of Shelby County and Illinois FOP
Labor Council
Gregory P. Szuter, #745
1. Base pay, Unit A - Employers final proposal
2. Base pay, Unit B - Union's final proposal
3. Insurance premium - Union's final proposal

5/11/2020

S-MA-19-194

City of Highland and Illinois FOP Labor Council
Matthew W. Finkin, #744
Wages – City’s offer

5/14/2020

S-MA-19-227
Supplemental

United Steelworkers Local 9189 and City of Wood River
Peter R. Meyers, #746
Insurance, Spouse Rule

6/22/2020

26

S-MA-19-220

City of Sycamore and Illinois FOP Labor Council
Edwin H. Benn, #747
1. Duration
2. Wages
. Insurance
4. Reopener
5. Clothing allowance and equipment
6. Tentative Agreements
7. Maintenance of Positions
8. Retention of Jurisdiction

6/22/2020

L-MA-12-006

City of Chicago (Police Department) and Policemen's Benevolent and
Protective Association, Unit 156B
George T. Roumell, #751

6/26/2020

27

Caseload Statistics
STATE PANEL LOCAL PANEL
Unfair Labor Practice Charges
CA
CB

TOTAL

Total

136
30
166

48
31
79

184
61
245

Total

0
63
8
67
1
17
156

0
20
0
5
0
0
25

0
83
8
72
1
17
181

Total

9
269
278

0
4
4

9
273
282

Declaratory Rulings

0

2

2

Strike Investigations

1

0

1

601

110

711

Representation Cases
AC
RC
RD
UC
VR
DD
Grievance Arbitration Cases
Mediation/Arbitration Cases

Total Caseload

CA
CB
AC
RC
RM
RD
UC
VR
DD
DR

-

Unfair Labor Practice Charge Against Employer
Unfair Labor Practice Charge Against Labor Organization
Petition to Amend Certification
Representation/Certification Petition
Employer Representation Petition
Decertification Petition
Unit Clarification Petition
Petition for Voluntary Recognition Certification
Declaration of Disinterest Petition
Declaratory Rulings

28

Representation Cases Certified
STATE
PANEL

LOCAL
PANEL

TOTAL

Labor Organization Prevailed
“No Representation” Prevailed
Cases Certified

16
2
18

0
0
0

16
2
18

Number of Units Certified (Majority Interest)

34

23

57

Voluntary Recognized Representatives

1

0

1

Revocation of Prior Certifications

17

0

17

Unfair Labor Practice Charges Workload
2020

Cases pending start of fiscal year

2019
396

Charges filed during fiscal year

355

245

Total caseload

751

611

Total cases closed

385

255

366

Petition Management (Representation) Workload
Petitions pending start of fiscal year

2019
96

2020

Petitions filed during fiscal year

316

181

Total caseload

412

393

Total cases closed

200

340

29

212

Case Actions in FY 2020
STATE
PANEL

LOCAL
PANEL

TOTAL

8
4
3
15

9
3
2
14

17
7
5
29

(B) With no exceptions filed
CA
CB
RC
UC
Total

8
1
1
0
10

4
1
10
6
21

12
2
11
6
31

(C) Strike Investigations

1

0

1

(D) Declaratory Ruling

1

0

1

II. ADMINISTRATIVE DISMISSALS
(Not appealed to the Board)
CA
CB
RC
Total

35
23
0
58

40
34
1
75

75
57
1
133

III. CERTIFIED
AC
DD
RC/RM/RD
UC
VR
Total

0
16
52
67
1
136

0
0
23
5
0
28

0
16
75
72
1
164

IV. WITHDRAWALS
CA
CB
RC
RD
UC
Total

95
10
11
6
154
276

22
5
1
0
0
28

117
15
12
6
154
304

I. BOARD DECISIONS
(A) With exceptions filed
CA
CB
RC
Total

30

Certifications of Representative

se Name

Labor
Organization

Date
Certified

Prevailing
Party

# of
Employees

Unit
Description

City of Chicago

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

7/3/2019

AFSCME

12

Add to
Bargaining Unit #1
Program Development
Coordinator
Code 3899

S-RC-19-055

Illinois Secretary of
State

Illinois FOP Labor
Council and
Policemen’s
Benevolent Labor
Committee

7/12/2019

FOP

41

All police officers in
the following
classification:
Capitol Police
Investigator

S-RC-19-056

Illinois Secretary of
State

Policemen’s
Benevolent Labor
Committee and Int’l
Brotherhood of
Teamsters, Local 700

7/12/2019

PBLC

11

All employees in the
Department of Police in
the following
classification:
Investigator-Sergeant

S-RC-19-066

Majority Interest

Village of Schiller
Park (Fire
Department)

Associated Firefighters
of Illinois, AFFI-IAFF

8/1/2019

AFFI

22

All full-time employees
in the following titles:
Firefighter Paramedic;
Lieutenant Paramedic

S-RC-20-001

Village of Crestwood

Illinois Council of
Police

8/1/2019

ICOP

53

All part-time police
officers

S-RC-20-002

Bureau County
Emergency
Telephone System
Board (BuComm)

Illinois FOP Labor
Council

8/13/2019

FOP

10

All full-time and parttime employees in the
following titles:
Telecommunicator;
Lead
Telecommunicator

L-RC-18-021

Chicago Transit
Authority

Int’l Brotherhood of
Teamsters, Local 700

8/14/2019

Teamsters

7

All full-time employees
of the Capital
Construction Division,
in the following
classification:
Project ManagerConstruction

L-RC-19-003

City of Chicago
(Police Department)

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees
Council 31

8/14/2019

AFSCME

11

Add to
Bargaining Unit #3
Criminal Intelligence
Analyst
(Code 9117)

Case No.

Employer

L-RC-19-034

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

31

S-RC-19-063

Village of Rochester

Int’l Union of
Operating Engineers,
Local 965

8/21/2019

IUOE

1

Add to S-RC-19-038
Part-time Seasonal
Mower

S-RC-20-007

City of Bunker Hill

Laborers Int’l Union of
North America, Local
338

8/22/2019

Laborers

6

All full-time and
regular part-time
employees in the
following titles:
Police Officer;
Chief of Police; Water
Clerk;
Deputy Clerk

S-RC-20-011

City of Springfield

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees
Council 31

9/4/2019

AFSCME

3

Add to
S-UC-17-082
Building Permit
Assistant

S-RC-19-065

Village of Glenview

Metropolitan Alliance
of Police, Glenview
Police Officer Chapter
156 and Illinois FOP
Labor Council

9/6/2019

MAP

50

All full-time sworn
police officers below
the rank of sergeant

S-RC-20-005

City of Nashville

International Union of
Operating Engineers,
Local 148

9/11/2019

IUOE

31

All full-time
maintenance and
administrative
employees in the
following departments
and titles:
Gas: Foreman, Laborer;
Golf: Greenskeeper;
Office: Administrative
Assistant, Billing Clerk,
Bookkeeper;
Sewer: Chief Operator,
Laborer;
Street: Crew Leader,
Foreman, Laborer;
Water: Laborer,
Operator

S-RC-20-013

City of Bunker Hill

International Union of
Operating Engineers,
Local 520

9/11/2019

IUOE

4

All municipality
workers in the Street,
Sewer, Water and Park
Departments

L-RC-19-006

City of Chicago

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

9/13/2019

AFSCME

11

Add to AFSCME
Bargaining Unit #1
Business Consultant,
Code 0350;
Senior Business
Consultant
Code 0351

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

32

S-RC-20-010

Majority Interest

Chief Judge of the
Circuit Court of Cook
County

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

9/16/2019

AFSCME

5

Add to existing
S-RC-19-050
Administrative Analyst
I
(Juvenile Temporary
Detention Center);
Exclude from
S-RC-19-050
PREA Coordinator/
Administrative Analyst
I/
Hearing Officer

L-RC-20-001

County of Cook

Service Employees
Int’l Union, Local 73

9/19/2019

SEIU

6

Add to
L-RC-07-018
Contract Negotiator
(Purchasing
Department)

L-RC-20-004

City of Chicago

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

9/26/2019

AFSCME

2

Add to existing
Bargaining Unit #4
Senior Information
Analyst (Civilian Office
of Police
Accountability).

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Exclude for existing
Bargaining Unit #4
Senior Information
Analyst
(Department of
Innovation and
Technology)
S-RC-19-062

County of Lake and
Sheriff of Lake
County

Illinois FOP Labor
Council and Teamsters
Local 700

9/27/2019

Teamsters

191

Corrections Officer,
Corrections
Officer/Maintenance;
Correctional Support;
Jail Receptionist;
Resident Field
Coordinator

L-RC-20-005

County of Cook

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

10/3/2019

AFSCME

7

Add to existing
L-RC-10-005
Regional Coordinator,
Training & Exercise
Coordinator
(Homeland Security
and Emergency
Management)

L-RC-20-006

County of Cook,
Health and Hospital
System

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

10/3/2019

AFSCME

2

Add to existing
Heath Facilities Unit
Patient Concierge
(Public Health)

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

33

S-RC-10-015

Town of Cicero
(Water Department)

Laborers’ Local 1092

10/3/2019

Laborers’

23

All full-time and parttime non-professional
employees in the
following titles:
Inspector; Laborer;
Meter Reader; Sewer
Rodder; Station
Attendant; Vac Truck
Operator; Water
Sampler

S-RC-20-009

McHenry County
Circuit Clerk

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31 and
Metropolitan Alliance
of Police, McHenry
County Circuit Clerk’s
Chapter 515

10/15/2019

AFSCME

45

Accounting
Coordinator;
Accounting Specialist
II; Court/Courtroom
Specialist I;
Court/Courtroom
Specialist I-Senior;
Court/Courtroom
Specialist II;
Court/Courtroom
Specialist III; Lead
Court/Courtroom
Specialist

S-RC-20-019

Saline County State’s
Attorney

Laborers Int’l Union of
North American, Local
773

10/15/2019

Laborers

3

Saline County Assistant
State’s Attorney

L-RC-20-008

County of Cook and
Sheriff of Cook
County

Service Employees
Int’l Union, Local 73

10/23/2019

SEIU

2

Add to existing
L-RC-16-003 unit
Quality Review
Assistant-Records

S-RC-20-021

Homewood
Flossmoor Park
District

Int’l Union of
Operating Engineers,
Local 399

10/23/2019

IUOE

5

Building and Facility
Technician

L-RC-20-007

Chicago Transit
Authority

Int’l Association of
Machinists and
Aerospace Workers,
District Lodge 8

11/5/2019

IAMAW

12

Add to existing
L-RC-14-008
Coordinator, Quality
Improvement-Bus;
Coordinator, Quality
Improvement-Facilities;
Coordinator, Quality
Improvement-Rail;
Project Coordinator,
GIS; Coordinator,
Engineering-Project
Planning

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

34

L-RC-20-011

County of Cook,
Health & Hospital
System

Service Employees
Int’l Union, Local 73

11/7/2019

SEIU

40

Add to existing
L-UC-17-007
Care Coordinator –
Brain Injury;
Care Coordinator –
Elderly;
Care Coordinator –
Social Worker;
Care Coordinator –
Disability

L-RC-18-024

Majority Interest

County of Cook,
Health & Hospital
System

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

11/20/2019

AFSCME

7

Add to existing Health
Facilities unit
Patient Access Quality
Management
Coordinator; Cashier
Division Supervisor II

L-RC-19-017

City of Chicago

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

11/20/2019

AFSCME

1

Add to existing
Bargaining Unit #1
Administrative Services
Officer IExcluded, Code 1303
(Family & Support
Services)

S-RC-20-023

City of Waukegan

Int’l Union of
Operating Engineers,
Local 150

11/20/2019

IUOE

1

Add to existing
S-RC-12-033
Parking Supervisor

S-RC-20-024

County of Brown
(Highway
Department)

Int’l Brotherhood of
Teamsters, Local 916

11/20/2019

Teamsters

5

Operator,
Highway Maintenance
Foreman/Assistant
County Engineer

S-RC-20-025

Town of Cicero
(Health Department)

Teamsters, Local 705

11/20/2019

Teamsters

3

Health Inspector

S-RC-20-027

County of Pike
(Pike County
Ambulance Service)

Int’l Association of
Machinists and
Aerospace Workers,
District Lodge 9

11/20/2019

IAMAW

12

Emergency Medical
Technician (EMT),
Paramedic

L-RC-20-010

Majority Interest

County of Cook and
Sheriff of Cook
County

Service Employees
Int’l Union, Local 73

11/21/2019

SEIU

1

Add to existing
L-RC-20-008
Administrative Support
IV

S-RD-20-005

City of Springfield

Elaine S. Urekar and
Int’l Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers,
Local 193

12/4/2019

No Rep

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

35

S-RC-20-020

County of Kane and
Sheriff of Kane
County

Int’l Brotherhood of
Teamsters, Local 700
and Policemen’s
Benevolent Labor
Committee

12/6/2019

Teamsters

36

Court Security Officer

S-RC-20-016

County of Livingston
and Sheriff of
Livingston County

Illinois Council of
Police and Illinois FOP
Labor Council

12/11/2019

FOP
(Incumbent)

35

All sworn, full-time
correctional officers in
the rank of lieutenant
and below, all sworn,
full-time court security
officers, and all fulltime secretaries and any
full-time office
manager

S-RC-19-018

County of Clinton
(Highway
Department)

Laborers’ Int’l Union
of North America,
Local 773

12/12/2019

Laborers

2

All full-time and parttime employees in the
title of
Engineer Technician

L-RC-18-030

County of Cook
(Cook County Public
Defender)

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

12/17/2019

AFSCME

2

Add to L-RC-18-030
Mitigation Specialist

S-RC-20-031

Majority Interest

Village of Stone Park
(Fire Department)

Int’l Brotherhood of
Teamsters, Local 700

1/2/2020

Teamsters

13

All Firefighters and
Firefighter/Paramedics

L-RC-20-002

City of Chicago

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

1/10/2020

AFSCME

1

Add to AFSCME
Bargaining Unit #1
Administrative Services
Officer II
(Family & Support
Services)
Code 1310

S-RC-20-029

Springfield Mass
Transit District d/b/a
Sangamon Mass
Transit District

Amalgamated Transit
Union, Local 1249

1/16/2020

AFSCME

8

Add to S-RC-19-035
Dispatcher

L-RC-20-012

County of Cook,
Cook County Public
Defender

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

1/21/2020

AFSCME

1

Include in S-UC-(S)18-005
Administrative
Assistant IV

S-RC-20-033

Village of Harwood
Heights

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

1/21/2020

AFSCME

1

Include in S-RC-20-033
Community Service
Officer in the Police
Department

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

36

S-RC-20-008

Franklin-Williamson
Bi-County Health
Department

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

1/21/2020

AFSCME

12

Non-Professional
Employees
Billing Clerk;
Front Desk Clerk;
H.H. Aide/Billing
Clerk;
Home Health Clerk;
Peer Counselor;
Public Health Clerk;
WIC Clerk;
WIC Clerk/Front Desk
Clerk

S-RC-20-008

Majority Interest

Franklin-Williamson
Bi-County Health
Department

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

1/21/2020

AFSCME

18

Professional
Employees:
Director of Emergency
Preparedness;
Director of Health
Education;
Director of Home
Health;
Home Health Nurse
MCH Nurse;
MCH/Public Health
Nurse;
Nursing Supervisor;
Public Health Nurse;
Sanitarian;
Supervisor of
Environmental Health;
Supervisor of Home
Health

L-RC-20-013

City of Chicago

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

1/23/2020

AFSCME

2

Add to Bargaining Unit
#4
Digital Media
Coordinator; GIS
Manager

S-RC-20-004

County of Clinton and
State’s Attorney,
Clerk/Recorder,
Treasurer and
Supervisor of
Assessments

Policemen’s
Benevolent Labor
Committee

1/23/2020

PBLC

1

Add to S-RC-18-014
Highway Office
Manager

S-RC-20-022

State of Illinois,
Department of Central
Management Services
(Corrections)

Illinois State
Employees
Association, Laborers
Int’l Union, Local 2002

1/28/2020

Local 2002

5

Include in VR-207
Corrections Treatment
Senior Security
Supervisor
Code 09867

S-RC-20-034

City of Waukegan
(Public Works)

Int’l Union of
Operating Engineers,
Local 150

1/29/2020

IUOE

1

Add to S-RC-12-033
Animal Control
Coordinator

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

37

S-RC-20-037

Village of Stone Park
(Fire Department)

Int’l Brotherhood of
Teamsters, Local 700

1/29/2020

Teamsters

3

All Lieutenant
Firefighters and
Lieutenant Firefighter/
Paramedics

S-RC-20-039

Village of Winnetka
(Public Works)

Int’l Union of
Operating Engineers,
Local 150

1/31/2020

IUOE

21

All regular full-time
employees in the
classifications of Fleet
Mechanic, Refuse
Collector and
Maintenance Worker

S-RC-20-040

Bloomingdale
Township Highway
Department a/k/a
Bloomingdale
Township Road
District

Int’l Union of
Operating Engineers,
Local 399

2/7/2020

IUOE

6

All full-time and
regular part-time
Laborers

S-RC-20-41

Village of Cobden

Laborers Int’l Union of
North America,
Local 773

2/18/2020

Laborers

3

All full-time Police
Officers

S-RC-20-046

Village of
Williamsville

Illinois FOP Labor
Council

2/26/2020

FOP

3

All full-time sworn
police officers

S-RC-20-035

Governors State
University
(Police Department)

Metropolitan Alliance
of Police, Governors
State University Police
Chapter #717 and
Illinois FOP Labor
Council

3/11/2020

MAP

12

All University Civil
Service Employees in
the classification of
Police Officer, Sergeant
and Police
Telecommunicator

S-RD-20-007

City of Collinsville

Amanda Guntrum and
Int’l Union of
Operating Engineers,
Local 148B

3/11/2020

No Rep

9

S-RC-19-058

Village of Wauconda

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

3/23/2020

AFSCME

1

Add to S-UC-10-021
Executive
Administrative
Assistant

L-RC-19-023

City of Chicago

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

3/23/2020

AFSCME

2

Add to
Bargaining Unit #1
Assistant Payroll
Administrator
Code 0114

S-RC-20-042

Town of Cicero

Illinois FOP Labor
Council

4/15/2020

FOP

14

Detention Officer
(Lock Up Keeper);
Parking Enforcement
Officer; Parking
Enforcement
Supervisor

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

38

S-RC-20-051

County of Will and
Sheriff of Will
County

Illinois FOP Labor
Council

4/15/2020

FOP

5

Court Security Officers

S-RC-20-054

Danville Public
Building Commission
(Vermillion County
Emergency
Communications
Center)

Communication
Workers of America

4/17/2020

CWA

11

Full and part-time
Public Service
Telecommunicators

L-RC-20-019

City of Chicago

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

4/15/2020

AFSCME

1

Add to
Bargaining Unit #4
Digital Asset
Coordinator

S-RC-20-043

Village of Crete

Illinois FOP Labor
Council and
Metropolitan Alliance
of Police, Chapter #36

4/23/2020

FOP

12

All full-time patrol
officers

S-RC-20-014

State of Illinois,
Department of State
Police

Int’l Brotherhood of
Teamsters, Local 700
and Troopers Lodge
No. 41, Fraternal Order
of Police

4/29/2020

Troopers
(Incumbent)

105

SUPERVISORY
UNIT:
All sworn peace
officers with the State
Police Merit Board rank
of Captain and
Lieutenant.

S-RC-20-044

City of Hickory Hills

Illinois FOP Labor
Council and
Metropolitan Alliance
of Police, Chapter #246

4/29/2020

FOP

19

All full-time patrol
officers

S-RC-20-047

Village of Broadview

Illinois Council of
Police and Illinois FOP
Labor Council

4/29/2020

ICOP

5

All full-time employees
in the classification of
Telecommunicator

S-RC-20-048

Village of Midlothian

Illinois Council of
Police and Int’l
Brotherhood of
Teamsters, Local 700

5/15/2020

ICOP

22

All full-time sworn
peace officers in the
titles of police officer
and detective

S-RC-20-050

City of Braidwood

5/15/2020

PBLC

13

All sworn full-time and
part-time patrol officers
below the rank of
Sergeant

L-RC-20-018

City of Chicago

Policemen’s
Benevolent Labor
Committee and Int’l
Brotherhood of
Teamsters, Local 700
American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

5/19/2020

AFSCME

1

Add to
Bargaining Unit #3
Health and Safety
Analyst

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

39

L-RC-20-017

County of Cook

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

5/21/2020

AFSCME

1

Add to L-RC-20-017
CI Manager
(EMHS Homeland
Security Department)

S-RC-20-059

Village of Mundelein

Mundelein Firefighters,
IAFF Local 4786

5/29/2020

IAFF

6

All full-time sworn fire
department employees
in the following ranks
or titles:
Firefighter/Paramedic;
Lieutenant/Paramedic.

S-RC-20-057

Majority Interest

Dundee Township
Highway Department

Int’l Brotherhood of
Teamsters, Local #330

6/15/2020

Teamsters

6

All full-time and
regular part-time
Highway Maintenance
Operators, Mechanics,
Foreman and office
clerical employees

L-RC-19-035

City of Chicago

American Federation
of State, County and
Municipal Employees,
Council 31

6/23/2020

AFSCME

1

Add to
Bargaining Unit #1
Staff Assistant
(Business Affairs and
Consumer Protection)

S-RC-20-049

City of Wood Dale

Metropolitan Alliance
of Police, Chapter #339
and Int’l Brotherhood
of Teamsters Local 700

6/25/2020

MAP

26

All full-time sworn
peace officers, assistant
watch commanders and
detectives below the
rank of sergeant

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Majority Interest

Certification of Voluntarily Recognized Representative
Case No.

Employer

Labor
Organization

Certification
Date

Unit
Description

S-VR-20-001

County of LaSalle
(Highway Department)

Laborers Int’l Union of North
American, Local 393

9/30/2019

Area Foreman; Civil Engineer I, II, III,
IV; Engineering Technician I, II, III, IV;
Maintenance Supervisor

40

Revocation of Prior Certifications
Date
Revocation

Unit4/
Description

Int’l Union of Operating
Engineers, Local 150

7/25/2019

All full-time police officers in the rank
of patrolman; all full-time police
officers in the rank of sergeant

St. Clair County Public
Building Commission

Laborers Int’l Union of North
American, Local 459

9/17/2019

All regular and full-time employees in
the following titles: Crew Leader;
Building Maintenance Worker; Painter;
Carpenter; Grounds Worker; Utility
Worker; Shift Operator; Switchboard
Operator; Parking Garage Attendant

S-DD-20-003

Adams County Circuit
Clerk

Int’l Association of Machinists
and Aerospace Workers, Local
822

9/30/2019

All employees employed by the Adams
County Circuit Clerk in the titles of
Administrative Assistant and Chief
Deputy

S-DD-20-004

County of Adams

Int’l Association of Machinists
and Aerospace Workers, Local
822

9/30/2019

All regular full-time and part-time
employees employed at the Adams
County Clerk's office in the following
title: Deputy Clerk; Deputy Clerk/Real
Estate Tax Specialist

S-DD-20-005

Village of Broadview
(Department of Public
Works and Building
Department)

Service Employees Int’l Union,
Local 73

11/26/2019

All full-time and part-time employees
of the Village of Broadview in its
Department of Public Works and
Building Department in the following
classifications: Artisan 3; Artisan 4;
Building Inspector; Building
Department Foreman; Laborer 1;
Mechanic; Public Works Foreman

S-DD-20-006

County of McHenry
(Valley Hi Nursing and
Rehabilitation)

Service Employees Int’l Union,
Local 73

12/9/2019

All full-time and part-time employees
of the County of McHenry, Valley Hi
Nursing and Rehabilitation, in the
following classifications: Activity
Assistant; Administrative Specialist I;
Admissions Coordinator; Certified
Nursing Assistant I; Certified Nursing
Assistant II; Cook; Custodian; Food
Service Assistant; Food Service
Worker; Front Desk Associate;
Housekeeper; Laundry Worker;
Medical Records Coordinator; NonCertified Nursing Assistant; Office
Assistant I; Pool Certified Nursing
Assistant; Psych-Social Aide

S-DD-20-007

County of McHenry
(Valley Hi Nursing and
Rehabilitation)

Service Employees Int’l Union,
Local 73

12/9/2019

All regular full-time and part-time
employees of the County of McHenry,
Valley Hi Nursing and Rehabilitation,

Case No.

Employer

S-DD-20-001

City of Aledo
(Police Department)

S-DD-20-002

Labor
Organization

41

in the following titles: Registered
Nurse; Licensed Practical Nurse
S-DD-20-008

City of Aledo

Int’l Union of Operating
Engineers, Local 150

1/31/2019

All full-time and regular part-time
employees in the following
classifications: Cemetery Sexton; Gas
Division Worker; Street Maintenance
Worker; Water/Wastewater Worker

S-DD-20-009

City of Countryside

Int’l Union of Operating
Engineers, Local 150

2/5/2020

All employees in the Administrative
Office in the following titles:
Accountant; Clerk; Senior Clerk; Code
Enforcement Officer; Office Clerk
(part-time); Property Licensing and
Inspection Officer

S-DD-20-010

Town of Cicero

Service Employees Int’l Union,
Local 73

3/5/2020

All employees of the Town of Cicero in
the following titles: Detention Officer
(Lock Up Keeper); Parking
Enforcement Officer; Parking
Enforcement Supervisor.

S-DD-20-011

City of Braidwood

Service Employees Int’l Union,
Local 73

3/12/2020

All Clerks in Accounting Department,
Records Clerk in Police Department,
Water Clerk, Zoning Clerks, Public
Works Supervisor, Deputy Clerk, Police
Civilian Supervisor, Communications
Director, Dispatch Supervisor, Office
Manager

S-DD-20-012

Village of Jerome

Illinois Fraternal Order of Police
Labor Council

4/29/2020

All full time sworn police office in the
classifications or ranks of Patrolman
and Corporal

S-DD-20-015

City of Quincy
(Fire Department)

District Lodge 9, Int’l
Association of Machinists and
Aerospace Workers

5/6/2020

All full-time and regular part-time
employees of the City’s Fire
Department in the following title:
Assistant Fire Chief

S-DD-20-016

Village of Hudson

Illinois Council of Police

5/12/2020

All part-time sworn peace officers in
the classification or rank of patrol
officer

S-DD-20-017

Village of Lisle

International Union of Operating
Engineers, Local 150

6/17/2020

All full-time and regular part-time
employees holding the positions of
Public Works Person and Senior Public
Works Person

42

Illinois Labor Relations Board
Organizational Chart
Joint Panel
State Panel

Chairman
William E. Lowry, Jr.

William E. Lowry, Jr., Chairman
Kendra S. Cunningham, Member
Jose L. Gudino, Member
John S. Cronin, Member
Thomas Willis, Member

Executive Director
Kimberly F. Stevens

Local Panel
Robert M. Gierut, Chairman
Charles E. Anderson, Member
Angela C. Thomas, Member

General Counsel
Helen J. Kim

Investigator
Olivia L. Campbell

Chief Fiscal Officer
Aaron M. Itulya

Associate General Counsel
Anna Hamburg-Gal

Investigator
Tiara L. Mackins

Personnel Officer
Carla Stone

Administrative Law Judge
Matthew S. Nagy

Information Tech Officer
Jodi M. Marr

Administrative Law Judge
Sharon A. Purcell

Case Manager
Richard C. Huffines

Administrative Law Judge
Michelle N. Owen

Administrative Law Judge
Donald W. Anderson

CHICAGO OFFICE
160 North LaSalle Street
Suite S-400
Chicago, IL 60601
312-793-6400

SPRINGFIELD OFFICE
801 South 7th Street
Suite 1200A
Springfield, IL 62703
217-785-3155

WEBSITE

www.illinois.gov/ilrb

Printed by Authority of the State of Illinois
October 2021
