ILLINOIS STATE LABOR RELATIONS BOARD
INTEREST ARBITRATION
__________________________
In the Matter of the Arbitration

Before

between

HARVEY A. NATHAN,
Sole Arbitrator

VILLAGE OF LIBERTYVILLE, IL.
AND
LIBERTYVILLE PROFESSIONAL
FIREFIGHTERS ASSOCIATION,
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF FIRE FIGHTERS, LOCAL 3892
Hearing Held:

ISLRB No. S-MA-03-215

April 26, June 28, July 22, 2004 (Mediation Sessions)
September 30, October 1, November 4, 17, 30,
December 1,2004,
January14, 17, 18, 26,
February 23, 2005, March 7, 2005 (Executive Session)

Final Offers Exchanged:

March 2, 2005

Briefs Exchanged:

July 29, 2005

For the Employer:

Terrence T. Creamer
Kyle B. Johansen
Franczek Sullivan P.C.

For the Union:

O P I N I O N

J. Dale Berry,
Cornfield and Feldman
A N D
1

A W A R D

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. Introduction

Page 3

II. Statutory Requirements

6

III. The Issues

7

IV. Discussion of the Issues

10

A. Economic Issues

10

1. Wages

10

2. Pay Day

17

3. Assignment of Overtime Work

19

4. Hireback

33

5. Layoff and Recall

43

6. Personal Leave Days

48

7. Retroactivity

52

B. Non-Economic Issues
1. Duties

55

2. Assignments and Transfers

59

3. Duty Trades

64

4. Residency

73

5. Promotion Re-opener

76

Award

79
? 2?

I. INTRODUCTION

This is an interest arbitration proceeding held pursuant to Section 14 of the Illinois
Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILL 315/14), hereinafter referred to as the "Act," and the Rules
and Regulations of the Illinois Labor Relations Board ("Board"). The parties are Village of
Libertyville, IL (“Employer" or “Village”) and International Association of Fire Fighters, Local
3892 (“Union”).
The Village of Libertyville is a nine square mile non-home rule municipality located in
Lake County, approximately 37 miles north of downtown Chicago. It has a population of
almost 21,000 and was incorporated in 1882. Its governing organization consists of a Village
president and six Trustees. A Village Administrator and Assistant Administrator oversee the
day-to-day operations. The Village employs 183 people within several departments, most of
which are unorganized (unrepresented by a labor organization). The police department is
represented by Lodge 33 of the Illinois Fraternal Order of Police. The fire department is the
other organized department.
The Village maintains three fire stations, one of which is located within the
Libertyville Township Fire Protection District in Lake Bluff, Illinois (“FPD”).1 The Village
provides fire fighting and ambulance services to the FPD pursuant to a long-standing
contractual arrangement. The system is integrated so that all stations service the two
1

The FPD was organized to provide fire protection services to unincorporated areas of
? 3?

jurisdictions and employees assigned to one station may be temporarily assigned to one of the
other stations. However, nine firefighters, most of the employees assigned to station 3, are
actually supplied by an independent contractor, Paramedic Services of Illinois (“PSI”).2 In
other words, the Fire Protection District functions merely as a taxing conduit because it
contracts with the Village to provide the services the FPD was created for, and the Village
then contracts out most of that work to a private company. The commanding officer for
station 3, the FPD station, is a paid-on-call “lieutenant”moonlighting from his regular job as
an assistant chief of another municipality.
The fire department employs one chief, four assistant chiefs, eight lieutenants, and 19
firefighter/paramedics as regular employees. The department also utilizes a number of paidon-call (“POC”) employees as a regular part of the workforce (in addition to the nine PSI
firefighters.)3 The department’
s budget for 2004-2005 was approximately $4.4 million, of
which nearly $2 million was funded through the Village’
s agreement with the FPD.4
The Union was certified as the bargaining agent for all regularly employed
Libertyville Township which includes portions of the Abbott Laboratories complex.
The PSI firefighters are not hired pursuant to the merit procedures established by the
Libertyville Police and Fire Commission, which otherwise sets the standards and administers the
hiring of regular firefighters.
2

As with the PSI personnel, POC firefighters have not gone through the employment process
administered by the Fire and Police Commission although they otherwise meet the minimum
requirements for certification by the State of Illinois.
3

The Village does not make an inability to pay argument in this case. The Village has, and
the arbitrator so finds, the resources to pay any of the proposals in this arbitration.
4

? 4?

firefighter/paramedics on March 8, 1999, following a difficult organizational campaign marked
by many inappropriate comments from management and the settlement of an unfair labor
practice complaint.5 Following certification the parties engaged in extensive collective
bargaining over a two year period which ended with an interest arbitration proceeding before
Arbitrator Robert Perkovich. During the pendency of that arbitration the parties reached a
settlement and their first contract was signed on July 10, 2001. During the term of that
agreement, which expired on April 30, 2003, the parties experienced numerous grievances,
several of which went to arbitration, and a high turnover of employees.6
The parties began negotiations for their second agreement on March 6, 2003. They
had several bargaining sessions including some before a federal mediator. The arbitrator was
notified of his appointment to this case on December 23, 2003. Thereafter three mediation

The Village argues that misconduct which occurred several years ago during the
organizational campaign is ancient history and should not be a consideration in this case.
Unfortunately, the evidence of record indicates continuing hostility toward those firefighters who
actively supported the Union and an atmosphere of harassment and tension in the workplace which
are, to this observer, clearly related to the issues in this case. The briefs by both sides address the
issues in terms of the personalities and the operational difficulties caused by these personalities. It is
disingenuous for the Village to argue on the one hand that the difficulties surrounding the Union’
s
emergence are stale and on the other hand focus as it does on the personalities of the Union
leadership and the troubles they have fostered. Each arbitration case must be considered within the
context of the unique relationship which the parties have created. Will County Board/Sheriff of Will
County and AFSCME Council 31, Local 2961, S-MA-88-09 (Nathan, 1988). In this case the
bargaining history, including hostility between the parties emanating from the Union’
s organization is
a critical factor. Village of Oak Park and International Association of Fire Fighters, Local No. 95, S-MA03-104 (Dichter, 2004).
5

The department has had an almost 100% turnover since the Union was certified, mostly
through resignations.
6

? 5?

sessions were held and a number of outstanding issues were resolved. The arbitration hearing
was formally convened on September 30, 2004.7
The parties further agreed that for the purposes of this arbitration the comparable
communities pursuant to Sec. 14(h)(4) of the Act are:
Bensenville
Buffalo Grove
Gurnee
Lake Zurich
Morton Grove

Northbrook
Rolling Meadows
St. Charles
Villa Park
Wheeling

II. STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS
Section 14(h) of the Act provides that the arbitration panel shall base its
findings, opinions and order upon the following factors, as applicable:
"(1) The lawful authority of the employer.
"(2) Stipulations of the parties.
"(3) The interests and welfare of the public and the financial ability of the unit of
government to meet those costs.
"(4) Comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of employment of the employees
involved in the arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours and conditions of
employment of other employees performing similar services and with other employees
generally:
"(A) In public employment in comparable communities.
"(B) In private employment in comparable communities.

At the commencement of the hearing the parties stipulated to several ground rules,
including: waiver of the 15 day rule for the commencement of the hearing (Sec. 1230.90(a) of the
Board’
s Rules and Regulations), waiver of a tripartite panel pursuant to Sec.14(p) of the Act,
agreement that the procedural pre-requisites for the convening of the hearing have been met, and
that the arbitrator has jurisdiction and authority to rule on those mandatory subjects of bargaining
submitted to it as authorized by the Act.
7

? 6?

"(5) The average consumer prices for goods and services, commonly known as the cost
of living,
"(6) The overall compensation presently received by the employees, including direct
wage compensation, vacations, holidays and other excused time, insurance and
pensions, medical and hospitalization benefits, and the continuity and stability of
employment and all other benefits received.
"(7) Changes in any of the foregoing circumstances during the pendency of the
arbitration proceedings.
"(8) Such other factors not confined to the foregoing, which are normally or
traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of wages, hours and
conditions of employment through voluntary collective bargaining, mediation, fact
finding arbitration, or otherwise between the parties, in the public service or private
employment."

III. THE ISSUES
At the conclusion of the hearing the parties agreed that the term of the Agreement
under consideration would be five (5) years, from May 1, 2003 through April 30, 2008. Prior
to the submission of briefs the Union accepted the Village’
s final offer for insurance coverage.
Those two issues are no longer before the arbitrator.
There are 12 issues before the arbitrator. The parties are in agreement that seven
issues are economic and four are non-economic. They disagree as to the last issue, that of
“duty trades.” Section 14(g) of the Act provides that the arbitrator shall determine which
issues are economic and that determination shall be final. As to economic issues the
arbitrator is bound to select the final offer which in the opinion of the arbitrator mostly nearly
complies with the statutory factors set forth in Section 14 (h) of the Act. As to noneconomic issues “the arbitrator may either select the final offer of a party, or he may formulate
? 7?

a unique offer, building on the two advanced.”Illinois Association of Firefighters, IAFF Local
717, 333 Ill. App. 3d 364, 374 (1st Dist. 2003), enforcing, No. S-MA-98-230 (Berman, 1999).8
A “duty trade”is an exchange of shift assignments between firefighters. It is allowed
within organized fire departments generally, universally accepted by the comparable
jurisdictions and has been permitted in Libertyville. The terms of the Agreement addressing
duty trades relate to the procedure for effectuating them. It is a cost neutral benefit to
employees. A higher paid employee might substitute for a lower paid employee but the
reverse is true at the other end of the exchange. In this case the Union is seeking to
streamline the procedure for duty trades and to allow trades within trades, i.e., allowing an
employee on a trade to trade with a third employee. The Village argues that duty trades are
an “economic”issue because if an employee on a trade is absent the department might have
to “hire back”another employee with special qualifications, and this would have an economic
impact.
The Village’
s argument is inapt because the essence of the proposal is cost neutral.
Absences might occur at any time and under any circumstances. If the Village’
s argument
were correct then any condition of employment might be turned into an economic one by an

As stated by Arbitrator Berman in the Cicero case, “I am not bound by the factors that
govern ‘
economic interest arbitration,’but to the extent that these factors are appropriate, I shall
consider them.”S-MA-98-230 (Berman 1999).
8

? 8?

intervening absence. For example, residency, an admittedly non-economic issue, could be
arguably construed as an economic issue if the Village were required to hire back employees
during inclement weather when scheduled firefighters were unable to get to work due to the
distance they had to travel. The economic impact is the result of an unrelated intervening
circumstance and not to the procedure itself under consideration. Accordingly, the issue of
duty trades will be examined as a non-economic issue.
In summary form, the twelve issues in arbitration are as follows:
Economic

7. Retroactivity: Should retroactivity be
applied to employees who have left
the bargaining unit prior to the date
of the arbitration award.

1. Wages: Schedule increase and new step.
2. Payday: When earned overtime and
premium pay should be disbursed.
3. Assignment of Overtime: Whether
bargaining unit employees should
be given preference for overtime
assignments.
4. Hireback (overtime): Equalization of
hireback opportunities among fulltime officers and full-time
firefighters.
5. Layoff: Preference for regular full-time
firefighters over temporary, parttime or outside contractor
employees.
6. Personal leave days: How many personal
leave days should there be

? 9?

Non-Economic

3. Residency: Should boundaries be
expanded to least restrictive
standard applied to other Village
employees.

1. Duties: Should full-time bargaining unit
employees have preference over
outside personnel in the assignment
of
driver/engineer
and
officer/paramedic in charge.

4. Duty Trades: Should the procedures for
trades among comparably qualified
employees be expanded.

2. Assignments and Transfers: Should shift
vacancies and specialized job
assignments vacancies be posted for
bidding.

5. Re-opener: Under what conditions
should the Agreement be reopened
to negotiate the subject of
promotions.

IV. DISCUSSION OF THE ISSUES
A. Economic Issues
1. Wages:
Village Proposal

Union Proposal
Effective 5/1/03, increase all steps 3.25%

Effective 5/1/03, increase all steps 3.00%

Effective 5/1/04, create a Step 8 at 5% above
Step 7. Increase all steps by 3.25%

Effective 5/1/04, increase all steps 3.00%
Effective 5/1/05, increase all steps 3.00%

Effective 5/1/05, increase all steps by 3.25%
Effective 5/1/06, increase all steps 3.25%
Effective 5/1/06, increase all steps by 3.25%
Effective 5/1/07, increase all steps 3.25%
Effective 5/1/07, increase all steps by 3.25%
Effective 11/1/07, increase all steps by .25%

Union Schedule
Date

5/1/05
5/1/04

5/1/03

11/1/07

Start

5/1/07
5/1/06

48,979
47,437

$45,944
? 10?

52,345
52,214

50,571

Aft 1 yr Aft 2 yr Aft 3 yr Aft 4 yr Aft 5 yr Aft 6 yr Aft 7 yr Aft 8 yr
$48,241 $50,677 $53,178 $55,845 $58,640 $61,561 $64,639
49,809

52,314

54,906

57,660

60,545

63,562

66,739 $70,076

51,428

54,014

56,691

59,634

62,512

65,627

68,908

72,354

53,009

55,770

58,533

61,469

64,544

67,760

71,148

74,705

54,825

57,582

60,435

63,467

66,642

69,962

73,460

77,133

54,962

57,726

60,586

63,625

66,808

70,137

73,644

77,325

Village Schedule
Date

Start

Aft 1 yr

Aft 2 yrs Aft 3 yrs Aft 4 yrs Aft 5 yrs Aft 6 yrs Aft 7 yrs

5/1/03

$45,833

$48,125

$50,544

$53,049

$55,710

$58,497

$61,412

$64,482

5/1/04

47,208

49,569

52,060

54,641

57,381

60,252

63,254

66,417

5/1/05

48,624

51,056

53,622

56,280

59,102

62,060

65,152

68,410

5/1/06

50,204

52,715

55,365

58,109

61,023

64,076

67,269

70,633

5/1/07

51,836

54,429

57,164

59,997

63,006

66,158

69,455

72,929

In the parties’first agreement, for the period of 5/1/99 through 4/30/03, the following
salary adjustments were made:

? 11?

Eff 5/1/99

Eff 5/1/00

Eff 5/1/01

Eff 5/1/02

3.5%

3.5%

3.25%

3.25%

plus add’
l step
at 2.5%

increase in new
step of 2.5%

Eff 11/1/02
.25%

This history can be compared to the current proposals with these charts:
Village Proposal
Eff 5/1/03

Eff 5/1/04

Eff 5/1/05

Eff 5/1/06

Eff 5/1/07

3.00%

3.00%

3.00%

3.25%

3.25%

Eff 11/1/07

Union Proposal
3.25%

3.25%

3.25%

3.25%

3.25%

.25%

plus add’
l step
at 5.0%
As can be seen from the above charts, the Union’
s proposal for wages is closer to the
parties’practice than is the Village’
s This includes the new step inasmuch as a new step was
also negotiated in the last agreement.9 The Village’
s 3.00% increase for the first 3 years of the
contract is below the historic adjustments.10

The Village has offered inadequate

If it is slighter smaller in percentage increases than it was in the first contract this is offset by
the earlier implementation of the additional step.
9

The Village’
s offer of 3% for the first 3 years instead of a more traditional 3.25% or 3.50%
results in a nearly 1% differential in wages over the life of the Agreement without regard to the new
step. If the new step is considered as a necessary factor to maintain the differential with lieutenants,
just as it did under the last agreement, the difference between the two proposals becomes striking by
the end of the Agreement. To justify the 3% with this history the Village should demonstrate some
compelling need.
10

? 12?

explanations for the disparity, which include such generalities as: There has been a revenue
stagnation, the economy is weak and that there is a cap on its taxing ability. It has offered
some evidence that the Village has trimmed off some discretionary spending from the budget
and that it has not filled one vacancy in the firefighter ranks. However, the employees in this
case have not received a wage increase for more than two years and the Village has therefore
had the use of their money during this time. Additionally, real estate values have greatly
increased in the past several years and this will translate into greater tax revenue.
Significantly, the Village does not make an inability to pay argument. Indeed its recent
purchase of expensive fire fighting equipment (the “quint”) and its large increase in
lieutenant salaries indicate that where the money goes are matters of choice and not
economy. While it is never a function of an arbitrator to pass judgment on how a municipal
employer spends its money, how it does so affects the probity of the employer’
s argument that
granting the Union’
s wage demands will create hardships.11

In this case the Village’
s

substantial wage increase to lieutenants undercuts it claim of limited revenues.
The arbitrator has considered the lower wage increases for unionized police officers.
These are not persuasive because the police wages are unsettled for a substantial portion of this
Agreement’
s term and in the last negotiations the police union obtained a very favorable adjustment
in work schedules. Pay practices for unrepresented employees are irrelevant because they cover
numerous classifications and pay grades and, of course, these employees have little say in the setting
of the pay scales. The arbitrator’
s impression is that the Village’
s proposal of 3% for the first three
years of the Agreement is more related to its desire for internal parity with the vast number of
unrepresented employees than with the merits of the firefighter/paramedics salary schedule standing
alone. While this is understandable, comparisons with unrepresented employees, who have little say
in their collective salary levels, is not probative in determining what is appropriate for a small unit of
represented sworn employees.
11

? 13?

In 2002 or 2003, after the execution of its first collective bargaining agreement for
firefighter/paramedics, the Village adjusted its pay structure for fire department lieutenants
and effective in 2003 their salaries went up 9.6%. This affected the traditional differential
between firefighter/paramedics and lieutenants which had been just below 16%.12

The

Union’
s proposal for an additional step adjusts the salary schedule to reflect the historic
differentiation just as the additional step added in 2001 remedied a distortion when the
lieutenants schedule was greatly enriched in 2000. Assuming the lieutenants stay on course
and do not have their salaries greatly enriched as in 2000 and 2003 beyond the 3.25% basic
increase proposed for the firefighter/paramedics, the rank differential will become 16.67% in
2005 and remain at that level for the remainder of the Agreement. In contrast, the Village’
s
wage proposal would create a disparity between firefighter/paramedics and lieutenants at
more than 23%.13
Work in a fire department is a team effort unlike in any other unit of public employees.
Whether it be emergency medical responses or fire suppression, lieutenants work side by side
The Village argues that there was no historical differential between the two ranks.
However, firefighters were on step 14 of the Village’
s pay plan and lieutenants were on step 17. After
the advent of collective bargaining lieutenants were put on step 18. As will be discussed below, rank
differential has been an important ingredient in wage negotiations in fire departments because of the
close working relationship between the two ranks.
12

While the arbitrator is not suggesting that lieutenants do not deserve the increase they
received, if these are times requiring economic restraint the sharp increase for lieutenants seems
contradictory. There was no competitive pressure to increase lieutenants’pay this severely.
Additionally, the increase coming as it did soon after the implementation of the first contract with
the rank and file, coupled with the troubled birth of the unionization of the firefighter/paramedics,
implies a connection between unionization and the wage increase for the non-unit lieutenants.
13

? 14?

with firefighter/paramedics and the success of their endeavors as well as their mutual safety is
dependent on teamwork and cooperation. It is important to avoid creating conflicts between
these ranks which an artificial disparity in wages would exacerbate. Unfortunately, as will be
discussed below, too much of that has occurred in this fire department and maintaining a
disparity as created by the Village’
s proposal is not in the public interest.14
Other arbitrators have commented on the significance of rank differential. In City of
Aurora and Local 99, IAFF, FMCS Case No. 91-00965 (Dilts, 1991), the arbitrator
commented that a comparison of fire management personnel with bargaining unit employees
was “the most valid”internal comparison for the determination of appropriate wages for the
bargaining unit employees. City of Aurora at p.9.15 In Village of Oak Park, S-MA-91-16
(Gundermann, 1992), the arbitrator took special note of the wage disparity between
firefighters and non-bargaining unit lieutenants. In that case the employer gave an outsized
increase to lieutenants in response to an earlier award which narrowed the gap between
lieutenants and firefighters to a more traditional level.

In response to Oak Park’
s

Stated another way: The record in this case amply demonstrates a divisive and unseemly
hostility between the department’
s management and the firefighters who support the Union. The
selection of the Union’
s proposal for wage increases in this case is not the result of this conflict,
notwithstanding the Union’
s strained argument that compensation should somehow track the work
environment. Rather, the arbitrator approaches this problem from another direction and reaches the
decision that the Village’
s final offer with no step increase is unacceptable because it would aggravate
the existing personnel conflicts. For a discussion of the effects of conflict between the ranks, see
Village of Oak Park and IAFF Local 95, S-MA-03-104 (Dichter, 2004). In this way the arbitrator
concludes that the Village’
s proposal for wages is not in the public interest.
14

15

Cf. City of Elgin and Local 439, IAFF, [no case number given], (Fleischli, 1992).
? 15?

reinstatement of that disparity Arbitrator Gundermann awarded the union its proposed wage
increase which included an additional step designed to address the disparity.
The thrust of these cases leads this arbitrator to conclude that when confronted with
competing offers an important consideration is which one best preserves a traditional wage
differential between firefighters and lieutenants. In this case the Village’
s 3.00% offer for the
first three years and no increased steps over the five year period of the Agreement certainly
does not do so.
With regard to external comparables, one can look at the statistics and find something
for each side. From some perspectives it can reasonably be argued that Libertyville
firefighter/paramedics are well-paid compared to the average for firefighters among the
comparable municipalities. But it is also true that the annual work schedule in Libertyville
has more hours than average, which dilutes the value of the annual salary.16
What the arbitrator finds particularly relevant is that in 2003 only one comparable
community settled for a wage increase of 3.00 %, as proposed by the Village in this case.
Every other comparable community managed to increase wages from 3.25% to 5.00%. These
communities are all within a reasonable proximity of Libertyville and subject to the same
economic pressures as this Village.17 For 2004, the increases among the comparables was

For a good comparison of total compensation among the comparable communities, see
Union Exhibit 11 which shows that Libertyville firefighter/paramedics rank 5th of 11 in career base
pay, 9th of 11 in total cash compensation.
16

17

Perhaps more importantly, these are the communities the parties stipulated as appropriate
? 16?

similar, although Morton Grove and Villa Park also had 3.00% increases. With all but two of
the comparable communities now having settled wages for 2004, the average is still above
3.50%, measurably higher than Libertyville’
s offer of 3.00%.18 For 2005, seven of the ten
comparables have resolved their firefighter wage schedules and the average wage increase is
3.86%. The point here is not that Libertyville is somehow bound to meet the average, but,
rather, that when most municipalities of similar size and geography as Libertyville find that
they can manage more than 3.00%, Libertyville’
s argument about difficult economic times,
loses persuasiveness.
Finally, the arbitrator notes that the overall compensation received by these employees
is within the range of the comparables and does not warrant some special wage adjustment as
an offsetting factor. Likewise, the arbitrator notes that the Union has indicated a willingness
to work with the Village on changes in medical insurance. In sum, the arbitrator has
reviewed the facts of record against the statutory criteria, particularly the interests and
welfare of the public, comparability, revenue sources, the cost of living, overall compensation
and the parties limited bargaining history and has concluded that the Union’
s proposal on
wages most nearly complies with the factors established in the statute.

for comparison purposes.
18

This does not include Bensenville’
s offer of 4.00%.

? 17?

2. Pay Day
The issue here is the scope of the word “pay”in contract language that says,
Employees shall be paid on the 5th and 20th of each month.
Payment received on the 5th day of the month represents pay
earned during the last half of the preceding month; i.e., from the
16th to the end of the month. Payment on the 20th day of the
month represents pay earned during the first 15 days of the
month. (Emphasis added)
Employees traditionally have received overtime earnings once a month. Evidence
from the Village indicates that at the end of each 27 day cycle (for firefighter employees) a
clerical employee computes the overtime earned and it is thereafter paid. When the abovequoted language was negotiated for the first collective bargaining agreement the Union was
under the impression that overtime would now be paid bi-monthly. There were some
discussions about this (the Union claims many discussions) at labor-management meetings
but no changes in the practice were made. No grievance was filed. In collective bargaining
for the new Agreement, now in arbitration, the Union proposed that the following language
be added:
Pay for the purpose of this Section shall be construed to include
all pay earned (e.g., overtime, premium pay, etc.).
The Union appears to argue that the merits of its proposal are self-evident, that
overtime earnings are part of “pay”and employees should receive all of this “pay”twice a
month. The Union argues that the Village’
s position on this issue only demonstrates its
“indifference to the interests of firefighters.”
? 18?

The Village argues that this is not a matter for collective bargaining because the
essential nature of the dispute is the meaning of the word “pay,”and that is for the grievance
procedure (citing Village of Algonquin and Metropolitan Alliance of Police, S-MA-95-85
(Benn, 1996).) The Village is incorrect in this regard. The Union has every right to avoid a
grievance arbitration by simply seeking to re-write, or clarify, the language in dispute. The
parties’ultimate rights are at the bargaining table. In a sense, grievance arbitration is only a
way station pending the next round of negotiations.
There are many problems with the Union’
s position in this case. First, it ignores the
Village’
s evidence that tallying overtime twice a month would be burdensome. It offered no
evidence to rebut this. In fact, the Union offered barely any evidence at all in support of its
proposal. As the moving party to change existing contract language it had the obligation of
proving to the arbitrator that a change must be made. While there is certainly nothing
inappropriate in wanting to be paid all elements of wages twice a month, there is nothing
inherently appropriate in it either. Given the long practice of paying overtime earnings once
a month the Union had an obligation of showing a need for the change. In this regard, the
Union has not shown any hardship, but only that a small portion of earned income is being
delayed every other pay day. At most this is an inconvenience. If the arbitrator is to balance
the interests of the Village in maintaining its practice against the interests of the
firefighter/paramedics in receiving a small portion of their earnings a little sooner, the Union
must show something in line with the statutory criteria of Section 14 of the Act. It has not
? 19?

met this burden and its request for this change in language is denied.
3. Assignment of Overtime Work
This issue concerns a conflict between bargaining unit employees and regular parttime employees who are not part of the bargaining unit but who do the same work as
bargaining unit firefighter/paramedics and work side by side with them. Prior to 1969, the
Village employed no full-time fire fighting employees. It operated with only part-time officers
and firefighters who were neither sworn nor enjoyed civil service protections.. In the years
that followed, the Village hired regular full-time firefighters utilizing a police and fire
commission, and a full-time Chief. Other officer positions were filled by part-timers who
directed and supervised the work of the regular firefighter employees. Over time, and with
the organization of the regular workforce by the Union, the Village employed fewer nonsworn part-time officers and they were replaced by sworn officers who were regular full-time
employees.19 However, the Village has continued to maintain a regular workforce of parttime non-sworn firefighters. These supplemental employees have become a part of the
routine and are regularly used on weekends, holidays and 12 hour weekday evenings shifts.
They also respond to emergencies as needed.20

19

Currently there is one paid-on-call lieutenant and two paid-on-call training officers.

The Village sometimes refers to these employees as “sleepers,”meaning that they are at
the fire stations during evening and night hours. In this regard, the Village suggests that their
primary tasks are lounging around and sleeping at the fire houses at night. It contrasts this with
periods of time during daylight hours when fire employees have tasks and are otherwise engaged in
20

? 20?

Part-time, non-sworn, personnel have basic fire fighter skills. They are licensed
firefighters in that they have taken the necessary training to be certified at the level of
Firefighter II. Some of these employees have other certifications including that of paramedic,
apparatus engineer, and the like. They also participate in regular training programs
conducted by the Village.21 These part-time employees, who the Village officially identifies as
“paid-on-call”employees, most frequently work from 7:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m at the fire
stations covering temporary vacancies caused by absences, vacations, sick leave, etc. of
regular full-time employees. However, unlike traditional paid-on-call firefighters in Illinois
who are called in to respond to particular emergencies such as traditional volunteers, but for
pay, these part-time employees have regular schedules, or at least a regular expectation of
employment. Their work schedules can be planned well in advance and slotted in for night
assignments based upon the known complement and schedules of the regular employees. In
this case, the Village is working below its budgeted capacity for full-time regular employees
and can do so because of the availability of the non-union part-timers. The Village readily
admits that it does so to save money, and it believes that it has a duty to its constituency to
save money in this way.
non-emergency work. This description is misleading because firefighters are paid to be responders
and their ability to sleep has nothing to do with their duties as employees. Firefighters are not piece
workers. They are emergency public safety employees and they sleep in fire houses in order to
facilitate their ability to respond.
The Village argues that these part-time employees have adequate training. It does not
argue that they are as well trained as sworn firefighters.
21

? 21?

The pay for this 12 hour shift is $75.00 as opposed to the more than the $300.00 cost
for a regular employee. The Village claims that these part-timers are fully qualified and that
their employment saves the Village several hundred thousand dollars a year. As a result of
this part-time labor force regular employees do not enjoy the overtime they would otherwise
have. While this issue is generated by the Union’
s concern about the professionalism of these
unsworn employees, it is also triggered by the Union’
s desire to enhance the earnings of
bargaining unit firefighters who lose overtime opportunities as a result of the use of these
paid-on-call employees.
Nonetheless, and contrary to the Village’
s well-crafted argument, there is more to this
issue than merely who gets a bigger piece of the pie. There are concerns about the ability of
two groups of employees with competing interests working side by side in a profession which
demands precise teamwork to save lives and property. The major difference in the
employment status of these two groups of firefighters is that regular full-time employees are
sworn officers with civil service status appointed and employed under the auspices of the
Libertyville Fire and Police Commission.22 Part-time employees, on the other hand, are “at
will”employees. They have no civil service protections. They may be hired based upon

The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILSC §§5/10-2.4-1,et.seq. provides that non-home rule
municipalities (such as Libertyville) shall have a fire and police commission which shall appoint fulltime fire department employees of that municipality from eligibility lists under its control. The
eligibility roster is determined by an open competitive examination. The terms of the termination of
employment process are likewise under the control of the commission and require a due process
protocol.
22

? 22?

personal relationships and may be terminated at the whim of the Fire Chief. Their loyalties
are inherently different from those with civil service protection and there is a built-in risk of
conflict with regular employees whose tenure is protected by a collective bargaining
agreement and the due process standards of the fire and police commission.23
There have been conflicts between regular employees and the part-time employees. In
one case the Village’
s only female fire fighter quit her employment because of a dispute with a
part-time employee who took control of an emergency medical call. There is also some
evidence, albeit limited, that part-time employees have been seen making procedural errors.
There is no evidence that any actual harm occurred to any member of the public because of
these errors. But there is evidence of tension between management and the Union leadership
arising out of the competition between what has emerged as competing groups for overtime
and job assignments. The record in this case is replete with incidents of conflict because of
management’
s assignment of non-bargaining union personnel to work on teams of regular
full-time employees. It is impossible to quantify damage done to the efficiency of the
department because of this conflict but the presence of different workforces working side-by-

Although Illinois law provides firefighters with a property interest in their jobs, this interest
is limited to full time firefighters. 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-26 In Toronyi v. Barrington Unit School
District 220, Barrington Countryside Fire Protection District, et.al., US DIST LEXIS 3065, (N.D. Ill.
2005)(Pallmeyer, J., Case No. 03 C 3949) a paid-on-call firefighter was summarily discharged
because of his wife’
s public statements about certain practices in Barrington schools. The U.S.
District Court found that a paid-on-call firefighter has no state law protecting his employment and
has no right to procedural due process prior to his termination. Toronyi at pp. 8-9, referring to Kyle
v. City of Oak Forest, 637 F. Supp 980, 989 (N.D. Ill 1986).
23

? 23?

side in Libertyville permeates this entire case and also gives rise to two other issues in
arbitration, Layoff and Recall, and Duties (shift assignments).
The existence of two units of certified firefighters in one department is unique among
the comparables. Four other fire departments, in Bensenville, Gurnee, Northbrook and St.
Charles, have paid-on-call personnel in addition to full-time members, but in each of these
four municipalities their role is limited. There is certainly nothing like this existing in the
Village’
s other bargaining unit, the police department.
The effect of the Union’
s proposal for the distribution of overtime is that the part-time
employees would be limited to a supplemental presence and not continue as the Village’
s
second fire protection and medical response force, working nights in a status equal to that of
regular employees. In order to accomplish this the Union proposes that the language of the
former agreement addressing the assignment of overtime work be modified so that overtime
assignments are offered first to regular full-time employees. The Union’
s theory is that by
requiring the Village to offer overtime to regular employees when there are absences the need
for paid-on-call employees will be reduced. The Union offers no calculations as to the
financial impact of this proposal and, of course, can only speculate as to whether this will
prompt the Village to hire additional regular full time employees from the Commission’
s
eligibility list. The proposed language reads as follows (new language in bold face):
Section 7. Assignment of Overtime Work
The fire chief or his designee(s) shall have the right to require
overtime work and firefighters may not refuse overtime assignments.
? 24?

Whenever practicable, overtime will be scheduled on a voluntary
basis, except for emergency situations, or except where qualified
volunteers are not readily available. It is the objective of the Village
to keep mandatory overtime schedule at a minimum consistent with
the need of the Village to provide proper fire protection..
Whenever overtime assignments become available, they shall be
first offered as described in Article X, Section 10 to full time
sworn members of the bargaining unit in preference to nonbargaining unit employees.
In the event the overtime assignment is not accepted by a bargaining
unit employee, it may be offered to a qualified non-bargaining
unit employee.

The Union argues that the ability to substitute part-time employees for sworn
personnel has allowed the Fire Department to operate without a full complement of
employees. According to the Union, two shifts (of the three) regularly run short one
firefighter. The Village does not disagree. It maintains that this is intentional because of the
cost savings involved in using part-time employees not covered by the collective bargaining
agreement. The Union argues that in using part-time employees as a portion of a regular
work force the Village has side-stepped the statutory scheme for the employment of sworn
personnel.24 Cf. City of Markham v. IBT Local 726, 299 Ill. App. 3d 615 (1st Dist., 1998), a
police case dealing with discipline and the local fire and police commission . The Union also
relies upon People ex rel. Gasparas v. Village of Justice, 88 Ill. App. 2d 227 (1st Dist. 1967)
This is borne out by the statistic that there are less sworn firefighters per officer in this fire
department than in any of the comparable departments. There are twice as many firefighters on
average in the comparable departments. While it can be argued that this only shows that the
department is top heavy, it is more likely that the number of officers per sworn firefighter is a
reflection of the impact of the part-time non-sworn firefighters.
24

? 25?

where the court held that the fire and police commission had the exclusive right to hire both
full-time and part-time police officers.25
The gist of these cases is that it is unlawful, or at least improper, for a non-home rule
municipality to hire police officers outside the ambit of the local fire and police commissions,
and these commissions have exclusive jurisdiction over the tenure of police employees. There
is no such case law for firefighters and given the common use of paid-on-call firefighters, this
arbitrator finds it unlikely to be forbidden. (The Village argues that the Municipal Code is
different for fire and police departments in this regard.) The arbitrator must therefore reject
the Union’
s argument that the employment of part-time paid-on-call employees is outside the
Village’
s authority. (See §14(h) of the Act.) Whether a municipality can systematically avoid
the use of a fire and police commission’
s eligibility roster by the continual hiring of paid-oncall employees, or create a shadow workforce as has occurred in Libertyville, is a matter best
left to the courts.
What is clear, however, is that such part-time employees have no rights and no
protections. They are beholden to management on a day to day basis and their interests are
necessarily different from those of regular sworn permanent employees.

In Village of

See also, Young v. Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of the Village of Worth,
57 Ill. App. 3d 6789 (1st Dist., 1978) where an employee was denied a pension because she had not
been properly appointed by the fire and police commission.
25

? 26?

Westchester and Illinois Firefighters Alliance, Council 1, S-MA-89-93 (!989), Arbitrator
Herbert Berman rejected a proposal for the contracting out of paramedic services. He found
that subcontracting work normally performed by firefighters “might subvert the interests of
bargaining unit employees and the Union.”Slip opinion p. 27. Arbitrator Berman pointed
out that the commingling of separate units of employees with separate standards of
employment :
increases the possibility of rift and imperils discipline - a result
inconsistent with the ‘
interests and welfare of the public’
. ***
Firefighting requires mutual trust, respect and teamwork; and
the use of contract firefighter/paramedics ‘
paid at ... substandard
wages’and not subject to the same standards of employment as
bargaining unit firefighters would do little to improve
teamwork.”
Village of Westchester, at p. 28.26
Likewise, in Bloomingdale Fire Protection District No.1 and Bloomingdale
Professional Fire Fighters Association Local 3272, S-MA-92-231(Nathan,1994) this
arbitrator rejected the employer’
s subcontracting proposal and selected the Union’
s work
preservation proposal. In Bloomingdale the employer had a long history of using paid-on-call
employees. In fact, the district began with a chief and a paid-on-call staff. The issue of
subcontracting arose several years later when the District planned on building a second fire
Arbitrator Berman cited Allis Chalmers Mfg. Co., 39 LA 1213, 1219 (Smith 1962) for
support on the risks of commingling and Uniroyal, Inc., 76 LA 1049, 1052 (Nolan 1981) for the
proposition that subcontracting should not be allowed where the result is “the weakening of the
bargaining unit or important parts of it.” Arbitrator Berman also expressed concern that the
employment of non-unit employees to perform bargaining unit work in a fire department raised the
likelihood of a diminution of employment opportunities for sworn personnel.
26

? 27?

station. The fire chief demonstrated that the labor costs would be decreased if paramedic
employees of an outside contractor were mixed in with regular sworn employees. The
existing collective bargaining agreement specifically allowed for subcontracting in its
management rights clause but it had not been utilized beyond the employment of paid-on-call
(part-time) employees to supplement the regular force as needed. Nonetheless, the employer
argued that it was wholly inappropriate for the arbitrator to take away a right the employer
already had.
The evidence in that case indicated that employees of outside contractors were
generally less experienced than regular sworn employees and frequently used the contracting
work as a stepping stone to regular employment in a fire department or fire protection district.
There was also evidence that in other locations there was friction between the outside
employees and the sworn regular employees. Based on that record this arbitrator granted the
union’
s work preservation proposal because the employer’
s plan to use full-time employees of
an outside paramedic service would circumvent the fire and police commission and that was
contrary to Illinois public policy. The opinion reads:
The Fire Protection Act requires that fire protection districts
with more than fifteen employees must establish a commission to
perform the hiring functions through competitive examination
and other standards. The purpose of extending civil service
protections *** is the establishment of a merit system for the
appointment of sworn personnel. Employment cannot be based
on favoritism, politics or some other non-objective standard.
The present employees of the District work there because they
have earned the right to do so. This is the public policy of the
? 28?

State of Illinois. The District’
s proposal would enable it to
circumvent civil service protections by delegating the hiring
process to an outside entity. Outside contractors are not
covered by the Fire Protection District Act, nor by any
regulatory statute of its type. Except for *** a certain level of
certification, the public is left unprotected from the harm civil
service was designed to avoid.
Of course, in the present case the issue involves part-time employees, not full-time
paramedics as in Bloomingdale. But the principle is the same. These part-time paid-on-call
employees are being used as substitutes for sworn employees on a regular basis. They are not
supplementing the regular employees, called in during emergencies, but are regularly
scheduled for12 hour shifts. They were selected not because they have passed a rigorous
qualification process but only because they met the Chief’
s approval, had at least minimum
qualifications and were willing to work for $75.00 for a 12 hour shift. In the short run this
might appear to be a good deal for the public. After all, should not elected officials
scrupulously control the public larder? But supply and demand economic theories can be
short-sighted when it comes to public safety. The public deserves the paramedics selected on
merit by its fire commission, not just the ones who are willing to work for $6.25 an hour.
The Village argues that there is no evidence that anyone has been harmed by the use
of non-sworn fire personnel. In the sense that there is no evidence that anyone has been
physically damaged as a direct result of using paid-on-call employees, it would seem that the
argument has facial merit. But there is certainly evidence of conflict within the force and the
obvious implication that efficiency has been affected. The Village is also correct that without
? 29?

evidence of harm there is no basis for the arbitrator to tamper with an established operation..
As this arbitrator has stated many times, interest arbitration is a conservative process and
arbitrators should tread carefully when considering the alteration of negotiated systems. Will
County/Sheriff of Will County and AFSCME Council 31, Local 2961, S-MA-88-09 (Nathan,
1988). Arbitration cannot be used a shortcut or as a substitute for hard bargaining.
However, the concept of “harm”is not limited to whether any member of the public suffered
greater damage as a result of the use of paid-on-call firefighters than would have occurred
without them. Harm, in the context of whether there is a reason to change negotiated
language, refers to a broader sense of impairment which includes efficiency, morale, skills and
risk. The public need not wait until a resident dies because competing paramedics could not
agree on who was in charge. It is sufficient that there is an identifiable risk that such a thing
might occur.
Additionally, the arbitral restraints expressed in Will County and the many cases
which followed it should not be read in a vacuum. After all, the statute anticipates that
arbitrators will make changes. The statute sets out the standards to be followed in making
these changes. There are cases where the parties are at such a deep impasse that it is
apparent that bargaining alone will not achieve agreement. In lieu of concerted activity such
as a withholding of services, the law in Illinois is that interest arbitration will resolve the
dispute. There are cases where the parties are so deeply entrenched in their bargaining
positions and the levels of enmity are so pronounced that the award of an arbitrator on the
? 30?

actual merits of the respective proposals is required. This is such a case.
Initially, there is no long bargaining history in Libertyville with which the arbitrator is
tampering. Organizing which began in 1998 was brought to completion in an atmosphere of
an unfair labor practice complaint against the Village which settlement included back pay for
a firefighter who was terminated. The parties’first contract took years to negotiate and was
settled during the course of an interest arbitration.

The present case has involved this

arbitrator for more than a year an a half and involved three formal mediation sessions, eleven
days of hearing (more than 3000 pages of transcript and boxes of exhibits) and an executive
session with the parties’leadership in a final attempt at settlement. The record is replete with
instances of unfair discipline or threats of discipline. In one instance a Union leader was
threatened with discipline because he closed the door to the dishwasher with his foot. The
Assistant Chief involved in that incident had previously engaged in the same conduct. He is
now the new Chief of the Fire Department. In other instances simple inquiries regarding
assignments were construed as challenges to authority. The Union President’
s testimony,
which the arbitrator credits despite the Village’
s attempt to depict him as a troublemaker, was
that he feels as if he has a target on his back.
Significantly, the change in the rank of firefighter has been unprecedented in this
arbitrator’
s experience. Since 1999 the turnover among firefighters has been nearly 80%.
Fifteen unit employees have left the Department, most by resignation. In comparison, the
average turnover during the same period among the comparable departments was less than
? 31?

5%. The great majority of this turnover in Libertyville occurred after the first collective
bargaining agreement was signed in 2001. It was not simply a reaction to the Union’
s
organizing efforts.27

It is a reasonable assumption that high turnover is not in the public

interest because it affects teamwork and efficiency. The operation of this department, more so
than in any other, depends on teamwork. Fire suppression, rescues and emergency medical
care are performed by teams. Teams consisting of employees with competing employment
interests are inherently less effective than those which share a commonality of employment
interests. The unusual turnover is certainly evidence that professional firefighters will not
work under these conditions when they are not present in neighboring departments.28
The work of fire departments is dangerous. Employees engaged in fire suppression risk
their lives continually. Employees must work together and gain experience with each other’
s
strengths and weakness to reach the peak of efficiency. There is simply no room for the type
of internal conflict which the record in this case reflects.
The Village recognizes the importance of having the best qualified employee on the
job. In response to the Union’
s proposal on another issue, that of hireback (for overtime
work), where the Union wants less work for lieutenants and more work for firefighters, the
Sarah Christie, the firefighter who resigned because of a conflict with a non-sworn
employee, did so in October 2003.
27

While it might be argued that employees are more likely to change employers because of
economic benefits, the discussion of comparable wages earlier in this Award establishes that the wage
rates are competitive. Based on the testimony of the firefighters themselves the problem in
Libertyville is working conditions.
28

? 32?

Village argues that if a lieutenant is available for lieutenant’
s work he should be called back in
preference to a firefighter being called back in an “acting up”capacity. The Village’
s
argument is based upon safety and the public interest, that a lieutenant is better trained to do
lieutenant’
s work. This is precisely the Union’
s argument regarding paid-on-call firefighters
being used instead of sworn officers who achieved their position based upon competitive
training. With regard to hirebacks the Village argues that anything less than the best
available personnel “would compromise the safety of the public.”29 This is likewise true with
paid-on-call employees working in place of available sworn full-time firefighters.
There is a compelling need for a change in the way in which overtime is assigned to
paid-on-call rather than regular sworn employees. The present system has caused friction in
the ranks, has contributed to massive turnover and has resulted in a compromise with public
safety. Libertyville is an outstanding community. Its citizens should not have to go to bed at
night with protection by part-time irregulars selected for their jobs on a non-competitive
basis. Primarily, however, action must be taken to alleviate a system of competing work
forces. This compelling need requires that the arbitrator select the Union’
s final offer for the
assignment of overtime. Accord, University of Illinois at Chicago and Illinois Fraternal Order
of Police Labor Council, S-MA-96-240 (Briggs, 1998); Village of Lombard and Lombard
Professional Firefighters Association, Local 3009, IAFF, S-MA-97-199 (Briggs, 1999).30

29

Village’
s Brief at p. 70.

30

The Village relies heavily on this arbitrator’
s award in Will County. In that case it was
? 33?

4. Hireback
The prior issue, involving Article X, Section 7 - Assignment of Overtime, concerned
the distribution of overtime work to employees who were not sworn firefighters qualified by
the Libertyville Fire and Police Commission. The next issue addresses the distribution of

said that in assessing non-economic issues the arbitrator is an extension of the bargaining process.
The process should not yield results which the parties themselves would never have agreed to. The
arbitrator should not “embark upon new ground and create some innovative procedural or benefit
scheme *** [but] the arbitration award must be a natural extension of where the parties were at
impasse.”supra, slip opinion p. 49. But the issue here under discussion is an economic issue involving
a fundamental economic term of employment, namely, overtime. With economic issues the
arbitrator is bound by the final offers. The arbitrator cannot go off on a frolic as is possible in noneconomic issues where the arbitrator can impose his/her own language scheme on the parties. The
caveats expressed in Will County are less applicable to most economic issues where the arbitrator
may only choose one party’
s offer or the other. Moreover, in this case the matter under discussion is
not some creative escapade by the arbitrator. The preference of offering overtime to bargaining unit
members first before offering to non-bargaining employees is a staple of collective bargaining
agreements. There is nothing adventurous in deciding that the use of paid-on-call employees as
substitutes for sworn firefighters is simply not working. As will be seen in the discussion of the next
issue, arbitrators also have to move cautiously where an issue is deemed “economic”but the issues are
really contract procedure.

? 34?

overtime opportunities (called “hireback”) between firefighters and lieutenants (also not
members of the bargaining unit). This section has had a complex and difficult history.
Before collective bargaining, scheduled hirebacks were rotated among firefighters and
lieutenants regardless of rank. There was one list and the names on it rotated. For
unscheduled hirebacks the department utilized a less structured system which favored those
employees with the best records for responding to the hireback requests. According to the
Village, prior to collective bargaining the interests of the Department in getting a suitable
replacement were balanced with giving employees the overtime they wanted. Equal
distribution was not a concern. Collective bargaining for the first agreement stalemated on
this issue and went to arbitration. After the hearing, the interest arbitrator for that contract,
Robert Perkovich, remanded the matter back to the parties for further negotiations.
According to the Union it eventually agreed that the old system was acceptable with one
basic change. Under the old system a lieutenant had equal access to firefighter hireback
opportunities. The Union wanted to change this so that firefighters would have the first
option for such openings (“blue shirt for blue shirt”). Eventually the parties agreed to
language and the matter was settled.
Sometime after the new language went into effect the Union began to suspect that
lieutenants were being favored in the assignment of overtime. A grievance was filed and
shortly thereafter when the Chief produced lists which did not include the data for
lieutenants at all, the Union filed a second grievance. The Village maintained that the new
? 35?

emphasis on giving firefighter hireback opportunities first to other firefighters had the effect
of pushing the lieutenants onto their own list, and the distribution of hireback opportunities
for those employees were of no concern to the Union because lieutenants were not part of the
bargaining unit. As the Village interpreted the new language it could decide that a hireback
opportunity was one for a lieutenant and therefore that opportunity was never available to
firefighters.

One side effect of this was that the percentage of hirebacks assigned to

lieutenants increased substantially. According to the Union this was a deliberate attempt by
the Chief to deny overtime opportunities to the now unionized firefighters. But it could also
be argued that the amount of all hirebacks was reduced and, of those remaining, more went to
lieutenants because there was a core of hireback vacancies which stayed the same and could
only be filled by other lieutenants. In other words, the increase in lieutenant utilization for
hirebacks was a result of the severe cutback in hirebacks generally and, the Village argues,
had nothing to do with the operation of the new language at all.
The two grievances on hirebacks went before Arbitrator Perkovich, this time sitting as
a grievance arbitrator. As styled by Arbitrator Perkovich, the relevant issues were (1)
whether the Village violated the Agreement by the manner in which it distributed overtime
and (2) whether the Village violated the Agreement by supplying the Union an overtime
utilization list without information about lieutenants? Arbitrator Perkovich stated the
relevant language at issue was:
Firefighters will be first offered positions vacated by firefighters.
? 36?

In the event that no firefighter is available..., then the position
may be offered to an officer, however when a firefighter is
scheduled to fill an officer’
s position it shall be in accordance
with Article IX.
Arbitrator Perkovich found that the language in question addressed only hireback
positions created by the absence of firefighters, that nothing in any part of Section 10
required the use of a firefighter to fill a lieutenant’
s position (although the language allows for
such an assignment at the Chief’
s discretion) and the bargaining history did not support the
Union’
s argument that overtime had been equalized between officers and firefighters.
The Union in this arbitration argues that Arbitrator Perkovich was wrong. It
recognizes that it is bound by his award and therefore seeks to amend the language so that
there can be no question that firefighters shall be eligible to fill any vacancy as a hireback
including one acting lieutenant vacancy per shift. It also seeks language which states that
officers cannot displace a firefighter from a scheduled hireback nor cause the reassignment of
an acting lieutenant to cover for another absent firefighter. Its proposal requires that there be
a single seniority list of firefighters and lieutenants and that offers for scheduled hirebacks be
based upon that list. It also seeks to equalize overtime opportunities among firefighters and
lieutenants. It vigorously insists that after the issuance of the Perkovich grievance award
firefighter hirebacks greatly diminished and that the lieutenants now get more than twice as
many hireback opportunities as the firefighters even though there are three times as many
firefighters as there are lieutenants. It argues that the parties never intended this result.

? 37?

The Village argues that the Union’
s proposal would cause a major change in the way
overtime is distributed. It argues that there is no basis under the Act to make such a change
and none of the comparables have a system such as that proposed by the Union. The Village
argues that the Union freely negotiated the language it now wants to change and that
Arbitrator Perkovich’
s grievance award proves that the Union knew exactly what it had
negotiated for the first agreement. The Village argues that imposition of firefighters to fill
lieutenant vacancies would deny the Village the use of the most qualified officers for the
positions. It argues that the Union does not understand the statistics and that hirebacks have
been decreased across the board. The only reason why there are proportionately more
opportunities for lieutenants is because there are less of them to fill more slots caused by the
greater amount of time off lieutenants get because of their seniority. The Village also argues
that substituting firefighters for lieutenants saves almost no money because only the most
senior firefighters are qualified to be acting lieutenants and these senior employees’wages are
similar to that of the average lieutenant’
s salary.
The Village proposes to maintain the current language. The Union seeks several
changes in the language. Its proposal is as follows:31

The text of Article X, Section 10 is quite lengthy. It has four parts: the procedure for
scheduled hirebacks, the composition of the scheduled overtime assignment reports, the procedure
for non-scheduled hirebacks, and the composition of the non-scheduled overtime assignment reports.
The Union proposes essentially the same language changes in the non-scheduled hirebacks as with
the scheduled hirebacks. In the interest of space limitations, only the scheduled hireback procedure
and its assignment reports will be set out here. The proposed new language will be in bold face.
31

? 38?

Section 10 Hireback
A. Scheduled Hireback
Scheduled hireback occurs when the Department is provided advance
notice that a position will need to be filled. A full-time employee
shall be offered scheduled hireback duty consistent with current
practice and within budgetary constraints. When an employee is
offered a scheduled hireback duty, such offers shall be distributed to
employees as follows:
1. Firefighters will be first offered positions vacated by
firefighters. The vacancy to be filled by the scheduled hireback
shall be based on the posted regularly scheduled shift assignments
(including one Acting Lieutenant assignment per shift). In the
event that no firefighter is available for a scheduled hireback position,
then the position may be offered to an officer but an officer shall not
be called in to displace a firefighter from the scheduled hireback
nor shall the firefighter assigned in the acting capacity be
reassigned to cover for another absent firefighter. Officers may be
first offered positions vacated by an officer, however when a firefighter
is scheduled to fill an officer’
s position it shall be in accordance with
Article IX.
2. The offer shall be made based upon a list arranged
according to seniority, wherein initially the most senior member will
be called first and so on down the list until a qualified hireback is
found (i.e. firefighter or lieutenant).
3. When a second or later hireback is needed, the list will
again be employed from where the last hireback was made and any
member who has not yet taken a hireback will be asked to work the
next hireback if they are qualified to do so.
4. After everyone on the list has accepted a hireback, or when
the last person on the seniority list refuses a hireback, calls shall again
commence from the top of the list.
5. If no hirebacks can be scheduled after all members have
been contacted, a forced hireback via reverse seniority may be
employed from those members not on the shift on which the hireback
is scheduled. If a member has already worked a forced hireback, the
next least senior member shall be forced back, and this process shall
? 39?

continue until all members are forced back before returning to the
initial member.
B. Scheduled Overtime Assignment Reports
Within fifteen (15) days after the completion of any month, the
Employer shall provide to the Union President (or designee) a
photocopy of the scheduled hireback list used dating the preceding
month. In addition, the Union on request shall be provided with
copies of the monthly shift schedule and monthly hireback
schedule. The objective of this procedure is to equalize overtime
assignment opportunities as evenly as possible among full time
officers and full time firefighters. If after complaint, the posting
discloses inequities, the affected employee(s) shall be placed in the
appropriate position on the list in the subsequent cycle. When
necessary to ensure equalized overtime opportunities among
members (i.e. officers and firefighters), the procedures of Article
IX shall be utilized.
C. Non-Scheduled Hireback
***
1. ***
2. ***
3. ***
4. ***
D. Non-Scheduled Overtime Assignment Report
***

As a result of this arbitrator’
s award on the prior issue, granting preference to
bargaining unit employees “whenever overtime assignments become available,” sworn
firefighters will no longer be competing with paid-on-call selectees and the Village will be
assured of having the most qualified professional firefighters responding to its emergency
calls. The present issue, involving Article X, Section 10 - Hireback, is so closely related to
the last issue as to be intertwined with it. Thus, the new language in Article X, Section 7,
? 40?

refers to the Section 10 for its description of the procedure for offering overtime. The new
language of Section 7 states:
“Whenever overtime assignments become available, they shall
be first offered as described in Article X, Section 10 to full time
sworn members of the bargaining unit in preference to nonbargaining unit employees.”
This award of overtime priority for full-time firefighters has a major impact on the
construction of Section 10 which addresses the distribution of overtime between bargaining
unit firefighters and officers. The significance here is that, unlike in nine of the ten
comparable fire departments, officers in Libertyville are not part of the bargaining unit. Thus,
as a result of the new language in Article X, Section 7, lieutenants as non-bargaining unit
members cannot be assigned bargaining unit work unless and until it is refused by members of
the bargaining unit. This is the plain meaning Article X, Section 7, and is the arbitrator’
s
intent.32
As discussed earlier, the primary change in the language of Section 7 is to insure that
the employees endorsed as firefighters by the Fire and Police Commission on objective and
competitive bases will be doing the traditional work of their profession. Paid-on-call selectees
cannot integrated with sworn professional personnel. It is this arbitrator’
s conclusion that for
similar reasons a separation of overtime opportunities between lieutenants and firefighters is
just as important. For this employer under the circumstances of continuing conflict among
To the extent that Article X, Section 10, refers to “current practice”that shall mean the
current practice as established in the new agreement with the new language.
32

? 41?

management and members of the bargaining unit, the public interest demands nothing less.
There have been the incidents of conflict between the Union president, Pat Neal, and senior
officers, particularly former Chief Zamor and Assistant Chief Richard Carani (now Chief).
There have been threats of discipline in response to Neil’
s active pursuit of a fair distribution
of overtime. Neal testified that problems with overtime distribution has been a contributing
factor in the large turnover of firefighters. Employees genuinely believe that the former Fire
Chief manipulated the language of Article X, Section 10 to deprive firefighters of a fair share
of overtime hirebacks.
Secondly, assigning firefighters to perform firefighter work rather than assigning this
work to officers is a more cost effect use of Village resources. When a hireback opportunity
arises due to the absence of a firefighter there is no economic justification for assigning a
higher paid lieutenant to perform lower paid work. The Village’
s juxtaposition of certain high
paid senior firefighters against junior lieutenants in order to argue that the difference in costs
is de minimus is not an accurate reflection of the disparity of wages which exists between
lieutenants and firefighters. (See the discussion regarding the issue of wages, earlier in this
Award.) There is no basis for highly paid lieutenants to be performing lower rated firefighter
work. Considering the conflicts between lieutenants and firefighters which result from the
intermingling, the restriction of overtime bargaining unit work to bargaining unit members as
now provided in Section 7, will be beneficial in Section 10 as well.
Additionally, the arbitrator notes that the Village’
s own study of the comparable fire
? 42?

departments shows that the problems this Village has had with the distribution of overtime
between firefighters and lieutenants does not occur in the other fire departments. While that
is probably because almost all of them include lieutenants in the bargaining unit, the “take no
prisoners”mentality by both sides in this Village requires that there be a jurisdictional bright
line between the work of bargaining unit and non-bargaining unit employees.
The language changes proposed by the Union are unnecessary and the benefits these
proposals would grant firefighters for hirebacks of all kinds over that of lieutenants would only
exacerbate the poor relations which already exist between the ranks. The Union’
s solution of
just giving more to the firefighters at the expense of the lieutenants will lead to more labor
strife.
While the distribution of overtime through hirebacks is of course an economic issue,
the Union’
s proposal represents the type of discrete language changes which, if they are to
occur at all, should be achieved at the bargaining table. (Will County Sheriff, supra.) While
the Union has certainly shown that there are problems with the current language, these are
problems based upon the Union’
s disagreement with Arbitrator Perkovich’
s interpretation of
the language, and not the language itself. But this is now a moot point because the changes
made in Article X, Section 7, together with the old language of Section 10 will prohibit
lieutenants from performing firefighter work, if such employees are available for the hirebacks,
and preserve lieutenants’hirebacks for that rank without having to account to the Union.
Of course, while firefighters have no contractual right to perform in an acting up
? 43?

capacity if management wants to fill all such opportunities with hireback firefighters, the
Chief and designees retain the right to offer such acting up positions to qualified firefighters
if, in management’
s exclusive discretion, it is determined that such an assignment is
appropriate. This approach will also settle the Union’
s questionable claim that once a
firefighter is assigned to act up as a lieutenant he cannot be reassigned to a bargaining unit
position when another scheduled firefighter is unexpectedly absent. The Union offered no
rational explanation as to why an overtime assignment cannot be changed or why a firefighter
is somehow “entitled”to occasional lieutenant grade work. On the contrary, there is no
better argument for firefighters performing officers’work than there is for paid-on-call
firefighters to perform the work of Commission selected sworn personnel. Nonetheless, there
are procedures in place for those occasions when management does decide to assign a
firefighter to perform the work of an officer. Accordingly, the Village’
s proposal of no change
in the language shall prevail. This conclusion is supported by costs and other financial
factors, the public interest in having the best qualified employees perform the necessary work,
the public interest in achieving better labor stability, by comparability and bargaining history
and by the Village’
s lack of authority to undermine the Union’
s jurisdiction and to threaten
employees for engaging in protected activities.33

The arbitrator is not suggesting that the Village has committed unfair labor practices by
taking disciplinary action against Pat Neal for engaging in protected concerted activity. The
arbitrator is suggesting that management’
s frustration with Neal, as exhibited in testimony and from
internal correspondence which is part of the record ( see, for example, Union Exhibits 49 and 50), is
related to his vigorous protection of rights the Union believes the Agreement provides employees. A
33

? 44?

5. Layoff and Recall
In discussing the assignment of overtime work, Article X, Section 7, the parties
addressed whether the Village could continue to employ paid-on-call non-sworn personnel to
substitute for absent bargaining unit firefighters. Without question, this issue was seen by
both sides as the sharing of overtime between two different units of employees. The Union’
s
proposal was to require that all overtime first must be offered to bargaining unit personnel.
The arbitrator sustained the Union’
s request with the understanding that because the
Village’
s “sleeper”program was actually a usurpation of overtime by lesser qualified employees
the overtime restriction language would not allow paid-on-call employees to work before it
was offered to sworn firefighters.
In considering the next issue, hirebacks, the arbitrator concluded that henceforth
officers could not be offered overtime in firefighter positions unless the work was first offered
to bargaining unit employees. In other words, as a result of the bargaining unit requirements
inserted in Section 7 of Article X, the language of Section 10 of that article likewise changed.
Reasoning that bargaining unit work belonged to bargaining unit employees and that
Union representative may speak up, even coarsely, in the privacy of the fire station while engaged in
union activities. The para military demeanor expected in the pursuit of firefighter duties cannot be
applied to the employees’living quarters where there is no threat to public safety and employees are
engaged in protected activities. Even some incivility in such situations is not insubordination. That
Neal gets on management’
s nerves is no defense. Many of the problems giving rise to the issues in this
case relate to management’
s discomfort with employees exercising their rights under the Act. The
Village’
s continuing argument that the Union has not made a case for change is simply overwhelmed
by the evidence of unnecessary discordance and the massive turnover of firefighters.
? 45?

lieutenants’work belonged to officers of that rank, the arbitrator accepted the Village’
s
proposal to keep the existing language. The arbitrator was critical of the Union’
s proposal
which would have given limited preference to firefighters for lieutenants’work. Again, the
critical consideration was that the public interest mandated the best quality employee
available to perform the important work of the fire department.
The next issue, Article XI, Layoff and Recall, is another variation on the same theme.
This issue concerns the use of yet another cadre of firefighters, those contracted from an
independent supplier, to perform bargaining unit work. Since 1998 the Village has had a
contract with Paramedic Services of Illinois (“PSI”) to provide trained firefighter/paramedics
for Station 3, the facility located within the boundaries of the Libertyville Fire Protection
District. (See discussion at pp.2 -3, above.) Sometime after the implementation of the
parties’first bargaining agreement, the Village began to assign PSI employees to cover
vacancies created by the absence of bargaining unit employees at the other fire stations. In
this regard the PSI employees function in the same way as the paid-on-call employees
discussed above. While the PSI employees might serve for entire 24 hour shifts whereas the
paid-on-call employees only performed bargaining unit work at night, the principle is
identical.
The Union proposes a change in the language of Article XI, Layoff and Recall. The
Union proposes that non-sworn employees, which would include the PSI employees, could
not perform firefighter duties while sworn firefighters were on layoff. The Union expresses
? 46?

concern that with PSI employees now being used as substitutes for regular sworn firefighters
in fire stations other than the FPD station, there is nothing in the contract to prevent the
Village from laying off sworn employees and replacing them with PSI employees. The Village
opposes any change in the language of Article XI. It argues that nothing in the record
indicates that the Village ever laid off firefighters after it began the employment of a sworn
fire protection workforce. There is no evidence that the Village plans to lay anyone off, let
alone replace them with outside contractors.

The Agreement does provide for

subcontracting. The Union is not seeking a change in this management right.
The Union’
s proposal (with the language changes in bold face) reads as follows:
Section 1. Layoff
The Village, in its discretion, shall determine whether layoffs are
necessary. If it is determined that layoffs are necessary, employees will
be laid off in reverse seniority order, except that part-time, temporary,
and probationary employee will shall be laid off before employees with
seniority. In addition, no non-sworn person not appointed from a
firefighter eligibility list established by the Libertyville Fire and
Police Commission shall be assigned to perform firefighter and/or
paramedic work when sworn full time employees are on layoff.
Except in emergency, no layoff will occur without at least fifteen (15)
calendar days notification to the Union. The Village agrees to
consult the Union, upon request, and afford the Union an
opportunity to propose alternatives to the layoff, though such
consultation shall not be used to delay the layoff.

The Union’
s proposal is flawed because it has offered no evidence that the Village is
planning a layoff of regular sworn employees to be replaced by outside contractors. For the
arbitrator to engage in such a basic change in the Agreement there must be a strong showing
of need in terms of the statutory factors. There is nothing in the record to support a
? 47?

restriction on layoffs. The Union does not cite one comparable fire department in support of
this proposal. If the Union’
s proposal is simply a backdoor attempt to keep the Village from
staffing Station 3 with outside contractors it would be better served by making that proposal
outright. But the Union appears to accept the presence of PSI employees at Station 3.
On the other hand, if the Union’
s real concern is the integration of PSI employees
with the regular workforce, the Union has already succeeded in prohibiting non-bargaining
unit persons from performing bargaining unit overtime. Thus, it is unquestioned that PSI
employees are being shifted from Station 3 to Stations 1 and 2 in order to cover absences by
regular firefighters. By maintaining less than the budgeted staff, the Village has caused an
increase in uncovered firefighter time. It has previously avoided full employment of
firefighters by utilizing paid-on-call employees to cover these vacancies or by using officers in
hireback situations. The arbitrator’
s acceptance of the change in language of Article X,
Section 7, requiring all overtime to be offered first to bargaining unit firefighters, addresses
this problem and can be applied likewise to the assignment of PSI employees to cover the
absences of regular sworn firefighters.
To recapitulate, the Union proposed eliminating paid-on-call employees from working
half shifts to fill in for sworn firefighters. It did so by changing the language of the overtime
article because the use of the paid-on-call employees dissipated overtime opportunities. The
Village did not argue that the use of paid-on-call employees had nothing to do with overtime.
It forthrightly acknowledged that the new restrictions on overtime would eliminate the
? 48?

sleeper program. The arbitrator agreed with the Union for numerous reasons in line with the
statutory factors, not the least of which was that a community such as Libertyville should not
go to bed at night relying on irregular part-timers who could not or would not pass the
competitive entrance requirements of the Libertyville Fire and Police Commission.
The positions that the paid-on-call employees were filling were vacancies that
otherwise would be hireback opportunities for regular firefighters. That is obvious from the
relationship between Section 7 and Section 10 of Article X. Accordingly, when the arbitrator
examined Section 10 to assess the Union’
s proposal to change this language he realized that
much of what the Union was seeking had been accomplished with the restriction that
vacancies which would be filled by vacancies which had to be offered to firefighters before it
could be offered to lieutenants. The principle was the same. A department staffed by fire
commission certified employees could not fill vacancies even temporarily with non-bargaining
unit personnel. The choice for the Village is to simply eliminate the department and return
to an all paid-on-call and volunteer staff. This conclusion by the arbitrator is reinforced by an
abundant record of turmoil in the workplace and a questionable attitude toward the Union.
The same principle carries over with the use of PSI outsiders to perform work which
would otherwise be hireback opportunities for sworn firefighters. The Union concedes the
use of PSI employees at Station 3. But with regard to Stations 1 and 2, temporary vacancies
must be offered first to bargaining unit employees. This has nothing to do with layoffs. The
Union’
s concern on the record in this case is misplaced. The changes to the language of
? 49?

Article XI, Section 1, as proposed by the Union are denied and the arbitrator selects the
Village’
s proposal of maintaining the old language on layoffs.
6. Personal Leave Days
The next economic issue is the Union’
s request for an additional two personal days.
The Village’
s proposal is to maintain the status quo. The wording of the Union’
s proposal
(with the proposed new language in bold face) is:

Article XIX

Section 3. Personal Leave Days

Employees shall be entitled to receive three (3) duty shifts off without
loss of pay as personal leave days. Effective May 1, 2006 employees
shall be entitled to four (4) duty shifts off without loss of pay as
personal days. Effective May 1, 2007 employees shall be entitled
to five (5) duty shifts off without loss of pay as personal days.

As with several of the other issues in this case this proposal comes with its own special
bargaining history. The Village has provided personal days as a benefit for employees for
many years. Prior to the organization of the bargaining unit, all Village employees, including
those in the Fire Department, received three personal days in addition to their holidays.
This did not include the Police, who were already organized and were receiving five personal
days.
In April, 2001, the Union and the Village were finalizing the workweek provisions for
the first agreement. The bargain involved eliminating five of the eight scheduled holidays,
the establishment of 6.75 Kelly Days per employee and the elimination of FLSA overtime
? 50?

with the scheduling of one Kelly Day every 18th shift. The net result was a decrease in the
workweek from 56 to 53 hours. Unbeknownst to the Union, however, the Village had
determined to increase the number of personal days for unrepresented employees from three
to five. There was no loss of holidays. According to the Village, information about the
increase in personal days for unrepresented employees had been given to department heads
several weeks earlier. This information was not disclosed to the Union until after the
agreement for the workweek had been signed off. The Union insists that had it known about
this change in benefits for unrepresented employees, which left the Firefighters as the only
group without five days of personal leave, the dynamics of bargaining would have changed
with the possibility of a different agreement. The Union decided not to abandon the bargain
but it did secure an understanding from the Village that this settlement did not establish a
precedent for future negotiations and the Union could raise the personal days issue in
bargaining for the next Agreement (as it has done). The Union argues that the Village
intentionally withheld important information form the Union at the bargaining table and that
should be a factor in support of its request for the additional two personal days in this case.
The Village argues that it did nothing wrong and the Union still ended up with 6.75
Kelly days with the loss of only 5 holidays.

The Village argues that this schedule is a

favorable one among the comparables. The Union argues that Kelly Days are not “days off”
but merely a device to increase the hourly rate and eliminate FLSA overtime.
In 2003 the Police negotiated a new collective bargaining agreement. Their mix of
? 51?

days off changed from 8 holidays and 5 personal days to 7 holidays and 6 personal days.
Additionally, the workweek for police employees was reduced below the FLSA standard of
42.75 hours per standard workweek to an average of 39.8 hours. While the day was
lengthened from 8 hours to 8-1/2 hours (including a paid lunch) the number of reporting days
decreased to 243.3 days per year, or 18 days less per year than in previous years.34 The Village
argues that this schedule is considered experimental and will back on the bargaining table in
the next Police negotiations. The Union argues that this leaves the Firefighters with the
weakest work schedule of any unit of employees in the Village.
Both parties argue that the comparable data favors their respective proposals. The
Union relies on an examination of total compensation. That includes wages and fringe
benefits. However, in order to consider this data valid the arbitrator needs to factor in the
increases in wages and the additional overtime which are products of this Award. In so doing,
Libertyville is competitive and does not need the additional two personal days to maintain its
position among the comparable communities. The Village’
s data focuses more on time off. It
shows that the average number of personal days and holidays is a little more than 3, as against
Libertyville’
s 6, and while 6.75 Kelly Days is below the average, it is about in the middle
against the other ten municipalities. In terms of vacation benefits, with or without holidays
and personal days, Libertyville is above average for 1,5,10,15, 20 and 25 years of service.
The Police workweek went from a 6/2, 6/3, 6/2, 6/3, 5/3 sequence of days of work to days
off, to a 5/2, 5/3 sequence. The Union argues that under the law this is the most favorable work
schedule for police employees while still considered as full-time employees.
34

? 52?

Granting the Union’
s proposal for two additional personal days would put Libertyville near
the top. The conclusion must be that the comparable data does not support the Union’
s
proposal for two additional personal days.
The arbitrator has carefully considered the Union’
s argument for two additional
personal days in light of the bargaining history. Its claim of unfairness is not persuasive
because there is no nexus between the Village’
s lack of candor and the ultimate result. While
it is true that had the Union known that the Village had granted two additional personal days
negotiations would have dragged on even longer, there is no certainty that the end result
would have been the same. Indeed, given the breakthrough for Kelly Days as well as the
additional step for senior firefighters the arbitrator is unconvinced that eventually the Village
would have ceded those additional two personal days. At some point in the future there
might be factors favoring the additional two days. But considering the economic package as a
whole resulting from this Award, the Union has not demonstrated a need for the additional
days in this agreement. The Village’
s proposal, which includes deletion of the side letter
preserving the Union’
s bargaining rights on this issue, shall be granted.
7. Retroactivity
The parties agree to retroactivity for wages from May 1, 2003. The difference in their
proposals is that the Village wants it to apply only to members of the bargaining unit
employed as of the date of the Award. The proposals are as follows:
ARTICLE XVII WAGES AND RATES OF PAY
? 53?

Section 5. Retroactivity
Village

Union

The wage increases provided by this section
shall be retroactive to May 1, 2003 on all
hours compensated for all members of the
bargaining unit employed as of the date the
Arbitrator issues his award.

The wage increases provided by this section
shall be retroactive to May 1, 2003 on all
hours compensated for all members of the
bargaining unit employed on or after such
effective date.

The Village argues that only five employees have left the Fire Department during the
period of retroactivity, one of whom was a probationary employee released for work
performance issues. Of the remaining four, two resigned in 2003. The Village argues that by
resigning their appointments as sworn firefighters the four employees abandoned their
interest in retroactive payments. They are no longer stakeholders in the process. The Village
also asserts that the delay in bringing these proceedings to a conclusion is attributable to the
numerous proposals for change made by the Union.
The Union argues that employees should be paid at the rates provided in the contract
regardless of when they leave employment. If the parties agreed to a certain wage rate for
2003, 2004 and 2005, employees who worked during that time should be paid those rates.
That they no longer work for the Village is irrelevant to wages already earned. The Union
also argues that the Village’
s proposal sets a bad precedent because it penalizes employees
who might be retiring. Failure to pay their wages retroactively affects their pensions because

? 54?

pensions are gauged on the basis of wages earned immediately before retirement.35
The Union also argues that a number of arbitrators have selected full retroactivity
when the issue was before them. The Union cites City of Rock Island and Rock Island
Firefighters Union IAFF Local 26, S-MA-91-64 (Berman, 1992) where the arbitrator stated:
I agree with the Employer that the city should be most
concerned with people who have remained employed.
Nevertheless, I cannot justify penalizing employees for the
parties’delay or for the delay built into the system of collective
bargaining and interest arbitration. Equally as important it is not
in the public interest and welfare to encourage delay by
permitting the employer to profit from turnover and employee
attrition –factors largely beyond the control of both parties.
This reasoning was adopted by Arbitrator Sinclair Kossoff in Village of Oakbrook and
Teamsters Union Local No. 714, S-MA-96-242 (1998). Arbitrator Kossoff, relying on the
awards of several other arbitrators, stated (slip opinion p. 30):
It is difficult to rationalize withholding from someone payment
for work performed or otherwise earned merely because he or she
is no longer employed by the village. The signing of a contract is
an acknowledgment that a fair rate of payment for the work
performed in 1996 and 1997 was above what the village actually
paid for that work. ***

The Union argues that it is beneficial to the Village to allow employees to retire before a
contract is settled knowing that they will get back pay up until their retirement. If employees could
not rely upon retroactivity they would be required to continue working until the contract was
resolved thereby depriving the Village of hiring a replacement at lower starting rates.
35

? 55?

As pointed out by Arbitrator Kossoff, once the parties agree what the proper wage rate
should have been for a year in the past, there is no reason to deprive employees who worked
at that time from being paid the proper rate. Employees who left the Village’
s employment in
2004 were then being paid wages set for 2003. Based upon a long tradition of providing some
modest increment each successive year these employees had the right to expect that the
proper wages for the work performed would eventually catch up to them. Retroactivity is not
a windfall. It is payment for services rendered. The delay in payment is simply a cost to be
borne by employees as a byproduct of collective bargaining. That employees should not be
paid eventually for the agreed upon value of their services would be unreasonable and
contrary to public policy which favors collective bargaining.

Accordingly, the Union’
s

proposal for retroactivity is selected.

B. Non-economic Issues
1. Duties
Article III of the May, 1999 through April, 2003, collective bargaining agreement is a
stand alone provision limiting duties to those that sworn employees have performed in the
past and those reasonably related thereto. The article specifically prohibits the performance
of electrical, plumbing or carpentry duties. The Union proposes to add a new sentence to
this article giving sworn firefighters priority with respect to assignments of driver/engineer

? 56?

and officer/paramedic in charge.36 The Village opposes any change in the language. The
proposal reads as follows (new language only):
Full time bargaining unit employees shall have priority over
non-sworn non-bargaining unit personnel with respect to
shift assignments of Driver/Engineer, Officer/Paramedic in
charge.
The Union argues that this proposal comes about because of the friction which exists
between regular sworn firefighters and non-sworn part-timers. There have been occasions
when some of the part-time employees working side-by-side with sworn personnel have
usurped or otherwise taken the more challenging positions of driver/engineer or paramedic-in
charge. The Union argues that teamwork is essential for the successful fulfillment of an
emergency call. Petty jealousies and competition between the two different workforces which
comprise the Village’
s response teams. The Union maintains that the sworn bargaining unit
members are more competent and better trained. The Village disagrees, and as a result has
disregarded the growing conflicts between the two different workforces.
This issue is directly related to Issue 3, above, Hours of Work and Overtime, where
regular full-time employees hired pursuant to the merit system of the Fire and Police
Commission are competing with employees hired by direct appointment and working at the
There is no official position or classification of driver/engineer in the this fire department
and the Arbitrator does not interpret the Union’
s proposal as a back door attempt to create one.
There is a function of driver/engineer and the Union’
s proposal seeks priority in the assignment of
that function. The paramedic in charge is responsible for determining the proper protocols for
treating a patient. According to the Village, the paramedic in charge has the final say on which
protocol to use and is held accountable for the patient’
s treatment.
36

? 57?

pleasure of the Fire Chief. As has been stated above, patronage employees in a public safety
profession such as police or fire are inherently less qualified as a class than those who
achieved their positions based upon competitive procedures. While of course there are
exceptions among individuals, and certainly there are exceedingly competent paid-on-call
employees who cannot work a sworn position because of personal circumstances, the law in
Illinois favors employment by objective standards. It is in that sense that the paid-on-call
employees are inherently less qualified than full-time sworn personnel. It is not in the public
interest to have a system where competing employees are bickering over who gets what
assignment. Where life and property is involved the public deserves the best not simply those
who sought and obtained the favor of the Chief.
Addressing the job of paramedic-in-charge, Fire Chief Robert Zamor (now retired)
testified that the Village participates in the Condell Hospital Health System which regulates
the certification and licensing requirements for the Village’
s paramedics and those of other
surrounding communities who are participating members. According to Zamor, the Condell
System has a rule, approved by the Illinois Department of Public Health, that requires that
the paramedic with the most years of experience as a paramedic be in charge. The Village
argues that if the arbitrator were to adopt the Union’
s proposal the Village would not be able
to participate in this multi-municipality health system.
There are at least three reasons why the Village’
s proposal is unpersuasive. First, the
actual regulation described by Chief Zamor was not introduced. The arbitrator is uncertain if
? 58?

the Chief was giving his interpretation of the rule or exactly what form it appears. Where a
party seeks to show that external law (in this case a sanctioned public health regulation)
affects the arbitrator’
s authority to fashion contract language the arbitrator needs the
regulation itself to interpret. Second, the arbitrator has no understanding, and none was
supplied, as to what the measurement is of length of service for the affected employees. Is it
continuous service or simply the date of certification.? Does a firefighter/paramedic who
works 48 hours on and 24 hours off have less service credits than a paid-on-call paramedic
who works one or two evenings a week? Finally, where the Union has shown a need for a
change in language, as it is has done with this issue, the change in language may simply mean
that the Village cannot use paid-on-call paramedics working on the same assignment as
regular sworn employees if the result is a violation of its labor contract. From the arbitrator’
s
perspective eliminating paid-on-call paramedics when regular sworn personnel are available is
a benefit to the public and the Condell System.
The Village also argues that the Union’
s proposal on this issue is inappropriate
because the Village also participates in the Mutual Aid Box Alarm System (“MABAS”)
pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement with surrounding communities.

This

arrangement requires the Village to comply with certain protocols when it responds to calls in
other communities. Among these is a requirement for Village personnel to respond to
direction from local people, including persons of local rank or no rank at all. The Village
argues that the Union’
s proposal for priority in shift assignments could conflict with
? 59?

obligations. This is farfetched if not a “red herring.” The Union’
s proposal relates to
assignments within a unit of Village firefighters. It has nothing to do with the chain of
command among different departments responding to the same call. The Union’
s proposal
addresses the ongoing conflict between merit system employees and those who obtained their
positions in the Village other than through the Fire and Police Commission. It has nothing
to do with intergovernmental mutual aid agreements.
The Village also argues that the Union has not fulfilled the arbitrator’
s prerequisites
for a language change because it has not, among other things, shown that change could not
be accomplished at the bargaining table. It argues that this issue was hardly bargained at all.
At the core of the Village’
s argument is its unwillingness to see that anything is wrong in the
way its fire department is functioning. Yet, the arbitrator has found numerous problems with
the operation of this fire department where:
1. The same work is being performed by three different and competing units
(regular sworn, regular part-time paid-on-call, and employees of a third party
outside contractor).
2. The three groups live and work side by side, freely moving from fire station
to fire station, in effect competing for the same assignments.
3. Each group works under different terms and conditions or employment.
4. The line supervisors (e.g. the lieutenants) whose work is integrated with the
firefighters are not in the bargaining unit, contrary to the comparables .
This structure is at the core of this case. The parties have expended enormous
resources in seeking resolution at the bargaining table of the problems associated with this
? 60?

structure. The parties have been unable to make progress on the source of these issues. The
Village’
s argument that the parties have not bargained hard enough is simply misplaced. The
arbitrator was witness to and participated in (as a mediator) intense bargaining, observing first
hand the futility in getting changes by either side on numerous issues. The arbitrator finds
that the parties cannot and will not agree to changes in this tripartite workforce. Given the
dysfunctional state of affairs which has caused unprecedented turnover, changes by the
arbitrator under the standards set forth in the Act are appropriate . Accordingly, the Union’
s
proposal on Duties is selected by the arbitrator.

2. Assignments and Transfers
In their first agreement the parties negotiated a detailed provision for the posting and
assignment of jobs within the Fire Department. It was primarily a procedural provision and
left the final decision of who should fill the vacancy to the Chief exclusively. The Village
proposes that this section has worked as it was intended and there is no reason to make any
changes, and if any changes are to be made it should be at the bargaining table. The parties
were able to negotiate the existing contract language and there is no reason to believe that if
changes are necessary they could not also be made at the bargaining table.
The Union proposes some alterations in the language so as to, in its opinion, bring the
wording within the original intent. According to the Union, under the original language
Chief Zamor applied the posting language only to shift vacancies. He did not post openings
? 61?

for the numerous special assignments which exist within the department. The Union does
not object to application of the language to shift vacancies, and also seeks to clarify that. But
the thrust of the Union’
s proposal is a requirement that numerous special assignments which
exist within the department, such as child safety seat installation, vehicle maintenance,
assisting the training officer, etc. be posted. While there are requirements that these
positions be filled on an objective basis the Chief has broad discretion in making his selection.
The idea behind this proposal, the Union explains, is to require the notification of employees
of all “jobs”so that everyone has an opportunity to express his interest.
proposal (in bold face) together with the existing language reads as follows:
ARTICLE VIII ASSIGNMENTS AND TRANSFERS
A. In the event of a job or shift vacancy due to the promotion,
demotion, retirement, resignation, discharge or demise of an
employee, or the creation of a new position or job (current jobs
are listed in paragraph B of this Article), which the Village decides
to fill, such job vacancy shall be made available with the following
provisions procedures:
1. Positions shall be announced within ten (10) days of the
occurrence of the event creating the vacancy by bulletin which
shall be posted in a location accessible to all employees for a period of
at least fifteen (15) days. Such positions shall be considered open for
written bid for this fifteen (15) day period.
2. Positions shall be filled from those employees submitting a bid for
the position, on a seniority basis, where the skill experience and
ability are determined by the Fire Chief or his designee to be equal.
3. In the event a bid is not received for a posted position from an
employee deemed by the Fire Chief or his designee to be qualified for
the position, the Village may assign the least senior employee to the
vacancy, provided the least senior employee has the requisite skill,
? 62?

The Union’
s

ability and experience as determined by the Fire chief or his designee
to perform the work of the position. In the event the least senior
employee is not qualified, the Village may fill the position regardless
of seniority.
4. Voluntary transfers between two employees within the same job
classification may be granted b y the Fire Chief.
5. Employees shall not be transferred for discriminatory reasons in
violation of the No Discrimination Article of this Agreement.
6. The Fire Chief/designee’
s determinations under this Article shall
not be overturned unless such determinations are found to be
arbitrary and capricious.
B. Current Jobs
Public Education Responsibilities

Miscellaneous Departmental Responsibilities

1. Fire Extinguisher Classes
1. Honor Guard
2. Shift Inspections: Senior Inspectors
2. Firehouse/NFIRS Data System
3. Safety Always Matters (SAMS)
3. Building Maintenance
4. Child Safety Seat Installation
4. Vehicle Maintenance
5. Risk Watch (Accident Prevention Program) 5. Vehicle Specifications
6. Community Emergency Response Team 6. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
(CERT)
7. Uniforms (New Quartermaster System)
8. Assistant to Training Officer
9. Assistant to Medical Officer

While most of these positions were briefly discussed at the hearing, some of them were
not. Nor was there much exploration, if any, of the qualifications and skills needed to
perform these tasks, or how the requirement to post and bid would affect the performance of
these duties by and with lieutenants. Some of these tasks are performed by lieutenants and
there is no explanation in the record as to how formalizing these tasks as “jobs”would impact
the Village’
s assignment of some or all of the duties of these “jobs”to officers.
There are insufficient details in the record with some of these items to adequately
? 63?

understand how they are really “jobs”that require a formal bidding process. There is a point
where tasks are not “jobs”to which individual employees have vested interests or identifiable
rights to them. Every task which is part of the regular duties of a firefighter cannot be
identified as a “job”for which employees compete. It is not unreasonable for management to
have discretion in assigning some tasks to one or more employees, to officers or to use a
different system for these assignments than a “bid and award”system. Of course, the parties
might negotiate otherwise, but the catch word here is “negotiate.” Nothing in the record
indicates that this is an issue which is so stalemated that it requires disposition by an
arbitrator. No other comparable fire department has required a contract provision such as
this.
The Union’
s proposal might be seen as a response to some allegations that the Chief
had favorite employees who appeared to get more of these special assignments than others. A
grievance was filed but not pursued to arbitration.37 If the Union’
s real complaint is an abuse

On several occasions in its brief the Village argues that the pursuit of a grievance on a
subject forecloses the Union from seeking a change at the bargaining table. Quite the contrary is
true. Grievance arbitration and collective bargaining (which might end in interest arbitration) are
separate ways to clarify contract language. That the Union chose not to pursue its grievance on this
subject to arbitration does not affect its right to seek a more fundamental understanding at the
bargaining table. Not every question of contract interpretation is appropriate for arbitration. There
are issues of proof, of costs, of timeliness, of internal union considerations, all of which may affect the
decision to take a grievance to arbitration. In this case there are dual concerns. First, the Union
needs to establish whether the tasks at issue are really “jobs”as referred to in the contract language.
Then it must demonstrate that the alleged favoritism by the Chief occurred and that it violated the
contract. Given these multiple considerations the Union is perfectly justified in seeking a change at
the bargaining table. The Village’
s reliance on Village of Algonquin and Metropolitan Alliance of
Police, S-MA-95-85 (Benn, 1996) is not apposite.
37

? 64?

of discretion by the Chief, the proposed solution of making every one of these tasks a job
open for bid might be seen as an overreaction or, colloquially speaking, taking a sledge
hammer to the problem where a screw driver might be more efficient. The arbitrator has a
sense that the Union’
s approach to this issue is half-baked. It may be valid. Certainly
favoritism which amounts to improper discrimination, if it occurred, is a real concern. But
the Union must look to the bargaining table for the resolution. As the Village points out, the
Union was able to negotiate the initial language which established the bidding process. It
may be able to do so again. But at this juncture, this issue is not yet ready for arbitration.
The Union proposal must also fail because there is not one comparable community
that requires the posting and bidding of specialized responsibilities. Nor is there any evidence
that there is a practice in any of these communities for the selection of specialized duties. In
a nutshell, the Union’
s proposal on this issue is inappropriate under the traditional standards
for awarding a non-economic issue. See generally, Nathan, Arbitral Standards for Deciding
Non-Economic Impasse Issues, 21 Ill Pub. Employee Rel. Report 1 (Winter, 2004).
Accordingly, the Village’
s proposal for this issue is selected.
3. Duty Trades
The ability of a firefighter to exchange an assigned shift with another employee of equal
rank is a common working condition in fire departments. It is recognized as an exception to
the Fair Labor Standards Act as long as it is a voluntary system approved by the employer. 29
C.F.R. § 553.31 (2003)
? 65?

It is standard operating procedure in Libertyville and in the other comparable fire
departments for the employee initiating the trade to complete a form giving the details of the
trade which is then signed by both employees and submitted to management for approval.
Although not clear from the contract language, the Union asserts that in almost all the
comparable fire departments approval is by shift commanders and is routine. In Libertyville
the Chief has been actively involved in the process and what is allegedly mundane in other
jurisdictions is cumbersome here. According to the Union, the Chief’
s personal involvement
in what should be an unremarkable process has caused personality clashes and the appearance
of an unnecessary exercise of power. The Village steadfastly denies the Union’
s claim of
arbitrary misuse of the procedure by the Chief, denies the Union’
s anecdotal evidence
regarding the practices in other jurisdictions and relies, instead, on the actual contract
language in other fire department agreements, and argues that the Union has woefully failed
to support its claim with any factual foundation showing a need for a change.
The Union proposes several changes in the language. The Village proposes retaining
the existing language. The Unions proposal, using bold type for new language and strike-outs
for deleted language, is as follows:
ARTICLE X HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME
Section 13. Duty Trades
In accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act, an employee
for his own convenience, may voluntarily have another bargaining
unit employee of comparable qualifications in the same position
substitute for him by performing work for all or part of the employee’
s
? 66?

work shift, provided the substitution is requested one (1) duty day 24
hours in advance (this requirement may be waived by the Chief of his
designees in an emergency), leaves employees on the shift who are
able to perform the duties of the assigned positions on the shift, and
does not otherwise interfere with the operation of the Fire
Department and is subject to approval by the Fire Chief or his
designee. Requests that are in compliance with these criteria as of
the date the request is made shall be approved. Employees may
request approval of a trade with less than 24 hours notice prior to
the start of the trade and such requests shall be made subject to
approval at the discretion of the employee’
s on duty Assistant
Chief or Shift Commander whose decision shall be final and not
subject to the grievance procedure. The approval of a trade shall
not restrict a later trade (i.e., Kelly or Duty) that is otherwise in
compliance with the criteria of this Section. All requests shall be
in writing on a form approved by the Chief or his designee. See
Appendix B. Shift trades must be completed within one year with a
“pay back”date (unless “pay back”is not expected, and shall not
result in overtime). Further, the Fire Chief of his designee on duty
Assistant Chief or Shift Commander, at his discretion, may approve
limited voluntary holdovers of less than one (1) hour as partial shift
substitutions, at shorter notice than is otherwise required in this
Section. Such approval will not be denied for arbitrary and capricious
reasons. The hours worked by the substitute employee would
otherwise be entitled to compensation. If a substitute employee works
all or part of another employee’
s scheduled work shift in accordance
with this Section, then the hours worked by the substitute employee
shall be counted as hours worked by the employee who was originally
scheduled to work that shift.

During the Union’
s organizing campaign threats allegedly were made to employees
that if the Union prevailed duty trades would become more difficult. Such alleged restrictions
became part of the Union’
s unfair labor practice charge and were part of the Complaint issued
by the Labor Board against the Village. When that case was settled the Village specifically
agreed that it would grant reasonable requests for short term duty trades.
In negotiating their first contract the parties agreed to conventional language permitting duty
? 67?

trades requested at least one duty day in advance subject to approval by the Chief or his
designee.38
The record demonstrates that on some occasions individual firefighters have had
difficulty in obtaining the Chief’
s approval. On one occasion, a lieutenant acting as shift
commander initialed a request form for Firefighter Kevin Fisher. The next day Fisher was
called by Assistant Chief (now Chief) Carani and told that the form was improperly filled out.
Fisher then called Assistant Chief Gromm who approved the request. Although now
approved by two assistant chiefs and one lieutenant acting as an assistant chief the request
was denied by the Chief because of form and Fisher was reprimanded for insubordination and
absence without leave. On another occasion in August 2001, Union President Pat Neal was
denied a duty trade because of unrelated conduct in a previous month. Chief Zamor
eventually approved the request but warned Neal that his conduct generally could be the
basis for the denial of unrelated duty trade requests. The Union points out that using duty
trade denials as a form of discipline is a misuse of the system. The arbitrator agrees that duty
trades are a qualified right for firefighters based upon the effect the trade will have on staffing.
It should not be granted as a reward for good behavior or denied for (unrelated) bad
behavior.39

38

The one duty day advance notice requirement can be waived in an emergency.

The present language is constructed so that duty trades are for the convenience of the
firefighters, provided that they do not interfere with the operational needs of the department. The
approval of the Chief or his designees relates to a confirmation of the operational needs. It is not a
39

? 68?

Firefighter Bill Bending testified that under the current system all duty trade requests
have to be approved by the Chief. According to Bending this creates bureaucratic problems
because the Chief is not always available and the requirement to get a request a full duty day
in advance (72 hours) complicates the planning of these requests. According to Bending it
would be much more efficient to have requests handled by the Assistant Chiefs without the
additional step of securing the Chief’
s approval. According to the Union, Assistant Chiefs
are in a better position to know whether the employees involved in the exchange have equal
qualifications. According to the Union, other fire departments use the more informal system
as well as the Police Chief in Libertyville who does not require his officers to clear their
individual duty trade requests with him.40
Bending also testified the Union was seeking the right of a firefighter to make a trade
after he has already scheduled a trade, or as it is called, a trade within a trade. Bending
testified that in most situations this arises when employees have traded Kelly Days, that is
they have traded days off. The reciprocation of the trade may not occur for several months.
In the meantime, the employee who is working (because of the trade) what had been a
discretionary benefit which may or may not be granted depending on the assessment of unrelated
behavioral issues any more than a other routine work schedule benefits provided in Article X may be
altered as a form of discipline. In other words, the Chief’
s discretion is a discrete one addressing the
needs of the shift’
s structure.
According to the Union only Bensenville requires approval by the Chief. While other
contracts do not even cover the issue, a survey by the Union established that fire chiefs elsewhere do
not get regularly involved in the process. The Village objected to the competency of this hearsay
evidence but offered no evidence of its own on the subject of actual practices.
40

? 69?

scheduled Kelly Day for him needs to take that day off for other reasons. Or, the employee
scheduled off at a future date (the exchanged Kelly Day) might need to use that future Kelly
Day for a different exchange because of intervening circumstances. He might, for example,
need someone to cover another shift for him and would offer the exchanged Kelly Day as the
reciprocating day off for the second trade. According to the Union, as long as the employees
involved in these trades are of equal qualifications it should not matter to the department
who is covering the shift. Employees of equal rank and qualifications, such as the ability to
drive a truck, are fungible. Alternatively, the Union maintains, it was understood at the last
negotiations that employees involved in a trade did not have to have identical qualifications
as long as another employee of the shift was working and could perform the duties of the
employee seeking the trade.41 The Union maintains that these internal schedule changes
should be a matter of routine and not grist for the Chief to over-control the rank and file.
The Village argues that the Union has failed to prove any legitimate need to change
the duty trade language. Considering the facts of this case as a whole, this is incorrect. The
record demonstrates a repeated abuse of power by the Fire Chief. Even if he eventually
granted most requests, his personal involvement in every instance request complicated the

The Village acknowledges that it has permitted “conditional duty trades”where the
employee working as a result of a trade does not have all the qualifications of his trading partner but
the fire station is otherwise staffed with an employee with the necessary qualifications.
41

? 70?

process and was unnecessarily burdensome on employees. The difficulties with duty trades
described by the Union’
s witness do not occur in the Village’
s police department or among
the comparable neighboring fire departments. While the Village argues that the Union has
not shown a single instance when a duty trade request has been denied because the Chief was
not reachable, the process caused a waste of time and energy which might have been better
directed to the mission of the department. The problem here is not that firefighters have
been denied duty trades but that the procedure that had to be followed to secure them was
onerous. As with other issues in this case, it is not that the Chief made bad judgments but
that he imposed his will at every stage of the department’
s operations unnecessarily
complicating (as opposed to denying) the valid exercise of rights secured in the collective
bargaining agreement. It is not the arbitrator’
s function to pass judgment on a department
head’
s management style. But where that style interferes with the efficient use of benefits
secured by the collective bargaining agreement, the arbitrator may change the language to
better secure the negotiated benefits in those cases where the parties have been unable to do
so by themselves. The burden of proof for making the change is always on the moving party.
In this case the Union has carried that burden.
The Village also argues that the Chief needs to approve every request so as to monitor
the work of his subordinate officers. But, as the department head, the Fire Chief always has
the authority to review the actions of his staff. That does not mean that he has to be
involved in every decision as it occurs. There is a difference between managing the
? 71?

department and making every staffing decision first. The record demonstrates that this has
been a cumbersome process and that there is a need for change.
On the other hand, there is a question whether the difficulties will be better addressed
with the Union’
s proposed language changes or merely by the employment of a new Fire
Chief, as has occurred. As a practical matter with an issue such as duty trades there is no
such thing as a friction-free system if the spirit of cooperation is not present. The Union
concedes this. It may not be so much that the existing language is flawed and needs
correcting as it is that the departing Chief abused the language and made a routine
administrative process into an ordeal. There is a need to be wary that in attempting to
correct a problem based more on personalities than sentence structure the arbitrator not
impose upon the Village a burden which hampers its ability to operate efficiently.42 Thus, for
example, the Union’
s request for systematizing, or making routine, duty trade requests with
less than 24 hours notice is of some concern. Management ought to know who is going to
staff each 24 hour duty rotation with enough notice that it can accommodate for emergencies
or unanticipated absences. The Union’
s language inhibits this and might even permit
One of the reasons why the parties should make their own corrections is because the
outsider can never be sure that his remedy does not cause more problems than he solved. Because of
the nuances inherent in duty trades the parties are always in a better position to work out the details.
In this case there appears to have been no recognition by the Village that there was any problem at
all. The arbitrator respectfully disagrees with the Village’
s argument that the only test is whether
duties trades were actually denied. If the process is unnecessarily complicated it will have a chilling
effect on the exercise of this negotiated benefit. Considering also the practices in other jurisdictions
as well as the absence of any problems in the Village’
s police department, the arbitrator concludes
that his change in language is not an abuse of power or an imposition of his management style.
42

? 72?

requests even after the shift has begun. While it is true that these requests can be denied, the
establishment of a formal system with a 24 hour cut-off might encourage short requests and
encumber shift commanders with unnecessary detail. While this might be allowed in an
emergency, the present language allows for exceptions in such cases. Stated another way, in
the absence of an emergency, firefighters should be able to plan their schedules so that duty
trades are not necessary on short notice. In the ordinary course, a duty shift in advance is an
adequate standard. That part of the Union’
s request seeking a shorter notification period is
denied.
With regard to trades within trades, there is nothing in the existing language which
bars this. It has simply been a restriction imposed by the Chief as an exercise of his authority.
Yet, if the requests are timely and meet the qualification requirement applicable to any duty
trade there is no reason why the present language should not have allowed this. Again, it is
not so much that the contract needs to be changed but that the existing language be
construed in a manner that satisfies the needs of both management and the employees.
Unfortunately, should the arbitrator deny all changes in the language relating to trades within
trades there may be an implication that the old process should continue. It appears to the
arbitrator that trades within trades ought to be considered no differently than any other duty
trade requests, and all of them should be with sufficient advance notice to insure proper
management of the department except, of course, in emergencies.

? 73?

The following language is awarded (new language in bold type):43
In accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act, an employee for his
own convenience, may voluntarily have another bargaining unit employee of
comparable qualifications in the same position substitute for him by performing
work for all or part of the employee’
s work shift, provided the substitution is
requested one (1) duty day in advance (this requirement may be waived by the
Chief of his designees in an emergency), leaves employees on the shift who are
able to perform the duties of the assigned positions on the shift, and does not
otherwise interfere with the operation of the Fire Department and is subject to
approval by the Fire Chief or his designee. Requests that are in compliance
with these criteria as of the date the request is made shall be approved.
The approval of a trade shall not restrict a later trade (i.e., Kelly or Duty)
that is otherwise in compliance with the criteria of this Section. All
requests shall be in writing on a form approved by the Chief or his designee.
See Appendix B. Shift trades must be completed within one year with a “pay
back”date (unless “pay back”is not expected, and shall not result in overtime).
Further, the Fire Chief of his designee on duty Assistant Chief or Shift
Commander, at his discretion, may approve limited holdovers of less than one
(1) hour as partial shift substitutions, at shorter notice than is otherwise
required in this Section. Such approval will not be denied for arbitrary and
capricious reasons. The hours worked by the substitute employee would
otherwise be entitled to compensation. If a substitute employee works all or
part of another employee’
s scheduled work shift in accordance with this
Section, then the hours worked by the substitute employee shall be counted as
hours worked by the employee who was originally scheduled to work that shift.
4. Residency

The Union has also proposed the addition of the word “voluntary”in that portion of the
Section 13 relating to holdovers. The record is unclear why this language is necessary or as to what
problems have arisen because that word did not appear in the old language. Based on this record the
addition of this word is denied at this time.
43

? 74?

The Union is proposing an amendment to the residency provisions in the Agreement.
The existing language and the Union’
s proposal (in bold face) are as follows:
ARTICLE XXI

RESIDENCY

Bargaining unit employees shall reside within the following boundaries:
northern boundary - south of the Wisconsin state line; southern boundary - north of
Route 58 (Golf Road); eastern boundary - western shoreline of Lake Michigan; and
western boundary - east of Route 31. The boundaries are further described on the
map attached as Appendix D. Probationary employees shall have six (6) months
after the completion of their probationary period to comply with the residency
requirement. Employees who fail to comply with the residency requirement will be
subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. In the event the
Village enforces less restrictive boundaries within the State of Illinois for any
other Village employees, the boundaries shall be expanded to coincide with the
least restrictive boundaries enforced for such other Village employees.
Employees residing beyond a ten (10) mile radius from a center located at
Cook Street and Milwaukee Avenue in Libertyville, Illinois shall not be issued paging
devices and, subject to the Fire Chief’
s discretion, may be contacted for emergency
callback and non-scheduled hireback duty.
Every employee covered by this Agreement shall have telephone service in
their (sic) place of residence with the employee phone number and place of residence
submitted to the Fire Chief within forty-eight (48) hours upon changing their place of
residence or telephone number.

Residency restrictions have been a traditional term and condition of employment in
Libertyville. The residency restriction ensures that fire personnel are within a sufficient range
to be summoned to work in the event of an emergency. In a sense it is in line with the same
thinking that puts firefighters in fire stations for 24 hour shifts. The need to be ready and
available at any time is central to the concept of a municipal fire department.
From the early 1970s to the early 1990s fire department employees were required to
live within five miles of the Village’
s fire station. When the department expanded to two
? 75?

stations in the 1990s the residency restriction was broadened to ten miles from either station.
In negotiating its first collective bargaining agreement the Union secured a significant
expansion of the residency requirement. It now includes all of Lake County, the north and
northwestern suburbs of Cook County and eastern parts of Kane and McHenry Counties.
This expansion came as the result of hard bargaining and as part of a package resolving other
outstanding issues. Non-bargaining unit fire personnel are subject to the old ten mile limit.
The Union’
s “me-too”proposal for a restriction no greater than the least restrictive
requirement available to any other employee of the Village would eliminate the residency
restrictions in their entirety because a great many Village employees have no restrictions at
all. The Union argues that an essential part of the bargain for the restrictions negotiated in
the earlier agreement was the provision limiting overtime callbacks to employees who
remained within the old ten mile limit. But, the Union argues, this is no longer a meaningful
element of the bargain because so much overtime has disappeared since the first agreement
went into effect. In other words, the Village no longer has a true concern for the ability of
firefighters to return to work because there are now very few occasions when overtime is ever
required. To this, the arbitrator responds that other changes made in this Agreement should
restore some overtime to firefighters. Changes in Article X will eliminate much of the
competition with paid-on-call and other non-bargaining unit employees. Looking at the issue
from the Village’
s perspective, the increased overtime demands underscores the need to have

? 76?

firefighters living within a reasonable distance of the Village.44
The Union also argues that residency restrictions are antiquated and have been
rejected by other arbitrators as an offense to individual liberty. Town of Cicero and Illinois
Association of Fire Fighters, IAFF Local 717, Case No. S-MA-09-230 (Berman, 1999). With
all due respect to my colleague Berman, this arbitrator does not see residency as an issue of
liberty any more than employment as a firefighter in Liberty is a right. More importantly, an
arbitrator’
s assessment of individual liberties is not a statutory factor for the determination of
final offers in an impasse arbitration. Of more significance in this case is the Union’
s failure
to prove any legitimate need for a change in the language. There is no evidence of hardship,
inequity or even inconvenience. Indeed, only two firefighters have moved from the old ten
mile limit since July, 2001 when the first agreement was signed.
Nor has there been any showing that comparability strongly supports the Union’
s
position. That some comparable municipalities have lenient residency requirements is not, in
and of itself, persuasive. Nathan, Hard Choices, 20th Annual Illinois Public Sector Labor
Relation Program, November 12, 2004. The Village’
s proposal for no change in residency
requirements is awarded.

In any event, the Union’
s proposal for this section of the contract does not address call
back limitations, only the residency limitation itself.
44

? 77?

5. Promotion Re-opener
The parties have agreed to defer bargaining over the issue of the promotion of
bargaining unit employees to the rank of Lieutenant pending the outcome of Case No. S-CA05-045 now before the Labor Board. The issue before the Labor Board is whether promotions
to a non-bargaining unit position is a mandatory or a permissive subject for bargaining. As of
the date of this Award there has been no written decision has been issued by the Labor Board.
Sometime in the fall of 2003 the Union proposed that the parties’new Agreement
contain standards for the promotion of bargaining unit employees to the rank of Lieutenant.
This new provision would be in accordance with the terms of the Fire Department Promotion
Act, 50 ILCS 742/1 et seq. (“FDPA”) which was enacted in August, 2003. In June, 2004 the
Village filed a Petition for a Declaratory Ruling for a determination as to whether the Union’
s
proposal was a mandatory subject for bargaining under the Act. In September, 2004, Acting
General Counsel Philip M. Kazanjian issued a Declaratory Ruling to the effect the Union’
s
proposal was not a mandatory subject of bargaining. One week later the Union filed an unfair
labor practice charge alleging that the Village’
s refusal to bargain about promotions pursuant
to the FDPA was a violation of law. On April 4, 2005, Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”)
Lori N. Carrozza issued a Recommended Decision and Order finding that there was no
unlawful refusal to bargain by the Village. A timely appeal was taken to the Labor Board.
Subsequently the Board made an announcement that it would reverse the Decision of the

? 78?

ALJ and find that the Village did violate the Act by refusing to bargain over the issue of
promotions pursuant to the FDPA. No written decision has yet been issued and no time
period for an appeal to the Appellate Court has begun to run.
The precise language of the parties’respective proposals on this issue are not critical.
Circumstances have changed since the final offers were submitted. The essence of the
Village’
s proposal is that no bargaining will be required until there is: (1) a final nonappealable order from either the Labor Board or a court of competent jurisdiction stating that
the subject of promotions is a mandatory subject of bargaining, or (2) an order by the Labor
Board or a court of competent jurisdiction requiring bargaining pending the completion of the
appellate process. If the parties reach an impasse in bargaining the parties shall submit final
offers to the undersigned Arbitrator Harvey A. Nathan for his award.
The essence of the Union’
s proposal is that the Union can demand bargaining on the
issue of promotions in the event that the Labor Board sustains the pending unfair labor
practice complaint. Thereafter the parties shall have sixty (60) days, or such other period as
the parties agree, to negotiate agreement on all mandatory subjects of bargaining in dispute.
If agreement is reached it will become part of the new contract effective May 1, 2003. If the
parties do not reach agreement within the applicable time period the outstanding issues shall
be submitted to the undersigned for disposition pursuant to Section 14 of the Act.
There are two critical differences in the respective proposals. The first is that under
the Village’
s proposal there would be no requirement to bargain until there is a final order
? 79?

from any court of competent jurisdiction. The second is that under the Union’
s proposal
bargaining would be limited to 60 days and thereafter the parties would be required to submit
the outstanding issues to impasse arbitration.
The parties have been in negotiations for a new Agreement since March, 2003. The
arbitrator was appointed to his position in December, 2003, nearly two years ago. It is time
for the parties to bring this matter to a conclusion. Further delays offend the purpose of the
Act and are not in the public interest. Accordingly, the parties will be required to commence
bargaining no later than thirty (30) days following the issuance of the Labor Board’
s written
decision finding a refusal to bargain by the Village. Thereafter the parties shall complete
bargaining within sixty (60) days and if no agreement is reached within that time the parties
shall submit final offers to the arbitrator within ten (10) after the expiration of the sixty (60)
day period. Upon receipt of the final offers the arbitrator will set a date for one day of hearing
to be held at Village Hall, Libertyville. The parties shall complete the hearing within that
one day and submit written briefs ten (10) thereafter. If necessary in order to meet the ten
(10) day deadline an expedited transcription of the report of proceedings shall be ordered.
Upon receipt of the briefs, the arbitrator shall have thirty (30) days to issue his award.

AWARD
1. The Union’
s proposal on wages is selected.
? 80?

2. The Employer’
s proposal on Pay Day is selected.
3. The Union’
s proposal on Assignment of Overtime Work is selected.
4. The Employer’
s proposal on Hireback is selected.
5. The Employer’
s proposal on Layoff and Recall is selected.
6. The Employer’
s proposal on Personal Leave Days is selected.
7. The Union’
s proposal on Retroactivity is selected.
8. The Union’
s proposal on Duties is selected.
9. The Employer’
s proposal on Assignments and Transfers is selected.
10. The new language for Duty Trades shall be as follows:
In accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act, an employee for his own convenience, may voluntarily
have another bargaining unit employee of comparable qualifications in the same position substitute for him by
performing work for all or part of the employee’
s work shift, provided the substitution is requested one (1) duty
day in advance (this requirement may be waived by the Chief of his designees in an emergency), leaves
employees on the shift who are able to perform the duties of the assigned positions on the shift, and does not
otherwise interfere with the operation of the Fire Department and is subject to approval by the Fire Chief or his
designee. Requests that are in compliance with these criteria as of the date the request is made shall be
approved. The approval of a trade shall not restrict a later trade (i.e., Kelly or Duty) that is otherwise in
compliance with the criteria of this Section. All requests shall be in writing on a form approved by the Chief
or his designee. See Appendix B. Shift trades must be completed within one year with a “pay back”date (unless
“pay back”is not expected, and shall not result in overtime). Further, the Fire Chief of his designee on duty
Assistant Chief or Shift Commander, at his discretion, may approve limited holdovers of less than one (1) hour
as partial shift substitutions, at shorter notice than is otherwise required in this Section. Such approval will not
be denied for arbitrary and capricious reasons. The hours worked by the substitute employee would otherwise be
entitled to compensation. If a substitute employee works all or part of another employee’
s scheduled work shift in
accordance with this Section, then the hours worked by the substitute employee shall be counted as hours
worked by the employee who was originally scheduled to work that shift.

11. The Employer’
s proposal on Residency is selected.
12. The language for the Promotion Re-opener shall be:
1. Bargaining on the issue of promotions shall begin no later than thirty (30) after the Labor

? 81?

Board’
s written decision is issued.
2. Bargaining shall be completed with sixty (60) days after its commencement.
3. If no agreement has been reached the parties shall submit written final offers to Arbitrator
Harvey A. Nathan no later than ten (10) days after the end of bargaining.
4. Upon receipt of the final offers the arbitrator shall set a date for a one day hearing to be held
at Village Hall, Libertyville.
5. Upon completion of the one day of hearing the parties may submit written briefs to the
arbitrator. If necessary in order to meet this ten (10) day deadline for briefs the parties shall
order an expedited transcription of the stenographic report of proceedings.
6. The arbitrator shall issue his award within thirty (30) days after the receipt of briefs.

Respectfully submitted,
HARVEY A. NATHAN
November 5, 2005

? 82?
