09/06/2022
0216-01
20-MED-02-0143
21-MED-02-0097 (wage re-opener)
39401

MASTER AGREEMENT

between

MIDDLETOWN CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT
BOARD OF EDUCATION

and

MIDDLETOWN TEACHERS ASSOCIATION

Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023
(Amended: Dec. 2021)
************

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Article #

Item(s)

Page#

GOVERNING PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.

RECOGNITION ......................................................................................... 1

ARTICLE 2.

DEFINITIONS............................................................................................ 2

ARTICLE 3.

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS ........................................................................ 3

ARTICLE 4.

ASSOCIATION RIGHTS .......................................................................... 4

ARTICLE 5.

DISTRICT COMMITTEES ....................................................................... 6

ARTICLE 6.

NEGOTIATIONS PROCEDURES............................................................ 9

ARTICLE 7.

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES ................................................................ 12
WORKING CONDITIONS

ARTICLE 8.

TEACHER CONTRACTS ....................................................................... 15

ARTICLE 9.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION ....................................................................... 17

ARTICLE 10.

REDUCTION IN FORCE ........................................................................ 17

ARTICLE 11.

ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER.......................................................... 19

ARTICLE 12.

DISCIPLINE AND TERMINATION ...................................................... 22

ARTICLE 13.

PERSONNEL FILE.................................................................................. 24

ARTICLE 14.

EVALUATION ........................................................................................ 25

ARTICLE 15.

SUBSTITUTE TEACHERS..................................................................... 27

ARTICLE 16.

TUTORS................................................................................................... 29
i

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

ARTICLE 17.

RESIDENT EDUCATORS ...................................................................... 30

ARTICLE 18.

REHIRED RETIRED TEACHERS.......................................................... 30

ARTICLE 19.

PLANNING PERIOD/TEACHER PREPS/DUTIES............................... 31

ARTICLE 20.

FACULTY MEETINGS........................................................................... 33

ARTICLE 21.

SCHOOL DAY......................................................................................... 33

ARTICLE 22.

SCHOOL YEAR....................................................................................... 34

ARTICLE 23.

WORKROOM/LOUNGE ......................................................................... 34

ARTICLE 24.

BUILDING PROCEDURES .................................................................... 35

ARTICLE 25.

CLASS SIZE............................................................................................. 35

ARTICLE 26.

PROTECTION OF TEACHING STAFF ................................................. 37
LEAVES OF ABSENCE

ARTICLE 27.

SICK LEAVE ........................................................................................... 39

ARTICLE 28.

PERSONAL LEAVE................................................................................ 41

ARTICLE 29.

PROFESSIONAL LEAVE ....................................................................... 42

ARTICLE 30.

ASSOCIATION LEAVE.......................................................................... 42

ARTICLE 31.

EMERGENCY LEAVE ........................................................................... 43

ARTICLE 32.

WORKERS COMPENSATION............................................................... 43

ARTICLE 33.

SABBATICAL LEAVE ........................................................................... 44

ARTICLE 34.

UNPAID MEDICAL LEAVE .................................................................. 44

ARTICLE 35.

CHILD CARE LEAVE ............................................................................ 45

ARTICLE 36.

MILITARY LEAVE................................................................................. 46
ii

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

ARTICLE 37.

PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATION LEAVE........................................ 46

ARTICLE 38.

COMPULSORY LEAVE ......................................................................... 46

ARTICLE 39.

OTHER LEAVES..................................................................................... 46
COMPENSATION

ARTICLE 40.

ADMINISTRATION OF THE SALARY SCHEDULE .......................... 47

ARTICLE 41.

SUPPLEMENTAL CONTRACTS........................................................... 50

ARTICLE 42.

INSURANCE............................................................................................ 52

ARTICLE 43.

TUITION REIMBURSEMENT ............................................................... 54

ARTICLE 44.

SEVERANCE PAY.................................................................................. 55

ARTICLE 45.

CALAMITY DAYS ................................................................................. 56

ARTICLE 46.

DURATION.............................................................................................. 55

APPENDICES:
APPENDIX A

SALARY SCHEDULES...........................................................................56

APPENDIX B

TUTOR SALARY SCHEDULES ………………………………………57

APPENDIX C

SUPPLEMENTAL SCHEDULES……………………………………….60

APPENDIX D

TEACHER EVALUATION GUIDELINES AND FORMS…………….61

APPENDIX E

EMERGENCY LEAVE FUND (ELF)…………………………………..67

iii

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

MIDDLETOWN BOARD OF EDUCATION
and
MIDDLETOWN TEACHERS ASSOCIATION
PROFESSIONAL NEGOTIATIONS CONTRACT

THIS CONTRACT made and concluded at Middletown, Ohio, this date by and between
the Middletown Teachers Association, hereinafter referred to as the MTA and the Middletown
City School District Board of Education, hereinafter referred to as the Board, and jointly referred
to hereinafter as the parties hereto.
The parties hereto believe that the welfare of the children of the Middletown City School
District is paramount in the operation of the schools of the district and to this end both parties will
endeavor to promote same.
The parties hereto believe that the interest of the education system is best served when
mutual understanding, cooperation and communication exist among the Board, the
Administration, and the MTA.
GOVERNING PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.
RECOGNITION
1.1

The Board recognizes the M.T.A. an affiliate of the Ohio Education Association and the
National Education Association as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for the purpose
of bargaining wages, hours, benefits and other terms and conditions of employment for the
professional teaching staff in the bargaining unit. The bargaining unit consists of all full
and regular part-time certificated classroom teachers, special education teachers, all
certificated therapists (P.T. and O.T.), tutors (small group instructors), librarians,
counselors, and speech therapists provided that these individuals work on a substantial and
regular basis, more than seventeen and one-half hours per week, every week of the school
year or a total of 120 school days during the regular school year for the Middletown City
School District; but excluding the Superintendent, Assistant Superintendent, all
Administrative Assistants, Directors, Coordinators, Principals, Assistant Principals,
School Psychologists, Head Counselors, Adult Education Instructors and Adult Vocational
Education Instructors hired after July 1, 1986, other Administrative or Supervisory
personnel and all other employees and substitute teachers except those substitute teachers
1

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

assigned to one specific teaching position for sixty (60) consecutive school days or one
hundred and twenty (120) school days in the Middletown City School District in any
combination of assignments during a single school year. Such substitute teachers, subject
to continued satisfactory performance, shall remain in the bargaining unit until the return
to duty of the teacher whose position the substitute has been assigned to or the end of the
school year, whichever event occurs first.
1.2

Whenever the word "teacher" or "employee" is used in this Agreement it shall be deemed
to mean the employees in the bargaining unit covered by this Agreement, as defined in
Article 1, paragraph 1.1 hereof.

1.3

Other Administrative and Supervisory personnel includes any certificated or professional
employee having the authority to responsibly direct other employees and/or the authority
to hire, transfer, assign, promote, discharge, reward, discipline or effectively recommend
such action as defined in O.R.C. Sections 3319.01 or 3319.02.
ARTICLE 2.
DEFINITIONS

2.1

“Teacher” refers to certificated professional teaching staff as included in Article 1, Section
1.1.

2.2

"Days" as used in this Agreement shall be defined as Monday through Friday, when the
district office is open, exclusive of winter and spring break.

2.3

"Association" or "MTA" means the Middletown Teachers Association.

2.4

"Board", "Board of Education" or "Employer" means the Board of the Middletown City
School District.

2.5

Unless otherwise provided herein, the "school year" shall be defined as the time period July
1 through June 30.

2.6

For purposes of this Agreement, seniority will be defined as the length of continuous
employment for the Middletown City School District Board of Education as verified by
official Board minutes.

2

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

ARTICLE 3.
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
3.1

3.2

Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Agreement, the Board hereby retains and
reserves all powers, rights, authority, duties and responsibilities conferred upon and vested
in the Board or its Superintendent by the laws and the Constitution of the State of Ohio
including, but not limited to, their exclusive right and responsibility:
A.

to determine matters of inherent managerial policy which include, but are not
limited to, areas of discretion or policy such as the functions and programs of the
Employer, standards of services, its overall budget, utilization of technology, and
organizational structure;

B.

to direct, supervise, assign, reassign, schedule, evaluate, hire, discipline, suspend,
demote, discharge, reprimand, layoff, transfer, promote, or retain employees;

C.

to maintain and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the Employer's
operations;

D.

to determine the overall methods, process, means, or personnel, internal and
external, by which the Employer's operations are to be conducted, the location,
type, and number of physical facilities, equipment, programs, and the work to be
performed;

E.

to determine the size, composition, and adequacy of the work force, as well as to
make, amend, and enforce work rules, regulations, standard operating policies, and
procedures;

F.

to determine the overall mission of the Employer as a unit of government;

G.

to effectively manage the work force;

H.

to determine the hours of work and work schedules;

I.

to determine the duties to be included in all job classifications;

J.

to take actions to carry out the mission of the Employer as a governmental unit.

It is agreed that the above listing of management rights shall not be deemed to exclude
other proper functions not specifically listed herein or traditionally exercised by the
Employer.
3

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

3.3

The management rights set forth above shall not be subject to arbitration or impairment by
an arbitration award or otherwise except to the extent that such rights are specifically
limited by an express provision of this Agreement. Failure to exercise a right or exercising
it in a particular manner shall not be deemed a waiver of any management right or
prerogative.

3.4

The District agrees that conditions of employment relating to wages, hours of work and
other significant and material terms and conditions of employment not expressly covered
by this Agreement which are mandatory subjects of bargaining as defined by law may not
be changed by the District unless the Association is first given notice of the proposed
change and an opportunity to bargain regarding the proposed decision and/or the effects of
such a decision on bargaining unit employees as that bargaining obligation is defined by
law.
ARTICLE 4.
ASSOCIATION RIGHTS

4.1

4.2

Association Representatives
A.

The President of the MTA or his/her designated representative, shall be allowed to
visit schools before or after school hours to discuss problems or grievances that
individual teachers may have. During the school day, the MTA president or his/her
designee shall be allowed to visit schools as approved by the Superintendent or
designee. MTA representatives must follow building sign in procedures upon
arrival.

B.

The President of the MTA or his/her designated representative, shall have a seat at
a table near the one occupied by the Board during official meetings of the Board of
Education. The President may be asked to comment on items under consideration
which concern teachers. The President shall receive a complete copy of the Board
agenda, plus addenda, and minutes of all Board meetings.

C.

Faculty representatives to the MTA executive committee and building
representatives shall be excused from administratively scheduled meetings to
attend scheduled monthly meetings of the MTA. Such regular after school monthly
meeting dates shall be on the second and third Tuesday of each month. Teacher
based team meetings are not administratively scheduled meetings.

Registration and Payroll Deductions for Professional Organizations
A.

The names and addresses of newly employed personnel eligible for membership in
the MTA shall be made available to the MTA following Board approval of the
4

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

contracts. A copy of the current Master Contract shall be made available to
employees through the District website.

4.3

B.

An MTA member, upon his/her written request, shall be given the right of payroll
deduction of combined dues for the MTA and its affiliates without cost to the
Association or the individual involved.

C.

The MTA is to assume clerical responsibility for registration for membership of
professional organizations for all "Professional teaching staff" eligible for
membership in the MTA.

D.

The MTA faculty representatives shall be allowed appropriate time during the new
teacher orientation for instruction regarding registration and enrollment.

E.

Association membership is annual with the membership year being September 1
through August 31. Once a member enrolls, such membership shall be continuous
thereafter for each subsequent membership year unless the individual cancels
membership. An employee may cancel membership by proper written notice to the
Association President between August 1 and August 31 of any year.

F.

The MTA agrees that it will indemnify and hold the Board harmless from and
recovery of damages and expenses sustained by reason of any action taken under
this Article.

Fair Share Fee

The parties agree that if the relevant provisions of Janus v. AFSCME Council 31 are overturned,
the parties will meet to negotiate Fair Share Fee provisions that are consistent with the changes in
law.
4.4

Facility Usage
A.

The MTA officers and faculty representatives shall have the right to insert materials
pertaining to the MTA in teachers' mailboxes and to send such materials through
the interschool mail system and/or through email. It is understood and agreed that
such materials will not promote or give notice of illegal or unlawful acts.

B.

The MTA officers and faculty representatives shall have the privilege of using
space on bulletin boards in each building teacher lounge(s) for MTA business. The
display of materials of any inflammatory or slanderous nature shall be prohibited.
It is understood and agreed that such materials will not promote or give notice of
illegal or unlawful acts.
5

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

C.

The MTA shall have the right to use school facilities in accordance with Board
policy. Any associated fees will be waived.
ARTICLE 5.
DISTRICT COMMITTEES

5.1

Faculty Advisory Committee
A.

There shall be a Faculty Advisory Committee established in each building, which
shall be chaired by a MTA Building Representative as appointed by the MTA
President.

B.

The Faculty Advisory Committee shall be composed of the building principal
and/or assistant principal, and MTA building representatives elected for that
building in a ratio of one (1) MTA representative for each ten (10) teachers, or
fraction thereof, provided that in each building the MTA shall be entitled to a
minimum of two (2) MTA representatives.

C.

The building chairperson and the building principal shall evaluate the structure of
the committee and jointly determine whether additional members need to be added
to provide adequate representation of the staff. They shall then take these
recommendations back to the Faculty Advisory Committee for their approval.
Membership may be granted to other faculty members by the committee on a
permanent or temporary basis for the school year. They may also from time to
time, when necessary, appoint a member or members of the building staff who are
not members of the committee for particular project studies.

D.

The intent of the committee is to improve communications between staff and
administration in regard to building problems and programs.

E.

The Faculty Advisor Committee shall meet at least once a month during the school
year to discuss matters of common interest in the building, such as scheduling the
teachers' preparation period, maintenance, supplies, etc. Meetings shall be
cancelled if neither party has items for the agenda. A schedule of regular meetings
shall be established and an agenda of matters to be considered at the regular
meetings shall be distributed to the building staff at least twenty-four (24) hours
before any regular meeting. Special meetings may be scheduled when necessary.

F.

Minutes of all meetings shall be kept and made available to the building staff, the
MTA, the Superintendent, and the Director of Human Resources. All meetings are
to be open so that any teacher or administrator can attend as an observer.
6

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

G.

5.2

At the beginning of each year the FAC and building principal shall prepare a
mutually acceptable plan such that every teacher shall have their scheduled
planning time.

Labor Management Committee
A.

In an effort to further a good working relationship between the parties, a labor
management committee shall be formed to investigate, study and discuss solutions
to mutual problems affecting labor relations.

B.

The LMC committee will consist of five (5) representatives from each party as
selected by the Superintendent and MTA President. With notification to the other
party, additional representatives may be called on to speak to a specific topic on the
agenda as needed.

C.

The parties reserve the right to invite their Association Representative or Legal
Counsel to meetings where Agenda items have bearing upon matters that relate to
collective bargaining or potentially grievable items or where otherwise deemed
necessary upon written notice to the other party.

D.

The Superintendent and MTA President will serve as co-chairpersons of the
committee.

E.

One member appointed by the co-chairpersons will serve as secretary and prepare
minutes of the meeting. Before distribution, both parties shall review the minutes.
Copies will be provided to all administrators, Board members and Association
representatives.

F.

The chairpersons shall recognize any consensus of the parties to table a topic.

G.

Meeting Schedule and Agenda
1.

Meetings will be held as needed by the parties. An agenda shall be
submitted at least 48 hours prior to the meeting to both parties. The intent
is for each side to come to the meeting as well prepared as possible.

2.

A specific day and time shall be agreed to for future meetings. Every
attempt shall be made to keep such a schedule, realizing that some flexibility
is necessary.

3.

Except in emergencies, topics not on the agenda shall not be discussed but
placed on the following meeting's agenda. The agenda shall include a brief
7

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

description of each item to be discussed. Emergency items may be added
to the agenda by mutual consent.
H.

5.3

General Guidelines
1.

It is recognized that recommendations growing out of these meetings are
not binding.

2.

Topics that could lead to grievances may be discussed.

3.

Each person wishing to speak shall be recognized by the facilitator before
speaking, subject to the rules of order adopted by the parties to govern the
conduct of meetings.

4.

The co-chairpersons shall recognize a consensus to table a topic for further
study.

5.

Each topic shall be discussed fully before proceeding to another topic.
Topics requiring further study may be tabled. Where mutually satisfactory
decisions are not reached, the topic shall be cancelled, reverting to its proper
place in the labor management relationship - for instance, grievance
procedure, negotiations, etc.

6.

There will be mutual agreement on any news releases.

Local Professional Development Committee
A Local Professional Development Committee (“LPDC”) shall be established following
the “LPDC Handbook” as amended from time to time by the LPDC Committee.
A single step supplemental will be created for payment in the spring of each year as
follows:
1.

$500 for members and $750 for the LPDC committee chair and secretary.

2.

The LPDC committee will have up to three days of release time and up to 30 hours
of non-released time to complete their work. Additional release time may be
granted by the HR director as needed. Time outside the workday, beyond the 30
hours, will be paid at the district hourly rate to a maximum of 10 additional hours.

8

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

ARTICLE 6.
NEGOTIATIONS PROCEDURES
6.1

6.2

Composition of Negotiating Teams
A.

The MTA shall be represented by not more than five (5) persons of the MTA and
designated by the MTA for this purpose. A chairperson shall be designated in
advance.

B.

The Board of Education shall be represented by not more than five (5) persons
approved by the Board of Education, upon recommendation of the Superintendent.
A chairperson shall be designated in advance. These persons shall not be members
of the MTA or professional personnel represented by the MTA.

C.

A quorum, consisting of two teams of two members each, shall be present before
each negotiation's session is begun.

D.

The membership of a negotiating team should be determined at the beginning of a
series of bargaining sessions and should, as far as possible, remain the same
throughout the sessions.

E.

Each team shall be empowered to make proposals and counterproposals and come
to tentative agreements on behalf of its respective party.

F.

Members of the negotiating teams, as professional individuals, shall be expected to
voice their opinions openly and freely in a cooperative attempt to reach equitable
decisions. No sanctions or reprisals of any kind shall be taken by either the MTA
or the Board of Education against the other party by reason of participation in
negotiations.

Requests for Negotiations
The master contract negotiations shall be reopened 120 days prior to the expiration date.
A request for calling a meeting of the negotiation teams can be made by the Association or
the Board of Education. The meetings shall be held in mutually acceptable surroundings
and placed on the calendar, not more than fifteen (15) days after the initial request to open
negotiations.

9

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

6.3

6.4

6.5

Meeting
A.

After each party introduces its initial proposals, no new issues shall be added for
negotiation without the consent of both teams.

B.

Negotiation meetings shall be scheduled to interfere least with school schedules;
however, if necessary, members of the negotiation teams may be reassigned from
school duties to attend these meetings.

C.

Until all negotiation meetings are completed, each meeting shall include a decision
on an agreed time, date and place for the next meeting.

Conduct of Meeting
A.

Representatives of the news media shall not be permitted to attend a negotiation
session. Any press releases during negotiations must be agreed upon by both
negotiating teams.

B.

Upon the request of either party, any negotiation meeting shall be recessed to permit
the parties to caucus.

C.

As items receive tentative agreement, they shall be reduced to writing and initialed
by each party. Such initialing shall be considered a final agreement on that item,
unless both parties mutually agree to modify the tentative agreement. Any items
not agreed upon shall follow the impasse procedures outlined below.

Agreement
A.

The completed negotiated agreement shall be reduced to writing and submitted to
the MTA and Board for final approval and ratification by the membership of the
Association and of the Board of Education.

B.

Upon ratification by both parties, the agreement shall be reviewed by both parties
for accuracy, and following the submission of the final proofed document, signed
by the Superintendent and by the President of the Board of Education and the
president of the MTA and the members of the negotiations teams.

C.

The agreement, as ratified by both parties, shall be entered into the official minutes
of the Board of Education at the time of ratification and shall go into effect
immediately unless a specified date is indicated as the effective date for a negotiated
time.

10

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

6.6

6.7

6.8

Impasse
A.

If the negotiating teams are unable to negotiate the items under negotiation to a
satisfactory conclusion within forty-five (45) calendar days from the date of the
first negotiations session, unless both negotiation teams extend the time, the matter
may be referred to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service by either party.

B.

If the parties are unable to reach an agreement within sixty (60) calendar days from
the date of the first negotiations session, unless both parties extend the time, the
matter shall be referred to a single impartial FACT FINDER under the rules of the
American Arbitration Association.

C.

The Fact Finder shall render a decision in writing and make his/her
recommendations within thirty (30) days after the impasse hearings. The final
recommendations shall be submitted concurrently to the Board and the Association.
Upon receipt of the Fact Finder's recommendations the provisions of Ohio Revised
Code Section 4117.14, which details the procedures related to the acceptance and
rejection of the Report, and the right to strike which procedures shall be adhered to
by the parties, except that the Board and the Association shall have fourteen (14)
days from the receipt of the Fact Finder's Report to accept or reject the Report and
serve notice of such action on the State Employment Relations Board.

D.

Each party shall bear the expense of its own witnesses, the production of its
evidence and the presentation of its case. The cost for the services of the AAA
arbitrator, including per diem expenses, if any, and the actual and necessary travel
and subsistence expenses shall be borne equally by the Board and the MTA.

Contrary to Law
A.

If any provision of this Contract shall be found to be contrary to law by a Court of
competent jurisdiction, then that provision shall be deemed invalid except to the
extent permitted by law, but all other provisions hereof shall continue in full force
and effect for the term of the Contract.

B.

Any section of this Contract found to be invalid, pursuant to Section A above shall
be renegotiated. Negotiations on such Section only shall commence within fifteen
(15) days of the determination that the provision is invalid. Negotiations shall be
in conformance to the procedures set forth above.

The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations that resulted in this agreement, each
party had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and proposals, and that the
understandings and agreements arrived at by the parties after the exercise of that right and
11

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

opportunity are set forth in this agreement, and this agreement embodies all applicable
provisions relating to employees covered. Therefore, the employer and the union, for the
term of this agreement, each agree that the other shall not be obligated to negotiate with
respect to any item covered by this agreement. The employer and the union may, however,
mutually agree to alter, amend, supplement, enlarge or modify the provisions of this
agreement only by a written agreement or letter of understanding.
6.9

The parties agree that this agreement will be the sole and exclusive recourse available to
employees and the parties hereto and, where provisions of this agreement conflict with
otherwise applicable provisions of Ohio law, this agreement shall prevail pursuant to Ohio
Revised Code, Section 4117.10(A).
ARTICLE 7.
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES

7.1

7.2

Definitions
A.

A "grievance" shall be described as a dispute or complaint arising between the
parties hereto under or out of this Agreement or the interpretation, application,
performance, termination or any alleged breach thereof. A grievance shall be
submitted through the prescribed form which shall be available on the District’s
intranet website.

B.

The grievant shall mean the party filing the grievance and may be a teacher or
teachers covered by this Agreement or the MTA.

C.

The term days shall be used as defined in Article 2.2.

Statement of Basic Principles
A.

Every teacher who so requests shall be represented by the MTA in the grievance
procedure. The teacher shall be present at any grievance discussion. When the
presence of a teacher at a grievance hearing is requested by either party, illness or
other incapacity of the teacher shall be grounds for any necessary extension of
grievance procedure time limits. The failure of the grievant to act on any grievance
with the prescribed time limits will act as a bar to any further appeal. The time
limits, however, may be extended by mutual agreement.

B.

A teacher who participates in these grievance procedures shall not be subject to
discipline or reprisal because of such participation. A copy of the grievance shall
not be filed in the teacher's personnel folder.
12

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

7.3

C.

Hearings and conferences under this procedure shall be conducted at a time and
place which will afford a fair and reasonable opportunity for all persons, including
witnesses entitled to be present to attend and will be held, insofar as possible, after
regular school hours, or during non-teaching time of personnel involved. When
such hearings and conferences are held at the option of the administration during
school hours, all employees whose presence is required shall be excused, with pay,
for that purpose. Arbitration hearings, however, shall be held during regular
working hours unless scheduled otherwise by the arbitrator.

D.

All notices of hearings and dispositions of grievances shall be either mailed,
emailed, or hand delivered with the date of mailing or postmark and date of receipt
recorded thereon. Written grievances and appeals shall be deemed to have been
received one (1) day after postmarked: if hand delivered, the date received and
initials of the recipient shall be recorded thereon.

E.

It is important that a grievance be processed as rapidly as possible. The number of
days indicated at each level shall be considered as a maximum, and every effort
shall be made to expedite the process. The time limit specified may be extended
by mutual agreement.

F.

All grievances may be withdrawn at any level without prejudice. In the case of
grievances filed by individuals, the teacher involved has the right to withdraw the
grievance at any time.

Procedure
A.

Level One - A grievance lodged with the principal or the appropriate administrator
must be within thirty (30) days after the grievant could reasonably be assumed to
have known of the event or action giving rise to the alleged grievance. The
grievance conference shall occur within ten (10) days after the grievance is filed.
The grievant shall be accompanied by the local MTA building representative or any
other MTA personnel of the grievant's choosing. The principal or appropriate
administrator shall file his/her decision within ten (10) days after the Level One
conference or, if the principal/administrator fails to answer, the grievance shall
automatically proceed to the next step.

B.

Level Two - In the event a grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved at Level
One, the MTA may file, within ten (10) days of the principal's or the appropriate
administrator's written decision at Level One, a copy of the grievance with the
Superintendent within ten (10) days after such written grievance is filed, the
grievant, the MTA and the Superintendent or designee shall meet to attempt to
resolve the grievance. The Superintendent or designee shall file his/her decision
13

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

within ten (10) days of the Level Two hearing and communicate it to the grievant
and the MTA or, if the Superintendent or designee fails to answer, the grievance
will automatically proceed to Level Three.
C.

Level Three - If the grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved at Level Two,
the MTA may within ten (10) days of the Level Two decision, demand arbitration
under the Voluntary Arbitration Rules of the Arbitration and Mediation Association
(“AMS”) of Cincinnati, Ohio, by direct written demand therefore and a list of
twelve (12) arbitrators to the AMS, with a copy of said notice to the other party.
The arbitrator shall be appointed in accordance with AMS rules according to the
strike and rank method.

D.

The cost for the services of the arbitrator, including per diem expenses, if any, and
the actual and necessary travel and subsistence expenses shall be shared equally by
the Board and the MTA.

E.

When issued in accordance with these procedures, the opinion and award of the
arbitrator shall be final and binding to all parties. The arbitrator shall not have the
power to add to, or subtract from, or modify this contract.

14

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

WORKING CONDITIONS
ARTICLE 8.
TEACHER CONTRACTS
8.1

Limited Contracts
All limited contracts shall be offered for a term of one (1) year. Teachers hired during the
school year to fill vacancies may be offered contracts for the remainder of the school year.

8.2

Probationary Non-Renewal
Notwithstanding any other provision in this Agreement, or State law including ORC
Sections 3319.16, 3319.11 and 3319.111, prior to June 1 of any of a limited contract
teacher’s first two years of service in the District, as defined by the Board adopted school
calendar, any such limited contract teacher may be notified of the Superintendent’s intent
to recommend the teacher be non-renewed. The non-renewal shall not be subject to the
grievance and arbitration procedures of this Agreement or any other appeal or hearing
procedures provided by State law. Prior to the non-renewal, however, the probationary
employee shall be given the reason(s) for the proposed non-renewal, in writing, at which
time the employee may request a meeting with the Human Resources Director and is
allowed representation by an MTA representative. For first year probationary employees,
the parties may discuss the possibility of a different assignment for the second year of the
probationary period in lieu of non-renewal. For purposes of this paragraph, a newly hired
limited contract teacher includes individuals who have previously served the District as
part-time tutors or substitute teachers. The parties may, by written consent, extend the
probationary period herein for one additional school year. At the District’s discretion, the
probationary period may be extended for one additional school year for any employee who
takes a leave of absence for longer than sixty (60) school days.
In addition, the District may unconditionally release any newly hired teacher within fortyfive (45) calendar days after they first report to work. This action may not be grieved or
appealed in any other manner.

8.3

Conditions of Employment for Newly Hired Limited Contract Teachers
Newly hired, limited contract teachers will during their first two years of employment, be
scheduled and paid up to four (4) additional days to be served before or after the 185 day
school calendar. An employee’s attendance at these additional days is a condition of
continued employment. Pay for the additional training will be at the district hourly rate.

15

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

8.4

Continuing Contract
No later than September 15 of each school year, the District shall notify all teachers that
those who achieve eligibility for continuing contract status must file an application form
with the Superintendent or designee no later than September 30 in the school year in which
they will qualify for a continuing contract. The teacher must satisfy all qualifications of
the continuing contract by the date of the last scheduled Board meeting in May in order to
receive continuing contract status for the following school year. In addition, to attain
continuing contract status, the teacher must demonstrate sufficient effort to be readily
available to allow for the administration to complete the evaluation procedures set forth in
the attached Memorandum of Understanding, be recommended by the Superintendent, and
be approved by the Board of Education by June 1 of the year in which continuing contract
eligibility has been achieved. If the teacher is not recommended, the teacher may be
granted a 1-year extended limited contract or be non-renewed. If the Board fails to take
appropriate action regarding the attainment of the continuing contract by June 1, then the
contract status will be governed by Ohio law.

8.5

Non-Renewal of Limited Contracts
A.

Basis for Non-Renewal
Non-Renewal of a teacher's limited contract shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Ohio Revised Code regarding the non-renewal of limited contracts
unless otherwise set forth below.

B.

Procedure
1.

2.

A teacher whose contract is not being considered for renewal shall be
notified in writing on or prior to June 1. Such notice may be personally
served or served on the teacher by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, at the last address given by the Employee to the Employer. The
notification shall include the following information:
a.

The grounds for such non-renewal;

b.

The right to undertake with his/her representative a complete review
of his/her personnel file which shall be in the office of the Director
of Human Resources.

In cases of non-renewal the affected Employee will be afforded a hearing
with the Superintendent or designee prior to Board Action on the issue of
non-renewal of the limited contract at which time he or she shall have the
right to have an Association representative present.
16

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

3.

The above contract provisions for non-renewals of limited contracts
regarding the subjects of notice, specifications, personnel file review,
meetings or hearings and related provisions are exclusive and shall control,
replacing and superseding the provisions of O.R.C. Sections 3319.11 or
3319.111.

8.6

Following the provisions of ORC Section 3319.15, no teacher shall terminate the teacher’s
contract after July 10 of any school year or during the school year, prior to the termination
of the annual session, without the consent of the Board of Education.

8.7

The procedures of this Article, pursuant to O.R.C. Section 4117.10(A), are intended to
supersede, where conflicting, the procedures set forth in Sections 3319.08, 3319.11,
3319.111 and 3319.16 or related conflicting sections of the Ohio Revised Code.
ARTICLE 9.
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION

The Association and the Board expressly believe that an affirmative action statement covering
ethnic-minority teachers is necessary. The Association and the Board recognize the importance of
a racially integrated staff and support affirmative action. The Association and Board further
recognize that it is desirable in making assignments to consider the programs of the District and
the distribution of teachers by sex and experience as well as race.
ARTICLE 10.
REDUCTION IN FORCE
10.1

If, in the sole judgment of the Board, it is determined to make a reduction in force for any
reason including, but not limited to the reasons set forth in Section 3319.17 of the Ohio
Revised Code, then the following procedures shall be utilized when making the reduction.
For purposes of a reduction in force all teacher evaluations shall be deemed comparable.

10.2

Reduction Order
A.

Reductions shall be made through attrition to the extent possible.

B.

If additional reductions are needed, limited contract teachers shall have their
contracts suspended in accordance with seniority within the teaching
certification(s) to be affected by the layoff. The employment date will be verified
by Board of Education official minutes.

17

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

C.

10.3

10.4

If further reductions are necessary, continuing contract teachers shall have their
contracts suspended in accordance with seniority within the teaching
classification(s) area affected by the layoff. The employment date will be verified
by Board of Education official minutes.

Seniority
A.

Seniority shall be defined as the length of continuous employment with the
Middletown City School District Board of Education with the date of employment
as verified by official Board minutes.

B.

Continuous employment as referenced above in Subsection A shall include all time
on Board approved leaves of absence, all time on disability retirement to a
maximum of five (5) years, and, subject to the recall provisions below, all time that
a certificated employee's contract has been suspended provided there is no break in
service.

C.

Seniority shall be lost and employment terminated when a certificated employee
resigns, retires, accepts gainful employment during an approved leave of absence
without the written approval of the Board or is discharged for cause.

D.

When two certificated employees have equal seniority, the employee with the
greatest number of years in the Middletown City School District shall receive
preference at the time of a reduction in force or at any time when seniority is a
critical factor in employment.

Recall
Employees whose contracts have been suspended shall have rights to recall as follows:
A.

First recall shall be of employees with suspended continuing contracts in order of
seniority in the employee's major areas of certifications, then in minor areas of
certification.

B.

If vacancies cannot be filled by employees with continuing contracts, then laid off
employees with limited contracts, by seniority, shall be eligible, first in major areas
of certification, then by minor areas of certification.

C.

The recall list shall be maintained for a period of two (2) years which shall include
the time period up to the first student day after the second year of the layoff.
Thereafter, an employee on layoff shall lose his/her right to recall.

18

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

10.5

D.

No new appointments may be made while there are laid off employees available
who are certificated to fill vacancies.

E.

If an employee on layoff refuses the position offered by the Human Resources
Department for which he/she is qualified, his/her layoff and recall rights shall be
terminated.

F.

The Board has fulfilled its responsibility herein by sending a written offer for a job
vacancy to an employee on the layoff list by certified mail at the last address left
by the employee. Unclaimed, refused or non-deliverable notices as well as failure
to respond within ten (10) calendar days from date of mailing shall constitute
refusal of the vacancy.

Reduction in Force Notice
When staff reduction is necessary, the Director of Human Resources shall give written
notice of the intent to recommend the suspension of contracts to the employees so affected
ten (10) days prior to Board action, and a list of all those affected shall be given to the
Association. The Association and Superintendent or designee shall confer on the reasons
for such reduction with five (5) days of receipt of notice of the Superintendent's intent to
recommend such reduction to the Board.

10.6

RIF Employee Benefits
Employees on layoff shall be permitted to carry group life insurance, dental, vision and
group medical and hospitalization insurance for the period the teacher is eligible to be
recalled from layoff, provided they pay 100% of the cost of the premiums for such
insurance. It shall be the individual's responsibility to see that the monies are paid to the
School Board Treasurer by the first day of each month. It is understood that the Board of
Education will assume no responsibility for any cancellations of insurance coverage. It is
also understood that this arrangement is only valid while the laid-off employee remains
unemployed.
ARTICLE 11.
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER

11.1

Assignment and Transfer
A.

The Association and Board recognize the statutory power of the Board to employ
and of the Superintendent to assign, reassign, or transfer teachers except as limited
by this agreement.
19

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

11.2

B.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, the initial assignment of new
staff shall be at the sole discretion of the Superintendent, after the completion of
involuntary transfers. Other assignments, reassignments, or transfers of a
classroom teacher shall be in accordance with the remaining terms of this Article
as set forth below.

C.

The provisions of this Article are subject to the licensure rules and regulations of
the State of Ohio and the requirements of the reauthorization of the ESSA.

D.

Intent Forms: The District shall electronically request that employees submit intent
forms by February 1 of each school year to the HR department. Upon request, a
copy of the MTA Intent forms shall be provided to the MTA president.

Reassignment Within Buildings
Beginning January of each school year, building principals may reassign teachers in their
building to teach any subject for which the teacher is licensed and highly qualified. The
reassignment for grades K-8 shall be within three (3) grade levels above or below their
current assignment. The reassignment shall be for the following year. Such reassignments
shall not be made for arbitrary or capricious reasons.

11.3

Posting of Vacancies
A.

A vacancy is an opening resulting from the creation of a new position or from the
resignation, retirement, termination, or reassignment of an employee which the
Board decides to fill.

B.

After building reassignments and involuntary transfers have occurred, remaining
open positions shall be internally posted. Vacancies shall be posted for a minimum
of five (5) working days. Notice of vacancies shall be posted on the District
website.

C.

Vacancies that occur during the school year may be filled with a long term
substitute placed at Step 0, the base rate of the salary schedule. The long term
substitute shall be considered part of the bargaining unit and subject to the
collective bargaining agreement, except that their contract shall automatically
expire at the end of the school year. The position shall be considered vacant. If the
District wishes to rehire the long term substitute, the employee shall be considered
for purposes of this contract, entering his/her second year of continuous service
with the District.

D.

Any vacancies that occur during the summer months shall be both internally and
externally posted at the same time for a minimum of five (5) working days.
20

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

Summer is defined as the time between the day after the last student day and the
day before the first student day of the following year. However, if any internal
candidates apply, they shall be granted consideration as stated in Article 11.4,
Voluntary Transfer, before any outside candidates are hired.
11.4

Voluntary Transfer
A.

11.5

Teachers may apply for open positions to the HR Department provided they meet
the following requirements:
1.

Have not been suspended in the last five (5) years.

2.

Not currently on an improvement plan.

3.

Have not been voluntarily transferred in the past three (3) years.

B.

Applicants shall meet with a panel consisting of the building administrator and
members of the grade level/department associated with the vacant position.
Following the meeting, applicants shall be notified within five (5) working days as
to their status. Applicants may also withdraw their request following the meeting
during the same five (5) day period. Denials for voluntary transfers shall not be
arbitrary or capricious. If the position remains open it shall then be posted
externally. If no qualified external candidate fills this position, the District shall
award the position to one of the internal applicants if they are still interested in the
vacancy.

C.

In the event of a successful grievance under this Article, the remedy shall be to
place the grievant in the vacancy requested at the beginning of the next school year.
The person who has been displaced as a result of a successful grievance shall be
given preference in assignment to a similar vacancy elsewhere when available.

D.

Employees shall not have the right to apply for a voluntary transfer during the first
three (3) years of employment with the Board. This limitation may be waived by
the Director of Human Resources.

Involuntary Transfer
A.

An involuntary transfer refers to a reassignment or change in teaching position that
has not been initiated by the professional staff member.

B.

Following the building reassignments, the District, after reviewing the intent forms,
may involuntarily transfer licensed employees to fill a need of the District.
21

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

Teachers will not be required to move more than three (3) grade levels in K-8. Such
transfers shall not be made for arbitrary or capricious reasons.

11.6

C.

In the event it is necessary to reassign an employee who has not requested a
reassignment or transfer, the employee will have the opportunity to discuss the
reassignment, and the reasons therefore, with the District prior to any transfer.

D.

Teachers shall not be involuntarily transferred two years in a row except for those
in District Positions. District Positions are those positions concerning physical
education/health, music, art, and special education positions that are not classified
as cross-categorized positions.

E.

In the event of a building closure, displaced teachers shall have the right of first
placement in other District vacant positions. This does not apply when one building
closes and another building opens simultaneously.

Half-Time Teachers
Half-time teachers may return to full-time status within their area of certification at the
beginning of any school year. They shall retain full seniority rights.
In the instance of the reduction of a half-time position in any building and/or department,
the half-time person shall have full rights under Section 10.4, Recall, of this contract.
ARTICLE 12.
DISCIPLINE AND TERMINATION

12.1

Statement of Purpose
A.

The Middletown City Board of Education (hereafter referred to as the Board) and
the Middletown Teachers Association (hereafter referred to as the MTA) recognize
that in the interest of maintaining good morale and in the interest of effective
personnel management, fair dismissal rights should be accorded all teachers and
should be embodied in every type of contractual agreement subject to this Article.

B.

Except as provided in Article 8, the employment status of any teacher shall not be
altered to his/her detriment (suspension, non-renewal of contract, or termination)
except for just cause and then not without adequate fair procedures that guarantee
to protect both the Board and the teacher.

22

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

12.2

12.3

Clarification of Terms and Conditions
A.

Termination of a contract shall be defined as the ending of a continuing contract or
a limited contract before the expiration time period specified in said contract.

B.

Suspension shall be defined as the removal of a teacher from his or her assigned
duties.

C.

It is the intention of the parties that the provisions of this Article shall govern all
aspects of notice of suspension, and discipline of employees. All statutory
provisions in Chapter 3319 regarding these subjects are hereby waived and
superseded as provided by O.R.C. Section 4117.10(A).

Discipline Procedures
The Board may issue a written reprimand, administrative transfer, a suspension without
pay, or termination.
A.

Before a teacher has a written reprimand placed in his/her official personnel file, or
before a teacher receives an administrative transfer or suspension without pay:
1.

The teacher shall have a pre-disciplinary conference during which time the
circumstances shall be explored. At this time the evidence of misconduct
or poor performance will be reviewed with the Employee.

2.

Prior to the conference, the teacher shall be notified of the purpose of the
conference and the right to representation.

B.

If the conference results in discipline, the reasons for the discipline shall be reduced
to writing and given to the teacher following the conference. The teacher shall have
the right to attach his/her rebuttal to the disciplinary notice.

C.

Disciplinary conferences may be held either at the Administration Building or at
the School. The teacher shall receive at least two (2) days' notice of the conference.

D.

The conference shall precede the discipline as stated above except in extreme
circumstances where removal from duties may need to precede such conference.

E.

If the conference results in an administrative recommendation of termination, the
affected teacher shall have the rights afforded him/her under Section 12.4 below.

F.

As a form of disciplinary action, the Board may, upon recommendation of the
Superintendent, suspend a teacher without pay for a period exceeding ten (10) days.
23

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

The Superintendent, with or without Board approval, may issue a suspension
without pay for up to ten (10) days. However, a teacher may file a grievance
challenging a suspension.
12.4

Termination of a Teaching Contract
A.

Basis for Termination
The contract of a teacher may be terminated by the Board for good and just cause.

B.

Procedure
In addition to the procedures above, the legal procedures the Board must follow in
terminating a contract are outlined below:
1.

Any teacher who has been notified of intent to dismiss has the right to
undertake with his/her representative a complete review of his/her
personnel file.

2.

Upon receipt of a written notice containing full specifications of the grounds
for dismissal, the teacher shall proceed according to the procedure outlined
in Article 4 hereof, treating termination as a grievance and begin action
through the Grievance Procedure Agreement between the Board and the
M.T.A., following the provisions agreed on therein.
ARTICLE 13.
PERSONNEL FILE

13.1

Any member of the professional staff shall have the opportunity to read any material which
may be considered critical of his/her conduct, service, character or personality before it is
placed in his/her official personnel file and shall be dated the date of review. The official
personnel file is defined as the file of the Director of Human Resources. There shall be
only one personnel file maintained for each employee by the Director of Human Resources.
A member shall acknowledge that he/she has read the material by affixing his/her signature
to the copy to be filed. His/her signature shall not indicate agreement with the content of
the material, but indicates only that the material has been inspected by the member. He/she
shall also have the opportunity to reply to such critical material in a written statement to be
attached to the filed copy.

13.2

Members of the professional staff shall be informed of any complaint by a parent and/or
student which is directed toward them, which will become a matter of record.
24

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

13.3

Anonymous letters or materials shall not be placed in a member's file nor shall they be
made a matter of record. Each member shall have the right, upon request, to review the
contents of his/her own personnel file in the presence of a member of the Human Resources
staff. A representative of the MTA may, at the member's request, accompany said member
in such a review.

13.4

All material being placed in the personnel file of any member of the professional staff shall
be dated on the date it is reviewed by the Human Resources office.

13.5

All materials contained in personnel files shall be privileged information and these files
shall be closed except as otherwise provided by law. An employee will be notified as soon
as possible of a public records request to see or copy his or her personnel file.

13.6

A staff member shall be entitled to a copy, at their cost, of any material in his/her file except
material originally supplied to the District as confidential prior to employment.

13.7

The contents of the official personnel file for each employee shall be limited to items
relating to work performance, discipline, and routine financial or personnel data.
ARTICLE 14.
EVALUATION

14.1

Evaluations
A.

All teachers hired by the Board shall be informed as to the evaluation criteria to be
used in determining their reemployment.

B.

Each teacher shall, pursuant to current evaluation procedures, be provided definite,
positive assistance to correct professional difficulties and time to incorporate the
recommended changes.

The evaluation procedure for the "Professional Teaching Staff" is attached as
Appendix D.
14.2

No complaints against professional staff will be used in the evaluation process unless
previously discussed with the employee and made a matter of record. Matter of record
means that there is evidence that the teacher had knowledge of the issue.

14.3

Observations resulting in identification of performance deficiencies shall be followed by a
conference between the evaluator and the employee in order for questions arising from the
observation to be discussed. All of the evaluator's observations shall be compiled in writing
25

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

and a copy of the written observation report given to the teacher at the post-observation
conference.
The supervisor and/or the evaluator involved in the particular area of the employee's work
will assist the employee in correcting deficiencies. If there is insufficient progress in
improving the deficiency, the evaluator and the teacher will develop a written plan for
correcting the deficiencies which may include assistance from the supervisor. The plan
shall include a reasonable time between observations to allow time for improvement in the
areas of performance deficiency.
14.4

The Board's currently existing provisions and practices regarding evaluations of limited
contract teachers who must be observed or evaluated pursuant to O.R.C. Section 3319.11
and 3319.111 are incorporated into this collective bargaining agreement by reference as
Appendix D, and shall supersede all observation and evaluation procedures and deadlines
as provided or required by statute.

14.5

If litigation and/or legislation amend or repeal the evaluation law in any way that requires
the parties to change the terms of this Agreement, the parties agree to meet and revise the
Agreement accordingly. In this situation, the changes will become effective upon
ratification by the Board and the Association membership.

14.6

A good faith attempt by the Board to comply with all required evaluation or non-renewal
procedures, as incorporated herein by reference, shall satisfy any and all legal requirements
precedent to the nonrenewal of any teacher's limited contract. Therefore, any minor,
technical or other immaterial failure to comply with these procedures by the Board, which
do not prejudice the substantial rights of a teacher, shall not serve to inhibit the right of the
Board to non-renew the limited contract of a teacher.

14.7

Observations and evaluations shall not be required as a condition precedent to the nonrenewal of supplemental contracts or the decision to non-renew or not rehire substitute
teachers and casual tutors whose contracts, if any, shall expire automatically, without
notice, at the end of each school year.

14.8

An Employee may review with his or her immediate supervisor or evaluator an
unsatisfactory evaluation, and have the right to make written objections to be included in
his/her personnel file.

14.9

Only procedural compliance with this Article, and not the contents of any evaluation, is
subject to the Grievance Procedure set forth in 7 herein. The Employee's opportunity to
submit written objections described above shall be the Employee's sole recourse to dispute
the contents of his or her evaluations except in disciplinary hearings before an arbitrator at
which time an Employee may contest the contents of an evaluation if such evaluation
formed the basis for an adverse personnel action.
26

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

ARTICLE 15.
SUBSTITUTE TEACHERS
15.1

Internal Substitution
A.

After asking for volunteers, teacher leaders shall be considered before assigning
regular classroom teachers to cover for a class period. Teachers assigned by the
building principal for class coverage shall receive additional pay equal to the full
hourly rate of the present base salary for the class period. A teacher may cover one
or more class periods. When all efforts to obtain a substitute have been exhausted,
an Intervention Specialist or Tutor may be used as a last resort. Additional pay
under this section shall only be provided to Intervention Specialists and Tutors
during their planning period and/or lunch period. If an intervention specialist or
tutor is used during their normal lunch period, they will receive a 30 minute lunch
at a different time.

B.

If a teacher voluntarily agrees to teach an extra period per day, he/she shall be paid
the proportional equivalent of his or her base salary daily rate (at the high school
level and middle school level) for those days, weeks and months for which the extra
period is taught. For example, if there are seven periods, then the teacher would be
paid one-seventh (1/7) of his or her base salary daily rate. Prior to such an
assignment, the teacher will sign a waiver which states that acceptance of the
assignment is voluntary and which also states the rate at which the teacher will be
paid for the extra period.

C.

In the event a substitute teacher is not available in the elementary school buildings,
the District may elect to divide the class of the absent teacher among other teachers
in the same building.
If the District chooses to divide the class of the absent teacher among other teachers,
it shall be done in a manner that maintains a proportionate number of students in
each classroom affected.
The District will then pay each teacher affected the current daily substitution rate
as divided equally among those teachers. This payment shall be the only additional
compensation received by these teachers.
If a music, art, or physical education teacher is absent, and the District moves those
students each period to another of the three listed teachers above, throughout the
day, the teacher will be given the entire daily substitute rate that would have
normally gone to a regular substitute in the District.
27

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

15.2

External Substitution
The following provisions of the contract shall not apply to Substitute Teachers who are
members of the bargaining unit because they have taught in one specific position for more
than sixty (60) continuous days or one hundred twenty (120) school days in any
combination of assignments during a single school year;
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Assignment, Transfer and Promotion
Individual Teacher Contracts
Termination, Non-Renewal and Discipline
Reduction in Force
Personal Leave
Association Leave
Sabbatical Leave and Leave for Professional Study or any other Leave of
Absence provisions of the Contract
Employment for Summer Work
Tuition Reimbursement and the ELF Fund

15.3

It is further understood by the parties that inclusion of a Substitute Teacher in the
bargaining unit shall not guarantee or require the assignment of a Substitute Teacher to
duty or payment for any day for which there is no need for the Substitute Teacher's services
nor shall such inclusion entitle the Substitute Teacher any rights to employment or
reemployment in any subsequent school year. Notice of non-renewal and all related
provisions of Ohio Revised Code Sections 3319.10, 3319.11 and 3319.111 shall not apply
to Substitutes who become members of the bargaining unit.

15.4

Permanent Substitutes (Floaters)
The District may hire permanent substitutes or floaters to cover for absent teachers during
the school year. These employees shall be part of the bargaining unit entitled to all salary
and benefits afforded them under the collective bargaining agreement. With the exception
that they will not be assigned to any specific classroom and/or building, but exclusively
used at the District’s discretion to cover for any absent teacher. If no substitute is needed
on a specific day, the floater will be used at the District’s discretion.

28

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

ARTICLE 16.
TUTORS
16.1

As used in this Article and notwithstanding any other provisions of this Agreement, the
term Tutor shall include only Employees under contract with the Board employed for and
regularly assigned to a tutorial position in the regular day school program requiring the
holding of a valid teaching certificate. Individuals satisfying the above definition shall be
included in the bargaining unit.

16.2

The District’s tutors include:
A.

EL Tutors

B.

Home Instruction Tutors

C.

Reading Tutors

D.

Reading, Math, Technology Tutors

E.

Alternative Instructional Method Tutor (AIM)

16.3

Tutors under contract and regularly scheduled for a full school day shall be considered fulltime employees. If a tutor is scheduled for a 3.5 hour day, that tutor shall be considered a
part-time employee. If a tutor is scheduled less than 3.5 hours per day, that tutor shall be
considered a casual employee.

16.4

Full-Time Tutors
Full-time Tutors are a part of the bargaining unit. Full-Time Tutors are not entitled to
bumping rights or seniority with regard to reduction in force or recall. Tutors are not
subject to the 3-year waiting period for transfers into open full-time positions. Full-Time
Tutors shall be granted seniority credit for placement on the Full-Time Tutors salary
schedule and such credit shall transfer over if the employee is hired into a position under
the regular teaching salary schedule. This position is dependent upon the availability of
Title I funding. Tutors shall not be required to come in before or after the teacher workday.
Full-Time Tutors’ work year shall consist of one hundred and eighty (180) contract days.
The student calendar may vary from year to year. To make up the days between the student
calendar and the 180-day contract, Tutors shall be required to attend the first and last
teacher workday of the school year. Any additional days needed to fulfill the 180-day
contract shall be at the District’s discretion as long as it aligns with the regular certified
work year calendar. The District shall provide Tutors with their 180-day calendar prior to
the start of each new school year. Furthermore, since the District has implemented late
29

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

arrival days, Tutors will be required to be present during the full teacher work day, along
with all other certified employees.
16.5

Part-time tutors will be paid at an hourly rate of pay at the B.S.-0 rate for the hours in which
they have worked.

16.6

Part-Time Tutor Contracts
A.

Service as a Part-Time Tutor shall not be considered service for purposes of
determining eligibility for a continuing contract.

B.

All Part-Time Tutors’ contracts will be given a one year limited contract that
expires at the end of a given school year.

C.

Benefits
Tutors under contract and regularly scheduled in excess of three and one-half (31/2) hours per day up to thirty-two (32) hours per week shall be eligible to receive
all of the insurance related fringe benefits set forth herein except the Board shall
pay 50% of the cost of the premium for said benefits. Tutors working more than
thirty-two (32) hours per week shall be eligible to participate in the benefit program
to the same degree as full-time employees. Furthermore, such full-time tutors will
be eligible for personal days, sick leave, professional meetings and assault leave.
ARTICLE 17.
RESIDENT EDUCATORS

The Resident Educator program for Middletown City Schools shall follow the minimum
requirements in state law as defined in ORC 3319.223, 3319.261 and Ohio Administrative Code
3301-24.
ARTICLE 18.
REHIRED RETIRED TEACHERS
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, if the Employer elects, in its sole
discretion, to employ an individual who has retired and is receiving benefits through the State
Teachers Retirement System, such individual shall be employed under a special limited contract,
defined below. The Employer has the right to place the teacher between steps 5 and 15 on the
salary schedule. The HR Director and the MTA President shall agree to any deviation from this
range.
30

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

A.

Special Limited Contract – A retired teacher under STRS who is rehired shall be
deemed a newly hired teacher regardless of the individual’s prior service, whether
with the Employer or another school district. Such individuals are eligible only for
a one year special limited contract which shall automatically expire upon the
completion of the school year for which such special limited contract was issued
without the requirement of Board action, evaluation, nonrenewal or notice.

B.

The Employer, however, in its sole discretion may elect to reemploy such special
limited contract teacher for the following year under the terms set forth above. The
Employer’s decision to employ or reemploy is not subject to the grievance and
arbitration provisions of this Agreement.

C.

All health or dental insurance benefits will be provided to retired bargaining unit
members employed under the provisions of this Article provided that they are not
eligible to receive benefits elsewhere. The employee may opt out of coverage upon
notification to the District.
ARTICLE 19.
PLANNING PERIOD/TEACHER PREPS/DUTIES

19.1

K-5/Central Academy
A.

Teachers in Grades K through 5 and Central Academy shall have two hundred
twenty-five (225) minutes of planning time each week within the student day, in
addition to their thirty (30) minute duty-free lunch period, but not necessarily daily,
or in blocks of forty-five (45) minutes. Building Principals will strive to minimize
the frequency and length of interruptions of teacher planning time.

B.

Substitutes shall be provided in the absence of art, music or physical education
teachers in grades K through 5 and Central Academy.

C.

Scheduled non-classroom* duties in the elementary schools shall be equitably
assigned among regular bargaining unit members. These duties shall not exceed
one-hundred (100) minutes per week.
*Non-classroom duties are defined as those assigned out-of-classroom duties before school convenes, during lunch period or after school dismisses.

D.

Special area teachers (art, music, PE), who may have open blocks of time within
their schedules, may be used by the building administrator to relieve a classroom
teacher for conferences such as IEPs or parental conferences; for intervention with
31

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

students; provide additional classes for development purposes; or for enrichment
working with the classroom teacher.
19.2

Middle School - High School
A.

A teacher in grades 6-12 shall be assigned a maximum of one hundred sixty-five
(165) students per day, subject to any applicable overload payment provided in
Article 25. Except as provided below, such teachers shall have a maximum of three
(3) preparations within a curriculum area per day except in self-contained
classrooms. Teachers assigned to teach in two or more curriculum areas will be
assigned a maximum of three (3) preparations. Teacher preparations will be
assigned in the best interests of the students and teacher.
1.

Foreign language and special teachers (such as art, music, industrial arts,
business education and physical education) may be assigned up to four (4)
preparations per day.

2.

Academic teachers who teach a fourth preparation with the prior written
agreement of the Senior Director of Curriculum Instruction will be entitled
to a $1,500 per year stipend, payable at the end of the school year.

3.

Special circumstances regarding preparations that are not directly addressed
or resolved by reference to this paragraph shall be finally determined, on a
case by case basis, by the Superintendent or designee.

B.

A teaching preparation is defined as a grade level or a different subject within a
curriculum area. To the extent possible, teaching preparations will be cooperatively
planned by the principal and faculty members in each department and, to the extent
possible, the number of preparations will be equalized among the members of the
department. However, the building principal and coordinator will make the final
decision on assignment of preparations.

C.

Every teacher is to teach six (6) periods on a seven (7) period day with a regular
program. No teacher will have more than six (6) classes per day or an equivalent
load, if teaching on a modular program or eight (8) period day. Every teacher shall
be guaranteed the equivalent of one planning period per day. Building Principals
will strive to minimize the frequency and length of interruptions of teacher planning
time.

D.

The assignment of homerooms and other non-classroom duty, such as cafeteria
duty, shall be done in an equitable manner within each building.

32

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

ARTICLE 20.
FACULTY MEETINGS
The principal shall schedule only one (1) regular faculty meeting per month. Faculty meetings
may be called either before or after school. Such meetings shall be held up to sixty (60) minutes.
However, no teacher shall be required to remain before or after school more than sixty (60) minutes
outside of their normal work day. Principals may call faculty meetings for a variety of reasons
which may include but are not limited to furthering district initiatives or goals and may include
professional development. The principal reserves the right to call additional meetings that address
urgent/time sensitive matters.
ARTICLE 21.
SCHOOL DAY
A.

Unless otherwise assigned to a duty, all elementary (including Central Academy) teachers
are expected to be in their respective rooms or assigned places for student supervision
fifteen (15) minutes before the tardy bell and fifteen (15) minutes after pupil dismissal, not
to exceed a 7½ hour workday. Within the teachers’ workday, teachers are expected to
supervise students upon student arrival at school. Teachers are expected to escort their
students to their dismissal location and remain with their students until they are dismissed
or loaded on their buses. After the end of the work day, students remaining shall be
supervised by the supplemental contracted personnel. Student supervision before and after
school are not considered duties.

B.

Unless otherwise assigned to a duty, all high school and middle school (including
Highview Sixth Grade Center) teachers are expected to be in their respective rooms or
assigned places for student supervision at least fifteen (15) minutes before the time for the
tardy signal and for fifteen (15) minutes after the first pupil dismissal, not to exceed a seven
and one-half (7½) hour work day.

C.

Teachers are expected to be present and performing their supervisory responsibilities
during the time that pupils are required to be there, and according to the hours established
by the Board.

D.

The length of the school day for all bargaining unit personnel shall be 7 hours, 30 minutes
and a floating hour per week that will not require travel and will not include professional
development.

E.

With the exception of open houses, parent teacher conferences (or individual studentrelated conferences held at the request of the parent, teacher or principal), MFEs, IEPs and
IATs (or other conferences required by law), and contractually required faculty meetings,
33

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

all other meetings outside the teacher’s seven and one-half (7½) hour work day will be
voluntary. To the extent possible, MFEs, IEPs and IAT (or other conferences required by
law) shall be held during the workday. The District will strive to limit after school meetings
to one per week.
ARTICLE 22.
SCHOOL YEAR
The school year shall consist of one hundred eighty-five (185) contract days which shall be for
instruction and in-service, except in the first two years of employment when up to four extra days
may be added for in-service training at the district hourly rate.
At least two (2) seven and one-half (7½) hour in-service days will be provided at the beginning of
the school year before the students’ first day of school. During these days, members will have no
less than fifty percent (50%) of the two (2) days to work independently.
One (1) seven and one-half (7½) hour in-service day will occur at the end of the first quarter.
Members will have zero percent (0%) of this day to work independently. One (1) seven and onehalf (7½) hour in-service day will occur at the end of the first semester. During this in-service
day, members will have no less than fifty percent (50%) of the day to work independently.
One (1) seven and one-half (7½) hour in-service work day will be scheduled in the calendar
following the last student day of the school year. This day will be set aside for dedicated time for
teachers to work independently to close out the school year.
ARTICLE 23.
WORKROOM/LOUNGE
A.

Teachers shall have at least one room of appropriate size reserved as a faculty lounge in
each building.

B.

All teachers shall have a quiet place to work during planning periods with access to a desk
and file cabinets.

34

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

ARTICLE 24.
BUILDING PROCEDURES
A.

Each principal will provide each teacher assigned to the building with a handbook, written
rules, regulations, and/or procedures at the beginning of each year.

B.

Except in cases of medical emergencies, teachers shall not be required to administer
medication to any student nor shall they be required to perform medical procedures such
as catheterization. Proper medical training/instruction shall be made available and required
of all teachers of children with special medical needs during contracted work hours.

C.

In the absence of an administrator, the principal shall designate a professional teaching
staff member to act as the principal's representative.

D.

No grade given to a student by a teacher will be changed without first consulting with the
teacher concerning the circumstances necessitating the change.
ARTICLE 25.
CLASS SIZE

The following pupil-teacher ratios are maximums in assigning students to classrooms in the
District. Every reasonable effort shall be made not to exceed the maximum daily averages,
including overloads, as set forth below.
Maximum
A.

Grades K-2

25

B.

Grades 3-5

27

C.

Grades 6-12
1.
English, Social Studies,
Science, Mathematics,
Foreign Language,
Health,
Art, Speech, Drama

Maximum Daily average
27.5

Maximum
2.
3.
4.

Physical Education
General Music
Remedial classes in

35
32
22
35

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

academic areas
D.

“Team Teaching” at the K-3 level is defined as two or more teachers serving the
needs of students in one physical setting. Except for newly hired teachers, team
teaching assignments shall be on a consensual basis. Otherwise, a non-consenting
teacher shall be treated as an involuntary transfer at that point in time. The class
size range for K-3 teams are 34 at the maximum (in 15-1 or reduced size
classrooms).

E.

Special Education
Pupil-teacher ratios in all special education classes shall meet the current standards
required for approval by the State Department of Education.

F.

G.

Overload Payments for Grades K-5
1.

In the event that the maximum number of students per class is exceeded,
beginning on the eleventh (11th) student day after the first day of school,
the classroom teacher will receive $6.00 per the number of students over the
maximum limit times the number of days retroactive to the first day that the
overload occurs. However, the maximum class sizes stated above for grades
K-5 shall not be exceeded by more than three (3) students.

2.

Student enrollment will be verified by the official attendance record kept by
the teacher and the principal's office. Payment for student overloads will be
paid on or before the last pay period in June.

Overload Payments for Grades 6-12
1.

In the event that the number of students per day assigned to an academic
teacher (those set forth in paragraph C.1., above) exceeds one hundred
sixty-five (165) students per day beginning on the eleventh (11th) student
day after the first day of school, the teacher will be entitled to receive
overload payments at a rate of $1.50 per student over the one hundred sixtyfive (165) student limit times the number of days the overload occurs
retroactive to the first day that the overload occurred. However, the
maximum number of students per day shall not exceed one hundred
seventy-five (175) students for academic teachers.
In addition, if on the 11th day after the first day of school, an academic
teacher’s student class exceeds thirty (30) students, the teacher will be
entitled to receive overload payments at a rate of $1.50 per student over the
thirty (30) student limit times the number of days the overload occurred.
36

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

2.

Student enrollment will be verified by the official attendance record kept by
the teacher and the principal's office. Payment for student overloads will be
paid on or before the last pay period in June.
ARTICLE 26.
PROTECTION OF TEACHING STAFF

26.1

The Administration recognizes its responsibilities to support professional teaching staff
members in the performance of their duties and shall fully support and assist professional
teaching staff members in the maintenance and control of discipline in the schools. In fact,
the Board of Education is most anxious to emphasize Board policy regarding teachers
carrying out their responsibility in regard to maintaining discipline both within the schools
proper and on school grounds, including hallways, restrooms, parking lots, etc. In
accordance with Section 3319.41 of the Ohio Revised Code, a professional staff member,
principal, or administrator may use only such force as is reasonable and necessary to quell
a disturbance threatening physical injury to others, to obtain possession of weapons or other
dangerous objects upon the person or within the control of the pupil, for the purpose of
self-defense, or the protection of persons and property. It is the responsibility of the
professional teaching staff member to provide a classroom learning situation which
provides an atmosphere for learning to take place. When it becomes apparent that a
breakdown in classroom discipline is caused by a particular pupil who is disruptive in
nature, it is the duty of the professional teaching staff member and the principal to find a
reasonable solution to the problem.

26.2

Assault
A.

All cases of physical threat or violence to members of the staff shall be reported to
the principal immediately after occurrence. If, in the judgment of the teacher and/or
the principal, the assault is sufficiently severe, the police shall be notified.
However, a teacher on his or her own initiative may, and shall, if requested by the
Employer, file criminal charges against the person(s) assaulting him/her. A written
report of all assaults on staff personnel will be made to the Superintendent for
further investigation and possible expulsion of the student. Any professional
teaching staff member who is assaulted may be excused by the principal to seek a
physician's evaluation of his/her injuries. Such leave shall be at no loss in pay and
shall not be chargeable to sick leave provided the employee provides a doctor’s
note.

B.

A teacher who has been assaulted shall make an immediate oral report to the
principal or his/her designee. The teacher shall also make a written report to the
principal before leaving school that day or as soon as physically possible. The
37

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

report shall contain all relevant facts and include the names of teachers, students
and/or other persons who were witness to the assault.

26.3

C.

At the teacher's request, and upon receiving approval from the building principal,
the accused student or students will be immediately withdrawn from the affected
teacher's class(es), pending investigation, with full consideration given to the
possibility of suspension, expulsion and/or other remedies. Approval shall not be
unreasonably denied.

D.

If criminal or juvenile court action results, the teacher shall be granted leave of
duties without loss of pay or consultation as may be requested by the prosecuting
attorney, the court, or law enforcement officers.

E.

Whenever a newly hired teacher is out of sick leave, and is absent from school as a
result of an assault arising out of his/her assigned duties, he/she will be paid his/her
full salary for the period of his/her absence due to the injury(ies) up to a maximum
of one week (seven calendar days) immediately following the assault/injury.

Complaints Against Staff
A.

Upon receiving a complaint from a complainant against a professional teaching
staff member, the principal shall give a copy to the professional teaching staff
member involved if written, or in the alternative, the principal may opt to discuss it
with the teacher within a reasonable period of time following the receipt of the
complaint. If the complaint becomes a matter of record, the member shall receive
a written copy.

B.

If a conference is deemed necessary by the professional teaching staff member, the
principal and the complainant, guidelines shall be followed as set forth under Board
Policy and every effort shall be made to notify the parent(s) or legal guardian of a
student complainant of the date, time and place of the conference.

C.

Teachers are expected to arrange time for conferences with students and/or
complainants either during the school day or immediately after the close of school,
provided the student and/or the complainants request the conference at least one
day in advance. The time and length of the conference should be kept as flexible
as possible in order to accommodate all parties concerned. Teachers are not
expected to interrupt their classes to arrange a small conference unless the principal
approves.

D.

If appropriate, the principal shall forward a letter to the complainant indicating the
disposition of said matter. A copy of same shall also be given or sent to the teacher
involved.
38

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

LEAVES OF ABSENCE
ARTICLE 27.
SICK LEAVE
The following leave provisions will be applicable to full-time professional teaching staff members.
Sick Leave
A.

Days or hours of absence in ¼ day increments authorized under this provision shall
be deducted from the sick leave accumulation. One and one-fourth (1¼) days of
sick leave shall be given full-time employees for each completed month of
employment up to fifteen (15) days per year. Employees shall be permitted a
maximum accumulation under this Article of two hundred fifty (250) days.

B.

All accumulations of unused sick leave credit heretofore accrued under prior laws
and policies shall remain to the credit of the sick leave account of each employee
on the effective date of this regulation. Accrued credits shall be allowed to
employees transferring their employment from other boards of education or other
political sub-divisions in Ohio, provided such credits have been computed under
the minimum requirements of the laws of the State of Ohio. Sick leave up to a total
of fifteen (15) days shall be allowed for teachers who come from other states, where
such sick leave has accumulated under the laws of that state and is certified by the
proper school official. In no event shall sick leave accumulate at a faster rate than
allowed by Ohio law.

C.

On reporting to duty each newly hired employee shall be credited with five (5) days
of sick leave. The five (5) days shall be concurrent with, but not in addition to the
one and one-fourth (1¼) days permitted below and R.C. 3319.141.

D.

At the completion of each month of service, one and one-fourth (1¼) days of sick
leave shall be credited to the sick leave account of the employee for the actual
number of months of service rendered. Persons who have been employed in the
Middletown City School District for a period of five (5) years or more and who
have consumed all presently accumulated sick leave, on the recommendation of the
Superintendent or designee and approval of the Board of Education, may be granted
an advancement on their sick leave to be earned thereafter. Employees shall return
borrowed sick leave days to the employer as credited each month until such time
that all days have been returned to the District. If an employee leaves employment
with the District for any reason, before repayment of all borrowed days, the District
shall withhold any such amount from the employee’s final paycheck.
39

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

E.

The same accrual of one and one-fourth (1¼) days per month shall continue during
the use of sick leave, provided the employee has not been officially separated from
the present payroll.

F.

Sick leave shall be used for periods not to exceed their accumulated sick leave
account for the following causes:
Personal illness or injury,
Exposure to contagious disease until quarantine is lifted or danger removed,
Death of father, father-in-law, mother, mother-in-law, spouse, or child,
Death of sister, brother, aunt, uncle, grandparent or step-parent,
Death of close friend, distant relative, or neighbor (up to 2 days maximum),
Serious illness or death in the employee's immediate household,
Serious illness of parents, grandparents, mother-in-law, father-in-law, children,
son-in-law, daughter-in-law or grandchildren living in a separate household when
the presence of the employee is necessary,
Serious illness of brother or sister living in a separate household (up to 3 days
maximum),
Disability or illness due to pregnancy.

G.

If an administrator has a concern with an employee’s excessive or unusual pattern
of sick leave use, they must request a meeting with the employee to discuss their
concerns. If the explanation of use satisfies the administrator’s concerns, the matter
shall be closed. If the administrator still has concerns, they may require the
employee to provide statements, written evidence, affidavits or other valid proof
substantiating the reason or cause for the sick leave. Said proof shall be submitted
to the building principal and then forwarded immediately to the office of the
Superintendent. For all meetings, the employee shall have the right to Association
representation. The meeting referenced above is not a prerequisite to discipline. If
poor attendance continues, the administrator may require a doctor’s note for all
future absences for the remainder of the current school year.

H.

The employee may appeal in writing to the Superintendent or designee for special
consideration for additional sick leave because of extreme hardship.

I.

Any teacher who has two hundred fifty (250) sick days accumulated as of the first
work day of each school year is entitled to use up to fifteen (15) days of sick leave
before any sick leave will be subtracted from his/her total of two hundred fifty (250)
days. No more than two hundred fifty (250) days can be accumulated. This Section
(I) only applies to employees who have notified the District of their intent to retire
by December 1 of the retirement year.
40

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

J.

Falsification of sick leave is grounds for termination.

K.

Upon exhaustion of accumulated sick leave, an employee may make an application
for borrowed sick leave for a catastrophic illness in accordance with the Emergency
Leave Fund (ELF) Plan provisions set forth in Appendix E to this contract.
ARTICLE 28.
PERSONAL LEAVE

A.

Personal Leave
1.

Each employee shall be entitled to three (3) days of absence, with pay, each
school year due to personal reasons, which days shall not be deducted from
sick leave. The employee shall give his/her principal or supervisor fortyeight (48) hours advance notice of his/her intention to take such leave,
except in rare circumstances when such notice is not possible. When a staff
member is absent for personal reasons, a report of such absence, signed by
the employee and his/her principal or supervisor, shall be filed with the
Treasurer within ten (10) days following the day of absence. Personal days
will not be permitted the first or last day of school, records day or the day
before or after school holidays or an extended vacation period. However,
in special emergency situations, at the discretion of the principal, these
limitations may be waived.

2.

During the school year personal days shall be limited on any particular day
as follows:
Teaching Staff Size
15 or fewer
16 through 19
20 through 49
50 through 74
75 or more

No. of Teachers Permitted
Personal Leave Day
1
2
4
6
8

3.

Traveling teachers for whom a substitute would normally be assigned shall
be attributed to the school where they are first assigned on the requested
day. Other traveling teachers shall not be included in the calculations.

4.

However, in special emergency situations at the discretion of the principal,
the limitations stated above may be waived. In cases where more requests
41

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

are made than allotments available, requests will be granted on a first-come,
first-served basis.
B.

Any unused personal leave day(s) shall be converted to sick leave at the ratio of 1:1
at the end of the school year.
ARTICLE 29.
PROFESSIONAL LEAVE

A.

Application form, provided by the Central Office, shall be submitted to the
principal or supervisor at least two (2) weeks prior to the date of the meeting. A
written approval or rejection will be returned to the applicant from the Central
Office.

B.

Attendance shall be authorized by the Superintendent in accordance with the school
system needs and fund limitations approved in the school budget.
ARTICLE 30.
ASSOCIATION LEAVE

Association Related Meetings
A.

B.

Leave
1.

The local Association President and officially elected delegates or alternates
shall be granted leave to attend the OEA Spring and Fall Representative
Assemblies, not to exceed three (3) days per delegate. Any additional leave
for such meetings will be at the discretion of the Superintendent.
Association business shall be conducted outside of school hours except in
cases of exigent circumstances.

2.

The Board is not obligated for any expenses related to the assemblies except
to provide released time for said president, delegates, or alternates.

3.

The Association shall be responsible for providing cost of substitute
teachers in the absence of said president, delegates, or alternates.

The Association President or President's designee shall also be allowed five (5)
days released time in order to do Association-related business such as grievance
hearings or building staff meetings. Such time will be at the President’s discretion
(with notice to the Director of Human Resources) and the Association will pay one42

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

half (1/2) of the substitute cost. Any additional leave time beyond the five (5) days
will be at the discretion of the Superintendent.
C.

The Association President or his/her designee may request additional release time
for Association business and the Association will pay for substitute wages for
approved days.
ARTICLE 31.
EMERGENCY LEAVE

Days of absence authorized under emergency leaves shall be fully paid days unless otherwise
stipulated in each individual emergency leave, and shall not be deducted from sick leave
accumulation.
A.

Jury duty – Absence for jury duty is permissible. On absences for jury duty the
employee shall receive full payment of his/her regular salary and does not have to
reimburse any nominal payment for such services to the Board.

B.

The Superintendent or designated representative, in his/her discretion, may
authorize absences for other justifiable emergency reasons. The reason for such
requests shall be stated in writing.

C.

Emergency leave requests shall be submitted as soon as possible after the
professional staff member becomes aware that emergency leave is necessary.
ARTICLE 32.
WORKERS COMPENSATION

32.1

Service-Connected Injury Leave
In the event of a service connected occupational illness or injury occurring in the scope of
a teacher's employment and arising out of such employment by the Board, as determined
by the Industrial Commission of Ohio, the teacher may elect to be paid the difference in
pay between Worker's Compensation benefits and his/her regular compensation with such
difference being charged to the teacher's sick leave on a percentage or fractional basis. This
will be accomplished by presenting evidence of the amount received from the Bureau of
Worker's Compensation to the Treasurer of the Board, and thereafter the Treasurer of the
Board will issue a check for such difference. Teachers shall be expected to return to duty
when able to resume duties and will be entitled to reinstatement under the same provisions
as though returning from sick leave. The teacher and his/her physician shall determine
when the teacher returns to duty. The Board may require a certification from the teacher's
43

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

physician that the teacher is able to resume teaching duties before being allowed to return
to duty.
ARTICLE 33.
SABBATICAL LEAVE
Sabbatical Leave
A.

A teacher who has completed five (5) years of service in the Middletown City
School System may, with permission of the Board, be entitled to take a leave of
absence with part pay, equal to the difference between the substitute's pay and the
teacher's expected salary, for one or two semesters subject to the following
restrictions:
1.
2.
3.
4.

B.

Application submitted by March 1, of school year prior to beginning of
leave.
A plan of study in education approved by the Superintendent.
Provide evidence at the conclusion of the leave that the plan was followed
and credit received.
Agree to work for Middletown City Schools for one year following
completion.

No more than five percent (5%) of the teaching staff may be on leave at one time.

This section is subject to all other provisions of Section 3319.131 of the Ohio Revised
Code.
ARTICLE 34.
UNPAID MEDICAL LEAVE
Unpaid Medical Leave
A.

Employees shall be entitled to family and medical leave in accordance with the
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, as amended.

B.

In addition to having FMLA benefits, and upon Board approval, prior to the
expiration of sick leave the employee who is ill may request a leave of absence for
personal illness not to exceed two (2) years that will run concurrently with any
unused FMLA benefits. A doctor's statement requesting the granting of said leave
must accompany each application.
44

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

C.

Nothing in this section will be construed to preclude a teacher from returning to
active employment from leave status with a doctor's statement of approval.
However, a teacher may not return to duty prior to the end of the term or semester
without the employer’s approval.
ARTICLE 35.
CHILD CARE LEAVE

Child Care Leave
A.

Leave Rights – A professional staff member may request and shall be entitled to a
leave of absence without pay for maternity or child care reasons to begin during the
third trimester of pregnancy or immediately after the birth of a child, or in the case
of adoption, the receipt of custody. Such leave shall be for the remainder of the
current semester and one additional school year, if desired.

B.

Application for Leave – Application for child care leave shall contain a statement
on the expected date of birth, or in the case of adoption, the date of obtaining
custody, the date on which the leave of absence is to commence and the term of the
leave.

C.

Rights While on Leave – Professional staff member on maternity leave or child
care leave shall be entitled to request and receive the right to continue to be covered
by any/or all district group insurance, providing the insurance company or hospital
service association involved permits such continuance of coverage of the person on
leave of absence and the professional staff member pays to the Treasurer of the
Board in advance each quarter the full amount of the quarterly group plan premium
of such coverages. Any overpayment of premium shall be refunded to the staff
member upon termination of leave. No other compensation or fringe benefits shall
be provided.

D.

Reinstatement Rights – Upon returning to service at the expiration of a leave of
absence, the teacher resumes the contract status which he/she held prior to the leave.
When an individual who is on an authorized leave of absence with a time-certain,
determines that he/she wishes to return to active employee status prior to the
expiration of the full term of said leave of absence, the Board through its authorized
representative shall make every effort to return the individual to the same contract
status that the individual had prior to leaving, subject however, to the then current
needs of the school district.

E.

Child Care Leave – Child care leave provisions of maternity leave apply to either
of the adopting or natural parents (father or mother).
45

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

ARTICLE 36.
MILITARY LEAVE
Military Leave
Military Duty – All professional staff members of the Middletown City Board of
Education, who are eligible shall receive military leave in accordance with state and federal
law. Employees shall provide proof of military orders before leave will be granted.
ARTICLE 37.
PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATION LEAVE
Office in State or National Professional Organizations
Upon request of the MTA, a member of the certified staff elected to a state or national
office of a bona fide professional organization at either state or national level will be
granted a leave of absence not to exceed two (2) years; bona fide professional organization
to be determined by MTA President or Superintendent.
ARTICLE 38.
COMPULSORY LEAVE
Compulsory Leave
School Related: In all school related cases where professional staff members are witnesses
or representatives of or on behalf of the Employer, they shall be paid the normal salary for
the period of absence.
ARTICLE 39.
OTHER LEAVES
Other Leaves
Other leaves may be granted by the Superintendent. The request shall be in writing. The
leave request shall be granted unless the Superintendent determines in his/her reasonable
discretion that: (1) the leave request is not for a good reason; or (2) that the leave can be
taken at another time without an absence from work; or (3) that the request was without
sufficient notice; or (4) that a substitute could not be obtained for the days requested.

46

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

COMPENSATION
ARTICLE 40.
ADMINISTRATION OF THE SALARY SCHEDULE
40.1

Teachers may advance on the salary schedule from one degree level to another, or to the
immediate step beyond a degree, such as B.S. plus 20, twice during a school year upon
successful completion of schedule requirements. An official transcript from the training
institution must be presented to the Office of Human Resources to certify the degree (i.e.:
Masters Degree) or the completion of course work for additional hours and such must be
received in the office of the Director of Human Resources before October 15, for a full
year adjustment and March 15, for the second semester of the school year to be eligible for
the full or half year adjustments.

40.2

Staff development and curriculum development for certificated personnel will be at the
District hourly rate.

40.3

Payroll Deductions
The following payroll deductions will be provided by the Middletown Board of Education:
TAXES
The Employer shall deduct all taxes required by law.
OTHER DEDUCTIONS
Vision Service Plan (VSP)
Middletown Area Schools Credit Union
Butler Health Plan (BHP)(Health and Dental Care)
Conseco (Cancer, Hospital Intensive Care and Heart Ins.)
UNUM Life Insurance Company (Disability)
NEA/OEA/SWOEA/MTA Unified Dues
Middletown Area United Way
OEA-FCPE/The NEA Fund for Children and Public Education
Child Support Payment (Court Ordered)
Wage Garnishments (Court Ordered)
Other Court Orders
It is understood by the parties that the names of the particular insurer or charity, etc., may
change at the discretion of the employer, or in accordance with any other existing
agreement.
47

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

40.4

40.5

40.6

Pays
A.

All certificated employees will automatically be on a twenty-four (24) period pay
plan.

B.

All certificated employees shall be paid by direct deposit.

C.

The District will provide twenty-five (25) pays to all new hires when the teacher
school year begins on or before August 10. This pay will begin with the second
(2nd) payroll in August.

New Hire Incentives
A.

The Board may, at its option, pay any new hire up to three thousand five hundred
dollars ($3,500.00) for relocation to the Middletown School District on or before
the first pay date of a new school year.

B.

The Board may pay a one-time lump sum, not to exceed $5,000, as a new employee
incentive payment to any new hire in math, science, foreign language, or in any
other positions that are difficult to fill as mutually agreed to between the
Superintendent or designee and the MTA President.

C.

The maximum amount any new hire can receive as an incentive for either 40.5(A),
(B), or a combination of (A) and (B) is $5,000.

D.

Any new hire who receives a new hire incentive must agree to remain with the
Middletown City School District for two (2) years. Any new hire who fails to
remain employed by the District for the required two (2) year period shall repay the
full cost of the new hire incentive.

Micro-Credentialing Incentive
Teachers who complete micro-credentialing courses with Digital Promise or another
vender approved by the District will be eligible for a micro-credentialing incentive. Such
courses must be pre-approved by the Superintendent or designee.
Teachers who complete a single course will receive $200 upon proof of successful
completion. Teachers who complete a 3 course “stack” will receive $600 upon proof of
successful completion. Teachers may only receive one micro-credentialing incentive (one
single course or one stack).
Current teachers must complete the micro-credentialing course in the 2021-2022 or 20222023 school year. Employees hired in the 2022-2023 school year must complete the micro48

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

credentialing course in the 2022-2023 or 2023-2024 school year. New hires in the 20232024 school year are eligible for a micro-credentialing incentive in the 2023-2024 school
year only.
Participation in the micro-credentialing course is strictly voluntary and the District agrees
to pay any fees and assume any costs associated with taking the micro-credentialing
courses. No teacher will be required to pay back any costs or fees regardless if they pass
or fail the course.
40.7

Counselors
Counselors in grades 6-12, excluding Central Academy, will be paid on the basis of the
regular teacher's salary schedule, plus an additional sum in the form of a twenty (20) day
extended contract to compensate for additional duties, including a seven and one-half (7½)
hour day. Ten (10) days are to be served both before and/or after the one hundred eightyfive (185) day contract year.

40.8

The Teacher and Tutor salary schedules are attached to this Agreement as Appendix A and
Appendix B, and shall reflect the following.
A.

2021-2022:

3.0% wage increase retroactive to July 1, 2021.
Current employees as of the date of ratification in 2021 will receive
a $1,000 one-time COVID-19 recovery stipend.*

2022-2023:

2.0% wage increase.
1.0% one-time COVID-19 recovery stipend, which will be paid by
the first payroll in November.*

* The COVID-19 recovery stipends referenced above are provided to address
challenges related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including recruitment or retention
challenges, compensation for staff that work in-person, compensation for staff who
have assumed new duties because of COVID-19, to incentivize effective teachers
to move to and work in schools with vulnerable students disproportionately
impacted by the pandemic, and/or other issues resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic.
B.

At the beginning of each school year, employees will advance one step through the
District Salary Schedule.

C.

The parties agree to implement a step recovery process. This process is only
applicable to “Impacted Employees.” Impacted Employees are those employees
49

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

who were employed by the district and who did not receive a step increase between
2011 and 2016.
When Impacted Employees reach step 20, those employees will annually recover
one step on the schedule in addition to the yearly step advancement as noted above
until they have fully recovered all steps they did not receive between 2011 and
2016.
D.

Retroactive to the beginning of the 2021-2022 school year, the tutor salary schedule
will receive a 1.5% salary adjustment in addition to any wage increase as described
in Article 40.8(A) above.
ARTICLE 41.
SUPPLEMENTAL CONTRACTS

41.1

The supplemental teacher contract for extra duty assignment and granted additional
compensation shall be separate from and in addition to the regular teaching contract and
shall include the following:
A.
B.
C.
D.

Specific supplemental assignment.
Salary and date(s) of payment.
Signatures of both parties to the contract and the date of the signing of the contract.
A job description will be attached and signed by the Employee and supervisor.
(Copies of which will be provided to the MTA)

41.2

The supplemental teacher contract shall be for one (1) year which will automatically
terminate at the close of the school year for which it was issued without Board action of
evaluation, nonrenewal or notice.

41.3

Supplemental Pay Schedule
A.

Each salary on the attached Supplemental Pay Schedule shall reflect a percentage
rate of the newly negotiated base pay (BA, 0 Step).
These percentages shall become the Supplemental Pay Schedule.

B.

Administration of the Schedule
1.

An employee shall advance one step on the supplemental scale with each
year of experience.

50

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

2.

Past experience in the same assignment shall count towards placement on
the supplemental salary schedule.

3.

The supplemental pay shall be computed by multiplying the index
percentage corresponding to the teacher's position experience by the base
salary.

41.4

The Superintendent or designee may place a person at an appropriate step on the pay
schedule instead of Step 0 if the person employed has had significant experience in the
activity such as coaching without pay, college experience in that sport, director of summer
theater, etc.

41.5

Vacant supplemental positions and all non-certified supplemental positions which result
from resignations and non-renewals shall be posted on the district website for a period of
five (5) days. Any qualified teacher may apply, in writing, to the office of the Director of
Human Resources prior to the expiration of the posting period.

41.6

All current employees who meet the necessary qualifications will be considered for the
position prior to the position being filled by a non-bargaining unit person.

41.7

The failure to apply for or accept a supplemental contract or the failure of the District to
renew a supplemental contract shall have no adverse effect on the Employee's evaluation
of his/her regular contract, unless the employee engages in misconduct.

41.8

Each year, the District will issue a detention supplemental contract in each building
pursuant to the supplemental contract provision of this Agreement.

41.9

The District may prorate supplemental contract payments if the season or program is
suspended or cancelled, or the employee otherwise fails to complete their duties for the
entire season/program. If the season is suspended or cancelled by the District,
coaches/employees shall receive 25% of their supplemental contract amount for off-season
conditioning and/or preseason work. The remaining 75% of the supplemental contract will
be prorated based on the number of days the season/program was suspended as a
percentage of the total number of days of the season/program.

41.10 A supplemental committee shall be formed to conduct a systematic review of the
supplemental schedules, positions and pay structures. The committee will consist of up to
5 representatives from the District as chosen by the Superintendent and up to 5
representatives from the MTA as chosen by the MTA President. The parties agree to meet
at least quarterly beginning with the 2021 school year. The goal of this committee is to
present to the respective bargaining teams a mutually agreed to proposal to be negotiated
into the successor agreement. If a mutual agreement is not reached the parties will present
their work to the negotiations teams for consideration.
51

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

ARTICLE 42.
INSURANCE
42.1

The Employer and Association agree to accept and join the Butler Health Plan (BHP) for
medical and dental insurance coverage for the term of this Agreement. The Board reserves
the right to provide different insurance options provided the plans are substantially similar
to the current plan.

42.2

The Board will pay eighty percent (80%) of a single or family membership in medical
insurance.

42.3

The Board will pay eighty percent (80%) of a single or family membership in dental
insurance.

42.4

The Board of Education will pay the cost of a forty thousand dollar ($40,000) term life
insurance policy with double indemnity clause for accidental death or dismemberment for
all employees who work more than twenty (20) hours per week

42.5

Subject to the requirements of the insurer, the Board of Education will provide single vision
insurance not to exceed a maximum contribution by the Employer of four dollars and fortytwo cents ($4.42) per month, per employee. All employees shall be required to enroll and
pay for vision coverage. The remainder of the cost for vision coverage will be provided
by the employee through payroll deduction.
Subject to any applicable enrollment limits by the insurer, the cost for dependent coverage
shall be the responsibility of the employee and must be paid through payroll deduction.

42.6

Each new employee will receive insurance coverage on the first billing date after the start
of the school year providing a timely application has been filed. Termination of coverage
will be effective on the billing date following the termination date of the employee.

42.7

Section 125 Plan
The Board of Education shall implement a full Section 125 plan for employees’ insurance
premiums and other medical and dependent care expenses.

52

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

42.8

STRS Pick-Up
The Board of Education hereby agrees with the Association to the tax sheltering method of
the pick-up of employee contributions to the State Teachers Retirement System of Ohio
(STRS). The pick-up will include retirement benefits paid on all salaries and wages,
including supplementals, overtime and extended time.

42.9

Annuities
A.

Changes from one annuity provider or carrier to another and changes in the amount
of salary reductions will be accumulated by the Treasurer and applied to the next
succeeding payroll.

B.

Designation of new annuity providers shall be considered viable agents by the
District when they have met the required minimum of the greater of one percent
(1%) of the District's full-time employees or five (5) employees. Annuity
deductions shall begin when the new annuity provider meets the required minimum
number of contracts.

C.

The District will provide an avenue for tax sheltering the severance pay benefit.

D.

A list of approved companies shall be kept on file with the Office of the Treasurer.

53

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

ARTICLE 43.
TUITION REIMBURSEMENT
43.1

43.2

Believing that our staff of teachers as a group will make a greater contribution to the
children they serve if additional training is obtained in fields related to their work, the
Middletown Board of Education will reimburse to a teacher toward the tuition costs in
college courses he/she has completed within the present calendar year, in which a grade of
"B" or better is earned, or for certain approved CEU courses, provided he/she enrolled in
courses approved in advance by the Superintendent or designee, while under contract to
the Middletown Board of Education. The total reimbursement for these college or CEU
courses shall not exceed $1,300 in any one fiscal year for any individual teacher, and the
total annual tuition reimbursement under this Article shall not exceed $75,000 for all
bargaining unit members.
A.

All courses must be from an accredited, four year institution recognized for
certification purposes by the Ohio Department of Education.

B.

Courses approved for CEUs will be courses which directly apply to the teacher's
present teaching position and certification or used in the renewal of a teaching
license as reflected in an employee’s Individual Professional Development Plan.

C.

A pass/fail grade will only be honored when it is the only grade given for a
particular course.

D.

A teacher must be employed by the Middletown City School District for two (2)
consecutive semesters to be eligible to participate in the above program.

E.

Any teacher who receives a tuition reimbursement must agree to remain with the
Middletown City School District for two (2) years after the course(s) completion.
Any teacher who fails to remain employed by the District for the required two (2)
year period shall repay the full cost of the tuition reimbursement.

Payment for tuition reimbursement shall be made one time each fiscal year in June.
Available funds shall be allocated and if necessary, prorated among all submissions. All
paperwork necessary for the payment of the tuition supplement must be in the Human
Resources Office no later than the first pay dates in June. The employer may elect to move
to an electronic submission of all required paperwork and will provide employees with the
written process for their electronic submissions. If an employee does not submit for
reimbursement according to the established deadlines, the employee’s request may be
denied.

54

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

43.3

A supplemental salary shall not be paid for any course where the teacher has previously
received financial aid for the course or courses in question in the form of a scholarship,
fellowship, or grant-in-aid, except in the case of a teacher who has received a tuition
certificate in recognition of his/her services as a cooperating teacher for supervising a
student teacher. The Board of Education shall pay such teacher, provided he/she enrolls in
a college course, in an amount equal to the equivalent tuition costs of the course at the
university where the certificate was issued.
ARTICLE 44.
SEVERANCE PAY

44.1

Upon retirement from the Middletown City School District as defined under Ohio Revised
Code 124.39, an employee shall be compensated for a sum equal to one-fourth (1/4) of
their accumulated unused sick leave.

44.2

The rate of compensation for a certificated employee shall be the employee's daily rate as
determined by dividing the annual salary by the number of duty days (185).

44.3

A teacher with five (5) years of service in the district who dies while in active service is
deemed for purposes of this article to have retired the day prior to his/her death.

44.4

Beginning July 1, 1996, bargaining unit members who maintain perfect attendance (no sick
leave days, no personal leave days and no salary deduct days) during a school year (July 1
to June 30) shall receive one (1) additional day of severance allowance up to a maximum
of sixty-five (65) days.

44.5

In addition to the benefit provided above, teachers who notify the Board on or before
November 1 of the school year in which the employee will retire shall receive as incentive
two days of compensation (the employee’s daily rate as determined by dividing the
employee’s annual salary by the number of duty days [185]).

44.6

In addition to the benefit provided above, employees who retire during their thirtieth (30th)
year of service will be entitled to be compensated for unused sick leave to the extent of one
(1) day for each three (3) days of such unused sick leave accumulated for the accumulated
sick leave days between one hundred eighty (180) and two hundred fifty (250), provided
such employee gives written notice of such retirement to the Director of Human Resources
by December 1 of such thirtieth (30th) year of service, such employee completes the entire
school year of work, and such employee has accumulated no less than two hundred and
fifty (250) days of sick leave by the final pay period of such thirtieth (30th) year of service.

55

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

ARTICLE 45.
CALAMITY DAYS
45.1

“Calamity Days” are defined as any days schools are closed by the administration due to
snow, or other inclement weather, calamity or energy reasons. Teachers shall be required
to report to their buildings on calamity days on which students are assigned to perform
school work, like “e-days.” In the alternative, teachers may remain at home to respond to
student/parent emails and to provide necessary assistance only if the teacher can connect
to the internet, the District’s web-based software, and have access to any other technology
that is necessary to accomplish their duties.

45.2

When the administration determines that a delay in the starting time is necessary, teachers
shall report no later than thirty (30) minutes prior to the scheduled commencement of
classes.

45.3

When the administration determines that an early dismissal is warranted, teachers shall not
be required to remain more than thirty (30) minutes following the dismissal of students.

45.4

However, the Superintendent may make such emergency decisions necessary, in the best
interest of the school district’s education process, which would alter the defined normal
procedures to be followed in the event of canceling, delaying, or early dismissing school.

56

Mltldl-TiNICMn AuoclDtian mtd 1/iddklow,1 Oty&:ltool ~
MIJIIB~~I

EJfot:twe JIIIJI I, ioitt t1uoug1, J- 31). ion

ARTICLE 46.
DURATION
This Agreement shall become effective as ofJuly 1, 2020, and shall continue until June 30,
2023. Thereafter, it shall continue in force from year to year unless either party hereto shall notify
the other in writing at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration ofthe tcnn or extended tcan of
this Agreement, of my intention to make clianges in or terminate the Agreement
FOR THE ~OCIATION

FOR THE BOARD

~a1rkrL

rie Wood, President
Middletown Teachei:s Association

Dr. Chris Urso, President
Middletown City Board of&Juc.ation

/IIJAl{J

T.,_;z4,1✓
-_

Teresa Howe, Bargaining Team Member

Marlon Styles, Superintendent

~

Randy Bertram. Treasurer

f,20,,,.k,UL ' , { ~

TeamMember

~j/...po1aCora Thompson, Bargaining Team Membe!'

~I\'\.~

rah Housa, Assistant
Superintendent
/

~[k;Lc
Me

~±'~

7;;:;::z:-J;::i;£

A~ ~gTemnMembor

&

Carmela Cotter, Principal

~ O D S Consultant

Ohio Education Association

~..fL

Jack ffimenway, Attorney
Frost Brown Todd LLC

58

-=:::::>

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

APPENDIX A
Teacher Salary Schedule

58

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

59

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

APPENDIX B
Tutor Salary Schedules

60

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

APPENDIX C
Supplemental Contract Categories and Payment Dates

61

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

62

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

63

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

Single Step Supplemental Pay Salary Schedule

64

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

APPENDIX D
Memorandum of Understanding
The Ohio Teacher Evaluation System
Pilot Year 2019-2020
This Memorandum of Understanding is entered into by and between the Middletown Board of
Education (Board) and the Middletown Teachers Association (Association) this _______ day of
October, 2019.
WHEREAS, the Board and Association have entered into a Collective Bargaining Agreement
(CBA) which is effective from July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2020;
WHEREAS, the parties have entered into certain agreements with regard to participation in the
Ohio Teacher Evaluation System (OTES) Pilot for the 2019-2020 year that affects the Association
and, in that regard, desire to memorialize their agreements pertaining to same;
WHEREAS, the parties intend to amend their current CBA and Board Policy as set forth
hereinafter, and further intend that all remaining sections of the CBA and Board Policy that are
not inconsistent herewith, shall remain in full force and effect;
NOW THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY AGREED by and between the Board and the Association
that the following language shall constitute their Agreement as it relates to this matter.
Teacher Evaluation Guidelines
I.

Philosophy of Evaluation
Evaluation of teaching is a continuous constructive process for the improvement of the
quality of instruction.
Evaluation is cooperative in nature. It provides a basis for self-evaluation and professional
growth for the teacher.
The evaluation process provides a means whereby teacher competency and performance
are carefully, fairly and systematically assessed, aids in making sound administrative
decisions affecting the teacher, and provides a permanent record of teacher performance.

II.

Frequency of Evaluation
A. Every teacher shall be evaluated every year, except that the frequency and scope of
evaluations may be reduced according to law. Accomplished and Skilled teachers must
65

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

show growth on their professional growth plan in order to remain on a reduced evaluation
frequency.
B. No teacher shall receive more than one summative evaluation annually.
C. The evaluation shall be conducted and completed no later than the first day of May and the
teacher being evaluated shall receive a written report of the results of this evaluation not
later than the tenth day of May.
D. If the Board has entered into a limited contract or extended limited contract with the
teacher, the Board shall perform a minimum of three formal observations during the
evaluation cycle in any school year in which the Board may wish to declare its intention
not to reemploy the teacher.
III.

Procedures for Evaluation
A. Evaluation Procedure Defined
1. The evaluation procedure established in this Appendix conforms to the framework for
the evaluation of teachers developed pursuant to section 3319.112 of the Ohio Revised
Code.
2. Each completed evaluation will result in the assignment of a teacher effectiveness
rating. The teacher effectiveness rating shall be derived from a summative evaluation
as derived from the OTES 2.0 Pilot Rubric. If the law changes regarding areas
addressed by this Section (A)(2), the law will prevail.
B. Application:
1. The teacher evaluation procedure contained in this agreement applies to the following
employees of the District:
a.

Teachers working under a license issued under sections 3319.22, 3319.26,
3319.222 or 3319.226 of the Revised Code who spend at least fifty (50)
percent of their time providing content-related student instruction.

b.

Teachers working under a permanent certificate issued under section
3319.222 of the Revised Code as it existed prior to September 2003 who
spend at least fifty (50) percent of their time providing content-related
student instruction,

66

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

c.

Teachers working under a permanent certificate issued under section
3319.222 of the Revised Code as it existed prior to September 2006 who
spend at least fifty (50) percent of their time providing content-related
student instruction.

d.

Teachers working under a permit issued under 3319.301 of the Revised
Code who spend at least fifty (50) percent of their time providing contentrelated student instruction.

2. The observations and evaluation of a teacher who is a Resident Educator will be
consistent and coordinated with the requirements of the Resident Educator Program. If
the Resident Educator Program is discontinued by the state, it shall be discontinued by
the District also.
C. Evaluation Instrument
1. The Evaluation Instrument shall be the process and forms used by the teacher's
evaluator. OTES 2.0 forms will be used.
D. Evaluators
1. All evaluators will be properly licensed and credentialed by the State of Ohio.
2. Evaluators will be building principals, building assistant principals, and immediate
supervisors, such as the Related Services Coordinators and the Gifted Coordinator. As
mutually agreed by the MTA and the Human Resources Director, the evaluator may be
other District administrators. This Section is not intended to prevent administrators
from monitoring classrooms monitoring program and technology implementation,
monitoring program protocols, etc.
3. Teachers who are assigned to two or more buildings will be informed early in the school
year as to who will be evaluating him or her.
E. High Quality Student Data
Per ORC 3319.111 two measures of high quality student data (HQSD) must be used in the
framework of teacher evaluation. HQSD must be attributable to the teacher, include Value
Added when applicable and one other measure of HQSD.
Teacher Value Added, if available, must be used, ODE approved vendor assessments, and
district determined instruments are all considered sources of HQSD.
67

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

F. Professional Growth Plans – Prior to November 1, the teacher will be informed of the
assigned evaluator and will meet with the evaluator at a goal setting conference to develop/
review the professional growth plan (PGP) for that year. This conference may occur during
prior year’s summative evaluation conference. Each professional growth plan shall have 1
teacher professional SMART goal.
1. Teachers with an earned rating of Accomplished will complete a self-directed PGP.
Teachers with an earned rating of Skilled will work with their evaluator to jointly
complete the PGP. Teachers with an earned rating of Developing will complete a PGP
that is guided by their evaluator.
2. Teachers who have received a performance rating of “Ineffective,” will be placed on
an improvement plan directed by the assigned evaluator.
3. Improvement plans will contain all of the elements noted on the OTES 2.0 form.
Improvement plans will contain reasonable time lines for completion, and achievable
goals.
4. The Association may provide supports to teachers who receive “developing” or
“ineffective” performance ratings. Supports must be pre-approved by the building
principal and shall be aligned to District goals and initiatives.
5. The evaluation process shall be conducted and completed no later than May 1 and the
teacher being evaluated shall receive a written report of the results of this evaluation
not later than May 10.
G. Observations
1. Formal observations shall be defined as an observation of a minimum of thirty (30)
minutes that results in completion of a written observation form and is preceded by a
pre-conference and followed by a post conference. A minimum of two (2) observations
will be made for all teachers being evaluated. A minimum of three (3) observations will
be made for teachers who may be subject to non-renewal. The first formal observation
will be a holistic assessment. The second formal observation will be a focused
assessment. The focus areas for the second observation shall be shared with the teacher
at the first post observation conference. If necessary, if the third observation is a
focused assessment that will be shared with the teacher at the second post observation
conference.
2. All formal observations will be conducted openly and with the full knowledge of the
teacher and shall be aligned with the pre-conference.
68

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

3. A pre-observation conference shall be held prior to each formal observation between
the evaluator and the teacher in order for the teacher and evaluator to engage in
discussions regarding the teacher’s instructional planning. The evaluator may offer and
the teacher may request a copy of the observation rubric at this meeting.
4. A post-observation conference shall be held between the evaluator and the teacher. The
post observation report rubric will provide evidence of teacher performance. At this
conference, the teacher may provide evidence not indicated by the evaluator that aligns
with the observation rubric. The post-observation conference shall be held within ten
(10) working days following the observation.
5. Formal observations shall not be scheduled and conducted during the first week of
school or on the day before or the day after a school holiday or vacation.
6. Informal Visits: The evaluation process begins the first day of the work year and
includes all aspects of the teacher’s performance. Informal visits may take place at any
time and are intended to allow for an “all inclusive” picture of the teacher’s professional
work life.
H. Summative Evaluation Report
1. All formal observations and evaluation report(s) will be signed or electronically
acknowledged by the evaluator and the staff member. The staff member’s signature or
electronic acknowledgment does not signify agreement with the contents of the
evaluation report(s), only that he/she has seen and read the evaluation report(s). The
staff member will have the opportunity to make a written response and have it attached
to the formal observation or evaluation report.
2. All evaluation documents will be accessible to the staff member via the electronic
evaluation management system. All formal observations and evaluation reports shall
be placed in the teacher’s personnel file.
3. The final summative evaluation report and conference will occur by May 10. At which
time, the teacher’s final evaluation rating will be reviewed and areas of focus will be
identified for the following year.
I. OTES Walk-Throughs
1. An OTES walk-through is an informal observation that provides an opportunity to
gather evidence and provide feedback to teachers. All walk-throughs will be conducted
openly and with the full knowledge of the teacher by assigned evaluator.
69

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

2. An OTES walk-through will be between five (5) minutes and fifteen (15) minutes in
length.
3. Members shall be provided with feedback regarding OTES required walk-throughs.
The evaluator will endeavor to provide this feedback within forty-eight (48) hours of
the walk-through. Members may respond in writing to a walk-through, and such
response will be attached to the walk-through documentation.
4. In years when the member is not subject to the formal evaluation, he/she will be subject
to an informal observation/walkthrough. The evaluator shall conduct one (1) informal
observation/walkthrough around thirty (30) minutes in length. The informal
observation electronic forms shall be provided to the member within five (5) working
days. One conference with discussion of progress on the Professional Growth Plan will
be held. Principals reserve the right to visit and informally walk through classrooms as
the Principal deems necessary.
J. A teacher who disagrees with an ineffective rating on his/her final evaluation is permitted
to write a rebuttal letter that will be included in his/her file, but may not grieve the
evaluation except for clear factual mistakes or procedural violations.
K. The Association may make written recommendations to the District regarding the
efficiency and effectiveness of evaluations. After submission of the recommendations, the
Association may request a meeting to discuss the recommendations. Prior to any
substantive alterations to the evaluations process, the Association President shall be
informed of the recommended changes and given the opportunity to provide input.
As noted in Article 14.5 (Evaluation), the parties agree to meet once the new evaluation system is
implemented by law and regulations. To the extent the new framework or statutes conflict with
this MOU, the parties will meet to revise and update the relevant language. In the event the
transition from the current evaluation model to the new version of OTES is delayed, the terms
outlined in this current MOU will be used for the length of the contract.
For the Board:

For the Association:

____________________________

____________________________

70

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

APPENDIX E
EMERGENCY LEAVE FUND (ELF)
Policy & Eligibility

I.

PURPOSE:
To provide additional days of sick leave for full time employees of the Middletown City School
District who experience catastrophic personal accidental injury, non-elective surgery, or other
catastrophic illness who are currently out of sick leave, vacation/non-duty, and personal leave.
For purposes of this benefit, a catastrophic condition may include, but is not limited to, a heart
attack, stroke, cancer, serious complications due to surgery, and life threatening accidents. A
catastrophic illness incapacitates the employee and requires continuing supervision and treatment
from a healthcare provider. An employee’s own medically certified “catastrophic health condition”
may be considered a catastrophic injury or illness.

II.

COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP:
This fund is to be regulated by the E.L.F. Board consisting of:
 The President of the Middletown Teacher’s Association, when the matter concerns MTA
members.
 The President of the Middletown Certified Employees Association, when the matter concerns
MCEA members.
 The Superintendent or Designee.
 The school physician. The physician may be consulted on a case by case basis.
 Additional E.L.F. Board members may be added to serve on this committee with the following
conditions:
o There will be no more than (3) three total members from the association:
 (3) three MTA members on the E.L.F. Board if the situation pertains to an MTA
member. This includes the MTA President.
 (3) three MCEA members on the E.L.F. Board if the situation pertains to an
MCEA member. This includes the MCEA President.
o There will be no more than (3) three administrators. This includes the Superintendent
or designee but does not include the school physician.
Annually, the Superintendent or designee and the Association’s Presidents may select E.L.F. Board
membership.

III.

PROVISIONS OF ELIGIBILITY:
A.

All full time certified & classified employees shall be eligible to be members of the E.L.F.

71

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

B.

IV.

1.

Initial voluntary membership will consist of a non-refundable day of sick leave to
be applied by the employee to the E.L.F. program upon time of hire. Between
November 1, and December 1, future enrollment and withdrawal must be done in
writing.

2.

Membership shall be continuous unless canceled during the period of November 1
through December 1, or an assessment period. All employees will receive an intent
form from the Human Resources Office for the purpose of enrolling in or
withdrawing from the E.L.F. At such time that the Human Resources Office has
received the employee’s intent form, it will be recorded and submitted to the
Treasurer’s Office. Each employee will receive a notice of receipt indicating their
participation in the program. Employees not wishing to participate in the E.L.F.
will also receive a notice of receipt indicating that they do not wish to participate.

3.

New members may join by December 1 of each year or during each assessment
period.

Days of E.L.F. eligibility are governed by years of service in the Middletown School
District as follows:
0-5 years of service
15 days maximum
6 & above years of service
30 days maximum

POLICY PROCEDURES:
A.

E.L.F. leave will not be granted until:
1.
All paperwork is received. Proper paperwork needs to be turned in prior to any
surgery, procedure, or therapy. In the event of an unforeseen situation, information
may be submitted at the earliest possible time and days may be awarded
retroactively. This will be determined at the discretion of the E.L.F. Board.
2.
The E.L.F. Board has examined all documentation from the employee’s healthcare
provider and determined that the employee’s condition merits E.L.F. leave.
3.
The E.L.F Board has met and rendered a final decision. The E.L.F. Board shall
meet and render a decision within 10 days of receipt of request.

B.

All decisions of the E.L.F. Board are final, binding, and not subject to grievance.

C.

Application for emergency sick leave can only be made under the following conditions:
1.
All accumulated sick and personal leave must be used first.
2.
Extended leave may be granted for catastrophic personal accidental injury, nonelective surgery, or serious illness.
3.
Verification by a physician shall be mandatory prior to any leave being granted.
4.
The application for E.L.F. days is submitted to the Director of Human Resources.

D.

Additional days may be granted above the maximum by the E.L.F. Board. A letter must

72

Middletown Teachers Association and Middletown City School District
Master Contract Agreement
Effective July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023

be submitted to the Human Resources Office requesting additional leave accompanied with
a physician verification justifying the need for additional leave. The E.L.F. Board will
meet and determine if the request is granted. The decision of the E.L.F. Board is final.
E.

In consideration of the benefits of participating in the E.L.F. each applicant for membership
in the Fund shall, as a condition to such application, agree in writing as follows:
“I specifically acknowledge and agree that granting of days from the
E.L.F. shall be at the sole discretion of the E.L.F. Board. All decisions of
the E.L.F. Board will be final, binding and not subject to grievance. I
further agree to abide by such decision and indemnify and hold harmless
the Middletown City School District, Middletown Teachers Association,
Middletown Classified Employees Association, the E.L.F. Board, and all
of their agents for any loss they may sustain as a result of any claim or
legal proceedings I may bring against any of them with respect to a
decision made by any of them concerning this application.”

F.

Unused requested days shall be returned to the E.L.F.

G.

The E.L.F. will begin with one non-refundable day from each contributing staff member.
When the fund is depleted below 150 days, each member will be assessed one additional
non-refundable day. The E.L.F. Board shall be responsible for notifying certificated
personnel of each assessment period.

H.

When an employee donates days to the Fund, he/she agrees to the above stated rules for
administration of the Fund and agrees to abide by the stated rules.

0058123.0257299 4815-3128-5943v5

73
