Thu, 04/17/2025 11:57:32 AM SERB

CONTRACT
BETWEEN
THE BEXLEY CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT
BOARD OF EDUCATION
AND
OAPSE/AFSCME LOCAL 4/AFL-CIO
AND ITS LOCAL #123

Effective July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2024

03/02/2022
0722-02
21-MED-04-0528
41502

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article

Description

Page

Preamble……………………………………………………….

1

1

Recognition…………………………………………………….

2

2

Payroll Deductions……………………………………………

3

3

Management Rights…………………………………………..

4

4

Union Rights…………………………………………………...

5

5

Hours and Overtime…………………………………………..

5

6

Vacations and Holidays………………………………………

10

7

Severance Pay…………………………………………………

12

8

SERS Pick-Up………………………………………………….

13

9

Calamity Days………………………………………………….

13

10

Leaves…………………………………………………………… 14

11

Vacancies/Transfers…………………………………………… 20

12

Probationary Period……………………………………………. 22

13

Educational Training…………………………………………… 22

14

In Service Meetings……………………………………………. 23

15

Seniority and Layoff……………………………………………. 23

16

Discipline and Discharge………………………………………. 25

17

Drug Testing…………………………………………………….. 27

18

Insurance………………………………………………………… 27

19

Grievance Procedure………………………………………….. 30

20

Labor Management Committee………………………………. 34
ii

Article

Description

Page

21

Bargaining Procedure…………………………………………

34

22

Classified Wage Schedule……………………………………

35

23

Total Agreement……………………………………………….

37

24

Anti-Harassment/Sexual Harassment Training…………….

38

25

Injury Reports………………………………………………….

38

26

Duration…………………………………………………………

38

27

Background Checks and Certificate Fee…………….……….

38

Signature Page…………………………………………………………

39

Salary Schedules………………………………………………………

40-42

ii

PREAMBLE
This Agreement is entered into between the Bexley City School District Board of
Education, hereinafter referred to as the “Board,” and the Ohio Association of Public
School Employees (OAPSE)/AFSCME Local 4/AFL-CIO and its Local #123, hereinafter
referred to as the “Union.”

1

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
1.01

Purpose
The expressed purpose of this Recognition Agreement is to confer onto the
Union recognition rights for the purpose of engaging in collective bargaining of
the issues of wages, fringe benefits, and terms and conditions of employment.

1.02

Recognition of the Union
The Board recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive bargaining
representative for all regular, employed non-teaching classified employees
holding position in the following classifications:
1.
2
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Secretarial (SI, SII, SIII)
Custodial (Including Head custodian, Custodian I, II)
Food Service (Including Head Cook)
Maintenance (MI, MII, MIII)
Aides
Interpreters
Health Office Nurse
Logistic/Warehouse Associate

If the Board changes any classification but does not change the function or the
position in the classification, the newly renamed classification shall remain in the
bargaining unit. However, if any new classification is incorporated, then the
Board and the Union shall meet to determine inclusion or exclusion.
In the event of layoff, auxiliary services personnel and those Employees
assigned to locations outside of Franklin County, shall not have the right to
displace employees assigned to another building. They shall be deemed to be
probationary employees and shall not achieve the job security protection of nonprobationary employees under this Agreement.
1.03

The exclusions from the bargaining unit are:
A.

As unclassified employees according to 124.11 (A)(B) ORC: Treasurer
Office Staff, Secretary to the Business Manager/Central Office
Receptionist, Secretary to the Director of Curriculum and Instruction,
Parent Mentor, Public Information Officer, Technology Support Staff,
Sound and Lighting, Auxiliary Services Personnel, Administrative
Secretary to the Superintendent, Complex Receptionist and Secretary.

2

B.

As non-certified Administrator supervisors or management level
employees according to ORC 3319.02: Treasurer, Director of Facilities
and Operations, Director of Employee Relations, Food Service Director,
Maintenance Manager, Business Manager, Director of Technology,
Athletic Director.

C.

Substitutes and student workers.

1.04

Both parties agree that all members of the bargaining unit have the right to join,
participate in and assist the Union and the right to refrain from such without
intimidation or coercion. Membership in any organization or the payment of any
fee or assessment shall not be a condition of employment or continued
employment for any employee. The Board shall deduct the dues of members of
the Union upon presentation of a written deduction authorization by the
employee.

1.05

Upon request of the Local President, the Superintendent or designee will provide
an updated list of all bargaining unit members, including name, title, building of
assignment, and email address no more than one time per fiscal year.
ARTICLE 2
PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS

2.01

Payroll Deductions
A.

Dues shall be payable by payroll deduction only. The Board agrees to
deduct from wages of employees the payment of dues to the Union. The
employee authorization must be submitted to the Board Treasurer by an
officer of the Union.

B.

The Union must notify the Board's Treasurer by September 1 of each year
as to the total amount of dues to be deducted from each member.
Notification shall be in the form of a letter signed by the Local President
and/or Secretary-Treasurer.

C.

Monthly payroll deductions shall be forwarded to the OAPSE State
Treasurer within fifteen (15) days after the deductions are made along with
an accounting as to each amount withheld and from whom it was
deducted.

D.

Deductions will be made each pay over the remaining pay cycle.

3

E.

The authorization for membership payroll deductions of dues or fees and
revocation of dues and fees shall be in accordance with the terms
specifically listed on the signed membership application/dues check-off
authorization. The Association and member shall jointly notify the
Treasurer in writing when dues deductions shall be terminated.

F.

The Union agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Board and the
Administration for any finding rising out of the provisions of this Article or
upon reliance of authorization cards submitted by the Union to the Board.

PEOPLE
G.

The employer agrees to deduct from the wages of any employee who is a
member of the Union, a PEOPLE (Public Employees Organized to
Promote Legislative Equality) deduction as provided for in a written
authorization. Such authorization must be executed by the employee and
may be revoked by the employee at any time by giving written notice to
both the employer and the Union. The employer agrees to remit any
deduction made pursuant to this provision promptly to the Union together
with an itemized statement showing the name of each employee for whom
such pay deductions have been made and the amount deducted during
the period covered by the remittance.

H.

The deducted amounts shall be submitted by the District Treasurer to the
OAPSE State Treasurer for both Union dues and the PEOPLE deduction.
The Board Treasurer will notify the OAPSE State Treasurer as to the
amount applicable to each area of deduction.
ARTICLE 3
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

3.01

Except as specifically abridged, delegated, granted or modified by the specific
and express terms of this agreement, the Board hereby retains and reserves to
itself, the Superintendent and other personnel in management all powers, rights,
authority, duties and responsibilities conferred upon and vested in it or them by
the laws and the Constitution of the State of Ohio and the United States.

3.02

The exercise of any management rights requires neither prior negotiations with
nor agreement of the Union. Board rights shall not be subject to arbitration or
impairment by arbitration award or otherwise except to the extent that they are
limited by specific provisions of this Agreement. Failure to exercise a right or
exercising it in a particular way shall not be deemed a waiver of any Board right.

4

ARTICLE 4
UNION RIGHTS
4.01

Equipment Use
Upon reasonable request, the Union shall have the right to use school buildings
on the same basis as members of the general public and also use school
equipment, provided such use is made on school property, does not interfere
with the school use of such equipment, and is done when the classified member
is not scheduled to work. Use of the telephone will be limited to local calls and
the OAPSE Watts line and will not interrupt other employees on duty. The Union
shall pay for all consumable supplies.

4.02

School Mail and Bulletin Boards
The Union and Board agree to abide by the past practice relative to the school
mail delivery system and use of the bulletin boards.

4.03

Board Meeting Agenda
The Superintendent shall email the Local President or his/her designee an
advance copy of the agenda for each Board meeting at the time it is sent to the
Board members.

4.04

Board Policies
A.

A written copy of all Board policies shall be placed in each Principal's
office and shall be available to unit members on request. Board policies
are not to be removed by unit members from the Principal's office and
Business office.

B.

Changes in Board policies shall be provided to the Local President.

C.

Anytime this Agreement requires provision of a document to the Union, its
President or any other union representative, such document(s) can be
given or provided electronically.
ARTICLE 5
HOURS AND OVERTIME

5.01

Work Week and Work Day
A.

The individual bargaining unit member work week shall normally consist of
five (5) consecutive days.

5

B.

5.02

5.03

The basic work day is eight (8) hours and the basic work week is forty (40)
hours. This provision shall not be construed as a guarantee by the school
system of eight (8) hours per day or forty (40) hours of work per week.
Working hours may vary depending upon the requirement of different job
classifications, length of service by the member per year, and needs of the
school district.

Lunch Period
A.

Bargaining unit members working five (5) or more hours per day shall be
granted a thirty (30) minute duty-free unpaid lunch period. On a five (5) or
more hour field trip, an employee does not have to specify the lunch break
time. Otherwise, an employee must specify the lunch break time, and if
the circumstances prevented the employee from taking a lunch break,
such must be noted on the time sheet.

B.

Lunch periods shall be taken at the same time each day as mutually
agreed to between the member and the supervisor. If agreement is not
reached, the supervisor will assign a lunch period.

C.

If a unit member is unable to take lunch at the regularly scheduled time
due to assigned or volunteered work duties (e.g., field trips and
emergencies) the member shall get prior approval from his/her supervisor
to change the time. If the member is unable to contact the supervisor
concerning the change, the member shall use his/her judgment to take
lunch at a reasonable time within their regularly scheduled hours.

Rest Periods
A.

Bargaining unit members shall be granted a fifteen (15) minute paid rest
period for each three and three quarter (3-3/4) hours consecutively
worked.

B.

The schedule of rest periods are set by the employee’s immediate
supervisor.

C.

Normally, rest periods shall not be scheduled within the first hour and onehalf (1-1/2) of the three and three-quarter (3-3/4) hours of work unless
agreed to between the member and the supervisor.

D.

Employees may not leave the building during the rest periods.

E.

During his/her rest period, the employee is not permitted to interrupt or
distract other employees from performing their duties.

6

F.
5.04

Maintenance employees shall take their rest periods at the building in
which they are working when their rest period occurs.

Overtime
A.

The rate of pay for overtime shall be one and one-half (1-1/2) times the
regular hourly rate of the bargaining unit member. Overtime pay shall be
paid for all hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours in any week
(Sunday through Saturday), all hours worked on Sunday, except for third
shift workers that begin their Monday shift on Sunday night, and all hours
worked performing snow removal outside regularly scheduled hours. All
overtime work must be authorized by the bargaining unit member's
immediate supervisor. "Hours worked" shall include paid holidays, jury
duty, personal days, and vacation days as set forth in this agreement.
"Hours worked" shall exclude all other hours, paid or unpaid, when the
employee is not actually performing work, such as sick leave, or similar
leaves. On a five (5) or more hour overtime assignment, an employee
does not have to specify the lunch break time. Otherwise, an employee
must specify the lunch break time, and if the circumstances prevented the
employee from taking a lunch break, such must be noted on the time
sheet.

B.

Bargaining unit members who work on paid holidays shall be
compensated at two (2) times the regular rate of pay. Thus, the employee
would receive his/her regular rate of pay (holiday pay) and 100% of his/her
regular rate for hours actually worked on the holiday.

C.

1.

There will be two (2) District-wide custodial/maintenance seniority
rotation lists for overtime: one (1) list for all inside/athletic events
and one (1) list for the snow removal team. All custodial and
maintenance personnel will be placed on the inside/athletic events
list, hereinafter known as the “main overtime coverage list.”
Employees may ask the Maintenance Manager/Supervisor in
writing anytime during the year to have their name removed from
the list. Once a name is taken off, it is off until July 1st. Only those
members volunteering will be placed on the snow removal team list.
A call for volunteers for the snow removal team will be sent out by
Maintenance Manager or his/her designee each year in September.
Any new custodial/maintenance staff hired after the snow removal
list has been established shall have an opportunity to volunteer to
be placed on the bottom of the list, if desired. They shall also be
placed at the bottom of the main overtime coverage list unless they
request in writing to be removed.

7

2.

A substitute will first be used to fill in for any absent employee. If a
substitute cannot be obtained, the overtime event will go to the
seniority rotation list to be filled, unless it is deemed an emergency.

3.

Cooks will be given first right of refusal to do overtime events in
their own buildings following seniority rotation. If all cooks in a
building turn down a building event, it will be offered to the next
senior cook in the District using a seniority rotation list for cooks.
This list shall also be used for overtime/extra time performed
outside of the school year.

4.

Maintenance/Custodian overtime shall be distributed by the
Maintenance Manager or his/her designee using seniority rotation
and must be authorized and approved by the Superintendent or
his/her designee. Because of the urgency of snow removal, it shall
take precedence over regular overtime. An employee having to
work snow removal in place of a selected regularly scheduled
overtime event shall be allowed to go back to the regular overtime
event and finish any remaining overtime in the event. The person
filling in for the staff member, who had to do snow removal, will
leave the event at the end of the first 2 hours when the snow team
member returns to the overtime event. The person filling in for the
staff member performing snow removal will be relieved of duty once
the originally assigned staff member returns from snow removal
duty. The replacement staff member will have the option to either
accept another assignment to complete the 2 hours of overtime
duty or depart and be paid for actual overtime worked.

5.

Any overtime event that requires a higher skilled employee, such as
a Maintenance 2 or Maintenance 3 employee, shall be filled only by
the maintenance person with the appropriate skill level at the
discretion of the Maintenance Manager, Supervisor or their
designee. If these overtime events are required to be selected out
of rotation, the person accepting these events will be skipped for
their next rotation selection.

D.

If an overtime/extra time event is cancelled, the assigned employee shall
have first choice for the next available unscheduled overtime/extra time
event plus remain at his/her current spot on the list. If the employee would
be offered the next event as a part of the rotation process, then the
employee shall be offered that event and the next offered event, to take
place of the cancelled event. This paragraph only applies to custodial and
maintenance.

E.

The overtime rotation lists shall be posted in a written or electronic format
and shared with all applicable members of the classification. If no one

8

volunteers to work an overtime event, the event will be assigned on a
reverse seniority rotating basis starting with the employee with the least
seniority that is on the rotation list. Employees will not be required to
accept overtime on days they are on pre-approved sick leave, personal
leave or vacation.

5.05

F.

Food Service personnel who are required by the Food Service Supervisor
or Business Manager to work at Board-approved non-school functions will
be paid at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times their regular hourly
rate.

G.

The administration may deviate from the overtime rotation lists for
emergency overtime events. If an employee who is scheduled for an
overtime event fails to show for any reason and does not notify the
Maintenance Manager or Supervisor at least 24 hours in advance of the
event will lose their next turn to pick an overtime event off of the main
overtime coverage list. An exception may be made for an employee who
has an extreme emergency that requires them to call off within the 24 hour
time period before the event. They must divulge the emergency to the
Maintenance Manager or Supervisor.

H.

Employees must use the regular call-off procedure in accordance with
Section 10.04(B) if they are unable to work overtime which they have
accepted or been assigned to work.

I.

The overtime rate shall not be paid for a job that an employee does
occasionally and sporadically that is different from his or her usual job (for
example, a custodian selling or taking tickets at a home football game, or
working as a “site manager” at a special event). The rate for such work will
be set by the Treasurer’s office per Board policy. This paragraph is an
exception to the overtime requirements of Article 5 of the Contract.

Call-In Pay
A.

Any bargaining unit member who has completed his/her regularly
scheduled work day and is called back to work or is called in to work at
times not scheduled shall receive a minimum of two (2) hours pay in
addition to regular pay due the employee on that day. This call-in pay
does not include time worked immediately prior to or following the
employees regular work day.

B.

Such call-in time shall be authorized by the supervisor. The intent of this
provision is to provide paid hours for employees who are asked to give up
time outside his/her regular work schedule to provide necessary work as
determined by the supervisor.

9

C.

Only hours actually worked when an employee is called in shall be used in
computing overtime. The call-in hours shall be computed on a straight
time basis.

D.

Placement on the call-in list is on a voluntary basis.
ARTICLE 6
VACATIONS AND HOLIDAYS

6.01

Vacations
A.

Twelve month bargaining unit members shall be granted vacation days
based on the following years of service in the Bexley City School District:
Years Employed
1 - 7 years
8 - 14 years
15 - 20 years
21 years
22 years

Days per Month

Days per Year

.83
1.25
1.67
1.75
1.83

10
15
20
21
22

The anniversary date for computing years of service will be June 30. A
year of employment is defined at 120 days worked between July 1 and
June 30.
The new rate of accumulation would begin upon the employee's
completion of year 7, 14, 20, 21, and 22. At the end of years 8, 15, 20, 21,
and 22, the employee would have accumulated the additional week or
days of vacation.
B.

After fulfilling the employment contract for the first year, an Employee who
separates from employment will be paid for accrued but unused vacation
days.

C.

If there is a separation of employment from the Board prior to the
completion of one year of employment, any vacation hours taken by the
employee during that time will be forfeited back to the Board at the
employee's hourly rate of pay for those hours.

D.

Vacation will be accumulated upon the completion of the first full calendar
month of service. Example 1: Employee starts work on October 1;
employee will receive .83 vacation days on November 5 paycheck.

10

Example 2: Employee starts the second work day in October; employee
will receive .83 vacation days on December 5 paycheck for vacation
earned for the month of November.

6.02

E.

New employees are eligible to take vacation upon completion of their
probationary period.

F.

Employees may not use more than ten (10) days of vacation, (fifteen (15)
days where the Employee is eligible for twenty (20) or more days of
vacation) between the last day of the regular instructional school year and
the first day of the following regular instructional school year, (the regular
instructional school year does not include summer school). Employees
must submit the required electronic vacation leave request form for
approval at least two (2) work days in advance of the requested vacation
dates. The Superintendent/designee may approve exceptions to the
above.

G.

A maximum of ten (10) days plus the current year vacation leave may be
accumulated at any one time. For example, a person employed for ten
(10) years can accumulate a maximum of 25 days. When an employee
reaches the maximum accumulation, the monthly amount will not be
added to the balance.

H.

No more than 10% of the bargaining unit and no more than 20% in any
one classification may be on vacation at any one time. If more than 10%
request vacation for the same time period, the date the Business Manager
receives the application for leave will determine who receive priority. The
Superintendent/ designee may approve exceptions to the above.

I.

Vacation days must be taken in one-half (1/2) or full day increments only.

Holidays
A.

Classified employees shall be granted the following paid holidays:
Juneteenth*
Independence Day*
Labor Day
Thanksgiving Day
Good Friday
Christmas Day

New Year’s Day
Martin Luther King Day
Presidents Day
Memorial Day

This is a total of eleven (11) paid holidays included in the work year for 12
month employees and eight (8) paid holidays for those on other
schedules.

11

*12 month employees only. The day after Thanksgiving is a paid holiday
for 12 month employees providing the day is not a school day with
students present.
B.

6.03

During this contract, if any holiday in 6.02 (A) above became a school day
with students in attendance, the bargaining unit member would be
required to work. A compensatory day off would be granted to the
bargaining unit member. The day off would require prior approval of the
Business Manager, Superintendent or Superintendent’s designee. In the
event that more than one (1) employee requested the same day, seniority
would be used as a guideline in granting the day off to the requesting
employee(s).

Qualification for Holiday Pay
A.

To receive pay for a holiday, the employee must be in paid status the day
before and the day after the holiday.
ARTICLE 7
SEVERANCE PAY

7.01

Upon moving into the retirement system, classified staff members shall be paid
remuneration for their unused sick leave according to the following provisions:
A.

The amount to be paid to the staff member retiring shall be determined by
multiplying the number of days credit by the daily rate of pay.

B.

The daily rate of pay shall be the staff member's salary at the time of
retirement divided by the number of days in the contract year.

C.

The number of days credit shall be one-fourth (1/4) of the number of
accumulated days of unused sick leave to the maximum of fifty-five (55)
and one (1) day for every ten (10) days over 220 accumulated and unused
sick leave days.

D.

In the case of employee death, the payment shall be made to the
beneficiary named on the employee life insurance policy.

E.

Any employee leaving the employment of the Bexley City School District
after completing ten (10) years of service shall receive one-fourth (1/4) of
all accumulated sick days up to twenty-five (25) days, regardless of the
reason for the separation of employment.

12

7.02

Severance pay will be paid on the first pay in January of the year following
retirement to those staff members who are retiring under these provisions with
the Bexley City School District. Application for this severance pay must be made
to the Treasurer within thirty (30) days of the staff members last date of
employment.

7.03

Receipt of payment of accrued but unused sick leave shall eliminate all sick
leave credit accrued by the employee.
ARTICLE 8
SERS/STRS PICK-UP

8.01

The Board shall make available to classified staff members the SERS or STRS
pick-up as applicable.

8.02

The pick-up will be of no cost to the Board and is solely for the purpose of
reducing current tax for classified staff members and will remain in effect as long
as Internal Revenue Ruling 81-36 remains substantially unchanged.

8.03

Classified staff members are individually responsible for reviewing the
relationship between the pick-up and their other tax deferral arrangements, if
any.
ARTICLE 9
CALAMITY DAYS

9.01

On the first day of a school year in which students are in session and schools are
closed by the Superintendent because of weather, epidemic or other public
calamity, employees in the maintenance, custodial, and logistic/warehouse
associate classifications will report in person to a school worksite. All other
employees may complete job duties as assigned by their supervisor remotely
and/or at their home. For all other days on which schools are closed by the
Superintendent because of weather, epidemic or other public calamity,
employees may be required to report to the work location identified by the
Superintendent or designee and complete duties as assigned by their supervisor.
If an employee is required to report to a school worksite and the Sheriff has
established a Level III emergency in Franklin County, the employee will not be
required to report unless specifically designated and legally able to do so. If an
employee is required to report to a school worksite and is absent because his/her
county of residence other than Franklin is under a Level III emergency, the
absence is excused and the employee may use available personal leave or
vacation leave or be docked for the day.

13

9.02

Certain classifications may be expected to work onsite on days that schools are
closed due to weather or other public calamity. If an employee in such a
classification repeatedly calls off work before a closing, that constitutes abuse of
leave and can be the subject of discipline.
ARTICLE 10
LEAVES

10.01 Educational/Professional
A.

Upon a written request, the Board of Education may grant a leave of
absence for a period of not more than two (2) years for educational or
professional purposes.

B.

Upon return the employee will be placed in the same or similar position
that they held at the time the leave was requested.

C.

The employee filling in the position of the bargaining unit member who is
on leave will be employed only for the length of time the regular employee
is on leave. When the regular employee returns to work, the replacement
employee will be separated from employment at a date convenient to the
Board.

10.02 Jury Duty
A.

In the event an employee is notified to appear for jury duty s/he shall
submit such notice to the Board Treasurer's office upon receipt of the
notice to serve and prior to the dates involved.

B.

Time required for the employee to serve as a juror shall be release time
not chargeable to either sick leave or personal leave.

C.

The employee shall receive his/her regular rate of pay during the time
he/she is required to serve as a juror. The employee may retain any fees
and expenses he or she receives from the court for serving as a juror.

10.03 Union Leave
A.

The Board may allow, upon written request, up to a maximum of nine (9)
days per year for the bargaining unit to send the Local President and two
(2) elected delegates to attend the annual OAPSE Delegate Convention.

B.

The Board may allow, upon written request, an additional three (3) days of
leave to a bargaining unit member who is elected to a State, Regional or
District OAPSE office to attend the annual OAPSE Delegate Convention.

14

C.

In the event the Board secures a substitute for an employee on Union
leave described above, the Union shall pay to the board all costs for the
substitute. No reimbursement for travel, lodging or meals shall be paid by
the Board for any bargaining unit member on Union leave.

10.04 Sick Leave
A.

Each person employed by the Board shall be entitled to fifteen (15) days
sick leave with pay for each year under contract, credited at the rate of
one and one-fourth (1-1/4) days per month. Sick leave accrual starts the
first full month of employment. Example: the employee starts work on
October 1. On the October 5 pay the employee receives 1.25 days of sick
leave. If the employee starts on October 5, the employee initially receives
1.25 days on November 1.

B.

Sick leave may be used for absence due to personal illness, pregnancy,
injury, exposure to contagious disease which could be communicated to
others, and for absence due to illness, or injury in the employee's
immediate family. Unused sick leave shall be unlimited. Sick leave may
be taken in full, half, or quarter day increments. Employees must call off
work at least ninety (90) minutes before first shift and at least three (3)
hours before second or third shift.

C.

Any accumulated sick leave of a person separated from any other public
service shall be transferable provided the years of service were within a
ten (10) year period of time.

D.

The Board may require a signed statement from a doctor to justify use of
sick leave if such leave exceeded three (3) consecutive days. If sick leave
is taken and medical attention was required the Board may require a
signed statement from a doctor to justify the use of sick leave, if such
leave exceeded three (3) consecutive days. This provision will not be
administered in a capricious or arbitrary manner.

E.

For purposes of this Agreement, immediate family includes parent,
grandparent, son, daughter, step-child, brother, sister, or in-laws bearing
any of these relationships, aunt, uncle, spouse or any individual who is a
member of the staff member's immediate household. Immediate family
also includes a grandchild if the staff member has exhausted all personal
leave and vacation. Sick leave may be used in conjunction with the death
or hospitalization of a grandchild in accordance with paragraph (F).

F.

An employee may be granted three (3) consecutive work days of absence
utilizing sick leave credit for death in the employee's immediate family.
Additional days may be granted by the Superintendent/designee in cases
where excessive travel or special circumstances seem to warrant

15

additional days. This request shall be provided to the Superintendent at
the earliest possible time.
G.

Each OAPSE staff member who has exhausted his/her accumulated sick
leave shall request in writing and may be advanced up to ten (10) days of
sick leave. Such advance, if approved by the Board/designee, shall be
given one (1) time only, unless the OAPSE staff member submits a letter
from his or her physician or a family member’s physician with a detailed
explanation of the individual’s injury or illness. If any of these ten (10)
days of sick leave are used, they shall be deducted from the sick leave
accumulated during that year of employment, or if necessary, from the
following employment year. If a staff member’s employment ends using
advanced sick leave and not earning the same, he/she will have the per
diem amount deducted for said unearned sick leave from the last salary
check issued by the Boards Treasurer. If an employee has exhausted
his/her sick leave, he/she may use other paid leave (vacation or personal)
or unpaid leaves if he/she is unable to work due to a medical condition of
the employee or an immediate family member, if necessary as certified by
the health care provider. If the employee is absent for medical reasons as
certified by the health care provider for more than five (5) consecutive
days and his/her sick leave expires during that absence, the employee (no
more frequently than one time within a two-year period) can use vacation
on an emergency basis.

H.

Upon return to work, a sick leave form must be submitted to the
Superintendent or designee within twenty-four (24) hours. If absent on the
last day of the month, all sick leave for that month must be turned in by the
beginning of the 2nd work day in the next month.

I.

In the event of catastrophic, prolonged, or chronic illness of a bargaining
unit member or member of the immediate family, a bargaining unit
member who has exhausted his/her sick leave may request, through the
Union, that the Superintendent authorize voluntary transfer of unused sick
days from other bargaining unit members to the affected member to be
used by the member as sick leave. Guidelines for administering this
provision will be mutually developed by the Superintendent and Local
Union, within five (5) school days of the request.
1.

Any bargaining unit member may donate up to three (3) days of
unused sick leave which will then be deducted from the donating
member’s sick leave and will not be transferred back.

2.

A doctor’s statement will be required with the request for
catastrophic sick leave in order for it to be considered.

16

3.

Catastrophic sick leave days will be paid at 100% of the requesting
member’s daily rate of pay.

4.

The receiving member will not earn sick or personal leave or
vacation leave or holiday pay while using donated leave days.

5.

The receiving member cannot use donated days to extend the date
on which his/her disability retirement takes effect, if applicable.

6.

The receiving member cannot use a total of more than sixty (60)
donated leave days.

7.

Any unused sick leave shall remain in the sick leave bank until such
time it is needed.

10.05 Personal Leave
A.

Subject to (D) below, each classified staff member shall be entitled to not
more than three (3) days of absence, with pay, per contract year (July 1
through June 30) due to personal business or obligations which cannot be
conducted other than on school time. Employees who begin or end
employment during midyear shall receive a pro-rated amount of personal
leave. Such days shall not be deducted from sick leave.

B.

A staff member shall give written notice to his/her supervisor at least fortyeight (48) hours in advance of his/her intention to take such leave. If used
for an emergency, the staff member will notify his/her supervisor as soon
as possible prior to said leave and disclose the emergency.

C.

Personal leave shall not be granted the day before or after a holiday,
except for: (1) a day of absence when students are not present; (2) July
4; (3) Christmas day; or (4) when approved by the Superintendent for
reasons that are disclosed by the employee.

D.

An employee may rollover up to two (2) unused personal leave days into the
next school year, having no more than five (5) total personal leave days
available in any school year. Provided, however, that no more than three (3)
consecutive contract days may be used unless the employee provides the
reason for the requested leave and obtains the Superintendent’s/Designee's
approval. Denial by the Superintendent/Designee cannot be the subject of a
grievance.

10.06 Child Care Leave
A.

An unpaid child care leave shall be granted to an employee in keeping
with the following provisions:

17

1.

B.

An employee who becomes knowledgeable of the birth or
anticipated birth of his/her child, or who is adopting a child is
eligible to take an unpaid child care leave.

At the option of the eligible employee an unpaid child care leave may
begin:
1.

2.

In the case of childbirth:
a.

during pregnancy, regardless of disability;

b.

after any necessary use of sick leave before and/or after
delivery; or

In the case of adoption:
a.

within ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice of the
placement of the adopted child.

C.

No later than ten (10) days after the childbirth or the placement of an
adopted child, the employee must give the Superintendent/Designee
written notice whether s/he will be taking unpaid child care leave.

D.

Any request for alteration in the effective date or cancellation of the
request may be made only once. This request must be submitted to the
Superintendent/Designee.

E.

An unpaid child care leave is limited to a maximum of twelve (12) months.

F.

An employee may remain a member of all or any employee group
insurance policies at the individual's expense after the effective date of the
Child Care Leave.

G.

Upon returning from leave, the employee will resume the contract status
which he/she held prior to such leave and will, whenever possible, return
to the same assignment held prior to such leave or to another assignment
within the school system, within the same classification.

10.07 Assault Leave
A.

Any employee who sustains personal injuries from a person not employed
by the Board of Education during the course of duties, and is disabled,
unable to perform regular duties due to the nature of the disabilities, as
certified by an M.D., shall be granted assault leave. The bargaining unit
member shall be required to re-certify the disabling condition monthly. If

18

requested, the member shall submit to an exam by an M.D. designated by
the Board. The cost of the exam will be paid by the Board. No sick leave
days will be deducted for the time the disability is certified by an M.D. to
be directly related to a physical assault by a non-employee of the Board.
10.08 Religious Leave
A.

When the recognized observances fall on school days, they may be taken
up to a maximum of three (3) days with pay for personal observance of
those holidays. The expression "recognized religious observances" refers
to those days which are generally observed, for religious purposes, by the
majority of a widely recognized religious group.

10.09 Unpaid Leaves
Leaves of Absence
A.

Upon a written request, the Board of Education may grant a leave of
absence for a period of not more than two (2) years for such leaves where
illness or other disability is the reason for the request.

B.

After one (1) year of employment on the active payroll by the Board the
Board shall pay fifty percent (50%) of the single hospital/major medical
insurance for the employee who has exhausted his/her sick leave for the
first three (3) months of unpaid leave for illness or disability for those
working less than 1250 hours and 12 months per year. An employee who
is eligible for and/or who has taken Family Medical Leave under Section
10.10 below is not eligible for this benefit.

10.10 Family Medical Leave
A.

The purpose of the law is to provide eligible employees with the right to
take up to a combined total of twelve (12) weeks of unpaid leave each
year (July 1 through June 30) in connection with one (1) the birth and firstyear care of a child; (2) the adoption or foster placement of a child; (3) the
serious illness of an employee’s spouse, child, or parent; and (4) the
employee’s own serious illness. Employees are those who have worked
twelve months for the district and served at least twelve hundred fifty
hours prior to the date of application. All qualifying definitions, eligibility
requirements, and conditions for use of family or medical leave under this
section shall be construed to be consistent with the Family Medical Leave
Act of 1993.

B.

If an employee has used sick for the above reasons, that time counts
towards the twelve (12) week time period.

19

C.

A classified employee desiring to use family leave shall notify the
Superintendent in writing at least thirty (30) days prior to beginning the
leave, if the need for the leave is foreseeable; otherwise, the written notice
shall be given as soon as possible after the classified employee learns of
the need for the leave.
The classified employees notice to the
Superintendent that he/she will use family leave must specify that Family
Leave will be the type of leave taken.

D.

During the leave, for up to twelve (12) weeks per year, the Board shall
continue to pay the contribution it makes for a classified employee on the
active payroll to continue participation in life, dental, and health insurance.
The classified employee must pay his/her portion of the premium for any
such insurances to the treasurer by the first day of the month in which the
classified employee desires to have the insurance coverage continued. If
the classified employee does not pay his/her contribution to the premium
cost, then the Board will not be obligated to contribute its share in order to
maintain the coverage.
ARTICLE 11
VACANCIES/TRANSFERS

11.01 When the Board determines that a vacancy exists in a classification, notice of
such vacancy shall be made known to all personnel through an electronic format.
The notice shall include the particular job classification and department, the
hours of work (where known), and the rate of pay. Employees interested in the
position shall inform the business office in writing within ten (10) days of receipt
of notice. Current employees will be considered prior to employing new
applicants. In the event the administration knows in writing that an employee will
be absent for more than thirty-five (35) calendar days, the position shall be
posted and filled as a temporary position per this Article. There shall be only this
one (1) move, and when the absence ends the employee who filled the vacancy
shall immediately return to his/her position.
11.02 Employees may express interest in the vacancy or position in the same
classification in which they are presently employed. An applicant for a vacancy
who is a current member of the bargaining unit in the wage classification of the
vacancy shall be given first consideration. However, no employee will be
considered for more than one (1) transfer in the same classification in the same
year (July 1 through June 30) unless the vacancy is a promotion. For purposes
of this article, a promotion shall mean a position with a higher hourly wage, more
hours per day or a day shift position. When more than one (1) employee is being
considered, date of hire shall be the tie-breaker. If the transfer is denied, the
employee, upon request, shall receive the reason(s) for denying the transfer.

20

11.03 Transfer from Classification
A.

Employees interested in a position or vacancy in a different general
classification other than the classification in which they are now employed
shall notify the Business Manager in writing of their interest. A person
desiring to change classification must possess the qualifications required
in the specific classification for which he/she is applying.
This
determination shall be made by the Business Manager or designee.

B.

In a change of position when ability and qualifications are equal as
determined by the Business Manager, Superintendent or the
Superintendent’s designee, date of hire shall be the tie breaker.

C.

Any bargaining unit member who is promoted to a higher classification
and pay range, shall be placed at the rate of pay in the higher
classification closest, but not less than, to what he/she was earning plus
one (1) more step increment. This provision shall not apply to a
bargaining unit member who changes classification and pay range for any
reason other than promotion. For the purpose of this section, a bargaining
unit member has been promoted when he/she has obtained a new
position or has been assigned new duties. If an employee is promoted
before February 1, the employee will receive a step increase on the
following July 1, but shall not if promoted on or after February 1.

D.

Each employee so transferred shall serve a probationary period of thirty
(30) working days. At the end of that thirty (30) day period, either the
employee or Business Manager, Superintendent or Superintendent’s
designee may rescind the transfer and return the employee to his/her
former position. There shall be no appeal under Article 19 of this
Agreement. If a rescinding of the transfer occurs, applications filed from
the original posting may be used to fill the position. No new posting shall
be required.

11.04 Except where a substitute is used on a long-term basis for an employee on a
Board approved paid or unpaid leave of absence. The Board shall not use a
substitute or more than one (1) substitute to staff a bargaining unit position for
more than five (5) months (June, July and August not counting unless the
position is for twelve months.)
11.05 If the Board increases a position by more than one (1) hour per day, the position
must be reposted for bid. The position will be filled through the procedure of this
Article.

21

ARTICLE 12
PROBATIONARY PERIOD
12.01 Each new employee shall serve a probationary period of one hundred and eighty
(180) work days from first date of work in the bargaining unit, during which time
the Superintendent or his/her designee may discipline or discharge the employee
at any time without providing reasons. In the event a probationary employee is
discharged, the Local President and employee shall receive a copy of the notice
of discharge.
12.02 If any employee is retained after completion of the one hundred and eighty (180)
work days from first date of work in the bargaining unit probationary period,
he/she may not be discharged except as provided in this Agreement.
12.03 Neither the Union or employee may file a grievance to an employee's discipline
or discharge during his/her probationary period.
12.04 Probationary periods begin at the date of employment as a regular employee.
ARTICLE 13
EDUCATIONAL TRAINING
13.01 A one-time lump sum payment of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) will be
given for each fifty (50) hours of job-related class work completed. The Business
Manager, Superintendent or Superintendent’s designee and employee must
agree beforehand whether the additional training is job-related. Conference
schedules, courses, grades, etc., must be presented as evidence of work
completed. Workshops will not be considered if less than three (3) days in
duration. One (1) payment of this type may be earned in a four (4) year period.
13.02 Fee waivers in a particular school year may be made available to the OAPSE
bargaining unit members if there are fee waivers left after persons outside the
OAPSE bargaining unit have had an opportunity to use them. Their availability
will be publicized in an electronic format and can be used on a first-come basis
by bargaining unit members.
13.03 If a classified employee earns a tuition voucher from a college, university, or
trade school, the classified employee earning the voucher shall have the first
right to accept or refuse the use of the voucher. This acceptance or refusal shall
be submitted in writing within 30 days of the notification to the employee by the
Superintendent’s office. If the employee earning the voucher gives up their right
to use the voucher, then other classified employees shall be allowed to request
the use of the voucher on a first come first served basis. All requests should be
in writing and sent to the Superintendent’s office. After refusal, the determination
of which employee will receive the voucher will be solely determined by

22

whoever’s request letter is received first by the Superintendent’s office after the
posting has been made in an electronic format.
If no classified employee wishes to use the voucher, then any employee in the
District will be allowed to apply for the use of the voucher on a first come first
served basis.
ARTICLE 14
IN SERVICE MEETINGS
14.01 It is the prerogative of the administration to schedule meetings of classified
personnel periodically.
14.02 Each classified employee, within the designated classification, shall be required
to attend all scheduled meetings.
14.03 Classified employee meetings, when possible, shall be held during regular work
hours.
14.04 Classified employees required to attend a meeting called by the administration,
other than during regular work hours, shall be paid for time spent at their regular
hourly rate, but not at time and one-half. Each employee will be required to
complete a time sheet for the time spent at the meetings.
ARTICLE 15
SENIORITY AND LAYOFF
15.01 The following procedure shall govern layoff of employees if the Board determines
to reduce the number of classified positions.
15.02 District seniority is defined as an employee's uninterrupted length of continuous
service as a regular employee of the Board. Board-approved leaves do not
constitute an interruption in length of service. In implementing layoff, the concept
of seniority shall be a factor.
A.

In case of identical seniority of two (2) employees, the tie shall be broken
by the steps taken in order:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Date the employee starts work with the Board;
Date of the Board meeting hiring the employee;
Date of written application;
Coin toss.

23

15.03 Classification seniority is defined as an employee's uninterrupted length of
continuous service as a regular employee of the Board in that classification.
Board approved leaves do not constitute an interruption in length of service.
15.04 Before any regular non-probationary employee is laid off, temporary and
probationary employees within the affected classification shall be laid off first.
Additional layoffs shall then begin with the employee with the least classification
seniority, continuing in inverse order of seniority until the reduction is completed.
15.05 Any employee affected by such reduction, either directly or indirectly, shall be
granted bumping rights. Bumping may be exercised on the basis of district
seniority and present pay range. Any employee affected by such a reduction
may displace the employee with less district seniority within the same pay range
and/or any lower pay range within their same classification series.
For the
purpose of determining bumping rights, there shall be established seven (7)
classification series as follows:
Series 1
Series 2
Series 3
Series 4
Series 5
Series 6
Series 7
Series 8

Custodial
Food Service
Maintenance
Secretarial
Aides
Interpreters
Health Office Nurse
Logistics/Warehouse Associate

An employee may displace the employee with the least district seniority in a
classification in a different classification series if the displacing employee holds
all the qualifications for the job and previously worked as a regular employee of
the Board in that classification.
15.06 An employee who has been laid off shall be placed on a layoff list by
classification series, those with the greatest seniority being put at the top of the
list. An employee who is laid off shall have recall rights for a period of one (1)
year from the effective date of the layoff. During such period, the Board shall not
hire or promote anyone into the classification series of layoff until all employees
with recall rights in the classification series have been offered a position, in order
of seniority on the recall list.
15.07 To offer a vacant position to such an employee, the Board shall send the
employee notice of the vacancy by registered mail, return receipt requested, and
addressed to the employee's last known address.

If the employee does not accept the offer of reinstatement in writing within seven

24

(7) calendar days from the date on which the Board's offer is postmarked, the
employee shall be deemed to have waived all rights of reinstatement and his/her
name shall be removed from the recall list.
ARTICLE 16
DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE
16.01 The employment of every employee, after he/she successfully satisfies the
probationary period for his/her job, shall be continuous until he/she:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

resigns;
retires;
is laid-off in accordance with the negotiated layoff policy;
is disciplined or discharged for cause;
fails to return to work by the end of the first work day after
expiration of an approved leave of absence;
fails to make timely acceptance of an offer of recall.

16.02 A non-probationary employee may be suspended by the Superintendent,
Superintendent’s designee or Business Manager for up to fifteen (15) work days
without pay or may be given a working suspension, or discharged from his/her
job by the Board for any of the following causes:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.

incompetency;
inefficiency;
dishonesty;
drunkenness;
immoral conduct;
insubordination;
discourteous treatment of the public or of fellow employees or
administrators/supervisors;
neglect of duty;
any other acts of misfeasance (wrongdoing), malfeasance (unlawful
activity or misconduct), or nonfeasance (nonperformance or
nonattention to job responsibilities) in his/her job;
uninsurability of driving of driving employees as it relates to vehicle
insurances paid by the Board of Education;
loss of license by driving employees shall be cause for the
employee to be placed on immediate unpaid suspension for the
duration of the loss of license pending additional disciplinary action
by the Board;
Six (6) points on the employee’s BMV driver abstract shall be just
cause for discharge if the employee has any work responsibilities
for driving vehicles.

25

16.03 Discipline Procedure
A.

Before implementing a suspension, working suspension, or discharge of a
non-probationary employee, the Superintendent or designee shall hold a
conference with the employee to give the employee an opportunity to
learn the reasons for the intended disciplinary action and to challenge the
reason for the intended action or otherwise to explain the alleged
misconduct or other cause.
The employee has the right to be
accompanied at the conference by one (1) Union representative. The
conference will be scheduled as promptly as possible by the
Superintendent/designee. If the Superintendent/designee determines the
employee's continued presence in employment prior to the conference
poses a danger to persons or property or a threat of disrupting operations,
he/she may suspend the employee without pay for up to three (3) days
pending the conference to determine final disciplinary action.

B.

Discipline shall normally follow these progressive steps:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Verbal redirection
Acknowledged verbal warning
Written reprimand
Suspension without pay for up to three (3) days
Further suspension for up to fifteen (15) days or discharge

The Board or administration may apply a higher level of discipline,
(including discharge) if appropriate, considering the alleged violation,
misconduct or performance problem(s).
C.

When imposing a suspension by the Superintendent, Superintendent’s
designee or Business Manager or a discharge by the Board, the
Superintendent, Superintendent’s designee or Business Manager shall
sign a written notice of suspension or discharge. The notice shall state
the grounds for the action.
The Superintendent, Superintendent’s
designee or Business Manager shall furnish a copy of the statement to the
employee and to the Local President. Disciplinary action is effective
according to the terms of the notice. The employee may file a grievance
concerning his discipline or discharge in accordance with the time limits
and procedures set forth in Article 12.

D.

Records of verbal redirection, acknowledged verbal warning and written
reprimands shall be effective and remain in an employee's personnel file
for twenty-four (24) months after their issuance, provided no intervening
discipline occurs. If intervening discipline occurs, the record of verbal
redirection, acknowledged verbal warning, and/or a warning reprimand,
shall remain in effect and in the employee's file for twenty-four (24) months
after the issuance of the intervening discipline.

26

Employees may request removal of verbal redirection, acknowledged
verbal warning, and/or reprimands prior to the twenty-four (24) months
and may be removed if mutually agreed to by the employee and the
Superintendent/designee.
ARTICLE 17
DRUG TESTING
17.01 The Board of Education/designee may, at any time during the course of
employment, require a drug screening for an employee. Such requirements for
drug screening shall not be arbitrary and a cause should exist for the drug test.
The Board will pay for the costs of the drug testing. If a positive result is
reported, the employee may request the testing of a split sample at any federally
certified laboratory within seventy-two (72) hours. If the split test result is also
positive, the cost will be the responsibility of the employee. The Board may also
screen employees who have responsibility to drive District vehicles for drugs
and/or alcohol on a random basis. (This sentence becomes effective when this
rule is implemented District-wide.) Refusing or failing to submit to the random
drug or alcohol screen shall be just cause for discharge.
ARTICLE 18
INSURANCE
18.01 Eligibility for Health Benefits Coverage
For those scheduled to work thirty (30) hours or more per week shall receive
Board paid insurances and HSA contributions. For those employees scheduled
to work twenty (20) hours or less per week are excluded from receiving 100%
Board paid insurances or HSA contributions. At the employee's option,
insurances may be purchased by the employee paying 100% of the cost of said
insurances.
For those employees scheduled to work 21-29 hours shall receive a prorated
percentage of Board paid insurance and a prorated percentage of any HSA
contribution. Example: Employee works 25 hours per week will receive 75% (25
hours/30 hours = 83.33% x 90% = 75.0%) Board paid medical insurance, 83.33%
of Board paid dental insurance, and 83.33% of any Board contribution to the
HSA.
18.02 Effective Dates of Coverage
A.

Health insurance coverage is effective the employee’s first day worked.
Insurance premiums are not pro-rated, but do fall under the 15/16 rule for

27

as long as the health insurer allows this rule. The rule applies as follows.
If the effective start date falls on or before the 15th of the month, the full
monthly premium will apply. If the effective start date falls on or after the
16th of the month, no premium will be charged.
B.

Health insurance coverage ends on the employee’s effective last day of
work if the effective end date falls on or before the 15th of the month, and
no premium will be due. If the effective end date falls on or after the 16th
of the month, the full monthly premium will apply and coverage will extend
to the end of the month. Employees who work less than twelve months
and whose resignation/retirement is effective at the end of the school year
will receive health insurance through July 31.

18.03 Dental Insurance
Upon proper application, the Board shall pay 100% of the cost for single and
family coverage of a dental care program. The benefits of any such program
shall not be less than those currently provided.
Bite Wing once per year, full mouth once per five (5) years, remove family
security benefit contingent upon written statement by the Board to pay survivors
insurance premium costs (complete) for two (2) years.
18.04 Group Life Insurance
Upon proper application, the Board shall pay 100% of the monthly premium of a
group life insurance policy for each classified staff member. Such policy shall
provide for an equal amount of accidental death and dismemberment coverage.
The face value of the policy will be equal to the yearly regular salary a staff
member earned rounded to the nearest thousand. No staff member will have
less than a $20,000 face value insurance policy. The policy will also provide a
conversion clause to allow the individual at the time his/her employment ends
with the Board to convert his/her coverage to an individual policy without
requiring a physical examination.
18.05 Health Insurance
A.

The Board provides a High Deductible Health Savings Account (HSA)
insurance plan for eligible bargaining unit members. The deductible
amounts shall be the minimum required by the IRS regulations for HSA
plans.

B.

The Board pays 90% of the premiums. If the premium increases 0-9% in
a year, the Board will continue to pay 90% of the increase.

28

If the premium increases more than 9% in a year, the Board will pay 90%
of the first 9% increase and 65% of any increase above 9%.
If the renewal rate for the premium exceeds 9% for the next insurance
year, either party may require expedited bargaining on renewal of the plan
and any relevant alternative plans. If agreement is not reached by the
deadline for the District to commit to renew the then-current plan, the thencurrent plan shall be renewed with the amount of the premium increase
that exceeds 9% being split by the Board paying 65% of such excess and
the employee paying 35% of such excess.
C.

The Board contributes to each participant’s HSA account in the following
amounts:
January 2022 (lump sum)
Single Contribution:
Family Contribution:

$700
$1,400

January 2023 (divided and paid monthly)
Single Contribution:
$700 ($58.33/month)
Family Contribution:
$1,400 ($116.66/month)
January 2024
Single Contribution:
Family Contribution:

$700 ($58.33/month)
$1,400 ($116.66/month)

See Section 18.01 regarding contributions for part-time employees.
If the deductible amounts set by the IRS regulations for HSA plans
increase by more than ten percent (10%) in any one year, then the Board
shall contribute additional funds to the HSA accounts in the amount of
50% of any amount over the 10% increase.
18.06 Liability Insurance
The Board shall provide liability insurance for those professional staff members
who must either convey students in a vehicle or must drive a vehicle in the
course of performing their contractual duties. The insurance shall be in effect
while the staff members perform duties related to theirs. This shall not include
travel either to or from the staff member's residence and his/her work site, but
does include travel between work sites during the contractual day. The limits of
$300,000 each accident bodily injury, and $50,000 each accident property
damage. The liability insurance shall be understood to supplement accident
protection; it is not a substitute for personal vehicle insurance and would only be
involved when personal insurance becomes exhausted on specific claims.
Vehicles owned or leased by the Board are fully covered by insurance.

29

ARTICLE 19
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
19.01 Definitions
A.

Grievance - A grievance should be defined as an alleged misapplication,
misinterpretation or violation of only the specific and express written
provisions of this Agreement.

B.

Grievant - is a member of the bargaining unit who files a grievance, or in
the event of a group grievance, the Local.

C.

Day - means a work day during the regular school year; during the
summer months, a day means a calendar day excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and legal holidays.

19.02 General Provisions
A.

Time limits: A grievance must be filed within fifteen (15) days after the
occurrence of the alleged violation. Since it is important that a grievance
be processed as rapidly as possible the number of days indicated at each
level shall be considered maximum, and every effort should be made to
expedite the process. The time limit specified may, however, be extended
by mutual written agreement. Failure of the employer to process a
grievance within the time limits specified, shall permit the grievant to
appeal to the next level; failure of the Employee or Union to initiate the
grievance or appeal a decision within the specified time limits shall result
in the grievance being deemed waived and void.

B.

Representation
The employee has the right to have a representative present at any and all
meetings. Such representative shall be a Union representative.

C.

Written Decisions
Except at the informal level, all decisions rendered, at all levels of the
grievance procedure, shall be in writing, setting forth the decision, and
transmitted promptly to all parties.

D.

Reprisals
No reprisals of any kind shall be taken by the employer or any of its
agents against any grievant, any representative, any member of the Union
or any other participant in the grievance procedure by reason of such
participation.

30

Similarly, no reprisals of any kind shall be taken by the grievant, his
representative or Union against the employer or any of it agents.
E.

Records
All grievance records shall be kept separate from the employees
personnel file and shall be subject to the same rules of confidentiality as
the personnel file. Nothing in this procedure shall deny the rights of an
individual to handle his/her own disputes individually, without
representation, through proper channels, either with the Administrative
staff or the Board of Education, providing that any settlement shall not
violate the terms of this Agreement.

F.

At no time shall the same person hear the grievance at more than one (1)
level (Steps II and III), unless otherwise agreed to by the Union.

19.03 Procedure
A.

Step I
A grievant shall first discuss the grievance with the appropriate immediate
supervisor. This meeting shall be on an informal basis and shall be held
within ten (10) days following the act or condition which is the basis for the
grievance. The grievant shall let it be known that the meeting is the
Informal Step 1 of the grievance procedure. All potential grievances shall
be submitted to a Union Grievance Committee composed of one
representative from each classification for approval prior to going to the
Step II level.

B.

Step II
If the grievance is not resolved by the informal procedure Step I, or if the
grievant elects not to use the informal procedure, it may be pursued
further by submitting a completed Grievance Report Form. On the
grievance form, the grievant must clearly indicate the Article and/or
paragraph in which the alleged misapplication, misinterpretation or
violation occurred of the express written provisions of this Agreement. A
copy of this form shall be submitted by the grievant to the immediate
supervisor. Within five (5) days of receipt of the Grievance Report Form,
the immediate supervisor shall meet with the grievant. The immediate
supervisor shall write a disposition of the grievance within five (5) days
after such meeting by completing Step II of the Grievance Report Form
and returning a copy to the grievant, the Union and the Superintendent.

31

C.

Step III
If the grievant is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at Step
II, the grievant shall complete Grievance Report Form, Step III, and submit
same to the Superintendent within five (5) days of the receipt of its
disposition at Step II. Failure to file such appeal within five (5) days from
receipt of the written disposition at Step II shall constitute a waiver of the
right to appeal. Within ten (10) days of receipt of the grievance form, the
Superintendent shall meet with the grievant. Within ten (10) days of the
meeting, the Superintendent shall write his/her disposition of the grievance
by completing his/her portion of Step III, and forwarding a copy to the
grievant, the Union and the immediate supervisor.

D.

Step IV – Grievance Mediation
If the Step III procedure does not resolve the grievance, the Union, within
five (5) days after the grievant receives the Step III written disposition,
may appeal the grievance to Grievance Mediation with the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS) with mutual agreement of the
Board. The parties shall contact the local FMCS office and request the
services of a mediator. As of the date of the written agreement to submit
the grievance to mediation, the timeline for appealing to Step V shall be
stayed until the end of the Grievance Mediation session.

E.

Step V
In the event that the dispute has not been satisfactorily settled by the
above steps of the grievance procedure, the Union may request arbitration
by giving the Board written notice of its desire to arbitrate, which must be
received by the Treasurer of the Board within ten (10) days of the Step III
answer, in which event the grievance shall be arbitrated according to the
following procedure:
Within five (5) days following the notice to arbitrate, the parties shall either
agree upon an arbitrator or shall request in writing the American
Arbitration Association to furnish the parties with a list of seven (7)
arbitrators. The parties shall adhere to the voluntary rules of AAA with
each party first having an opportunity to request a second list. The
arbitrator shall schedule the hearing with the mutual agreement of the
parties as to date, time and place.
The arbitrator shall hear and determine only one (1) grievance, multiple
grievance arbitration by one (1) arbitrator at a single hearing shall be
prohibited except upon specific and written agreement of the Union and
the Board to do so. The sole exception to this is two (2) or more
grievances which arose out of the same nucleus of operative facts. Within

32

thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the arbitrator shall issue his
award.
F.

The jurisdiction and the authority of the arbitrator's award shall be
exclusively limited to the interpretation of the explicit provision of this
Agreement. He shall have authority only to interpret and apply the specific
provision of this Agreement, which shall constitute the sole basis upon
which the arbitrator's decision shall be rendered, and shall consider only
employee grievances arising under the application of the currently existing
Agreement between the parties hereto. The arbitrator's decision shall be
final and binding on all parties.

G.

The arbitrator shall not have the authority to add to, subtract from, modify,
change or alter any of the provisions of this Agreement, not to add to,
detract from or modify the language herein in arriving at a determination of
any issue presented that is proper within the limitations expressed herein.
The arbitrator may consider the past practices of the parties only as an aid
in interpreting the terms of this written agreement. The arbitrator shall
expressly confine himself to the precise issue(s) submitted for arbitration
and shall have no authority to determine any other issue(s) not so
submitted to him or to submit observations or declarations of opinion
which are not directly essential in reaching the determination. The
arbitrator shall in no way interfere with management rights, nor limit or
interfere in any way with the powers, duties and responsibilities of the
Board under its policies, applicable law, and rules and regulations having
the force and effect of law.

H.

The procedures contained in this Article constitute the sole and exclusive
method of considering the redressing of grievances arising during the life
of this Agreement and any extensions thereof. It is expressly understood
and agreed that neither the Union nor any employee shall engage in
actions which are not expressly provided for in the grievance procedure
such as the initiation of litigation or charges with a state or federal agency
in connection with any dispute which is or could have been a matter
presented as a grievance within this grievance procedure. Any settlement
or resolution of a grievance that is mutually acceptable to the Union's and
the Board's representatives shall be final and binding upon the grievant,
the Union, the Administration and the Board.

I.

The costs for the services of the arbitrator, including per diem expenses, if
any, and actual and necessary travel and subsistence expenses, as well
as the related cost of the American Arbitration services, shall be borne
equally by parties. The arbitrator shall designate in his/her award the
prevailing party, or the predominately prevailing party. The expense of
witnesses and other representatives shall be borne by the party they
represent. A stenographic record of the arbitration proceedings may be

33

made. Each party shall pay for its own copy of such record, if requested.
The party requesting the stenographer shall pay for the stenographer,
provided however, that if the other party requests a copy of the record, the
parties shall split the cost of the stenographer.
ARTICLE 20
LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
20.01 The Board or its designated representative(s) and the Union or its
representative(s) agree to meet and discuss the implementation of
Memorandums of Understanding and issues other than those included in this
Agreement.
20.02 Such meeting shall be held at times and places as may be mutually agreed upon.
Advance requests shall be made at least three (3) days before a proposed
meeting date and an agenda of items to be discussed shall accompany the
request to meet. Meetings shall not exceed two (2) hours unless both parties
agree to extend the meeting.
20.03 No more than three (3) representatives may be present from each side at each
meeting. The committee shall meet no more than four (4) times a year.
20.04 Topics concerning wages, hours, benefits, and other terms and conditions of
employment could be discussed in this committee which would then serve in an
advisory capacity to the Board and/or negotiating committee.
ARTICLE 21
BARGAINING PROCEDURE
21.01 The board and the union shall designate a bargaining team not to exceed six (6)
individuals each, including the OAPSE Staff Field Representative. All bargaining
shall be conducted exclusively between the teams.
21.02 Between sixty (60) and ninety (90) calendar days prior to the expiration of this
agreement, either party may notify the other of a desire to commence bargaining
by filing with the State Employment Relations Board (SERB). Within fifteen (15)
work days of receipt of such notice, the first meeting shall be scheduled and
during that first meeting an exchange of proposals shall take place. All meetings
shall be held at times and places mutually agreed to by all parties.
21.03 TIME LIMITS
A.

If agreement is not reached within sixty (60) calendar days from the first
bargaining session, the provisions of Section 21.04 will be implemented.

34

B.

Either party may call caucuses during negotiations.

C.

The Board may, but is not required to, grant release time for those
employees involved as part of the bargaining team.

21.04 RESOLVING DIFFERENCES
A.

Mediation - Following the sixty (60) calendar day period described in
section 21.02 above, either party may declare a bargaining impasse, in
which case, unresolved issues are to be submitted to mediation. The
federal mediation and conciliation service will be utilized.

B.

The mediation period shall end upon the expiration of this agreement or
upon such subsequent date certain as the parties may mutually agree.

C.

In the event that the assistance of mediation is unsuccessful in producing
an agreement, the union reserves the right to strike, with at least a ten
(10) day notice.
ARTICLE 22
CLASSIFIED WAGE SCHEDULE

22.01 NOTES ON WAGE SCHEDULE
A.

2021-2022: 2.5% per hour increase
2022-2023: $.60 per hour
2023-2024: $.60 per hour

B.

Annual wages are based on hours for a normal year - they could vary
slightly depending upon the classified staff work year adopted by the
Board.

C.

Newly hired employees may be granted credit on the salary schedule for
prior work experience but placement on the schedule shall not exceed the
rate at the fifth (5th) step.
If an employee has worked in a classified position with Bexley City
Schools covered by the recognition clause of the negotiated agreement
between OAPSE Local #123 and the Bexley City Schools, then leaves
that position for a classified position not covered by the recognition clause
(e.g. district secretarial/ receptionist position) but remains employed with
Bexley City Schools, and subsequently returns to a classified bargaining
unit position, said employee shall receive credit for all years employed as
mentioned above. As well, the employee may receive up to five years
credit on the salary schedule for experience (if the experience credit

35

language is in the negotiated agreement). Such experience credit cannot
be duplicated and may be given only once (e.g. an employee cannot
receive up to five years experience credit, leave the bargaining unit, then
return and be given additional credit for the same experience.)
D.

Aides who work a varying schedule and all bus drivers shall report their
individual hours worked by completing a time sheet. The time sheet will
be given to the Treasurer on a weekly basis.
Adjustments to the employee's annual salary for days/hours worked shall
be computed in the last payroll check the employee receives for the
school year.

E.

If the Board requires a license issued by the State of Ohio for a
maintenance position, the job will become Maintenance III at one dollar
($1.00) per hour higher than Maintenance II.

F.

Secretarial employees shall not be responsible for calling their own
substitutes to cover any leaves they may be taking.

G.

For regularly assigned shifts beginning at or after 2:00 p.m., the Board
shall pay an additional twenty-five cents ($.25) per hour, and for regularly
assigned shifts beginning at or after 9:00 p.m., the Board shall pay an
additional fifty cents ($.50) per hour. The differential shall apply even
though the employee is temporarily reassigned to a different shift. This
paragraph only applies to custodial and maintenance employees.

H.

All custodial and maintenance employees who have successfully
completed their probationary period shall receive a $150 stipend in the
first pay of July every year for work clothes.

22.02. PAYROLL PRACTICES
A.

All employees will be paid in twenty-four (24) approximately equal
installments. Payment will be made on the fifth (5th) and twentieth (20th) of
each month.

B.

Direct Deposit
1.

Employees are required to have their payroll checks directly
deposited in a checking or savings account that is a member of the
Federal Banking System. Funds will be available on the appropriate
pay date. Employees may have up to two (2) direct deposits.

2.

A payroll stub with a payroll voucher will be provided electronically to
all employees.

36

C.

Procedures
1.

When a pay date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, holiday, or school or
bank holiday, the salary checks shall be issued the last work day
preceding the regular pay date.

2.

Miscellaneous pay will be paid each pay date based on the cutoff
date for submitting the information.

3.

Employees will have all sick leave, and personal leave accruals
posted on the first pay of the month. Days used will be posted to
each pay as days are submitted.

4.

All payroll deductions shall be transmitted to the receiving agency or
institution within one (1) day of pay day.
ARTICLE 23
TOTAL AGREEMENT

23.01 The parties to this Agreement each acknowledge that this Agreement contains
the entire Agreement between the parties and neither party shall be obligated,
during the term of this Agreement, to negotiate matters contained in this
Agreement or matters not contained in this Agreement, even though such
subjects or matters may not have been within the knowledge or contemplation of
either or both of the parties at the time they negotiated or signed this Agreement.
23.02 This Agreement supersedes and cancels all previous Agreements, verbal or
written or based on alleged past practices between the Board and Union and
constitutes the entire Agreement between the parties. Any amendment or
Agreement supplemental hereto shall not be binding upon either party unless
executed in writing by both parties.
23.03 Consistent of ORC Chapter 4117, this Agreement governs the wages, hours and
terms and conditions of employment of bargaining unit members to the extent
this Agreement specifically addresses a matter relating to wages, hours, terms or
conditions of employment. The employment relationship between employees in
the bargaining unit and the Board shall be governed exclusively by the terms of
this Agreement and not by the civil service laws of Ohio or ordinances or rules of
the City of Bexley or its civil service commission, except for the conduct and
grading of civil service examinations, the rating of candidates, the establishment
of eligible lists from the examinations, and the original appointment from the
eligible lists. If any provision of this Agreement is or becomes legally invalid, only
that provision shall be negotiated to comply with law and the remainder of the
Agreement shall remain in full force and effect.

37

ARTICLE 24
ANTI-HARASSMENT/SEXUAL HARASSMENT TRAINING
24.01 The Board shall provide anti-harassment and sexual harassment training to all
current Employees and new hires.
ARTICLE 25
INJURY REPORTS
25.01 If an employee is injured at work, he or she must cause an accident report to be
made electronically to a supervisor or administrator within twenty-four (24) hours
of the event causing the injury. The Superintendent, the Superintendent’s
designee or the Business Manager may require the employee to be examined by
a physician or other health care provider of the administration’s choice, with the
Board paying the cost of such exam. Such examination must be due to such
injury.
ARTICLE 26
DURATION
26.01 This Agreement shall remain in effect for three (3) years, commencing on July 1,
2021 and terminating June 30, 2024.
ARTICLE 27
BACKGROUND CHECKS AND CERTIFICATE FEE
27.01 The Board will pay for the cost for state and federal background checks required
by the Ohio Revised Code as to a bargaining unit member (does not cover initial
hire). Such payment will be made directly to the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation once the unit member completes the background checks.

38

OHIO ASSOCIATION OF PUBLIC
S
OOL EMPLOYEES LOCAL # 123

BEXLEY BOARD OF EDUCATION

'2di.
President

~L: z _,-_

L½u.! ('..ddv.,-df
OAPSE Stale Representative

~ #-1~
Negolating TeamM

Iler

sUiSS

ager

~f. 1 C.:./J,
lr~

Negotiating Team Member

;i)e<'.4'.n,k

2o, 2021

39

r ., ~

Salary Schedule - July 1, 2021 to June 30, 2024
Increases: FY22 = 2.5%, FY23 = $.60 per hour, FY24 = $.60 per hour
Effective 7/1/2021 shift pay for beginning after 2PM = $0.25 per hour. For shifts beginning after 9:00 PM = $0.50 per hour.
AIDES WAGE SCHEDULE

FOOD CASHIER / MAIL SERVICE

EXPERIENCE

7/1/2021

7/1/2022

7/1/2023

EXPERIENCE

7/1/2021

7/1/2022

7/1/2023

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
18
21

19.82
20.13
20.46
20.78
21.06
21.41
21.73
22.06
22.37
22.68
23.00
23.40
23.77
24.16

20.42
20.73
21.06
21.38
21.66
22.01
22.33
22.66
22.97
23.28
23.60
24.00
24.37
24.76

21.02
21.33
21.66
21.98
22.26
22.61
22.93
23.26
23.57
23.88
24.20
24.60
24.97
25.36

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
18
21

19.23
19.55
19.85
20.16
20.48
20.81
21.14
21.44
21.75
22.07
22.38
22.77
23.13
23.52

19.83
20.15
20.45
20.76
21.08
21.41
21.74
22.04
22.35
22.67
22.98
23.37
23.73
24.12

20.43
20.75
21.05
21.36
21.68
22.01
22.34
22.64
22.95
23.27
23.58
23.97
24.33
24.72

COOK WAGE SCHEDULE

HEAD COOK WAGE SCHEDULE

EXPERIENCE

7/1/2021

7/1/2022

7/1/2023

EXPERIENCE

7/1/2021

7/1/2022

7/1/2023

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
18
21

18.63
18.95
19.24
19.56
19.89
20.20
20.52
20.83
21.13
21.44
21.75
22.13
22.51
22.89

19.23
19.55
19.84
20.16
20.49
20.80
21.12
21.43
21.73
22.04
22.35
22.73
23.11
23.49

19.83
20.15
20.44
20.76
21.09
21.40
21.72
22.03
22.33
22.64
22.95
23.33
23.71
24.09

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
18
21

19.48
19.79
20.08
20.40
20.73
21.03
21.36
21.67
21.97
22.28
22.59
22.97
23.35
23.73

20.08
20.39
20.68
21.00
21.33
21.63
21.96
22.27
22.57
22.88
23.19
23.57
23.95
24.33

20.68
20.99
21.28
21.60
21.93
22.23
22.56
22.87
23.17
23.48
23.79
24.17
24.55
24.93

CUSTODIAN I WAGE SCHEDULE

CUSTODIAN II WAGE SCHEDULE

EXPERIENCE

7/1/2021

7/1/2022

7/1/2023

EXPERIENCE

7/1/2021

7/1/2022

7/1/2023

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
18
21

18.81
19.15
19.45
19.78
20.08
20.39
20.71
21.01
21.34
21.65
21.98
22.33
22.71
23.08

19.41
19.75
20.05
20.38
20.68
20.99
21.31
21.61
21.94
22.25
22.58
22.93
23.31
23.68

20.01
20.35
20.65
20.98
21.28
21.59
21.91
22.21
22.54
22.85
23.18
23.53
23.91
24.28

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
15
18
21

20.58
20.90
21.23
21.53
21.83
22.14
22.47
22.78
23.09
23.41
23.72
24.09
24.47
24.85

21.18
21.50
21.83
22.13
22.43
22.74
23.07
23.38
23.69
24.01
24.32
24.69
25.07
25.45

21.78
22.10
22.43
22.73
23.03
23.34
23.67
23.98
24.29
24.61
24.92
25.29
25.67
26.05

*See Section 22.01 (G) for custodial and maintenance shift differential

40

Salary Schedule - July 1, 2021 to June 30, 2024

Increases: FY22 = 2.5%, FY23 = $.60 per hour, FY24 = $.60 per hour
Effective 7/1/2021 shift pay for beginning after 2PM = $0.25 per hour. For shifts beginning after 9:00 PM = $0.50 per hour.
HEAD CUSTODIAN WAGE SCHEDULE

INTERPRETERS/HEALTH OFFICE RN'S WAGE SCHEDULE

EXPERIENCE

7/1/2021

7/1/2022

7/1/2023

EXPERIENCE

7/2/2020

7/3/2020

7/4/2020

0

22.47

23.07

23.67

0

23.11

23.71

24.31

1
2

22.78
23.08

23.38
23.68

23.98
24.28

1
2

23.59
24.06

24.19
24.66

24.79
25.26

3
4
5

23.41
23.73
24.02

24.01
24.33
24.62

24.61
24.93
25.22

3
4
5

24.53
25.00
25.48

25.13
25.60
26.08

25.73
26.20
26.68

6
7

24.33
24.66

24.93
25.26

25.53
25.86

6
7

25.95
26.42

26.55
27.02

27.15
27.62

8
9

24.96
25.28

25.56
25.88

26.16
26.48

8
9

26.90
27.37

27.50
27.97

28.10
28.57

12
15
18

25.61
25.97
26.34

26.21
26.57
26.94

26.81
27.17
27.54

12
15
18

27.84
28.31
28.78

28.44
28.91
29.38

29.04
29.51
29.98

26.71

27.31

27.91

21

29.25

29.85

30.45

21

MAINTENANCE I WAGE SCHEDULE

MAINTENANCE II WAGE SCHEDULE

EXPERIENCE
0
1

7/1/2021
20.83
21.13

7/1/2022
21.43
21.73

7/1/2023
22.03
22.33

EXPERIENCE
0
1

7/1/2021
22.17
22.49

7/1/2022
22.77
23.09

7/1/2023
23.37
23.69

2
3
4

21.44
21.75
22.08

22.04
22.35
22.68

22.64
22.95
23.28

2
3
4

22.80
23.11
23.43

23.40
23.71
24.03

24.00
24.31
24.63

5
6

22.40
22.70

23.00
23.30

23.60
23.90

5
6

23.75
24.07

24.35
24.67

24.95
25.27

7
8
9

23.01
23.35
23.64

23.61
23.95
24.24

24.21
24.55
24.84

7
8
9

24.35
24.68
25.00

24.95
25.28
25.60

25.55
25.88
26.20

12
15

23.94
24.32

24.54
24.92

25.14
25.52

12
15

25.30
25.69

25.90
26.29

26.50
26.89

18
21

24.70
25.07

25.30
25.67

25.90
26.27

18
21

26.06
26.43

26.66
27.03

27.26
27.63

MAINTENANCE III WAGE SCHEDULE

SECRETARY I WAGE SCHEDULE

EXPERIENCE

7/1/2021

7/1/2022

7/1/2023

EXPERIENCE

7/1/2021

7/1/2022

7/1/2023

0
1

23.37
23.66

23.97
24.26

24.57
24.86

0
1

20.52
20.84

21.12
21.44

21.72
22.04

2
3

23.95
24.29

24.55
24.89

25.15
25.49

2
3

21.16
21.46

21.76
22.06

22.36
22.66

4
5

24.61
24.92

25.21
25.52

25.81
26.12

4
5

21.78
22.11

22.38
22.71

22.98
23.31

6
7
8

25.24
25.55
25.85

25.84
26.15
26.45

26.44
26.75
27.05

6
7
8

22.44
22.76
23.06

23.04
23.36
23.66

23.64
23.96
24.26

9
12

26.18
26.48

26.78
27.08

27.38
27.68

9
12

23.40
23.72

24.00
24.32

24.60
24.92

15
18
21

26.87
27.23
27.60

27.47
27.83
28.20

28.07
28.43
28.80

15
18
21

24.10
24.47
24.86

24.70
25.07
25.46

25.30
25.67
26.06

*See Section 22.01 (G) for custodial and maintenance shift differential

41

Salary Schedule - July 1, 2021 to June 30, 2024
Increases: FY22 = 2.5%, FY23 = $.60 per hour, FY24 = $.60 per hour
Effective 7/1/2021 shift pay for beginning after 2PM = $0.25 per hour. For shifts beginning after 9:00 PM = $0.50 per hour.
SECRETARY II WAGE SCHEDULE

SECRETARY III WAGE SCHEDULE

EXPERIENCE

7/1/2021

7/1/2022

7/1/2023

EXPERIENCE

7/1/2021

7/1/2022

7/1/2023

0
1

20.54
20.86

21.14
21.46

21.74
22.06

0
1

21.02
21.35

21.62
21.95

22.22
22.55

2
3
4

21.20
21.48
21.81

21.80
22.08
22.41

22.40
22.68
23.01

2
3
4

21.67
22.00
22.30

22.27
22.60
22.90

22.87
23.20
23.50

5
6

22.14
22.46

22.74
23.06

23.34
23.66

5
6

22.62
22.94

23.22
23.54

23.82
24.14

7
8
9

22.78
23.09
23.42

23.38
23.69
24.02

23.98
24.29
24.62

7
8
9

23.23
23.56
23.89

23.83
24.16
24.49

24.43
24.76
25.09

12
15

23.74
24.12

24.34
24.72

24.94
25.32

12
15

24.20
24.58

24.80
25.18

25.40
25.78

18
21

24.51
24.88

25.11
25.48

25.71
26.08

18
21

24.95
25.33

25.55
25.93

26.15
26.53

*See Section 22.01 (G) for custodial and maintenance shift differential

42
