12/05/2023
0334-02
22-MED-03-0304
43686

Index
Article

ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE

Title

1
2
3
4
5

6
7
8
9

10
11
12
13

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

Page

TERM
RECOGNITION
DEFINITIONS
PRINCIPLES
NEGOTIATIONS
NO STRIKE
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
EMPLOYEES' RIGHTS
ASSOCIATION RIGHTS
BOARD (MANAGEMENT) RIGHTS
PAY
SENIORITY
LAYOFF AND RECALL
BID PROCEDURE
OVERTIME
PERSONAL LEAVE
ATTENDANCE INCENTIVE
PROFESSIONAL MEETINGS
SICK LEAVE
SEVERANCE PAY
MILEAGE COMPENSATION
BUS. ROUTE BIDDING
EXTRA TRIPS
JOB DESCRIPTIONS
VACATION
HOLIDAYS
LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY
FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT
ASSAULT LEAVE
MISCELLANEOUS
PAY PERIODS
WAGES AND FRINGE BENEFITS
EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS
HIRING RETIRED EMPLOYEES
ATTENDANCE OF EMPLOYEES' CHILDREN
AT BATAVIA LOCAL SCHOOLS

EXHIBIT "A"

3
3
3
5
6
7
9
9

10
11

11
12
13
14
15
16
16
16
17
17
18
19

21
21
22
23
23
24
24
25
25
27
27
28
30

SIGNATURE PAGE
ATTACHMENT

l
l

FORM- REQUEST FOR NON-RESIDENT
STUDENTS OF CLASSIFIED EMPLOYEES
TO ATTEND BATAVIA SCHOOLS
SALARY SCHEDULES
I•

31
32

QmTRACT
This Contract made and entered into this day of Jum8o , 2022 by and between the Board of
Education of the Batavia Local School District, hereinafter referred to as the "BOARD" and the
Ohio Association ofPublic School Employees (OAPSE) and its affiliate, Chapter #738, hereinafter
referred to as the "ASSOCIATION".

ARTICLE 1 -TERM
This Contract is effective for the period beginning July 1, 2022, and ending June 30, 2025

ARTICLE 2 - RECOGNITION
Section I - The Board hereby recognizes the Association as the sole and exclusive
bargaining representative for all employees now employed or to be employed who are eligible to
be members of the hereinafter described bargaining unit for the term of this Agreement.

'
I

I

I

The Association recognizes that the Board is charged with the establishment of policy of
public education in the Batavia Local School District and is the employer of all personnel of the
Batavia School System under state law. The Association further recognizes that the Board has the
sole responsibility for management and control of all public schools whatever name or character
in the district.
Section 2 - The bargaining unit includes all full-time and regularly employed short-hour
employees in the following positions or classifications which are regularly assigned to work
schedules:
a. Bus Drivers
b. Cooks
c. Custodians
d. Mechanics
e. Paraprofessionals
t: Maintenance
Section 3 - For the purpose ofthis Contract, the following are excluded from the bargaining
unit:
a. Board Treasurer and Superintendent
b. Secretaries
c. Assistant Treasurer(s)
d. Treasurer's Assistant(s)
e. Any person employed in an administrative, director or supervisor position.

I

Sectiou 4- Union Secul'i!.1.'.· .Dues/Fees .Deductions -All employees of the Bargaining Unit shall
become either:
1.
A member of the Ohio Association of Public School Employees (OAPSE) Local
738 and execute an authorization for dues deduction on a form provided by OAPSE. Should Fair
Share fee be declared constitutional at some later date, the language regarding fair share from the
2016-2019 contract shall be re-implemented.
2.

All bargaining Unit Members shall authorize payroll deduction for the payment of

dues
3.
Such deductions shall be made in twenty four (24) equal installments beginning
with the first pay in October. Signed Payroll Deduction Authorizations executed by the members
shall be continuous from year-to-year for the duration of the term ofrecognition of OAPSE Local
738 as the Bargaining Representative, or until such time as the employee withdraws such
authorization in writing. An employee may withdraw Membership in accordance with the
guidelines indicated in their signed membership application, a copy of which shall be provided to
the District Treasurer.
4.
Payroll deductions shall occur immediately upon request, or in the case of a new
employee(s), following the Initial Employment Period. The Board Treasurer shall notify the
OAPSE State Treasurer of the gross salary of the employee based on W-2 information and the
amount of dues or service fee to be deducted. The Board Treasurer shall forward to the OAPSE
State Treasurer the amount of the State dues/fees, along with a complete description by name and
amount, for each employee. A copy of this description shall be fotwarded to the Local OAPSE
Treasurer. The Board Treasurer shall forward the dues to the State OAPSE Treasurer within five
(5) days of the deduction.
The Union shall defend and indemnify the Board, the Treasurer, their Officers,
5.
Members, Agents, and Assignees in both their individual and Official capacities, and hold them
harmless against any and all claims, demands, suits, or other forms ofliability, including legal fees
and expenses that may arise out of or by reason of the action taken by the Board, its Officers,
Member Employees and/or Agents for the purpose of complying with any ofthe provisions ofthis
Article, or in reliance on any list, notices, or assig11111ents furnished under any of such provisions.
The Union shall retain control of any appointments of Legal Counsel for defense and
indemnification purposes.
6.
PEOPLE Deductions: Upon enrollment of at least five (5) employees, the Board
agrees to deduct from the wages of any employee who is a member ofthe Union a People deduction
as provided for in the written authorization. Such authorization must be executed by the employee
and may be revoked by the employee at any time by giving written notice to both the employer
and the Union. The Board agrees to remit any deductions made pursuant to this provision promptly
to the Union, together with an itemized statement showing names of each employee from whose
pay such deductions have been made and the amount deducted during the period covered by the
2

remittance.
Section 5 - In the event a new position is created, the Board and the Association will meet
to detennine the application of the position in accordance with this Article. In the event the new
position is included in the bargaining unit, the Board and the Association will negotiate an
appropriate wage schedule.

ARTICLE 3 - DEFINITIONS
Days - Refers to calendar days unless otherwise indicated.
Good Faith - "Good Faith" means coming to the negotiating table with the intention of
giving consideration to the proposals and reasons therefore of the other party, not of dogmatically
pursuing preconceived stands. Good faith requires the representative(s) of the
Association and the representative(s) of the Board to be willing to react to each other's proposals
and the reasons for such proposals. If a proposal is unacceptable to one of the parties, there is an
obligation to give its reasons for its opposition. Good faith requires both parties to recognize
negotiations as a shared process, but the obligation of the Board's representative (s) to meet for
the purpose of negotiations does not compel either party to agree to a proposal or require the
making of a concession.
Party- Shall be construed to mean the Association's and the Board's appointed members
of the negotiating team.

ARTICLE 4 - PRINCIPLES
Section I. - All employees covered by this Agreement have the right to join in, participate
in, and assist the Association and, likewise, the right to refrain from becoming a member of or
assisting the Association.
Section 2 - The Board and the Association shall comply with all the laws and regulations
of the state of Ohio.

ARTICLE 5 - NEGOTIATIONS
Section I - Neg;ol:iation Teams - The designated representative(s) of the Board will meet
with representatives designated by the Association for the purpose of discussing and reaching
agreements. All negotiations shall be conducted exclusively between said teams. The Board's
negotiating team and the Association's negotiating tean1 will be limited to six (6) members each.
Neither party shall have control over the selection of the other party's team members. While no
final contract shall be executed without ratification by the Association and fonnal acceptance by

3

the Board, the negotiating teams will have the authority to make proposals, consider proposals,
and detennine items acceptable to both patties involved in negotiations.
Section 2 - Consultants - Up to two (2) consultants may be used by each of the parties in
any ofthe negotiation meetings in an advisory capacity. Consultants will not be permitted to enter
into discussion unless both parties agree to permit them to address the teams.
Secticm 3 - Expense - The expense of such consultants shall be borne by the party
requesting or hiring them.
Section 4 - .Ji:xclumgc of Infonuation - Prior to and during the period of negotiations, the
Board and the Association agree to provide each other, upon request, all regularly and routinely
prepared public information concerning the issue(s) under consideration.
Section 5 - Submission of Issues - All issues for negotiation shall be submitted by the
Association in writing at the first meeting and the Board shall submit in writing to the Association
all of its issues for negotiation at the same meeting. No additional issues shall be submitted by
either party following the first meeting unless agreed to by both parties.
Section 6- Negotiations PJ'occdurcs- The parties shall meet at places and times agreed
upon at the prior meeting. Length of meetings as well as times and places of the following
meetings shall be agreed upon at the beginning of each session. All meetings shall be held in
executive session. No loss of pay shall occur if negotiations meetings are mutually scheduled
during working hours.
Section 7 - Caucus - Upon request ofeither pmty, the negotiation meeting shall be recessed
to permit the requesting party a period oftime within which to caucus in private. This caucus shall
be limited to forty-five minutes, unless the parties agree to provide additional time, which consent
shall not unreasonably be withheld.
§.cction 8 - Prog1·css Repotts - During negotiations, interim reports made to the
Association and the Board of Education by either party will be permitted. Each party will be
responsible for requesting that the information from such reports shall be confidential information
within the organization concerned.
Section 9 ··News Releases - News releases during negotiations and prior to the declaration
of impasse by either side shall be made only by mutual agreement. Once impasse has been
declared pursum1t to the contract, either party may issue news releases without consulting with
and/or obtaining the consent of the other party.
Section 10 - Protocol - No action to coerce, censor or penalize any participmlt in
negotiations shall be made or implied by any other person or members of either patty. Both sides
agree to conduct themselves in a professional manner.
4

Section l l - Item Agreement - As negotiated items are agreed upon, they shall be reduced
to writing and initialed by the chief negotiator of each party. Such initialing shall be construed as
tentative agreement by both parties on that item, or issue, subject to finalization by ratification by
the membership of the Association and agreement by the Board.
Section 12- Contract - When a contract is reached through negotiations, the outcome shall
be reduced to writing. Both parties shall review the contract together to determine the accuracy of
the transcript. If the contract is then in proper fonu, it shall be submitted to the membership ofthe
Association, and the Board for ratification and adoption. The bargaining teams pledge that they
will favorably recommend to their respective parties the acceptance of the
tentative agreement reached through negotiations. Ifratified by both parties, the new contract shall
be executed by the appropriate representatives of the parties and shall become binding upon both
of them.
Section 13 - Impasse Procedure- If after having negotiated for at least sixty (60) calendar
days, the two bargaining teams have not been able to reach an agreement on all items, then either
bargaining team may declare impasse and request in writing to the other that the issues be
submitted to mediation.
The parties shall jointly notify the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service of the
dispute and request t11e selection of a mediator. The parties shall mediate for at least thirty (30)
calendar days from the first meeting with the mediator and if no agreement is reached in that time
frame, then the impasse procedures ofthis contract shall be deemed to have been completed, unless
the parties have mutually agreed to an extension ofthe mediation process. This impasse procedure
supersedes and replaces the impasse procedure contained in Chapter 4117 of t11e Ohio Revised
Code. Should the parties be unable to reach agreement through mediation, and the parties having
not agreed to an extension of the mediation process the Association maintains its right to strike
provided the provisions ofthe contract subject to negotiation have expired and t11e Association has
given the Board notice to strike required by Chapter 4117 of the Ohio Revised Code. Should the
Association provide the notice to strike ultimate impasse shall be deemed to exist between the
parties.
ARTICLE 6 - NO STRIKE/NO LOCKOUT
The Association agrees that it will not encourage, sanction or approve any strike, stoppage,
slow down or other interruptions of work during the lifo of this Agreement. On the contrary, the
Association will actively discourage and denounce any strike, stoppage, slow down or other
interruption of work in violation of this Agreement. Neither shall the Board lock-out employees
covered by this Agreement in any manner which would result in a loss of pay.

s

ARTICLE 7 - ~ISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE
Section l - An employee covered by this Agreement may be disciplined up to and
including suspension and/or discharge, for just cause. Except with respect to the more serious
offensl',s listed in Section 2 below, the principles of progressive discipline will be followed in
situations warranting the application ofdiscipline while performing their paid duties. Specifically,
an employee shall first receive a verbal reprimand, documented in writing, then a written
reprimand, then an unpaid suspension and then termination.
Section 2 - The progressive discipline steps described above will not apply to the more
serious offenses and conduct listed below:
A.
Insubordination and/or refusal to perfonn assigned work;
B.
Consuming, using or being under the influence of intoxicants, including alcohol
and controlled substances;
C.
The use of insulting or abusive language to the public;
D.
Deliberately causing injury to a fellow employee or deliberately causing the
destruction ofa fellow employee's property or Board property;
E.
Immoral conduct with a student;
F.
Carrying concealed weapons or any other violations of criminal law;
G.
Falsification of records with the intent to defraud and/or stealing school district
property of other employees;
H.
Misuse of sick leave, which includes falsification ofreasons for sick leave usage or
falsification of the information on the sick leave form;
I.
Misuse of personal leave .
.T.
Other actions by the employee which constitute just cause for the suspension or
dismissal ofthe employee.
Committing aoy of the acts described above may be cause for immediate suspension or dismissal.
Section 3 - Progressive discipline may be utilized by the Board for absenteeism which is
unrelated to serious illness of the employee or employee's immediate family members if the
employee has been advised that there is a problem with his/her attendance and has been directed
to improve that attendance and fails to do so.
Section 4 - The Board may issue aod require employees to observe and obey rules,
regulations and policies adopted by the board, and employees shall be subject to disciplinary action
in accordance with the above procedure for violation(s) of such rules, regulations, and policies.
Board policies, rules and regulations will be available on the District website and at the Board
administrative offices.
Section 5 - Employees are to receive not less than forty-eight (48) hours' notice of a
disciplinary hearing. The notice shall contain the charges and that an employee who so chooses
has the right to have a representative present at any meeting or hearing which may lead to or result

6

in disciplinary action against the employee.
ARTICLE 8 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Section I - Definitions - The following definitions shall apply:
A.
"Grievance" is a formal claim by a classified person(s) who is covered by this
Agreement that one or more of the terms of this Agreement have been misinterpreted or
misapplied.
B.
"Grievant" is a classified person or persons or the Association covered by this
Agreement having an alleged grievance.
C.
"Association" is defined as the OAPSE Chapter #738.
D.
"Board" is the Batavia Local School District Board of Education.
E.
A "Day" in this atticle shall mean Monday thm Friday excluding holidays. The
number of days indicated at each level shall be considered as a maximum and should be adhered
to in expediting the procedure.
Section 2 - Purpose
The purpose of the grievance procedure is to secure, at the lowest possible administrative
level, proper solutions to grievances. Both parties agree that glievance proceedings shall be kept
as infonnal and confidential as appropliate at all levels of the procedure.
Section 3 - Procedure
A.
The number of days indicated at each level shall be considered as a maximum and
every effort should be made to expedite the process. The time limits may be extended by mutual
consent of all patties concerned.
B.
The grievant may be accompanied at all steps by an Association member, or field
representative with full patticipation rights.
C.
Grievances shall be resolved as follows:
Section 4 - Gdcv:mce Steps
Step Qnll- The grievant(s) shall first discuss his/her or their grievance with the appropliate
supervisor with the objective of resolving the grievance info1mally. The grievant(s) shall state to
the supervisor at the start of the conference that this is Step One of the grievance procedure.
Step Two - If the grievant(s) is, or are not, satisfied with the disposition made at Step One,
or if no disposition is made within five (5) days after such conference, the grievant may file the
grievance in writing with his/her, or their supervisor. The supervisor shall, within five (5) days
after receipt of the written grievance, give the aggrieved person or persons his written answer.
The formal grievance must be filed at Step Two in writing within fourteen (14) days of the
occurrence of the event, or condition upon which the grievance is based. Failure to file the
7

grievance within said fourteen (14) day period will constitute a waiver of the grievance.
Step Three- Ifthe grievant(s) is, or are not satisfied, with the disposition ofthe grievance
made at Step Two, or if no disposition is made within five (5) days after such discussion, the
aggrieved may, within five (5) days of receipt of the decision, appeal said decision to Step Three
of the grievance procedure. Failure to appeal within tl1e time allotted herein will constitute a
waiver of the right to appeal the grievance to Step Three or any farther in the grievance process.
Upon receipt of a proper appeal, the Superintendent shall, within five (5) days after receipt
of tl1e grievance, meet with the grievant(s) and such other pcrson(s) as the Superintendent
designates to consider the grievance. Within five ( 5) days after such meeting, the Superintendent
shall give the grievant(s) his or her response to the grievance.
Step l<'om· - In the event the grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of tlle grievant at
Step Three, or if no disposition is made wiiliin five (5) days after such meeting at Step Three, the
patiies may mutually agree to submit the grievance to mediation through the use of the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service. The request for mediation must be made within five (5) days
ofthe decision or lack of decision. Ifmediation of the grievance is attempted and is unsuccessful,
or if the Board does not agree to submit the grievance to mediation, then the Association may
appeal the grievance to Step Five of the grieva11ce procedure.
Ste!) Five - In the event tllat the grievance is not satisfactorily resolved at Step Four, the
Association may submit the grievance to arbitration by filing a notice of appeal to Step Five in
writing with the Treasurer of the Board no later than five (5) days and to the Federal Mediation
and Conciliation Services no later tha11 thirty (30) days after the completion of mediation at Step
Four or the Board's refusal to submit the matter to mediation. Failure to appeal to Step Five of the
grievance procedure within the time period stated herein shall constitute a waiver of the right to
appeal the grievance to Step Five of the grievance procedure.
Upon the receipt of a proper appeal to Step Five of the grievance procedure, the Board's
representative and the gdevant's representative shall jointly request a list of names from the
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS),. The Board's representative a11d the
grievant's representative shall then select an arbitrator from a list provided by the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service. The arbitrator shall have the authority to hold hearings and
to confer with any person deemed advisable in arriving at his/her decision on the grievance. The
arbitrator shall rep01i his/her decision to the grievant, the union, and the Board in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Seivice. The parties do not
have an obligation to submit to arbitration any grievance not filed or appealed within the timelines
stated in this Article. It is agreed by the parties that tl1e decision of the arbitrator shall be final and
binding. The parties against whom the arbitrator mies shall pay the full amount of the arbitrator's
bill and expenses.

8

Section 5 - Miscellaneous
A.
No reprisal of any kind shall be taken by or against any participant in the grievance
procedure by reason of such participation.
If a grievance is filed which alleges that the Superintendent of the District or the
B.
Board of Education has misinterpreted or misapplied the Agreement, the grievance shall
commence at Step Three.
C.
No grievance award may be in conflict with the statutory or common law governing
the Board and the District.
D.
If at any step, a reply is not received in writing within the time allocated, the
grievant(s) has/have the right to proceed to the next step in the grievance procedure.
E.
If a written grievance is filed on an issue which has been resolved by the
administration as an informal complaint, the decision of the administration shall not constitute a
precedent.
F.
An association representative may be present upon request at any step of the
grievance procedure.
G.
If the grievance is unilaterally withdrawn by the Union after arbitration has been
requested, the Union shall be responsible for all cancellation costs due to FMCS and the Arbitrator.

ARTICLE 9 - EMJ>1,0YEES' RIGHTS
The official personnel file of each classified employee shall be maintained at the
Superintendent's office. However, copies of the file or portions of the file may be maintained
elsewhere, but there shall be one official file located at the District's office.
Employees shall be provided the opportunity to see any derogatory material before it is
placed in the employee's file.
An employee will be entitled to a copy of any material in his/her file upon the payment of
a reasonable copying charge as set forth in Board policy.
An employee shall be provided the opportunity to review his/her evaluation with his/her
supervisor and to sign his/her evaluation before it is put in any file. If the employee refuses to
sign, it may be placed in the file without the employee's signature. The mles governing the
personnel files as outlined in this article shall be supplemental to and in addition to Section 1347
of the Ohio Revised Code. Access to personnel files shall be in accordance with the Ohio Public
Records Law.

ARTICLE 10 - ASSOCIATION RIGHTS
OAPSE Chapter #738 shall have the following rights and privileges:
A.

The use of designated areas in school buildings at no charge for the purpose of
9

Association meetings. Such use shall be confined to times ofthe day when school is not in session
and shall be arranged with the building principal at least three (3) days in advance.
B.
Association matetials may be sent from one building to another through the school
mail.
C.
Association materials may be posted on bulletin boards located in the employees'
workrooms.
D.
The Association may submit items of a non-political nature to the building
ptincipals to be annotmced over the public address systems
E.
The Association shall be provided, upon request, the names and addresses ofnewly
employed staff members covered by this Agreement.
F.
The following shall be subject to payroll deductions and remitted as deducted:
1. Credit Union
2. United Appeal
3. Contract and Voluntary Life Insurance/Health Insurance/Dental Insurance/
Cancer Insurance/Intensive Care Insurance.
4. Board approved Tax Sheltered Annuities
5. Section 125 Plan.
G.
Use of school office machines and matetials with prior approval of the building
principal.
H.
The Union shall be pem1itted to speak with new employees for a period of no more
than ten (10) minutes to discuss Union membership and benefits. The meeting can take place on
paid time, in private, and in the new employee's first week ofwork, or at the next most reasonable
opportunity.
ARTICLE 11 - BOARD (MANAGEMENT) RIGHTS
Section 1.
As stipulated in Chapter 4117.0S(c) of the Revised Code, the Board of Education
shall maintain its right and responsibility to:
A.
Determine matters of inherent managerial policy which include, but are
not limited to, areas ofdiscretion or policy such as the functions and programs ofthe public
employer, standards of services, its overall budget, utilization of technology, and
organizational structure;
B.
Direct, supervise, evaluate, or hire employees;
C.
Maintain and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of governmental
operations;
D.
Determine the overall methods, process means, or personnel by which
governmental operations are to be conducted;
E.
Suspend, discipline, demote, discharge for just cause, lay off, non-renew,
transfer, assign, schedule, promote, or retain employees;
F.
Determine the adequacy of the work force;
G.
Detennine the overall mission of the Board as a unit of government;
H.
Effectively manage the work force;
10

I.

Take actions to carry out the mission of the Board as a governmental unit.

Section 2.
The exercise of the rights and responsibilities of the Board as set forth herein, the
adoption ofpolicies, rules and regulations and practices and the use ofjudgment and discretion in
connection with the implementatfon of these rights shall be limited only by specific and express
te1ms of this contract The parties hereby agree that the Board shall not be permitted to exercise
any management rights which alter or modify an existing provision of this agreement.
The Board shall have the right to implement any management rights not specifically addressed in
the collective bargaining agreement provided that the Board engages in good faith negotiations
over the decision and effects of the implementation of the decision which concerns wages, hours,
and other terms and conditions of employment. Negotiations shall commence and be completed
within twenty (20) working days, or within the time frame mutually agreed to by the parties,
after the Board's request to the Union to engage in good faith negotiations. Additionally, the
negotiations teams shall consist of four (4) individuals and the OAPSE Field Representative and
the Parties' consultant. In the event an agreement caimot be reached between the Board and the
Union regarding the issue, the Board may implement its decision. However, the Union may, at
its discretion, proceed to binding arbitration in accordance with Article 8 to appeal the Board's
exercise of decision. In the event an arbitrator should find that the Board's implementation
failed to follow the process set forth herein, is inconsistent with Article 1I, Section I, or is
arbitrary, capricious, unreasonable, discriminating or retaliatory, the arbitrator may find for the
Union and return the parties to the status quo that existed prior to the Board's implementation,
with all other appropriate remedies.

ARTICLE 12 - PAY
The regular rate ofpay for each position in the bargaining unit shall be in accordance with the rates
established for each class as provided in the wage schedule, which is attached hereto, and by
reference incorporated as a patt of this Agreement. Upon initial employment, the Board shall
detc1mine which step of the appropriate salary schedule the new employee shall be placed on in
its sole discretion.

ARTICLE 13 - SENIORITY
Seniority shall be defined as the unintenupted length of continuous service with the Board in a
particular job classification. Authorized leaves of absence do not constitute an interruption in
continuous service. In the case of identical seniority, the first day of work shall be used in
dete1mining order of seniority. In the case of identical first day of work, date of application shall
be used. It is recognized that an employee may acquire seniority in more that1 one job classification
during his/her employment with the Board.
The Union will be provided a current seniority list upon request.

11

ARTICLE 14 - LAYOFF AND RECALi,

When layoff becomes necessary in a job classification due to the abolishment of positions, lack
of funds or lack of work, the following procedures shall govern such layoff:
A.
The number of people affected by reduction in force will be kept to a minimum by
not employing replacements insofar as practical for employees who resign, retire or otherwise
vacate a position.

B.
Whenever it becomes necessaiy to lay off employees for reasons as stated above,
affected employees shall be laid off according to seniority within a job classification with the least
senior employees in that job classification being laid off first.
C.
The following classifications shall be used for the purpose ofdefining classification
seniority in the event oflayoff:

1.
2.
3.

Bus Drivers
Cooks
Custodians

4.
5.
6.

Mechanics
Paraprofessionals
Maintenance

D.
The Board shall determine in which classifications the layoff shall occur and the
number of employees to be laid off. In the classification of layoff, employees with the least
seniority in that classification shall be laid off before any employee in that classification with
greater classification seniority is laid off. An employee who is to be laid off and who has
employment seniority with the Board in another classification shall be pe1mitted to bump into the
other classification in which he/she has seniority if there are employees in that other classification
with less seniority in that classification than the employee exercising bumping rights.
Qualifications for job positions shall not be changed when a reduction in force is implemented
until the bumping procedure has been completed.
E.
Fourteen (14) days prior to the effective date of layoff, a list shall be prepared by
the Board setting forth the names, seniority dates and classifications of those individuals to be laid
off and this notice shall be provided to the President of OAPSE Chapter #73 8. Each employee to
be laid off shall be individually notified in writing ofhis/her anticipated layoff with each notice of
layoff stating the following:
I.
2.

Reasons for the layoff or reduction.
The effective date oflayoff.

F.
Reinstatement shall be made from the recall list of laid off employees in reverse
order before any new employees are hired in that classification.

12

G.
Vacancies which occur in the classification of layoff shall be offered in writing to
the employee standing highest on the recall list for that classification before the next person on the
list may be considered. An employee who declines reinstatement and/or does not respond to the
notice of recall within seven (7) days of its mailing shall be deemed to have declined the offered
position and shall be pennanently removed from the recall list.

H.

The employee's name shall remain on the appropriate recall list for a period of
twenty-four (24) months from the effective date of layoff. If reinstated from layoff during this
period, the employee shall retain all previous accmnulated seniority, but the affected employee
shall not earn seniority while laid off.

ARTICLE 15 - BID PROCEDURE
When a vacancy occurs in a classification or a location assignment, it shall be emailed to
each employee at his/her District email account and shall not be filled for a period of five (5)
working days from the date of the email and shall be posted on the District website.
Each posting shall specify classification, location, and hours of the position, but this
information will not need to be included in the auto-notify am10uncement. If multiple vacancies
exist, the positions may be posted in one posting. The President of OAP SE 738 shall receive a
copy of each posting. Any employee may request the vacant position in writing or via District
email.
In selecting the replacement employee, the Board shall apply the following formula;

A.

The posted notice will describe the minimum qualifications required for the
vacancy.

B.

Employees within the department or classification of the position shall be
considered first for the vacant position.

C.

If more than one employee within the same department or classification requests
the position in writing, the employee with the highest seniodty shall be considered
first for the position.

D.

The highest seniodty shall be determined by the employee's last date ofhire by the
Board.

E.

If the position is not filled by an employee within the vacant position classification,
other employees within the bargaining unit may apply for and be interviewed for
the position if they are qualified. Qualifications for a position shall be determined
by the Board.

13

F.

Seniority and qualifications will be considerations used in filling any job vacancy.

G.

Ifit is determined by the Board that a current bargaining unit member is not
qualified for the position, the Board may fill the position with a newly hired
employee.
Changes in job classifications: Those changing job classifications will be put
on the salary schedule step in the following manner. Step 0 to 5 will match
step for step. Step 6 to 9 will be put on step 6. Step 10 to 14 will be put on step
I 0. Step 15 to 19 will be put on step 15, and step 20 and above will be on step
20.

ARTICLE 16 - OVERTIME /.Extra Time
A.
All overtime must be approved by the employee's supervisor. All ove1time work
shall be assigned by the Superintendent or hislher designee. Overtime will be paid bi-monthly.
B.
Assigmnent of Custodial Overtime-Cooks Extra time- In assigning overtime/Extra
time the Superintendent or hislher designee shall make an effort to assign overtime/Extra time to
custodians/cooks on a rotating seniority basis. All custodians/cooks wishing to be considered for
overtime/Extra time work for extracurricular activities shall have their names placed on an
overtime/Extra time rotating list at the beginning of the school year.
As overtime\Extra time opportunities occur, the Superintendent or his/her designee shall
assign the extracurricular overtime/Extra time work to the custodian standing at the top ofthe list
regardless of the building location in which the ove1time opportunity may occur. If the Head
Custodian is designated as the coordinator for the overtime, he/she shall be paid for all time spent
doing so outside hislher regular work day. Once the employee is notified, the employee must let
the Superintendent/designeeknow ofhislher intent to work the overtime/extra time within four (4)
hours of the notice. If an employee is skipped in the ove1time rotation, they will be offered the
next event with the same or comparable hours. Once a custodian at the top of the overtime list has
been offered the opportunity for an overtime assignment, his name shall rotate to the bottom of the
list. If the Board is unable to obtain a custodian in the preceding manner, the Superintendent or
hislher designee may hire a substitute custodian, or if a substitute is unavailable, any custodian on
the overtime list may be required to perform the work, in order of reverse seniority unless the
employee is unable to do so due to extenuating circumstances.
C.
Definition/Compensatory Time - For all hours actually worked over forty (40) in
one work week, the employee shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half or shall receive
compensatory time as determined by the Superintendent or hislher designee. An employee shall
be permitted to use earned compensatory time within a reasonable period after making the request
if the use does not unduly disrupt the operations of the Board, however, compensatory time may
not be used during instructional time unless specifically approved by the Superintendent or his/her
14

designee. Compensatory time received in lieu of a cash payment shall be at the rate of one and
one-half hours of compensatory time for each hour of overtime worked. An employee may not
accrue more than two hundred forty (240) hours of compensatory time. Saturday, Sunday, and
Holiday work shall be paid at the rate of time and one half, or the employee may be granted
compensatory time as determined by the Superintendent or his/her designee provided that the
Satnrday and/or Sunday are not part ofthe employee's regularly scheduled work week.
D.
Mutually Agreed Schedule Adjustment - If an employee works more than their
regularly scheduled hours in any particular day, the Board and the employee can mutually agree
to adjust the employee's schedule for that week to reduce the hours to be worked in any future date
that week. The Board or the employee may request the schedule adjustment.
E.
Hours Worked Defined- Work week shall be defined as 12:00 a.m. Sunday through
11 :59 p.m. Saturday. Time for which an employee is compensated for sick leave personal leave,
vacation, or professional leave, but does not actually work, shall not be computed as "hours
worked" for purposes of detennining eligibility for overtime. or compensatory time off.

ARTICLE 17 - PERSONAL LEAVE
Section I - Classified employees are entitled to receive a maximum of three (3) nonaccumulative days per contractual year ofpaid personal leave.
Section 2 - The following rules, regulations and procedures shall govern the use of these
days.
A.

Notification for personal leave shall be via KIOSK or equivalent at least three (3)
days prior to such leave.
B.
Personal leave shall not be granted:
1. On the first and last day of the student school year, nor on the work day
immediately preceding or following a holiday nor the day before, during, or the day after a vacation
period for students except in the case of a bona fide emergency or extenuating circumstances, as
determined by the Superintendent or his/bcr designec.
2. For employees to be gainfully employed by another person or entity on any
day included on the employee's work calendar.
C.
An approved personal leave day which happens to fall on a calamity day will not
be counted as a personal leave day. Personal leave may be taken in half (112) day or full day
increments. Personal leave may be taken in one -third (1/3) day or full day increments if you arc
a driver with a mid-day route.
D.
The Board reserves the right to deny the use ofpersonal leave ifmore than I 0% of
the employees in the classification in the building have requested personal leave or arc on sick
leave and additional absences for personal leave would unduly inten-upt the operation of the
building or tbe classification.
E.
Any personal leave which the employee does not use shall be converted to sick
15

leave at the end of the school year.
Section 3 - If an emergency arises, as determined, and approved by the Superintendent or
his/her designee, the three (3) day notice may be waived.

ARTICI,E 18 -ATTENDANCE INCENTIVE
The Board will provide the following attendance incentive for nine (9) month employees.
0 day missed 1 day missed 2 days missed -

$500.00
$400.00
$200.00

The Board will provide the following attendance incentive for twelve (12) month
employees.
0 day missed 1 day missed 2 days missed -

$750.00
$600.00
$300.00

For purposes ofthe attendance incentive, a day missed for any reason except approved professional
leave, or vacation shall be considered a day missed for purposes of determining eligibility for the
attendance incentive. Perfect attendance will be determined based upon the contracted work year
of the employee.

ARTICLE 19 - PROFESSIONAL MEETINGS
The release of personnel to serve as official delegates shall be limited to one (1) delegate
and the Chapter President for the Annual OAPSE Conference. The number of days without loss
ofpay shall be limited to no more than a collective total of four (4) days per calendar year.

ARTICLE 20 - SICK LEAVE
Section 1 - Sick leave (day absent with pay) will be granted to classified employees for
days absent due to personal illness, pregnancy related illness or injury, injury, exposure to
contagious disease which could be communicated to others, and for absence due to illness, injury
or death in the employee's immediate family. The sick leave request shall be entered into the
approved electronic system at the time of the request.
Section 2 - For the purpose of sick leave use in the event of illness or injury to a member
of the itmncdiate family, immediate family is interpreted to include husband, wife, child, mother,
father or other relative living in the employee's household.
Section 3 - In the event of death, up to five (5) sick leave days may be used if the death
16

involves a member of the immediate family. For the purposes of death in the immediate family,
immediate family is defined to include father, mother, brother, sister, husband, wife, child, in-laws,
grandparents or other relatives living in the member's household.
Section 4 -Each full-time classified employee shall be entitled to accumulate fifteen (15)
days of sick leave for each year under contract which shall be earned at the rate of one and onequarter (I 1/4) days per month. Classified employees who are less than full-time but work more
than one hundred (120) days during the year shall be entitled to accumulate sick leave for the time
actually worked. Sick leave accumulation shall not exceed a maximum of two hundred sixty-five
(265) days per employee. Employees capped as of March 1, 1987, shall have 5 additional days
added to their sick leave accumulation.
Section 5 - The Superintendent reserves the right to request a staff member to furnish a
physician's statement confirming his/her reason for absence when claiming sick leave in the event
there is some question as to whether or not sick leave benefits are justified.

ARTICLE 21- SEVERANCE PAY
The Batavia Local School District Board of Education shall, at the time of retirement or
death of an employee from the District, grant payment for one-fomth (114) of the number of days
ofsuch employee's unused accumulated sick leave not to exceed sixty- six and one-quarter (66.25)
days.
The per diem rate at the time of retirement or death shall be used to determine the amount
of such pay. Said pay to be made in a single payment at the time of retirement or in the case of
death, to the employee's beneficiary(s); or in the calendar year immediately following the
employee's last work day upon the employee presenting to the Treasurer a copy of his/her first
retirement check.
Retirement as used herein means disability or service retirement under any state or
municipal retirement system in the state, provided it takes place simultaneously with the
employee's te1mination of employment with the Board.

ARTICLE 22 - MILEAGE COMPENSATION
Classified employees who drive their personal vehicles in the performance of official
school business shall be compensated at the current IRS rate.
Mileage reimbursement will be paid only upon submission of the official school district
mileage form signed by the appropriate supervisor and the superintendent. Forms must be
submitted on a monthly basis.
17

ARTICLE 23 - BUS ROUTE BIDDING
Scctio!J...! - Route Development: The Transportation Supervisor has the responsibility of
developing, establishing the route time, maintaining, and adjusting all regular (AM/PM), mid-day,
shuttles, unassigned routes, and other bus duties.
Each route will have a set starting and ending time, estimated driving time, and designated
stops identified, and include a student list. Each route will have a minimum of Y, hour additional
daily time (2 Y, hours per week) over and above the driving time inclusive of layover time for the
purpose of compensating for time spent completing pre-trip and post trip inspections, bus
sweeping, bus washing, bus window and mirror cleaning, completing required pape1work and
occasional fueling. Failure to use the additional time for the intended purpose, or failure to
maintain bus cleanliness may result in disciplinary action per Article 7. Buses shall be assigned
by the Transportation Supervisor.
Section 2 - Route Bidding: Bus routes will be available for preview on-line and in a paper
copy one week before the first day of August in-service day activities. Drivers will pick routes on
the first day of in-service activities in August. Drivers will be notified by the end of the school
year of the date of the route bidding for the subsequent school year. Drivers, on the basis of
seniority, shall select regular, mid-day routes, shuttle routes, and other bus duties simultaneously
tmtil all routes have been selected. The cumulative time (regular, mid-day, and shuttles) on which
a driver may bid (or accept) shall not exceed eight hours a day. Each driver will be allotted 15
minutes to choose their route. Route times (base pay) will be established on that day.
Scction 3-Route Re-bidding-Definition and Time-frame: Any circumstance that results
in an increase of route time of at least fifteen (15) minutes will be cause for a route re-bidding
(e.g., route review, new student(s), vacancy, new route, other). Route re-bidding shall occur only
as of November I and prior to March15rt'. After March l5 1h, the Transportation Supervisor shall
fill routes with drivers not assigned to a specific route, substitutes, or new hires in this order.
Section 4- Procedure for Route Re-Bidding
I. Route Review: a driver or the Transpo1tation Supervisor may request of the other, in
writing, that the time of the driver's route be reviewed. If the route review establishes that a
differential of at least fifteen (15) minutes (either way) exists from the original route time
established for the route, the time will be adjusted to reflect the new route driving time. A gain
of at least fifteen (15) minutes shall he cause for a route re-bid. For route time reviews, GPS will
be used to determine the route time by randomly selecting, by lot, four (4) of the previous ten (! 0)
days GPS information. The dates shall be represented by numbers 1-10, with l being the most
recent date. The Board representative and Association representative shall each select two (2)
numbers each, rotating the selection with the Board representative selecting first. The GPS
generated time must evidence a consistent deviation of at least fitleen (15) minutes from the
18

established route time to be subject to this provision. This information will be reviewed by the
Transportation Supervisor and Association President/Designee. A route re-bid shall also occur if
a driver is off on a Board approved leave of absence for more than thirty (30) work days and an
interested driver will gain at least fifteen (15) minutes. Drivers who changed routes due to this
shall return to their previous route upon the driver returning from their leave of absence.
2. Route Vacancies: Route vacancies occurring during the school year shall be cause for
route re-bidding.
3. Re-bid Procedure. Routes eligible for re-bid (hereinafter referred to as "vacancy") shall
be posted for five (5) days, within three (3) days ofbeing known and filled on the basis ofseniority.
Once the vacancy is filled, a substitute shall be assigned to the vacated route for the remainder of
the school year. In the event there are no eligible drivers to fill any of the vacancies and for
vacancies occurring after March 15th, the Transportation Supervisor may fill those vacancies for
the remainder of the school year with permanent subs, substitutes, or new hires.
Definition of a "Floater" - A Floater is driver who is not assigned a specific route.

ARTICLE 24- EXTRA TRIPS (FIELD, EXTRA CURRICULAR, EMERGENCY,
OVERNIGHT, OTHER)
Scetion l - Procedure At the begi1111ing of each school year, Field Trip lists (see below)
shall be created with drivers being placed on "rotating" lists on the basis of seniority. These Field
Trip lists will include the following:
1.
Evening and Weekend Field Trips
2.
Mid-day Field Trips
3.
Mid-day Routes and Shuttles
4.
Emergency Ttips
5.
Extra Work* (master seniority list)
* Extra work shall be defined as other student transportation needs that are within the
district boundaries, trips that can be dropped off, trips that are less than 2 hours in duration, work
on days that Batavia Schools arc not in session, and for non-driving tasks (e.g. delivery of buses,
picking up parts, assisting the mechanic, bus washing). Dtivers shall be selected on a rotating
basis from the master seniority list and paid at their regular hourly rate. Summer work shall be
rotated weekly. Summer school work will be bid by June 1, by seniority.
6. Summer Bus Washing. Dtivers may be hired from the master seniority list to thoroughly
clean buses inside and out in preparation for the state inspection and/or other duties as defined by
the Transportation Supervisor. (paid the rate of Step Oper horn').
Field trips, which are known, shall be posted no later than Wednesday of each week and
selection of trips may begin immediately and will continue until all trips are selected. If a work-

19

week is shortened due to no school (e.g., 11ianksgiving, Winter Break, Spring Break, other), the
posting may be for more than one week's worth of trips and bidding for these Extra Trips will
continue until all trips arc selected. The Wednesday posting shall be for the following week, which
begins at 12:01 a.m. on Sunday. Trips received after Wednesday's posting will be considered
Emergency Trips. Drivers will be notified of Emergency Trips by posting or radio and will be
filled by seniority rotation. A driver who accepts an Emergency Trip will not lose his/her rotation
position on any of the other Lists.
A driver may not select a field trip that conflicts with his/her regular route assignment
unless it is posted and authorized by the Transportation Supervisor. However, for the life of the
contract, a driver will be permitted to bid on a field trip route and drive the pickup portion of the
route so long as the driver can be at the pickup site prior to the departure time as noted on the trip
ticket.
All posted field trips shall be selected no later than the end of the day on Friday. Once a
driver has been notified that they are "next up" on any list, they will have no more than two (2)
hours to pick or pass on the trips, failure to pick in the allotted time will result in a automatic pass.
Ifno substitute drivers are available, then regular drivers not on the Field Trip List that are willing
to take a trip may do so. If none are willing to do so, then the Extra trip shall be assigned to the
driver on the Field Trip List in the reverse order of seniority with the least senior driver being
assigned the trip and his/her name rotating to the bottom of the list for this purpose.
If an evening or weekend trip is cancelled after the driver reports for duty, the driver shall
be compensated for two hours at the Field Trip Rate for "show up" time. During the time periods
when the driver is on site at the extracurricular event but is not driving, the driver shall be
compensated in accordance with Section 3.
Section 2- Overnight Trips -When a diiver takes an overnight trip, he/she shall be paid at
the applicable hourly wage rate set forth in Section 3 for all time he/she actually spends driving,
(e.g., pre-tiip, time from bus garage to pick up ofpassengers and transporting to hotel/motel, time
driving from motel to site of event, time spent driving from event to bus garage). On overnight
trips, the Board will provide and pay for the driver's room and up to $10 for breakfast, $15 for
lunch and $25 for dinner, which includes gratuity and sales tax. Receipts are required for payment
of this allowance.
Sectllln 3 - Except as provided in Section 2, the driver shall be compensated at
the drivers regular hourly rate of pay for all time on field trips, whether driving or waiting at the
event. Pay will commence upon the completion of the ddvers route should the route and the trip
overlap.

Uus Driver Traine1·
Bus driving training is the primary responsibility of the Transportation Supervisor;
however, additional trainers may be hired (for an additional $3.00 per hour) from a driver sign-up
20

sheet on an as needed basis. Applicants (BLSD drivers) shall be interviewed and considered by
the Transportation Supervisor p1ior to selection. Seniority will be considered, but will not be the
determining factor. Th.e selection will not be the subject to a grievance.
Vans/or Other School Owned Transportation
Vans used for regular school transportation to and from school shall be driven by bus
drivers. Vans used for field, athletic or athletic trips may be driven by coaches who are vancertified.
ARTICLE 25 - JOB DESCRIPTION
Members of the bargaining unit should be furnished with a copy of their Board approved
job description at date ofhire. Job descriptions for each position are available at the Board offices.
The Association President will be provided a copy of any proposed change in a job
description at least ten (I 0) days prior to Board action on the proposed change.
ARTICLE 26 - VACATION
Section l: Each full-time, non-teaching employee, including full-time, hourly-rated and
per diem employees, after service of one (1) year with the Board of Education, shall be entitled,
during each year thereafter while continuing in the employ ofsuch Board of Education, to vacation
leave with full pay for ten days, excluding legal holidays.

Section. 2: Employees continuing in the employ of such Board for ten (10) or n10re years
ofservice shall be entitled to vacation leave with full pay for fifteen days, excluding legal holidays.
Section 3 • Employees continuing in the employ of such Board for fifteen (15) or more
years of service shall be entitled to vacation leave with full pay for twenty days, excluding legal
holidays.
Section 4 • "Full-time employee" is a person who is in service not less than eleven (11)
months in eaeh calendar year.
Eleven and twelve month employees who were hired before July 1, 2019, will receive their
vacation allotment on Janumy I of each year.
Eleven and twelve month employees who were hired on or after July 1, 2019, will receive their
vacation allohnent on their anniversary date.
Secliou 5 - Upon separation from employment, a non-teaching employee shall be entitled
to compensation at his/her cmTent rate of pay for all lawfully accrued and unused vacation leave
to his/her credit at the time of sepm·ation, not to exceed the vacation leave accrued to his/her credit

21

for the two (2) years immediately preceding his/her separation and the prorated portion ofhis/her
earned but unused vacation leave for the current year. In case of the death of a non-teaching
employee, such accrued and tmused vacation leave, and prorated portion of the current year shall
be paid in accordance with Section 2113.04, Ohio Revised Code, or to his/her estate.
Section 6: Each non-teaching employee must use his/her vacation time in the year that it
is earned and at a time most convenient to the work schedule of the Board of Education as
detennined by the Superintendent or his designee.

ARTICLE 27 - HOLIDAYS
Section I - All regular classified employees employed on an eleven or twelve month basis
are entitled to the following holidays for which they will be paid their regular wage provided each
such employee accrued earnings on his/her next preceding and next following scheduled work
days before and after such holiday or was properly excused from attendance at work on either or
both of those days: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day,
Juneteenth, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, the day after Thanksgiving,
Clnistmas Eve, and Christmas Day. As it relates to Memorial Day or Labor Day for nine (9) month
employees only, the requirement to accrue earnings both the day before and the day after the
holiday only applies if the employee is scheduled to work on both of those days. In addition to the
above holidays, employees are entitled to any day that the Board of Education may declare as a
holiday. Veterans' Day will be a paid holiday if the Board declares it as a holiday.
~ectlon Z - All regular classified employees employed on a nine or ten month basis are

entitled fo the following holidays for which they will be paid their regular wage provided each
such employee accrued earnings on his/her next preceding and next following scheduled work
days before and after such holiday or was properly excused from attendance at work on either or
both of those days: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, the day after Thanksgiving, Clnistmas Eve, and Christmas Day.
In addition to the above holidays, employees are entitled to any day that the Board of Education
may declare as a holiday.
Section 3 - Holidays, as defined in this article, which fall on Saturday or Sunday, shall be
celebrated on the following Monday or the preceding Friday, as detennined by the Board of
Education. Holidays falling on all other days ofthe week shall be celebrated on the day the holiday
falls.
Section 4 - A holiday falling during an employee's approved vacation week will extend
the vacation period by one day.

22

ARTICLE 28-LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY
Upon written request of a classified employee, the Board of Education may grant a leave
ofabsence without pay for a period ofnot more than two (2) consecutive school years for education
or professional or other purposes, and shall grant said leave where illness or other disability is the
reason for the request. Upon subsequent request, such leave may be renewed by the Board. The
request shall state the reason for the required leave, the date the leave is to begin and the date the
leave is to end.
An employee may be required by the Board to provide adequate medical documentation if
the reason for the leave request is illness or other disability.
Persons returning from leaves of absence are subjet.1: to assignment by the Superintendent
to a position within their classification.
The employee shall provide a written notice of intent to return on or before July 1, in the
year the leave is taken, except in the case ofmedical leave. Should this written notification not be
forwarded by this stated date, all obligations between the employee and Board shall be terminated
as ofJuly 2 of the year at issue.
If, after the return of the employee from leave, the person employed for the purpose of
replacing an employee on leave is continued in employment as a regular employee, or if he/she is
hired by the Board as a regular employee within a year after the employment as a replacement,
he/she shall receive credit for the length of service with the Board during the replacement period
as stipulated in Ohio Revised Code 33 I 9.13.
An employee on illness or disability leave of absence without pay has the option of
retaining full insurance coverage by paying monthly in advance to the Treasurer an amount equal
to those premiums. The provisions of this Article are intended to supersede any conflicting
provisions of Ohio Revised Code section 3319.13.

ARTICLE 29-l?AMILY MEDICAL Ll~AVE ACT (li'MLA)
The Board of Education agrees that if an employee who is eligible to receive benefits
through the Family Medical Leave Act requests to be placed on leave pursuant to said Act, the
Board shall place the member on family medical leave for the period oftime it is required to do so
and pay the insurance benefits of an employee on FMLA to the extent required by law. In
accordance with the provisions of the FMLA, the Board may require the use of paid leave
contemporaneously with the use of FMLA leave. Eligibility shall be on a rolling calendar basis.
Upon returning from leave pursuant to this provision, the Board shall return the employee
23

to the same or similar position he/she had prior to going on leave.

ARTICLE 30 - ASSAULT LEAVE
Any classified employee who is absent from work due to a physical injury resulting from
a physical assault on him/her which occurs in the course of that employee fulfilling his/her
contractual duties will remain on full pay statns for up to ten (10) days per assault without loss of
sick leave. The following mies shall apply:
A.
Any case of assault on a classified staff member shall be promptly reported to the
building administrator, and the police will be notified.
B.
A written report of all assaults on classified staff personnel shall be made to the
office of the Superintendent and immediate investigations, hearings and actions shall commence
according to the adopted suspension/expulsion regulations of the Board.
C.
Any classified staff member who is physically assaulted may be excused by his/her
supervisor, upon request, to seek a physician's or dentist's evaluation of his/her condition.
D.
Physical disability on the day of the assault and the following school day shall
require a statement signed by the employee to justify the use of assault leave. The same mies
apply to this as ordinary sick leave with regard to fraudulent statements.
E.
Absence beyond that provided in the immediately preceding paragraph shall require
a certificate from a licensed physician or dentist stating the nature of the disability and that the
employee is tmable to work as a result ofthe disability before payment can be approved.
F.
The classified employee shall not lose any pay as a result of his/her absence due to
comi appearance for the purpose ofprosecuting the assailant.

·ARTICLE 31-MISCELLANEOUS
Scctlo!L! - During the term of this Agreement, the Board shall not establish any mies,
regulations, and/or policies which directly contravene any of the negotiated terms and conditions
set forth herein unless required by a federal or state statute or law now existing or hereafter adopted
or decided. If, during the term of this Agreement, there is a change in any state or federal !aw
which would invalidate or contravene any provision of this Agreement, the parties will meet to
negotiate any necessary change in the Agreement relative to the affected provision within thirty
(30) calendar clays upon request of either party. Should the parties fail to reach agreement during
these negotiations, the Board may implement its last and final offer.
Section 2 - If any provision of this Agreement or any application of this Agreement is
found to be contrary to law, then, only that provision or application shall be considered invalid to
the extent it is contrmy to law, but all other provisions hereof shall continue in full force and effect
unless the essence of this has bet-'11 destroyed by the finding that such provision or application is
contrary to law. Any such provision or application which is found contraiy to law and is thus
invalidated shall be, upon written request, the subject of further negotiations between the
Association and the Board and shall be subject to the terms of Article 5.

24

Section 3 - The Agreement expresses the entire and complete agreement between the Board
and the Association and it constitutes the complete and exclusive agreement governing the
relationship of the parties and supersedes all prior understandings, agreements and practices
between the Board and the Association or the classified personnel covered by this Agreement,
whether wdtten or oral, express or implied and may not be modified except in writing, signed by
the parties hereto and during the full term of the Agreement, neither the Board nor the Association
may require the other party to negotiate on any subject covered or not covered by this Agreement.
Section 4 - Calamity - In the event that the Batavia Local School District is closed due to
an epidemic, snow, or other public calamity as stated by Ohio Revised Code employees shall be
paid for all hours contracted to work on that day. If an employee is required to work on a calamity
day, then the employee shall receive compensatory time in an amount equal to the number of hours
worked on the calamity day. The use of compensatory time shall be with the approval of the
employee's supervisor. Should the Board make up the day for which the employee was already
compensated, and the employee did not actually work on that calamity day, the employee shall not
be entitled to any additional compensation so long as the number of total days worked do not
exceed assigned number of work days.

ARTICLE 32-PAY PERIODS
All bargaining unit members shall be paid on a biweekly pay basis. If the normal pay date
falls on a holiday, the paycheck shall be issued on the preceding wotl: day. Payroll ei;ors will he
con-ected immediately, if possible, but no later than the next pay period if agreed upon by the
parties involved. Each bargaining unit member shall be paid in twenty four (24) equal pays on the
15th-and 301h of each month.
All bargaining unit members shall have their payroll check deposited by electronic transfer
to a financial institution of his/her choice. The employee's salary shall be paid by electronic transfer
to a financial institution not later than 10:00 a.m. each pay date. Remittance evidence of paychecksh
shall be emailed to each employee on the scheduled pay date.

ARTICLE 33 - WAGES AND FRINGE BENEFITS
l.h
The Board of Education will provide a health insurance plan, available through Clermonth
County Health Consortium, with the Board paying Eighty Eight Percent (88%) of the premiumh
and the employee paying Twelve Percent ( 12%) of the premium.h
2.h
The Board of Education will provide a dental plan and pay Eighty Eight Percenth
(88%) of the premium and the employee paying Twelve Percent (12%) of the premium.
3.h

The Board of Education shall provide $50,000 life insurance or equivalent and payh
25

100% of the premium.
4.
The Board of Education shall provide all employees working twenty (20) or more
hours per week and all other employees hired prior to 2/28/87 the benefits set forth in Article 30,
subsections I, 2 and 3. All employees hired after 2/28/87 and working less than twenty hours per
week shall not be provided the insurance described in Article 31, subsections 1, 2, 3, and 4.
5.
Effective July 1, 2022, a 3% per step wage increase. Effective July 1, 2023, a 2%
per step wage increase. Effective July 1 , 2024, a 2% per step wage increase. There shall be a
stipend of$750.00 for maintenance and mechanic employees annually and paid twice a year (every
6 months).
Step 22 $.50 more than step 20
Step 25 $.50 more than step 22
$500.00 one-time bonus payable by 12/01/2022
6.
The Board shall designate each employee's mandatory contribution to the SERS
Retirement System as "Picked-Up" by the Board, although they shall continue to be designated as
employee contributions.
The amount of the employee's income reported by the Board is subject to federal and state
income tax, and shall be the employee's total gross income reduced by the percentage amount of
the employee's mandatory retirement systen1 contribution made by the Board.
No employee's total salary shall be increased by such "pick-up" nor shall the Board's total
contribution to the retirement system be increased thereby. There shall be no increased cost to the
Board except incidental administrative expenses necessary to implement this program.
In the event that a majority of the members of the employee's bargaining unit no longer
desire this "pick-up" plan or if there is an adverse determination from any governmental unit
(including the Internal Revenue Service), affecting the qualifying status of this plan, this "pickup" provision shall be null and void.
Members of the bargaining unit acknowledge that the Board is in no way liable to them as
a result of the implementation of this program at their request and that they shall assume any
liability as the result of an adverse ruling by the Internal Revenue Service.
7.
For the employee to receive the insurance benefit programs, they must complete
the necessary applications and provide all information needed by the insurance companies and the
Board of Education. The insurance will become effoctive for new employees on their first day of
employment according to the starting date on their contract.

26

8.
If a bargaining unit member is awarded a supplemental employment contract the
effective hourly rate for the duties performed under the tenns of the supplemental contract shall
be the Federal minimum hourly wage rate. The Treasurer shall notify the employee in writing of
the maximum number of authorized work hours for the position for the entire contract. No
employee may work more than those stated hours. Under no circumstances shall an employee be
paid less than the stated contract amount. An employee shall complete a time sheet for all hours
worked under the supplemental contract.
9.
Effective July !, 2016, the opt out shall be removed and any employee who had
previously opted out shall be paid a onetime payment of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Should
the opt out be found to be legally permissible, it will be reinstated.
10.
The Board shall offer a Section 125 Plan for the sole purpose ofproviding tax relief
for employees' contributions toward insurance benefits.

11.

Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00) per person shall be provided to maintenance and
mechanic personnel each year for the purposes ofpurchasing jeans, collared name/district badged
shirts, pocketed I-shirts, boots, bibs and/or jackets. The Board will purchase ten (IO) shitts
annually for custodians and food service personnel.

ARTICLE 34 - EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS
Upon employment by the Board into a regular bargaining unit position, beginnit1g with any
person employed after July 1, 2019, the employee shall be employed pursuant to the contract
sequence set forth in Ohio Revised Code section 3319.081.

ARTICLE 35 - HIRING RI~TIRED EMPLOYEES
1.
Beginning July 1, 2022, individuals who have retired and who are or will be
receiving retirement benefits through any State retirement system may be employed by the Board.
There shall not be any expectation that any snch individual, whether formerly an employee of the
Board or not, will be offered employment. The Board reserves the right to offer or not to offer such
employment selectively, based on the needs of the school district, and no reason for declining to
offer such employment to anyone pursuant to this provision shall be requit'ed.
2.
The salary to be paid to the retired employee shall be determined by the Board at
the time of initial employment and at the time of each subsequent contract grant.
3.
Individuals employed pursuant to this shall receive any health, dental, and vision
benefits, and shall not receive any life insurance or severance benefits.
4.
Individuals employed pursuant to this provision shall receive one (1) year limited
contracts and shall not be eligible for continuing contracts, regardless oftheir years of service. The
27

decision whether to employ an individual hired under this section for another year is solely within
the discretion ofthe Board ofEducation, and that decision is not subject to the grievance procedure
or Ohio Revised Code section 3319.081 or the Ohio Revised Code section 3319.083. If the board
determines that it will employ the bargaining unit member for the succeeding school year, the
board will attempt to notify the retired employee by April 30'"· Retired employees shall be subject
to removal in accordance with Article 32 and shall have the same status as Probationary Employees
set forth therein.
5.
Each one (1) year contract shall automatically expire upon the completion of the
school year, and it shall not be necessary for the district to take formal action to non-renew the
employee pursuant to Ohio Revised Code section 3319.083 in order to terminate the employment
relationship. The employment relationship shall end upon the expiration ofthe contract in the same
manner as a supplemental contract. Individuals employed pursuant to this provision may not apply
for vacancies, shall not maintain bumping rights, shall have no seniority rights over any other
employee, and are not subject to, or required to participate, in any evaluation process provided by
this Agreement. Individuals hired pursuant to this provision are not entitled to any severance
benefits or retirement incentive benefits.
6.
Individuals employed pursuant to this provision shall start each contractual year
with a zero (0) sick leave balance but shall earn sick leave during the contractual year at the same
rate as other members of the bargaining unit. If the individual is employed under another
contract(s) for succeeding years, there will not be a carryover of the sick leave days from year to
year.
7.
All of the terms and conditions of employment set forth in the preceding numbered
paragraphs shall supersede and replace any sections of the Ohio Revised Code with which they
are in conflict, including but not limited to, Sections 3319.081; 3319.082; 3319.083; 3317.12;
Chapter 3309; 3313.202; and, 3319.141.
~RTICLE

36 - ATTENDANCE OF EMPLOYEES' CHILDREN AT
BATAVIA LOCAL SCHOOL DISTRICT

If the Board rescinds its open enrollment policy, employees residing outside ofthe Batavia
Local School District shall be permitted to enroll their children, tuition free, in the Batavia Local
School District subject to the following conditions:
A.
A parent files an application with the Superintendent by June 1 of each school year
requesting that his/her child be enrolled in the Batavia Schools for the following school year.
B.
The student the employee wishes to enroll has not been suspended or expelled from
a publie or private school located in or outside tl1e State of Ohio.
C.

The Superintendent determines that classroom space is available for the student in
28

the grade level. and/or courses he/she will be taking the next school year.
If all the above conditions are met, the student shall be enrolled in the Batavia School District for
one school year tuition free.

29

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Board and the Association have executed this Agreement
by their duly authorized representatives at Batavia, Ohio this th~ Oday of J
e , 2022.

"''°"

BATAVIA LOCAL SCHOOL DISTRICT
BO

Treasurer

OHIO ASSOCIATION OF PUBLIC
SCHOOL EMPLOYEES
CHAPTER #738

30

Batavia Local School District
Request for Non-Resident Students of Classified
Employees to Attend Batavia Schools

Employees residing outside of the Batavia Local School District shall be permitted to enroll their
children, tuition free, in the Batavia Local Schools subject to the following:
1. A parent files an application with the Superintendent by June 1 of each school year requesting
that his/her child be enrolled In the Batavia Schools for the following school year.
2. The student the employee wishes to enroll has not been suspended or expelled from a public or
private school located in our outside the state of Ohio.
3. The Superintendent determines that classroom space is available for the student in the grade
level and/or courses he/she will be taking the next school year.
I hereby request approval for the following children to attend Batavia Schools:

Social Security Number:
Address:
Telephone Number:

Building Assignment: - - - - - -

Child/Children

Grade

School of Attendance
-~----

Signature of District Employee

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Central Office Use Only
Date Request Received:

Approval/Board meeting:

31

I

l

!
~

k

'

Head
k

,
Cust"'"' 1"""'

l
l

1

1

i

Head

~"'rofessional !

,...

Mainten

I

I

I

I

•
Bus
Driver..--'--"""'
M•eclra~~n~ic..._-l
'

o
13.56 1
16.75.
16.98,
18.44 I
13.88 I
21.01 I
17.SZ. I
19.46
1
13.86 I
17.04 I
17.15 i
18.62 !
14.17 I
21.:33 I
18.25'
19.77
2
14.1617.35 i
17.35 ;
18.81 ;
14.43 I
2.1.47 I
18.64 I
19.92
3
1
14.44
17.SS i
17.471
18.94 i
14.76 !
21.65;
19.04 I
20.10
1---47---t-,.-----;14·f_,,79:+1----;1"1.*s1~i----;1"1.*ss;:-T1-··· ·---T1a;c:;,12;;-;-1----71s*"."'10;;-;-1---~21""."'ao;--...-1----,,1a"'."".;;;"°T-1---?:20"'.:1-:::4M
5
i
15.05
18.24 I
17.83 I
192.9 I
15.37 !
21.98 j
19.65 ,
20A1
1---";;.---T-'---,;-1s,,..35*·:t-:------0:1*a.ss~7; _ _ __,1*1.!ilo,;7;;-;-l-----::1,,,s.*43.,._,..1_ _ __,1,.s..,,ee,,_-r--1----:;22.~1sJ ··--~20.,......z;..,,....1_ _ _~20~.57,,_,
7
I
15.86 I
18.86 i
18.17 I
19.64 !
15.98 I
22.31 1
20.ea 1
20.76
a
1
1s.98 l
19.111
1a.33 1
1s.79 1
1a.so 1
22.45 ,
--21.12 '
20.ss
9
i
16.26
1S.45 I
18.4$ I
19.S6
16.SS: !
22.62.;
21.!i5 1
21.04
10
i
16.58 I
19.77 I
18.W i
20.13
16.90 I
22.77 t
21.97;
21.22
12
I
16.!l? .i
20.·~ !
18.96 I
20.!!$
17.19 i
23.10 I
22.30 '
21.53
1$
l
17.01
20.19 i
19.13 I
20,!1()
17.34
23.25 I
224.2 I
21.65
15
i
17,15
20.34 !
19.29 I
20.76 i
17.47
23.SS i
22.541
21.77
17
I
17.47
20.llo I
19$6
21.~'
17.711
·-23.73 I
22.ee I
21.90

22
26

21.46 I
20.44
21.91
1MO
24.53 l
23.28 I
22.61 '
21.96 i
20.94
22.41
19.10
25.03 I
23.7!1 I
Z!\.01
l
!
;
!
Contractd•~
1891
193 I
280 .
200 :
1&l '
260 ·
189 I
280
P"'""-'"'-"""'--1------""'-l------'""'-t-----"""'-t----""-"'+------'""··L----"=----~=-c----==-i
I

I

18.28 ·
18.78 .
!

!

l

1

I

!

1

!

$7SOAnnua!

S750Annual

Sfioend

Stipend

-

i
I

I

Local School Olstrict

1 ~Htt'I" Schedule ,

'

l

JOlllo Association of Public School

l

i~.Sc:JWotYear£A$s1>mntio.-'is,.-:.. 23.ir~'

,~...tveDabos: See cover$tep

i
i

I

i

, COok

I

,......._.

I

0
1
2
3
4
5
6

I

13.83 I
14.13 i

I
l

14.45 i
14.73 l
10l.®
15.35

j

15.85' i

7
8

I

!
I

s

I

10
12

i

!

'

13

15

l

17

l

20

l

22
.25

i

ConlraCt

I

I
I

15-93 l
15.30 I
16.59 I
16.91 I
17.21
17.35

17.50
~1 ..8:2'
18.13
18..64 !
1,9..19 f
i

189 j

-

Cook

I
I

I

I

I

I

I

l

I

II

I

d!aO

20.4$

17.32.
11.00 I
17.69 I
17.821
18.00 I
18.19 I
18.331
1a.54·1
18.69 I
18JIB !
19.04
19.$4.

20.SO

19.51 l

20.75
21.!17
21.38 I
21.691
22.40 !

19.58 i

1e.23 I

1s.55 I

19.84;
'Al16 l

193 :

I

I

I

I.

I

~021

20.$4 I
20.85 I
.r1.3$ j

260

I
I

+I

-·

Head

i

lona1

'
J

l

19.50

14.16 i
14.46
14.77 I
15.061
1M1

19JS8 l
19.82 l
20.03 i

1s.ee
1s.se
16.30

20.19 I
20.361
20.54 i

16.63
16.lli
17.24 '
17.54 !
17.69 ·,
17.82 i
18.1S I
18.4$ I

18.81.i

18.99
19.19
19:.32

2().64 i

21.01 I
21.17
21.51
21.84

22.36
22.86
260

..

i

...

.

"'"'

21.43 i
21.76 l
21.00 I
22.10 !

=

22.58 l
22.76: 1
22.90 l
23..07 \

20.68

=
23.56

19.4?_1
188 I

280

I
$750 Annual
Stioend

an1c

18.17 j
18.61 I
19.02 I
19.42 I
19.84 i

,,24..
2242

I

I
Bus
Driver

I

23.71
23.86 I
:&4.20 I
24.511.
25.-021
25.63 I

18.!l7

l

•

I•

i

1

'l.

I

-·--

•

I
I

17Jl8 •
17.38 I
17.69 I
17.98 I
18.33 I
16.50 l
18.00

.

I

..

19.85
20:16

20.32
20.50
20.64
20.82
20.98

21.10
21.54
21.98

21.17

22.41 I

21.64
21.96

21.30
21.46

22.75:
22.87:
22.S~..J

22.08
22.20

~~

23.11 I
23.23 l
23.74 I
24.25 I

22.$6

189 I

260-

I

23.471

I $7501\nnual
I
I

stloend

I
ZQ2~tunScb.o01 Yeat1A$Stl.mntiari$

I
I

I

I

=.

----!

~h-*

I

Effec!lVe~ Seecoversheot

'

i

l
t.:nnk

0
1

I

l

!

i

I

14.i1 l
14.'12 I

Head

I

Cook;

I

!

Cusfw;Uan

J
I

I

Head

I

C11Wtan

1

t Parap~nal j

1

17.42 i
17.66 \
19.19 I
i
17.73 I
17.85 I
19.37 ;
1---2~--+-1----;14.;;_"'73~·----;1='a.=05;+;----;1a~os,_.;-1_ _ _71s=".57 1
3
I
16.03 i
18.34 I
1$.18 '
19.to :
4
I
15.38 I
18.70 '
18.SS I
19.89 i
5
I
15.aa I
1a97 I
1a55 '
20.07 I
6
'
15.97 !
1!l.2B
18.70 !
20.22 I
1---7r---+-'----;16"'.30=+-----..;19.:2261+-··
18.91 I
20.43 j
8
r
1a63
1s.94
1s.07 1
20.59 ,

r-

j

l

Maintenance

1,

6os
pw_~r

Mecltanic
j

_ _i

14.44 •
21.66 I
18.54 !
20.25
14.75
22.19
18.99
20.Sll
15.07 1
1
1s.4Q
20.n
15.36 I
22.54 I
19.81
20.9~
~1:.;5c:;.7,,;.1..;.!_ _ _-...;22.6~;;8+1----...;2;;0.23~.;....---..;2~1-;;05"-l
15.99 I
22.87 I
20.68
21.24
16.30 I
23.03 ---~21=+'i.09~'----;2;;1c,.4~0
16.63 l
23.21 I
21.52 i
21.60
1e.se 1
23.35 1
21.91 ·
21.n

=

~=====9~:.::::t1.:::::::~16~-~92~t:::::::~2020~-2.3~56t~1.·=======~1199~.~~·~~4[:~.~------~-...-.:_,,20~~~·~7$~~t1:-:-:-:-:-:-:-..;1~~7~.25~~~~+'--.:..-.:_-_-_-_-.:_--.:..~..;23~~~-;;53~'11--.:..-_-::_-_-_-.:_--.:_~~~;~~42.'t~'1-----=-·--=2~1.89~
10
12

!

!

17..25

3

17.56 I

20.87 ·

19.73 I

189 •

193 I

260 I

260 I

I

!

!

l

17.58 l
17.89 I

23.69 I
24.04 ·

188

260
\

~-

23..20

22.07
22.40

------f-'--..·---t'------tl------+-~"'-''5:;;0:':An'-"n"1ual""----·+------~.
l S750 MnueJ
i
l
Sfi~
!
Sti nd

1------+-'·i- - - - - + i
1

20.llS I
21.25 i

1

i

1
