AGREEMENT

Between

THE CITY OF MUSKEGO
MUSKEGO, WISCONSIN

and

THE MUSKEGO POLICE ASSOCIATION
LOCAL #360
WISCONSIN PROFESSIONAL POLICE ASSOCIATION

January 1, 2020
through
December 31, 2022

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE 1

INTENT AND PURPOSE ...........................................................................2

ARTICLE 2

COOPERATION .........................................................................................2

ARTICLE 3

RECOGNITION ..........................................................................................2

ARTICLE 4

DUES DEDUCTION ...................................................................................2

ARTICLE 5

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ......................................................................3

ARTICLE 6

WAGES .......................................................................................................5

ARTICLE 7

HOURS AND WORKWEEK......................................................................6

ARTICLE 8

OVERTIME .................................................................................................9

ARTICLE 9

HOLIDAYS ...............................................................................................10

ARTICLE 10

VACATIONS ............................................................................................11

ARTICLE 11

UNIFORM MAINTENANCE ...................................................................12

ARTICLE 12

HEALTH AND WELFARE ......................................................................13

ARTICLE 13

PENSION ...................................................................................................15

ARTICLE 14

SICK LEAVE ............................................................................................15

ARTICLE 15

FUNERAL LEAVE ...................................................................................17

ARTICLE 16

PROBATIONARY PERIOD .....................................................................18

ARTICLE 17

SENIORITY ..............................................................................................18

ARTICLE 18

LAYOFF AND RECALL ..........................................................................19

ARTICLE 19

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS RESERVED..................................................19

ARTICLE 20

CONSTRUCTION OF AGREEMENT .....................................................20

ARTICLE 21

NO STRIKE CLAUSE ..............................................................................20

ARTICLE 22

CONDITION OF AGREEMENT..............................................................20

ARTICLE 23

MISCELLANEOUS ..................................................................................20

ARTICLE 24

CANINE OFFICER ...................................................................................20

ARTICLE 25

SCHOOL DISTRICT OVERTIME……………………………………...22

ARTICLE 26

TERMINATION…………………………………………………………22

APPENDIX “A”

....................................................................................................................23

SIDE LETTER OF AGREEMENT ………………………………………………………...…...24

1

THE CITY OF MUSKEGO
AND
THE MUSKEGO POLICE ASSOCIATION
This Agreement is made and entered into at the City of Muskego, Wisconsin, by and between the
CITY OF MUSKEGO, a municipal corporation, hereinafter referred to as the "Employer" and the
MUSKEGO POLICE ASSOCIATION, hereinafter referred to as the "Association."
ARTICLE 1 -- INTENT AND PURPOSE
Section 1. It is the intent that the following Agreement shall be implementation of the provisions
of Section 111.70 of the Wisconsin Statutes, consistent with that legislative authority which
devolves upon the City of Muskego, the Statutes and, insofar as applicable, the rules and
regulations relating to or promulgated by the Civil Service Ordinance.
Section 2. Both of the parties to this Agreement are desirous of reaching an amicable
understanding with respect to the employer-employee relationship that exists between them and to
enter into an Agreement covering rates of pay, hours of work and conditions of employment.
ARTICLE 2 -- COOPERATION
Section 1. The Union agrees for its members who are employees of the City of Muskego that they
will individually and collectively perform loyal and efficient work and service, that they will use
their influence and best efforts to protect the property of the City of Muskego and its interest, and
that they will cooperate in promoting and advancing the welfare of the City of Muskego and service
at all times. For the mutual benefit of both the employees and the City of Muskego, the Union
further agrees to cooperate with the City of Muskego and actively participate in the promotion and
operation of an effective safety and job training program.
Section 2. The City of Muskego agrees that it will cooperate with the Union in its efforts to
promote harmony and efficiency among all of the City of Muskego’s employees, and to this end
agrees to actively promote and maintain an effective and continuing program of safety and job
training.
ARTICLE 3 -- RECOGNITION
Section 1. The Employer recognizes the Association as the exclusive bargaining representative of
all employees of the Police Department with powers of arrest, excluding all supervisors,
confidential, executive and managerial employees, clerical employees, dispatchers and all other
employees of the Employer for the purposes of negotiating in relation to wages, hours and
conditions of employment.
ARTICLE 4 -- DUES DEDUCTION
Section 1. The Employer agrees to deduct monthly dues in the amount certified by the
WPPA/LEER from the pay of employees who individually sign a dues deduction authorization
form where the Employee is knowingly and affirmatively consenting to the deduction of dues from
the employee’s paycheck, including any Local Association dues which the employee has
authorized to be deducted in conjunction with the WPPA/LEER dues.

2

The Employer shall deduct the combined dues amount each month for each employee requesting
such deduction, upon receipt of such form and shall remit the total of such deductions, with a list
of employees from who such sums have been deducted, to the WPPA/LEER or Local Association
if applicable, in one lump sum not later than the 15th of each month.
Authorization of dues deductions by a member may be revoked upon notice in writing to the
Employer, WPPA or to the Local Association and with the understanding that the deduction will
cease as reasonably as practical after receipt of written notice of revocation.
No employee shall be required to join the Association, but membership in the Association shall be
made available to all employees in the bargaining unit who apply consistent with either the WPPA
or Local Association Constitution and By-Laws. The Employer agrees to notify the WPPA office
in Madison in writing of the name of any new hire into the bargaining unit. No employee shall be
denied membership because of race, creed, color, sex, or other legally protected class status.
It is expressly understood and agreed that WPPA/LEER will refund to the Employer or the
employee involved any dues erroneously deducted by the employer and paid to WPPA/LEER
and/or the Local Association. The Association does hereby indemnify and shall save WPPA/LEER
shall indemnify and hold the Employer harmless against any and all claims, demands, suits, or
other forms of liability, including court costs, that shall arise out of or by reason of action taken or
not taken by the Employer, which Employer action or non-action is in compliance with the
provision of this Article, and in reliance on any lists or certificates which have been furnished to
the Employer pursuant to this Article; provided that the defense of any such claims, demands, suits
or other forms of liability shall be under the control of the Association and its attorneys. However,
nothing in this section shall be interpreted to preclude the Employer from participating in any legal
proceedings challenging the application or interpretation of this Article through representatives of
its own choosing and at its own expense.
ARTICLE 5 -- GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Section 1. Definition. A grievance is a claim based upon an event or condition which affects the
wages, hours or conditions of employment of one or more employees, or the Association, involving
the interpretation, meaning or application of any of the provisions of this Agreement. The
Association may be a grievant in cases where it feels it has a collective grievance of its members.
A grievance does not include any type of complaint by a police officer or the Association
respecting any discipline taken by the Department. Such disciplinary matters shall be handled
pursuant to Wisconsin Statute 62.13(5).
Section 2. Procedure.
A. The grievance procedure shall consist of four steps hereinafter set forth. No grievance
shall be made or recognized unless it is founded upon an alleged breach of the terms
and conditions of this Agreement. All grievances not initiated or filed by the grievant
or his representatives within the applicable time limit specified in this article shall be
deemed abandoned. A grievant may initiate, present and process his grievance with or
without a representative or representatives. All times hereinafter set forth in this article,
unless otherwise specified, are working days and are exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays
and any holiday recognized in this Agreement. All time requirements set forth in this
article may be waived or extended by mutual agreement of the parties. If, in any step,
3

the City's representatives fail to give their written answer within the time limit therein
set forth, the grievance shall automatically be transferred to the next step at the
expiration of such time limit. Should any grievance not be moved to the next step by
the Association, within the time limits provided, following the City's answer, the
grievance will be considered settled.
B. A grievance affecting a group or class of employees may be submitted in writing by
the Association to the Chief directly and the processing of such grievance shall
commence at Level 2.
C. All decisions respective to written grievances will be in writing and shall be transmitted
to the aggrieved and to the Association.
STEP 1. A police officer, believing he has cause for a grievance, shall orally present his
grievance to his Division Commander within fifteen (15) days of the incident or within
fifteen (15) days of his securing knowledge thereof. Thereafter the grievant shall discuss
the matter with his Division Commander. Such discussion shall be held as soon as
possible, but no later than forty-eight (48) hours after the initiation of the grievance. If the
grievance is not settled within forty-eight (48) hours after such discussion to the
satisfaction of the grievant, the grievant shall reduce such grievance to writing and submit
it to the Chief within five (5) days after such discussion. In the event of such appeal, the
answer of the Division Commander above shall be reduced to writing within (5) days.
STEP 2. The Chief shall set a time for discussion of the grievance that shall be within five
(5) days from the time of the presentation to him of the written grievance by the grievant
and his Division Commander. The Chief shall give his decision in writing to the grievant
and his representative; within (5) days of the date the discussion was held. Within five (5)
days, if the grievant is not satisfied with the Chief's decision, he shall further process his
grievance as provided in Step 3.
STEP 3. The grievant shall present his grievance in writing to the City Council or its
designate. The City Council through its Chairman or his designee shall attempt to make
the necessary adjustment to reconcile the grievance. In any event, the Chairman or his
designee shall be required to respond in writing within thirty (30) days from the date of
receiving the written grievance, to the grievant and a copy to the Association President. If
the grievance is not settled in Step 3, either party may take the matter to arbitration as
herein provided.
STEP 4.
a. Not later than fifteen (15) days, after the written response required in Step 3, either
party can request the Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission to name an
arbitrator from its staff.
b. The arbitrator shall have the authority to determine issues concerning the
interpretation and application of all articles and sections of this Agreement.
c. The written decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding upon both parties.

4

The arbitrator shall expressly confine himself to the precise issues submitted for arbitration
and shall have no authority to determine any other issue not submitted to him or to submit
observations or declarations of opinion which are not directly essential in reaching the
determination. The arbitrator shall have no right to amend, modify, nullify, ignore or add to
the provisions of this Agreement.
The arbitrator shall take such evidence as in his judgment is appropriate for the disposition of
the dispute. Statements of position may be made by the parties, and witnesses may be called.
The arbitrator shall have initial authority to determine whether or not the dispute is arbitrable.
Once it is determined that a dispute is arbitrable, the arbitrator shall proceed in accordance
with this article to determine the merits of the dispute submitted to arbitration, and his
decision shall be final and binding upon all parties. The cost of the arbitrator shall be shared
equally by both parties. All other costs shall be paid by the party that necessitates the expense.
ARTICLE 6 – WAGES
Section 1. All employees shall be paid biweekly according to the wage scale listed in Appendix
“A”. The City shall pay all employees on Thursday for work performed through the previous
Saturday.
Section 2. Placement in the Salary Schedule
A. At the discretion of the City, newly hired officers can be placed on the salary schedule
above the start rate based on their applicable level of experience.
B. Newly hired officers placed above the start rate will also receive an allotment of vacation
commensurate with their placement on the salary schedule and their level of experience as
a police officer.
C. Newly hired officers will not be eligible to bid for promotion until they have completed
three years of service with the City of Muskego Police Department.
D. It is understood that placement on the salary schedule above the start rate does not affect
the officer’s seniority which will be measured pursuant to the Collective Bargaining
Agreement.
Section 3. Shift Commander Pay. Officers who act as shift commander (including an acting
lieutenant), in the absence of a supervising officer acting as shift commander, shall be paid the
appropriate starting sergeant's, or starting Lieutenants rate of pay for such work after they have
worked for a period of at least two (2) consecutive hours. The pay shall be for the entire time the
officer acts in a shift commander capacity.
Section 4. Temporary Assignment. Any officer appointed to the position of Community Resource
Officer on a temporary basis shall be compensated at the CRO wage rate for all hours worked
while performing CRO duties. It is understood that notwithstanding the above, all officers are
expected to perform community-related activities as part of their regular duties.
Section 5. Jury Duty. Employees shall be granted time off with full pay for reporting for jury duty
upon presentation of satisfactory evidence relating to this call to duty. Any employee engaged in
jury duty shall be considered working the day shift (7:00 AM to 3:00 PM) and shall be excused
5

from his normal work responsibilities. If the employee is not required to return for jury duty after
the lunch recess, that employee shall be expected to report to work and complete the remainder of
his shift. Any compensation received for such jury duty, exclusive of travel pay, shall be turned
over to the employer. However, if the jury duty occurs on a regularly scheduled off day, all
compensation shall remain with the employee.
Section 6. Beginning 01/01/2015 all qualified Field Training Officers, or Officers who are utilized
as field training officers, shall be compensated at one (1) hour of pay or compensatory time off at
the straight time rate for each day worked training a new Officer.
Section 7. Worker's Compensation. Any employee who is absent due to injury or illness caused
during the course of his duties and is eligible for Worker's Compensation payments for temporary
partial or temporary total disability, shall receive his Worker's Compensation payment, and a
payment from the City equal to the difference between the Worker's Compensation payment and
the employee's regular salary.
ARTICLE 7 – HOURS AND WORKWEEK
Section 1. The normal hours of work for the Police Department employees covered by this
Agreement are as follows:
A. Officers shall be assigned regular hours on an established shift as prescribed by the
Chief so that the highest level of protection to life and property may be maintained.
B. The normal workday consists of eight (8) consecutive duty hours including one-half
(1/2) hour lunch break, subject to call, and shall be preceded by fifteen (15) minutes
of report-in time, for a total of eight and one-quarter (8¼) hours.
C. The schedule of days worked shall normally be as follows:
Four (4) days of work followed by two (2) days off and in turn:
Four (4) days of work followed by two (2) days off (4-2) (4-2).
D. The schedule of days worked for officers assigned to the Special Services Division
shall normally be an eight (8) hour day as follows:
Five (5) days of work followed by two (2) days off in turn:
Five (5) days of work followed by two (2) days off (5-2) (5-2).
E.

Any flexing of normal duty hours shall be on a mutually agreed upon basis between
the employee and the shift/bureau commander/supervisor. The flexing of normal
duty hours includes the following: changing the starting and ending times of the shift.

F. The work schedule of the officer assigned as the Community Resource Officer shall
be as follows:
Monday and Tuesday
Wednesday through Friday

1:00 PM to
8:00 AM to

6

9:00 PM
4:00 PM

G. It shall be the policy of the Employer to recognize seniority within rank and
classification as to shift assignment.
H. Officers shall be given reasonable notice in the event of a temporary change in shift
assignment. Reasonable notice is defined as at least forty-eight (48) hours before the
scheduled new starting time or old starting time, whichever provides for greater
notice. Any officer given less than forty-eight (48) hours’ notice shall be paid at one
and one-half (1-1/2) times his regular rate for all hours worked outside his or her
normal shift within forty-eight (48) hours of the notice. In the event of a temporary
shift assignment beyond ten (10) days, an officer can elect to bump a less senior
officer. It is mutually agreed that this forty-eight (48) hour provision is intended for
exigent situations.
I.

School Resource Officers. Officers shall be selected as School Resource Officers as
set forth in Department Policy #314, dated July 19, 2001. Nothing contained in this
policy shall affect the status attained by the SRO’s prior to the July 19, 2001 revision.
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

J.

The position of School Resource Officer shall have a term of one year, assigned
to the Detective Bureau.
The term of a School Resource Officer shall commence at the end of the School
year. Duty hours outside of the regular school year shall be reviewed by the
Administration set by February 1st of each year.
School Resource may be retained for additional one-year terms. Not later than
May 1 of each year the School Resource Officers and the Department
Administration will meet to review the assignments for the following year. No
later than May 15, the parties will indicate, in writing, their intentions to renew
their assignment.
School Resource Officers who are returned to patrol duties before the end of
their term shall retain the wages of a SRO for the duration of their term. Officers
will revert to the normal work schedule of the patrol division.
Officers exiting the position shall assume the schedule of the officer chosen as
a replacement. Should no replacement be named, assignment of exiting officer
shall be based on seniority.
If an officer requests to leave the position of SRO prior to the end of their term,
he/she may be required to continue until the end of the current school year.
School assignment shall be based on seniority with the classification, providing
all other qualifications are equal, including the preference of the school
administration.

The Chief of Police, in his discretion, may assign one hundred percent (100%) of the
total number of employees of the Department to work overlapping shifts in case of
investigation, riots, civil disturbances, strikes or other emergencies. Should a dispute
regarding this article result the Association agrees to the principle of work now,
grieve later.

K. For as long as the City maintains one detective position, that position shall be a
promotion. If the City maintains more than one detective position, the additional
positions shall be appointments as described below:
1. The assigned position of Detective shall have an initial term of two years.
7

The term shall commence at the beginning of a calendar year. If the
appointment is made after April 30th of any year, the term will commence at
the start of the next calendar year.
2. Appointed Detectives may be retained for additional two-year terms. No later
than August 1 of the year the term is set to expire, the Detective and the
Department will meet to review the assignments for the following term. No
later than October 15, the parties will indicate, in writing, their intentions to
renew their assignment.
3. Appointed Detectives who are returned to patrol duties at the request of the
Department before the end of their term shall retain the appropriate detective
wage for the duration of the current calendar year. Officers will revert to the
normal work schedule of the patrol division.
4. A Detective exiting the position other than the end of a term shall assume the
schedule of the patrol officer chosen as a replacement. If no replacement is
named, assignment of exiting officer shall be based on seniority. Should the
replacement come from a specialty position, the exiting officer will be assigned
to patrol.
5. If an officer requests to leave the detective position prior to the end of their
term, he/she may be required to continue until the expiration of the term.
L.

Community Resource Officer (CRO). Officers shall be selected as Community
Resource Officers as set forth in Department Policy #314.
1. The position of Community Resource Officer shall have a term of one year.
2. The term of a Community Resource Officer shall commence at the time of the
appointment. Duties to be established by the Chief.
3. The Community Resource Officer may be retained for additional one-year
terms.
4. Community Resource Officers who are returned to patrol duties before the end
of their term shall retain the wages of a CRO for the duration of their term.
Officers will revert to the normal work schedule of the patrol division.
5. Officers exiting the position shall assume the schedule of the officer chosen as
a replacement. Should no replacement be named, assignment of exiting officer
shall be based on seniority.
6. If an officer requests to leave the position of CRO prior to the end of their
term, he/she may be required to continue until the end of the term.
7. Assignment shall be based on seniority within the classification, providing all
other qualifications are equal.

Section 2. Annual Shift Selection. On October 1 of the preceding year, employees may select
their preferred shift assignment within their respective rank, according to their seniority within that
rank, Lieutenants and Sergeants having picked first. Each employee will be allowed three (3) days
from the last pick to make their choice of shift selection. A list will be posted showing the available
shift and division assignments, along with a seniority listing. Employees will be checked off as
they complete their pick. It will be each employee's responsibility to check the list for their time
to pick. The newly selected shifts shall take effect January 2 of each year. In the event that the
shift selection process results in an employee working in excess of four (4) consecutive days, the
employee will not be able to claim additional compensation. In the event that the shift selection
process results in an employee working two (2) consecutive shifts, the employee will be required
to take a vacation day, personal holiday, trade day, or compensatory time in lieu of working the
8

second consecutive shift, if manpower allows. Any employee not making his shift selection at the
proper time shall lose his seniority rights for the selection process.
Section 3. Trade Days. Personnel who have a need for trade days and who can meet the provisions
of the below guidelines may file a “Trade day” request with their respective Division Lieutenant
or his/her Designee. The Division Lieutenant/Designee shall be responsible to screen all trade day
requests. Said request shall be granted or denied based on but not limited to the following criteria:
A.

B.
C.
D.

E.
F.
G.

Employees in like classification will be permitted to trade between each other any
authorized days off, or one (1) of their off days in each group. Trades shall be
allowed between sworn officers and sergeants. An authorized day is defined as an
eight and one quarter (8¼) hour shift within a twenty-four hour period. Trade days
shall not be granted between sworn and non-sworn personnel, investigative and
uniform personnel, or dispatch and non-dispatch personnel.
Request for a trade day will be made in writing prior to the trade occurring.
Employees will not be permitted to trade shifts unless a minimum of eight (8) hours
separates the hours of work.
Probationary employees will not be permitted this opportunity unless all necessary
training has been completed so as to allow the employee to work without the direct
supervision of a field-training officer, and that the employee is counted for
minimum staffing.
Officers will be allowed to utilize trade days prior to use of compensatory time.
Trades are not limited to 8.25-hour shifts, but include the ability to trade partial
shifts and hours, as is the past practice of the Department.
No trades involving either a partial or whole shift shall be approved which would
cause an officer to work in excess of 12.25 hours consecutively.
ARTICLE 8 -- OVERTIME

Section 1. So long as there is scheduled a 4-2, 4-2 work schedule there shall be a fifteen (15)
minute call-in role call prior to the start of the shift. All employees who work in excess of their
normal regularly scheduled workday of eight and one-quarter (8¼) hours or regularly scheduled
workweek shall receive time and one-half (1½) for all such hours worked. During the term of this
Agreement, said overtime shall be paid at an hourly rate derived from dividing the annual salary
by 2080 hours. Provided, however, that employees working a 5-2 scheduled and an eight (8) hour
workday shall be eligible for the above after eight (8) hours worked. Payment for such overtime
shall be made on each pay period, provided, however, that an employee who has worked overtime
shall have the alternative of being paid for such overtime or be granted compensatory time off at
the rate of one and one-half (1½) hours for each overtime hour worked. Provided that no employee
may accumulate, for the purpose of compensatory time off, more than sixty-four (64) hours of
compensatory time off. Any overtime accumulated in excess of sixty-four (64) hours will be
compensated pursuant to this Article.
Section 2. The Employer shall have the right to schedule employees for the annual in-service
training and specialized training by adjusting off-duty time to avoid having to pay time and onehalf (1½x) if a training session would otherwise fall on the employee's regular off time, provided
the training session is a minimum of eight hours in length (to be considered the equivalent to the
loss of a regular shift).
Section 3. Overtime shall be divided as equally as possible among the employees.
9

Section 4. Employees covered by this Agreement, when requested to work at a time not included
in their regular work schedule and not subject to Article 7, Section 1, shall be paid a minimum of
two (2) hours at their applicable rate in accordance with Article 7, Section 1. If an officer’s court
appearance is canceled after 4:00 p.m. on the day before, the officer shall be paid two (2) hours of
straight time.
ARTICLE 9 -- HOLIDAYS
Section 1. All employees scheduled to work a 4-2, 4-2 work schedule shall be entitled to eight (8)
hours pay at their regular straight-time rate for eight (8) of the following holidays. Such payment
to be made in a lump sum, payable to each employee the payday prior to the Thanksgiving holiday.
The parties understand and agree that this annual December holiday payment shall be paid on a
pro-rated basis for new hires, or for employees whose employment has terminated, or who are
placed on an unpaid leave of absence prior to the end of the calendar year. Said pro-rated payout
shall be on the basis of one-twelfth (1/12) of the payout to be paid for each month worked during
the calendar year. A month shall be considered worked provided the employee either began prior
to the 15th of the month or worked past the 15th of the month in the event his employment is
terminated or he is placed on an unpaid leave of absence. In any event, an employee who
commenced work in the month of January of the then applicable calendar year shall receive all
twelve (12) months of said holiday pay. The parties agree that the holidays shall be as follows:
New Year's Day
Spring Holiday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day

Thanksgiving
Day After Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve Day
Christmas Day
New Year's Eve Day

Section 2. In addition to the eight (8) days of holiday pay, employees shall be entitled to take two
(2) floating holidays at a time mutually agreed upon by the Chief and employee. The accrual of
hours for these floating holiday hours shall be on a pro-rated basis for new hires, or for employees
whose employment has terminated, or who are placed on an unpaid leave of absence. Said prorated payout shall be on the basis of one-twelfth (1/12) of the payment to be paid for each month
worked during the calendar year, and shall be paid with the remaining holiday payout on the first
pay period in December. The employee may elect to take any unused holiday time pay at the
regular straight-time rate in lieu of such holiday(s) to be paid with the last paycheck of the year.
Section 3. If an employee works a full shift on a holiday, which does not fall on one of his
scheduled workdays, he shall receive sixteen (16) hours of pay in addition to his regular monthly
salary. If less than a full shift, i.e., eight and one-quarter (8¼) hours, are worked on such holidays,
a proportionate amount shall be paid.
Section 4. If an employee is scheduled to work on a holiday, all hours worked in addition to the
regular shift shall be paid at two times the employee's regular hourly wage.
Section 5. The above language shall not be construed to apply to officers scheduled to work a 52, 5-2 work schedule as set forth in Article 7, Section 1 (D). Such employees shall receive the
above-named holidays off with pay and, in addition, shall receive one (1) additional personal
holiday to be taken at a mutually agreeable time. Provided further that when such employees work
on a holiday, they shall be paid at two (2) times their regular rate of pay for all hours worked on
10

said holiday, not the celebrated holiday. For employees working a 5-2 workweek, when a holiday
falls on an employee's regular off day, the holiday shall be celebrated on the nearest scheduled
workday. In addition, if Memorial Day or Labor Day falls on an employee's regular off day, the
holiday shall be celebrated on the preceding Saturday.
ARTICLE 10 -- VACATIONS
Section 1. All full-time employees shall be granted vacations with pay based upon the anniversary
date of their continuous employment as follows:
Years of Service

Vacation Accrual Days

Hours - Bi-Weekly

During the 1st year
During the 2nd year
During the 3rd year
During the 4th year
Beginning 5th year
Beginning 6th year
Beginning 7th year
Beginning 8th year
Beginning 9th year
Beginning 10th year
Beginning 16th year
Beginning 17th year
Beginning 18th year
Beginning 19th year
Beginning 20th year

2 weeks (10 workdays)
2 weeks (10 workdays)
2 weeks (10 workdays)
2 weeks (10 workdays)
3 weeks (15 workdays)
3 weeks and one day (16 workdays)
3 weeks and two days(17 workdays)
3 weeks and three days (18 workdays)
3 weeks and four days (19 workdays)
4 weeks (20 workdays)
4 weeks and one days (21 workdays)
4 weeks and two days (22 workdays)
4 weeks and three days (23 workdays)
4 weeks and four days (24 workdays)
5 weeks (25 workdays)

80
80
80
80
120
128
136
144
152
160
168
176
184
192
200

3.08
3.08
3.08
3.08
4.62
4.93
5.24
5.54
5.85
6.16
6.46
6.77
7.08
7.38
7.70

For vacation accrual purposes, the hiring date of all employees shall be converted to the first day
of the month depending upon the actual date of hire (see below). The resulting date shall be used
to determine the amount of vacation time the employee is entitled to receive.
Hiring Date
On or before the 16th day of the month
On or after the 17th day of the month

Vacation Anniversary Date
1st day of the month hired.
1st day of the following month.

Section 2. Employees, when separated from City employment, will be compensated at their
regular rate of pay for earned and unused vacation accumulated to their credit.
Section 3. An employee who has completed six (6) months of employment may elect to take one
(1) week of vacation at that time, and one (1) week of vacation during the second year. On any
anniversary date, the vacation bank may not exceed that year’s total accrual amount or it shall be
lost. An employee may not elect to take vacation that exceeds the accrual amount.
Section 4. Vacation choices shall be granted according to department seniority within each shift
or team. Vacation picks will commence one week after shift selection process is completed and
the Association is notified by the Administration. Each employee will be allowed three (3) days
from the last pick to make their choice of vacation or forfeit their seniority. A seniority list will
be posted and employees will be checked off as they complete their pick. It will be each
employee's responsibility to check the list for their time to pick.
11

Section 5. During the annual seniority vacation selection, the maximum vacation period which
may be requested shall be two (2) rotations as defined in Section 7. The Shift Commander shall
notify each shift of the approved vacation schedule as soon as the seniority vacation selection for
each shift has been completed. Additional vacation periods may be requested commencing three
(3) days after notification of the seniority vacation selection schedule. Such additional requests
shall be considered on a first-come first-served basis.
Section 6. The number of employees who are granted vacation on each shift shall be at the sole
discretion of the Chief in maintaining necessary staffing requirements. These staffing
requirements are not necessarily synonymous with the minimum manpower requirements of each
shift.
Section 7. The normal vacation period shall be defined as the number of days of vacation necessary
to vacation from a duty week of an employee's regular work schedule (i.e., four (4) or five (5)
days, depending upon the employee's regular work schedule under Article VII, Section 1. The
parties agree further that only once each year, employees will be allowed to combine their single
vacation days with compensatory days or floating holidays to provide for additional consecutive
paid time off. Such combination shall be subject to the approval of the Chief or his designee and
in keeping with the necessary staffing requirements.
Section 8. Unused vacation pay of deceased employees shall be payable to the surviving spouse
or estate.
Section 9. All vacation selection, once made, may not be cancelled, except in the event of an
emergency. The definition of emergency shall be understood to include lack of available
manpower to meet shift minimums. Vacations may be changed at the request of the officer with
the approval of the Chief. It is understood and agreed that the Chief shall not act in an arbitrary
and capricious manner.
ARTICLE 11 – UNIFORM MAINTENANCE AND WEAPON ALLOWANCE
Section 1. A uniform maintenance allowance of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per year shall be
paid to each employee on the payday prior to the Thanksgiving holiday. This payment shall
include the footwear allowance. Partial payments shall be prorated on months of service.
Section 2. In addition, the City will pay for the cost of any officer's personal items up to a
maximum of Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) per item, damaged, destroyed, or lost while on
duty. If the payment for such item is paid by the City, and at some later date due to court action
an award for the damages is made directly to the officer, such award shall be turned over to the
City up to an amount equal to that which the City paid. The City shall replace or repair an officer’s
duty weapon if damaged, destroyed or lost while on duty.
Section 3. The City shall provide up to an additional Two Hundred Twenty-Five Dollars ($225.00)
per year for maintenance for clothing for members who are normally assigned to a plain-clothes
assignment. Such additional maintenance payment shall be prorated based on length of service in
a plain-clothes assignment. Such payment shall be paid to each employee covered by this section
on the payday prior to the Thanksgiving holiday.

12

Section 4. At the time of initial hire, a Gun Allowance of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00)
for a new gun will be given, with ownership to be retained by the officers. For all other officers,
the City shall, upon the armorer deeming an officer’s gun in need of replacement, select up to a
maximum of three officers in need of a gun replacement per calendar year to issue a Gun
Allowance of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for purposes of assisting such officers with
replacement of their gun. Any officer, who terminates employment during the first year after
receiving any Gun Allowance under this paragraph or is terminated while on probation, will
reimburse the City for the $250.00 Gun Allowance. Any officer who terminates employment or
is terminated during the first two to five years after receiving any Gun Allowance under this
paragraph will reimburse the City for one-half of the $250.00 Gun Allowance. The Muskego
Police Department’s armorer will clean and inspect all handguns at least once per calendar year.
Repairs caused by routine wear will be paid for by the owner of the weapon.
Section 5. If an employee terminates prior to one (1) year of employment, fifty percent (50%) of
the cost of the uniforms provided shall be deducted from the employee's final paycheck. The
employee shall turn in the uniforms to the City on his last working day.
Section 6. Protective Body Armor. The City shall provide to all employees who make a request,
protective body armor, with the minimum standards of protection being a Class II vest. In addition,
the City shall replace these items within a five (5) year time frame. The City will provide an
allowance of up to eight hundred dollars ($800.00) for the cost of the vest, one additional carrier
and ballistic plates of the Officer’s choosing if desired. Any cost resulting from a request by the
employee for additional items or a vest costing more than the allotted amount shall be borne by
the employee making the request. Said additional amount, up to two hundred dollars ($200.00),
may be taken from the Officer’s annual uniform allowance.
ARTICLE 12 -- HEALTH AND WELFARE
Section 1. Life Insurance. The City shall obtain a term group life policy covering all department
personnel.
Employees will be enrolled in the Life Insurance program upon satisfactory completion of thirty
(30) calendar days of employment, wherein employees will be eligible to be enrolled in the Life
Insurance program on the first day of the following month. Effective March 1, 1998, the City
agrees to offer the Wisconsin Retirement Service basic policy.
Section 2. Health Insurance. The Employer shall provide hospital and surgical, major medical,
outpatient and diagnostic coverage during the term of this Agreement.
Section 3. Premium Co-payment. Employees will contribute ten percent (10%) of the applicable
monthly premium for health insurance. These deductions will be made on a pre-tax basis pursuant
to the City’s premium only cafeteria plan. The City will offer a Health Risk Assessment (HRA)
Program to covered employees and their covered spouses. Covered employees and covered
spouses who do not participate in the HRA will pay thirteen percent (13%) of the premium the
following calendar year.
Section 4. Insurance Opt-Out Provision. Employees who elect to waive health coverage shall be
compensated as follows:
If eligible for:

Effective 1/1/09
13

Family and take nothing
Limited Family and take nothing
Single and take nothing
Family and take single
Limited Family and take single
Family and take Limited Family

$400.00 per month
$305.00 per month
$150.00 per month
$280.00 per month
$160.00 per month
$95.00 per month

Section 5. Retiree Health Insurance. The City agrees to enroll retired employees in the same
health plan as the City may have for full-time employees with the retired employee (or widow or
widower) to pay the premium required for said coverage if otherwise required under COBRA.
Section 6. Healthcare Reimbursement Account.
A. Participation in the City's health insurance program ceases at the earliest of the
following:
a. The employee-retiree's attainment of age sixty-five (65), and the
employee/retiree is eligible for Medicare.
b. The employee/retiree's death.
c. Expiration of the employee – retiree’s or surviving spouse’s COBRA rights.
B.

On a quarterly basis, the City shall deposit to the North Shore Bank Health
Reimbursement Account the amount of money that would have been paid in
longevity for that year according to the following schedule:
$10.00 per month after 5 years of continuous employment.
$15.00 per month after 10 years of continuous employment.
$20.00 per month after 15 years of continuous employment.
$25.00 per month after 20 years of continuous employment.
$30.00 per month after 30 years of continuous employment.
Each year when the amount is deposited by the City, a printout shall be provided to
the Association identifying the contribution and the officer whose name the
contribution was made under.

C.

On January 1, the City agrees to deposit into the North Shore Bank Health
Reimbursement Account the value of one sick day based on the top patrol wage rate
for each employee, with this day being subtracted from each employee's sick leave
account. For employees hired during the calendar year, they shall have a sick leave
day subtracted from their sick leave account on December 31 of that year, with the
value of the day being added to the fund.

D.

The City of Muskego and the Muskego Police Association agree to participate in the
North Shore Bank Health Reimbursement Account for Public Sector Labor
Association Employees (the Plan) in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
Plan’s Participation Agreement. The parties hereto designate Security Financial
Resources, Inc. to serve as the Plan Administrator for the Plan, or its successors
14

appointed in accordance with the Plan and Trust documents. The Employer agrees
to contribute to the plan on behalf of eligible employees of the Muskego Police
Association.
Employer contributions to the plan are based on the following:
Longevity /Health Insurance Pay pursuant to Article 12, Section 6, (B) of the
Collective Bargaining Agreement. This contribution shall be deposited into the North
Shore Bank Health Reimbursement Account.
Sick Day Contribution pursuant to Article 12, Section 6, (C) of the Collective
Bargaining Agreement. This contribution shall be deposited into the North Shore
Bank Health Reimbursement Account.
Sick Leave Incentive pursuant to Article 12, Section 6, (E), of the Collective
Bargaining Agreement. This contribution shall be deposited into the North Shore
Bank Health Reimbursement Account.
To reduce the administrative costs and participant fees, the City of Muskego also
agrees to participate in the 457 Deferred Compensation Plan through North Shore
E.

The parties agree the contributions to the North Shore Bank Health Reimbursement
Account will cease on December 31, 2017. Prior to that date, the parties agree to
meet to discuss a mutually agreeable replacement program that is cost-neutral to the
City and is more desirable to the Association. The parties further agree to discuss
how to handle the remaining funds in the current Account. If the parties cannot reach
a mutually acceptable agreement on these topics, on or before June 30, 2017, the
parties will reopen the contract for formal negotiations limited to this topic, and the
current program shall continue until those negotiations are resolved.

F.

Sick Leave Incentive – Employees who have reached the maximum sick leave accrual
level of 720 hours may place fifty (50%) percent of the value of any accumulated but
unused sick leave for the calendar year into the North Shore Bank Health
Reimbursement Account to a maximum of 24 hours. For each employee who, as of
December 31, has reached the maximum sick leave accrual of 720 hours, during the
ensuing calendar year the City shall place Five Dollars ($5.00) into the North Shore
Bank Health Reimbursement Account for each month the employee continues to
maintain the maximum sick leave accrual of 720 hours. An employee must maintain
the maximum sick leave accrual of 720 hours for an entire month to be eligible for
this benefit.
ARTICLE 13 -- PENSION

Section 1. Each employee shall be a participant of the Wisconsin State Retirement Plan as
provided by Wisconsin Statutes and Rules established by the Wisconsin retirement Fund Board.
The Employee will pay one hundred percent (100%) of the required employee contribution.

15

ARTICLE 14 -- SICK LEAVE
Section 1. All full-time employees shall earn and shall be granted sick leave with pay at the rate
of one day per month, accumulative to two thousand (2,000) hours. All employees hired after
01/01/2015 shall have sick leave capped at 960 hours. Employees shall be credited with all sick
leave accrued prior to the effective date of the Agreement. Sick leave cannot be used until earned.
Section 2. Sick leave shall be granted to those employees who are unable to report to work due to
personal illness or injury or exposure to contagious disease.
Section 3. All sick leave credits shall be computed on a whole month basis per the following
formula regardless of date of appointment:
On or before the 16th -- 1st day of the month
On the 17th or thereafter -- 1st day of the following month
Section 4. When an insufficient sick leave balance remains to cover the absence of an employee,
the remainder shall be charged either to compensatory time, accumulated vacation or leave without
pay, at the employee's option.
Section 5. In the event that a paid holiday falls within the week or weeks when the employee is
on sick leave, such holiday will be charged as a paid holiday and not deducted from the employee's
accrued sick leave.
Section 6. While an employee is on paid sick leave, the accrual of sick leave benefits shall continue
during the period of convalescence. Sick leave shall not be accrued for laid off employees or
employees on leave of absences without pay that exceed twenty (20) working days. Employees
shall be allowed to use sick leave if they become ill while on vacation (a doctor's certificate or
other evidence to support this sickness may be required).
Section 7. Whenever an employee is laid off due to lack of work or funds, any accumulated sick
leave shall continue in effect if he is rehired.
Section 8. Use of Sick Leave Credits. If an employee is absent from work for any reason set forth
under Section 2 of this article and at such time has accumulated insufficient sick leave to cover the
time lost, the amount of time lost shall be deducted from current earnings of said employee,
provided, however, that from each month worked during such calendar year by said employee
during which no sick leave is taken, said employee shall be reimbursed for the time he had lost as
a consequence of the insufficient accumulation of sick leave.
Section 9. In order to be granted sick leave with pay, the department head or supervisor or
employee must adhere to the following:
A. Report the reason for absence from work promptly.
B. Keep the Employer informed on one's condition.
C. Permit Employer, at his own cost, to make such medical inquiry or visit as he may
determine necessary.

16

D. Submit a medical certificate for any absence of more than four (4) working days
certifying as to inability to work.
Section 10. Employees hired prior to January 1, 1988, upon termination from City employment,
shall be entitled to pay, at their last base rate, for any accumulated unused sick leave days up to a
total of 960 hours. Those employees hired after January 1, 1988 shall be entitled to pay, at their
last base rate, for any accumulated unused sick leave days up to a total of 720 hours. Upon
termination, employees hired after January 1, 2015 shall be entitled to pay at their base rate for
any unused sick days, at the following level:

Years of Service
Under three (3)
Three (3) – Nine (9)
Ten (10) or more

% of Accumulated
Maximum
0%
25%
50%

Section 11: Extended Leave:
In the event all leave time is exhausted for continued salary during an extended illness or
other medical condition, an employee may request one (1) additional paid leave per
separate major illness in accordance with the following schedule, which is based off an
employee’s length of employment with the City:
Years of Service
One (1)
Two (2)
Three (3)
Four (4)
Five (5)
Six (6)
Seven (7)
Eight (8)
Nine (9)
Ten (10) or more

Maximum Paid Leave Days
6
12
18
24
30
36
42
48
54
60

Section 12. In the case of the death of any employee, any accumulated sick leave days up to one
hundred twenty (120) days shall be paid to the beneficiary of the employee.
Section 13. Willful misuse of sick leave or the willful making of false reports regarding illness
may subject the employee to disciplinary action. Repeated misuse may be just cause for
suspension, demotion or discharge.
Section 14. Time off sick shall not be paid during the first six months of the probationary period,
and termination during that period will result in no sick leave payout. After successful completion
of six months of employment, reimbursement may be made for sick leave up to the amount accrued
from the date of hire, or it may remain in the bank, at the employee's option.

17

Section 15. Time off sick during the second six months of the probationary period shall be paid
and the sick leave bank reduced accordingly.
Section 16. The parties agree that the Chief may require mental or physical examinations of a
police officer, at the expense of the City, only where a reasonable basis for questioning physical
or mental fitness for duty has been demonstrated. The reasonable person standard shall apply
hereto and the Chief further agrees not to be arbitrary or capricious with respect to exercise of his
authority under this Section. In the event an officer elects an opinion by a doctor of his own
choosing, the City agrees to pay the cost of such exam not otherwise covered by insurance. The
parties agree further that only the Chief, Acting Chief in the event of a vacancy in the Chief's
position, or the Police and Fire Commission may order such examination.
ARTICLE 15 – FUNERAL LEAVE
Section 1. In the event of the death of an employee’s spouse, five (5) days leave of absence with
pay shall be granted. In the event of the death of a member of an employee’s immediate family,
three (3) days leave of absence with pay shall be granted. In the event of funerals out of town
(more than 250 miles) an additional one (1) day of absence shall be granted.
Section 2. Immediate family is described as child, stepchild, adopted child, parents, stepparent,
grandparent, grandchild, brother and stepbrother, sister and stepsister, brother-in-law, sister-inlaw, of the employee or his spouse, and the spouse of any of the above children, or any person for
whom the employee is primary caregiver.
If the employee believes that additional bereavement days are necessary, that employee shall be
allowed to take reasonable sick leave for that purpose.
Section 3. In the event of the death of an aunt, uncle or first cousin of employee or employee’s
spouse, one (1) day of absence with pay shall be granted. Verification must be given of death of
family member.
ARTICLE 16 -- PROBATIONARY PERIOD
Section 1. All newly hired employees shall be considered probationary for the first 365 days of
their employment, excluding any time spent in recruit school training. An additional 180 days
extension of the probationary period shall be allowed at the discretion of the Chief, with
notification given to the Association at the time of the extension. Employees sponsored by the City
of Muskego to attend recruit school training shall receive between 75% and 100% of the starting
pay until completion of recruit school training, with such percentage to be determined at the City’s
discretion based upon the merits of the candidate.
Section 2. Continued employment beyond the first 365 days of employment or completion of an
extension of probation shall be evidence of satisfactory completion of probation and such
employee at that time shall be eligible for accrued benefits retroactive to the date of employment.
Section 3. A probationary employee may be terminated without regard for cause and without
recourse to the grievance procedure.
Section 4. New employees shall be eligible for paid holidays after one (1) month of employment.
New employees shall be eligible for health and life insurance benefits on the first day of the month
following the start of employment.
18

Section 5. Employees who have been promoted shall serve a one (1) year evaluation period.
Employees not successfully completing their evaluation period, or requesting a voluntary return to
the position they previously held during their evaluation period, shall return to that position/rank
with no loss of seniority.
ARTICLE 17 -- SENIORITY
Section 1. It shall be the policy of the Employer to recognize seniority within rank and
classification as to layoff.
Section 2. The date an employee is employed or re-employed in a regular position will become
his initial date of continuous employment.
Section 3. Seniority for part-time employees shall be based upon the actual number of hours
worked (i.e., and employee working 20 hours per week shall accrue one-half (1/2) of one (1)
month's seniority credit for each full calendar month worked.)
Section 4. The initial date of continuous employment will be used in all computations involving
length of service for contract-covered items such as seniority, vacation, sick leave, etc.
Section 5. The seniority date of an employee shall be the date of first continuous employment or
the latest date of continuous reemployment as the case may be.
Section 6. The seniority rights of an employee shall continue to accumulate during periods of
layoff, military leave, sick leave, leave of absence and when drawing Worker's Compensation.
Section 7. An employee shall lose his seniority rights for any of the following reasons:
A. When he retires.
B. If he is discharged for just cause.
C. If he is on layoff status for a period in excess of one (1) year.
D. Resignation. (Any employee absent for two (2) consecutive scheduled workdays
without notifying the Employer of the reason for absence and who has no legitimate
reason for being absent from work shall be considered as having resigned.)
E.

Unexcused failure to return to work after the expiration of a vacation period, leave of
absence of period for which Worker's Compensation was paid or failing to report to
work within five (5) days after notice of recall from layoff.
ARTICLE 18 -- LAYOFF AND RECALL

Section 1. If a reduction in employed personnel becomes necessary, the least senior employee
shall be the first person laid off, provided that the remaining employees are capable and qualified
to perform the available work.
Section 2. The last person laid off shall be the first person recalled (if available and desires to
return.)
19

Section 3. All temporary or seasonal employees shall be laid off prior to a regular employee being
laid off.
Section 4. The seniority of an employee, who enters the bargaining unit from a position within
the City but outside of the bargaining unit, without break in continuous service, shall have seniority
rights as follows:
A. They shall retain all accrued seniority for the purpose of all fringe benefits (i.e., sick
leave, vacation, insurance, etc.) provided they meet all other requirements contained
in the applicable section of this Agreement.
B.

They shall be considered new employees for the purpose of seniority in regard to
layoff, recall, job posting and vacation selection.

C.

They shall be placed on the "Salary Schedule" as new employees and shall progress
based upon time in class.
ARTICLE 19 -- MANAGEMENT RIGHTS RESERVED

Section 1. Unless otherwise herein provided, the management of the work and the direction of the
working forces, including the right to hire, promote, demote, or suspend or otherwise discharge
for proper cause and the right to relieve employees from duty because of the lack of work or other
legitimate reason is vested in the Employer.
Section 2. If any action taken by the Employer is proven not to be justified, the employee shall
receive all wages and benefits due for such period of time involved in the matter.
Section 3. The Employer may adopt reasonable rules and amend the same from time to time.
ARTICLE 20 -- CONSTRUCTION OF AGREEMENT
Section 1. The Employer agrees that all conditions of employment pertaining to wages, hours of
work, and general working conditions shall be maintained at no less than the highest minimum
standards in effect at the time of the signing of this Agreement, unless otherwise agreed to in the
course of negotiations.
ARTICLE 21 -- NO STRIKE CLAUSE
Section 1. The Association agrees that for the duration of this Agreement, Association officers,
representatives or employees will not authorize, assist, support or engage in any strike, work
stoppage, slow-down, interruption of work or interference of operations of the Employer. In the
event of any strike, work stoppage, slow-down or interruption or impeding of work, the Employer
shall notify the Association thereof and the Association shall give notice to the employees involved
that they are in violation of this Agreement and should and such strike, work stoppage, walkout or
interruption impeding of work. Failure of the Association to give such notice to the employees
shall be considered in determining whether or not the Association authorized, assisted, supported
or engaged in such prohibited activity.
ARTICLE 22 -- CONDITION OF AGREEMENT
20

Section 1. This Agreement constitutes the entire Agreement between the parties, and no verbal
statement shall supersede any of its provisions.
Section 2. Each party agrees that the other shall not be obligated to bargain collectively with
respect to any subject or matter during the term of this Agreement whether or not such subject or
matter is referred to or covered in the Agreement.
Section 3. If any article of this Agreement or any additions thereto should beheld invalid by
operation of law or by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or if compliance with or enforcement
of any Article or section should be enjoined or restrained by such tribunal, the remainder of the
Agreement and amendments thereto shall not be affected thereby, and the parties hereto shall enter
into immediate collective bargaining negotiations for the purpose of arriving at a mutually
satisfactory replacement for such Article or section.
ARTICLE 23 – PERSONNEL FILES
Section 1. All training certificates or diplomas earned in schools or training that officers attend on
their own time will be placed in their personnel files unless the Chief, after notice to the employee,
determines such inclusion is not in the best interests of the City.
ARTICLE 24 – CANINE OFFICER
Section 1. Should the Department create or maintain the duty assignment of Canine Officer, it
may be eliminated anytime at the discretion of the Chief of Police. The selection of and the
continued service of a Canine Officer is at the discretion of the Chief of Police. Canine Officers
agree to serve in his/her assignment for the duration of the service life of the canine assigned.
Section 2. Canine Officers will provide daily care, grooming, and exercise of his/her canine.
Furthermore, Canine Officers must house/kennel the canine at the Officer’s residence. Housing
and kenneling is subject to periodic inspection by the Department.
Section 3. The Employer will provide, at no cost to the Canine Officer, the following:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

The purchase and training of the canine;
Complete veterinary care of the canine;
Appropriate food supplies;
Necessary grooming equipment and supplies;
Necessary training equipment and supplies;
An outdoor kennel at the Officer’s residence, if it is determined the canine will be
housed outside.
g. Kenneling of the canine while the Officer is on vacation, out of town or otherwise
unable to care for the canine.
Section 4. Canine Officers shall be responsible for costs associated with change of residence, i.e.
kennel/dog house relocation.
Section 5. Canine Officer’s hours/shifts and regular off day schedule will be created and assigned
by the Chief of Police on an annual basis and are not subject to seniority or any selection process.

21

Section 6. Canine Officer will be furnished with a police vehicle for commuting to/from work.
No personal use of the vehicle is authorized.
Section 7. Canine Officer will receive “Specialist Pay” as described in the current bargaining
agreement and receive an additional 6 hours of compensatory time off per month, in order to
compensate for the daily (both work and non-work days)/routine care, feeding and grooming of
the canine.
Section 8. Regular veterinarian visits will be done on duty time with no overtime authorized.
Section 9. Canine Officers, when qualified, may participate in the promotional process. If a
Canine Officer is promoted, s/he will remain a Canine Officer for the assigned canine until the
canine’s retirement, after which the Officer will not be assigned another canine.
Section 10. In the event a Field Training Officer becomes a Canine Officer, s/he will not be
assigned field training duties while responsible for the canine.
Section 11. Upon retirement or removal of the canine, subject to the approval of Police Chief and
at the written request of the Canine Officer, the Canine Officer will be given sole ownership of the
canine and shall assume total responsibility for all costs relating to ownership of the canine.

ARTICLE 25 – SCHOOL DISTRICT OVERTIME
Section 1. On Duty Muskego Police Officers will be utilized for School functions.
Section 2. Officers working at these functions will work outside of their normal duty hours, but
will be in full duty uniform.
Section 3. The rate of pay will be the officer’s normal rate of pay (not overtime wages as called
for in the current contract). It is understood that these hours of work will be paid and cannot be
converted to compensatory time off.
Section 4. Should arrests occur that cannot be handled by on-duty officers working their normal
shift, the school function officer making the arrest will complete the assignment at the overtime
rate of pay for any hours in excess of the scheduled event.
Section 5. Hours worked for the School District shall be distributed as evenly as possible between
those who sign up for the functions.
Section 6. These hours will be posted within the Department on a separate sign-up sheet providing
as much advance notice as possible. The hours earned will be separate from all other contractual
overtime as allowed under the Special Duty exception to the FLSA, and be calculated from the
start to the end of the school year.
ARTICLE 26 – TERMINATION
This Agreement shall become effective January 1, 2020 and shall remain in full force and effect
until and including December 31, 2022, and shall be automatically renewed from year to year
22

thereafter unless negotiations are initiated by either party prior to October 1, 2022, or any first of
October of any effective year of the Agreement thereafter.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed the Agreement on this ________
day of ____________________, 2019.
CITY OF MUSKEGO

MUSKEGO POLICE ASSOCIATION

By: ______________________________
Kathy Chiaverotti, Mayor

By: _____________________________
By: _____________________________
By: _____________________________
By: _____________________________
Jim Schumitsch, Business Agent
WPPA

23

APPENDIX ‘A’
WAGE SCALE
City of Muskego Police
Bi-weekly wage scale
Effective Payroll 01/01/2020 (addition of 5-year step, $1,500 adjustment to Detective and
Specialists Schedule, and 1%)

Patrol Officer
(Yearly)

Start

1 Year

2 Year

3 Year

5 Year

$2,301.78
($59,846)

$2,540.59
($66,055)

$2,714.34
($70,573)

$2,892.30
($75,200)

$2,950.57
($76,715)

Specialists

$3,116.40
(SRO/CRO/Drug Unit/Canine Officer)

(Yearly-$81,026)

Detective

(Yearly-$83,023)

$3,193.18

Effective Payroll 01/01/2021 (1%)

Patrol Officer
(Yearly)

Start

1 Year

2 Year

3 Year

5 Year

$2,324.80
($60,445)

$2,566.00
($66,716)

$2,741.48
($71,278)

$2,921.22
($75,952)

$2,980.08
($77,482)

Specialists

$3,147.56
(SRO/CRO/Drug Unit/Canine Officer)

(Yearly-$81,837)

Detective

(Yearly-$83,853)

$3,225.11

Effective Payroll 07/04/2021 (1.50% for 5-year Step, Detective, and Specialists; 1% for all
others)

Patrol Officer
(Yearly)

Start

1 Year

2 Year

3 Year

5 Year

$2,348.05
($61,049)

$2,591.66
($67,383)

$2,768.89
($71,991)

$2,950.43
($76,711)

$3,024.78
($78,644)

Specialists

$3,194.78
(SRO/CRO/Drug Unit/Canine Officer)

(Yearly-$83,064)

Detective

(Yearly-$85,962)

$3,273.49

24

Effective Payroll 01/1/2022 (1%)

Patrol Officer
(Yearly)

Start

1 Year

2 Year

3 Year

5 Year

$2,371.53
($61,660)

$2617.58
($68,057)

$2,796.58
($72,711)

$2,979.93
($77,478)

$3,055.03
($79,431)

Specialists

$3,226.72
(SRO/CRO/Drug Unit/Canine Officer)

(Yearly-$83,895)

Detective

(Yearly-$85,962)

$3,306.22

Effective Payroll 07/03/2022 (1.50% for 5-year Step, Detective, and Specialists; 1% for all others)

Patrol Officer
(Yearly)

Start

1 Year

2 Year

3 Year

5 Year

$2,395.25
($62,277)

$2,643.76
($68,738)

$2,824.55
($73,438)

$3,009.73
($78,253)

$3,100.86
($80,622)

Specialists

$3,275.12
(SRO/CRO/Drug Unit/Canine Officer)

(Yearly-$85,153)

Detective

(Yearly-$87,251)

$3,355.81

25

SIDE LETTER OF AGREEMENT ON HEALTH INSURANCE
The City will provide health insurance for all bargaining unit members of the same plan design,
and consistent with the health insurance provided uniformly to all other City employees excluding
any differences bargained and included in the Collective Bargaining Agreement. If this side letter
is later determined to be a prohibited subject of bargaining this will represent the non-binding
intent of the City.
FOR THE CITY OF MUSKEGO

FOR THE ASSOCIATION

_____________________________

__________________________

_____________________________

__________________________

_____________________________

__________________________

__________________________

26

SIDE LETTER OF AGREEMENT ON STUDY COMMITTEE
The parties agree to create a Study Committee made up of representatives of the Association and
Management to consider a Fitness Program as part of the City-wide Wellness Program under the
Employee Handbook. The Committee may make recommendations for creating such a program
during the term of this contract, but no program covering represented employees will be adopted
without the mutual consent of the parties.
FOR THE CITY OF MUSKEGO

FOR THE ASSOCIATION

_____________________________

__________________________

_____________________________

__________________________

_____________________________

__________________________

__________________________

33558329_2

27
