08/09/2022
2025-01
22-CON-01-2025
41922

AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE BOARD OF EDUCATION OF
ONTARIO LOCAL SCHOOLS
AND THE
ONTARIO FEDERATION OF TEACHERS
LOCAL #1703
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF TEACHERS
AFL/CIO
JULY 1, 2022 - JUNE 30, 2025

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
………………………………………………………….. 01
………………………………………………………….. 03
………………………………………………………….. 04
………………………………………………………….. 05
……………………………………………………….…. 06
A. RECOGNITION…………………………………... 06
B. CHALLENGES……………………………………. 06
C. DEFINITIONS…………………………………….. 07
D. OTHER ORGANIZATIONS………………….…. 08
E. DUES CHECK- 0FF……………………………... 08
F. AGENCY SHOP……………………………….….. 09
CLARIFICATION…………………………………………….. 10
CONFORMITY TO LAW…………………………………….. 12
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE………………………………..... 12
TEACHER TRANSFER POLICY……………………………. 16
LUNCH PERIOD……………………………………………... 16
ATTENDANCE PREMIUM………………………………….. 17
Leave ………………………………………………………….... 17
A. Sick_Leave………………………………………….. 17
B. Severance_Pay……………………………………… 19
C. Personal Leave …………………………………….. 20
D. Professional_Meetings ……………………………... 22
E. Attendance at Federation Meetings ………………. 23
F. Maternity_Leave …………………………………….24
G. General Leave ……………………………………… 25
H. Limited Leave ……………………………………… 25
I. Sabbatical Leave ……………………………………. 26
J. Assault Leave ……………………………………….. 27
K. Notification of Return. ……………………………...28
PERSONNEL FILES………………………………………….. 28
NON-TEACHING DUTIES..…………………………………. 29
CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL TEACHERS…….. 29
PUPILS’ REPORT CARD MARKS……………………….... 34
ACADEMIC FREEDOM…………………………………….. 34
DISCIPLINE CODE………………………………………….... 35
HIRING OF SUBSTITUTE TEACHERS………………….... 36
HIRING OF RETIRED TEACHERS………………………….37
LENGTH OF SCHOOL DAY AND SCHOOL YEAR……….38
DAILY WORK SCHEDULE………………………………….. 39
TUTORING/REMEDIATION……………………………….. 40
CLASS SIZE LIMITATIONS………………………………….41
CLASS LOADS…..…………………………………………….. 41
CURRICULUM/IN-SERVICE TRAINING.……………….... 42
JOB DESCRIPTIONS……………………………………….... 43
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT………………………... 43
NON-TENURED / TENURED EMPLOYEES…………….... 44
REDUCTION IN FORCE………….…………………………. 46
MEDICAL EXAMINATION………………………………….. 51

Table of Contents
Signature Page
Treasurer’s Certificate
Contract Length
Preamble
Article I

Article II
Article III
Article IV
Article V
Article VI
Article VII
Article VIII

Article IX
Article X
Article XI
Article XII
Article XIII
Article XIV
Article XV
Article XVI
Article XVII
Article XVIII
Article XIX
Article XX
Article XXI
Article XXII
Article XXIII
Article XXIV
Article XXV
Article XXVI
Article XXVII

1

Article XXVIII
Article XXIX

AIDS POLICY……………………………………………...........52
HEALTH INSURANCE…………………………………..….....53
A. Full-Time Employees…………………………………....53
1. HOSPITALIZATION…….......………………........53
2. DENTAL…………......………………………….….54
3. VISION …..……………………………………..….54
B. Hospitalization Plan Options ………………………….. 55
C. Minimum Value Hospitalization Plan.………..………. 55
D. Retiring Employees Insurance Termination……...…....55
E. Long-Term Substitutes Eligibility……………………....55
F. Insurance Liaison…………………………………...........56
Article XXX
LIFE INSURANCE………………………………….……........ 56
Article XXXI
ANNUITIES…………………………………………………..… 56
Article XXXII
FEDERATION REPRESENTATION ON COMMITTEES…57
Article XXXIII
FEDERATION DAYS…………………………………………..57
Article XXXIV
WORK STOPPAGES………………………………………….. 58
Article XXXV
AMENDMENT TO THIS AGREEMENT..…………………...58
Article XXXVI
NEGOTIATIONS PROCEDURE …………………………......58
A. STATEMENT OF PRINCIPAL…………………….…59
B. SUBJECTS OF NEGOTIATIONS………………….....59
C. REQUESTS FOR NEGOTIATIONS………………….59
D. CHOICE OF FORMAT………………………………. 60
E. NEGOTIATION MEETINGS………………………... 61
F. REPRESENTATION…………………………………. 61
G. INFORMATION…………………………………….….61
H. NEWS RELEASES…………………………………......61
I. AGREEMENT………………………………………… 61
J. DISAGREEMENT……………………………………...62
Article XXXVII
SALARY SCHEDULE REGULATIONS…………….………. 63
Article XXXVIII
EXTRACURRICULAR SALARY REGULATIONS.…….…. 65
Salary Indices …………………………………………………………………………….. 66
Salary Schedule 2022-2023 …………………………………………………………….... 67
Salary Schedule 2023-2024 …………………………………………………………….... 68
Salary Schedule 2024-2025………………………………………………………………. 69
Extracurricular Salary Indices………………………………..……………………….… 70
Extracurricular Salary Schedule 2022-2023………….………………….........................71
Extracurricular Salary Schedule 2023-2024………….………………….........................75
Extracurricular Salary Schedule 2024-2025……………………………………………..79

2

3

4

NEGOTIATIONS
This agreement between the Ontario Federation of Teachers and the Ontario Local Board of
Education pertaining to all items, monetary and non-monetary, shall be for a period,
beginning July 1, 2022 and ending June 30, 2025.

5

PREAMBLE
The purpose of this agreement is to set forth the intents and terms thereof agreed to by the
Ontario Local Board of Education and the Ontario Federation of Teachers as follows:

ARTICLE I
Table of Contents 1

A - RECOGNITION
1. RECOGNITION OF FEDERATION

The Ontario Local Board of Education recognizes the Ontario Federation of Teachers,
Local 1703, American Federation of Teachers, AFL-CIO, as the sole and exclusive
bargaining representative for all classroom teachers in the Ontario Local School District
on matters of salary, fringe benefits and terms and conditions of employment as
addressed in this negotiated agreement.
2. RECOGNITION OF BOARD
In order to carry out its responsibility for the development and operation of programs
providing the best educational opportunity for the Ontario Local School District, the
Federation recognizes that the Board has the responsibility and authority to manage and
direct in behalf of the public, all operational activities of the school district to the full
extent authorized by the law.
3. RECOGNITION OF SUPERINTENDENT
The Federation and Board recognize the Superintendent as the chief executive officer and
primary professional advisor of the board.
Table of Contents 1

B – CHALLENGES

1. Only bona fide teacher organizations may challenge the Ontario Federation of teachers
for the right to represent the bargaining unit. If such a teacher’s organization wishes to
challenge the Ontario Federation of Teachers for such rights, that organization must
notify the Ontario Federation of Teachers during the third week of September
commencing with September, 1985. The challenge must be through a petition which
6

contains at least 50% of the regular certificated staff exclusive of administrators. After
receiving such notice and with little delay, no more than two representatives of the
Ontario Federation and two representatives of the challenging organization shall meet to
establish policies and procedures for an election. No challenge shall be valid except as
provided herein.
2. If no notice is received pursuant to Article I B, the Ontario Federation of Teachers shall
remain the sole and exclusive representative of the bargaining unit for a period of three
additional years. Future negotiated agreements will extend no longer than the time
remaining in the three year recognition period.
3. If, as a result of the procedure stated in sections A & B above of the Article, an election is
to be held, that election shall be held during the second week of December commencing
with 1987 under the direction and supervision of the American Arbitration Association in
accordance with ground rules to be negotiated between the Ontario Federation of
Teachers and the challenging organization. The cost of the election will be borne by the
challenging organization.
4. The Ontario Local Board of Education will recognize the winner of an election as the
sole and exclusive agent for regular certificated staff which includes teachers, librarians,
and guidance counselors. Administrators are excluded.
5. The winner of such an election will be the organization which obtains 50% plus 1 (simple
majority) of those voting.
6. The Ontario Local Board of Education recognizes that the present contract has been
negotiated with the Ontario Federation of Teachers and if the Ontario Federation of
Teachers is not re-elected as the bargaining agent, the contract will become null and void.
Table of Contents 1

C - DEFINITIONS

1. Wherever the term “Board” is used, it is to mean the Ontario Local Board of Education.
2. Wherever the term “Federation” is used, it is to mean the Ontario Federation of Teachers,
affiliated with the Ohio Federation of Teachers and the American Federation of Teachers,
AFL-CIO.
3. Whenever the singular is used, it is to include the plural.
7

4. When the term “superintendent” is used, it shall refer to the superintendent or his/her
delegated representative. When “principal” is used, it shall refer to the principal or
his/her delegated representative.
5. Whenever the term “teacher” is used, it shall mean all members of the bargaining unit as
defined in Article II, #5.
Table of Contents 1

D - OTHER ORGANIZATIONS

Teachers shall have the privilege of joining any teachers’ organization, but such membership
shall not be a requirement of employment. No undue pressure shall be applied to any
certificated teacher to join a particular teachers’ group. No member of the faculty shall be
influenced against joining or continuing membership in any such organization by any person
in a supervisory or administrative capacity.

Table of Contents 1

E - DUES CHECK- 0FF

1. The Board shall deduct Federation dues from the second paycheck of each month for
each employee from whom it receives a written authorization to do so. Such deductions
shall continue until the Treasurer of the Board is in receipt of a written revocation of such
authorization from the employee; or until the employee’s services are terminated. Forms
shall be provided for such purpose. Enrollments may be filed monthly not later than the
tenth of the month. The treasurer of the Board will make reasonable effort to notify the
Union upon written receipt of revocation, however, failure to provide such notices does
not constitute grounds for continuation of the deduction or payment.
2. Monies from dues collections accompanied by a list of employees from whom they have
been deducted shall be transmitted to the Federation not later than 15 days. If dues are
not deducted because of a clerical mistake, the Federation will notify the Treasurer and
the proper deductions shall be made the following month.
3. The form provided shall read:

8

I hereby authorize and direct the Board of Education of Ontario Local Schools,
through its Treasurer, to deduct from the portion of my salary due me each month the
amount as certified by the Ontario Federation of Teachers as the current rate of dues.
Such deduction is to start after the date of this authorization.
I further authorize and direct you to transfer and pay such sum as determined by the
Ontario Federation of Teachers’ Fair Share Fee Procedures.

____________________________________________
Employee Signature
Effective Date______________________________________________
Social Security Number______________________________________
Position___________________________________________________
Last Name______________________First_____________________Initial______
Address_________________________________________________
__________________________________________________
Building________________________________________________

4. Organizational dues deductions shall be the sole and exclusive right of the bargaining
representative.
Table of Contents 1

1.

F - AGENCY SHOP

All members of the bargaining unit who are not members of the Federation shall pay a
fair share fee to the Federation in accordance with the following requirements:
a. The fair share fee shall be automatically deducted from the pay beginning with the
first payroll or 60 calendar days after the employee’s first day of service, or the
effective date of this agreement, whichever is later.
b. The fair share fee shall not be more than the dues paid by members of the Federation
not including initiation fees, fines, assessments, or optional payments.
c. The Federation shall provide the Treasurer with a list of names of those unit
employees who are not members of the Federation and the amount of the fair share
fee to be deducted for each.
9

d. The Federation shall develop and provide a written copy to each employee of an
internal rebate procedure which conforms to Section 4117.09 of the O.R.C. and other
applicable law.
e. The Federation shall indemnify the Board and its members and hold them harmless
from any liability, damages, or expenses including legal fees resulting from legal or
administrative claim brought against them as a result of this provision.

ARTICLE II
Table of Contents 1

CLARIFICATION

A. Electronic copies of all school Board minutes shall be available to the Federation as soon
as they are approved by the Board action.
B. Electronic copies of the Board agenda and addendum(s) of each regular and special
Board meeting shall be available to the president of the Federation or his/her assigned
representative when completed. The Federation president shall be advised as soon as
possible of all special Board meetings.
C. Superintendents, principals, or secretaries shall not collect dues for any teacher
organization.
D. The Federation agrees to represent equally all teachers without regard to membership or
participation or association with the activities of any teacher’s organization and to give
equal consideration and representation to any teacher not affiliated with a teacher’s
organization.
E. The bargaining unit includes guidance counselors, special education teachers, remedial
teachers, certificated school librarians, and classroom teachers.
F. A list of all bills presented for payment at each regular Board of Education meeting shall
be available to the Federation president, or his/her representative, at Board meetings.
G. The Superintendent, or his/her designee, and a Federation representative shall meet at the
request of either party to discuss any matters pertaining to the terms of the negotiated
agreement. Other labor relation problems which are mutually agreed to may be discussed
at said meeting. Similar meetings may take place at the building level between the
principal and the Federation building representative. An agenda shall be prepared
10

twenty-four (24) hours in advance by the requesting party and a copy will be provided to
all other participants.
H. A place on the agenda of building teacher meetings shall be reserved for the Federation
building representative for announcements. Sufficient notice shall be given to the
principal so that this may be added to the agenda.
I. The Federation shall place on the agenda of each meeting any matters brought to its
attention for its consideration by the administration.
J. Whenever members of the bargaining unit are mutually scheduled by the parties to
participate in conferences, meetings, or in negotiations concerning the collective
negotiations agreement, they shall suffer no loss in pay, providing the meeting has been
authorized by the Superintendent of Schools. Normally, all such conferences, meetings,
and negotiations are to occur after scheduled school hours.
K. The Federation agrees to distribute copies of this agreement to all Federation members,
administrators, and board members, within twenty (20) days following ratification of the
agreement. The Federation further agrees to provide copies to all new teachers at the
time of employment. The cost of and preparation of the new contract will be the
responsibility of the Federation.
L. The Federation shall be provided adequate bulletin board space in the teachers’ lounge of
each school for the posting of official notices and other official materials relating to
Federation activities. The bulletin board space allocated shall be identified with the name
“Federation.” The school delegate or designee shall have the responsibility of posting
materials on the bulletin board. Board notice of staff vacancy or pertinent information
that originates within the Ontario Local School System about our teachers may be posted
by the building principal.
M. Only the Federation shall have the right to place Federation related material in the
mailboxes of teachers, principals, and bargaining unit members. Placement shall be
made by the building representative or his/her designee.
N. The Board shall permit the president of the Federation or his/her designated local
representative to visit the local schools for any purposes relating to the terms and
conditions of this agreement, so long as the educational program is not interrupted.
11

O. Information such as statistics, and records deemed to be relevant to negotiations, or
reasonably necessary for the proper enforcement of the terms of these policies, shall be
made available by the Board of Education to the Federation upon its request with the
exception of personal records.
P. Upon request, the Federation shall be permitted to hold meetings within the school
buildings before or after school hours.
Q. A block of time will be scheduled for the OFT luncheon on the new teacher’s day.

ARTICLE III
Table of Contents 1

CONFORMITY TO LAW

A. If any provision of this agreement is or shall be at any time contrary to law, then such
provisions shall not be considered a part of this policy; it being understood that the
parties shall then negotiate differences in accordance with law.
B. In the event that any provisions of this agreement shall become contrary to law, all other
provisions of this agreement shall continue in full force and effect.
C. Either party may request to open discussion on new legislation affecting teachers.

ARTICLE IV
Table of Contents 1

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

A. DEFINITION
A grievance is a complaint by an employee wherein it is alleged that (1) there is a
violation, misinterpretation, or misapplication of the provisions of this agreement, or that
(2) his/her health or safety is jeopardized. Under this definition an alleged grievance may
be taken to final arbitration (Step 5).
An alleged violation, misinterpretation, or misapplication of adopted Board policy not
covered by this agreement may also be registered. A grievance in this category may not
be taken beyond the Board level (Step 4).
As used in this article, the term “employee” shall mean (1) an individual employee, or (2)
a group of employees having the same grievance, or (3) the Federation when not in lieu
12

of an individual’s problem.
B. PROCEDURE
Grievances shall be presented and adjusted in accordance with the following procedures:
1. INFORMAL PROCEDURE
Either the teacher with a grievance or the local Federation representative, or both,
may first discuss the matter with the principal or administrator concerned, with
the objective of resolving the matter informally.
2. FORMAL PROCEDURE
Step 1 - In the event the matter is not resolved informally, four copies of the
grievance stated in writing shall be filed with the building principal. Within five
school days in session the principal shall set a time to meet with the party or
parties concerned and a decision shall be reached within that five school-day
period. The principal shall state his decision in writing, together with the
supporting reasons, and shall furnish three copies to the Federation representative.

Step 2 - Informal meeting: An informal meeting with the grievance committee
chairperson and the Superintendent to review the opinion will be held within three
school-days after a formal grievance is filed to attempt to resolve the grievance.

Step 3 - Should no satisfactory decision be reached in the above procedure, all
facts shall be presented to the Superintendent. All action taken heretofore shall be
presented in written form to the Superintendent. The Superintendent or his
delegated representative shall set a time and meet within five school days in
session with the principal, the employee concerned, and the Federation
representative. The Superintendent shall make a decision within five school days
in session following that meeting. The decision shall be made in writing, together
with supporting reasons, to the aggrieved teacher, to the Federation
representative, and to the principal or administrator involved.

Step 4 - Failing satisfactory settlement at Step 3, the aggrieved may appeal to the
13

Board of Education. The request for Board consideration must be written and all
procedures heretofore explained. A meeting of the Board, the Superintendent, the
principal, the aggrieved, and the Federation representative shall be held within
five school days in session after the written request has been received to consider
the request. The Board shall make a decision within ten school days in session.
This decision shall be made in writing, together with supporting reasons, to the
aggrieved teacher, to the Federation representative, and to the principal or
administrator involved. Such decision shall be signed by the president of the
Board or a delegated member.

Step 5 - If the Board is unable at Step 4 to resolve the grievance to the satisfaction
of the aggrieved, written notification shall be sent to the Board. The Board shall
then employ the services of the American Arbitration Association or Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service for the purpose of obtaining a resolution.
Either party may contact the American Arbitration Association or Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service and shall notify the other party that such
action has been taken. If the services of the American Arbitration Association are
employed, the Board requests under this section (Article IV, Step 5) that the
American Arbitration Association supply to both the Board and the aggrieved a
list of seven (7) arbitrators from which an arbitrator will be selected. This
arbitrator shall be selected by the alternate striking of names from the list until
only one name remains. To determine which party shall strike first, a coin shall
be flipped. Representatives of the Board and Federation shall meet at times
established by the arbitrator for the purpose of hearing the grievance. The
arbitrator shall prepare a written statement of his decision for the parties. The
decision of the arbitrator shall be final. All parties to the grievance shall comply
with the decision of the arbitrator.

C. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. If a grievance is not initiated within thirty calendar days of the cause for grievance, it
14

shall no longer be considered a grievance under this agreement.
2. When hearings are held during school hours, all employees who are directly involved
at the hearing shall be excused for the purpose with pay.
3. No employee shall be placed in jeopardy or be subject to reprisal for having followed
this grievance procedure.
4. A grievance filed due to health and safety shall be accompanied by a bona fide
statement from one medical doctor. This statement must be submitted after Step 2 of
the formal grievance procedure.
5. No employee at any stage of the grievance shall be required to meet with any
administrator concerning the grievance without a Federation representative.
6. If a grievance arises from the action of authority higher than that of the principal of a
school, the aggrieved may present such grievance directly to the authority involved.
In such cases, the building principal shall be apprised of the grievance and its final
disposition.
7. If the grievance is not satisfactorily resolved at this meeting, the aggrieved may
proceed to the next step.
8. Failure of the party with whom the grievance is registered to observe the specified
time limits shall automatically advance a grievance to the next step unless mutually
agreed upon.
9. The time limits specified in this procedure may be altered, in any specific instance, by
mutual agreement in writing.
10. Cost of employing the services of the American Arbitration Association or Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service shall be incurred by the party against whom the
arbitrator rules.
11. It is understood that any teacher who is not a member of the Federation or has not
expressed a desire to be represented by it shall have the right to present grievances
and appeals on his/her own behalf as an individual.
12. An appeal by the aggrieved of a decision at any step of the procedure must be made
within ten school days after a decision has been rendered. Failure to appeal shall
denote acceptance of a decision and such decision shall thereafter be finding on the
15

aggrieved.
13. A grievance filed with less than five school days in session shall be processed,
according to the grievance procedure, within the next five days in session or
administrative work days.
14. Should a grievance be filed which involves a second staff member, that staff member
shall be given a copy of the grievance filed by the first party.

ARTICLE V
Table of Contents 1

TEACHER TRANSFER POLICY

A. Each teacher is guaranteed the right to apply for a transfer to another grade or school as
vacancies occurs. Transfers shall be based upon consideration of qualifications as to field
or grade level, on seniority in the Ontario Local School system, and recommendation of
principals concerned and the Superintendent of Schools.
B. All OFT vacancies and new teaching positions shall be sent electronically to all OFT
members.
C. No appointment may be made until transfer requests for existing openings have been
considered.
D. Requests for transfer shall be made in writing to the office of the Superintendent within
five school days after announcement has been made of the vacancy of the position.
Forms shall be provided by the Superintendent.
E. Applications for transfer shall be made in duplicate, and the teacher shall be given a dated
copy.
F. A file of all transfer requests shall be maintained in the office of the Superintendent. This
applies only to the position that is open.
G. All notices of transfer shall be in writing from the office of the Superintendent to the
teacher involved.

ARTICLE VI
Table of Contents 1

LUNCH PERIOD
16

Every teacher shall have a duty-free lunch period of at least thirty minutes.

ARTICLE VII
Table of Contents 1

ATTENDANCE PREMIUM

Each teacher having not used any personal leave shall receive a premium of $300.
The premium(s) shall be included with the second paycheck in July. Charges shall be made
against the sick leave and personal leave premium as follows:
For sick leave, $125 dollars shall be deducted from the $300 dollar for the
First two sick leave days used and the remaining $50 for the third day.
Sick Leave Premium
Personal Leave Premium
1st Day
$125
1st Day
$150
nd
nd
$125
2 Day
$150
2 Day
3rd Day
$ 50
Total
$300
Total $300
For personal leave, $150 Dollars shall be deducted from the $300 dollar premium for
each personal leave day used. (SEE Article VIII, Leave, Sections C., 3 for the
possibility of additional pay for unused personal leave days.)

In no case shall the deduction(s) exceed $300. No deductions shall be made for days when
schools are closed due to inclement weather and/or other unforeseen difficulties or events. A
teacher using ten or more days of sick leave will not qualify for the personal leave premium.
Perfect attendance and personal leave premium shall be calculated each year from July 1st
through June 30th. To be eligible to receive the attendance premium, an employee must be
under an employment contract during the entire school year. Teachers who retire in May or
June will be considered eligible for the attendance premium.

ARTICLE VIII
Table of Contents 1

LEAVE

A. SICK LEAVE
One and one-fourth days of sick leave may be accumulated each month for a total of
fifteen days in one school year.
Sick leave shall be accumulated for a total of 450 days, with accumulation beyond 300
days beginning July 1, 1999.
17

Sick leave is granted for the following reasons:
1. Illness or injury to the employee;
2. Illness or injury in the immediate family; is, spouse, children, father, mother;
employee’s in-laws and grandchildren (if employee is legal guardian of
grandchild);
3. Death in the immediate family as stated above, as well as sister, brother, in-laws,
nephew, niece, aunt, uncle, cousin, grandchildren or grandparents;
4. One day per school calendar year for attendance at the funeral of a person not
related to the employee;
5. Pregnancy and/or childbirth in accordance with mandates of current law.
Pregnancy is defined as the date of conception through child birth and will be
treated as any other illness. Maternity is defined as the period after the birth of a
child. The adoption procedure is utilized based on the following language: The
physical acquisition of a child for adoption begins with the use of two personal
leave days, if needed for such things as travel. Any days beyond that time, must
be used as sick leave days. If one personal leave day has been used prior to the
physical acquisition of a child for adoption, the second personal leave day must be
used for the initial day of travel. If both personal leave days have already been
used prior to the physical acquisition, sick leave days must be used for the initial
day of travel, if that number of days is accumulated. Sick leave use for
maternity/adoption is limited to (60) sixty paid days minus any days used under
pregnancy leave for the same pregnancy. Maternity/Adoption leave may be used
in combination with unpaid days and sick leave up to the maximum number of
weeks allowable under FMLA.

If the principal does not receive a call at the end of any school day during which a teacher is
out due to illness, it will be assumed that the teacher will be back on the job the following
school day.

A teacher with less than (5) five accumulated days of sick leave at the start of the school year
18

shall be advanced the difference between their accumulated balance and (5) five days if
needed and requested by the teacher. A teacher who begins the school year with at least (5)
accumulated sick leave days will not be advanced sick leave days during the school year.

Any teacher who exceeds 100 sick leave days in a school year or 100 consecutive days is
required to apply for disability with the State Teacher’s Retirement System in order to
continue receiving payment for sick leave. If disability retirement is awarded by STRS, it
must be accepted by the employee.

The Superintendent of schools may require a teacher to furnish a written, signed statement on
forms prescribed by the Board to justify the use of sick leave. If medical attention is
required, the employee’s statement shall list the name and address of the attending physician
and the dates when he or she was consulted. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
waive the physician-patient relationship provided by law.

Any abuse of sick leave policy will result in non-payment of the delinquent teacher’s salary
for the duration of employment in question. The Superintendent or his delegated
representative shall investigate such absence and make a written report of such findings. The
employee involved and the Superintendent shall confer on the report. A recommendation
shall then be made to the Board of Education with a recommendation for action.

Falsification or abuse of sick leave shall be grounds for disciplinary action, including
termination. These sick leave provisions shall be executed in accordance with the Ohio
Revised Code 3319.141.

B. SEVERANCE PAY

Table of Contents 1

Severance pay shall be a one-time, lump sum payment to eligible employees according to
the following provisions:
1. ELIGIBILITY
To be eligible for severance pay, an employee must meet the following criteria:
19

a. The individual must retire from the school system.
b. Retirement is defined as disability or service retirement under any state or
municipal retirement system in this state.
c. The individual must be eligible for disability or service retirement as of the last
day of employment.
d. The individual must within 120 days of last day of employment with Ontario
Local Schools, prove acceptance into the retirement system by providing a copy
of his/her first retirement check or an official letter from STRS verifying the
individual’s retirement. This time frame shall be extended in cases where failure
to meet the 120 day limit is the fault of the State Teachers Retirement System.
e. Must not have less than ten years of service with Ontario Local Schools, the state,
or its political subdivisions.
f. Must sign for severance check certifying all eligibility criteria have been met.
2. BENEFIT CALCULATION
The amount of benefit due an employee shall be calculated by:
a. Multiplying the employee’s accrued but unused sick leave by 22.22%.
b. Multiplying the product times the per diem rate of pay appropriated for that
individual’s placement on the salary schedule. For the purpose of computing
severance pay only, the daily rate of pay as a teacher shall be computed by
excluding supplemental pay
3. PAYMENT OF SEVERANCE PAY
Checks for severance pay shall be issued within thirty days after the employee proves
he/she has received and cashed the first retirement check or has demonstrated that
he/she has met the above criteria, whichever comes first. Severance pay shall be a one
time, lump sum payment for eligible employees as applicable, in the District’s
Medical Expense Reimbursement Plan and Trust / 403(b) Special Pay Plan (the
“Conversion Plan”).

C.

PERSONAL LEAVE

Table of Contents 1

Teachers are entitled to two (2) personal leave days, without restriction, from July 1st of
20

each year through June 30th of the following year.
A teacher hired during the school year is eligible for only one (1) personal leave day.
This condition applies only during the first year of service.
The following exceptions apply:
1. When possible, application for personal leave shall be made at least five (5)
school days prior to the first day for which the leave is requested. In case of
emergency, the teacher shall give the application to the principal within one (1)
day after returning.
2. Personal leave may be taken in full or half day increments.
3. Unused personal leave days may accumulate up to a maximum of four (4)
accumulated days in addition to the two (2) days provided annually for a
maximum total of six (6) personal leave days at any one time. In order to carry
over personal leave days, employees will need to complete an Attendance
Premium waiver form provided by the Treasurer’s office by the end of the school
year, indicating the portion of unused Personal Leave days they want to carry
over. Employees may elect to waive attendance payment for any or all unused
personal leave days. The waived days will be carried over to the next year. Any
days not waived by the end of the school year will be paid in the Attendance
Premium. If no waiver form is completed by the end of the school year, the
Attendance Premium will be paid for any unused personal leave days. Once the
Attendance Premium is paid, the employee cannot subsequently change their
mind and waive the payment. The purpose of allowing the accumulation of
unused personal leave days is to eliminate requests for dock days. Dock days will
only be approved by the Superintendent in dire situations, under extreme
circumstances, or for Family Medical Leave Act purposes.
4. The teacher will not use personal days for purposes of gainful employment.
5. The teacher will not be charged with a personal leave day if subpoenaed as a third
party. This will be classified as a paid court day.
6. Personal leave days may not be used in lieu of sick leave.
7. Any abuse of personal leave shall result in loss of pay for that leave.
21

8. The granting of personal leave is contingent on the availability of a substitute,
except for cases of emergency.
9. Except in cases of emergency, personal leave will be approved on a first come,
first served basis or in the order that the requests are received.
10. It is the teacher’s responsibility to monitor their personal leave usage. If they use
more personal days in a year than they have available, even if the request form is
approved by their administrator, the teacher will be docked for the additional day
used.

D. PROFESSIONAL MEETINGS

Table of Contents 1

Certificated staff members who on days when school is in session, wish to participate in
professional meetings, workshops, visitation, conferences, and clinics pertaining to their
particular teaching fields as listed on regular and supplemental contracts, shall submit to
their building principals, at least three weeks in advance of the scheduled activity, three
(3) copies of a written request to attend. This request shall state the nature of the event,
the dates when attendance is required, where the event is to take place, the date of the
request itself, and the name of the employee making the request. Building principals shall
forward one copy of the request for the Superintendent’s approval. Such request shall not
be granted for attendance at meetings of teachers’ organizations.
Approval of such leave shall be granted pending consideration of the following:
1. The activity must pertain to the grade or subject area in which the teacher
submitting the request is working.
2. If a substitute teacher is available.
3. When more than one teacher is involved in such a request, leave shall be granted
on approval of the principal.
4. Attendance at such meetings shall be limited to two days.
5. Meals will only be reimbursed if there is a required overnight stay.
Reimbursement of meals will be at a rate not to exceed $40 daily (and not more
than $20 per meal). Itemized receipts for meals must accompany the request for
reimbursement filed with the Treasurer’s office.
22

6. Under no condition will reimbursement be given for entertainment or alcohol.
7. Personal expenses not directly related to conference, workshop, seminars, etc. will
not be reimbursed.
8. Receipts for other reimbursed expenses, such as parking, must accompany the
request for reimbursement filed with the Treasurer’s office.
9. Approval to attend such meetings shall include payment of the teacher’s salary
while he/she is in attendance. A mileage rate, as established by the Board of
Education and subject to availability of appropriate funds, shall be paid to the
teacher. A substitute teacher shall be paid to assume the teacher’s responsibilities
while he/she is absent.
10. Teachers attending such meetings shall report items of interest to grade-level
teachers, department staff, building staff or the entire school staff, if such report is
requested. The building principal shall schedule a meeting at a time convenient to
the majority of the staff involved. The building principal shall attend the
scheduled meeting.
11. The head high school coach and varsity staff, on paid supplemental contracts, may
be permitted to attend one clinic pertaining to their extracurricular field. In
addition, the head high school coach and varsity staff may be permitted to attend
the state tournament or substitute this tournament with one additional clinic. State
tournament tickets may be purchased through the general athletic fund.

E. ATTENDANCE AT DISTRICT, STATE AND NATIONAL MEETINGS OF THE
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF TEACHERS

Table of Contents 1

Members of the bargaining unit who wish to attend district, state, and national meetings
of the American Federation of Teachers must seek the approval of the President of the
Ontario Federation of Teachers. With the President’s approval, three (3) copies of the
written request must be forwarded to the Superintendent at least three weeks in advance
of the scheduled meeting.
1. Such a meeting is scheduled for days on which school is in session.
2. Attendance at any and all such meetings shall be limited to five (5) total school
23

days per school year, to four (4) staff members per year and to fifteen (15) total
staff days per year.
3. Members of the Ontario Federation of Teachers whose requests are approved
shall provide their building principals with teaching plans to cover classroom
work during time of absence.
4. The Board of Education shall pay the salary of substitute teacher to cover the
employee’s absence.
5. If there is a need for a substitute to replace a professional staff member authorized
to attend a meeting of the American Federation of Teachers, the Board of
Education shall be reimbursed by the Federation for said substitute’s established
salary.
6. The Board of Education shall not pay any expenses incurred by teachers attending
such a meeting.

F. MATERNITY LEAVE OF ABSENCE Table of Contents 1
1. Any employee who becomes pregnant shall, upon written application to the
Superintendent, be granted leave to absent herself from work for maternity
reasons.
2. The application shall include (1) a signed statement justifying the use of maternity
leave, (2) the date when the employee’s services will be discontinued, (3) the
name and address of the attending physician and dates when he/she was
consulted. Such application shall be presented to the Superintendent as far in
advance prior to discontinuance of service as is practical. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to waive the physician-patient privilege provided by law.
3. If at any time during the term of pregnancy the Superintendent is of the opinion
that such employee is unable to satisfactorily perform her duties by reason of said
pregnancy, the Superintendent may request such employee to discontinue her
service.
4. Additional unpaid maternity leave in conjunction with maternity/adoption as
listed under LEAVE Item F shall be granted for a period of not more than one
24

school year from the date on which such leave becomes effective. Certificated
staff members may return to full-time service from a maternity leave upon
presenting a formal request to the Superintendent which would include a written
statement that such a return to service would not be detrimental to the health of
said staff member. It shall be the prerogative of the Board to reinstate the
employee at the beginning of the next semester after the date on which she is
physically able to return to work.
5. In no case of leave for maternity shall any combination of such maternity leave
and sick leave days be used beyond a total of 365 continuous days.
6. An employee who adopts a child may request, upon written application to the
Superintendent, a leave of absence without pay for maternity reasons. The initial
request may be for the remainder of the school year. (Refer to LEAVE Item F)
Said employee may request in writing an extension of the leave for one additional
year. Extensions may only be granted if approved by the Superintendent. A leave
granted under this section shall not be terminated during a school year unless
approved by the Superintendent.
7. When an employee who has been on maternity leave of absence returns to the
staff, she shall be assigned to a position for which she is qualified and certified.
Final assignment shall be made by the Superintendent.
8. Seniority shall apply to all teachers whether teaching or on leave, including
maternity leave.

G. GENERAL LEAVE

Table of Contents 1

Certificated staff members may apply in writing through the principal and
Superintendent to the Board of Education for approval of a leave of absence for an
entire academic year for one of the following reasons:
1. Illness of a personal nature or in the family;
2. Other justifiable causes.
When an employee who has been on general leave of absence returns to the staff,
he/she shall be assigned to a position which he/she is qualified and certified to fill.
25

Final assignment shall be made by the Superintendent.

H. LIMITED LEAVE

Table of Contents 1

Certificated staff members may apply in writing through the principal and the
Superintendent to the Board of Education for approval of a limited leave for a
semester or less, providing such request be made at least three (3) weeks before the
leave shall be effective.
Limited leave is subject to the following conditions:
1. A substitute certified in the teaching field involved may be secured.
2. The teacher must forfeit his/her salary during the time of absence.
3. Pending the recommendation of the appropriate building principal and
Superintendent, final approval must be granted by the Board of Education.

I. SABBATICAL LEAVE Table of Contents 1
Fully certificated members of the bargaining unit, with a Bachelor’s degree may be
granted a leave of absence for two (2) semesters for study and/or research at an
accredited four year college or university, subject to the following conditions:
1. The employee must have completed five (5) consecutive years of employment
in the Ontario Local Schools immediately prior to application.
2. Each year up to two percent (2%) of the eligible staff may be granted
sabbatical leaves of absence.
3. The leave must be based on a detailed plan for professional growth, to be
submitted to the Superintendent by March 1st, of the year preceding the year
of the requested leave.
4. The employee must sign an agreement requiring him/her to return to service in
the Ontario Local Schools immediately upon termination of the sabbatical
leave and continue in such service for at least one (1) year or to refund all of
the Board’s contribution to the STRS that was paid for the teacher during the
sabbatical leave.
5. At the request of the employee on leave, the employee may participate in the
26

Board’s hospitalization, vision, dental, and life insurance plans. Premiums
will be paid by the employee.
6. Upon return to Ontario Local Schools, the employee shall resume the contract
status he/she held prior to such leave and shall be reassigned, if possible to the
same position, or a comparable position to the one held immediately prior to
the leave.
7. Within sixty (60) days after completion of the sabbatical leave, the employee
granted such leave shall file a written report with the Superintendent showing
evidence that the plan of professional growth was followed.
8. No employee shall be permitted to take sabbatical leave more than once in
five (5) years, and after five (5) years, said employee shall not be allowed
sabbatical leave if others have made application for such leave.
9. Teachers wishing to apply for sabbatical leave shall do so by March 1st, of the
year preceding the year for which sabbatical leave is requested. Should more
than 2% of the staff apply, with acceptable plans of study, a waiting list will
be established to identify the year in which acceptable applicants may take
sabbatical leave.

J. ASSAULT LEAVE

Table of Contents 1

Assault leave with pay will be available to teachers who are unable to perform their
contract duties because of physical injury or illness caused by an assault on said
member while he/she is performing his/her contract duties. All such leave will be
subject to the following provisions:
1. The teacher has signed a written statement justifying the granting and use of
assault leave.
2. The teacher shall be required to provide a physician’s statement describing the
nature of the disability and its duration.
3. The teacher agrees to sign a statement indicating a willingness to participate and
cooperate with the Board if the Board decides to pursue legal action against the
assailant.
27

4. The teacher will be maintained on full pay status with fringe benefits during the
period of the paid assault leave, not to exceed twenty (20) working days.
5. The teacher may not perform any duties related to any other job during the period
of the paid assault leave.
6. Where Worker’s Compensation reimburses the teacher in any amount for the time
lost during the assault leave, the Board shall pay the difference between the
teacher’s full pay for the period of the assault leave and the amount paid by
Worker’s Compensation.

K. NOTIFICATION OF RETURN Table of Contents 1
A teacher returning from leave must notify the Superintendent in writing of his/her
intent by March 1st, preceding the school year of return, unless it is medically
uncertain. In this case, the notice of intent to return to work shall be provided as far
in advance of the beginning of the school year as possible. Failure to provide this
notification shall be grounds to terminate the teacher’s contract.

ARTICLE IX
Table of Contents 1

PERSONNEL FILES

A. An official grievance filed by any teacher under the grievance procedure as outlined in
this collective bargaining agreement shall not be placed in the personnel file of the
teacher nor shall such grievance become part of any other file or record which is utilized
in the promotion process; nor shall it be used in any recommendation for job placement.
B. No material that is hearsay, unauthorized and unsigned by the complainant shall be
placed in a teacher’s personnel file. The teacher shall acknowledge that he/she has read
such materials by affixing his/her signature and date on the actual copy to be filed with
the understanding that such signature merely signifies that he/she has read the material to
be filed and does not necessarily indicate agreement with its content. Should a teacher
refuse to sign the material in question, the building representative will initial and date
said material, indicating that the teacher is aware of this material.
28

C. The teacher shall have the right to answer any material filed, and his/her answer shall be
attached to the file copy.
D. Upon appropriate request by the teacher, he/she shall be permitted to examine his/her file,
except for confidential recommendations.
E. The teacher shall be permitted to reproduce the material in his/her file at the Board
established rate per page. Confidential recommendations cannot be copied.
F. Written reprimands and any associated documents will remain in a teacher’s personnel
file for two (2) years and will be removed after the two (2) year period upon request of
the teacher. If there is an additional reprimand during that two (2) year period, the
original reprimand will remain in the personnel file for a total of three (3) years and will
be removed after the three (3) year period upon request of the teacher. Material will be
removed sooner from the file in accordance with administrative procedure when the
teacher’s claim that it is inaccurate or unfair is sustained by the Superintendent or his/her
designee.
G. Medical records, records pertaining to adoption, probation and parole proceedings , trial
preparation records, confidential law enforcement investigatory records, and records
which cannot be released by virtue of state or federal law, shall not be a matter of public
records, and shall not be made available for inspection or copy, to any member of the
general public.
H. If a teacher’s file is requested for examination by the general public and examination is
granted, the teacher shall be notified of the examination request and an OFT elected
representative shall review the file prior to examination. Items redacted will be in
accordance with Ohio Law.

ARTICLE X
Table of Contents 1

NON-TEACHING DUTIES

A. Non-OFT personnel shall, when available, assist teachers in duplicating instructional
materials.
B. A minimum of two individuals will be assigned to supervise lunchrooms. Those
individuals could be a combination of OFT personnel, non-OFT personnel and/or
29

administrators.

ARTICLE XI
Table of Contents 1 CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL TEACHERS

A. The employer and the Federation agree that special attention and supportive help and
guidance in classroom techniques shall be provided for the new teachers. All available
resources, including principals, as well as the experience and diverse abilities of all
teachers, shall be utilized to help orient the new teacher.
B. Emotionally disturbed pupils, as well as pupils who present severe disciplinary problems,
impede the educational progress of the entire class. Teachers faced with such pupils in
their classes shall be given early support in the form of psychological and social work
assistance. These pupils will be placed in classes in accordance with district procedures
as established by law.
C. All returning classroom teachers shall provide the building principal with initial book and
instructional supply orders in the spring. The building principal shall review these
orders in light of (1) budget allotments, (2) availability, and (3) total building needs. The
principal shall advise the teachers as to which supplies and curricular materials cannot be
obtained and the reason for deletion by fall. The building principal shall present the
initial book and material requirements to the central administration for appropriate action.
The employer shall then have three months to purchase and allow for delivery of these
initial materials. Teachers shall be immediately notified regarding supplies that have
been deemed unavailable. Delivery of needed books, material, and equipment orders
shall be due by fall. It shall be the administration’s responsibility to determine the
appropriate source of the instructional supplies.
D. Prior to the last week of school, the teachers shall receive their salary notices for the
upcoming year, except for the year in which the contract expires. During a year in which
the contract expires, the salary notices will be provided within thirty (30) days after
ratification of the contract. Additionally, if there is a change in a teacher’s grade and/or
subjects to be taught or a change in the school where a teacher is to teach for the
upcoming year, the teacher(s) would be informed.
30

E. Except in an emergency, teachers shall not be assigned outside their field of certification.
F. Teachers shall not be required to purchase instructional materials. However, the teacher
may do so at his/her option.
G. Teachers who anticipate qualifying for a continuing contract in accordance with Board
Policy and state law shall notify the Superintendent prior to the first day of the school
year. Failure to do so, unless already scheduled for a full-cycle evaluation would
disqualify consideration until the next full school year. (See Article XXV, item B for
more information).
H. Members of the bargaining unit shall keep in full force and effect all certificate types and
teaching field codes on teaching certificates. Exceptions shall be made only through
petition to the superintendent whose decision will be final. Violation of this provision
shall cause the teacher to reapply and obtain the correct certificate or shall be grounds to
terminate a teacher’s contract.
I. TEACHER/SCHOOL COUNSELOR EVALUATION PROCEDURE
1. OTES/OSCES EMPLOYEES
In accordance with Ohio Revised Code Section 3319.111 and 3319.113, The Board’s
adopted standards-based teacher/school counselor evaluation policy is included in this
Master Agreement, by reference, for application to OTES/OSCES employees. Prior
to implementation of the policy for OTES/OSCES employees, any effects of that
policy on terms and conditions of employment must be bargained by the parties in
accordance with the law. Similarly, any subsequent revisions to that policy which
affect terms and conditions of employment must be bargained prior to
implementations.
All matters contained within the Board policy on OTES/OSCES shall be considered
grievable under the grievance procedure contained within this contract.
The Board policy and guidelines will be provided online to all OTES/OSCES
employees.
A. Evaluations Committee
1. The Ontario Federation of Teachers and the Board agree to establish a
standing joint Evaluation Committee for the purpose of recommending
31

revisions to the Board’s standards-based teacher/school counselor evaluation
policy and related guidelines, and to regularly review the effectiveness of the
policy and its related procedures and process, including forms, for the
evaluation of teachers/school counselors in the District.
2. In addition, the Evaluation Committee will make recommendations for
adoption by the Board and ratification by the Ontario Federation of Teachers
regarding evaluation language and procedures for Non-OTES members.
3. Nothing herein shall be deemed to alter or otherwise affect the obligation of
the Board to engage in bargaining, upon request of the Ontario Federation of
Teachers, on matters which affect the terms and conditions of employment.
B. Committee Composition
1. The committee shall be comprised of up to two (2) bargaining unit members
appointed by the Ontario Federation of Teachers President and up to two (2)
administrators appointed by the Superintendent.
C. Committee Operation
1. The committee shall be chaired jointly by a committee member from the
Ontario Federation of Teachers and a committee member appointed by the
Superintendent.
2. Members of the committee may receive training in all aspects of OTES, the
state adopted evaluation framework, and the standards for the teaching
profession prior to beginning their work.
3. The committee will establish by mutual agreement a meeting calendar, tasks
for the committee to complete, and timelines for the completion of specific
tasks.
4. Committee agendas will be developed by the committee.
5. All decisions of the committee, as set forth herein, will be achieved by
consensus.
6. At the initial committee meeting, the committee will develop the guidelines
and ground rules by which the committee will operate.
7. Members of the committee will receive necessary release time for committee
32

work and training as determined by the committee.
8. The committee may establish sub-committees to assist with their work.
9. Sub-committees will be jointly appointed by the committee.
10. The committee shall be authorized to utilize consultant(s) (examples include,
but are not limited to, educational consultants, software consultants,
credentialing trainers, etc.) as it deems appropriate. The cost, if any shall be
borne by the Board.
D. Compensation/Release Time
In addition to any release time provided, any work authorized by the committee and
performed outside of the contractual work day will be paid at $25.00 per hour.
E. Committee Authority
1. The committee is responsible for jointly developing, reviewing and
recommending changes to the Board policy for teacher/school counselor
evaluation and assisting in the evaluation of teacher-submitted SLO’s
according to Board Policy and ODE requirements.
2. The committee shall not have the authority to negotiate wages, hours, or terms
and conditions of employment.
F. Walkthroughs
1. Within a reasonable period of time, (not to exceed (3) three work days)
following a walkthrough, the administrator will provide written feedback to
the teacher.
2. A teacher or administrator may request a meeting following a walkthrough.
Any meeting requested by the teacher or administrator should occur within
five (5) work days following the request.
2. Non-OTES Teachers
Bargaining unit members who are not OTES teachers will be evaluated in accordance with
law and board adopted policies and procedures.
J. JURY DUTY
An employee of the Board of Education, who is called for jury duty at a time which
conflicts with his/her regular assignment, will be paid the difference between such
33

employee’s regular per diem compensation and the per diem remuneration received by
him/her for serving as a juror.
K. Teachers’ children may attend the Stingel Latch Key program at a reduced
payment of 50%. (This reduction is limited to the first 10 registered children of
teachers). The employee must notify the Stingel complex secretary in charge of
Latch Key registration by June 10th to reserve a slot. Upon notification, the
teacher’s name will be placed at the top of the enrollment list.
L. The Board will pay the teacher’s BCI/FBI costs for employment and recertification
requirements.
M. All OFT staff members will receive a Family Sports Pass.

ARTICLE XII
Table of Contents 1

PUPILS’ REPORT CARD MARKS

The mark of a teacher is the record of the teacher’s evaluative judgment of the pupil’s work.
The teacher shall be considered the expert in evaluating the work of his/her pupils, and the
integrity of the teacher in marking the pupil will be respected. The mark given by a teacher
shall not be changed by another person without consultation and agreement between the
principal, the teacher concerned, and other persons involved. Undue pressure shall not be
applied to the teacher. An error shall be corrected by the principal, following a conference
between him/her and the teacher involved. Should it be impossible to reach the teacher, the
principal will make the correction according to guidelines as defined in the school system or
building handbook. No minimum or maximum limitation shall be set on the number who
pass or fail.

ARTICLE XIII
Table of Contents 1

ACADEMIC FREEDOM

It is mutually recognized that teachers do have a responsibility to present material to their
34

classes which is relevant to their course at their grade level. Within the limits of
administrative direction and encouragement, teachers may explore with students topics of a
controversial nature that relate to their curriculum within the classroom. This exploration
should be objective, unbiased, and presented from all possible points of view so as to
contribute to the overall, intellectual growth and development of the student. With this
mutual agreement, the teacher should have the right to teach without harassment, pressure, or
intimidation from persons or sources outside the educational community.

ARTICLE XIV
Table of Contents 1

DISCIPLINE CODE

SECTION 1
a) Effective discipline, observance of law and order, and respect of the rights of others
are necessary so that all students may attain the highest degree of quality education.
b) Each student has the right to learn. Any act by another student which interferes with
that right will not be tolerated.
c) Students who deny this right to other students and who disrupt classroom and school
procedures will be dealt with promptly and according to adopted school policies and
rules and regulations of the Board of Education.
SECTION 2
The primary responsibility for discipline lies with the classroom teacher. Each
teacher is responsible for the behavior of students under his/her supervision.
SECTION 3
Any teacher has the right to discipline any student in any area of the school and refer
the student or students involved to the building principal.
SECTION 4
The teacher may temporarily remove from the classroom a student who is causing a
disturbance.
a) The student shall report to the principal’s office in accordance with building
administrative procedure.
35

b) The classroom teacher shall provide the necessary information concerning the
problem as soon after class is practical.
c) The principal or his/her representative shall investigate the referred problem.
d) A conference between the classroom teacher, the building principal and, if
necessary, counselor, parent and/or other concerned person shall determine
final disposition of the problem.
e) The principal shall inform all concerned parties of the final decision.
SECTION 5
The use of corporal punishment as a means of discipline is prohibited in the Ontario
Local School District. Teachers, administrators, other employees, or school bus
drivers, may within the scope of their employment, use and apply such amount of
force and restraint as is reasonable and necessary to quell a disturbance threatening
physical injury to others, to obtain possession of weapons or other dangerous objects
upon the person or within the control of the pupil, for the purpose of self-defense or
for the protection of persons and property.

ARTICLE XV
Table of Contents 1

HIRING OF SUBSTITUTE TEACHERS

Substitutes shall be provided in the absence of regular classroom teachers, teachers of special
subjects, and playground supervisors. Librarians will be provided substitutes for the High
School and Middle School libraries after three consecutive work days of absence. Regular
classroom teachers shall not be expected to cover for absent teachers or teachers who cannot
meet their classes due to schedule changes. Classroom teachers shall not be required to
secure their own substitutes.

Teachers not carrying seven work periods shall be expected upon request of the building
principal to cover without compensation for absent teachers in emergency situations where a
substitute is not available. Examples of such emergencies are: personal illness, illness in the
family, death in the family, an accident to a family member and/or calamity.
36

In other instances, a teacher assigned to cover for another teacher during his or her
conference/prep period shall receive a pro-rated pay at the rate established by the Board of
Education ($15.00 per hour). Such assignment shall be made upon a rotating basis in each
building.
Should it be impossible to secure substitutes, teachers may be assigned over longer periods of
time by mutual agreement between the building principal and teachers involved.
In the event that an elementary teacher must cover his/her class during the absence of a
music, art, or physical education teacher, his/her pay shall be pro-rated at the rate established
by the Board of Education ($15.00 per hour).

Mutual agreements between teachers, who with consent of the building principal, cover for
each other, shall not receive such compensation.

Any teacher who has been employed to fill the vacancy of a teacher on a leave of absence
shall be automatically non-renewed without notice at the end of the year. Such teachers need
not be evaluated and shall not be entitled to the procedure set forth in R.C. 3319.00(G)

ARTICLE XVI
Table of Contents 1

HIRING OF RETIRED TEACHERS

Employees retired and wishing for re-employment:
1. Any teacher who elects to retire must do so without regard for re-employment.
2. A retired teacher would receive consideration for re-employment when the
administration has determined that other qualified non-retired teachers are not
available or suitable.
3. A retired and re-employed teacher will be considered for the purposes of employment
as a new employee subject to but not limited to: fingerprinting, TB testing, Medicare
deduction, one year eligibility for attendance bonus, no personal days until December
2nd, etc. For the purpose of transfer or a decrease in staff, the retired teacher’s
seniority will be based upon most recent hire date and qualifications may or may not
be considered.
37

4. A teacher retired under STRS who is re-employed is not entitled to a second
severance payment.
5. The employee, at the time of rehire, has the choice to either carry over unused
personal leave days or be paid for their unused personal leave days in the attendance
premium.
6. Effective for teachers retiring after January 24, 2011, a re-employed, retired teacher
under STRS will be placed at experience level 11 on the teacher’s salary schedule.
Further, the re-employed, retired teacher will not receive yearly steps, but he/she is
entitled to the same base increase given to all teachers.
7. All employed retirees are eligible for all Ontario Health Care Plan coverage. Not
withstanding any provision to the contrary in Article XXIX of this Agreement,
employed retirees shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the premium for any
Ontario Health Care Plan coverage selected.
8.

A re-employed, retired teacher under STRS will be placed on one year limited
contracts during the duration of employment. The teacher may be non-renewed upon
resolution of the Board and written notice by April 30th of each year. Such teachers
need not be evaluated and shall not be entitled to the procedure set forth in R.C.
3319.11 (g).

9. See Article XXXVII; item M for Early Announcement Incentive Bonus.

ARTICLE XVII
Table of Contents 1 LENGTH OF SCHOOL DAY AND SCHOOL YEAR

Teacher arrival and dismissal times are as follows:
Ontario High School

Arrival: 7:40 AM

Dismissal: 3:00 PM

Ontario Middle School

Arrival: 7:40 AM

Dismissal: 3:00 PM

Stingel Elementary

Arrival: 8:40 AM

Dismissal: 4:00 PM

The school year shall contain no more than 180 days in session with students in attendance,
plus no more than five additional work days.
38

The schedule is subject to modification in meeting unique needs as long as there is no
increase in total hours of work.
Quarterly, early student dismissal will be scheduled in each of the buildings as follows:
a)
b)
c)

Stingel Elementary dismissal, 2:55 PM
Staff development session, 3:00 PM – 4:45 PM
Ontario Middle School dismissal, 1:52 PM
Staff development session, 2:00 PM – 3:45 PM
Ontario High School dismissal, 1:55 PM
Staff development session, 2:00 PM – 3:45 PM

Additionally, two early student dismissals will be scheduled, the last workday before
Thanksgiving, and the last workday before Christmas. On these two occasions, staff is also
dismissed at the same time as students.

In addition, 3 early student dismissal days shall be scheduled on the last day of the 1st, 3rd
and 4th quarter. In the event that the last work day before Christmas vacation is not on the
end of the 2nd quarter, an additional early student dismissal day shall be scheduled for
teachers to complete student report cards on the end of the 2nd quarter. This time will be
dedicated for teachers to complete their student report cards.

ARTICLE XVIII
Table of Contents 1

DAILY WORK SCHEDULE

The following items relating to the daily work schedule are hereby mutually agreed upon:
1. Special teachers of art, music, and physical education shall be employed.
2. All teachers and librarians in the middle and senior high schools shall be provided with a
daily preparation period of forty-five minutes.
3. All teachers in the elementary schools shall have a minimum of 250 minutes preparation
time provided in a five (5) day week.
4. Study-hall duty shall be considered a work assignment.
5. When administratively possible, the number of different rooms to which a teacher is
assigned shall be held to the absolute minimum.
6. Faculty meetings shall be held as deemed necessary by the building principal.
39

Attendance by teachers is required but teachers in multiple buildings will be required to
attend only one building’s meetings and open house.
7. Emergency faculty meetings shall be determined by building principals and their staffs.
8. All teachers, including special teachers, shall be on assigned time every day of the
scheduled school year, including the first and last days of school.
9. When the physical facility is not available within the building, all special area teachers
shall meet their classes according to schedule in the classroom and shall conduct
activities appropriate to the curriculum of their special areas within the capacity of the
facility available.
10. Teachers may volunteer to teach instead of taking preparation time. This will occur only
when mutually agreed upon by the Board and the Federation. If the Board or a teacher
considers initiating this option, the Federation must be notified first. If agreement is
reached, the teacher will be paid a proportional amount of his/her daily rate for the time
taught. This agreement will be reached in advance of a new school year beginning. The
agreement will last for that school year only and must be renewed in advance of another
school year beginning. Undue pressure shall not be applied to the teacher to teach in lieu
of preparation time.
In order to qualify for this option, a teacher must teach seven periods (no study
halls/lunch duty counts as a teaching period) and this option will be considered only if the
teacher meets one of the following guideline1. The paid preparation time is utilized for state testing intervention.
2. There is a back-log of students signed up for the course who can’t take the class
unless the teacher teaches an eighth period.
3. There exists an excessive number of study halls for students in a grade level.
4. This option can’t be utilized for the sole purpose of class size reduction.

ARTICLE XIX
Table of Contents 1

TUTORING/REMEDIATION

A. Employee(s) who perform remediation responsibilities, outside the contracted day, upon
the request of the administration, shall be paid at the rate of $22.50 per hour.
40

B. REMEDIATION
1. Remediation may be provided to students as identified by the building principal.
2. The student/teacher ratio will be no more than ten (10) students per teacher.
3. All participants who will serve as teachers in the program must be an Ontario School
District certificated/licensed, elementary or middle grade teacher. In the event that an
Ontario teacher can not be found, then the District may employ any
certificated/licensed teacher.

ARTICLE XX
Table of Contents 1

CLASS SIZE LIMITATIONS

As a guideline, the Board of Education will attempt to maintain the following as the
maximum average student/adult ratio in each teaching assignment K-6: Grades K-1 – 24
students, Grade 2 – 26 students, Grade 3 – 27 students, Grades 4-5-6- 29 students, except in
special areas which of necessity or by educationally accepted practice are normally handled
in large groups, such as band or classes of an activity nature.

As a guideline for grades one through five, Inclusion Classrooms will have 3-5 fewer
students than in regular classrooms.

Classes may not be scheduled for less than fifteen (15) students unless the class in question is
on in a series necessary to meet graduation requirements.

When an excess of staff members exists in a particular building or teaching field, these
people shall be transferred to meet the staff needs in other buildings, when a need exists,
providing they are certificated for the particular assignment.

41

ARTICLE XXI
Table of Contents 1

CLASS LOADS

A. By October 15 of each academic year, each building principal shall post on the official
school bulletin board, a list of teachers’ names followed by the number of pupils per class
session which each teacher has been assigned.
1. For grades K through 6, the aforementioned list shall include individual teachers’
assignments.
2. For grades 7 through 12, the aforementioned list shall include all subject titles, as well
as exact number of hours in the classroom, assigned to each teacher.
3. When administratively possible, the attempt will be made to equalize class loads.
4. By mutual agreement between the teacher and the building principal, assignments and
class loads may be altered.
B. Class schedules shall be posted on bulletin boards in the office of each building
principal.

ARTICLE XXII
Table of Contents 1 CURRICULUM/IN-SERVICE TRAINING

Central Office Administration will develop and conduct a survey each spring to seek staff
input for the following year’s staff development program. The survey will include a variety
of themes/topics to consider and time frame preferences (release time, August, June, after
school, etc.). The survey results will be considered when designing the following school
year’s professional development opportunities. However, administration will make the final
decision on the professional development program and provide explanation if the decision is
against the majority of staff input.
For subject areas in curriculum studies, time will be provided for K-12, building-level, and
grade-level meetings. These meetings will provide opportunities for staff to review content
standards, assessments, curriculum maps, equipment needs, and instructional materials.
42

Central Office administration will make the final decision on purchases and provide
explanation if the decision is against the majority of staff input.
1. In-Service Education Programs are defined as those programs which are designed
to improve the teaching performance of the participants.
2. Any teacher who is required to participate in an in-service program beyond the
negotiated agreement outside of the school day and school year herein defined
shall be compensated at the rate of $12.00 per hour for the time actually spent in
such a program or project.
3. Regularly scheduled staff meetings shall not be considered as in-service education
programs.

ARTICLE XXIII
Table of Contents 1

JOB DESCRIPTIONS

A. The Superintendent shall prepare job descriptions for every position in the school district.
Such job descriptions shall include a clear definition of the responsibilities of each job.

ARTICLE XXIV
Table of Contents 1

PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT

A. LPDC
The Ontario Board of Education and the Ontario Federation of Teachers have mutually
agreed to the implementation of the Local Professional Development Committee (LPDC)
as established by Ohio Revised Code 3319.22 and adopted by the Board of Education.
Any future revisions to the bylaws will be by written mutual consent between the OFT
and the Board.
B. TEA
An educational committee will be formed. This educational committee shall be known as
Team for Educational Action (TEA).
The committee will consist of the following members: the Superintendent, Director of
Operations, the President and Vice-President of the Ontario Federation of Teachers,
43

Local #1703, a building level administrator, and three (3) Federation members, one from
each building. Meetings may be requested by either the Board or the OFT, however,
meetings will not be held unless the Board and the OFT agree to meet. Written notice
with reasons given for refusal to meet will be given to the other party.
C. TUITION REIMBURSEMENT
The Board will establish and maintain a yearly professional development fund of
$15,000. Any funds not used at the end of the year (June 30) will be added to the next
year’s $15,000. This fund will provide teachers the opportunities to engage in
professional development activities and will not replace the building principal’s
professional development fund.
The criteria used to apply for funding will be established by OFT. No teacher will be
eligible to receive the year end adjustment payment unless they are under contract to
teach for the proceeding year. Final year end adjustment payment will be paid the last
week in June. If a teacher quits after receiving the year end adjustment payment, the
teacher in question must make restitution to the Treasurer’s office for the amount in
question through payroll deduction. Those monies returned to the Treasurer’s office will
be carried over to the next year’s fund amount.
D. LICENSE RENEWAL
Upon evidence of payment to the treasurer, teachers will be reimbursed $100 for the first
license renewal and $20 for each additional aligned license.

ARTICLE XXV
Table of Contents 1 NON-TENURED / TENURED EMPLOYEES

A. NON-TENURED EMPLOYEE / LIMITED CONTRACT TEACHER
1. Before a limited contract teacher, one not eligible for tenure, may be declared
unsatisfactory, he/she must have supervision or guidance by the principal. He/she
will be evaluated in accordance with district Administrative Procedure.
2. In cases on non-renewal, reasons for non-renewal will not be provided, as in
accordance with Ohio law.
3. Teachers first employed after 1998, under one year limited contracts, may be non44

renewed by Board resolution. Such resolution must be adopted on or before April
30th and service upon the teacher of written notice of non-renewal by that date.
Service may be made by personal service or certified U.S. mail. Prior to such nonrenewal each teacher shall be evaluated once each semester. Each evaluation shall be
based upon two observations of at least thirty minutes. Areas in need of improvement
will be noted in written form to the teacher within ten school days after each
evaluation conference. This procedure shall supersede the procedure provided in
R.C. 3319.11 and 3319.111, but this process shall be subject to the grievance
procedure (Article IV) of this contract.

B. TENURED EMPLOYEE – CONTINUING CONTRACT TEACHER
1. Teachers who anticipate qualifying for a continuing contract shall notify the
Superintendent prior to the first day of the school year. Failure to do so, unless
already scheduled for full-cycle evaluation would disqualify consideration until the
next full school year. (For additional information regarding the tenured process see
the LPDC handbook).

C. PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEE
1. A probationary employee is defined as an employee who becomes eligible for a
continuing contract as prescribed by law, and who is not granted a continuing contract
because the Board has chosen to exercise its option in law.
a. The principal of the building shall be responsible for the initial evaluation of
the probationary employee utilizing primarily two methods:
i. Periodic classroom visits and conferences.
ii. Written evaluation forms in December and March.
iii. A copy of such evaluation shall be given to the teacher.
b. During the process of the written evaluation, the principal and the
probationary employee will confer on the positive aspects and weakness of the
classroom teacher.
c. If, after the initial evaluation in December, the principal deems it advisable,
45

he/she may seek assistance from the Superintendent’s office for further
evaluation.
d. If any written evaluation to the Superintendent’s office is of a negative nature,
the Superintendent will confer with the principal and the probationary
employee.
e. If by 30 days or April 30, whichever comes first, prior to the end of the school
year, the probationary employee is deemed to be unsatisfactory, he/she shall
be notified in writing that his/her contract shall not be renewed for the
forthcoming school year.
f. In accordance with Ohio law, reasons for non-renewal will not be provided.

ARTICLE XXVI
Table of Contents 1

1.

REDUCTION IN FORCE

Reasons for Reduction in Staff

Unit members may have their contract suspended pursuant to a reduction in force in
accordance with Ohio Revised Code Section 3319.17.

2.

Reduction in Staff
A. When a reduction in the teaching staff is necessary, the Board, upon
recommendation of the Superintendent, shall determine the number of
positions to be affected, in whole or in part, and the effective date of the
reductions.

B. The Federation President shall be notified prior to a reduction in force to
inform him/her of the reasons requiring said reduction.

3. Suspension of Contracts
Reduction will be made by suspension of contracts for unit member in each affected
teaching area. Suspension of contracts shall mean that the unit member is placed in
46

an inactive state of employment, in whole or in part. In circumstances when a
contract is wholly suspended, the unit member shall not receive pay or benefits at
Board expense or have any other rights or association with the District other than
those that may exist in this Agreement or by law.

4. Teaching Areas
Teaching areas shall mean the subject(s) and/or grade level(s) on the teaching
certificate(s)/licenses held by the unit member. To qualify under this provision of the
Agreement, certificates/licenses must be maintained in accordance with the Ohio
Department of Education’s certification/licensure requirements.

5. Seniority
A. All unit members will be placed on a seniority list for each teaching area for
which they are properly certificated/licensed and qualified. Unit members
serving under continuing contracts will be placed at the top of the list, in
descending order of seniority.

B. System seniority will apply and is defined as the total number of years of
continuous service in the District. A year is defined as one hundred twenty
(120) days of work of at least three and one-half (3.5) hours and/or leave with
pay in any one (1) school year.

1.

Board approved unpaid leaves of absence shall not disrupt continuity
of seniority but time spent on such leave shall not count toward
seniority. Unit members shall accrue seniority while on paid leave.

2. The suspension of a contract under the provisions of “Reduction In
Force” shall not disrupt continuity of seniority but such time shall not
count toward seniority.

47

3. If two (2) or more unit members have the same length of continuous
service, seniority will be determined by:
a. the date of the Board meeting at which the unit member was
hired, and then by:
b. drawing of lots.

6. Retention
A. Retention of bargaining unit members and recall of eligible teachers whose
contracts have been suspended pursuant to a reduction in force will not be
based upon seniority, except in circumstances when choosing between
teachers with comparable evaluations. The Superintendent and the OFT
President will meet to discuss the teacher performance section of the
evaluation for those teachers with comparable evaluations.
7. Order of Reduction
A. If reductions are necessary, limited contract teachers shall first be reduced in
the affected teaching fields (certification/licensure) utilizing the following
order:
1. Comparable evaluations.
2. When evaluations are comparable, seniority in the District shall
prevail, with the contract of the least senior limited contract teacher in
the affected teaching field the first to be suspended.

B. Should the necessary reduction of staff required exceed the number of limited
contract teachers in the affected field, continuing contract teachers will be
reduced in the affected teaching fields (certification/licensure) utilizing the
following order:

1. Comparable evaluations.
2. When evaluations are comparable, seniority in the District shall
prevail, with the contract of the least senior continuing contract teacher
48

in the affected teaching field the first to be suspended.

8. Displacement
In those instances where seniority is involved (i.e., when selecting from teachers with
comparable evaluations), a teacher affected by a reduction in force may elect to
displace a less senior teacher who holds the area of certification/licensure provided
he/she holds a valid certification/licensure in the area.
If the displaced teacher is in the ineffective category, they can only bump other less
senior ineffective teachers.

9.

Teachers whose continuing contracts or limited contracts are suspended shall
immediately be placed upon a RIF list. Retention and recall shall be based upon the
summative effectiveness ratings as determined in accordance with the Board’s
standards-based evaluation policy, with continuing contracts taking precedence over
those with limited contracts. Seniority shall not be a factor in recalling any
bargaining unit member unless the decision is between teachers with comparable
evaluations. When selecting among teachers with comparable evaluations, any
teacher unemployed as a result of staff reduction shall be recalled in reverse order of
being released, provided the teacher is certificated/licensed for the position.

10. The names of unit members whose limited contracts are suspended in a reduction in
force will be placed on a recall list for two (2) years and unit members holding
continuing contracts shall remain on the list indefinitely. The time on the recall list
shall begin to toll on the day following the last work day of the affected unit
member.

A. No new teacher will be employed by the Board while there is a teacher on the
recall list who is certificated/licensed and qualified for a vacancy or new
position.

49

B. If a vacancy occurs or a new position is created, the Board will send a
certified notice to the last known address of all unit members on the recall list.
It is the unit member’s responsibility to keep the Board informed of his/her
current address, a telephone number at which he/she can be reached, and the
name, address and phone number of a person(s) who has the authority to
respond in the unit member’s absence. When the unit member provides such
address and/or phone number, the Board shall, in addition to sending the
notice of vacancy by certified mail, contact the unit member by phone. Unit
members holding proper certification/licensure who want to fill the vacancy or
new position must respond within fourteen (14) days of the postmark on the
envelope of the certified mail containing the notice. Such response must be
by certified mail, or if a response was made by phone within the fourteen (14)
days. Unit members eligible for the vacancy or new position who do not
respond to the notice or who decline the position shall remain on the recall
list. This shall not cause the time on the recall list to increase from the two (2)
years for the limited contract unit members.

C. All benefits to which a unit member was entitled at the time of the contract
suspension shall be restored as of the effective date of recall. These benefits
shall include all seniority and sick leave accumulation. And, the unit member
shall be placed at the proper step of the salary schedule.
Time spent under a suspended contract shall not count toward the fulfillment
of the time requirements for acquiring tenure.

D. A seniority and recall list shall be prepared and kept current by the Board.
Any member of the bargaining unit may see the current seniority list and
recall list at any time. Adjustments to these lists shall be made as changes
occur.

11. Nothing in this Article shall limit the Board’s authority to create new or additional
50

teaching areas or positions or be construed to require the Board to fill any vacancy in
any teaching area that it has abolished.

ARTICLE XXVII
Table of Contents 2

MEDICAL EXAMINATION

A. After notifying the Board of Education, the administration may require a physical
examination of an employee whose general health condition does not permit him/her to
fulfill his/her teaching assignment adequately. The Board of Education shall pay the cost
of such an examination and may designate the physician for said examination. The
physician’s report and recommendation shall be final.
B. After notifying the Board of Education, the administration may require a psychological
and psychiatric examination of an employee whose emotional state does not permit
him/her to fulfill his/her teaching assignment adequately. The Board of Education shall
pay the cost of such an examination and may designate the specialist to make such an
examination. The specialist’s report and recommendation shall be final.
C. Flu shots are covered by Ontario Schools’ medical insurance. Therefore, any employee
covered under the medical insurance plan who desires to receive a flu shot may get the
flu shot on their own and must turn the bill into the insurance company. An employee
may also be reimbursed for any insurance reimbursement that was less than the current
Mansfield/Ontario/Richland Health Department cost, plus 10%. The employee must
submit a copy of their Explanation of Benefit from the insurance company to the
Treasurer’s Office in order to be reimbursed.
If the serum is not available for purchase by the Board of Education, employees, not
covered by the School’s medical program, can go to the health department or their doctor
and be reimbursed for the cost of the flu shot up to the current
Mansfield/Ontario/Richland County Health Department cost, plus 10%. The employee
must submit a receipt from their provider to the Treasurer’s Office in order to be
reimbursed.
51

When the flu shot serum is available, the Board of Education will purchase the serum in
bulk and provide the flu shot at no charge to any certified employee who desires it.
Employees covered under the medical insurance plan will not be required to process
anything with the insurance company for the flu shot. When the Board of Education can
provide the shot, no employee will be reimbursed for a flu shot administered by someone
other than the Board’s nurse unless the staff member is required to have the shot
administered by a physician. In this instance, he or she will be reimbursed up to the
current Mansfield/Ontario/Richland County Health Department cost, plus 10%.

ARTICLE XXVIII
Table of Contents 2

AIDS POLICY

A. The Board of Education recognizes that AIDS is currently a significant medical and
social problem. The Board desires not to discriminate against and to protect the rights of
individual employees who may be infected with AIDS as well as protecting non-infected
students, staff, and the public. AIDS includes Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome,
AIDS related complex, or the presence of HTLV-III antibody.
B. AIDS EVALUATION
The Board of Education believes, based on current medical information, that each
employee who is diagnosed as having AIDS is entitled to an evaluation of his or her
medical condition. Decisions regarding the advisability of a particular employee
continuing to attend or work in the schools of this district will be made only after
consideration of all available information regarding the physical condition of that
individual.

To conduct these evaluations, the Board of Education will appoint an AIDS evaluation
team. That team will consist of a physician appointed by the Board, the individual’s
primary care physician, and a physician specializing in AIDS.

The physician specializing in AIDS shall be mutually agreed upon by the Board
52

appointed physician and the employee’s physician. The physician appointed by the
Board shall act as chairperson of the AIDS evaluation team with the Board paying for the
Board appointed physician and the physician specializing in AIDS. The individual will
incur the cost of his/her physician.

C. CONFIDENTIALITY
The Board of Education recognizes the need to protect the individual rights and health
of persons infected the AIDS and the rights and health of those not infected. The Board
believes that information concerning the health of any employee should be treated as
confidential information. In the case of an employee, the Superintendent, building
principal and employee’s immediate supervisor should be informed of any physical
condition which may require special attention, including AIDS. Unless there is a specific
need, other employees shall not be informed about the individual’s physical condition,
including whether or not an individual is infected with AIDS.

No employee shall be required to submit to a test for Human Immunodeficiency Virus.

ARTICLE XXIX
Table of Contents 2

HEALTH INSURANCE

A. FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES (Employees regularly contracted to work more than 30
hours per week)
1. HOSPITALIZATION Table of Contents 2

Effective January 1, 2023 and until negotiated otherwise, the Board of Education
will pay 90% (HSA) or 80% (MVP) of the premium increase. If the annual
premium increase is greater than our current insurance company’s trend increase
for our area at that time, both sides agree to investigate options to lower the
premium. OFT has the choice to implement any of the options or pay the full
percentage increase above trend.

A professional staff member on Medicare receiving reduced rates for the
53

Hospitalization Program will receive credit for actual payment.

Effective date of hospitalization insurance shall be September 1 for any new
teacher employed for a full school year. Any teacher employed during the school
year may enroll with the effective date of insurance the first of the month
following the date of employment.

Present employees may enroll or add to their coverage by filling out an
enrollment card with effective date three (3) months from the 1st day of the month
following the date of filling out the enrollment card. Example – Enrollment card
filled out 1/15/88. Effective date of insurance would be three (3) months from
02/01/88, which would be 05/01/88.

2. DENTAL CARE INSURANCE Table of Contents 2
Effective January 1, 2023 and until negotiated otherwise, the Board of Education
will pay 65% of the premium increase. If the annual premium increase is greater
than our current insurance company’s trend increase for our area at that time, both
sides agree to investigate options to lower the premium. OFT has the choice to
implement any of the options or pay the full percentage increase above trend.

3. VISION CARE INSURANCE Table of Contents 2
Effective January 1, 2023 and until negotiated otherwise, the Board of Education
will pay 48% of the premium increase. If the annual premium increase is greater
than trend, both sides agree to investigate options to lower the premium. OFT has
the choice to implement any of the options or pay the full percentage increase
above trend.
Any premium for the above insurances which is in excess of the maximum
amount to be paid by the Board will be paid by the employee through payroll
deduction.

54

B.

HOSPITALIZATION PLAN OPTIONS
Effective January 1, 2023, the Board of Education will offer an HSA Plan according
to the summary plan description. The Board will contribute annually $850 for single
and $1,700 for family coverage to an HSA account. This will be paid one-half in
January and one-half in July. New employees will be paid on a prorated basis in the
month their coverage begins. If an employee terminates their employment after
completing their contract, the employee will not receive the July HSA payment.

C. MINIMUM VALUE HOSPITALIZATION PLAN
A second option will be provided to employees. A minimum value health insurance
plan option will be provided for any employee who works 30 hours or more per week.
The Board will pay 80% and the employee will pay 20% of the single plan premium.
The employee will pay 100% of the family plan premium.

D.

RETIRING EMPLOYEES INSURANCE TERMINATION DATE Table of Contents

2

Insurance coverage will terminate on the date of retirement for any employee who is
retiring into the STRS system. Any employee who retires on or after January 1, 2009
and is rehired under Article XVI, Hiring of Retired Teachers, with no break in service
(except summer vacation) shall be eligible to continue coverage under the Ontario
Health Care Plan provided, however, that beginning on September 1, following the
date of retirement, the employed retiree shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the
premium for any Ontario Heath Care Plan coverage selected.

E.

LONG-TERM SUBSTITUTES ELIGIBILITY Table of Contents 2
Long-term substitutes will not be eligible to participate in the health insurance plan,
unless they qualify under the Affordable Care Act. (Supersedes ORC. 3319.10) They
will only be offered the Minimum Value Plan option.

F. INSURANCE LIAISON Table of Contents 2
55

The OFT President and Board Treasurer will mutually select a representative to serve
as the OFT’s liaison in conjunction with the Board and the Health Care Provider on
all matters concerning health care issues; to include, but not limited to premiums,
program changes, review of other program providers, and processing of claims. If a
mutual agreement cannot be reached, the position will be filled by a current OFT
officer. As part of this Health Care agreement, the representatives of both the Board
and OFT will continue to pursue and consider other health care providers in an effort
to obtain one which has the same or similar health care benefits as the present
program, but at a reduced cost to both the Board and the employee. Changes in the
hospitalization, dental, or vision care programs and/or provider now in effect shall be
determined by the Board of Education, after discussion with representatives of the
administration and representatives of the Federation. The Board is authorized, by
mutual agreement with OFT, to add an additional health care plan as a voluntary
option for eligible employees.

ARTICLE XXX
Table of Contents 2

LIFE INSURANCE

The Ontario Local Board of Education shall provide a $50,000 term life insurance policy for
each certificated employee. Long-term substitutes will not be eligible to participate in the
life insurance plan. (Supersedes ORC. 3319.10)

ARTICLE XXXI
Table of Contents 2

ANNUITIES

A. Teacher shall be provided the opportunity, through payroll deductions, to take advantage
of the federal law concerning tax free annuities of their choice. A minimum of five
employees is necessary for the Board to recognize an annuity company. Any newly hired
employee with an existing annuity will be able to continue the annuity through Ontario
Local Schools regardless of the number of participants. It shall be the responsibility of
56

the employee to ensure that the amount of the annuities withheld is in compliance with
Internal Revenue Service regulations. The employees shall hold the treasurer harmless
for the annuity calculations.
B. The Board shall provide for the sheltering of each teacher’s contribution to the State
Teachers’ Retirement System as authorized by Federal Revenue Ruling No. 77-462 and
OAG 82-097. Under these provisions, the Board, upon proper application with STRS,
shall not deduct state or federal taxes on the amount of the current teacher’s required
contribution to STRS, and such shall be noted on or with the individual teacher’s W-2
form.

ARTICLE XXXII
Table of Contents 2

FEDERATION REPRESENTATION ON COMMITTEES

Opportunity shall be provided for at least one Federation member to participate on any
school committee pertaining to teacher welfare. An employee officially representing
teachers on any committee, agency, or other such body shall be selected from nominees
submitted by the Federation.

ARTICLE XXXIII
Table of Contents 2

FEDERATION DAYS

On those days when schools are scheduled closed for the meeting of any teachers’
organization, the Federation shall be permitted to hold its own professional meetings.

57

ARTICLE XXXIV
WORK STOPPAGES

Table of Contents 2

During the life of these policies, the Board of Education shall not lock out any employee
until all bargaining procedures, as outlined in this agreement, have been exhausted, or at least
five (5) days after the last negotiation step of the procedures has been fulfilled. In case of
such a lock out, the Ontario Federation of Teachers has the option of canceling the agreement
at any time between the tenth day after the lock out and the date of settlement.

During the life of this agreement, the Ontario Federation of Teachers will not cause or permit
its members to cause; nor will any member of the Federation take part in any sit-down,
slowdown, or so-called illness leave or any curtailment or restriction of work on the part of
any other employee of the Ontario Local Board of Education. The Federation shall not cause
or permit its members to cause; nor will any member of the Federation take part in any strike
or stoppage of the school system’s operation or picket any of the school buildings or
premises.

ARTICLE XXXV
Table of Contents 2

AMENDMENT TO THIS AGREEMENT

The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations, which resulted in this contract, each
had the opportunity to make proposals, and that the understandings and agreements arrived at
by the parties after the exercise of that opportunity are set forth in this contract. Therefore,
this contract contains the full and complete agreement between the Board and the Federation
on all negotiable issues and neither party shall be required, during the term thereof, to
negotiate upon any issue whether it is covered or not covered in this contract unless
otherwise mutually agreed.

ARTICLE XXXVI
Table of Contents 2 NEGOTIATIONS PROCEDURE FOR THE ONTARIO

58

BOARD OF EDUCATION AND ONTARIO FEDERATION OF TEACHERS
A.

STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLE

Table of Contents 2

1. The Ontario Local Board of Education, hereinafter referred to as the “Board,” and the
Ontario Federation of Teachers, AFT, AFL-CIO, Local 1703, hereinafter referred to
as the “Federation,” state that the purpose of the procedures established in this
document is to provide a means for harmonious and cooperative relationships
between the Board and certificated employees through collective negotiations, and to
protect the public and the welfare of the students of Ontario Local Schools by
assuring orderly operation of the school system. For and in aid of that purpose, the
principles stated in succeeding sections of this document shall govern the negotiation
process between the Board and Federation.
2. It is recognized and agreed that the Ontario Local Board of Education is an official
body duly elected by the community to discharge its authority as defined by the laws
of this state, and statements within this document shall not be construed to prevent the
Board from complying with its duty. Nothing in this agreement shall diminish the
statutory rights and responsibilities of the Board.
3. “Good Faith” negotiation, as provided for in this document, include, but not by way
of limitation, reasonable positions on negotiable issues; an indicated willingness to
reach an agreement thereon; setting forth, evaluating or agreeing to proposals with
sound, professional consideration; a search for counter proposals not accepted; but
does not compel either party to agree to a proposal or require the making of a
concession.
4. Representatives of the Board and the Federation shall participate in negotiations
freely without fear of penalty, sanction, reprisal, or recrimination.
B. SUBJECTS OF NEGOTIATION Table of Contents 2
Representatives of the Board and the Federation will negotiate in good faith a
professional salary schedule, fringe benefits, and terms and conditions of employment.
C. REQUESTS FOR NEGOTIATION Table of Contents 2
1. If either the Board or Federation desires to negotiate changes in salary schedule,
fringe benefits, or other terms and working conditions of employment, it shall notify
59

the other party in writing not later than two (2) months, and not earlier than three (3)
months, prior to the expiration of this agreement of such desire, and according to the
terms of the negotiating procedure outlined below.
2. Notification in writing from the Federation shall be submitted to the Superintendent.
Notification in writing from the Board shall be submitted to the President of the
Federation.
3. Prior to negotiations, if both agree, the “Problem Solving Approach” training can
occur.
D. CHOICE OF FORMAT Table of Contents 2
1. Within ten (10) working days after receipt of such notice, an initial meeting will be
held between the representatives of the Federation and the Superintendent or his
designee(s) to determine the format for negotiations described as either the “Problem
Solving Approach” or the “traditional Collective Bargaining Approach.”
2. If the “Problem Solving Approach” is selected, training will occur if agreed by both
the representatives of the OFT and the Board.
3. If said representatives cannot agree on format for negotiations the “Traditional
Collective Bargaining Approach” will be followed.
a. Problem Solving Approach
Within fifteen (15) working days after choice of format, an initial meeting will be
held to begin.
Phase I
Phase II
Phase III
Phase IV
Phase V
Phase VI
Phase VII
Phase VIII

Problem sharing
Data sharing
Discussion of options
Resolution of issues
Final contract writing
Final agreement
Ratification
Final signing

b. Traditional Collective Bargaining Approach
i. Within fifteen (15) working days after choice of format, an initial meeting will
be held at which both parties will exchange, in writing, their proposals
ii. In the first negotiations session, proposals shall be in form and detail
60

specifying that to which agreement is sought. Topical listing of items
proposed for negotiations shall constitute a clear failure of compliance with
this requirement and may be disregarded.
iii. The items proposed shall constitute the total for negotiations. The remaining
items of the then current contract shall remain in force and effect, and shall be
part of any successor agreement.
E. NEGOTIATION MEETINGS

Table of Contents 2

1. Once negotiations begin, the Board will provide four (4) one-half days of release time
to the three OFT representatives who serve on the negotiating team.
2. Beyond the four (4) one-half days of release time, negotiation meetings shall be
scheduled by the parties until negotiations are concluded. Either party may require, at
each meeting, a decision on the date, time, and place of a subsequent meeting.
3. Meetings shall be scheduled at reasonable intervals, places, and times to avoid, as
nearly as practical, conflict and interference with school and employment schedules.
4. Negotiations meetings shall be closed to the press and the public.
5. Either party may recess for caucuses of a reasonable length of time.
6. Minutes of meetings shall be kept in such form and detail as may be determined by
the parties.
F. REPRESENTATION

Table of Contents 2

Representation at negotiation meetings shall consist of no more than three (3) local
representatives each for the Board and the Federation.
G. INFORMATION Table of Contents 2
The teams agree to furnish, upon request and in a reasonable time, available information
concerning the financial status of the district and such other available information as will
assist the teams in the development and resolution of issues.
H. NEWS RELEASES

Table of Contents 2

Any contacts with or releases to the news media must be jointly written and issued.
I. AGREEMENT Table of Contents 2
1. Tentative agreement on negotiated items shall be reduced to writing and initialed by
the representatives of each team. Tentative agreements may be brought back to the
61

table when it is believed that it will result in progress toward developing a final
package. All agreements are tentative, based upon the complete resolution of all
issues.
2. The purpose of the “tentative agreements” is to develop a package that will be
submitted to the teachers and the Board for ratification. Initialing of tentative
agreements shall be done in good faith.
3. The team of the Federation must affirm the acceptance of the contract by a teacher
vote. If approved by the Board, the contract shall be binding.
4. Digital copies of the contract shall be made available to all members of the bargaining
unit. The cost for jump drives for new employees will be shared between the
Federation and the Board. The responsibility of distributing copies of the contract
will be that of the Federation.

J. DISAGREEMENT

Table of Contents 2

1. If agreement is not reached within sixty (60) days following commencement of
negotiations, either party may at any time thereafter request the employment of a
mediator, and the cost, if any, of such mediating services shall be shared equally by
the Board and the Federation. However, if after sixty (60) days from commencement
of negotiations should either side request that negotiations be extended before
mediation and if both parties mutually agree to do so, negotiations before mediation
will be extended up to thirty (30) additional days making a total number of days for
any one negotiation session ninety (90) days from the day of the initial meeting.
2. The mediator shall be supplied by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.
3. In the event mediation fails to help the parties reach an agreement, the final act of the
mediator shall be to report to the parties in writing. His or her report would declare
the points of disagreement and the position of the parties on the impasse items as they
appear to the mediator and his/her recommendations.
4. Days herein shall mean calendar days.

62

ARTICLE XXXVII
Table of Contents 2

SALARY SCHEDULE REGULATIONS

A. College credit hours on the salary schedule are based upon semester hours. Quarter hours
will be converted to semester hours using a factor of 2/3 or 0.667.
B. Except in special cases, the policy of the Board of Education shall be not to employ
teachers with less than a Bachelor’s degree and an initial license.
C. The Superintendent will grant prior experience in other Ohio public/private schools up to
5 years of actual teaching experience. The Superintendent may grant additional
experience in other public/private schools, outside Ohio public/private schools, and for
prior work experience which is related to the teacher’s performance of his/her duties, to
the extent that the new employee will receive a raise from their prior employer. Up to
five years experience shall be allowed for earned military service.
D. Teachers who, from time to time have earned additional credits which shall enable them
to move from one salary classification to a higher one shall file a transcript of their
credits with the Superintendent not later than August 26th of the current academic year.
Changes in teachers’ salaries shall be final as of September 5th of the current academic
year. Experience for placement on the salary schedule shall be determined at the time of
employment. Thereafter, purchase of service credit, for retirement purposes shall not
change the placement on the salary schedule.
E. Teachers shall be paid on a twelve-month basis with 24 pays. Bi-monthly checks will be
paid on the 5th and on the 20th of each month. If the 5th and/or the 20th falls on a weekend,
checks will be paid on the prior Friday.
F. Teachers working beyond their Bachelor’s degree shall confine their work to their
teaching fields or general education course if credit is desired on the salary schedule.
Exceptions may be granted upon approval of a committee consisting of:
1. Teacher representatives – One elementary and one secondary Federation members
2. Principal – Elementary or Secondary representing level involved
3. Superintendent or his/her representative
G. Additional credits on the salary schedule may be obtained by regular academic work at
the colleges and universities, attendance at workshops for which college credit is given,
and institutes for which college credit is given. Any course work taken via the internet to
63

be considered for a salary increase must be reviewed by the Local Professional
Development Committee and approved by the Superintendent.
H. Teachers placed on the salary schedule below the Bachelor’s degree shall be considered
individually and by resolution. Salary adjustment shall be made prior to issuing contracts
and salary statements.
I. Any additional state money allocated for salaries for teachers, or as a means of raising the
state minimum teachers’ salary, shall be allocated to the professional staff on a basis
determined by representatives of the Board of Education and the Federation negotiating
team. The final determination shall be made by the Board of Education.
J. Effective with the 1997-98 contract, the zero salary step will be reinstituted at the same
level as step 1. The intent of this regulation is for new hires with no experience to begin
on step zero and move to step 1 their second year with no increment increase. All
employees hired prior to the effective date will be grandfathered and not affected by the
addition of the zero step.
K. All employees are required to participate in direct deposit of their payroll check. In
addition, all employees are required to receive their payroll check statement
electronically.
L. Any teacher, who receives National Board Certification after August 2001, will be paid a
one time $500 stipend upon proof of certification.
M. Early Announcement Incentive Bonus – Teachers will receive an Early Announcement
Incentive Bonus of $1,000 for notifying the Ontario Board of Education on or before
March 1st of the year they plan to retire. Written notification must be received by the
Superintendent’s office with an effective retirement date of January to July of that same
year. The bonus will be paid the last pay period in June of that year. A teacher who
retires and is rehired by Ontario Local Schools is not eligible to receive the bonus.
N. All Kindergarten teachers will be paid at their per diem to conduct Kindergarten
screening, upon completion of a time sheet.
O. All teachers shall be paid according to the adopted Salary Schedule.
P. 2022-2023 Employment Contract 2% Base Wage Increase.
2023-2024 Employment Contract 4% Base Wage Increase.
2024-2025 Employment Contract 4% Base Wage Increase.

64

ARTICLE XXXVIII
Table of Contents 2

EXTRACURRICULAR SALARY REGULATIONS

A. Extra pay for extracurricular duties shall be granted as stipulated in the extracurricular
schedule.
B. All teachers shall be paid according to the adopted salary schedule.
C. Final extracurricular supplemental pay will not be made until the inventory form is
completed and approved by the Athletic Director and/or Principal.
D. Assignments to the various extracurricular activities shall be recommended by the head
of any activity when more than one person is involved, and the principal or the building
concerned, with final recommendation by the Superintendent with approval by the Board
of Education.
E. A minimum number of participants shall be established for each activity.
F. Should an intramural program be financed by the Board of Education, the salaries for
personnel involved are negotiable items between the representatives of the Federation
and the Board.
G. When more than one figure is shown on the extracurricular salary schedule, the lowest
figure represents compensation for the first year of experience in said activity. The
subsequent figures represent additional years of experience.
H. Extracurricular salaries are on a ratio or percentage basis. The salaries will be computed
by multiplying the beginning teacher’s salary by the percent listed for each activity on the
supplemental salary schedule.
I. The Board will pay the coach’s BCI/FBI costs for employment and recertification
requirements.

65

66

67

68

69

ONTARIO LOCAL SCHOOLS
EXTRACURRICULAR SALARY INDICES

INDEX
E X P E R I E N C E
CODE
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
------------------------------ ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- ----------------1
0.16000
0.16000
0.16817
0.17600
0.18400
0.19200
0.22000
1A (10)

0.11000

0.11000

0.11800

0.12600

0.13400

0.14200

0.16500

2

0.09235

0.09235

0.09700

0.10158

0.10620

0.11082

0.12697

3

0.08793

0.08793

0.09235

0.09676

0.10117

0.10548

0.12100

3A (11)

0.08116

0.08116

0.08523

0.08932

0.09338

0.09738

0.11163

4

0.07439

0.07439

0.07810

0.08188

0.08558

0.08927

0.10226

5

0.04874

0.04874

0.05120

0.05366

0.05602

0.05849

0.06705

6

0.03900

0.03900

0.04094

0.04289

0.04484

0.04679

0.05361

7

0.02565

0.02565

0.02700

0.02822

0.02955

0.03078

0.03533

8

0.02052

0.02052

0.02155

0.02257

0.02360

0.02463

0.02822

9

0.01539

0.01539

0.01621

0.01693

0.01775

0.01847

0.02122

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82
