AGREEMENT
between the
LYNN SCHOOL COMMITTEE
and the
LYNN TEACHERS UNION
LOCAL 1037
AMERICAN FEDERATION
OF TEACHERS, AFL-CIO
PARAPROFESSIONALS
2016-2017
2017-2018

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Page
Article I–Union Recognition & Jurisdiction ............ 1
H. Adoption Leave................................................ 9
A. Union Recognition........................................... 1
I. Leave for Conferences, Conventions, etc. ....... 9
B. Jurisdiction ...................................................... 1
J. Jury Duty.......................................................... 9
C. Definitions ....................................................... 1
K. Marriage Leave ................................................ 9
Article II–Compensation .......................................... 1
L. Graduation Leave ............................................. 9
A. Basic Salary Schedules .................................... 1
M. Requests for Leave......................................... 10
B. Itemized Payroll Deductions ........................... 1
Article VII–Grievance Procedure ........................... 10
C. Method and Time of Payment ......................... 1
A. Definition ....................................................... 10
D. Severance Pay .................................................. 1
B. Adjustment of Grievance ............................... 10
E. Vacation Pay .................................................... 2
1. Level 1–Principal ....................................... 10
F. Mileage Allowance .......................................... 2
2. Level 2–Superintendent of Schools ........... 10
G. Longevity ......................................................... 2
3. Special Procedures for Grievances
H. Anniversary Date ............................................. 2
Relating to Salary and Leave Matters ........ 10
I. Working Before and/or After the
4. Time Limits................................................ 11
Regular School Day/Year ................................ 2
Article VIII–Arbitration ......................................... 11
J. Clothing Allowance ......................................... 2
Article IX–Union Privileges and Responsibilities . 11
Article III–Fringe Benefits ....................................... 2
A. Dues Check-Off ............................................. 11
A. Blue Cross Blue Shield .................................... 2
B. Protection of Individual and
B. Life Insurance .................................................. 3
Group Rights .................................................. 11
C. Pension ............................................................ 3
C. Information .................................................... 11
D. Tax-Free Annuity ............................................ 3
D. Existing Laws and Regulations Preserved ..... 11
E. IRA Accounts .................................................. 3
E. Printing of Contract ....................................... 12
F. Workers’ Compensation .................................. 3
F. Paraprofessional Meetings ............................. 12
G. Liability Insurance ........................................... 3
G. Distribution of Materials ................................ 12
H. Annual Redemption of Sick Leave.................. 3
H. Agency Fee .................................................... 12
Article IV–Working Conditions ............................... 4
I. Fair Practices.................................................. 12
A. Duty-Free Lunch Period .................................. 4
Article X–Handling of New Issues......................... 12
B. Seniority .......................................................... 4
Article XI–Savings Clause ..................................... 12
C. Lay Off ............................................................ 4
Article XII–Resolution of Differences by
D. Discharge ......................................................... 4
Peaceful Means .............................................. 13
E. Evaluation of Paraprofessionals ...................... 4
Article XIII–Duration ............................................. 13
F. Work Day and Work Year ............................... 5
Letter of Understanding–1 ...................................... 13
G. Assistance in Assault Cases............................. 5
Letter of Understanding–2 ...................................... 13
H. School Facilities .............................................. 5
Attachment A ...................................................... 13
I. Discipline ......................................................... 5
Memorandums of Agreement 1 & 2 ....................... 14
J. Personnel Files–
Appendix A-1–Basic Salary Schedule ................... 15
Instructional Paraprofessionals ........................ 6
Appendix A-2–Basic Salary Schedule ................... 15
K. Professional Activity ....................................... 6
Appendix B Performance Evaluation System ........ 16
L. Substitutes........................................................ 6
Rationale for the Performance Evaluation
M. Job Preference ................................................. 6
of Staff................................................................. 17
N. Job Description ................................................ 6
Job Description—Paraprofessionals ................... 17
Article V–Transfers; Vacancies ............................... 6
I. Performance Responsibilities ...................... 17
A. Transfers or Reassignments ............................. 6
II. Qualifications .............................................. 18
B. Filling Vacancies ............................................. 7
III. Terms of Employment ................................ 18
Article VI–Leaves of Absence ................................. 7
IV. Evaluation ................................................... 18
A. Sick Leave ....................................................... 7
Procedure for Performance Evaluations
Sick Bank Regulations .................................... 8
(Paraprofessionals) .............................................. 19
B. Funeral Leave .................................................. 8
I. General Information .................................... 19
C. Military Leave ................................................. 9
II. Evaluation Process ...................................... 19
D. Organized Reserve Forces ............................... 9
Summary ............................................................. 20
E. Emergency Suspensions of Sessions ............... 9
Paraprofessional Performance Evaluation
F. Personal Leave ................................................. 9
Instrument ........................................................... 22
G. Maternity Leave ............................................... 9

Article I
UNION RECOGNITION AND
JURISDICTION
A. Union Recognition
The Lynn School Committee recognizes the Lynn Teachers Union, Local 1037, American Federation of Teachers,
AFL-CIO as the exclusive bargaining representative for all paraprofessional employees designated by the Massachusetts
Labor Relations Commission as including, but not limited to, the following job classifications:
Instructional paraprofessionals, library paraprofessionals, lunch/breakfast paraprofessionals, and other classifications
that aide teachers and/or students in the schools.
B. Jurisdiction
The jurisdiction of the Union shall include those persons now or hereafter who perform the duties or functions of the
categories of employees in the bargaining unit.
C. Definitions
The term “Superintendent,” as used in this Agreement, means the person holding the position of Superintendent of
Schools of the Lynn School Department.
The term “Administration,” as used in this Agreement, shall be understood to mean the same as Superintendent,
Assistant Superintendent, or Deputy. (In accordance with new Administrative Staffing.)
The term “parties,” as used in this Agreement, refers to the Committee and the Union as participants in this
Agreement.
The terms “paraprofessional,” “aide,” and “person,” as used in this Agreement, means a person employed by the
Committee in the bargaining unit as described in Section A. of Article I.
The term “Union representative,” as used in this Agreement, means any qualified designee of the Union.
The term “school,” as used in this Agreement, means any work location or functional division maintained by the
School Department.
Whenever the singular is used in this Agreement, it is to include the plural.
Whenever in this Agreement a personal pronoun is used, it is understood to include both male and female.
Article II
COMPENSATION
A. Basic Salary Schedules
1. The salaries of the members of the bargaining unit are set forth in Appendices A 1-3 which are attached to and
made a part of this Agreement.
2. Upon employment in the Lynn Public Schools, a member of the bargaining unit shall be placed at the step
appropriate for his educational status and creditable years of experience.
3. Presently employed paraprofessionals shall be placed on the step appropriate for their educational status and
creditable years of experience as determined by their initial date of employment.
B. Itemized Payroll Deductions
A statement of weekly payroll deductions shall be provided to each employee.
C. Method and Time of Payment
1. Each member of the bargaining unit shall be paid weekly.
2. The following holidays shall be allowed with pay: Columbus Day, Veterans’ Day, Thanksgiving Day, Friday
following Thanksgiving Day, the day before Christmas, Christmas Day, the day before New Year’s Day, New Year’s
Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents’ Day, Patriots’ Day, Good Friday, and Memorial Day.
3. Payment will be made for holidays which fall on Saturday, Sunday, or within a vacation period.
D. Severance Pay
1. Severance pay of fifty percent (50%) of accumulated sick leave days will be paid to a legitimate retiree under the
Municipal Employees Pension Plan, where applicable otherwise, the paraprofessional shall be a legitimate retiree.
The preceding applies only to a paraprofessional employed as of June 30, 1987.
2. In the event of death, payment shall be made to the paraprofessional’s estate or named beneficiary.
3. Employees first appointed after June 30, 1987, shall not be eligible for severance pay as aforesaid. Sick leave
accumulated by any employee after June 30, 1987, shall not be credited for severance purposes. In the event that
eligible employees must use sick days from the accumulation credited for severance purposes, said employee may

1

replace those days used to the level credited to her/him as of June 30, 1987, from any sick leave accumulated
thereafter.
A retiring employee shall have the option of receiving her/his cash payment on the date of retirement or in a schedule
of payments not to exceed five (5) fiscal years; such option shall be exercised in writing by the employee at least one (1)
week prior to her/his retirement. Any amount in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) must be deferred to the
second year or, at the employee’s option, a later year.
E. Vacation Pay
All paraprofessionals covered by this Agreement shall be granted the following vacation period with pay.
a. Following the completion of one (1) year of service, vacation of two (2) weeks.
b. Following the completion of three (3) years of service, vacation of three (3) weeks.
c. Following the completion of five (5) years of service, vacation of four (4) weeks.
d. Following the completion of twenty (20) years of service, vacation of five (5) weeks.
e. Vacation leave earned in any one (1) year shall not be permitted to accumulate or carry over to a succeeding
year. The above payments shall be included in the last paycheck of the fiscal year.
F. Mileage Allowance
Traveling paraprofessionals covered by this Agreement who are authorized to use private automobiles for school
business shall be reimbursed at the rate of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year.
G. Longevity
1. A paraprofessional who normally works twenty (20) or more hours per week shall receive the following payments
based upon her/his length of service in the Lynn Public Schools. All longevity payments shall be based upon a
percentage of the Working Foreman’s salary, step 3, as follows:
4% after
6% after
8% after
12% after
14% after
17% after

5 years of service
10 years of service
15 years of service
20 years of service
25 years of service
30 years of service

2. The above payments will be paid weekly.
3. For purposes of longevity, paraprofessionals serving more than one-half (1/2) the school year will receive credit
for that year of service.
H. Anniversary Date
For purposes of salary payment, paraprofessionals serving more than one-half (1/2) the school year will advance a
step on the salary schedule each September.
I. Working Before and/or After the Regular School Day/Year
Paraprofessionals employed before and/or after the regular school day/year shall be compensated at their regular rate
of pay.
The Union shall be notified of any temporary position which may become available.
In the event the principal or his/her designee requests and the paraprofessional accepts the request to attend an open
house, professional development/training, faculty meeting, parent meeting et al. before or after the close of school hours,
the said paraprofessional shall be compensated at the paraprofessionals’ hourly rate.
J. Clothing Allowance
Paraprofessionals who work in food service and/or cafeteria shall be reimbursed with receipts a clothing allowance up
to three hundred dollars ($300.00) payable in the first paycheck in September, October, November or December.
Article III
FRINGE BENEFITS
A. Blue Cross Blue Shield
The City of Lynn shall provide paraprofessionals who normally work twenty (20) or more hours per week the same
Blue Cross Blue Shield provisions as in effect for other School Department employees.
The current City policy for retirees shall remain in force.
The City of Lynn shall provide a pre-tax deduction of insurance premiums in accordance with Section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.

2

B. Life Insurance
The City of Lynn shall provide paraprofessionals who normally work twenty (20) or more hours per week the same
life insurance provisions as in effect for other School Department employees.
The current City policy for retirees shall remain in force.
C. Pension
The parties agree that all provisions of the Municipal Employees Pension Plan shall be made a part of this Agreement
for paraprofessionals who normally work twenty (20) or more hours per week.
D. Tax-Free Annuity
1. Paraprofessionals who normally work twenty (20) or more hours per week shall be allowed to take advantage of
the federal law concerning tax-free annuities.
2. Such paraprofessionals may join an approved company in September. Increases may be made in September or
January. Decreases will be accepted at any time.
E. IRA Accounts
Paraprofessionals shall be allowed to take advantage of the federal law concerning tax-free IRA Accounts through
payroll deductions to a bank or financial institution of their choice. The Committee will request the Treasurer of the City
of Lynn to deduct and submit said sums as specified.
F. Workers’ Compensation
Paraprofessionals shall be included under the provisions of the Workers’ Compensation Law.
A paraprofessional who is absent because of a personal injury arising out of or in the course of his employment shall
be paid full pay during the statutory period of exemption, without loss of personal sick days. Following the period of the
statutory exemption, Workers’ Compensation Disability Allowance shall be paid. Paraprofessionals eligible for Workers’
Compensation shall be allowed to draw upon sick leave benefits until weekly compensation is paid. Requests are to be
made with the Human Resource Manager.
Upon request, the paraprofessional may be able to draw from sick leave benefits to make up the difference between
the Workers’ Compensation coverage and his weekly salary.
Upon presentation of medical bills, each paraprofessional shall be reimbursed by the Committee for all medical
expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not already covered by the Committee.
G. Liability Insurance
A joint committee shall be formed to investigate liability insurance for paraprofessionals and report their findings to
the parties.
H. Annual Redemption of Sick Leave
An employee working twenty (20) or more hours per week and who has used fewer than a total of five (5) sick days
for the school year may elect to redeem sick days in a lump sum cash payment in accordance with the following schedule:
Sick Days Used
0
1
2
3
4
5

Available Redemption
5
4
3
2
1
0

An employee working less than twenty (20) hours per week and who has used fewer than a total of two (2) sick days
for the school year may elect to redeem sick days in a lump sum cash payment in accordance with the following schedule:
Sick Days Used
0
1
2

Available Redemption
2
1
0

Prior to the close of school in June of each year, the School Department will notify each qualifying employee of the
number of days she/he may redeem. Such compensation shall be payable on or before July 15th.
Unredeemed sick days will be accumulated in the manner provided in Article VI, Section A.

3

Members of the Sick Leave Bank as set forth in Article VI, Section A.5, shall not suffer any loss of available
redemption following the assignments of two (2) sick days the first year of participation and one (1) day thereafter
annually to the bank.
Article IV
WORKING CONDITIONS
A. Duty-Free Lunch Period
Paraprofessionals who normally work twenty (20) or more hours per week shall be provided with at least a thirty (30)
minute duty-free lunch period.
B. Seniority
1. Seniority is defined as length of continuous service as a paraprofessional in the Lynn School System. An
employee shall be placed on the seniority list after completing a three (3) month probationary period, with seniority
effective the date the employee was hired.
2. In the case of employees appointed at the same School Committee meeting, the order of appearance in the School
Committee minutes shall determine the order of seniority.
3. Each September the Committee shall post on all bulletin boards, and send to the Union, an updated seniority list
addition, showing the date of hire of each new employee. A challenge to placement on the list shall be deemed
waived unless grieved within fifteen (15) working days from date of posting.
4. An employee’s seniority shall be deemed broken by termination of employment, or failure to be available to
return to work within five (5) days after a leave of absence. Periods of service divided by a true break due to
resignation or termination shall not be added together to determine seniority.
Effective September 2014, the employee’s seniority date shall be adjusted by the number of no-pay days incurred
by the employee.
5. Effective September 1, 1987, lunch personnel transferring to the classification of instructional personnel shall, for
seniority purposes only, be credited with one (1) year of service for every two (2) years of service in the former
classification.
For purposes of this section, service of one-half (1/2) year or more shall be calculated as one (1) year.
C. Lay Off
1. In the event of a cut back in programs paraprofessionals shall be terminated on the basis of seniority; the
employee with the least seniority being the first to be laid off. Paraprofessionals shall be permitted to exercise their
seniority rights to replace a paraprofessional with less seniority in classification.
For purposes of this section, classification refers to the distinction between lunch personnel and instructional
personnel.
2. Non-certified instructional paraprofessionals may not displace certified instructional paraprofessionals.
3. Paraprofessionals shall be given written notification of termination, at their last listed address provided to the
School Department, following the vote of the School Committee.
4. No new employees in the bargaining unit shall be hired until all employees with rights of recall from layoff
according to seniority in their particular classification have been offered recall.
5. An employee in the bargaining unit who is laid off because of lack of work and who is recalled within five (5)
years shall regain the seniority and shall be credited with the accumulated sick leave to which he was entitled at the
time he was laid off.
6. Employees on lay off and those returning from a leave of absence must exercise their seniority rights at the time
of posting of available positions. Failure to do so shall indicate a termination of said seniority rights. Employees on
lay off shall receive prior notice of the time and place of postings.
7. The School Committee agrees that it shall not contract out any positions or jobs performed by members of the
bargaining unit.
D. Discharge
An employee who has completed his three (3) month probationary period shall not be discharged except for just
cause. The required notice of termination is thirty (30) calendar days.
E. Evaluation of Paraprofessionals
1. The Committee reserves the right to evaluate the performance of paraprofessionals and/or programs annually for
the purpose of making individual decisions on employment or for the purpose of determining whether the
paraprofessional program should be maintained, discontinued, modified, expanded, or for any other purpose.

4

2. The evaluator shall meet with the paraprofessional to discuss the evaluation report and to render constructive
assistance. A copy of the evaluation report shall be given to the paraprofessional. After the discussion, the
paraprofessional shall sign the report, but the paraprofessional’s signature does not necessarily indicate agreement of
the contents. The paraprofessional shall have the right to make a written reply which shall be attached to the
evaluation report.
3. A paraprofessional not satisfied with the evaluation discussion shall be granted an appointment to discuss the
report with the Superintendent of Schools or his designee. If the evaluation report is the basis for a discharge
procedure, it shall be subject to the grievance and arbitration procedure.
4. Effective September 1, 2005, the policy document entitled Lynn Public Schools–Paraprofessional Performance
Evaluation System, April 2005 shall be attached hereto as Appendix B and made part of this Agreement.
F. Work Day and Work Year
1. Paraprofessionals shall be required to work each day when school is in session.
2. Any paraprofessional required to work by the administration beyond the regular number of hours shall be
compensated at the hourly rate.
3. The minimum work day week shall be:
Instructional Paraprofessionals Weekly
Elementary
Junior and Senior High
L.V.T.I.

28.75 hours
27.5 hours
30 hours

Parent Liaison Paraprofessionals Weekly
Elementary
Junior and Senior High

28.75 hours
31.25 hours

Lunch Paraprofessionals Weekly
Chief Lunch Aide (Over 300 meals served)
Chief Lunch Aide (Under 300 meals served)
Lunch Aide
Food Distributors (Over 300 meals served)
Food Distributors (Under 300 meals served)

19 hours
13 hours
10 hours
17.5 hours
15 hours

Breakfast Paraprofessionals Weekly
Chief Breakfast Aide
Breakfast Aide

5 hours
5 hours

The Chief Lunch Aide shall not have a classroom assignment in schools where the enrollment exceeds 400. In
the event that there are an odd number of classroom assignments and the enrollment exceeds 400, the Chief Lunch
Aide will be responsible for that one (1) classroom.
G. Assistance in Assault Cases
1. Paraprofessionals should report all cases of assault and injury to themselves to the principal of the building.
2. The principal shall conduct an investigation of the incident and notify the paraprofessional in writing of the results
of the investigation.
H. School Facilities
A mailbox shall be provided in each school for the exclusive use of paraprofessionals.
The Lynn Public Schools remain committed to providing and maintaining healthy and safe working and learning
conditions, and to initiating and maintaining operating practices that will safeguard employee and student health and
safety.
Paraprofessionals assigned to serve breakfast/lunch in the classrooms shall be provided a wheeled device, if
requested, to transport the food to and from the classrooms. In schools equipped with elevators, lunch paraprofessionals
shall have access to them.
I. Discipline
1. Copies of the Discipline Code shall be distributed to all paraprofessional personnel.
2. Paraprofessionals shall assist in helping to maintain good discipline.

5

J. Personnel Files – Instructional Paraprofessionals
1. Personnel files shall be made up of all the documents and other materials which are accumulated from the
beginning of service in the Lynn Public Schools.
2. Files shall be maintained under the following circumstances:
a. No material derogatory to an instructional paraprofessional’s conduct, service, character, or personality shall
be placed in the files by an administrator unless the instructional paraprofessional is sent a dated copy at the same
time.
b. The instructional paraprofessional shall have the right to submit a response to the statement. The instructional
paraprofessional’s answer shall also be included in the file.
c. Upon request, the instructional paraprofessional shall be given access to her/his file without delay.
d. Upon receipt of a written request, the instructional paraprofessional shall be furnished a reproduction of any
material in her/his file.
e. Official files shall be maintained by the Superintendent or his designee at the administration building.
K. Professional Activity
1. In the event an in-service course or program is mandated by the School Committee as a job requirement for
paraprofessionals, all members of the bargaining unit shall be allowed to avail themselves of the course or program to
the maximum extent possible. Programs offered for professional development purposes shall be offered to all
paraprofessionals to the maximum extent possible.
2. This does not apply to federal workshops held during the school day unless such workshop applies to the creation
of a new category.
3. All paraprofessionals shall attend activities on staff development days and be compensated at their hourly rate of
pay. For salary purposes, staff development days are regular work days.
4. Effective September 1, 2007, members of the bargaining unit shall receive one (1) salary credit for each ten (10)
professional development points earned. This section shall apply only to internal activities offered by the department
which are appropriate for paraprofessionals. If the course is subject specific, it must be relevant to the
paraprofessional’s position within the Lynn Public Schools. Only PDP’s earned after September 1, 2007, may be
converted to salary credits. PDP’s for salary credit shall require the advanced approval of the Superintendent or his
designee.
5. On the November professional development day Paraprofessionals may receive paraprofessional specific
professional development. Some suggested topics of said PD are behavioral management training, restraint training,
CPR and classroom management.
L. Substitutes
1. Every effort will be made to hire substitutes to cover classes of regularly assigned paraprofessionals in severely
handicapped classes when they are absent.
2. All lunch personnel, substituting in a position of higher rate, shall be compensated at the higher rate.
3. Classroom personnel shall not be required to substitute for teaching staff except in emergency situations on a
voluntary basis. In such emergency situations, classroom paraprofessionals shall receive compensation at the rate of
one hundred forty dollars ($140.00) per day or the appropriate prorated amount for hours worked.
M. Job Preference
Members of the bargaining unit shall have a job preference on all positions beyond the regular school day or school
year. On-site paraprofessionals shall have first preference for positions designated for a specific school population.
Seniority based on consecutive years of experience in the Lynn School Department and qualifications shall govern all
assignments.
N. Job Descriptions
All instructional and parent liaison paraprofessional job descriptions will be made available during the posting
process, on the X drive, and directly made available to the Lynn Teachers Union annually.
Article V
TRANSFERS; VACANCIES
A. Transfers or Reassignments
1. In the determination of reassignments and transfers, the convenience and wishes of the individual
paraprofessionals will be honored to the extent that these considerations do not conflict with the instructional
requirements and best interests of the School System and the pupils. No assignment of new paraprofessionals shall be

6

made until all transfer requests have been considered. When more than one (1) paraprofessional requesting transfer or
reassignment may be favorably considered, system-wide seniority shall be the determining factor.
2. A list of paraprofessionals requesting transfers shall be supplied to the Union after the postings close.
3. The Office of the Superintendent shall make available to the Union, system-wide data indicating the names of
persons who have been reassigned or transferred and the nature of the new assignment.
4. Following the October posting, when a reduction in class size necessitates a transfer of a paraprofessional’s
assignment, the affected employee shall displace the least senior person within a category of the employee’s choice.
Transfers shall not occur until the Superintendent has determined the classroom needs.
In the event that a new contractual position opens within the building, in the same category, the Superintendent
may assign the closed employee to that new position until June at which time the employee may exercise her/his
system-wide seniority rights.
For the purpose of this section, category refers to either instructional paraprofessional, resource paraprofessional,
or one-to-one paraprofessional.
All paraprofessionals actively employed, including those returning from an authorized leave of absence, adversely
affected by the closing of positions or prior transfers, must fully exercise their seniority rights at the time of posting of
available positions. Failure to do so shall constitute a termination of seniority rights.
5. Any involuntary reassignment or transfer shall be made only after a meeting between the paraprofessional
involved and the Superintendent and/or his designee, at which time the paraprofessional shall be notified of the
reasons for the reassignment or transfer.
B. Filling Vacancies
1. On or before June 1st, the administration will post a list of known vacancies showing location and assignment. A
second posting shall take place on or before June 15th. A copy shall be sent to the Union by mail.
2. All vacancies resulting from the June posting and changes which occur during the summer shall be posted on or
before the first week in October.
a. All paraprofessionals shall have the opportunity to bid for a posted position.
b. Paraprofessionals whose positions have been closed may bid or wait until the posting is completed. If
unsuccessful in bidding or has chosen not to bid, the paraprofessional will be offered any available position by
seniority. The assigned position shall be held until the June posting at which time the paraprofessional will be
afforded the opportunity to exercise her/his full bidding and bumping rights.
c. Paraprofessionals who were closed and bid successfully shall be locked into those positions until the June
posting. No additional bumping rights shall be afforded at that time.
d. In the event that no positions are available in October or that the paraprofessional is unable to perform the
duties of the available position(s), the employee will be allowed to displace the least senior paraprofessional
whose duties can be performed.
3. Applications shall be filed in writing with the Office of the Superintendent, or his designee, within five (5) days of
the posting.
4. In cases of conflict concerning the filling of vacancies by paraprofessionals, all other things being equal, seniority
in the job category shall govern.
5. Paraprofessionals successfully bidding on the first June posting shall be locked into that position until the October
posting unless the employee is adversely affected following the second June posting.
6. All positions filled during the school year will be filled on a temporary basis.
7. A position of personal needs paraprofessional shall be established. Said position need not meet federal highly
qualified guidelines. However such person, hired after September 2014, shall not be allowed to bid into an
instructional paraprofessional position unless he/she does meet the highly qualified standards.
Article VI
LEAVES OF ABSENCE
A. Sick Leave
1. In case of personal illness or accident, or illness in the immediate family: parent, husband, wife, child, brother,
sister, or other relationship determined by the Superintendent of Schools, paraprofessionals who normally work
twenty (20) or more hours per week shall be allowed absence of fifteen (15) working days during each school year
without loss of pay.

7

In case of personal illness or accident, or illness in the immediate family: parent, husband, wife, child, brother,
sister, or other relationship determined by the Superintendent of Schools, paraprofessionals who normally work less
than twenty (20) hours per week shall be allowed absence in accordance with the following schedule:
3 days after 5 years service
4 days after 6 years service
5 days after 7 years service
6 days after 8 years service
7 days after 9 years service
Such leave not used in the year of service for which it is granted shall be accumulated for use in subsequent years.
Any accumulation of sick leave days which present employees have at the effective date of this Agreement shall
be retained.
2. Each employee who qualifies for sick leave shall receive a notice of his accrued sick leave during the month of
September. The information should be transmitted in a sealed envelope.
3. Effective September 1, 2004, paraprofessionals completing ten (10) years of service shall be entitled to apply to
the Superintendent for a maximum of two (2) thirty-two (32) day sick leave extensions.
4. Effective September 1, 2004, after thirty (30) consecutive days of absence, the School Committee has the right to
send an employee to a physician chosen by the School Committee at School Committee expense. If the employee’s
physician and the School Committee’s physician disagree, the School Committee reserves the right to send the
employee to a third doctor not affiliated with the first or second at School Committee expense. The employee will be
bound by the majority opinion of the physicians visited.
5. There shall be established a Sick Leave Bank under the following conditions:
Sick Bank Regulations:
The purpose of the Sick Leave Bank will be to provide its members sick leave with pay for periods of disability
resulting from catastrophic illness, accident, or injury.
a. Any member of the bargaining unit who so certifies shall assign two (2) sick days the first year of participation
and one (1) day thereafter annually to the Sick Leave Bank in September or upon employment.
b. Such paraprofessional, five (5) days after the exhaustion of her/his personal sick leave, both annual and
accumulated, and who is still disabled due to an extended illness or injury may draw upon the bank, if application
is approved. Applications for the withdrawal of days shall be made to the Sick Leave Bank Committee by written
notice to the Human Resource Manager. Applications must be filed prior to use of the Bank and contain medical
verification substantiating the inability to work. For long-term absences, a second medical opinion may be
required.
c. The Sick Leave Bank shall be administered by a Sick Leave Bank Committee composed of two (2) members
designated by the Union and two (2) members designated by the School Committee to serve for a period of two
(2) years. The Sick Leave Bank Committee shall receive all requests for use of the Sick Leave Bank filed with
the Human Resource Manager. Approval of all requests for use of the Sick Bank will be made by the
Superintendent and the Union President.
d. Effective September 1, 2004, upon approval of the initial request, the Sick Leave Bank Committee shall allow
up to fifteen (15) days use by the member. Where circumstances warrant, additional entitlement not to exceed
sixty (60) working days per year may be granted upon written request at the discretion of the Superintendent and
the Union President.
e. The decisions of the Superintendent and the Union President shall be final and binding.
f. Any member of the Sick Leave Bank who so certifies may terminate membership in the Bank; however,
members shall not be entitled to withdraw days previously contributed. Any member who fails to contribute the
required day annually shall be terminated in the same manner.
B. Funeral Leave
1. Four (4) days funeral leave including the day of the funeral shall be granted to paraprofessionals upon the death of
anyone in the immediate family: their mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, grandparents, grandchild, or anyone residing in the same household. The preceding shall also apply
to step relatives.
2. Funeral leave of one (1) day shall be allowed on the death of an aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, or in-laws if not
living in the household.
3. Additional days for out-of-state travel may be granted at the discretion of the Superintendent.

8

4. Funeral leave shall be used in full within 5 consecutive week days, unless the day of the funeral and/or burial
itself takes place out of the 5 week day time frame, in which case a paraprofessional is entitled to use their fourth day.
Other circumstances will be discussed between the Lynn Teachers Union and the Superintendent.
C. Military Leave
Military leave of absence, without pay, may be granted to a paraprofessional who normally works twenty (20) or more
hours per week and who is inducted into the armed forces for the required length of service, according to the terms of the
Selective Services and Training Act of 1940, and subsequent amendments by Congress.
D. Organized Reserve Forces
Any paraprofessional who normally works twenty (20) or more hours per week and who is a member of a reserve
component of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be granted, in accordance with Section 59 of Chapter 33 of the
General Laws, leave of absence, without loss of pay, during the time of his annual tour of duty as a member of such
reserve component; provided, however, that such leave shall not exceed seventeen (17) days.
E. Emergency Suspension of Sessions
Paraprofessionals will receive full pay for all sessions suspended due to inclement weather.
F. Personal Leave
1. Paraprofessionals will be entitled to three (3) personal days with pay. Effective September 2014,
paraprofessionals will be entitled to four (4) personal days with pay.
2. Requests for personal leave shall be made in writing, to the principal, forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the date
of the requested leave.
3. No reasonable request for such leave will be denied and no written request will be required in an emergency
situation.
4. Unused personal leave shall be added to the accumulated sick leave at the end of the school year.
5. Personal leave shall not be used for the purpose of extending vacations or holidays.
G. Maternity Leave
1. A paraprofessional shall be granted a maternity leave of absence without pay to become effective at her discretion
and to terminate not more than two (2) years.
2. Unless a paraprofessional returns to duty at the expiration of the maternity leave her employment shall be
terminated.
3. a. Employees shall be entitled to receive compensation for accumulated sick leave days for any time period
during which they are disabled due to pregnancy, childbirth, or related conditions.
b. Employees, at their option, are entitled to use fewer sick leave days than the amount to which they are eligible.
c. Employees shall be paid for the sick leave days at the applicable rate as of the time period for which the sick
leave is claimed.
d. The Committee may request medical verification of the disability forty-two (42) calendar days from the date of
delivery in order for the employee to continue the use of sick leave benefits.
H. Adoption Leave
Upon reasonable notice to the Superintendent of Schools, an adopting parent shall be granted an adoption leave of
absence without pay to become effective at her/his discretion and to terminate not more than two (2) years from the day of
adoption. If a paraprofessional fails to return from the adoption leave by the expiration of the two (2) year period, her/his
employment shall be terminated.
I. Leave for Conferences, Conventions, etc.
With the approval of the School Committee, no more than four (4) official delegates of the Paraprofessional Chapter
of the Lynn Teachers Union may be granted no more than two (2) days leave with pay to attend conventions of affiliated
bodies, educational conferences or other functions which contribute to the advancement of educational welfare in the City
of Lynn.
J. Jury Duty
Paraprofessionals in the bargaining unit shall be granted leave for jury duty. Any difference between their pay and
payment for jury duty shall be made up by the School Committee.
K. Marriage Leave
A paraprofessional who marries shall be granted two (2) weeks leave without compensation.
L. Graduation Leave
1. A paraprofessional covered by this Agreement shall be granted leave of absence with pay for one (1) day to attend
commencement exercises at which she/he will be awarded a degree or diploma.

9

2. A paraprofessional covered by this Agreement shall be granted leave of absence with pay for one (1) day to attend
commencement exercises, from Junior High School through college, at which a member of her/his immediate family
will be granted a degree or diploma.
M. Requests for Leave
All requests for leave under this Article, shall be made through a person’s principal or immediate supervisor to the
Superintendent of Schools or his designee.
After two (2) consecutive years on a leave of absence, the paraprofessional must return to her/his position or be
terminated.
Article VII
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
A. Definition
1. A “grievance” shall mean a complaint by an employee or the Union that there has been a violation,
misinterpretation, or inequitable application of any of the provisions of this Agreement.
2. As used in this Article, the term “employee” shall mean either an individual employee or a group of employees
having the same grievance.
3. The Union may initiate and process grievances under the following procedure, acting in place of the employee.
B. Adjustment of Grievance
1. Level 1–Principal
a. An employee may present a grievance in writing to the principal of the school within fifteen (15) school days
following knowledge by the grievant of the act or condition which is the basis of his complaint, unless the
grievant has a valid excuse for later filing.
b. The employee and the principal shall first confer on the grievance with a view to arriving at a mutually
satisfactory resolution of the complaint. At the conference, the employee may be represented by the appropriate
Union representative; but where the employee is represented he must be present. Whenever a grievance is
presented to the principal by the paraprofessional personally, the principal shall give the Union representative the
opportunity to be present and state the views of the Union.
c. The principal of the school shall communicate his decision in writing to the aggrieved employee and to the
Union representative who participated within five (5) school days after receiving the complaint.
2. Level 2–Superintendent of Schools
a. If the grievance is not resolved at Level 1, the aggrieved employee may appeal from the decision at Level 1 to
the Superintendent of Schools within ten (10) school days after the decision of the appropriate superior has been
delivered. The appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth specifically the reasons for the appeal.
b. The Superintendent of Schools, or his designated representative, shall meet and confer with the aggrieved
employee with a view to arriving at a mutually satisfactory resolution of the complaint. The aggrieved employee
and the appropriate Union representative shall be given at least two (2) school days notice of the conference and
an opportunity to be heard.
c. Notice of the conference shall also be given to the principal of the school. The principal of the school and the
appropriate superior may be present at the conference and state their views.
d. When the employee is not represented by the Union at this level, the Superintendent of Schools shall furnish
the Union with a copy of the appeal from Level 1, together with notice of the date of the conference. In such
cases, the Union may be present and state its views.
e. The Superintendent shall communicate his decision in writing, together with the supporting reasons, to the
aggrieved employee and to any Union representative who participated at this level, within ten (10) schools days
after receiving the appeal.
f. The principal of the school and the appropriate superior shall also receive a copy of any decision at this level.
3. Special Procedures for Grievances Relating to Salary and Leave Matters
a. Any grievance based on a complaint that the employee has been placed on the wrong salary schedule, or step,
or that he has been improperly denied an increment, or that his salary has been miscalculated, or that the person’s
absence deduction was improperly calculated, shall be filed directly with the Human Resource Manager and shall
next be appealed to the Superintendent of Schools. In such cases, the provisions of the general procedures
relating to Level 2 shall apply to the presentation and adjustment of the grievance except that:
(1) The grievance shall be filed within fifteen (15) school days following knowledge by the grievant of the act
or condition which is the basis of the complaint, unless the grievant has a valid excuse for later filing.

10

(2) The employee need not be present at the conference.
The provisions of the general procedures relating to Level 2 shall apply to any appeal to the Superintendent of
Schools from the decision of the Human Resource Manager.
4. Time Limits
a. The time limits in this Article may be extended by mutual agreement.
b. Failure at any level of the Grievance Procedure to appeal within the specified time limits shall be considered
acceptance by the employee of the decision rendered.
c. Failure at any level of the Grievance Procedure to communicate a decision within the specified time limits
shall permit the employee to proceed to the next level.
Article VIII
ARBITRATION
A grievance dispute which was not resolved at the level of the Superintendent under the grievance procedure may be
submitted by the Union to arbitration. The proceeding may be initiated by filing with the School Committee and the
American Arbitration Association a request for arbitration. The notice shall be filed within ten (10) school days after
receipt of the decision of the Superintendent, under the Grievance Procedure. The voluntary labor arbitration rules of the
American Arbitration Association shall apply to the proceeding. The parties shall determine by lot which of them shall
strike first from the list of arbitrators submitted.
The arbitrator shall issue his decision not later than thirty (30) days from the date of the close of the hearings or, if
oral hearings have been waived, then from the date of transmitting the final statements and proofs to the arbitrator. The
decision shall be in writing and shall set forth the arbitrator’s opinion and conclusion on the issues submitted. The
decision of the arbitrator, if made in accordance with his jurisdiction and authority under this Agreement, will be accepted
as final by the parties to the dispute and both will abide by it. The arbitrator’s fee will be shared equally by the parties to
the dispute.
The Committee agrees that it will apply to all substantially similar situations the decision of an arbitrator sustaining a
grievance and the Union agrees that it will not bring or continue, and that it will not represent any employee in any
grievance which is substantially similar to a grievance denied by the decision of the arbitrator.
Article IX
UNION PRIVILEGES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
A. Dues Check-Off
1. The Union may secure authorization for payroll deductions for Union dues. Such authorizations may be
revocable as provided by law. The Committee will request the Treasurer of the City of Lynn to submit such sums in
total to the Union Treasurer weekly.
2. The Union shall be notified of any paraprofessional withdrawing or dropped from payroll deductions.
3. Any paraprofessional desiring to have the Committee discontinue deductions that he has previously authorized
must provide written notice to the Committee.
B. Protection of Individual and Group Rights
1. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the Committee, a member of the Committee, or its
designated representatives, from meeting with any paraprofessional for expression of the paraprofessionals views. In
the area of collective bargaining, no changes or modifications shall be made except through consultation or
negotiation with the Union. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to permit any organization other than the
Union to appear in an official capacity in the processing of a grievance.
2. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent any person from informally discussing any dispute with
his immediate superior or processing a grievance on his own behalf in accordance with the grievance procedure.
C. Information
1. The Committee shall make available to the Union, upon its reasonable request, all records relevant to
negotiations, or necessary for the proper enforcement of this Agreement.
2. Names, addresses, and current assignment of newly employed paraprofessionals shall be provided to the Union
following their election by the School Committee.
D. Existing Laws and Regulations Preserved
The rights and benefits of persons provided herein are in addition to those provided by city, state, or federal law, rule
or regulation, including without limitation all applicable tenure, pension, or education laws and regulations.

11

E. Printing of Contract
The Committee agrees to pay one-half (1/2) the cost of printing the Agreement in booklet form and to distribute
copies of the Agreement to each paraprofessional presently employed by the Committee and to each new paraprofessional
hired by the Committee.
F. Paraprofessional Meetings
A committee of paraprofessional representatives not to exceed five (5) members shall meet after school hours with the
Superintendent of Schools for consultation on problems and policies related to this Agreement. There shall be no more
than four (4) meetings per year. Both parties may submit items for the agenda. The Chapter Chairperson and the
Superintendent shall establish a mutually convenient time for these meetings.
G. Distribution of Materials
The Union shall have the right to distribute Union-related materials to all paraprofessionals.
H. Agency Fee
Any paraprofessional employed by the Lynn School Department on or after September 1, 1983, and is not a member
of the Lynn Teachers Union, shall be required, as a condition of employment, to pay an agency fee to the Lynn Teachers
Union.
Such payment shall be in accordance with Massachusetts statute, G.L. c. 150E, Section 12 and shall represent the
agency fee person’s fair share of administrative costs pertaining to collective bargaining and contract implementation.
I. Fair Practices
As sole collective bargaining agent, the Union will continue its policy of accepting into voluntary membership all
eligible persons in the unit without regarding to race, color, creed, national origin, sex, age, handicap, or marital status.
The Union will represent equally all persons without regard to membership, participation in, or activities in any employee
organization.
The Committee agrees to continue its policy of not discriminating against any person on the basis of race, creed,
color, national origin, sex, age, handicap, marital status, or participation in or association with the activities of any
employee organization.
Article X
HANDLING OF NEW ISSUES
Matters of collective bargaining import not covered by this Agreement may, during the life of the Agreement, be
handled in the following manner:
By this Committee:
With respect to matters not covered by this Agreement which are proper subjects for collective bargaining, the
Committee agrees, it will make no changes without prior consultation and negotiation with the Union.
By the Union:
In any matter not covered in this Agreement which is a proper subject for collective bargaining, the Union may raise
issue with the Committee for consultation and negotiation; except that the Union shall not seek to renew to be effective
during this Agreement any question introduced, debated and settled, either negatively or affirmatively, during the
bargaining prior to final settlement.
Being a mutual Agreement, this instrument may be amended at any time by mutual consent.
Article XI
SAVINGS CLAUSE
If any provision of this Agreement is or shall at any time be contrary to law, then such provision shall not be
applicable, performed, or enforced, except to the extent permitted by law and substitute action shall be subject to
appropriate consultation and negotiation with the Union.
In the event that any provisions of this Agreement are or shall be contrary to law, all other provisions of this
Agreement shall continue in effect.

12

Article XII
RESOLUTION OF DIFFERENCES BY PEACEFUL MEANS
The Union and the Committee agree that differences between the parties shall be settled by peaceful means as
provided within this Agreement. The Union, shall for the term of this Agreement, not engage in, instigate, or condone any
strike, work stoppage, or any concerted refusal to perform normal work duties.
Article XIII
DURATION
This Agreement and each of its provisions shall be in effect as of September 1, 2016, and shall continue in full force
and effect until August 31, 2018. Negotiations for a subsequent agreement shall commence on November 1, 2017, on all
items. The School Committee and the Union agree to a salary reopener effective at the request of either party.
Date of Execution: January 25, 2018.
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING – 1
between the
LYNN SCHOOL COMMITTEE
and the
LYNN TEACHERS UNION LOCAL 1037, AFT, AFL-CIO
1. The Administration shall at the start of the school year conduct a study of the Food Distributor’s working conditions
where the meals served exceed 300. The Union shall have representation in this study group.
2. In Article IV, Section F., Work Day and Work Year, additional hours may be provided subject to prior approval by
the Superintendent.
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING – 2
between the
LYNN SCHOOL COMMITTEE
and the
LYNN TEACHERS UNION LOCAL 1037, AFT, AFL-CIO
Incorporated by reference are Sections 5-7 of the Home Rule Petition. (See attachment A.)
ATTACHMENT A
Section Six: Article 5 of the Charter of the City of Lynn is hereby amended by inserting the following:
Section 5-7 Allotments
On or before August 1st of each year, or within ten (10) days after the approval of the City Council and the Mayor of
the annual appropriation order for such fiscal year, whichever shall occur later, the city officials in charge of departments
or agencies including the Superintendent of Schools for the School Department, shall submit to the Chief Financial
Officer, with a copy to the City Clerk, in such form as the Chief Financial Officer may prescribe, an allotment schedule of
the appropriations of all personnel categories included in said budget, indicating the amounts to be expended by the
department or agency for such purposes during each of the fiscal quarters of said fiscal year, or such shorter time periods
as the Mayor or Chief Financial Officer may prescribe.
Whenever the Chief Financial Officer determines that any department or agency, including the School Department,
will exhaust or has exhausted its quarterly or shorter time period allotment and any amounts unexpended in previous
periods, he shall give notice in writing to such effect to the Department Head, the Mayor, the City Solicitor, and the City
Clerk who shall transmit the same to City Council. Upon such a determination and upon giving such notice, the Chief
Financial Officer shall provide such officers additional reports on at least a monthly basis indicating the status of such
accounts.
The Mayor within seven (7) days after receiving such notice, shall determine whether to waive or enforce such
allotment. If the allotment for such period is waived or not enforced, as provided above, the department or agency head
shall reduce the subsequent period allotments appropriately. If the allotment for such period is enforced or not waived,

13

thereafter the department shall terminate all personnel expenses for the remainder of such period. All actions, notices, and
decisions provided for in this section shall be transmitted to the City Council and the City Clerk within seven (7) days.
No personnel expenses earned or accrued, within any department, shall be charged to or paid from such department’s
or agency’s allotment of a subsequent period without approval by the Mayor, except for subsequently determined
retroactive compensation adjustments. Approval of a payroll for payment of wages, or salaries, or other personnel
expenses which would result in a expenditure in excess of the allotment shall be a violation of this section by the
department or agency head, including the Superintendent of Schools and the School Committee. If the continued payment
of wages, salaries, or other personnel expenses is not approved in a period where a department has exhausted the period
allotment or allotments as specified above, or in any event, if a department has exceeded its entire appropriation for a
fiscal year, the City shall have no obligation to pay such personnel cost or expense arising after such allotment or
appropriation has been exhausted.
Not withstanding the provisions of Chapter 150E of the General Laws, every collective-bargaining agreement entered
into by the City or the School Department after the effective date of this act shall be subject to and shall expressly
incorporate the provisions of this section.
Memorandums of Agreement
1. One-to-one paraprofessionals, when not servicing their regular student assignment, shall be subject to be assigned to
an appropriate instructional paraprofessional duty by the principal.
2. In an effort to create career opportunities for paraprofessional employees, the Lynn School Committee and Local
1037 agree to participate in a Joint Study Committee to determine the possibility of adding the position of instructional
assistant.
Said Committee shall be comprised of two (2) administrative members appointed by the Superintendent and two (2)
paraprofessional members appointed by the Union.
This Committee will present a report to the Lynn School Committee and Local 1037 on or before February 4, 1994.

14

Step

1
2
3

Step

1
2
3

APPENDIX A-1 BASIC SALARY SCHEDULE
Effective September 1, 2016
C
D
E
F

A

B

G

H

Lunch Aide
Breakfast
Aide

Food
Distributor

CLA/CBA
Non-Cert.
Para

Certified Para
10 Credits

Certified
22 Credits

Certified
28 Credits

Assoc.
Degree

Assoc.
Degree
+20 Credits

11.12
12.86
14.19

12.65
14.09
15.70

13.93
15.17
17.23

14.90
16.90
17.89

16.43
18.43
19.41

17.10
19.16
20.08

17.76
19.80
20.75

18.43
20.47
21.40

APPENDIX A-2 BASIC SALARY SCHEDULE
Effective September 1, 2017
C
D
E
F

A

B

G

H

Lunch Aide
Breakfast
Aide

Food
Distributor

CLA/CBA
Non-Cert.
Para

Certified Para
10 Credits

Certified
22 Credits

Certified
28 Credits

Assoc.
Degree

Assoc.
Degree
+20 Credits

11.34
13.12
14.47

12.90
14.37
16.01

14.21
15.47
17.57

15.20
17.24
18.25

16.76
18.80
19.80

17.44
19.54
20.48

18.12
20.20
21.17

18.80
20.88
21.83

Column A: Lunch aides and breakfast aides.
Column B: Food distributors.
Column C: Chief lunch aides, chief breakfast aides, and non-certified instructional paraprofessionals.
Column D: Certified instructional paraprofessionals with at least ten (10) education credits from an officially recognized
accredited institution of learning beyond a high school diploma or credits earned through district or union offered
professional development and approved by the Superintendent or an instructional paraprofessional with certification
through an instructional paraprofessional training program.
Column E: Certified instructional paraprofessionals with at least twelve (12) additional education credits, beyond the ten
(10) earned in Column D, from an officially recognized accredited institution of learning beyond a high school diploma or
credits earned through district or union offered professional development and approved by the Superintendent.
Column F: Certified instructional paraprofessionals with six (6) educational credits beyond Column E.
Column G: Associate’s Degree: Paraprofessionals who have obtained an Associate’s Degree from an accredited college
or university in an area relevant to education or in content matter beneficial to the Lynn Public Schools shall move to
Column G with the approval of the Superintendent.
Paraprofessionals who are taking courses at an accredited college or university working toward an Associate’s Degree
in an area relevant to education or in content matter beneficial to the Lynn Public Schools must have those courses
approved in advance by the Superintendent.
Paraprofessionals who began taking courses at an accredited college or university working toward an Associate’s
Degree in an area relevant to education or in content matter beneficial to the Lynn Public Schools prior to the effective
date of this contract shall submit evidence of courses taken to the Superintendent no later than February 11, 2005.
Paraprofessionals who have obtained a minimum of sixty (60) credit hours from an accredited college or university
which would lead to a Bachelor’s Degree and teacher certification from the Department of Education shall move to
Column G with the approval of the Superintendent.
Column H: Associate’s Degree +20 Credits: Effective September 1, 2011, paraprofessionals who have obtained an
Associate’s Degree and 20 credits from an accredited college or university in an area relevant to education or in content
matter beneficial to the Lynn Public Schools shall move to Column H with the approval of the Superintendent.
Paraprofessionals who are taking courses at an accredited college or university working toward a Bachelor’s Degree
in an area relevant to education or in content matter beneficial to the Lynn Public Schools must have those courses
approved in advance by the Superintendent.
Paraprofessionals who began taking courses at an accredited college or university working toward a Bachelor’s
Degree in an area relevant to education or in content matter beneficial to the Lynn Public Schools prior to the effective
date of this contract shall submit evidence of courses taken to the Superintendent no later than April 30, 2012.
Paraprofessionals who have obtained a minimum of eighty (80) credit hours from an accredited college or university,
which would lead to a Bachelor’s Degree and teacher certification from the Department of Education, shall move to
Column H with the approval of the Superintendent.

15

Appendix B

Lynn Public Schools
Paraprofessional Performance Evaluation System

April 2005

16

LYNN PUBLIC SCHOOLS
RATIONALE FOR THE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF STAFF
The Lynn School Committee is responsible for providing the students, parents, and citizens of Lynn with the best
educational opportunities and programs possible.
To effectively carry out this responsibility, the Committee must insure that the staff provides the quality of education
desired by all who support, benefit from, and most importantly, depend upon the Lynn Public Schools for their education.
The Committee believes that the continuous evaluation of job performance as required by M.G.L. Chapter 188 is one
effective way to insure quality public schooling for the citizens of Lynn.
The primary purposes of Lynn’s staff performance evaluation system are:
1. to improve student achievement and the instructional programs via the continuous monitoring and improvement
of staff job performance;
2. to identify and commend outstanding staff performance;
3. to identify and provide reasonable opportunities for the remediation of staff performance as needed;
4. to provide the Committee, the Superintendent, and other administrative and supervisory personnel with job
performance-based information in order to assist them in making employment-related decisions.
The Committee’s commitment to the use of performance evaluation of staff as one mechanism to insure the provision
of the desired quality of education is based upon four beliefs. They are:
1. student learning is directly and significantly related to the quality of staff performance;
2. the quality of instruction and, therefore, student learning can be increased by improving the job performance of
staff;
3. the improvement of staff performance is the responsibility of each staff member and the supervisory and
administrative staff of the school system;
4. staff performance and ultimately student learning can best be improved, in most instances, via face-to-face
communication and immediate feedback (oral/written) as required by a formal performance evaluation system.
If staff performance evaluation is to produce the desired results—improved instruction and learning—all parties must
be committed to its successful implementation. All have a role in improving the current quality of instruction and
learning in the school system. All can benefit from constructive periodic changes to improve job performance.
This staff performance evaluation system requires that administrators and other supervisory personnel spend time and
energy in carrying out two primary responsibilities:
a. evaluating the job performance of personnel;
b. assisting personnel in improving their job performance.
School systems that consistently deliver quality educational services have an administration and supervisory staff that
value performance evaluation and consistently work with teachers, paraprofessionals, and other personnel to increase
student learning via the improvement of instructional performance.
This staff evaluation system acknowledges that paraprofessionals and other personnel who provide instructional
services directly to students are the most important components of the instructional delivery system. It also acknowledges
that our students can only learn and maximize their opportunities and educational growth if the instruction they receive is
of the highest quality.
LYNN PUBLIC SCHOOLS
JOB DESCRIPTION—PARAPROFESSIONALS
TITLE: PARAPROFESSIONAL
REPORTS TO: PRINCIPAL (or Designee)
JOB GOALS:
1. To help provide maximum learning opportunities for students in accordance with school system goals and
students’ abilities and educational needs.
2. To continuously develop his/her professional knowledge, skills, attitudes, and behaviors in order to improve the
educational opportunities for his/her students.
I. PERFORMANCE RESPONSIBILITIES
A. INSTRUCTION
1. Assist the teacher to instruct students in accordance with the educational philosophy, goals, policies, and
curriculum of the school system.

17

2. Help the teacher in directing the teaching/learning process toward the achievement of program goals, establish
specific course and lesson objectives, and communicate these objectives to students.
3. Instruct students assigned to him/her under the direction of the teacher.
4. Support the teacher by employing a variety of instructional techniques, materials, and instructional media,
consistent with the needs, interests, and abilities of the students and the objectives of the course.
5. Aid the teacher in motivating students to learn and encourage active student participation.
6. Report the progress of students in terms of course objectives on a continuous basis to the teacher.
7. Set a positive example for students and community by demonstrating respect and concern for students and an
awareness of community values.
8. Assist in the recording and collection of data according to established procedures.
B. MANAGEMENT OF TEACHING/LEARNING ENVIRONMENT
1. Help establish and maintain a classroom environment conducive to learning and teaching.
2. Assist the teacher in implementing policies and/or rules governing student life and conduct and help maintain
order in the classroom in a fair and just manner.
3. Promote appropriate student behavior and correct students’ misbehavior when it occurs in the classroom (e.g.,
hallways, cafeteria).
4. Encourage mutual respect among students.
5. Take reasonable precautions to protect students, equipment, materials, and facilities from harm.
6. Assist in the care of all specialized equipment (wheelchairs, braces, walkers, lifts, etc.).
7. Monitor student safety in all situations and at all times.
C. ORGANIZATION
1. Help conduct all school-related activities in accordance with School Committee policies and administrative
regulations.
2. Cooperate with administrators and others in developing and supporting school activities and maintain an
atmosphere conducive to learning and teaching.
3. Establish and maintain productive working relationships with colleagues and supervisors.
4. Assist the teacher in recording attendance accurately in classes and/or homerooms.
5. Conduct routine assignments with accuracy, promptness, and efficiency.
6. Is punctual to class and other professional meetings.
7. Perform all other school-related duties as required by the teacher, principal, or department head.
D. PARENT/COMMUNITY RELATIONS
1. Demonstrate respect and courtesy for parents at all times.
2. Establish and maintain communication (oral and written) with teachers concerning both the academic and
behavioral progress of all assigned students.
3. Maintain good humor, enthusiasm, initiative, and integrity with students and colleagues and have a positive
working relationship with them.
E. PROFESSIONALISM
1. Incorporate constructive feedback and suggestions for improvement in performance made by teachers and
administrators.
2. Exercise sound judgment in school-related matters in accordance with the highest standard of professional
conduct and ethics.
3. Abide by the chain of command in all professional matters.
4. Demonstrate commitment to the positive growth and well-being of his/her students, school, and the school
system.
II. QUALIFICATIONS
Associate’s Degree or highly qualified status as stated in No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB).
III. TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT
Salary, benefits, and work year established by Agreement between the Lynn School Committee and the Lynn
Teachers Union.
IV. EVALUATION
The principal, headmaster, or other administrative head outside of the bargaining unit will be responsible for all
evaluations. However, they may be assisted by other qualified persons (who are not members of the bargaining unit)
designated by the School Department. Input will also be sought from the teacher for whom the paraprofessional works.

18

LYNN PUBLIC SCHOOLS
PROCEDURE FOR PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS (PARAPROFESSIONALS)
I.

GENERAL INFORMATION
A. DEFINITIONS AS PROVIDED IN STATE REGULATIONS
EVALUATIONS. Personnel evaluation is the ongoing process of defining goals and of identifying, gathering,
and using information as part of a process to improve professional performance and to judge total job
effectiveness. The evaluation process shall be free of racial, sexual, religious, and other discriminations and
biases as defined in state and federal laws.
PARAPROFESSIONAL. A school employee whose position is either 1) instructional in nature; or 2) who
provides other direct or indirect services to students. The instructional paraprofessional works as a member of a
team in the classroom where the teacher has the ultimate responsibilities for the design and implementation of the
classroom education program, the education program of individual students, and for evaluation of those programs
and student progress.
The paraprofessional works under the ultimate supervision of the school principal and is assigned to work
under the direction of a teacher or a team of teachers.
EVALUATOR. Any person designated by a School Committee with responsibility for evaluation. It is the
responsibility of the Superintendent of Schools to insure that evaluators have training in general principles of
supervision and evaluation and have or have available to them expertise in the subject matter and or area to be
evaluated.
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE. Standards of productivity and performance are subject to collective
bargaining under M.G.L. c150E.
B. CHARACTERISTICS OF AN EFFECTIVE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION SYSTEM
An effective performance evaluation system has the following characteristics:
1. assumes that standards of effectiveness can be determined and that performance can be measured in terms of
those standards;
2. states clearly, in writing the purposes of evaluation;
3. includes information based primarily on direct observation of performance;
4. allows for differences in assignments, includes information concerning class size, support, characteristics of
students, and class environment;
5. includes information from evaluatee about his/her job performance;
6. identifies areas of strengths and areas in need of improvement;
7. provides specific recommendations for improving performance as needed and follow-up evaluation;
8. evaluation report is communicated in writing to the evaluatee;
9. evaluatee has an opportunity to respond in writing to his/her evaluation report;
10. provides for the evaluation of the job performance every year.
II. EVALUATION PROCESS
The distinction between the processes of observation and evaluation must be clear. Observation refers to seeing,
reviewing, analyzing, and documenting paraprofessional performance throughout the school year in classroom and nonclassroom settings. Evaluation refers to the making of judgments based upon the data accumulated about the
paraprofessional’s performance during observations of classroom performance and during the implementation of nonclassroom responsibilities throughout the school year.
The evaluation process is a CONTINUOUS CYCLE OF DATA COLLECTION, ANALYSIS, AND FEEDBACK
through classroom visits, conferences, and staff interaction throughout the school year.
A. RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PRINCIPAL
The principal shall be responsible for the performance evaluation of ALL personnel assigned to his/her school on
a non-itinerant basis.
In areas of non-expertise, the principal shall rely on the expertise of assistant principals, department heads, and
other supervisory personnel in evaluating the professional staff in his/her school.
The job performance of all itinerant personnel shall be evaluated by appropriate supervisory personnel from
central administration. The principal shall participate in the evaluation of itinerant personnel in those performance
areas where he/she has expertise.

19

B. FREQUENCY OF PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
All paraprofessionals will be evaluated at least once during his/her three (3) month probationary period. All other
paraprofessionals will be evaluated annually. Copies of the Paraprofessional’s Job Description, Evaluation
Instrument, and Rationale will be available from the principal upon the paraprofessional’s request.
In addition, prior notice for classroom observation(s) for paraprofessionals shall be at least one (1) but not more
than five (5) school days. If the observation does not occur within this parameter as scheduled, prior notice must be
repeated. A minimum of one (1) classroom observation is required.
All evaluations of paraprofessionals shall be completed no later than June 1st.
If necessary, as determined by the principal, paraprofessionals may be evaluated as often as required to improve
performance.
C. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION ACTIVITY
All observation and evaluation of a paraprofessional’s performance shall be conducted with full knowledge of the
paraprofessional.
Evaluations which indicate unsatisfactory performance or need for improvement shall include specific
recommendations by the evaluator for the paraprofessional to implement. Paraprofessionals may also request
additional help from the school administration in order to improve their performance as required.
No adverse comments concerning a paraprofessional’s performance shall be given to the paraprofessional by
evaluators in the presence of anyone but another supervisor.
D. CONFERENCES
At the beginning of each school year, the principal or his/her designee shall meet with the paraprofessionals for
the purpose of explaining the evaluation process and instrument and answer any questions.
Principals (or designees) may conduct a pre-observation conference with the paraprofessional whose classroom
performance is to be observed.
Post-observation conferences within five (5) school days are required.
All conferences may include data and discussion of performance other than classroom performance but within the
scope of the performance responsibilities as detailed in the job description.
The post-observation conference is a key component of the evaluation process. Performance ratings are discussed
and clarified. Goal-setting and strategies for improvement, if necessary, are outlined. Plans are made to provide
assistance and schedule subsequent observations and other assistance as needed. The focus is on what specific
performances need to be improved and what needs to be done by the paraprofessional and evaluator to insure that the
improvement occurs in a reasonable period of time. CONSTRUCTIVE CANDOR IS REQUIRED.
Minimally, the post-observation conference should provide an opportunity for the evaluator to adequately detail
the rationale for his/her ratings of the paraprofessional’s performance, appropriate commendations, and, most
importantly, constructive feedback for improvement, if necessary. It should also provide the paraprofessional an
opportunity to describe his/her performance, clarify for the evaluator information that is incorrect, be commended for
his/her performance, and establish some goals and strategies for improvement, if necessary.
At the conclusion of the post-observation conference, the paraprofessional shall sign the Evaluation Report. This
signature does not necessarily mean agreement. It means that the results of the evaluation were discussed with the
paraprofessional in a post-observation conference and that the paraprofessional has received a copy of the Evaluation
Report.
If the need for remediation is indicated, the evaluator and paraprofessional will develop a plan for improvement.
E. RECORD OF PERFORMANCE
Upon completion of the Evaluation Reports, the principal shall provide copies of the reports to the following
parties:
1. Paraprofessional
2. Principal’s Files (School)
3. Paraprofessional’s Personnel File
4. Deputy Superintendent
Copies of Evaluation Reports for paraprofessionals shall be forwarded to the Deputy Superintendent no later than
June 15 of each school year.
SUMMARY
The primary purposes of this evaluation system are to improve paraprofessional performance, to strengthen
competencies, to recognize and commend exceptional performance, and of course, to remediate skills in need of
improvement. Remedial assistance, if necessary, will be provided. Only if remedial efforts do not succeed will this
system be used to support recommendations concerning future employment.

20

This system of performance evaluation acknowledges that paraprofessionals are an important component of our
instructional delivery system. It also acknowledges that our students can only learn and maximize their opportunities and
growth if the instruction they receive from our teachers and paraprofessionals is of the highest quality.
This system of performance evaluation purports to insure quality instruction and, therefore, quality learning—in
short—quality education and genuine opportunity for all students.
The Lynn School Committee wishes you every success in its implementation.

21

LYNN PUBLIC SCHOOLS
PARAPROFESSIONAL PERFORMANCE EVALUATION INSTRUMENT
Paraprofessional’s Name:_____________________________________

Date:____________________________________________

Evaluator:_________________________________________________

Classroom Teacher:________________________________

School:___________________________________________________

Program:_________________________________________

(Check One) Highly Qualified_____

Reasonable Progress_____

Not Highly Qualified_____

(Check One) Instructional paraprofessional_____

One to One paraprofessional _____

Lunch/Breakfast paraprofessional _____

PERFORMANCE RATINGS
1.
2.
3.
4.

EXCEEDS STANDARDS⎯Performance surpasses the standards of the Lynn Public Schools.
MEETS STANDARDS⎯Performance fulfills the standards of the Lynn Public Schools.
NEEDS IMPROVEMENT⎯Performance fulfills the requirements for the most part. Improvement, however, is needed and expected.
DOES NOT MEET STANDARDS⎯Improvement is required.

PARAPROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES (ALL PARAPROFESSIONALS)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.

Maintains proper appearance and demeanor
Works in a cooperative fashion with all staff
Accepts directions from others
Demonstrates flexibility in accepting schedule/assignment changes
Able to get verbal or written messages across in a clear, organized and appropriate manner
Uses time wisely
Respects student and family rights to confidentiality at all times
Encourages care and responsibility for school materials and environment

ATTENDANCE AND PUNCTUALITY

(ALL PARAPROFESSIONALS)

a. Adheres to district policy regarding attendance/use of sick time
b. Adheres to district policy regarding punctuality
INSTRUCTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.

_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______

_______
_______

(INSTRUCTIONAL PARAPROFESSIONALS ONLY)

Supports the goals and objectives of the teacher and the instructional program
Supervises students effectively
Assists the classroom teacher with establishing and maintaining a challenging teaching/learning environment
Assists the classroom teacher with the provision of instructional activities at the appropriate level for all students
Assists the classroom teacher with establishing and maintaining appropriate management procedures in the class
Demonstrates the ability to carry out assignments and responsibilities with minimal supervision
Cooperates with the classroom teacher
Assists in the collection and recording of data accurately according to established procedures
Assists in the care of all specialized equipment (wheelchairs, braces, lifts, etc.)
Monitors student safety in all situations and at all times

_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______

Evaluator’s Comments:

Paraprofessional’s Comments:

Date:______________________________

Signature of Evaluator____________________________________________________

Date:______________________________

Signature of Paraprofessional______________________________________________

The paraprofessional’s signature indicates that the paraprofessional has received a copy of this performance evaluation. It does not indicate that the
paraprofessional is in agreement with the evaluator’s ratings of his/her performance or the evaluator’s commendations or recommendations.
The paraprofessional may comment on the evaluator’s ratings, commendations and recommendations in writing on this page or additional pages.

22

LYNN SCHOOL COMMITTEE
BARGAINING COMMITTEE:
Thomas McGee, Mayor
Brian Castellanos
Donna M. Coppola
John E. Ford, Jr.
Lorraine Gately
Jared Nicholson
Michael Satterwhite
Catherine C. Latham, Superintendent
John C. Mihos, Esquire, Labor Relations Consultant
LYNN TEACHERS UNION, LOCAL 1037
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF TEACHERS,
AFL-CIO, PARAPROFESSIONALS
BARGAINING COMMITTEE:
Sheila O’Neil, President
Jeremy Shenk, AFT Massachusetts
Rocio Cruz
Catherine Deveney, Chairperson
Kirsten Kasper
Carol McPherson
