MANOR BOROUGH COUNCIL
MONTHLY BUSINESS MEETING ON May 15, 2024
1. CALL TO ORDER - Council President Mr. Tony Gockel called the Council
Meeting to Order at 6:30 P.M. on May 15, 2024, in the Manor Community Room
and led the
2. PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
3. ROLL CALL
(Present)

Tony Gockel, President
Ted Dornin
Jim Vacha
Chelsea Dice, Solicitor
Randy Carlson, Chief of Police

Chuck Charrie
Dave Gongaware
Ed Malinoski, Mayor
Ed Antonacci, Engineer
Mike Radakovich, Tax Collector

(Absent)

Dawn Lynn, Vice-President
Jason Krainbucher, Zoning Office

Terry Nemitz

4. APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES for meeting on 04/17/2024 - Mr. Gongaware
motioned to accept the meeting minutes for the meeting held on March 20, 2024.
Seconded by Mr. Dornin, and the motion carried unanimously.
5. PUBLIC COMMENT – AGENDA ITEMS ONLY – None.
6. MAYOR’S REPORT – The Mayor reported the police had received 150 total calls
for the month of April. He also reported that there are currently 3 docketed
criminal cases. The Mayor gave an update on the planning for community day. It
will be hosted on August 17, 2024. There will be various activities in the
community room from 11am until 6pm. Additionally, there will be bands and food
vendors at the baseball fields from 12pm until 10 pm. Finally, there will be parking
nearby, and a shuttle will be provided.
7. SOLICITOR’S REPORT – The Solicitor reported that she had researched current
ordinances relating to the Borough parking lots. The current ordinance states the
Borough Building parking lot is open 24 hours. However, there are provisions that
allow for permitted parking. The other Borough lots are closed to parking at
sunset. She recommends a meeting with the buildings and properties committee
to discuss further.
8. ENGINEER’S REPORT – The Engineer reported that Dun Rite Construction had
completed their work in Manor Park, and they are currently creating a punch list.
On Cameron Drive, D&M Contracting have finished their work, and are finishing
their punch list. He also reported that Derry Construction would like to have a preconstruction meeting for the Rowe Road project. Finally, the Engineer met with
the water company, they are ready to move forward on the Oak Street project.
9. ZONING OFFICER’S REPORT – None.

10. BOROUGH MANAGER’S REPORT – The Borough Manager reported that the
new backhoe has been delivered, and the public works department has received
training from CAT. The property located at 198 Oak Street was sold at sheriff sale
to the mortgage company on May 6, and is currently up for auction. The Borough
Manager also reported that the electronic speed sign has been placed at 210
Cameron Drive. Finally, a vehicle drove through a road closed sign on Rowe
Road and hit a borough vehicle. The vehicle sustained no damage.
11. TREASURER’S REPORT - Mr. Gongaware motioned to approve the treasurer’s
report for the month of April 2024. Seconded by Mr. Vacha, and the motion
carried unanimously.
12. TAX COLLECTOR’S REPORT - Mr. Dornin motioned to approve the treasurer’s
report as presented. Seconded by Mr. Vach, and the motion carried unanimously.
13. COMMITTEE REPORTS
a. Building & Properties – Mr. Charrie reported that he would like to meet to
discuss the Borough parking lots further, and to prepare a recommendation
for council. Mr. Gockel asked if there were any updates for the sound
system for the community room. There is no update on the sound system
bid, but there has already been a vote to go out to bid and the
advertisement is ready. Mr. Vacha asked about an update for a new park
restroom. Mr. Charrie stated that he would like access to the park to bring
people in to look at the current restroom for renovations. The Borough
Manager suggested the Engineer research potential locations for a second,
new restroom in the park.
b. Community Betterment, Parks & Recreation – Mr. Dornin reported that he
had received 2 new applications and clearances for the recreation board.
c. Personnel & Finance – Mr. Vacha reported that the meeting with the
Teamsters to negotiate a new public works contract that was scheduled for
Friday has been cancelled. It will be rescheduled in June.
d. Community Outreach & Communication – Mr. Gockel reported that the
junior council program has been postponed until next year.
e. Planning & Zoning – Mr. Charrie reported that the Planning Commission
had met Monday. He reported that the plans for PT Court have changed
and the commission has requested more information for the next meeting.
They also spoke to a representative for Sandywood lots 11 & 12 about a
change in zoning from green space to residential, and requested more
information from them. Finally, he reported that the new zoning ordinance
is done, and is ready to be reviewed with hopes that it can have final
approval in August.
f. Public Safety & Public Works – Mr. Gongaware asked if they have received the
reciprocity agreement from Penn Township, and the Solicitor stated that she has
not received it.
14. OLD BUSINESS
a. Discussion and/or Deliberation and/or Official Action on appointing a Third-Party
Code inspection and Permitting services entity for both residential and nonresidential activities regulated by the UCC. – Mr. Charrie motioned to advertise an
RFP for building inspection services. Seconded by Mr. Gongaware. Mr. Vacha
commented that he thought they were going to meet with BIU again, but Mr.

Charrie would like to wait until after the advertised deadline passes. The motion
carried unanimously.
15. NEW BUSINESS
a. Discussion and/or Deliberation and/or Official Action on authorizing the Solicitor to
draft and advertise an ordinance for restrictive license agreements for Tax Parcel
ID’s 19-01-11-0-146, 19-01-11-0-145, 19-01-11-0-144 and 19-01-11-0-143. Mr.
Vacha motioned to authorize the Solicitor to draft and advertise an ordinance for
restrictive license agreements. Seconded by Mr. Gongaware. Mr. Charrie asked if
this would put the Borough at risk for other to use Borough property. The Solicitor
noted that historically, these have been granted on a case-by-case basis. Mr.
Dornin asked if these can be revoked. The Solicitor answered that they can be
revoked, and if the current owner sells the property, then the items would have to
be removed. The motion carried unanimously.
b. Discussion and/or Deliberation and/or Official Action on accepting the resignation
of Shannon Malinoski from the Recreation Board. Mr. Gongaware motioned to
accept the resignation of Shannon Malinoski from the recreation board. Mr. Dornin
seconded, and the motion carried unanimously. Mr. Charrie asked if these
resignations are kept on file, and they are kept on file. He submitted extra
documentation to be kept on file with the letter of resignation.
c. Discussion and/or Deliberation and/or Official Action on payment request from Dun
Rite Construction. – Mr. Gongaware motioned to pay Dun Rite Construction. Mr.
Vacha seconded. Mr. Vacha asked if the punch list would add more costs, and the
Engineer answered that it would not because there is a retainer. The motion carried
unanimously.
d. Discussion and/or Deliberation and/or Official Action on payment request from D&M
Contracting. – Mr. Gongaware motioned to pay D&M Contracting. Mr. Dornin
seconded. Mr. Vacha asked if the punch list would add more costs, and the
Engineer answered that it would not because there is a retainer. The motion carried
unanimously.
e. Discussion and/or Deliberation and/or Official Action on payment request from
Jeffrey Associates. – Mr. Gongaware motioned to pay Jeffrey Associates. Mr.
Vacha seconded. Mr. Charrie asked about the negative amount on the invoice, and
it was a discount given by the company. Mr. Charrie asked why there were 2
invoices, and 1 was for the concrete pad and installation of the pavilion and the
other for the pavilion structure. The motion carried unanimously.

16. CORRESPONDENCE – None.
17. APPROVAL TO PAY BILLS - Mr. Dornin motioned to pay the bills as of May 15,
2024. Seconded by Mr. Gongaware, and the motion carried unanimously.
18. EXECUTIVE SESSION for personnel matters and matters of potential litigation. –
None.
19. CITIZEN COMMENTS/PUBLIC COMMENTS (From Sign-Up Sheet) – Ms.
Dawson of Rowe Rd had questions and comments regarding various topics. She
would like the borough to use the Nixle system to alert residents about weather
and road closures. She asked when the park will be opening and why has council
not already scouted locations for a new restroom. Mr. Vacha stated that they have
spoken about locations previously, and Mr. Charrie stated that there has been

progress. Finally, Ms. Dawson stated that the junior council program should be
limited to just borough residents. Mr. Gockel stated that borough residents would
be given preference.
Ms. Shenk and neighbors of Cameron Drive stated their concerns about vehicles
speeding on Cameron Drive. The neighborhood has many children living there
and they are concerned about potential injury because of the speeding cars. The
Police Chief stated that they will paint more lines and will use Accutrack. Finally,
Ms. Shenk and her neighbors stated that the police are allowed to use their
driveways to catch speeding vehicles.
20. Motion To Adjourn - There being no business to discuss, a motion "to adjourn the
meeting" was made by Mr. Dornin and was seconded by Mr. Vacha. The motion
carried unanimously. The meeting was adjourned at 7:42 PM.

Joseph N. Lapia
Borough Manager
