01/22/2021
1003-04
20-MED-09-0971
39899

BETWEEN
THE COLERAIN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF
TRUSTEES AND

THE FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE,
OHIO LABOR COUNCIL, INC.
SERGEANTS

January 1, 2021 through December 31 , 2023

Colerain Township Gold 1-1-21 lo 12-31-

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE 1
ARTICLE 2
ARTICLE 3
ARTICLE 4
ARTICLE 5
ARTICLE 6
ARTJCLE 7
ARTICLE 8
ARTICLE 9
ARTICLE 10
RTICLE 11
ARTICLE 12
ARTICLE 13
ARTICLE 14
ARTICLE 15
ARTICLE 16
ARTICLE 17
ARTICLE 18
ARTICLE 19
ARTICLE 20
ARTICLE 21
AKnCLE 22
ARTICLE 23
ARTICLE 24
ARTICLE 25
ARTICLE 26
ARTICLE 27
ARTICLE 28
ARTICLE 29
ARTICLE 30
ARTICLE 31

AGREEMENT PURPOSE
RECOGNITION
UNION REPRESENTATION
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
NON-DISCRIMINATION
LABOR/MANAGEMENT MEETINGS
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
DISCIPLINE
PERSONNEL FILES
PROBATIONARY PERlODS
SENIORITY
LAYOFF AND RECALL
WORK RULES - GENERAL ORDERS
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME
WAGES AND COMPENSATION
COURT TIME/CALL-IN /STAND-BY TIME
INSURANCE
HOLIDAYS/PERSONAL LEAVE
VACATIONS
SICK.LEAVE
UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT
EXPENSES
LEAVES OF ABSENCE
SEVER.ABILITY
WAIVER IN CASE OF EMERGENCY
POLICE PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY INSURANCE
DURATION
MEDICAL/PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS
NO STRIKE/N O LOCK.OUT
MID-TERM BARGAINING
SUBCONTRACTING
SIGNATURE PAGE
APPENDIX

2

3
3
4
5
6
7
7
12
14

15
16
17
17
18

20
21

21
22
23
24
25
27
28
29
30
30
30
31
31
32
32
33
34

Ccilc 1rnm lc,wn::-hip Gold 1-1-?1 lo 1?-31-?:~

RT1CLE 1 AGREEMENT
&P RPOSE
ection 1.1
T his .Agreement, entered into by the Colerain Township T rustees, hereinafter referred to as the
"E mployer', and the Fraternal Order o f P olice, O hio Labor Council, Inc., hereinafter referred to
as the " Union", has as its purpose the foUowing:

1 o comply with the requirements of Chapter 411 7 o f the Ohio Revised Code; and to set forth
in its entirety, the fuU and complete understandings and agreements of the parties governing the
wages, hours, terms and conditions of employment for those employees included in the
bargaining unit as defined herein.
ARTICLE 2
RECOGNIT ION
ection 2. 1
The Employer recognizes the Union as th e exclusive collective bargaining agent for all regular fuUtime employees of the Colerain T own ship Police D epartment in the rank o f Sergeant.
The E mployer recognizes the right of the employees covered by this agreement to have one
J\ssociate Members from employees in the tank o f Sergeant, and on e alternate member, which
comprises the bargaining unit in bargaining/ negotiating the contract. T he Union will authorize
from time to time the p arty or parties whid1 will act as Union representatives in all matters.
Section 2.2
In the event that a new classification is created within the department. the Employer shall
determine whether the new position ,vill be included in or excluded fro m th e bargaining unit and
shall so advise the Union in writing within thirty (30) calendar days. If the Union disputes the
E mployer's determination o f bargaining unit status, th e parties shall meet in an attempt to resolve
their disagreement within seven (7) calendar days from the Union's no tification to the E mployer.
If the parties agree on the determination, it sh all b e implemented as agreed by the Employer and
th e Un.ion. Jf th e parties do not agree, the position shall be subject to challenge by the Union to
the State E mployment Relations Board pursuant to Chapter 411 7 of the Ohio Revised Code and
the SERB Rules and Regulations.
Section 2.3 Unio n Dues
The E mployer recognizes the right of the Union to receiYe dues from members of the Union. The
E mployer agrees to deduct the periodic dues, initiation fees and assessments, if any, of members
of the Union upon presentation of a written deduction authorization br the employee.

3

Col~m1n Towru,l11p Gold 1-1-21 to 12-31-23

ARTICLE 3
UNION REPRESENTATION
Sectio n 3.1
T he U nio n s hall designate th.tee employees and o ne alternate w ho sh all act as Union
representatives. F ro m said gro up of designated employees:
a.

n o t m ore than one employee shall participate in the
negotiatio n o f con tracts;

b.

no t m o re than two employees shall p artic ipate in labor
m an agem ent meetings, pursuant to Article 6; and

c.

n o t m o re than one of said employees, o r ano ther party
desig nated by the grievan t shall act as representative fo1· the
purpose o f processing grievances in accordance with the
grievance pro cedure.

In additio n to the E mployees design ated above, th e representative, if any, designated from
time to time b y the U nion in sectio n 2.1 s hall have the rig ht to atte nd and participate in t he
activities described in this paragra ph 3. 1.
Sectio n 3.2
The U nion sh all provide to the E mployer an o fficial roster, in t he Mon th o f
January, of its officer s and representatives w hich is to b e kept current at all times
and shall include the follo wing:

1)

Nam e

2)

A ddress

3)

H o m e T elepho n e N umber

No employee shalJ b e recognized by the E mployer as a Unio n representative u ntil the
U nio n has presented the E mployer with w ritten certificatio n o f that person's selectio n.

4

Co!~rarn 7 ownsl110 Gold 1-1-.'1 10 12-31 -?3

Section 3.3
T he investigation of grievances (alleged o r filed) sh all b e o n n o n-work time. Writing o f
grievances by representatives m ay b e performed during working hours wh en such activity d oes
n o t interfere with the per fo rmance of the representatives assig ned duties. Ifgrievance h earings
are scheduled during representatives o r employees regular d uty hours, the representative
and/ 0 1· employee sh all no r suffer any loss o f pay while attending the hearings, no r be eligible
for oYertime
Sectio n 3.4
T he U nion agi:ees that n o r ept:esentative of the Un.ion , either employee or no n- employee of
the E mployer, s hall interfere, interrupt, o r d isrupt the normal duties o f employees. F urthe r,
the U n.ion agrees not to conduct m eetings (bargaining unit, lo dge, o r committee meeting)
involving o n -duty employees except to the extent sp ecifically authorized by the Employer.
Bargaining unit members shall not conduct Unio n business during work ho m s or while under
the supervisory control o f a department s upervisor and / o r failure to cease unautho rized
activity m ay subject the offending employees co disciplinary action. H owever, pe.rcinent
literature and informatio n may be distributed in department mailboxes.
Informatio n regardii1g Union business m ay be sent to and transmitted from the Police Department copier
and email, provided that said use of the copier and email does not unreasonably disrupt or interfere with
n ormal Police Department bu siness conducted o n said copier and email. All costs connected with the
U nio n's use of this equipment shall be paid by the U nion. The Employer cannot guarantee the
confidentiality of Union documents received o n the Police Departmen t copier o r email.
A RTICLE4
MANAGE MENT
RIGHTS
Sectio n 4.1
The E mployer p ossesses the sole righ t to operate th e Department and all management r ig hts
reside therein. The E mployer's exclu sive rig hts sh all not be limited except as expressly limited
by the terms and conditio ns set forth in th.is Agreement.
"Management Rig hts" include, but are not wnited to the right of m anagem ent to do the
follo wing :
1.

Determine matters of inherent m anagerial p olicy which include, but are no t
limited to areas o f discretion o r policy such as the functio n s and program s of
the public employer, standards o f services, its overall budget, utilization of
techno logy, and organizatio n al structure;

5

Colerain Township Gold 1-1-21 to 12-31-23

2.

Direct, supervise, evaluate, o r hire employees;

3.

l'vfaintain and improve the e fficiency and e ffectiveness ofgoven1mental
o perations;

4.

D etermine the overall m eth ods, process means, o r personnel b y w hich
governmental o peratio ns are to be conducted;

5.

Suspend, discipline, dem ote, or discharge for just cau se, or lay o ff,
tran sfer, assign, schedule, promote or retain employees;

6.

D etermine the adequacy of the workforce;

7.

D etermine the overall mission of the employer as a unit of government;

8.

Effectively manage the work force;

9.

Take actions to carry out the missio n o f the public employer as a
governmental unit; and

10.

Pro mulgated work rules and general orders.

T he emplo yer is no t required to bargain o n subjects reserved to the m an agement and direction
of governmental unit except i f they affect wages, ho urs, terms and conditio n s of employm e nt,
and the continuation, m o dification, or deletion of a n existing provisio n o f a collective
b argaining agreement. A public employee may raise a legitimate complaint o r file a g rievance
b ased o n the collective bargaining agreement.
ARTICL E 5
N O N -DISCRIMINJ\.TION
Sectio n 5.1
T h e E mployer and the Union agree not to discrimin ate against any bargaining unit employee
with respect to compen satio n, terms, or conditio ns of employment because of such
individual's race, colo r , religio n, sex, age, natio nal o rigin, handicap, ancestry, disability, and/or
veteran s tatus o f any p erson, o r Union m embers hip o r no n-m embership. Management's use
of Bonafide Occupation al Qualifications (B.F.O.Q) in accordan ce with job characteristics
(i.e., physical strength s, fitness, agility, and stamina) m ust b e jo b -related and applied uniformly.
Such B .F.O .Q.'s shall n o t be con strued as discriminatory, and therefore, no t subject to the
G rievan ce P rocedure Article. H owever, failure to apply an o therw ise v alid B .F.O.Q. uniformly
will be subject co thegrievance procedure.

6

Colerain Township Gold 1-1-21 to 12-31-23
t olu.1111 1'11\\ 11:-hlJ' c;111d l-l- 1 1 l'I l~-;1.2,

ARTICLE 6
L-\BOR MANr\GEME T MEETI GS
Section 6.1
In the interest of sound labor/ management relations, the Employer and/ or its designee(s)
shall meet with not more than three representatives and/ or alternate of the Union to
djscuss peniling problems and to promote a m ore harmonious labor management
relationship will agree to m eet o n an as needed basis.
An employee atteniling a Labor Management meeting during their sch eduled work hours shall
be paid for the sc heduled time, as if worked. An employee's attendance at a labor-management
m eeting after scheduled work hours shall not be compensated.
Section 6.2
Special labor/ management meetings m ay be requested, and when mutually agreed upon,
they sh all b e convened as soon as practica ble .

ARTI CLE 7

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Section 7 .1
The term grievance shall mean an allegation by a bargaining unit employee that th ere has been
a breach, misinterpretation, o r improper application of this Agreemen t. It is not intended that
the grieva nce procedure be used t o effect changes in the A rticles of this Agreemen t or those
matters which are controlled b y th e provision s of Federal and/ or State Laws and/ o r by the
United States or Ohio State Constitutio n.
Section 7.2
All grievan ces mus t be presented at the proper step and time in progression in order to be
considered at the next step. Grievances involv ing lost pay iliscipline (suspension, reduction
in pay, removal or discharge) sh all be initiated at Step 3.
The aggrieved may withdraw a grievance at any point by submitting, in writing, a
statement t0 that effect, o r by permitting the ti.me requirements at any step tO lapse
withou t further appeal.
A n y g rievan ce not an swered by the Employer's representatives within the stipulated time
limits, w ith.in th e first two steps of the grievance procedure, s hall be deemed denied and may
b e advan ced by the employee to the next step in the g rievance procedure, and will be heard
and responded to as o utlined in this article. Time limits set forth herein may only be extended
by mutual agreement. W here a group of b argaining unit employees desires to fi le a grievance
involving a situation affecting m ore tha n o ne member of t h e bargaining unit in a like m anner,
one member selected by such a group will process the grievance, and shall so indicate th at the
.
.
.
g rievance 1s a group gnevan ce.
A grievance may be brought by any m ember of the bargaining unit o n their own behalf. The
Union or their representative s hall have the right to be present at the settlement o f any
14

Colerain Township Gold 1-1-21 lo 12-31-23

grievance bro ught by an employee on their own b ehalf.
Section 7.3
A g rievance must be submitted to the grievance procedure within ten (1 0) calendar days after
an em p loyee knows or should have known the facts giving rise to the grieva n ce, o therwise it
wiU be considered not to have existed.
Section 7.4
All grievances must be submitted in writing and sho uld contain the following
information to be considered:
1.

Aggrieved employee's name and sig nature;

2.

Date grievance was filed in writing;

3.

Date, time a nd location o f grievance;

4.

Descriptio n of incid ent giving rise to the grievance:

5.

Date grievance was first discussed;

6.

Name of supervisor with whom grievance was discussed;

7.

Article and sectio n of the Agreem ent alleged to have been violated; and

8.

Desired remedy to resolve grievance.

Section 7.5
The follo wing steps shall b e fo llowed in the formal processing ofgrievan ces:
Step 1.

A grievance m ay be submi tted by the employee to the employee's immediate supervisor, or
the supervisor's designee with.in the time limits set forth in Sectio n 7.4. It shall be the
respon sibility of the Supervisory Officer o r their d esignee to investigate the matter and to
provide a written an swer to the employee within ten (10) cale ndar days following the day on
w hich the m atter was submitted to him.
In the event that the employee's "immediate supervisor" is the Police Chief (i.e., no person
holding a rank above Lie ute nant and authorized by the P o lice C hie f to h ear grievances has
then been appointed), the P o lice C hief sh all h ear the grievan ce in this step 1, and step 2 shall
b e skipped.
Step 2.
A grievance unresolved at Step 1 may be submitted by the emplo yee to the P o lice C hief o r
their designee within seven (7) calendar days of the p resentatio n of the Step 1 answ er. It sh all
be the respo n sibility of the Police Chief or theii· d esignee to investigate th e matter and to
15

Colerain Townsti1r Gold 1.·.·>1 to 12-31-2'•

proYide a written answer to the employee within seven (7) calendar days following the day on
which the matter was submitted to the Police Chief.
Step 3.
A grievance unresolved at Step 2 may be submitted by the employee to the T ownship
Administrator with.in seven (7) cale ndar days of the presentation of the Step 2 answer. T he
A dministrator or their designee shall meet with the employee and a representative o f the
Union if the employee desires, and provided that Article 3, Section 3.4 is not vio lated, within
ten (10) calendar days of submission of the - grievance to Step 3, to discuss the grievance.
The Administrator or their designee sha ll provide a written answer to the employee within
seven (7) calendar days of such meeting.
Step 4.
In the event the grievance canno t be resolved at Step 3, the grievance may be submitted by the
Union or their representative to the Board of Colerain Township Trustees within seven (7)
calendar days of the presentation of the Step 3 answer. The B oard of Trustees sh all meet with
the employee, the Township Administrator o r their designee, the PoLice Chief or their d esignee,
and a representative of the U nio n, if so requested in writing, no later than one day prior to the
sched uled meeting, in executive session at the next regularly scheduled Board of Trustee's
meeting to discuss the grievance. The Board of Trustees or its designee shall provide a written
answer to the employee ,vi thin seven (7) calendar days of such meeting.
Step 5. Arbitration.

A grievance unresolved at tcp 4 may be submitted to arbitration upon reques t of the Union
or their representative m accordance w ith the provisions of Section 7.7 of this Article
hereinafter set forth.
Section 7.6
T he Union or their representative, based upon the facts presented, has the right to decide
w hether to submit a grievance for arbitration. Within fourteen (14) calendar days from the
date of the final answer on a grievance from Step 4, the Unio n or their representative shall
notify the Employer in writing of its intent to seek arbitration over an unresolved grievance.
The U nion or their representative may withdraw its request to arbitrate at any time prior to
the actual hearing. A ny cancellation fee due the arbitrator shall be paid by the party or parties
canceling the arbitration. Any grievance not submitted within the fourteen (14) calendar day
period described above sh all b e deemed settled on the basis of the last answer given by the
Employer or its representative.
r\. After receipt of a request to arbitrate, the representatives of each of the p arties shall
select an arbitrator. The arbitrator shall be selected in the following manner: the
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS) shalJ be jointly requested to s ubmit
a p anel List o f seven (7) arbitrators. The parties shall alternately strike the names of the
arbitra tors until only, o n e name remains. The person w hose name remains shall be the
arbitrator .
The a1·bitrator shall limit their d ecisions strictly to the interpretation , application or
en forcement of specific A rticles of this agreement. They may not modify o r amend
this Agreement.
16

Colerain Township Gold 1-·1 -21 10 12-31-23

B. The question of the arbitrability of a grievance may b e raised by either p arty be fore
the arbitration h earing of the grievance, o n the grounds that the m atter is n o narbitrable o r beyond the arbitrator's jurisdiction. The first questio n to b e placed before
the arbitrator will b e w hether o r not the alleged grievan ce is arbitrable. I f the arbitrator
determines the grievance is arbitrable, the alleged grievance will b e heard o n its m erits
before the same arbitrator.

C. The decision o f the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the grievant, the Uni o n
o r their representative, and the Employer. The arbitrator shall render their decision
witlun thirty (30) calendar days after the conclu sion of testimo ny and arg ument or
subnussio n o f final briefs.
D. The costs of the services and expenses of the arbitrato r and hearing roo m exp enses,
if any, shall be b orne equally by the Employer and the U1uo n o r their representative.
T he exp enses of any witnesses shall be borne by the party calling them. T he fees o f
the court reporter shalJ be p aid b y the party requesting the reporter, o r split equally by
th e parties if both parties d esire a reporter.
Any b argairung unit m ember w h ose attendance is required b y the Employer for suc h hearing
shall n o t lose p ay or ben efits to the extent such hearing hours are during normal sch eduled
working ho urs on the d ay of hearing.
Sectio n 7.7
The Union o r grievant sh all use a grievance form w hich shall provide the information outlined
in Sectio n 7.5. The Unio n shall have the respo nsibility for the duplicatio n, distributio n, and
their own accounting of the grievance forms.
ARTICLE 8
DISCIPLINE
Section 8.1
E mployees shall have good behavior and provide e fficient service. . The Police C hie f, when
having just cau se, may take disciplina1y action against any employee in the b argaining unit.
No employee shall b e suspended, reduced in pay and positio n , and no no n - probatio nary
employee shall b e removed o r discharged except for just cause. The P o lice C ruef may take
disciplinary action relating to an en1ployee's conduct while o n duty, w hile working under the
color ofauthority of the E mployer, o r at any o ther time, w hen the employee's conduct vio lates
their oath o f office, o r is of such a derogatory nature that it undermines the integrity of the
P olice Department.
Section 8.2
Incompetency, ine fficiency, disho n esty, drunkenness, under the influen ce of illegal drugs o r
substan ces, inimo ral conduct, ins ubordinatio n , discourteous trea tment o f the public, neglect
of duty, ab sence without leave, or any conduct unbecoming of P olice Officer o r any o ther
acts of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance shall be cause for disciplina1y action.
Anon ym o us complaints with n o corrob or ative evidence shall no t be cause for disciplinary
action.

17

Cott,a,r Town::;hlp Gold 1-1-21 lo 12.31.23

Section 8.3
Except in extreme instan ces wherein the employee is found guilty of gross misconduct.
discipline \vill b e applied in a progressive and uniform m anner . Progr essive discipline shall
take into account the nature o f the vio lation, the employee's record o f discipli.ne, and the
employee's record of performance and conduct.

A. Verbal .Admo nishment (Notation to file);
B. W.r.itte n warning with coun seling (File entry)
C. Official Reprimand;
D. Suspension without pay;
E. Reduc tio n in pay and p ositio n ; and
F. Rem oval or discharge from employment.

Section 8.4
W hen ever the Employer or th eir d esignee(s) intei-views, questio n s, or interroga tes bargaining
unit members in referen ce to alleged o r suspected misconduct, either in preliminaty
investigatio n s or in disciplinary h earings, the following condition s shall apply:
1 . Employees being questioned as wit.nesses shall b e so informed. Employees
susp ected of misconduct will be given either Garrity or Miranda Rig hts by the
employer o r their dcsignee.

2. Employees suspected of misconduc t shall be, during the preliminary investigations,
apprised o f the nature of the suspected misconduc t as it is known at that time. Not
less than twenty- four (24) h o urs prior to the sch eduled starting time of a form al
disciplinary hearing, the employees will be provided with written specificatio n s and
particulars of the ch arges which m ay be the basis for disciplinary action.

3. Prio r to questio ning, employees (including \Vitnesses) shall be informed chat failure
respond or failure to resp o nd truthfully may result in disciplinary action for
insubordination ordisho nesty.
to

4 . The Police Chief. or their designee, may tape record, with the knowledge of the
party involved , preliminary investigation interviews. Formal disciplinary h earings sh all
be tape recorded . A copy o f the r ecording sh all, at the request of the charged employee,
be provided to the employee with.in forty-eigh t (48) h ours of the close o f th e hearing.
In t he event the employee tape records the hearing, a copy o f said tape recording shall
be provided to the P o lice C hief Mthin forty-eight (48) hours o f the close of the hearing.
5 . Preliminary investigatio n s and disciplinary hearings shall be held either during an
employee's scheduled working hours or at times in reasonable proximity to their shift.
Disciplinary hearings held outside the employees scheduled working hours s hall be
considered time worked.
6. Bargaining Unit Members shall not investigate fellow Bargaining Unit Members, except members of
the Gold Bargaining Unit may investiga te members o f the Blue Bargaining Unit, unless ordered by
the Police Chief.
Section 8.5
Whenever the E mployer determines that an cm.p loyee will be subject to discipline o f
18

Colerain Township Gold 1-1-21 to 12-31-23

suspensio n, reductio n or termination, a disciplinary hearing will be scheduled to give the
employee an oppo rtunity to offer an explanatio n of the alleged misconduct.
Sectio n 8.6
T he employer may be represented in the disciplinary h earing by such p erson s asth e employer
may d eem necessary for the purpose of presenting the employer's position, or presenting the
facts relating to the subject of the hearing. Disciplinary hearings will b e conducted by the
Township Administrator o r their desig nee. The employee may be r epresented at the hearing
by o ne re presentative of their choosing. The employee must choose co: (1) appear at the
hearing to present oral or written s tatements in their d e fense; o r (2) appear at the hearing and
have the chosen r epresentative present oral o r written statements in de fen se of the employee;
or (3) elect in writing within 24 ho urs prior to the sch eduled h earing t o waive the opportunity
to have a disciplinary hearing. Failure to elect and pursue one of these three o p tion s will be
deemed as a waiver of the employee's right to the disciplinary hearing.
ection 8.7
At the disciplinary hearing, the Township A dministrato r, P o lice Chie f or their d esig nee will
ask the e mployee or th eir representative to respond to the allegations of miscon duct w hic h
were o utlined to the employee. A t the h earing, the e mployee may present an y testimony,
witnesses, or documents w hich explain whether or n o t the alleged misconduct occurred. T he
employee sh all provide a list o f witnesses and th e nam e and occupation of their r epresentative,
if any, to the Township administrator or their d esig n ee as far in advan ce as p ossible, but no
later th an 8 a.m . o n the d ay of the b earing. Said list and no tificatio n m ay be made by email. It
iR the employee's responsibility to notify their w itn esses that the employee desires their
attendance at the h earing.
Sectio n 8.8
T he employee and the employer will be permitted to confro nt and cross-examin e w itnesses.
A written report will b e pre pared by the Administrator o r their designee concluding whether
or not the proposed discipline is warranted and w hat disciplinary action will b e taken , if any.
A copy of the A dministrator 's report will b e prov ided to t he employee within seven (7)
calendar days following its pre paratio n .
Sectio n 8.9
Disciplinary action may be appealed through the G riev ance P rocedure.
ARTICLE 9
PERSONNEL FILES
Sectio n 9.1
Each emplo yee may request to insp ect their official personnel file maintained by the
Employer. Inspection of the individual's personnel file sh all be b y scheduled

19

Cole-rain Township l~otd 1 1-21 to 11-31 23

appointment requested in writing or by phone call to the E mployer. A ppointment shall be during
th e regular scheduled work hours of the administrative staff of the Police Department. A n
employee shall be entitled to h ave a representative o f th eir choice accompany tl1em during such
review. A ny employee may cop y documents in their official p ersonnel file.
Section 9.2

If an unfavorable statement o r notation is in the official personnel file, the employee shall be given
the rjght to place a statement of rebuttal or explanation in the file. No anonymous material of any
type shall be included in the employee's official personnel file.
Sectio n 9.3
Records of counseling sessio ns, verbal admonishments, official reprin,ands, susp ensio n, reductio n
in pay or positio n, and removal o r dismissal, shall be maintained in the official per sonnel fiJ e, as
re9wred by the public reco rds law.
Records of coun seling sessio ns and verbal adm onish ments shall cease to have fo rce and effect
two years fro m date of issuance, provided no inte1vening discipline has occurred.
Records o f official reprimands, reductions in pay or positio n, suspensio n , removal or dismissal,
shaU cease to have force and effect tl1tee years fro m date of issuance, provided no inten-enm g
discipline has occurred.
Section 9.4
The foUowing in fo rmation from an employee's personnel file shall be considered public
information available immediately upo n reguest to the Employer: annual salary, degrees held, areas
of special certification, and awards or commendations. A ny request for additional information fro m
a member's personnel file will require the E mployer to immediately no tify the Bargaining Unit
member and to allow the member three (3) calendar days notification prior to release o f said
in formation.
The employer sh all disclose all such information from the employee's file in compliance with the
sp ecific sections of the O hio Revised Code which is in effect at the time the request for
information is received.
ART ICLE 10

PROBATIONARY PE RIODS
Section 10.1
Every newly hired o r pro moted. employee will be r equired to successfully complete a probationary
period. The probationary period shall b egin on th e first day which tb e employee receives
compen sation from the E mployer and shall continue for a p erio d

15

Cole1a1r, Tow11st11p Go1o 1-1-21 to 12-31 -23

of (one) 1 calendar year. However, for a newly hired employee who is not OPOTA Certified,
the pro bationary period shall begin o n the first day w hich the employee receives
co mpen sation from the E mployer and shall continue for a perio d of eighteen
(1 8) m o nths. A n ewly hired o r promoted probationary employee may be terminated at any
time during their probationa1.-y period and shall have no right to grieve the termination.
Sectio n 10.2
A ny employee promoted into a highe r-level p ositio n shall be required to successfully
complete a probationary p erio d of one (1) calendar year. An employee serving a promo tio nal
probationary period whose p erformance is judged unsatisfactory shall b e returned to their
former classificatio n .
A RTICLE 11
SENI O RITY
Section 11.1
"Senio rity" shall accrue to all employees in accordance with the provisions o f this A rticle.
Senio rity, as de fined in Section 11.2 of this Article, will apply wherever employee senio rity
rig hts are established in te rms and conditions of this Agreement.
Section 11 .2
"Seniority" shall be computed o n the basis o f uninterrupted length o f continuous full-tim e
service as a law en forcem ent officer in the employ of the Colerain Township Police
D epartment.
1. The following situatio n shall n ot constitute a break in continuo us service:
A.

Absence while o n approved leave of absence;

B.

Ab sence while o n approved sick leave or disability leave;

C.

Involuntary Military leave; or

D . A layoff of eig hteen (18) m o nths duration or less.
2.

The following situatio n s constitute breaks in continuo us service for w hich
seniority is lost:
A.

Discharge during probatio nary period;

B.

Discharge or removal for just cause;

C.

R etirem ent;

D. Layoff for more than eig hteen (18) m o nths;

16

Coh:>rain Jownsh1p Gold 1-1 -?1 to 1?-~1-23

E.

Failure to return to work within fourteen (14) calendar days of a recall from
layoff;

F.

Failure co retLu·n to work at the expiration of leave of absence; or

G. A resignation.
Section 11.3
Employees laid o ff shall retain their seniority for a period of eighteen (18) m o n ths from
the date of layoff.
ARTICLE 12
LAY-OFF AND RECALL
Section 12.1
When the E mployer determines because of lack of m oney or lack of work, that a lo ng-te1m
layoff is necessary, they shall notify the affected em ployees thirty days in advance of the
effective date of the layoff. Employee(s) wilJ be notified of the E mployer's decision co
implement a ny short-term layoff, lasting nine working days or less as soon as possible.
Section 12.2
The layoff of employees covered by this collective bargaining agreement, shall be based on
Departmental seniority, as that term is u sed in Section 11.1 of th.is Agreement. These
employees shalJ be laid off in inverse order of t heir Departmental seniority. Any position that
is vacated as a result of a layoff may not be filled.
Section 12.3
At the time of recall of laid off employees, recall shall be in inverse order of th eir layoff. If
any employee requires additional training in order to be qualified after a recall, the E mployer
will pay for all training.
Section 12.4
Notice of recall sh all b e sent to the employee by certified mail. T he employer shall be deemed
to have fulfil led its obligation by mailing the recall to the employee at their last known address.
Certified mail will have been considered delivered if signed receipt is not received by
Employer within fourteen (14) calendar days of sending.
Section 12.5
The recalled employee shall have five (5) calendar days following the date of receipt of the
notice to notify the employer of their intention to return to work and shall h ave fourteen (14)
calendar days to report b ack to duty, unless otherwise specified.

ARTICLE 13
17

Colern1n rownsh1p Guld 1-1-21 to 12-31-23

WORK RULE. - GENERAL ORDE R '
Section 13.1
The employer agrees that all department work rules and general orders sh all be applied
uniformly within the group of employees to whom rules or genera l ord ers are directed.
Section 13.2

A U department w ork rules, general orders and any amendments s hall be reduced to writing
and copies disseminated to all employees as soon as practicable.
Section 13.3
The employer possesses the management right to pro mulgate work rules for the purposes,
among other things, of promoting the efficient administration of law enforcement set-vices,
and the effective and safe o peration of the department. No work rule sh all be arbitrary and
capricious and unrelated to the furtherance of any dg ht reserved to managem ent.

ARTICLE 14
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERT IME
Sectio n 14.1
Each employee's work schedule shall be determined by the P o lice Chief. Work schedules
covei-ing not less than a twenty-eight (28) calendar. day perio d s hall be p os ted seven (7)
calend ar days in advan ce of their effective date. The posting shall no t restrict the Police Chief
from altering individual work sch edules w hen the best interest of the P o lice D epartment or
the community wo uld be served. The current schedule for patrol o peratio ns is a twelve (12)
ho ux work day. The schedule con sists of a six (6) week cycle that alternates days working and
days o ff. T h e cycle is two
(2) days o n and two (2) days o ff; three (3) days on and two (2) days off; and two (2) days o n
and three (3) days off, every two-week period. A Kelly day will be provided to each o fficer
once every six (6) weeks to compensate for the additional four (4) hours worked each pay
cycle without pay. Kelly Days shall b e picked by seniority. The hours of operation o f the
twelve (12) hour days shall be determined by the E mployer.

For purposes of this Article, these three schedule variations d escribe the "Standard Work
Day" for employees so scheduled.
Section 14.2
The standard work period for all bargaining unit employees shall consist of no m ore than
o ne hundred seventy-o n e (17 1) hours within a twenty-eig ht (28) day period.
Section 14.3

A U ho urs actually worked including the applicatio n o f compen satory time, vacation time, or
p erso nal leave time in excess o f the e mployees "Sta ndard Work Day" s hall b e considered
overtime and shall be comp ensated at the rate of o ne and one-half times ttheir regular ho urly
pay rate. For the purpose o f computing overtime, sick leave shall not be counted as time
18

Colerain Town ship Go!d 1-1-:' 1 to 12-21-23

actually worked . Overtime shall b e calculated in guarter hour increments.
Sectio n 14.4
A n employee m ay elect, in lieu of overtime pay. to accept compensatory time. Compensatory
time shall b e credited at th e rate of one and one- half ho urs off for each hour of overtime
worked. Compensato1--y time may be accum ulated by an employee, but only to a maximum of
two hundred forty (240) bo urs at any given time. I n the event that an employee goes over the
limit, that employee shall receive overtime pay. The following rig hts and conditio ns shall exist
as th ey pertain to compen satory time:
1.

Comp ensatory time m ay be taken in lieu o f overtime p ay. The em ployee sh all
indicate this request w h en reponing their time for the overtime worked;
a.

Requests for taking compensatory time off sh all be ho no red subject to the
operatio nal n eed s o f the department.

2.

Requests for compensatory time off must be submitted in advance of the
time requested;

3.

T he P o lice C hief may schedule a n employee off o n compensatory tim e, so long
as su ch scheduling does not reduce an employees' compensatory balance below
eig h ty (80) h ours;

4.

T he P o lice C hief shaJJ provide n ot less than sixteen (16) h o urs no tice to an
employee of an y E m p loyer scheduled compensatory timeoff;

5.

Compensatory time off requested by an employee w h o has been approved and
sch eduled, sh all not be canceled except w h en un anticipated o peration al needs
of the dep artm e nt would requireit; and

6.

Employees may cash in all their compensatory time o n record upon
retirement.

Section 14. 5
With the prior approval o f the Police C hief o r their designee, an employee may exchange days
off or work shift assignments with another employee. Such exchanges shall not affect the pay
status o f either, except that an employee who works an exchange and is required to work
over tim e shall receive the overtime compensation.

Section 14.6
A ny employee havi ng compensatory ho urs held in escrow may elect semi-annually to cash
in those hours for payment, up to a maximum of forty (40)hours
A n employee shall make written notification of their inten tion to convert accumulated
compensatory time, partially o r in its entirety, to pay. Said n o tification sh all be in the form of
a m emorandum submitted to the Police Chief stating the employee's intention. The
notification must b e received by the P olice C hief o r their designee no later than that calendar
day ending the first pay period of May and November of the year in w hich the em p lo yee is
19

Colerain lownship Gold 1-1-21 to 12-31-23

making notification.
The mon tary conversion f any unused comp nsatory time in escrow shall be paid based
on the employee , hourly rate at the time of payment.
Section 14.7
Unless authorized b the Police Chief, in no case may an employee work more than seventeen (17)
hours in any 24-hour period.
ARTICLE 15

WAGE A D CO:MPE

TION

ection 15.1
Employees shall be c mpensated according to the following pay scale:

2021
Sergeant

2022

2023

I$87,000.00 I $89,610.00 I $91,402.20

. ection 15.2
Any police offic r who, in the absence of a supervisor is designated by the Polic Chief as
an officer-in-charge shall receive additional compensation. Such compensation shall be paid
at an hourly rate of 1. 70 per hour. The term " Senior fficer" shall ha e the sam meaning
as Officer in Charge and shall recei e the same compensation a Officer in Charge when
acting in that capacity. Abs nee of a supervis r shall mean that time when no police officer
f the rank of sei-geant or above is actually on duty.
ection 15.3 - Field Training Officers
Employees that are FTO's (Certified Field Training Officers) will receive one (1) hour of
compensatory time for ev ry day actually worked in the FTO position in lieu of Q\rertime
pay for the first one (1) hour beyond the end of their shift. For officers working an eight (8)
hour day, they shall receive thirty (3 ) minutes of compensatory time fore, ery day actually
worked in the FTO position in lieu of overtime pay for the first thirty (30) minutes beyond
the end of their shift.
ection 15.4 - Longevity
mployee with fi e (5) or more ears of continuous servic , calculat don Jul 1•1 of each year, as a
full time police officer in Colerain Township shall receive longevity pay as follows:
. 5-10 Years of continuou service
·11 + Years of continuou service

•1,000.00
$100 times years of service

B. Longevity payments shall be made in one lump um amount on the first pay period following July
1" of each year.
ARTTCLE 16
20

Colemln Townshir, Gold 1-1 -~1 lo 1?-·~ 1-23

COURT TIME / CALL-I

/ STAND -BY TIME

Section 16.1
Whene,·er an employee w ho h as worked a night s hi ft, and who, o n the m o rning on w hic h
su ch a s hift ends, is required to appear o n o ff-duty time before any o fficial court or b efore
th e Prosecutor for pretrial con feren ce on matters p ertaining to o r arising from the
employee's o fficial duties, the employee s hall receive a minimum o f four (4) hours pay at the
overtime rate for su ch appearances w hich shall b egin at the end o f the employee's shift. 1f
the ernployee must stay lo nger than the four (4) ho urs, then the E mployer will pay at the rate
of o ne and one-h alf time the ho urly rate.

For all o ther employees (tha t is, those w ho are n o t working a nig ht s hift) w ho are required to
appear b efore any o fficial court o r before the Prosecutor for pre trial conference o n matters
p errajning to o r arising fro m the employee's o fficial duties, the employee sh all receive three (3)
h o urs of overtime at the overtime rate.
Employer agrees to reimburse employees for parking expense for Court
appearances for actual cost incurred, but not m ore than $8 per appearance.
Sectio n 16.2
W henever an employee is called in at a tim e outside of their regularly sch eduled shift, the
employee shall receive a minimum of two ho urs s how up time at the rate of overtime.
n exceptio n to the abov e, is when a m ember is requested to report for duty preced ing their
regularly sch eduled shift starting time. T he m ember will receive a minimum of one hour at
the overtime rate.
eccio n 16.3
Any employee w ho, while in an o n -call status, is required t o rem ain o n the employer's
premises, or at their home o r o ther specific location to await a call w h en needed, is considered
as being unable to use th e tim e effectively for th eir own purpose. For eve ry calendar day in
an o n call status, employee shall receive o ne (1) ho ur of com pensatory time.
Unless designated as above, the carrying of a cell pho ne and / or resp o nding to a text, e mail,
or cell pho n e d oes not constitute an "o n ca U" status. No discip]jnary actio n may be taken for
failure to respo nd wh en no r in "o n call" status.
ARTI CLE 17
fNSURAN CES
The E mployer shaU make available to all bargaining unit employees' compreh ensive major
m edical/hospitalization health ca.r e through a high d eductible h ealth plan with the E mployer
paying a percentage o f the premium costs depending on the level of coverage and contrib ution
rate, as selected by the employee. The Employer wilJ also provide a dental insurance plan, in
effect as of the effective date o f this Agreem ent.
If it becom es necessary to change carrie.rs, o r t o change to an insurance p ool arrangem ent, and
such change would affect the benefits under the plans, the employer agrees to meet with the
21

Colerain rownship Gold 1-1-~1 to 1?-31 -23

members of the Union prior to implementing.
During the term of this agreement, the Employer will maintain the same quality of hea lth care
co\'erage at no increase of percentage cost to the employees. Depending upon the medical
coverage option selected by the employee, the employee's contribution can range from 0% to
30% of the total premium expense.
The employee's contribution shall b e 20% of the tot'll cost of the program for Dental, Vision
and Prescription coverage for the duration of this agreement.
To the extent that the deposit will not exceed the federal maximum for HSA contributions, on
the first business day of plan year, the Employer, the Employer shall make a deposit into the
participating employee's Health Savings Account (H SA) based on the following participation:
Employee O nly Plan= Depending upon the employee plan selection and employee
contribution level: Deposit amount may vary from $250 to $3,000
Employee+ Child Plan = Depending upon the employee plan selection and employee
contribution level: Deposit amount may vary from $500 to $6,000
Employee + Spouse Plan = Depending upon the employee plan selection and employee
contribution level: Deposit amount may vary from $500 to $6,000
Family Plan = Depending upon the employee plan selectio n and employee contribution level:
Deposit amount may vary from $500 to $6,000
HS.A deposits will be prorated in the year of hi.re based on the effective date o f hi.re. lf the
annual increase in premium exceeds 10% , the parties agree to reopen negotiations to
discuss only Article 17 for the purpose o f cost sharing the excess premiums.
The employer shall provide a $50,000 group life insurance policy to all bargaining unit
employees at no cost to the employee.
A RTI CLE 18
HOLIDAYS / PE RSONAL LEAVE
Section 18.1
The Employer shall recognize each of the fol1owing days as a paid holiday:
Martin Luther KingDay
Memorial Day
Labor Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
President's Day
Independence Day
Columbus Day
Veteran's Day
New Year's Day
An employee, while o n any unpaid leave of absence will not receive holiday pay
22

Coletc11n lownsh1p Gold 1-1-:"1 to 1?-31 -?3

compensauon.
Sec tion 18.2
If an employee is sch eduled to, -and wo rks, o n a Ho liday listed in ection 18.1, that employee
shall be p aid at a rate equal to one and o ne half (1 1/2) times their r egular rate of pay for all
h ours worked. T his is in addition to their regular H oliday Pay.
Section 18.3
H o liday pay is equal to the actual hours worked at the em ployee's reg ular rate o f pay.
Section 18.4
E mployees will be granted two (2) per sonal days annually.

Unused per sonal days as of

December 31 s t shall be forfeited.

1\RTICLE 19
VACATION
Section 19.1
E mployees sh all earn vacation leave according to their number of years of full-time service
with governm ents from O hio, Indiana, a nd Kentucky and sh all be accru ed each pay p eriod
as fo llows:

A.

Zero (0) through Five (5) years· 80.0 h ours (or its equivalent) ten days
vacation, computed 3.1 ho urs per pay period . H owever, vaca tio n may norbe used until the employee h as reached their first a1111j versary.

B.

Six (6) through Ten (10) years • 120 hours (or its ecJ uiv aJent) fifteen days
vacation , computed 4.6 h ours per pay period.

C . E le,·en (11) through Fifteen (15) years - 144 ho urs (or its equivalent)
eighteen days' vacation , computed 5.54 ho urs p er pay period.
D.

Si..xteen (16) thro ugh Twen ty- Five (25) years - 176 h o urs (or its
equivalent) 22 days' v acation , computed 6.77 h o urs per pay period.

E. Twenty-Six (26) or more year s · 200 hours (or its equivalent) twenty- five days'
vaca tio n, computed 7.7 h ours per p ay period.
Section 19.2
Vacation credit accrues w hjle o n vacation, military leave, and sic k time. No vacation credit is
earned while a n employee is in no pay s tatus other th an military leave. Pro- rated vacation
credit is given for any part of a pay perio d .
Sectio n 19 .3
Vacation requests shall be ho nored o n the b asis of the employee's senioriry, subject to the
23

Colerain Township Gc,ld 1-·1 .:;1 to 12-31-23

following:
A.

Vacation s are scheduled and approved in accordance with the workload
reguirements o f the P olice C hief;

8.

Once an employee has designated their vacatio n time off and it has been
approved, no o ther employee can bump that employee to another time; and

C.

Once an employee ha s picked their date o f vacatio n, they may change to
ano ther provided that they notify the employer o ne week in advance of the
ch ange.

Section 19.4
E mployees may carry over the eguivalent of one year's accrual into the next vacation year, but at no time shall
accumulate more than two year's vacation time. Vacation hours in excess of two year's vacation time carryover shall be forfeited .
Section 19.5
Any employee who separates from the service shall be paid for any earned but wrnsed
vacation leave for w hich they are eligible.
Sectio n 19. 6
A ny employee h ospitalized while o n v acatio n shall, upo n reguest and upon submission of
sufficient evidence o f the hospitalizatio n, b e entitled to change their s tatus to sick leave for
all days h ospitalized and any subsequent days necessary for recovery. U po n submission of the
request with verifi cation o f hospitalization, any vacation charged to the employee for the
duration o f the illness sh all be restored to their credit.
ART1CLE 20
SICK LEAVE
Section 20.1
Employees shall accrue sick leave credit at the rate o f 4.6 hours for each eigh ty (80) ho urs of
regular ho urs worked, or while in active pay s tatus, including paid v acatio n and sick leave. Sick
leave credit sh all no t accrue during any p eriod o f unpaid leave o r layoff A dvance use of sick
leave shall no t b e granted. Sick leave m ay be accumulated without limit.
Section 20.2
Sick leave shall be gran ted to an employee, upon approval of the P o lice Chief, for the
following reason s:
1.

Illness, injury o r pregnancy related conditio n s of the employee;

2.

Examinatio n of the employee, including m edical, psych o logical, dental o r
optical examinatio n , by an appro priate practitioner, when such an examinatio n
canno t be scheduled during no n -work h o urs;

3.

D eath of a member o f the employee's immediate family. Such u sage shall be
24

Colernin l owr,f.h1p Gc,ld 1- 1-? I to 12-21 -23

limited to a reason ably necessary time, no t to exceed seven (7) calendar days.
O n e o f the days must be the date of the funer al i f th e employee is sch eduled to
work o n the d ay o f the funeral;
4.

Illness, injury o r pregn an cy related conditio n o f a m ember o f the em p loyee's
immediate family w here the employee's presen ce is necessa1y for the h ealth and
welfare of the affected family m ember; o r

5.

Examinatio n , including m edical, psycho logical, d ental o r o ptical examination o f
a m ember o f the em p loyee's immediate family b y an appropriate practitioner
w here the employee's presen ce is necessary.

Fo r the purpose o f this A rticle, th e d efinitio n of immediate family shall be: m o ther,
step -m o ther, fa ther, step -father, son, step -son, d aughter, step -d aug hter. b rother, stepbrother, sister, s tep -sister , spo use, g randparen t, gr andchild o r any in-law o r a legal
gu ardian.
Sectio n 20.3
Sick leave usage, w hen approved, sh all b e ch arged in minimum uni ts of o ne-ho ur increm ents.
In o rder to r eceive pay for sick leave usage, an em ployee must comply with all departmen tal
rules and regulatio ns governing applicatio n o f u se. Falsificatio n o f an applicatio n for sick leave
o r a practitioner's statem en t sh all b e grounds for disciplinary actio n .
Sectio n 20.4

A.

T he employer agrees to ap ply the provisio n s of the Family and Medical Leave
Act P olicy (FMLA) as approved b y the Town ship T rustees, co all employees in
the Bargaining U nit.

B.

A n employee taking leave to w hich th ey are entitled under the FMLA shall
exhaust available paid leaves earned under this Agreem e nt d uring FML leave.
1\ ny sick leave of m ore than five (5) con secutive days m ay be charged against
FML A leave, if FMLA leave is approved .

Sectio n 20.5
A ny unused sick leave at th e tim e of the employee's retirem ent o r d eath shall be paid
according to th e following schedule:
F or a full-time employee with tenure of at least 10 years, they shall be paid in cash 1 / 4 o f the
value of t he accrued, but unused sick leave credit. T he m aximum number of unused sick leave
ho urs which m ay be accumulated is 1,440 . The m aximum n umber o f h o urs which can
therefor e b e paid o ut to the employee is 360 ho urs pay.
Section 20.6
A ll E mployees of the bargaining unit sh all b e eligible for d o n ated time bene fits, to relieve
hardship r esulting from extended illness o r injmy off duty. T h e d o natio n and use of sick
leave h o urs sh all b e subject to the D o natio n o f Sick Leave policy ad o pted by the employer .
A RTICLE 21

UNIFORMS AND EQU IPMENT
25

Colerain lownsh1p Gold 1-1-21 to 12-31-?3

Section 21.1
Upon hire, the Employer shall supply at no cost to the employee all uniforms and
equipment required by the Employer, excluding socks and underwear, in quantities
specified by the Employer. Ad ditionally, the E mployer shall furnish firearms. ammo,
lea ther goods to all employees covered under this Agreement.
The Employer will also supply the necessary uniform and equipment for o fficer's assigned to a
position that utilizes a uniform appearance that is different from the Employer's "patrol"
uniform. Examples include, and are not limited to the following alternate uniforms: Canine,
Bike Patrol, Investigations. E mployer ,vill also provide a bullet resistant vest to all employees
and replace as needed, as determined by the P olice Chief or their designee. The Employer shall
replace uniforms and equipment damaged during an event, in th e course of tbe Employee's
duty.
Section 21 .2
E mployees shall be responsible for maintenance and replacement of all uniform, equipment, and
clothing item s not specifically supplied and replaced by the Employer under Section 21.1 of this
Agreement. E mployees who have completed o ne (1) year of service with the Employer shall
receive $1,000 annually for the purposes of maintaining or replacing all uniforms. equipment
and clothing items which are necessary to perform the E mployee's assignment-specific duties.
E mployees who are eligible to receive the "uniform and equipment allowance" will be paid the
agreed upon allowance by February 1st of each new calendar year. E mployees wbo complete
probation after the February 1st issuance date, shall receive a prorated "allowance," based on the
annual allowance and the one-year anniversary date of the Employees full- time hire.
Section 21.3
All uniforms and equipment issued by the Employer are the property of the E mployer and shall,
upo n termination of employment of an employee, be returned to the E mployer in condition
issued, allowing for reasonable wear and tear, prior to the issuan ce of any final compensation to
the employee. A ny item issued which is lost by an employee shall either be replaced o r paid for
at current market value b y the employee, at the o ption of the Employer.
Section 21.4
Equipment and oth er items not issued or required by the E mployer may n o t be utilized or
worn without th e permission o f the Police Chief.
Section 21.5
Wh en an employee supplies evidence that their personal property sustained damage while
performing the duties of their assigned work, or on off-duty details approved by the Police
Chief. provided such damage was not the result o f horseplay, willful misuse, or negligence on the
part of the employee, th e Employer shall rein1burse the employee for the cost of necessary repair
or r eplacement up to a maximum of two hundred dollars per year, but no more than fifty
dollars for any, watch or jeweh-y items. The employee shall present the damaged item s to the
E mployer for inspection prior to the repair or replacement of said property. The E mployer has
26

Colerain ·1 ov,nshir, Goll; 1• •71 to i ::,.31.n
the option to replace or repair of said property_ Any court ordered restitution received by an

employee as compensation for damage to this personal property sh all be remitted to the
E mployer up to the amoun t the Employer has paid.
ARTICLE 22
EXP ENSES
Section 22. 1
W h en an employee's duty reguires him to travel on Police D epartment business, the P olice
C hief m ay provide a vehicle for trans portatio n or permit the employee to be reimbursed for
the use of their p ersonal motor vehicle at a rate m ost r ecently approved by th e B oard o f
T own ship Trustees for reimbursem ent of Town ship officials.
Sect.io n 22.2
Wh en an employee, while acting o n b ehalf o f the E mployer, must park in a commercial
parking facility, the E m ployer sh all reimburse the employee for parking expen ses, up to $8.00
per day, with proof of said receipt.
Sect.ion 22.3
\,Vhen an employee is required to attend training or travel on P olice D epartment business
authorized b y the Police C hief, the Employer sh all pay all necessary, reasonable, authorized
and approved expenses .incident to su ch training and travel inclushre of reguired m eals,
lo dging, parking, and fees.
Sect.ion 22.4
All required and authorized training shall be counted as time worked. On multiple day trai ning
sessio n s w here the employee has been authorized by the Em ployer to remain at or n ear the
training site overnight, the days in training w hich do no t reguire travel to the site from
Hamilton County o r to Hamilton County from the site shall b e counted as regular work days.

27

Col8ram Towm,ri~, Gold 1-1-:?1 to 1~-31-

A RTICLE 23
LEAVES OFABSENCE
Section 23.1 - Leave Witho ut Pay
Employees may be granted the following types o f unpaid leaves of absence:

A.

Disability Leave

A p hysically or m entally incapacitated employee who has completed their probatio n ary p eriod
may request a disability leave. A disability leave for a p eriod no t to exceed o ne year may b e
granted when the djsability continues b eyond the accumulated sick leave rights provided the
employee furnishes satisfactory medical proo f o f suc h djsability alo ng with their written
request;
and is:

B.

1.

Hospitalized or ins titutionalized;

2.

On a period o f convalesce nce after being hospitalized, institutionalized, or;

3.

Declared incapacitated for th e p erformance of the duties of their positio n b y
a licen sed physician. It is the employee's responsibility to request a disability
leave when th e employee's sick leave has expired.

E mployer R equired Disability Leave

The Employer m ay require an employee to be examined by a licensed physician selected by
the employee, fro m a list o f three submitted by the Employer, at the Employer's expense. A n
employee fo und to be unable to physically p erform the substantial duties o f their position
sh alJ be pl aced on Disability Leave as described in Section 2 1.1 A. Employer required disability
leave may be appealed through the grievance and arbitration procedures.
C.

Leave of A b sence

The Police C hief may grant a leave of absence without pay to any employee for a maximum
duratio n o f six m o nths for any personal reason of the employee. Such a leave may not be
renewed or extended b eyond a total accumulated perio d of six m o nths in any o n e cale ndar
year with out the approval of the Board of Trustees.
1.

The authorization of a leave of absence without pay is a m atter of
administrative discretion. T he P o lice C hief will decide in each case if a leave of
absence is to be g ranted.

2.

The granting of any leave of ab sence is subject to approval o f the P o lice Chie f.
Except for em ergencies, employees will make request to the

28

Colerain T ownship Gold 1-1-21 to 12-31 -

Police Chief sixty (60) days prior to commencement of the desired leave so that
the various agency functions may proceed pro perly.

3.

Upon completio n o f a leave of absence, the employee is to b e returned to the
position formerly occupied, or to a similar position if the employee's former
position no longer exists.

4.

.1\ n employee may retum to work before the sch eduled expiration ofleave as
requested by the employee and agreed to by th e Police Chief. If the employee
fails to return to work at the expiration of approved lea,·e of absence, such
employee shall be removed from their position, unless extenuating
circumstances arise. During this time, the employee shall not receive seniority
time for the period of the leave.

5.

Leaves o f absence which ate for any purpose covered by the Family and
Medical Leave Act shall be governed b y the Townshjp's FlvlLA policy.

Section 23.2 - Leave with Pay
E mployees may be granted the following types of prud leave of absences:

A.

Court Leave

The Emp loyer shall grant full pay w here an employee is summoned for jury duty or subpoenaed
as a witness for a proceeding o utside the scope of their employment.

.All compen sation from the Court or subpoenaing party shall be reimbursed to the department.
An employee released from jury or witness duty prior to the end o f their scheduled work day shall
report to work for th e remaining hours.
The E mployer shall not be required to p ay employees when they are appearing in court for criininal
or civil cases being heard in connection with the employee's p ersonal matters or in matters wherein
the employee or the Union is a plaintiff in a case against the Township or any T ownship officials
or employees. T hese absences would be leave without pay, compensa tory time, personal leave or
vacatio n at the djscrerion o f the employee. An employee shall request prior approYal for court
leave, in order for such leave to be granted.

8.

Military Leave

Bargaining unit employees are entitled to leave and/ or benefits as described in State and Federal law.

ARTICLE 24
SEVER.ABILITY
Section 24.1
T his agreem ent supersedes and replaces all applicable state and local laws w hich it has the
autho rity to s upersed e and replace. W here th.is Agreem ent is silent, the provisio ns o f
29

Colerain T ownshi p Gold ·1- 1-21 to 12-3 1

applicable law shall prevail. If a court of competent jurisdiction finds any provision of this
Agreement to be contrary to any applicable statute, such provision shall be of no further force
and effect, but the remainder of the Agreement shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 24.2
The parties agree that should any provisions of this Agreement be found to be invalid, by a
court or agency of proper jurisdiction, they will schedule a meeting within thirty (30) calendar
days at a mutually agreeable time to negotiate alternative language on the same subject matter.

ARTICLE 25
WAIVER IN CASE OF EMERGENCY
Section 25. 1
In cases of em ergency declared b y the President of the U nited States, the Governor of the
State ofOhio, the Sheriff or the Federal or State Legislature, such acts of God or civil disorder,
th e following conditions of this Agreement may be temporarily suspended by the Employer:

A.

Time limits for the processing of grievances; and

B.

All work rules and/ or agreements and practices relating to the
assignment of employees.

Section 25.2
Upon the termination of the emergency should valid grievan ces exist, they shall be processed
in accordance with the provisions outlined in the grievance procedure of the Agreement and
shall proceed from the point in the grievan ce procedure to which they, the grievance(s), had
properly progressed, prior to the emergency.
ARTICLE 26

POLICE PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY INSURANCE
Section 26. 1
T he P o lice Professional Liability Insurance shall be maintained at current levels by the
Board of Township Trustees. Any increase of cost will be covered by the Township
Trustees.

ARTICLE 27
DURATION
Section 27. 1
Th.is agreement shallbe effective 12:00 A.M. January 1, 2021 and shall remain in full force
and effect through midnight December 31, 2023.
Section 27.2

If either party desires to m odify or amend this Agr eemen t, it shall give written notice of such
30

Colerain T ownship Gold 1- 1 21 to 12- 3 1-

intent no earlier than one hundred- tvve nty (120) calendar d ays prior to the expiration, o r no
later than ninety (90) calendar days prio r to the expiration date of th.is Agreement. Such no tice
shall be by certified mail with return receipt requested. The parties shall commence
negotiations within two weeks upon receiving notice of intent.
Section 27.3
The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which resulted in this Agreement, each had
the unlimited rig h t to make d emands and proposals o n any subject matter no t removed by law from
the area o f collective bargaining, and that the entire unde rstandings and agreement arrived at by the
parties after the exercise of that right and o ppo rtunity are set forth in th.is Agteem ent. T he
provisions of thi s Agreem ent constitute the entire agreement between the Employer and the U nion
and all prior agreements, practices and p o licies, either or al or written, are hereby canceled. T herefor e,
both parties, for the life of this Agreement, voluntarily and unequivocally waive the right, and each
agrees that the o ther shall no t be obligated to bargain collectively o r individually with resp ect to any
subject o r matter re ferred to o r covered in this Agreement, or with respect to any subject o r matter
not specifically referred to o r covered in this Agreeme nt , even tho ugh such subjects or m attersmay
not have been within the kno wledge of eithe r or both parties at the time they negotiated o r sig ned
this agreement.
ARTICLE 28

MhDICAL/ PHYSICAL EX."\.MIN.ATTON
Sectio n 28.1
[This provisio n is intentio n ally omitted, and is the subject of letter of understanding
executed concurrently with the 1997 agreem ent between the parties.]

A RTICLE 29

0 STRIKE/ N O LOCKOUTS
SECTION 29. 1
The Union an<l the Employees agree that there shall b e no s trikes of any kind. The te1m
"strike", s hall have the same de finitio n for purposes o f this ag reem ent as contained in 41·17.01
H of the O.R.C. and include any effort to u se sick leav e for the purpose of withho lding
services. A ny employee who is absent from ·wo rk without permission, o r abstains fro m
performance of their o r her assigned duties in a no rmal m anner with.out permission, sh all be
presumed to have engaged in such a scrjke. In the event that any employee is e ngaged in an y
violatio n of th.is article, the U nion shall, upo n n o tificatio n b y management, immediately o rder
such emplo yees to resume normal w ork activities and sh all publicly den o unce any vio lation
o f this article.
The Union, its o fficers, agents, representatives, members and all oth er Employees covered by
this Agreeme nt shall no t, in an y way, authorize, assert, en courage, participate in, sanctio n,
ratify, condone, or lend suppo rt to any strike. A n y strike of the employees entered into, or
any strike called for by the Union, shall con stitute a breach o f this agreem e nt and shall
abrogate the obligations o f Town ship under this agreement. In law the T ownship sh all h ave
the rig ht to impose discipline up to and including discharge for any employee who authorizes,
condones, o r lend support to any strike. In the event of a strike, Union o fficers and
repi·esentatives wiU continue ro carry o ut their duties as employees and will take positive action
31

Colerain T ownship Gold 1-1 -21 to 12-31-

to bring the strike to an end.
During t he life o f this agreement, the employer shall no t cause, permit or engage in any lock
out of the bargaining unit employees .

ARTICLE 30
MID-TERM BARGAI N ING
Section 30. 1
Subject to the specific rights retained by the E mployer in this Agreem ent, the Employer
recognizes its legal o bligation under ORC chapter 4117 to b argain with the FOP prior to
implementation o f any changes in wages, h ours, or other term s and conditions of
employment applicable to members o f the bargaining unit. Prior to implementing new or
changed work rules, p olicies, o r other changes that materially affect \vages, hours, or terms
or conditions of employm ent o f b argaining unit employees, the E mployer will notify the
U nion seven (7) calendar days in advance o f the e ffective date of implem entatio n s. If the
Unio n requests to bargain over such a change within the notice period , the E mployer and
the U nio n will negotiate in good faith . If the Union does no t request to bargain within
seven (7) calendar days after the no tice of change is given, objections to the p roposal in the
n otice are waived, including any right to file a grievan ce or unfair labor practice. If th e
E mployer and the U nio n bargain ro impasse, the parties may submit the issues to fact
finding and conciliation in accordance with the O.R.C. Sec. 411 7. 14. However, if the change
is not a topic o f b argaining under ORC C hapter 4117 or in the case if the change is necessary
due to exigent circumstances o f the State or Fed eral directive or regulation, the Employer is
not r equired to give the seven (7) cale ndar day no tice or to bargain over the implementation
of the change; h owever, the E mployer may elect to d o so if time permits without waving its
rights.

Tf the Unio n desires to b argain as described above, the Contract shall be o p ened only for
negotiatio ns o f matters relating to the subject of the Notice of C hange, and no o ther.
Sectio n 30.2
Whenever practical, the E mployer agrees to notify the U nio n in advance of any ch anges in
the employm ent relation ship that may affect the FOP or its members through the laborm anagem ent committee. The n o tification is not to constitute an abridgm ent of
managem ent' s .r ights to make ch anges that it deem s necessary.
Decisions to ch ange p olicy and procedures that do not directly affect wages, h ours, and
other terms and conditions of employment are not subj ect to the grievance procedure.
ARTICLE 31
SUBCONTRACTING
Section 31.1
T h e E mployer shall no t subcontract any p o lice services to or for the Township c urrently
performed by members of T h e U nio n during the life of this agreement.
32

Colerain Township Gold 1- 1-21 to 12-31 -

Section 31.2
Subcontracting does not preclude the Employer fr m entering into " hared Services"
agreements with other political ~ubclivisions or law enforcement agencies to share police
related assets and / or resources.

INWIT
S WHEREOF, the parties have hereunto set their hand this _______day
of Decemb r, 2020.
For the Township:

Date

R

Date

1 t\/\L:
Matt

Ge

rt, T mstee

ilz Town hip Administrator

Date

For the Union:

~

/1/J

Barry Gray, Ohio Lab r Council

I Z-?/z/4fkl
Date

/2-Z,4,W
Date

s to Form:

o([Ak

Larry Barbiere, Law Director

33

Colerain Township Gold 1-1-21 to 12-31-

Appendix

WAGE SCALE

Sergeant

2021

2022

2023

87,000.00

89,610.00

91,402.20

34
