MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE
MANHEIM TOWNSHIP BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 2024 - 6:00 P.M.
Roll Call:
The meeting of the Manheim Township Board of Commissioners was held at 6:00 p.m.,
Monday, September 23, 2024, in the Public Meeting Room of the Municipal Office, 1840
Municipal Drive. Members present were Commissioners John C. Bear, Carol J. Gifford,
Mary-Jo Huyard, Celso A. Mesias, and Stacey Morgan-Brubaker. Township Manager Rick
Kane was also present. President Morgan-Brubaker led all in the pledge of allegiance to the
flag of the United States of America.
Announcements or Changes to the Agenda:
Public Comment on Agenda Items: There was no public comment on agenda items this
evening.
Minutes:
Commissioner Gifford moved to approve the minutes of the September 9, 2024, regular
meeting. Seconded by Mr. Mesias. President Morgan-Brubaker asked if there were any
questions or comments. There were none. Motion carried unanimously.
Payment of Bills:
Commissioner Bear moved to approve the September 23, 2024, disbursements and to fund the
appropriate accounts for the disbursements. The bills presented for payment for the period
ending September 23, 2024, were from the General Fund in the amount of $451,588.76, from
the Stormwater Fund in the amount of $2,595.77, from the Golf Course Fund in the amount
of $8,393.52, from the Capital Reserve Fund in the amount of $25,512.03, from the American
Rescue Plan Act Fund in the amount of $2,595.00, from the Highway Aid Fund in the amount
of $24,955.00, from the Library Foundation Fund in the amount of $2,914.31 and from the
Escrow Fund in the amount of $58,106.20 for a Grand Total of $576,660.59. Large payments
went towards engineering services, legal services, electrical bills for street lights and
buildings, and IT support. Seconded by Ms. Huyard. President Morgan-Brubaker asked if
there were any questions or comments. There were none. Motion carried unanimously.
Public Hearings/Presentations/Appointments:
Employee of the Month
Police Chief Duane Fisher introduced Edward Christine as the Employee of the Month for
August. Chief Fisher gave a brief description of the contributions Civilian Aid Christine has
made to the Police Department and the Township.

COMMISSIONERS MEETING MINUTES – MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 2024

President Morgan-Brubaker, on behalf of the Commissioners, presented Mr. Christine with
an appreciation award, and thanked Mr. Christine for all his hard work.
Manager’s Monthly Report:
Mr. Kane presented the manager’s report for August. He announced the Pleasure Road
Culvert Replacement Project is complete and the roadway reopened on September 6th. The
new fire pumper is now on the production line, this was funded by the Commissioners in the
2024 budget through a lease.
The Township recently hired Jonathan Massrie to fill the Public Works Assistant Director –
Engineering position. Public Works recently mailed the 2024 leaf collection schedule. Leaf
collection starts on October 21st.
Recently a Department of Agriculture inspector performed a surprise inspection of the Public
Works pesticide spraying program. The inspector was very impressed with the Department’s
organization and digital documentation for the spray program. After the inspection the
Township was found to be compliant with all of the Agricultural Department’s regulations
and requirements.
Commissioner Liaison Reports/Announcements:
Commissioner Mesias had no report this evening.
Commissioner Gifford had no report this evening.
Commissioner Huyard shared she and Commissioner Gifford attended the 9/11 memorial
ceremony which was very well done. She thanked those who organized and participated in
this event. Commissioner Gifford mentioned the employee of the month, police aide, Ed
Christine, had a significant role in the ceremony. She agreed this was a very nice ceremony.
Vice-President Bear mentioned he and President Morgan-Brubaker attended the coffee with
a commissioner event on Saturday where they had approximately 10 people participate.
President Morgan-Brubaker had no report this evening.
Old Business: There was no old business this evening.
New Business
Consent Agenda:
Commissioner Mesias moved to approve all items in the Consent Agenda, which consists of
one security release and two extension of time requests. Seconded by Ms. Gifford. President
Morgan-Brubaker asked if there were any questions or comments. There were none. Motion
carried unanimously.

Page 2 of 6

COMMISSIONERS MEETING MINUTES – MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 2024

212 Spottswood Drive – Stormwater Management Plan, Financial Security Release
Authorized release of the financial security for the above referenced project in the amount of
$16,474.20, which represents the costs associated with required improvements completed and
approved by the Township Engineer. The amount of financial security that will be retained
after the release is Zero Dollars.
Ashford Meadows (Erb Farm) – Preliminary Subdivision & Land Development Plan –
2325 Lititz Pike & 120 Kreider Avenue, R-2 Residential Zoning District, Extension of
Time Request
Approved the time extension provided by the applicant for the Preliminary Subdivision &
Land Development Plan for Ashford Meadows for action by the Manheim Township Board of
Commissioners. The time extension will extend the time in which the Board needs to act on
the plan to December 30, 2024.
Joseph A. & Michelle B. Rondinelli – Preliminary/Final Lot Add-On Plan, 680 Valley
Road, R-2 Residential Zoning District, Extension of Time Request
Approved the time extension provided by the applicant for the Preliminary/Final Lot Add-On
Plan for Joseph A. and Michelle B. Rondinelli for action by the Manheim Township Board of
Commissioners. The time extension will extend the time in which the Board needs to act on
the plan to February 15, 2025.
Resolutions:
Resolution 2024 – 56 Approving the Collective Bargaining Agreement Between
Manheim Township Professional Firefighters Association Local #5423 International
Association of Firefighters and Manheim Township, and the corresponding
Memorandums of Understanding Regarding (1) Retroactive Economic Benefits
Beginning on January 1, 2024, and (2) “Float Fire Captain” Job Description
President Morgan-Brubaker mentioned she and Vice-President Bear were on the negotiation
team for the Township working with a group of firefighters on this contract for approximately
six months.
She summarized the agreement, mentioning this is a four-year term retroactive back to
January 1, 2024. The contract includes a process to phase out the part-time firefighters. This
will lift the burden of full-time firefighters having to work overtime to cover shifts for parttime firefighters who are no-shows. The contract also includes a wage scale based on years of
service, etc. She stated the Commissioners are grateful for the all the work, patience and
discussions the firefighters did to make this productive.
Captain Daniel Wagaman, President of the Firefighters Union thanked the Board for working
with the professional firefighters to get this contract before the Board for approval. He stated

Page 3 of 6

COMMISSIONERS MEETING MINUTES – MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 2024

this contract is an investment in the safety and security of all the people who live, work and
visit Manheim Township. He pointed out other key items in the contract such as annual/biannual cancer screenings as firefighters have a higher risk of a cancer diagnosis. This contract
also guarantees there are twelve trained certified and practiced firefighters on duty 24/7.
Commissioner Huyard moved to adopt Resolution 2024 – 56 approving the Collective
Bargaining Agreement between Manheim Township Professional Firefighters Association
Local #5423 International Association of Firefighters and Manheim Township, and the
corresponding Memorandums of Understanding Regarding (1) Retroactive Economic Benefits
Beginning on January 1, 2024, and (2) “Float Fire Captain” Job Description. Seconded by
Mr. Bear. President Morgan-Brubaker asked if there were any questions or comments. There
were no questions or comments. Motion carried unanimously.
Resolution 2024 – 57 Budget Amended for Manheim Township Fire Rescue
Commissioner Gifford moved to adopt Resolution 2024 – 57 authorizing amendments and
supplemental appropriations of encumbered and unencumbered funds within various budgeted
line items of the 2024 General Fund for retroactive economic benefits for all Manheim
Township Fire Rescue Firefighters currently employed subject to the Collective Bargaining
Agreement. Seconded by Mr. Mesias. President Morgan-Brubaker asked if there were any
questions or comments. There were no questions or comments. Motion carried unanimously.
Ordinances: There were no additional ordinances this evening.
Motions/Decisions:
301 Sarsen Drive – Final Subdivision Plan, R-1 Residential Zoning District
Randy Dautrich, Dautrich Engineering, explained the plan proposes the subdivision of an
existing 1.835-acre residential lot containing a single-family detached dwelling into three
lots, creating two new building lots for construction of single-family detached homes. The
plan provides stormwater management facilities on each of the two new lots for the future
dwellings and associated improvements. The Township Engineer and staff recommend
approval of the plan and associated modification requests.
Commissioner Bear moved to approve the 301 Sarsen Drive Final Subdivision Plan and
associated modification requests, conditioned upon satisfaction of the Township Engineer
and staff review letters. Seconded by Ms. Huyard. President Morgan-Brubaker asked if there
were any questions or comments. There were no questions or comments. Motion carried
unanimously.
Stonehenge Estates Tract 2 (Stonebriar) – Final Subdivision and Land Development
Plan – 256 Koser Road, R-2 Residential Zoning District
Derrick Musser, ELA Group, Inc. explained the plan proposes subdivision of a 23.6-acre lot
for development of 90 new lots for construction of 52 single-family detached and 38 single-

Page 4 of 6

COMMISSIONERS MEETING MINUTES – MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 2024

family semi-detached dwelling units at the intersection of Buckwalter and Koser Roads. 21
TDRs are required for the project. The plan includes sidewalks throughout the development
with a crosswalk at the intersection of Buckwalter Road and Inverness Drive to allow
pedestrian access to Reidenbaugh Elementary School. The Township Engineer and staff
recommend approval of the plan and associated modification requests.
Commissioner Mesias moved to approve the Final Subdivision and Land Development Plan
for Stonehenge Estates Tract 2 (Stonebriar) and associated modification requests,
conditioned upon satisfaction of the Township Engineer and staff review letters, and
acquisition of required TDRs. Seconded by Ms. Huyard. President Morgan-Brubaker asked
if there were any questions or comments. There were none. Motion carried unanimously.
Fisher Companies – Final Lot Add-On Plan, 1758 and 1766 Oregon Pike, B-2 Business
Zoning District and D-C Corridor Overlay
Douglas Herr, Hershey Land Surveyors, LLC, spoke on behalf of the applicants. The plan
proposes to transfer 0.314 acres from the BELCO Community Credit Union property at 1766
Oregon Pike to the adjacent Dennis D. Herr property at 1758 Oregon Pike. The Township
Engineer and staff recommend approval of the plan and associated modification request.
Commissioner Huyard moved to approve the Final Lot Add-On Plan for Fisher Companies
and associated modification request, conditioned upon satisfaction of the Township Engineer
and staff review letters. Seconded by Ms. Gifford. President Morgan-Brubaker asked if
there were any questions or comments. There were none. Motion carried unanimously.
GJA Real Estate Partnership (Neffsville Veterinary Clinic) – Conditional Use
Application, 2555 Lititz Pike, B-2 Business Zoning District, Schedule a Public Hearing
Commissioner Gifford moved to schedule a public hearing on the Conditional Use
Application of GJA Real Estate Partnership for a 4,521 net square-foot expansion of the
Neffsville Veterinary Clinic for Monday, October 28, 2024. Seconded by Mr. Mesias.
President Morgan-Brubaker asked if there were any questions or comments. There were
none. Motion carried unanimously.
Motion: Approval of the Minimum Municipal Obligation (MMO) for Funding of the
2025 Pension Obligations for the Police and Non-Uniform Plans
Commissioner Bear moved to approve the Minimum Municipal Obligation (MMO) in the
total amount of $2,298,215.00. Seconded by Ms. Huyard. President Morgan-Brubaker asked
if there were any questions or comments. There were none. Motion carried unanimously.
Acknowledgements: There were no acknowledgements this evening.
Other Business/Deliberations: There were no other business/deliberations this evening.
Correspondence and Petitions: There was no correspondence or petitions this evening.

Page 5 of 6

COMMISSIONERS MEETING MINUTES – MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 2024

Public Comment on other Township Related Business:
Ralph Stone, 206 Bushong Road, shared his concerns regarding traffic congestion and the
unsafe intersections at Oregon Pike, East Oregon Road and Bushong Road and Pinetown and
Creek Roads.
Nancy McMillin, 53 Kreider Avenue, asked for further information about the Erb Farm
extension of time request, which was part of the consent agenda.
Sharyn Young, Director of Planning and Zoning, explained the purpose of the time extension
is to allow the Township more time to review the plan and for the Board of Commissioners to
act on the plan. This is due to the fact that the project is pretty involved, and the applicants’
plan is still evolving. This extension of time extends through December.
Ms. McMillin stated the property is currently being farmed and certain farming practices are
not congruent with peaceful residential development living. It was explained that State law
protects the agriculture community by allowing normal farming operations from having to
adhere to public nuisance laws.
Adjournment:
There being no further business before the Commissioners, Commissioner Bear moved the
meeting to be adjourned at 6:40 p.m. Seconded by Ms. Huyard. Motion carried unanimously.
Respectfully submitted,

Richard C. Kane
Manager/Secretary

Page 6 of 6
