AGREEMENT
Between The

City School District of the City of Binghamton,
New York
and the

Binghamton Administrative & Supervisory Association

July I, 2021- June 30, 2024

I

ARTICLE I
RECOGNITION & CONTRACT DURATION
100

The Association was, by order of the New York State Public Employment Relations Board
dated November 6, t977, certified as the exclusive representative for the purpose of collective
negotiations with the Binghamton City School District in the determination of terms and conditions
in the employment and settlement of grievances for the employees in the hereinafter enumerated
titles pursuant to the New York Public Employee Fair Employment Act.
10r

Unit Titles:
Assistant PrincipalVDeparlrnent Chairpersons Middle Schools

Assistant Principals/Department Chairpersons High School

Associate Principal - High School
Associate Principal for Student Achievement and Accountability
Assistant Director of Special Services
Dean of Students
Department Chairpersons
Director of Auendance and Pupil Services
Directors of Curriculum and Instruction
Director of Instruction ELA/Social Studies
Directors of Early Childhood through Grade 12
Director of Early Childhood and Elementary Education
Director of Health, Physical Education and Athletics

Director of Humanities
Director of Instructional Data
Director of Math, Science and Technology
Director of Planning and Evaluation
Director of Primary Education
Director of Special Services
Director of Fine Arts and World Languages
Director of Educational Technology and Innovation
Elementary Principals
High School Principal
Middle School Principals

102
This Agreement is fol the period July 1, 2021 Lhrough June 30,2024

2

ARTICLE II
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
200
Except as validly limited by express provisions of this Agreement, the Distict reserves the right to
unilaterally determine the standards for selection for employment, to direct and assign its employees, to take
disciplinary action according to New York State law, to relieve its employees from duty because of lack of
work in the District, to maintain the efficiency of govemmental operations, to determine the method, means,
personnel by which its operations are to be conducted, and to take all necessary action to carty out its mission
in emergencies.

ARTICLE III
PROF'ESSIONAL COMPENSATION AND WORK YEAR
300
Salary:
202r-2022
Each Administrator who was on staff during the 2020-202I school year and who returns for the
2021-2022 school year, shall receive a salary increase equal to three percent (3.0%) plus $500
over their total2020-202l salary. Each l2-month member employed on July 1 receives an
adjustment to their 2021-22 base salary at ll220th of their July 1, 202I salaty.

2022-2023
Each Administrator who was on staff during the 2021-2022 school year and who retums for the
2022-2023 school year, shall receive a salary increase equal to two point seventy five percent
(2.75%) plus $1,000 over their totaI202l-2022 salary.
2023-2024
Each Administrator who was on staff during the 2022-2023 school year and who returns for the
2023-2024 school year, shall receive a salary increase equal to two point five percent (2.5%)
plus $1,000 over their total2022'2023 salary.

2021-2024 Startin g S alaries
The following are the minimum starting base salaries for each category.
2021-22: $72,000 I 2022-23: $73,500 I 2023-24: $75,000
Category
2021-22: $85,000 12022-23: $86,700 12023-24: $88,400
Category
Category
$110,000
Category
$120,000

I
II
III
IV

BASA members who advance to new categories will receive a four percent (4%Q promononal increase
applied to the member's total salary or the applicable starting minimum salary, uftichever is greater. The
promotional increase of fow percent (4yr) \\rllapply to each categorical advancement. The promotional
increase will occur at the time of appointnent to the position. Promotional increases are in addition to salary
increases dueto allmembers forthatyear. The Superintendenthas the discretion to recommend higher
salaries without limit to the Board of Education.
a
J

301
Category I includes the following titles:
Assistant Principals/Deparlrnent Chairpenons

Assistant Director of Special Services
301.1
Effective July 1,2013, newly hired category I adminisnators will be 10.5 month
employees. The employee will be teat€d as a 101/z month employee for all purposes.

301.2

Dean of Students
Apersonholdingthe tifle Deanof students'salary shall be 10/10.5 ofcategory I.

302
Category II includes the following tifles:

Elementary Principals
Associate Principal of High School
Associate Principal of Student Achievement and Accowrtability

Director of Attendance and Pupil Services
Director of Curriculum and Instruction
Director of hsfuction ELA/Social Studies

Directors of Early Childhood through Grade 12
Drector of Early Childhood and Elementary Education
Director of Health, Physical Education and Athletics
Director ofHumanities
Director of Instructional Data
Director of Planning and Evaluation
Director ofMatll Science and Technolory
Directors of Special Services
Director of Fine Arts and World Languages
Director of Primary Education
Director of Educational Technology and Innovation

303
Category III includes the following title:

Middle School Principals
304
Category IV includes the following title:

High School Principal
305
Assistant PrincipalslDepartrnent Chairpenons, at the Middle Schools and High School, shall perform
duties which have been taditionally performed by pe$ons in ttrose job titles. The Building Pri"r@ in each
school shall have the diryretion of assigning building responsibilities to their Assistant PrincipallDepartrnent

Cftairperson. Assistant Principals acting intheir capacities as Deparfrnent Chairpenons will observe and evaluate
classroom teachers.
4

306
Employees shall be compensated for graduate work at the following rates:
BAplus 30 hours

a)
b) MA
c) Hours beyond BA 30/\4,4' for each six (6) hours up to sixty (60) hours
e)

for each 6 hours of graduate study taken and completed after July 1, 1993.
However, the benefit shall not be payable until July l't ofthe following year.
Doctorate Degree (effective July 1, 1994)

$s00
$7s0
$100

$s00

307
Category I employees who have completed five (5) years of administrative service in the
School District shall receive a longevity increment of $1,000 effective July 1, 2021.
Category II, III, and IV employees who have completed five (5) years of administrative service in the
School Disfiict shall receive a longevity increment of $1,000 effective }uLy 1,2021.

307A
Category I employees who have completed ten (10) years ofteaching and/or administrative service
in the School Disfiict shall receive a longevity increment of $750 effective Jluly 1,2021.
Category II, ilI, and IV employees who have completed ten (10) years ofteaching and/or adminishative
service in the School District shall receive a longevity increment of $800 effective hily I,2021.

308
Category I employees who have completed fifteen (15) years of teaching and/or administrative service
in the School District shall receive a longevity increment of $750 effective July I,2021.
Category II, III, and IV employees who have completed fifteen (15) years of teaching and/or administrative
service in the School District shall receive a longevity increment of $800 effective Jvly 1,2021.

309
Category I employees who have completed twenty (20) years of teaching and/or administrative service
in the School District shall receive a longevity increment of $750 effective hly 1,202I.
Category II, ilI, and IV employees who have completed twenty (20) years of teaching and/or administative
service in the School District shall receive a longevity increment of $800 effective htly 1,2021.
310
Category I employees who have completed twenty-five (25) years of teaching and/or administative service
in the School Distict shall receive a longevity increment of $750 effective hly I,2021.
Category II, III, and IV employees who have completed twenty-five (25) years of teaching and/or
administrative service in the School Disfiict shall receive a longevity increment of $800 effective h:ly I,2021.

310A
Category I employees who have completed thirty (30) years ofteaching and/or administrative service
5

in the School Distict shall receive a longevity increment of $1,000 effective Jvly 1,2021.
Category II, ilI, and IV employees who have completed thirty (30) years of teaching and/or administrative
service in the School Distict shall receive a longevity increment of $1,000 effective hly 1,2021.

311

Assistant Principals/Department Chairpersons shall receive a stipend of $450 effective

July 1,202L
312

Work Year
312.1
The work year for Categories II, HI and IV, shall be a total of 236 working days. The work year
begins July 1 and ends June 30 of the following year, with 15 of those days aspaid vacationduring
the morrths of July and August. Vacation is to be arranged between the Superintendent and
administrator and scheduled between July I and two weeks prior to the opening of school. Directors,
however, may use up to three (3) vacation days per year between September I and June 30 upon
approval and at the discretion of the Superintendent. Where School District activities may require
work during the vacation period, anangements may be made for compensatory vacation time or a
per diem pay for each day worked at arute calculated using 220 working days.

FOR CATEGORY II, ilI, & IV MEMBERS IN THE INITIAL YEAR OF HIRE:

1. Vacation days will be earned on a rolling, cumulative basis upon commencement of work,
prorated by month of start date, according to the following schedule:

a. July
b. August

1.5
1.5

c. September

1.5

d. October
e. November

1.5
1.5

f. December

1.5

g. January
h. February

1.5
1.5

i. March
j. April

1.5

k. Work commencing Mayl to June 30

1.5

0

2. Vacation clays shall be used in accordance with Article III, Section 312 of the CBA, unless
otherwise arranged at the sole discretion of the superintendent.

3. Unused vacation days in the first school year of employment may not be carried over to the
following year. However, they will be converted to personal illness days, up to a maximum of
10.

6

FOR ALL OTHER CATEGORY II, ilI, & IV MEMBERS:

1. 15 vacation days shall be credited on July 1 of each subsequent school year following the initial
school year of employment.

2. Vacation days shall be used in accordance with Article III, Section 312 of the CBA, unless
otherwise arranged at the sole discretion of the superintendent.

3. For each year after the initial year of appointment, up to ten (10) unused available vacation
days may be calried over into the next year. The maximum number of days that would be
available at the beginning of any year would be twenty-six (26), unless other negotiated
agreements apply.

Where the BOCES calendar for a particular school year causes the work year to be more or less
than 236 workdays, neither party shall be entitled to additional work obligations or financial
compensation for those days.

All administrators in any category shall not work any day identified in the Board of Education
adopted calendar as "school closed." In case that school is closed for inclement weather, or other

emergency closing, or closure due to the Superintendent's discretion, no administrator is
obligated to report to work.

312.2
Effective July 1, 2014 the Assistant Principal and Assistant Director positions shall be reduced
from 12 months (220 days) to l}rlzmonths (210 working days). The work year for the Assistant
Principals and Assistant Directors shall begin two weeks prior to the first day of the academic
year and conclude on June 30 of each year. The salary for the Assistant Principals and the Assistant
Directors shall be reduced proportionately. Unused vacation days (up to to) will be allowed to
carry over to use until exhausted with no end date.

If Assistant PrincipaVAssistant Director works approved days in capacrty as an Assistant
PrincipaVAssistant Director, he/she will be compensated at their per diem.

If Assistant Principal/Assistant Director attends approved professional development
during July through-3rd week of August, he/she will be compensated at 1.5x teacher staff
development rate per hour.

It is also understood that the Assistant Principals and Assistant Directors may apply for a
summer school principal position and other administrative summer work, subject to the
recommendation of the Superintendent of Schools and subject to approval by the Board of
Education.

3t2.3
The work year for the Dean of Students is to months, September to June, beginning the first
day of school in September and ending June 30 of the following year. Dean of Students shall
be compensated at their per diem pay rate for each day required to work during the months of
July and August.
7

313
In the event that a currently assigned administrator is absent for an extended period of time, a person
currently in an administrative position and elevated through a Board Resolution to assume this position,
shall be paid an agreed upon salary within the appropriate category.

3t4
The School District shall provide a substitute in the absence of the School Principal until
availability of substitutes is exhausted and, when possible, for other administrators as required.

315
In the event of a member's retirement, notice of four (4 months) will be given the District. If at the date
of the official retirement, a permanent replacement is not available, the retiring member can work up to
twenty (20) days at a per diem rate.
316
Any employee who enrolls in and successfully completes a prior approved graduate level course at an
accredited college or university shall be eligible to receive up to $500.00" as reimbursement for tuition,
upon proper documentation. Approval of said course of study shall be by the Superintendent of
Schools or their designee and shall be at their sole discretion. Only one tuition reimbursement, per
school year, per employee, shall be allowed.

ARTICLE IV
PROT'ESSIONAL BENEF'ITS
401

Temporary Leaves
401.1
Personal Illness: Days for personal illness will be computed on the basis of fourteen (14) days.
These days are cumulative without limitation.

401.2
Personal Business: The unit member shall be entitled to take up to three days for personal business,

per year, at full compensation with no deduction from pay, with prior approval and mutual
agreement between the Superintendent and the employee requesting personal business days.
401.3
Family lllness: Absence for family illness may be granted upon written application at the
discretion of the Superintendent. The days of absence granted shall be deducted from
accumulated sick leave unless the Superintendent in individual cases and in their discretion
directs that the day shall not be deducted. The Superintendent may terminate said leave at any
time.

8

401.4

Family is defined as members of an administrator's immediate family or person living ln_the
administrator's home. ("immediate family" is defined as follows: father, mother, stepfather,
stepmother, grandfather, grandmother, stepson, stepdaughter, brother, sister, son, daughter,
huiband, wife, mother-in-law, father-in-1aw, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece,
nephew, and grandchild).
401.5
Administrators may participate in a Sick Leave Bank provided they contribute sick days to the
sick bank prior to 9ll5 of each year and mid-year hires within two weeks of hire date. An
administrator may draw from the Sick Leave Bank provided:

a) He/she has exhausted their own sick days, and vacation days within the current school
year. A sick leave applicant who has exhausted all their sick and vacation days of the
current school year may request from the Superintendent of Schools additional leave to
conduct personal business that may come up prior to the end of the school year. Such
requests shall not be unreasonably denied.

b) He/she has furnished a physician's statement in writing demonstrating the need for
additional sick leave and,

c) The Sick Leave Bank Screening Committee approves the application, with
consideration of the following data:
a. Attendance data from the prior three years
b. Past requests/approvals from the Sick Bank Committee
c. Urgency of the situation: elective surgery versus treatment for a life-threatening
condition

Any administrator participating in the Sick Leave Bank will be limited to withdrawing from the
bank up to a total of sixty (60) days in succession. When an illness extends beyond sixty days, the
administrator may reapply to the Screening Committee for further coverage.
The Sick Leave Bank Screening Committee shall consist of three District appointees and two
BASA appointees. Decisions of said committee shall not be subject to grievance procedure.
The District shall contribute one hundred (100) days to the bank for the 2004-2005 school year and
will replenish all or part of these days whenever the bargaining unit members'contributed days
have been exhausted.
The bargaining unit shall not be allowed to annually contribute more days thananumber derived
by multiplying the number of bargaining unit members by two.

40t.6
Other leave days: Days of absence will or may be granted to the employee with no deduction from
compensation as follows:

a)

Days for religious observance, as requested, according to the Commissioner's Regulations

will be granted.
9

b)

Professional leave days may be granted to attend conferences, workshops, professional
programs, and professional organizations, for the purpose of improving instruction,
administration of instruction or improving administrative procedure of the SChool District.
Said days may be granted upon recornmendation of the Superintendent and approval of the
Board of Education.

c)

'l'ime necessary for appearance in any legal proceeding connected with the
employee's
employment, or with the school system, or for the performance of jury duty, or in the
Superintendent's discretion for any other legal proceeding if the employee is required by
subpoena and/or summons to attend.

d)

In a case where an employee is quarantined by action of the Health Department in their place
of residence because of illness or a contagious disease contracted-within the courie of
employment by contact with a student or another School District employee, accumulative
sick leave shall not be charged, and salary deductions shall not be made ior duration of the
quarantine period or such other periods the School Doctor shall certifr as requisite or
prudent.

e)

Bereavement:

1. An Association member may submit a written request to the
Superintendent of Schools for the use of up to two person allfamily illness
days, personal business days or vacation days in any combination for the

purpose of bereavement following the death of any individual. Such
request may be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the
Superintendent.

2. An Association member use up to three days leave, utilizing
personal/family illness days, personal business days or vacation days in
any combination for the purpose of bereavement following the death of
any individual defined as oofamily" under the terms of the collective
Bargaining Agreement, Article 401.4.

3. In the event an Association member has expended all personal illness
days, personal business days and vacation days and remains in need of a

bereavement day following the death of a "family" member(s), the
Superintendent, in their sole discretion, may grant up to three
bereavement days, upon written request of the Association member.

4. In thc cvent an Association member has expended all personal illness
days, personal business days and vacation days for the sole and

exclusive purpose of bereavement following the death of a "family,,
member, the Association member may submit a written request to the
Superintendent that such days be reinstated. Such request may be
granted, granted in part, or denied at the sole discretion ofthe
Superintendent.

10

401.7

Personal property loss: The School District will reimburse an employee for loss or damage
to personal property caused by unusual or disruptive occurrence or happening in the
course of employment.

402
Extended Leave
402.L

Other Leaves: A leave of absence for a period not to exceed one year may be granted upon
recommendation of the Superintendent and with the approval of the Board of Education, such
leave shall be without compensation or benefits and such time shall not be
considered as time served with the School District for service credit, seniority, or salary
placement. The employee, upon return to active service, shall be then entitled to restoration of
credit for accumulated sick days and will, for purposes of salary placement and service credit,
be entitled to restoration of service time accrued prior to commencement of the aforementioned
unpaid leave.
402.2
The District will make leaves of absence available to unit members in accordance with the Family
and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (See Board of Education Policy 6145 adopted lll20l07).
403

Other fringe benefits
403.1

Health Insurance:

Effective as soon as possible after July 1, 2008' the District shall make
available to all unit members two (2) heatth insurance plans.
Plan I: Blue Cross Blue Shield of Central New York Region wide Plan Option II This
health insurance plan is the indemnity plan offered since January 1,1999.
There are to be no changes to existing language for this plan.
Plan II: Blue Cross Blue Shield of Central New York Region wide Blue PPO-Plan H.
The PPO-Plan H shall have the following benefits:
$10 to copay per office visit
$50 copay per emergency room visit to be waived if admitted
$250 copay per hospital admittance for unlimited days

a.
b.

c.

d. $5/$15/$30 prescription retail copay
e. $10 copay for annual physical for all insured dependents

f. $10 copay for vision exam every 12 months

11

It is further agreed that co-pays for prescription drugs and the utilization of the mail order
prescription drug plan will be reviewed to become more cost effective for the administrators ancl
the School District.
As an employee option, the District will pay up to the same amount of premium equivalent toward
the cost of a locally mutually chosen health maintenance organization. The person will pay the
difference.
Employees who submit claims in accordance with the procedures established by the Plan shall have
said claims paid in a timely manner to the extent of the coverage provided, so that an employee shall
suffer no financial loss as a result of the slow payment of a claim. An employee shall be considered
to have suffered no financial loss if the Claims Administrator pays a claim within forty-five (45)
days ofreceipt ofthe necessary data.

All other terms and provisions of the collective bargaining agreement in regard to the health
insurance plan shall remain in full force.

Such program shall be available to all retirees and the District shall pay 40 percent of the family
costs and 50 percent of the individual costs of plan coverage. The plan shall bb reviewed in May of
each year.
The District reserves the right to change the health plan administrator provided that the plan benefits
are equal or better than the plan coverage provided under the current plan.

403.2
In order to assist the District in cost saving measures in the area of health insurance, the
Association agrees that:

a.) Effective July 1, 202I for the following prescription drug provisions will be implemented:

a. There shall be Copays of $5/$15/$30, or the actual medication cost if less than the
applicable copay, for both the Classic Blue and PPO prescription plans. For mail
order prescriptions, there shall be a one-month copay for a 90-day supply.

b. Pre-authorization and step-therapy procedures shall be implemented for all
prescription plans.

c. There be an annual cap of $700 on out-of-pocket prescription costs per member.
"Annual" shall be defined by the start and end dates of the District's medical Flex
Plan. The district would reimburse costs above that annual amount up to a district
cap of $4,000 annual reimbursement total for all BASA members.

d. Should the total reimbursement costs for all covered BASA members exceed
$4,000 in any one year, there shall be a proration of reimbursement for each
member that is the percentage of the actual requests determined by $4,000 divided
by the actual requested total, rounded to the nearest tenth of a percent. (Example:
Total requests were $5,000; $4,000 divided by $5,000 : .8; each member would
receive 80% of the requested reimbursement.)

t2

e. BASA members must submit for reimbursement of any annual out of pocket
prescription costs that are above the maximum of $700 per member no later than
the annual final reimbursement request date of the District's medical Flex Plan
(October l).

f. No prescription payment over the $700 cap made or reimbursed through the pre-tax
flex plan may be submitted for reimbursement under this provision.

g. The association and district will mutually develop a reimbursement form and
process for submission to the business office for reimbursement.

h. Pre-Authorizationand step-therapy will not apply to scripts that originated before
July 1,2021.

i. BASA shall be provided with a list of formulary drugs in place on July 1,202L
The most current formulary will be posted on the district website.

b.) Administrators will endeavor to reduce prescription costs by mail order purchases where
said prescription will require long-term usage of medication. The District shall provide
sources, current prices, and lists of available medications by mail order to each administrator.

c.) Where an administrator plans to submit to elective surgery, the District shall have the right to
require a second opinion, provided the District pays the cost.

d.) The District shall have the right to require that the Plan Administrator shall audit all hospital
and physician's bills.
e.) The District may establish an employee education program for the purpose of making
administrators aware of insurance benefits and costs. Said program may include an annual
summary of charges incurred by each administrator, but individual administrator's names will
not appear on any sunmary to be publicizedrn such a program.

13

0

The District and Association agree to comply with all state and federal laws concerning
generic drugs.

g) The annual rnajor meclical cleductibles shall be one hundred twenty-five ($125.00)
dollars for individual coverage and three hundred twenty-five ($325.00) dollars for
family coverage.

h) The payment of benefits as described in the District medical benefits plan will be
made as determined on the basis of the submission of proof that a charge fee or
expense has been incurred. Payment of covered hospital in-patient charges will be
made by a two-party check payable to the hospital and the covered person, or parent
or guardian of the covered person if the covered person is a minor or mentally or
physically totally disabled. The payment check will be sent to the individual payee
to be endorsed and forwarded to the hospital. Payment of benefits to other service
providers may be made directly to the service provider. However, any
reimbursement by the plan for a charge, fee or expenses paid by an individual will
be disbursed to that individual who paid the charge, fee, or expense.

i)

The parties agree to participate with a preferred provider for health services for
employees covered by this Agreement. Employees so covered shall maintain the
right to determine the health services provider of their choice without penalty.

j)

Right of Reimbursement and Assignment of proceeds
The term "Third Party" means a person or organization other than the Covered
Person. No benefits shall be paid under any coverage of this Plan with respect to
any injury or sickness for which a Third Party may be liable or legally responsible.
However, subject to the provisions of this Section, the Plan will pay such benefits
provided that the Covered Person (or his or her legally authorized parent,
guardian, or representative) shall comply with the following conditions:

1. Prior to payment of any such benefits under this Plan, the
Covered Person and the legal representative of the Covered
Person shall agree, in writing, to provide the Claims
Administrator and the Fund Administrator with written notice
whenever a claim is commenced against andlor recovery is
received from any Third Party (or insurer or surety thereof) for
damages as a result of the injury or sickness; and

2. Prior to payment of any such benefits under this Plan, the
Covered Person ancl the legal representative of the Covered
Person shall agree, in writing, to reimburse the Plan in accordance
with this Section for any benefits paid by the Plan on account of
such injury or sickness; and

t4

J

Prior to payment of any such benefits under this Plan, the Covered
Person and the legal representative of the Covered Person shall
provide, in writing, an assignment of proceeds in favor of the Plan in
the amount of any benefits paid by the Plan on account of such injury
or sickness; such assignment to be valid against any Judgment,
Settlement, or recovery in any manner received from such Third Party
or such Third Party's insurer or surety.

The conditions herein set forth shall not apply to any benefits payable under Medicare
Supplementary coverage, or to any amount received by the Covered Person under any other
insurance policy or certificate issued to the Covered Person or to any Dependent of an Employee
covered hereunder.
The amounts to be recovered by the Plan pursuant to the provisions hereof shall not be reduced by
any attomey's fees, court costs, or other disbursements.

k.) The Binghamton City School District shall provide a flexible spending/cafeteria plan
pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section 125 which shall be used for purposes of the payment
by employees of health care premium equivalents, uncovered health care expenses, uncovered
dental expenses, child-care expenses, optical care and other uncovered medical and/or health
expenses as permitted by regulations of the Internal Revenue Service. It is understood that this
flexible spending account/cafeteria plan shall allow the employee to pay these expenses with
pre-tax dollars. The initial startup cost of this plan shall be paid by the Binghamton City School
District. Any monthly expense or administration fee for belonging to or participating in said
plan shall be paid for by the employee through payroll deduction. There shall be no obligation
on the part of the District to provide this plan unless a minimum of twenty-nine (29) employees
elect to participate in the plan. This plan shall only be offered so long as it is permitted by the
Internal Revenue Code and Internal Revenue Service regulations.

l.) All employees employed as an administrator as of June 30,2017 shall contribute lZYo toward
the annual premium for the medical plan. Anyone hired or promoted to an administrator position
on or after July I,2017 shall contribute I5%o toward the annual premium for the medical plan
each year.

m.) Inpatient admissions for alcoholism and substance abuse, mental illness and nervous disorders
shall be treated like any other illness.

p) All services are reviewed and covered based on medical review.

15

403.3

Dental Plan: A non-contributory Dental Insurance Program with coverage for each employee
and their dependents shall be provided by the School District and will be reviewed annually.
403.4
Annuities: The School District will make provisions for salary deductions provided the
School District shall not be required to transmit payment for more than twelve carriers,
s9 that each employee, upon written authoization to the School District thereof may participate in
the tax sheltered annuity program.

403.5
Payroll Deduction: The Board will make provisions for deductions of a constant amount
from the payroll and transmission of payment to financial institution for each unit member who has
given written authorization.
403.6

Payroll Deduction: The School District will make provision for deductions of a constant
amount from the payroll and transmission of payment to the treasurer of the Association for each
unit member who gives written authorization.
403.7
Subject to the following, the Board of Education shall deduct from the salary of current
members of the Association and any new employee who is included in the unit after July
1, 1985, but is not a member of the Binghamton Administrative and Supervisory Associaiion an
amount up to the equivalent of dues payable by a member of the BASA. The Board of Education
agrees to an Agency Shop Fee deduction provision, as authorized by law, upon the following
conditions:

1. That the Board shall act only as a collection and disbursing agency as permitted under the
Taylor Law, Education Law and other relevant statutes and case law.

2. That the Board assumes no responsibility with respect to the ultimate use of said fees other
than collecting and disbursing same to the Association provided by the law.
404
Cell Phone Reimbursement
The District will provide to each unit member the sum of $900 per year for cell phone
reimbursement. This benefit is expressly conditioned upon the unit member utilizing his or her
personal cell phone for purposes connected with the performance of official duties. So long as
the unit member utilizes his or her personal cell phone for business purposes, that
individual shall be reimbursed $900 per year during the term of active iervice. This
benefit shall be provided in lieu of the District providing a District owned cell phone to
the unit member. In the event that the employee chooses to receive a District owned cell
phone, the cell phone reimbursement shall be inapplicable. The option whether to
choose a District owned cell phone or the reimbursement shall generally be that of the
employee unless, for any reason, the employee's personal cell phone is unusable or does not
have requisite coverage or cannot provide the cell phone coverage necessary for effective and
efficient contact with the unit member. In any month in which the employee cloes not rencler
active service, the cell phone reimbursement shall not be applicable.

t6

405

Technology Allowance
Each unit member shall be entitled to a technology allowance of up to $750 per year for the
purchase of, rental, or month expenses in connection with the acquisition of any technology
related device or apparatus which is work related and reasonably necessary to carry out the duties
of their position. This benefit shall only be available upon prior approval for the purchase or
acquisition of said device or apparatus, and provided that the employee is able to establish that
the device is work related and beneficial to the performance of the employee's duties as an
administrative staff member of the Binghamton City School District.

When the technology device is purchased, it shall become the property of the individual
Administrator, once purchased, following proper approval from the Superintendent or the
Superintendent's designee.

ARTICLE V
PROTECTION OF' ADMINISTRATORS

500
No administrator shall be required to use their personal automobile to transport students or other
persons within or outside the School District.

501
The Association reserves the right to request periodic meetings with the Superintendent
to discuss concems of its membership.

ARTICLE VI
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
600

Definitions
601.1
Employer: The Board of Education, City School District of the City of Binghamton, New
York.
601.2
Employee: Any person covered by this Agreement employed and compensated by the Board of
Education in a professionally centered area as defined by the Commissioner of Education of the
State of New York.

601.3
Employee's Representative: Any person selected by an employee to represent him/her in formal
grievance procedures, said person being termed "employee's representative" regardless of
occupation or profession.

l7

601.4
The term "grievance shall mean:

E

A complaint by an employee covered by this Agreement that there has been as to the

b)

A complaint by the Association that there has been a violation or misinterpretation of this

employee a violation or misinterpretation of this Agreement. However, no grievance may be
presented in the grievance procedure described herein, unless the Binghamton
Administrative and Supervisory Association approves the same and agrees that the same
constitutes a grievance as defined herein. Nothing contained herein shall grant to any
employee the right to file a grievance independent of the Association.

Agreement affecting a covered employee or employees.

602

Procedures
602.1
Informal
Stage I: The Binghamton Administrative and Supervisory Association shall present its
grievance to the Chief School Administrator, either directly or through its representatives. If the
grievance is not resolved at the District level within five (5) workdays, initiate action to implement

-

Stage II.

602.2
Formal - Stage II: The Association shall inform the Chief School Administrator of its intent to
institute Formal Proceedings and present the grievance in waiting to him/her. This document shall
state the nature of the grievance, the historical background of the grievance, evidence supporting the
grievance, action taken thus far to resolve the grievance, and the reasons for dissatisfaction with
action taken during informal proceedings. The Superintendent or their designee shall study the
grievance. This may involve conferences with the Association or its representatives. Following study,
the Superintendent or their designee will render their written decision to the Association no later than
ten (r0) workdays following written receipt of the grievance as outlined in Stage I. If the Association
rejects the decision, it may elect to go to Stage 3.
602.3
Stage

III

1)

The Association not satisfied with the disposition at Stage II may submit the grievance
to advisory arbitration by written demand served upon the employer and the American
Arbitration Association within ten (to) workdays from the conclusion of Stage II.

2)

The Arbitrator shall be selected pursuant to AAA Rules and the parties shall be bound
by the Rules Procedures of the AAA. The cost shall be borne equally.

3)

If the Arbitrator's written advisory decision is acceptable to the Association and the
Superintendent of Schools, the grievance shall be resolved in accordance with such
decision. If either the Association or the Superintendent of Schools disagrees with the
Arbitrator's advisory opinion, such party shall notiff the other party within fifteen
(15) working days from receipt of the Arbitrator's decision.

18

In the event of disagreement by the Association or Superintendent of Schools, the
Association may, within fifteen (15) workdays from receipt of or sending to the
Superintendent of Schools a notice of disagreement, make a written request to the
Board of Education, with a copy to the Superintendent, for review and final
determination by the Board of Education.
4)

The Board shall, within 20 workdays from receipt of a request for review conduct a
hearing on the grievance, at which the parties may appear and give evidence.

602.4
No grievance shall be entertained under the aforesaid provisions and shall be deemed waived unless
the grievance is presented at Stage I within sixty (6o) days after the occurrence of the alleged
violation or misinterpretation of this contract.

ARTICLE VII
OTHER PROVISIONS
701
The School District will provide a copy of this Agreement and the agreements of all other
bargaining units to each administrator.
702
It is the intention of the Superintendent of Schools to continue regular monthly meetings known as
Superintendent's Administrators'Council. One of the functions of said Council is to provide a
forum for administrators to articulate their concerns and to make suggestions concerning the
operation of the School District; the Association may and is encouraged to submit to the
Superintendent of Schools agenda items for the aforesaid meetings.
703
The use of school buildings shall be permitted for Association business without cost at reasonable
times for meetings with the approval of the Superintendent. Application for use of a school
building is to be made on forms provided by the Business Office. If a building is to be used at a
time other thanatime when it is ordinarily staffed by a custodian, the Association will pay the
overtime cost for necessary custodial staffing.
704
The District will continue its policy of requesting recommendations of its administrative
employees as to hiring, terminating, and transferring of staff when said staff is under the
jurisdiction of the administrative employee.
705
The employees will have the right to review, upon request to the Superintendent, the contents of
their personnel files excepting confidential matter and may be permitted by the Superintendent to
make copies of the documents in it. The employee may request a representative of the Association

I9

to accompany the employee during review. The District shall endeavor to advise the employee of
documents, other than confidential, which are to be placed in the employee's files and the employee
should be requested to review and sign the documents. In any event, the employee in reviewing their
file should sign any unsigned documents. The employee may file a response to any material placed
in their file.

706
The parties to this Agreement recognize it to be in the best interest of the District to properly relate
administrative responsibility and to clearly define the role of administrators in the management of
the District.

707
There shall be established a committee to develop rules and procedures for determining a seniority
list of the employees in this unit, and the committee shall devise a process by which the calculation
of seniority and the determination of a list will be an annual process and a permanent part of the
Collective Bargaining Agreement.

708
SHARED DECISION MAKING
We believe that public interest is best served through assuring the availability of high-quality
education for all and that knowledgeable, ethical, and effective administrator are essential to
achieving educational excellence.
We believe that in successful and effective schools administrators play a key role.

We support shared decision-making as long as the decision-making process is a consensus model.
We believe that when dedicated people do the necessary research and have access to all of the
available information, they will generally agree upon a decision. All parties must continue to work
for what is best for our students.
In shared decision-making matters related to personnel practices, all parties must recognize that due
process must be maintained for all personnel. Parties must all realize that as established by law
administrators have a legal responsibility and authority to make some decisions.
Above all, we share the belief that the shared decision-making process does not mean a shift in the
decision-making from autocracy to oligarchy but does mean a change in the way we approach
decisions and a commitment to gathering information, sharing it with others, and reaching
consensus.

Finally, we believe that all Binghamton City School District administrators function as one team,
working cooperatively with each other to solve problems and to make decisions with the interests
of the students as the driving force.

It is our strong belief that all administrators in the Binghamton City School District be involved in
the instructional process in some way, and that this involvement includes persons in all positions.

20

709
RETIREMENT INCENTIVE
Each employee who is eligible forNew York State Retirement and is at least fifty-five (55) years of
age during the life of this agreement shall be eligible for a retirement incentive. Eligible employees
who seek to obtain this benefit must give the Binghamton City School District four (4) months (or
less at the discretion of the Superintendent) advance notice of their intention to retire.
The member must have tenure in the district to be eligible for the retirement incentive.
The retirement incentive shall be $20,000 based on two or more years of service in the district.
For less than ten (10) years of service the incentive will be at the rate of $2,000 per year. Such
contribution will be made to a 403(b) progftrm able to accept Employer contributions as defined
in the Internal Revenue Code. This contribution will be processed within thirty (30) days of
retirement.
No Cash Option-

No Employee may receive cash in lieu of or as an altemative to any of the
Employer's Non-elective Contribution(s) except as described herein. (See
paragraph 4.A.)
Contribution Limitations

-

In any applicable year, the maximum Employer contribution shall not cause an
Employee's 403(b) account to exceed the applicable contribution limit under Section
a15 (c)(1) of the Code, as adjusted for cost-of-living increases. For Employer Nonelective Contributions made post-employment to former Employee's a03@) account,
the Contribution Limit shall be based on the Employee's compensation, as determined
under Section 403(b) (3) of the Code and in any event, no Employer Non-elective
Contribution shall be made on behalf of such former Employee after the fifth taxable
year following the taxable year in which that Employee terminated employment.
In the event that the calculation of the Employer Non-elective Contribution
referenced in any of the preceding paragraphs exceed the applicable contribution
limits, the employer shall handle the excess amount as follows:

A. For all members in the New York State Teachers'Retirement System ("TRS") with
a membership date before June 17, 1971, and for all members in the New York
State Employees' Retirement System regardless of their membership date, the
Employer shall first make an Employer Non-elective Contribution up to the
Contribution Limit of the Internal Revenue. Code and then pay any excess amount
as compensation directly to the Employee. In no instance shall the Employee have
any rights to, including the ability to receive, any excess amount as compensation
unless and until the Contribution Limit of the Internal Revenue Code are fully met
through payment of the Employer's Non-elective Contribution; and

2l

B. For all members in the New York State Teachers'Retirement System ("TRS") with
a membership date in the TRS on or after June 17, 1971, and for all members in the
New York State Employees'Retirement System regardless of their membership
date, the Employer shall first make an Employer Non-elective Contribution up to
the Contribution Limit of the Internal Revenue Code. To the extent that the
Employer Non-elective Contribution exceeds the Contribution Limit, such excess
shall be reallocated to the Employee the following year as an Employer Nonelective Contribution (which contribution shall not exceed the maximum amount
permitted under the Code), and in January of the following year for up to four (4)
years after the year of the Employee's employment severance, until such time as the
Employer Non-elective Contribution is fully deposited into the Employee's 403 (b)
amount. In no case shall the Employer Non-elective Contribution exceed the
Contribution Limit of the Internal Revenue Code.
403(b) Accounts

-

Employees receiving a contribution according to this article shall be required to
select a a03@) account designated to accept Employer Non-elective
Contributions. Employer contributions shall be deposited into the 403(b) account
selected by the Employee.
Tier I Adjustments

-

Tier I members with membership dates prior to June 17, 1971, Employer Nonelective Contributions hereunder will be reported as non-regular compensation
to the New York State Teachers'Retirement System.
Contributions under this Article shall be subject to Internal Revenue Service
regulations and rulings. Should any portion be declared contrary to Law, then such
portion shall not be deemed valid and subsisting, but all other portions shall
continue in full force and effect. As to those portions declared contrary to Law, the
Association and the Employer shall promptly meet and alter those portions in order
to provide the same or similar benefit(s), which conform, as close as possible, to
the original intent of the parties.
This Article shall further be subject to the approval of the 403(b) provider, which
shall review the provisions hereunder, solely as a matter of form and as the
provider of investment products designed to meet the requirements of Section
403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Both the Employer and the Employee sholl providc nccurntc informntion to thc
403(b) provider regarding the Employee's elective, the Employer Non-elective
Contributionso and the amount of the Employee's compensation.

22

710

PROF'ESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
The district/superintendent will make every effort to supplement the $750 with additional sources of
funding so that every administrator will have opportunities for professional development. The
Assistant Superintendent of Instruction and the President of BASA will collectively communicate
additional professional development opportunities and available funds to support professional
development opportunities beyond the supplemental $750.

If Assistant Principal/Assistant Director attends approved professional development during
July through-3rd week of August, he/she will be compensated at 1.5x teacher staff
development rate per hour.

7tt
UPCOMING NEGOTIATIONS
BASA and the district will continue negotiations to research and discuss Domestic Partner
benefits in upcoming negotiations.

ARTICLE VIII

800
In the event that any provision of this Agreement shall be determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or illegal, it shall be null and void and unenforceable. Such
decision shall not affect any of the other provisions of this Agreement, which shall continue in full
force and effect.

801
IT IS AGREED BY AND BETWEEN THE PARTIES THAT ANY PROVISION OF THIS
AGREEMENT REQUIzuNG LEGISLATIVE ACTION TO PERMIT ITS IMPLEMENTATION
BY THE AMENDMENT OF LAW OR BY PROVIDING ADDITIONAL FUNDS THEREOF,
SHALL NOT BECOME EFFECTIVE UNTIL THE APPROPRIATE LEGISLATIVE BODY
HAS GIVEN APPROVAL.

Dated:

Dated:

FOR THE DISTRICT:

FOR THE ASSOCIATION:

fut/tl,
Peter

Dr
Thompson
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS

23
