PROFESSIONAL AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
SUFFIELD BOARD OF EDUCATION
AND
SUFFIELD EDUCATION ASSOCIATION

July 1, 2013 to June 30, 2016
2548579v1
November 21, 2012

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE
ACADEMIC FREEDOM
ASSOCIATION LEAVE
ASSOCIATION RIGHTS
CHILDREARING LEAVE
CLASS SIZE
COACHING STIPENDS
CONFERENCE LEAVE
DEFINITIONS
DEGREE DEFINITIONS
DURATION
DUTY FREE LUNCH
EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION
EMPLOYMENT YEAR
EXCHANGE TEACHERS LEAVE
EXTRA PAY FOR EXTRA DUTY
EXTRA PAY FOR SUPERVISORY POSITIONS
EXTRA REMUNERATION FOR EXTRA DUTY
FIFTH DISEASE
GENERAL LEAVE
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
INSURANCE BENEFITS
JOB SHARING
JURY DUTY
JUST CAUSE
LEAVE FOR NEGOTIATION AND GRIEVANCE REP
NO STRIKE
NON-DISCRIMINATION CLAUSE
PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS
PERSONAL INJURY BENEFITS
PERSONAL LEAVE
PERSONNEL DATA SHEETS
PERSONNEL FILES
PLACEMENT ON THE SALARY SCHEDULE
PREAMBLE
PREGNANCY DISABILITY LEAVE
PREPARATION TIME

ARTICLE #
ARTICLE 28
ARTICLE 36
ARTICLE 49
ARTICLE 35
ARTICLE 16
APPENDIX C
ARTICLE 38
ARTICLE 3
ARTICLE 8
ARTICLE 59
ARTICLE 21
ARTICLE 54
ARTICLE 17
ARTICLE 33
ARTICLE 7
APPENDIX B
APPENDIX E
ARTICLE 52
ARTICLE 39
ARTICLE 45
ARTICLE 5
ARTICLE 10
ARTICLE 40
ARTICLE 31
ARTICLE 27
ARTICLE 37
ARTICLE 46
ARTICLE 47
ARTICLE 12
ARTICLE 14
ARTICLE 30
ARTICLE 50
ARTICLE 26
ARTICLE 9
ARTICLE 1
ARTICLE 34
ARTICLE 20

PAGE
31
35
41
34
23
51
36
6
12
46
28
43
24
33
11
49
57
42
36
40
7
14
37
32
31
36
41
41
19
20
32
42
30
12
4
34
27

PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN
PROFESSIONAL NEGOTIATION
PROMOTIONS
PROTECTION OF TEACHERS
RECOGNITION
RETIREMENT NOTICE
SABBATICAL LEAVE
SALARY PAYMENT
SALARY SCHEDULE
SEPARATION AND RECALL
SERVICE INCREMENT
SEVERABILITY
SICK LEAVE
SPECIAL SCHOOL PROGRAMS
SPECIAL TEACHER REQUIREMENTS
STUDENT MASTER TEACHER
SUMMER SCHOOL
TEACHER FACILITIES
TEACHER TRANSFER
TEACHING ASSIGNMENTS
TEACHING PERIODS
TEMPORARY REPLACEMENT TEACHERS
TRANSPORTATION ALLOWANCE
TUITION REIMBURSEMENT
VACANCIES
VIRTUAL LEARNING
WORK DAY

APPENDIX D
ARTICLE 4
ARTICLE 44
ARTICLE 13
ARTICLE 2
ARTICLE 57
ARTICLE 32
ARTICLE 6
APPENDIX A
ARTICLE 15
ARTICLE 11
ARTICLE 48
ARTICLE 29
ARTICLE 22
ARTICLE 24
ARTICLE 23
ARTICLE 53
ARTICLE 25
ARTICLE 42
ARTICLE 41
ARTICLE 19
ARTICLE 56
ARTICLE 51
ARTICLE 55
ARTICLE 43
ARTICLE 58
ARTICLE 18

54
6
40
20
5
44
32
10
47
21
18
41
31
28
29
28
42
30
38
38
26
44
42
43
39
45
25

THIS AGREEMENT IS MADE AND ENTERED INTO ON THIS ____ Day of
________, 2012, by and between the Suffield Board of Education (herein after referred to
as the “Board”) and the Suffield Education Association (herein after referred to as the
“Association”), affiliated with the Connecticut Education Association and the National
Education Association.
WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, the Board and the Association recognize and declare that providing a
quality education for the children of Suffield, CT is their primary aim and responsibility;
and
WHEREAS, the Board has a statutory obligation pursuant to 10-153 a-g inclusive,
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, to negotiate with the Association, or its
successor. The Association or its successor has the statutory right to negotiate as the
exclusive representative of its teaching and special service personnel with respect to
salaries, hours as defined therein, and all other conditions of employment; and
WHEREAS, the parties have reached certain understandings which they desire to
confirm in this Agreement.
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE AS FOLLOWS:
ARTICLE 1
PREAMBLE
A.
This Agreement is negotiated under 10-153a through 10-153g of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended, in order to fix for its term the salaries, hours as defined
therein, and all other conditions of employment provided herein.
B.
This Agreement contains the full and complete agreement between the Board and
the Association on all negotiable issues. The parties may mutually agree to negotiate
during the term of this agreement or may negotiate if ordered to do so by an authority of
competent jurisdiction.

4

ARTICLE 2
RECOGNITION
A.
The Board hereby recognizes the Suffield Education Association as the exclusive
representative of the certified professional employees who are employed by the Suffield
Board of Education in positions requiring a teaching or other certificates and are not
included in administrators’ unit or excluded from the purview of paragraph 10-153a to
10-153g inclusive. The Association was designated as the exclusive representative of the
certified professional employees pursuant to a designated petition certified by the Suffield
Board of Education, February 17, 1971.
B.
The Board agrees that it will not negotiate with any individual or organization of
teachers other than the Suffield Education Association, as long as said Association retains
organizational recognition status.
C.
Subject to the provisions of this Agreement, the Association recognizes that the
Board and the Superintendent of Schools reserve and retain full rights, authority and
discretion, in the proper discharge of their duties and responsibilities, to control,
supervise and manage the schools and its professional staff under governing law,
ordinance, rules and regulations.
D.
In accordance with the provisions of Public Act 03-174, employees working in a
teaching position solely on the basis of a Durational Shortage Area Permit (DSAP) shall
be included in the bargaining unit. Such individuals shall be covered by all terms and
conditions of the collective bargaining agreement, except as follows:
1. A DSAP holder shall not accrue seniority or length of service for any purpose of
this Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a DSAP holder becomes
certified as a teacher and is retained continuously by the Board as an employee
after receiving such certification, with no break in service, then the individual
shall be credited with seniority and length of service for all purposes under this
Agreement, retroactive to the first date of employment by the Board.
2. The Board shall have the right, in its sole discretion, not to renew and/or to
terminate the employment of a DSAP holder, and the DSAP holder shall have no
right to file and/or pursue a grievance under this Agreement with respect to such
action.
3. DSAP holders shall have no bumping rights or recall rights under this Agreement.

5

ARTICLE 3
DEFINITIONS
As used in this Agreement, the following terms shall have the respective meaning as set
forth below:
1. “Board” - the Board of Education of the Town of Suffield, CT or a designated
Committee made up of duly elected Board members.
2. “Superintendent” - the Superintendent of Schools for the Town of Suffield, CT or
his/her designee.
3. “Association” - the Suffield Education Association.
4. “Teacher” - all personnel as defined in Article 2 - Recognition.
5. “Association Representative” - the duly designated representative of the Suffield
Education Association in each school building.
6. “PR & R” - the Professional Rights and Responsibilities Committee of the
Suffield Education Association.
7. “Preparation Period” - preparation periods are those periods in which the teacher
is involved in the preparation of classroom materials, lesson plans, and
consultations requested by the Administration.
ARTICLE 4
PROFESSIONAL NEGOTIATION
The Board and the Association agree to negotiate in good faith pursuant to Section 10153d of the Connecticut General Statues as amended, in accordance with the procedure
set forth therein, to secure a Successor Agreement relative to all matters concerning
salaries, hours as defined therein and other conditions of employment. The Agreement,
so negotiated, shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the Board and the
Association.

6

ARTICLE 5
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Definitions
1. “Grievance shall be defined as a complaint by a teacher or a group of teachers that
as to him, her, them, there has been a misapplication, a misinterpretation, or
violation of a specific term or terms of this Agreement, to the detriment of the
teacher or teachers.
2. “Teacher” shall mean any member of the unit as defined in Article 2,
“Recognition”.
3. “Party in interest” shall mean the person or persons making the claim, and their
designated representative provided herein, and the Board of Education.
4. “Days” shall mean days when school is in session, except after May 1st
when days shall be calendar days, so that the matter may be resolved before the
end of the school term, or as soon as possible thereafter. However, for teachers
who work during the summer, “days”, for purposes of filing and processing
grievances during July and August shall be calendar days excepting weekends or
holidays on which the Board of Education office is closed.
5. “AAA” shall mean the American Arbitration Association.
6. “File” shall mean the teacher shall present the written grievance to the appropriate
administrator or his/her designee in person. The grievance shall be dated and
initialed by both the administrator and the grievant when received.
7. “Render” shall mean the appropriate administrator or his/her designee shall
present the written decision to the teacher in person. The decision shall be dated
and initialed by both the administrator and the grievant when received.
8. “ADRC” shall mean the American Dispute Resolution Center.
Time Limits
1. Since it is important that grievances be processed as rapidly as possible, the
number of days indicated at each step shall be considered as a maximum. The
time limits specified may, however, be extended by written agreement of the
parties in interest.
2. If a teacher does not file a grievance in writing within twenty (20) days after
he/she knew or should have known of the act or conditions on which the
grievance is based, then the grievance shall be considered to have been waived.
For grievances which arise during the summer recess, the twenty (20) days shall
7

run from the first day of school in the fall, except with respect to teachers who
work during the summer as provided in Section 4 above.
3. Failure by the aggrieved teacher at any level to appeal a grievance to the next level
within the specified time limits, shall be deemed to be acceptance of the decision
rendered at that level.
4. Failure by any administrator or Board to render his/her or its decision within the
specified time limits shall allow the aggrieved to pursue the grievance to the next
level.
Informal Procedure
1. If a teacher feels that he/she may have a grievance he/she shall first discuss the
matter with his/her principal or other appropriate administrator in an effort to
resolve the problem informally
2. If the teacher is not satisfied with such disposition of the matter, he/she shall have
the right to have the Association assist him/her in further efforts to resolve the
problem informally with the principal or other appropriate administrators.
Formal Procedure
1. Level One - Principal
(a) If the teacher is not satisfied with the disposition of the matter in the informal
procedure, he/she may file his/her written grievance with the principal.
(b) The principal shall, within five (5) days from the filing of the grievance, render
a written answer, with a copy to the President of the Association.
2. Level Two - Superintendent of Schools
(a) If the aggrieved teacher is not satisfied with the disposition of his/her
grievance at Level One, he/she may, within five (5) days after the receipt of the
decision, file his/her written grievance with the Superintendent of Schools.
(b) The Superintendent shall, within five (5) days after receipt of the grievance
meet with the aggrieved teacher and with the representatives of the Association, if
the teacher so desires, for the purpose of resolving the grievance.
(c) The Superintendent shall, within five (5) days after the hearing, render his/her
decision and the reason thereof in writing to the aggrieved teacher, with a copy to
the President of the Association.

8

3. Level Three - Board of Education
(a) If the aggrieved teacher is not satisfied with the disposition of his/her
grievance at Level Two, he/she may, within five (5) days after receipt of the
decision, file the grievance with the Board of Education.
(b) The Board of Education shall, within ten (10) days after the receipt of the
grievance, meet with the aggrieved teacher and with the representatives of the
Association for the purpose of resolving the grievance.
(c) The Board shall, within ten (10) days after such hearing render its decision and
the reasons therefore in writing to the aggrieved teacher, with a copy to the
President of the Association.

4. Level Four - Arbitration
(a) If the aggrieved teacher is not satisfied with the disposition of his/her
grievance at Level Three, he/she may, within three (3) days after the decision,
request in writing to the President of the Association that his/her grievance be
submitted to arbitration.
(b) The Association may, within five (5) days after receipt of such request, submit
the grievance to arbitration by so notifying the Board in writing and by filing a
demand for arbitration under the Voluntary Labor Arbitration Rules of the AAA
or the ADRC, or the Board and the Association shall jointly select an experienced
and impartial arbitrator to act as the administrator of the proceedings.
(c) The arbitrator selected shall confer promptly with the representative of the
Board and the Association, shall review the record of prior hearings, and shall
hold such further hearings with the parties in interest as he/she shall deem
requisite.
(d) The Arbitrator shall be bound by the Voluntary Labor Arbitration Rules.
He/She shall be bound by and must comply with all of the terms of this
agreement. He/She shall have no power to add to, delete from, or modify in any
way any of the provisions of this agreement. The decision of the arbitrator shall
be final and binding upon all parties in interest.
(e) The costs of the services of the arbitrator shall be born equally by the Board
and the Association.

9

RIGHTS OF TEACHERS TO REPRESENTATION
1. No reprisals of any kind shall be taken by either party or by any member of the
administration against any participant in the grievance procedure by reason of
such participation.
2. Any party in interest may be represented at any level of the grievance procedure
by any member of the bargaining unit of his/her own choosing or by a
representative designated by the Association, except that he/she may not be
represented by a representative or by an officer of any teacher organization other
than the Association. When a teacher is not represented by the Association, the
Association shall immediately be notified and has the right to be present and to
state its views at all stages of the procedure.
3. The Association may, if it so desires, call upon the professional services of the
Connecticut Education Association for consultation and assistance at any stage of
the procedure.
MISCELLANEOUS
1. All documents, communications, and records dealing with the processing of a
grievance shall be filed separately from the personnel files of the participants.
2. Forms for filing and processing grievances and other necessary documents, shall
be prepared by the Association and approved by the Superintendent and made
available through the Association.
3. If the grievance occurs as a result of an action of other than the teacher’s
immediate superior or affects a group or class of teachers, the grievance may be
processed immediately at the level at which it occurs.
4. The Association may elect to process a grievance of any teacher, grievant, group
of individuals or party in interest, on its own behalf at any step of the grievance
procedure.
ARTICLE 6
SALARY PAYMENT
A.
The salaries of all teachers covered by this Agreement are set forth in the
Appendices which are attached hereto and made a part of this Agreement.
B.

Method of Payment

All teachers shall elect to receive their full salary in either twenty-one two (22)
equal installments per year or twenty- two (22) installments equal to l/26th of their salary
plus one (1) balloon installment equal to 4/26th of their salary. Any teacher who has
elected the balloon paycheck option will be paid the balance of his/her earned salary for a
10

school year in a single payment which will be issued not later than June 30th. Payment
shall be made in a manner which does not increase the employee’s withholding tax
liability, subject to compliance with applicable state and federal law.
When the regular payday falls on a holiday or other non-work day, payments will be made
on the preceding workday. Paychecks during scheduled vacations may be picked up by or
mailed to teachers in accordance with existing practice. Upon the employee’s request,
there will be direct deposit of paychecks at the bank of his/her choice providing that there
is no additional cost to the Board of Education.
Payment shall be made on alternate Thursdays beginning no later than the 2nd Thursday in
September.
A teacher who wishes to change his/her payment option for the following year must
notify the Superintendent in writing by June. This selection will remain in effect until a
teacher informs the Superintendent in writing of a change in payment option by June.
C.
Upon initial employment, a teacher will elect one of the two payment options as
described in Section B. However, teachers who begin employment in the middle of a
school year will not have the option of the balloon check until the following
school
year.
D.
If termination of employment comes prior to the end of the regular school year,
such teacher’s pay will be prorated on the basis of the number of days worked.
ARTICLE 7
EXTRA PAY FOR EXTRA DUTY
A.
Extra duty for which extra compensation shall be paid and the amounts of such
compensation are set forth in Appendix E, which is attached hereto, and made a part of
this Agreement.
B.
Teacher participation in extra duty activities in the extra duty pay schedule in
Appendix E shall be strictly voluntary. Teacher participation in other extra duty activities
involving students outside the normal school hours shall also be strictly voluntary. The
Board reserves the right to accept a volunteer. The Board may employ a person outside
the bargaining unit if no qualified Association member applies for such employment
within the initial posting period.

11

ARTICLE 8
DEGREE DEFINITIONS
The salary schedules listed in the appendices of this Agreement shall be interpreted and
applied in accordance with the following definitions and in compliance with the
Professional Development Program outlined in Appendix D:
Bachelor

A baccalaureate degree earned at an accredited college or
university.

Master’s or
Equivalent**

A master’s degree earned at an accredited college or university;
the completion of thirty-six (36) credits beyond the baccalaureate
degree.

Sixth Year or
Master’s +30
or Equivalent

A second master’s degree in a discipline other than the discipline
in which the initial master’s degree was attained, or a Sixth Year
Certificate from an accredited college or university.

Sixth Year +15
Master +45
or Equivalent

A second master’s degree in a discipline other than the discipline
in which the initial master’s degree was attained plus fifteen
(15) credits beyond the master’s degree; or a “Sixth Year
Certificate” plus fifteen (15) credits beyond from an accredited
college or university; or eighty-one (81) credits beyond the
baccalaureate degree.

Doctorate

A doctoral degree from an accredited college or university.
** Persons initially employed in Suffield after June 30, 1985,
shall be required to earn a master’s degree to advance to this
preparation level.
ARTICLE 9
PLACEMENT ON THE SALARY SCHEDULE

A.

Initial employment in the Suffield Public Schools.
1. New teachers to the Suffield Public Schools shall be placed on the appropriate
step on the salary schedule. Full credit shall be granted on the prevailing schedule
for prior teaching experience. However, teachers with the maximum years of
teaching experience may be hired up to two steps below the stated maximum.
The Superintendent may place a teacher "two steps above" that teacher’s years of
previous teaching experience. The extent to which credit shall be granted shall be
determined by the Superintendent. If the teacher is hired pursuant to the alternate
route to certification or as a second career candidate following traditional
preparation routes to certification, credit may be granted, not to exceed ten years,
at the Superintendent’s discretion.

12

B.
All other teachers shall be placed on the appropriate step on the salary schedule,
taking into consideration the following:
1. Annual increments for each year of service in the Suffield School System,
provided that the Board of Education may withhold individual increments for
unsatisfactory service.
2. Degree status as defined under “Degree Definitions” Article 8.
3. As of September l, 1976, there shall be no military service credit except that those
teachers receiving military credit on that date shall continue to receive such credit
at the rate then in effect.
C.
Any teacher expecting a change in degree status must notify the Superintendent no
later than January 2 in order to be placed on the appropriate salary schedule for the
following school year.
1. Teachers submitting documentation of said degree achievement prior to
September will be placed on the new salary schedule for the first paycheck of the
new school year.
2. Any teacher submitting documentation of degree achievement between September
1 and March 1 of the new school year, will be placed on the new salary schedule
beginning with the next paycheck.
3. Teachers who submit documentation after March 1 of the new school year will not
be placed on the appropriate schedule until September of the following school
year.
4. The reason for notification no later than January 2 is in order that funds may be
budgeted to meet the salary change in the next fiscal year.
D.
In order for a teacher to be placed on the M.A., M.A.+30 or M.A.+ 45 salary
column as a result of the completion of courses, the courses must be approved by the
Superintendent or his/her designee in advance, as part of a planned program or individual
courses, from an accredited university and in a subject area or field that is beneficial to
the teacher’s position in Suffield and the Suffield Public Schools.
In any given twelve month period, teachers may advance on the pay schedule no more
than one (1) column and no more than one step.

13

ARTICLE 10
INSURANCE BENEFITS
1. The Board shall provide the following insurance benefits for each teacher and
eligible dependents for the period of July 1, 2013, through June 30, 2016:
2. Life Insurance: The Board shall provide $50,000 group term life insurance paid by
the Board; at least $50,000 additional life insurance may be purchased by the
employee, up to the extent allowed by the carrier.
3. On an annual basis, participating teachers shall elect one of two health insurance
plans offered by the Board:
(a) a PPO plan with benefit levels as set out below;
(b) an HSA plan with benefit levels as set out below.
The HSA (Health Savings Account) plan shall be the core insurance plan. For any
teacher wishing to remain in the PPO plan, the Board will contribute an amount equal to
the dollar amount contributed by the Board toward the premium of the HSA plan for the
teacher’s coverage level. Any teacher remaining enrolled in the PPO plan shall pay the
full difference between the dollar amount contributed by the Board and the full cost of the
PPO plan.
Teachers may change plan options during the year upon the occurrence of a
Qualified Life Event as defined in Internal Revenue Code Section 125, without the
imposition of pre-existing limits, late entrant requirement or medical evidence
requirements, as per the insurance carrier’s requirements.
For the 2013-14 school year, the HSA plan shall have the following components:
In-Network
Annual Deductible
(individual/aggregate family)
Co-insurance
Co-insurance Maximum
(individual/aggregate family)
Cost Share Maximum
(individual/aggregate family)
Lifetime Maximum
Preventive Care
Prescription Drug Coverage

Out-of-Network
$1500/3000

0% after deductible

20% after deductible up to coinsurance maximum
$1500/3000
$3000/6000

Unlimited
Deductible waived
Treated as any other medical
expense, Subject to
deductible, once deductible
is met, then $10/30/45 copay
per prescription

$1,000,000
N/A
20% co-insurance after
deductible, subject to
co-insurance limits

14

Effective July 1, 2014, the HSA plan shall have the following components:
In-Network
Annual Deductible
(individual/aggregate
family)
Co-insurance

Co-insurance
Maximum (individual/
aggregate family)
Cost Share Maximum
(individual/aggregate
family)
Lifetime Maximum
Preventive Care
Prescription Drug
Coverage

Out-of-Network
$2000/4000

0% after deductible

20% after deductible up
to co-insurance
maximum
$3,000/6,000
(Out of network Coinsurance and In-network
post deductible RX copays)
$5,000/10,000

Unlimited
Deductible
waived
Treated as any other
medical expense,
Subject to deductible,
once deductible is met,
then $10/30/45 copay
per prescription

$1,000,000
N/A
20% co-insurance after
deductible, subject to coinsurance limits

The Board will contribute 50% of the deductible amount in 2013-14, 2014-15 and 201516. The Board’s contribution toward the HSA deductible will be deposited into the HSA
accounts throughout the course of the year, on the Board’s payroll dates. The parties
acknowledge that the Board’s 50% contribution toward the funding of the HSA plan is
not an element of the underlying insurance plan, but rather relates to the manner in which
the deductible shall be funded for actively employed teachers. The Board shall have no
obligation to fund any portion of the HSA deductible for retirees or other individuals
upon their separation from employment.
Effective July 1, 2013, the PPO shall have prescription drug programs, with the following
co-payment structure:
Managed Prescription Drug Program
Retail:
$10 per prescription for generic drugs
$30 per prescription for formulary
$45 per prescription for non-formulary

15

Mail order:
$15 per prescription for generic drugs
$40 per prescription for formulary
$50 per prescription for non-formulary
Retail duration:
30 days
Mail order duration: 90 days
unlimited maximum
Co-payments for PPO Plan:
Office Visit Co-pay

$25

Urgent Care Co-pay
Emergency Room Copay

$50
$100

Inpatient Hospitalization
Co-pay
Outpatient Surgery Copay

$250

Out-of-network services
Deductible
Co-insurance
Out-of-pocket
Maximum

$100

$300/700/1000
$800/1000/1500
$1000/1500/2500

Premium Cost share:

HDHP/H.S.A
Dental Plan

2013-14

2014-15

2015-16

17%
18%

18%
18%

19%
19%

4. The Board shall provide the current Co-Pay Dental Plan and Dental Rider A, with
deductibles of $25 for individuals and $50 per family or an alternate plan as the
parties may mutually agree upon in writing.
Participating employees shall contribute the following percentages of the
applicable premium rates, and the Board shall contribute the following
percentages of the applicable premium rates. The Board shall make available and
IRC Section 125 premium conversion plan available to employees making such
contributions:
16

5. The Board of Education shall provide the Association with copies of insurance
rate changes within 14 days after it receives rate changes from the carrier, in any
event no later than April 1. Participating employees shall make a yearly election
for Option 1, Option 2 or Option 3 by May 31 of each year.
6. The Board shall have the right to change insurance carriers and/or to self-insure in
whole or in part in order to provide the insurance coverage set forth above,
provided that there shall be no reduction or diminution in the above coverage and
no increase in expense to any bargaining unit members, and provided further that
coverage which results from change in carriers and/or self-insurance are at least
equal to coverage described above, in terms of coverage, benefits and
administration. Network shall not be a factor in considering if coverage, benefits
or administration are at least equal.
The President of the Association shall be notified in writing within 30 days of any
intention to change carriers and/or self-insure and shall have a reasonable
opportunity to review the proposed changes. Should the Board and the
Association disagree that the changes proposed will provide coverage at least
equal to the coverage, benefits and administration described above at no
additional cost to staff members the disagreement(s) shall be subject to impartial
arbitration as set forth in Article 5 of this Agreement, preferably before an
arbitrator with experience and expertise in insurance matters. Arbitration may be
demanded by either party and, should either party elect, such arbitration shall be
expedited under the Rules of AAA or ADRC for expedited arbitration. No change
in carrier or institution of self-insurance shall be made until the arbitrator has
rendered his/her award.
7. The Board shall provide 50% of the cost of full benefits for teachers employed less
than 0.5 F.T.E. with the teacher paying the remaining 50% of the cost. For
employees hired on or after 7/1/99, the Board shall provide 50% of the cost of full
benefits for teachers employed 0.5 F.T.E. or less, with the teacher paying the
remaining 50% of the cost.
8. Having successfully performed his/her contract obligations to the school system, a
teacher who resigns after completion of the school year to take a new position the
following school year is entitled to appropriate benefits through August 31 of the
final year of employment, unless benefits are available through the teacher’s new
employer.
9. The Board shall allow continuation of all existing health care insurance for any
teacher upon retirement at no cost to the Board of Education. Such coverage shall
be equal to the terms in the current master agreement between the Board and the
Association. It is understood that if a retiring teacher wishes to continue in the
insurance plan, payments must be made by the teacher at the appropriate time.
For teachers employed in Suffield as of September 1, 1987, the Board shall pay
1.5% of the premium for each year of service in Suffield for the first five years of
17

retirement or until age 65, whichever comes first. The teacher may elect to
continue in the group at his/her own expense.
10. The Board shall establish and maintain an IRS Section 125 Flexible Spending
Account (FSA) for all members. The account shall be designed to permit
exclusion from taxable income each teacher’s share of health and medical
premiums, deductibles, co-insurance, and unreimbursed medical expenses as well
as the cost of dependent care. The dependent care account shall have a $5,000
maximum and the medical account shall have a maximum amount as approved by
the Board annually of no less than $1,000.
ARTICLE 11
SERVICE INCREMENT
In recognition of length and quality of service rendered to the Suffield Public Schools, the
Board of Education may upon the annual recommendation of the Superintendent:
1. Pay an amount in addition to regular salary to teachers who have served twenty or
more years under contract in the Suffield Public Schools.
2. Pay an amount in addition to regular salary to teachers who have served twentyfive or more years under contract in the Suffield Public Schools. The Board will
attempt to pay the service increment at the first organization meeting of the year.
Upon filing initial application, said longevity stipends shall be granted annually unless
withheld for cause. The Board shall provide a written statement of reason in case a
stipend is withheld from a teacher in a given year, together with suggestions for
improvement leading to reinstatement of a stipend in subsequent years. Such statement
shall be provided within twenty (20) days of the Board action to withhold.
Applications for initial or reinstatement of stipends must be made by November 1 of the
preceding year and will be reviewed by the Board of Education together with a
recommendation by the Superintendent. Final Board action on such applications shall be
taken not later than February 1 of the school year in which they are submitted. Upon
recommendation of the Superintendent and at the discretion of the Board, exceptions may
be made for persons whose cumulative service is not all in the Suffield Public Schools.

2013-2016

20 years
$748.00

25 years
$964.00

Persons initially employed in Suffield after June 30, 1996, will not be eligible for a
service increment.

18

ARTICLE 12
PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS
A.

In addition to those payroll deductions required by law, including state income
tax, employees may request deductions be taken from their salary for such reasons
as (1) employee contributions to Board provided insurance benefits (health, FSA,
life and dental) or (2) employee contributions to Board approved providers of Life
Insurance or IRC 403(b) Tax Sheltered Annuity Plans and Long Term Care. All
requests for deductions must be in writing on an approved authorization form.

B.

Upon request, there will be direct deposit to the life insurance or annuity plan
providing there is no additional cost to the Board of Education and the Board will
provide a current list of approved plans.

C.

Paperwork may be submitted to the business office prior to the first business day
of the month to participate or modify participation in these plans.

D.

Dues Deduction and Service Fee Deduction
1. All teachers employed by the Suffield Board of Education shall, as a condition of
continued employment, join the Association or pay a service fee to the
Association. Said service fee should be equal to the proportion of Association
dues uniformly required of members to underwrite the cost of collective
bargaining, contract administration and grievance adjustments.
2. The Suffield Board of Education agrees to deduct from each teacher an amount
equal to the Association membership dues or service fee by means of payroll
deductions. The amount of the deduction from each paycheck for membership
dues shall be equal to the total Association membership dues divided by the
number of paychecks from and including the first paycheck in September through
and including the last paycheck in June. The amount of the deduction for service
fee from each paycheck shall be equal to the total service fee divided by the
number of paychecks from and including the first paycheck in January through
and including the last paycheck in June. The Association shall, no later than
August 1 of each year, give written notice to the Business Office of the amount of
dues and those of the CEA and NEA, which are to be deducted in that school year
under such authorization. The amount of service fee shall be certified by the
Association to the Board of Education prior to January 1 of each school year.
3. The balance of the annual dues shall be deducted from the final paycheck of any
employee resigning his position, receiving a leave of absence or terminating his
employment after the opening of school.
4. The right to refund to employees monies deducted from their salaries under such
authorization shall lie solely with the Association. The Association agrees to
19

reimburse any employee for the amount of any dues deducted by the Board and
paid to the Association, which deduction is by error, in excess of the proper
deduction and agrees to hold the Board harmless from any claims of excessive
deduction.
5. No later than the first paycheck in October of each school year, the Board of
Education shall provide the Association with a list of all employees of the Board
of Education and the positions held by said employees. The Board shall notify the
Association monthly of any changes in said list.
6. The singular reference to the “Association” herein shall be interpreted as referring
to the Suffield Education Association, the Connecticut Education Association, and
the National Education Association.
7. The Association shall indemnify and save the Board and/or the town harmless
against all claims, demands, suits, judgments, or other forms of liability including
attorney’s fees and the cost of administrative hearings that shall or may arise out
of, or by reason of, action taken by the Board of Education for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this article.
ARTICLE 13
PROTECTION OF TEACHERS
The Board of Education agrees to save teachers harmless in accordance with 10-235a and
10-236a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
ARTICLE 14
PERSONAL INJURY BENEFITS
Whenever a teacher is absent from school as a result of personal injury caused by an
accident arising out of and in the course of his/her employment within the meaning of the
Worker’s Compensation Act, he/she shall be paid full salary (less the amount of any
worker’s compensation award made for temporary disability due to said injury) for a
maximum of the first thirty days of such accident, and no part of such 30 days shall be
charged to his/her annual accumulated sick leave. After the above 30 days, said teacher is
eligible to use accumulated sick leave. Sick leave so used will be charged against the
teacher’s sick leave bank at the rate of l/3 of a day of sick leave for each day of disability
beyond the 30 day full salary period. In no case shall the combination of sick leave and
workman’s compensation exceed the employee’s normal pay.

20

ARTICLE 15
SEPARATION AND RECALL
A.

GENERAL STATEMENT

It is recognized that under 10-220 and 10-4a of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
Board of Education has the responsibility to maintain good public elementary and
secondary schools, and to implement the educational interests of the state. However,
recognizing also that it may become necessary to eliminate professional staff positions in
certain circumstances, this Article is adopted to provide a fair and orderly process should
such eliminations become necessary.
B.

REASONS FOR ELIMINATION OF PROFESSIONAL STAFF POSITIONS

It is recognized that the Board of Education has the sole and exclusive prerogative to
eliminate professional staff positions, consistent with the provisions of the state statues.
Elimination of professional staff positions may result from reasons including but not
limited to decreases in student enrollment, changes in curriculum, severe financial
conditions, or other circumstances as determined by the Board of Education.
C.

DEFINITIONS
1. As used herein, the term “days” shall mean calendar days.
2. As used herein, the term “teacher” shall apply to any employee covered by this
contract.

D.

PROCEDURE
1. The Board of Education may, in the first instance, exercise its right and power to
reduce the number of professional staff positions without determining which
teacher contracts will be terminated, if any, or what other staffing changes will be
made to effectuate the purpose of position elimination.
2. Prior to commencing action to terminate teacher contracts under this procedure,
the Board of Education will give due consideration to its ability to effectuate
position elimination and/or reduction in professional staff by:
(a) voluntary retirements
(b) voluntary resignations
(c) transfer of existing staff members
(d) voluntary leaves of absence
21

3. In the event that it appears necessary to terminate teacher contracts in order to
effectuate the elimination of professional staff positions, the Superintendent will
propose to the Board for its consideration, an orderly plan for elimination of
positions, identifying professional personnel whose contracts he/she recommends
for termination.
4. The following criteria will be used to select those employees whose contracts are
to be considered for termination as a consequence of elimination of professional
staff positions:
Criteria for determining which teacher(s) shall remain: Pursuant to Connecticut General
Statute 10-151(b), as amended within the separate categories of tenure teachers and nontenure teachers, the following criteria will be used in the order listed:
(a) Areas of certification.
(b) Total years of experience in the Suffield School System;
(c) Total years of teaching experience;
(d) Degree status as determined by the total number of hours of accepted
professional development credits beyond the Bachelor’s Degree;
(e) Qualifications and ability as determined by a written evaluation of the
teacher’s performance as well as consideration of degree status.
5. It is understood that a layoff is a termination of employment subject to
administrative and/or judicial review in the manner set forth in the subsections of
Section 10-151 of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended, and in no other
manner. A layoff under this Article is not subject to arbitration under ARTICLE 5
of this contract. Notification and any subsequent proceedings will be in
accordance with Section 10-151 of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended.
E.

POLICY PROVISIONS NOT APPLICABLE TO PROMOTION

Nothing, herein, shall require the promotion of a teacher to a position of higher rank,
authority or compensation, even when the teacher whose contract is to be terminated
because of elimination of position is qualified and/or certified for the promotional
position.
F.

RECALL PROCEDURE

If the employment of a teacher is terminated because of elimination of positions, the
name of the teacher shall be placed on a reappointment list and remain on such list for
two (2) full years unless such teacher obtains employment as a public school teacher in
another district, other than on a substitute basis, during that period. If a position becomes
open during such period, the teacher who has been selected by the Board of Education as
the person on the recall list who is certified to hold that position, as determined in
D(4)(e), will be notified in writing by registered mail, sent to his/her last known address,
at least thirty (30) days prior to the anticipated date of re-employment. The teacher shall
accept or reject the appointment in writing within fifteen (15) days of date of letter
22

registration. If the appointment is accepted, the teacher shall receive a written contract
within twenty days (20) of the receipt of the teacher’s reply by the Board of Education. If
the teacher rejects the appointment offer or does not respond according to this procedure
within fifteen (15) days, then the name of the teacher will be removed from the recall list.
Teachers recalled under provisions of this Article shall have all previously earned sick
leave and personal leave days reinstated.
G.

REDUCTION FROM FULL TO PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT
1. Subject to all preceding sections of this Article and Section 10-151 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, a full-time teacher whose position is to be reduced
to a part-time position shall receive two separate letters as follows:
(a) Notification of elimination of the position.
(b) Offer of a part-time position.
2. Teachers who accept part-time teaching positions or non-certified positions in
Suffield as a result of the elimination of their full-time position shall remain on
the recall list. They shall be offered the first available full-time teaching position
for which they are certified and qualified.

H.
All Administrators employed by the Suffield Board of Education who are covered
by the provisions of the Teacher Fair Dismissal (Tenure) Law and who are laid off from
work due to a reduction in administrative staff shall have rights to displace teachers
covered by this Agreement, in positions where said administrators are qualified and
certified as determined by Article 16 of the Professional Agreement in a manner provided
by applicable law. No administrator shall be discriminated against with respect to such
displacement rights by virtue of his/her service outside the teacher bargaining unit.
ARTICLE 16
CLASS SIZE
The size of given classes or the number of pupils met by individual teachers will vary
according to educational objectives, physical limitations, safety factors and staffing
patterns. The Board wishes to maintain class size(s) and teacher load which reflect both
educational goals and the community’s willingness to support recommended practices.
To all instructional settings, factors such as staff competency, adult: pupil ratio and
educational goals shall influence Board and administrative decisions pertaining to class
size. The following, while not absolute limitations, are considered by the Board to be
firm guidelines:
Kindergarten

No more than 25 - NOT AVERAGED

Grades 1-5

No more than 25 - NOT AVERAGED FOR EACH GRADE
LEVEL FOR EACH SCHOOL
23

Grades 6-8

Academic Subjects (English, Math, Science, Social Studies,
Reading) No more than 25 - NOT AVERAGED FOR EACH
ACADEMIC AREA FOR EACH GRADE
Industrial Arts, Home Economics - No more than 20 - NOT
AVERAGED
Physical Education - Maximum of 25 students per instructor NOT AVERAGED
World Language and Music - No more than 25 - NOT
AVERAGED
Special Needs Classes - No more than 18 - NOT AVERAGED

Grades 9-12

Regular Classes - No more than 30 - NOT AVERAGED (ROOM
SIZE A FACTOR)
Advanced Specialized (i.e., 3rd and 4th year Language, Accounting
2 and 3, advanced mathematics) - No more than 25 - NOT
AVERAGED (ROOM SIZE A FACTOR)
General Level and Special Education Classes - No more than 18 NOT AVERAGED
Laboratory - No more than 20 - NOT AVERAGED
Shops - No more than 20 - NOT AVERAGED
Physical Education - Maximum of 25 students per instructor NOT AVERAGED
ARTICLE 17
EMPLOYMENT YEAR

Members of the bargaining unit (who are not new teachers in Suffield) shall be
compensated for school years during the term of this Agreement in accordance with the
salary schedule set forth herein based upon an employment year of one hundred eighty
eight (188) days including at least two non-instructional days, such work year to be
scheduled at the discretion of the Board of Education at a time contiguous with the
student school year. One of these non-instructional days is to be scheduled immediately
before the start of the school year and one is to be scheduled immediately following the
end of the school year as a teacher work day (no in-service, no meetings) for the express
purpose of preparing/cleaning classrooms and materials for start or end of school year.
New teachers shall have an employment year of eighty-nine (189) days, including one
24

induction day. Should the Board in its discretion extend the work year, as defined above,
members of the bargaining unit shall be compensated at a per diem rate based on their
annual salaries for every such day at the rate of l/188 and 1/189 for new teachers.
ARTICLE 18
WORK DAY
A.
Teachers shall be required to report twenty (20) minutes before the start of the
student school day and to remain twenty (20) minutes after the close of the student school
day except for after school meetings and regularly scheduled activities, provided that such
required time before and after school shall not exceed a total of thirty (30) minutes.
Teachers at the Middle School may be assigned to duty for more than twenty (20) minutes
before the student school day with equal compensatory time to be taken as scheduled by
mutual agreement between the teacher and principal. In addition, in special cases,
teachers may be allowed to arrive late and/or leave early with the permission of the
immediate supervisor.
If the required work day for teachers is extended beyond the required work hours in effect
in 2003-04 by the Board during the term of this Agreement beyond that set forth above,
the Board shall compensate affected members of the bargaining unit at a rate of
compensation based upon a pro-rating of their annual salaries equal to a percentage of the
time that the required work day is extended.
B.
Any faculty meeting of teachers scheduled by the Principal, Teacher Leader, or
the Superintendent, after regular school hours, may be required of all teachers. Any such
meetings after regular school hours, unless of extraordinary nature, will be held not more
than once per week. Such meetings shall commence at the end of the regular contractual
day except in extraordinary circumstances. Meetings shall not be more than 60 minutes,
except in extraordinary circumstances. This provision does not apply to release time.
C.
Teachers are expected to attend Parent Conferences, Open Houses, and Parent
Night programs. The required total yearly evening program time shall be 12 hours or
fewer at each level. Scheduling of such conference time shall be the responsibility of the
building level administrators.
Any participation in other afternoon/evening/weekend programs shall be strictly
voluntary and non-precedent setting.
D.
Due to variable time requirements that may arise from time to time and the
professional nature of the teacher’s position, the administrator and the teacher may
schedule the teacher’s work day in a pattern different from that delineated in paragraph A
above, except that no teacher’s work day may be lengthened under this provision. The
Supervisor will work with affected staff members to ensure responsible use of this
provision.

25

ARTICLE 19
TEACHING PERIODS
It is agreed that the Board of Education will exercise due diligence to achieve the
realization of the following standard with a minimum of reasonable necessary exceptions:
A.
Secondary school teachers shall not be required to teach more than 1250 minutes per
week (middle school-including Quest and Advisory) or 1265 minutes per week (high
school).
B.
Secondary school teachers shall not be required to teach more than two subject areas
in any school term.
C.
Secondary school teachers shall not be required to have more than three teaching
preparations in any school day.
D.
Teaching (as referenced in this Article) shall be defined as time in which a teacher
is actively involved with a class of multiple students in the art of teaching and for which
he/she has participated in the preparing, implementing and/or evaluating student learning.
E.
Under extraordinary circumstances, a secondary school teacher may be requested to
teach an additional class of students such that the teacher teaches more than the minutes
specified in Article 20 paragraph A above. In such instances, the teacher shall be paid up to
an additional .2 of his/her yearly salary for teaching the additional class. Any teacher who
receives additional pay in accordance with this paragraph shall remain responsible for the
typical number of duties. If the additional class occurs during preparation time, the teacher
shall not be compensated for lost preparation time.
F.
For classes that are determined by the administration to require additional teaching,
preparation and student tutoring time than is required for the typical class, the
administration may designate the class as an “extra duty class” and compensate the teacher
of that class for the extra teaching time in accordance with the following formula:
(.2 FTE wages at the rate on the salary grid of the individual teacher assigned to the extra
duty class) X the amount of extra teaching time designated by the Administration for the
class as a percentage of normal total teaching time for a class (expressed in decimal
form), which shall not exceed 50% (.5)) X (.75)
The determination of whether a class is an “extra duty class” shall be made by the
administration, in their sole discretion. If there are multiple sections of the exact same
class (same level, same material) taught by different teachers, all teachers who teach that
“extra duty class” and devote extra teaching time to that class shall receive the additional
compensation described above.
The extra teaching time shall be scheduled by the administration. Teachers teaching
“extra duty classes” must actually work the extra teaching time that is designated by the
26

administration as necessary for the “extra duty class” in order to receive the additional
compensation. Any teacher who receives additional pay in accordance with this section
(paragraph F) shall remain responsible for the typical number of duties. If the additional
class occurs during preparation time, the teacher shall not be compensated for lost
preparation time.
ARTICLE 20
PREPARATION TIME
A.
Whenever possible, each teacher shall receive at least forty (40) minutes of
preparation time each day.
B.
If possible, these periods should be scheduled as one per day at a minimum of
forty (40) minutes each. If it is impossible to schedule forty (40) minutes of preparation
time per day, the total preparation time per week must total at least two hundred (200)
minutes. The manner of this scheduling is intended to provide the flexibility required by
the administration to permit reasonable scheduling of such required meetings as PPTs.
Under exceptional circumstances, a teacher may be required to give up a preparation
period to attend such a meeting. In such cases, compensatory preparation time shall be
made available to the teacher so that the intent of this paragraph is upheld.
C.
In the event, for any individual, the amount of normal preparation time as stated
above is reduced, the Board and the Association shall negotiate the impact, if any.
D.
Preparation time may be scheduled as team preparation. Team preparation period
is defined as a meeting with an instructional team that may include regular classroom
teachers, special education teachers, or teachers of subjects such as art, music, PE, library
technology, etc. for the purpose of developing materials and strategies for delivering
instructional services to a discrete group of students. A team preparation period may
include all members of a team, or smaller groups e.g. two co-teachers or a coordinator
and teacher(s).
E.
Middle school grade level meetings as well as any meeting at any level which is
primarily administrative in nature shall not be considered a preparation period.
G.
The morning recess break and the lunch/recess period do not count as preparation
periods.
H.
The required teacher attendance times before and after school are not considered
preparation periods.
I.

Supervision of study halls is not considered preparation time.

J.
Part-time teachers are entitled to preparation time in proportion to the time for
which they are hired.

27

K.
All teachers shall be entitled to leave the school if necessary as part of classroom
preparation upon the signing of a “sign in/out” sheet, unless requested to remain in the
building by the principal. The principal shall give a reason for the restriction should the
teacher request one.
L.
Teachers shall be assigned to cover another teacher’s class only when no
substitute is available.
M.
In the event that a teacher is required to cover another teacher’s class and
therefore loses preparation time as guaranteed above, he/she will be compensated at the
appropriate salary rate on a per diem basis for the amount of the lost time.
ARTICLE 21
DUTY FREE LUNCH
A.
The Board and the Association agree that a teacher’s primary responsibility is to
teach and that the teacher’s energy should, to the extent possible, be utilized to this end.
B.
Members of the Bargaining Unit shall have an uninterrupted duty-free lunch
period daily of a minimum of 20 minutes. At the elementary level the lunch period shall
include the time when the children are at lunch and noon recess with the exception that
each member may be assigned to recess duty once per week. All assignments shall be
done on an equitable basis. The remaining days shall be reserved for consultation with
staff, parents and students, and activities addressing a teacher’s primary responsibility.
C.
All teachers shall be entitled to leave the school during the duty free periods set
forth in the preceding paragraph, upon the signing of a “sign in/sign out” sheet, unless
requested to remain in the building by the principal. The principal shall give a reason for
the restriction should the teacher request one.
ARTICLE 22
SPECIAL SCHOOL PROGRAMS
Homebound tutors in the bargaining unit shall be paid at the rate established for other
non-classroom service, as set forth in Appendix E, B.3.
ARTICLE 23
STUDENT MASTER TEACHER
Each teacher shall have the right to accept or reject a student teacher.

28

ARTICLE 24
SPECIAL TEACHER REQUIREMENTS
A.

Mentor Teacher:

B.

Team Leader:
1. A Team Leader is a teacher who has been assigned to provide leadership and
coordination concerning the delivery of instruction services to a discrete group of
students served by an instructional team. An instructional team can include
regular classroom teachers, special education teachers, teachers of art, music, PE,
library, technology, etc., as well as paraprofessionals.
2. The position will be posted annually.
3. The position shall be awarded by the Superintendent.
4. The Team Leader stipend is listed in Appendix B.

C.

Grade Level Leader
1. A Grade Level Leader is a teacher who has been assigned to coordinate the
delivery of instructional services in all classes of a given grade. The Grade Level
Leader will likely represent that grade level in school-wide planning and
coordination activities, lead grade level meetings for coordination purposes, and
coordinate the allocation of resources among teachers.
2. The position will be posted annually.
3. The position shall be awarded by the Superintendent.
4. The Grade Level Leader stipend is listed in Appendix B.

D.

Master Teacher

The Board of Education will establish “Master Teacher” positions. Such positions will
be posted by the Board and teachers who meet the following requirements may apply.
Candidates must be on the maximum step of the contract for either the M+30 or
M+45 tracks.
Candidates must have completed at least six (6) graduate credits, or the
equivalent, within the last five (5) years.
A committee consisting of equal numbers of teachers and administrators will review
applications and make recommendations to the Superintendent. The Superintendent will
recommend those candidates he/she determines are appropriate for consideration by the
29

Board of Education. Appointment to Master Teacher status will be made by a vote of the
Board. The appointment will be for a five (5) year term.
1. Those teachers appointed as Master Teachers will carry out action research
projects in lieu of the Teacher Evaluation Method goal process.
2. Specific responsibilities will be mutually agreed upon by the teacher, supervisor
and Director of Curriculum.
3. Individual agreements of responsibilities will be approved annually by the
Superintendent.
4. Task expectations will be equal to approximately six (6) total days of extra work.
5. The Master Teacher stipend is listed in Appendix B.
ARTICLE 25
TEACHER FACILITIES
A.
Parking spaces will be provided for teachers at each school. There will be a
designated and well marked parking area for teachers only.
B.
Additional concerns regarding teacher facilities may be brought to the attention of
the Superintendent and the Board by the Association, and a written response must be
received within 10 working days.
ARTICLE 26
PERSONNEL FILES
A.

No anonymous complaints may be placed in any teacher’s personnel file.

B.
No complaint shall be placed in a teacher’s personnel file until the complaint has
been investigated and verified by the Superintendent or his/her designee. Such
investigation shall include consultation with the affected teacher.
C.
No evaluation or written statement of criticism originating after initial
employment shall be placed in a teacher’s personnel file for more than three (3) days
unless the teacher has been notified and has had the opportunity to review such material.
The teacher may submit a written notation regarding any material, and the same shall be
attached to the file copy of the material in question. If the teacher is asked to sign the
material placed in his/her file, such signature shall be understood to indicate his/her
awareness of the material, but in no instance shall said signature be interpreted to mean
agreement with the content of the material.

30

D.
Each teacher shall have the right to review and make copies of any material in the
teacher’s personnel file upon reasonable notice during the hours in which the Board’s
office is open.
ARTICLE 27
JUST CAUSE
No teacher shall be denied an increment, given a written reprimand, or suspended without
just cause. If a teacher is to be formally disciplined, as defined above, he/she shall be
entitled to receive a statement of the reasons in writing within one working day and to
have a representative of the Association present.
ARTICLE 28
ACADEMIC FREEDOM
A.
The private and personal life of a teacher is not within the appropriate concern or
attention of the Board of Education except as it may interfere with the teacher’s
responsibilities to and relationships with students and/or the school system.
B.
Teachers will be entitled to full rights of citizenship, and no religious or political
activities of any teacher (provided such activities do not take place during his/her working
hours) or the lack thereof will be grounds for any discipline or discrimination with respect
to the professional employment of such teacher.
ARTICLE 29
SICK LEAVE
A.
Teachers shall be entitled to sick leave with full pay up to fifteen (15) working
days in each year for the employee’s personal illness or disability. Unused sick leave
shall be accumulated from year to year so long as the teacher remains continuously in the
service of the Board up to a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days. In addition to
the maximum number of days which may be accumulated (i.e., 180) each teacher shall be
permitted an additional 15 days sick leave at the beginning of each school year (in
accordance with Connecticut General Statute 10-156) which may not be accumulated.
B.
The Board of Education shall keep a record of each teacher’s unused sick leave.
A teacher may examine his/her record upon request.
C.
The Board in its sole discretion may provide sick leave in excess of limits defined
in this article. Board action on a particular request shall not be in any way binding or take
precedence with respect to any other request, whether similar or dissimilar, and each
application shall be reviewed independently on a case-by-case basis.
D.
When there is a demonstrated pattern of sick leave usage which reasonably
appears to show a pattern of abuse, or when there is other reasonable cause to suspect
abuse of sick leave, the Superintendent may require the teacher to produce a medical
31

certificate to justify his/her sick leave, provided the Board will pay for the cost of such
certificate.
ARTICLE 30
PERSONAL LEAVE
A.
A total of five (5) days of personal leave per year shall be granted to teachers for
reasons of a personal or emergency nature, which made absence from school unavoidable
and necessary, subject to the approval of the building principal or immediate supervisor.
B.
Such personal leave shall not accumulate from year to year except that, for
reasons of severe illness or death in the immediate family, unused leave shall accumulate
from year to year to a maximum of ten (10) days.
C.
Application for such leave shall be made as far in advance as practicable and,
except for emergencies, shall be made at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of
the leave. Such leave shall be granted except in cases of extreme hardship or disability to
the school system and permission will not be unreasonably withheld.
ARTICLE 31
JURY DUTY
Any teacher who is called for jury duty shall receive the necessary leave to fulfill this
legal obligation. This leave shall not be deducted from sick leave or from personal days.
The staff member shall receive a rate of pay equal to the difference between the
professional salary and the jury fee.
ARTICLE 32
SABBATICAL LEAVE
A.
For teachers employed in the Suffield Public Schools for a minimum of six (6)
consecutive years, the Board of Education will consider application for a sabbatical year
leave to be devoted to professional improvement as detailed in a planned program of
study, of combined travel and study of research, of writing and publication, designed to
increase the professional competency, knowledge, stature of the teacher, and to reflect
credit upon the System.
B.
The Board of Education agrees to continuance of contract on a sabbatical basis
including maintenance of position and placement on salary schedule.
C.
The Board of Education agrees to pay a sabbatical leave stipend based upon 80%
of due salary, full benefits and contributions toward C.S.T.R. as detailed in the
regulations.

32

D.
The teacher participating in sabbatical leave under this policy shall contract to the
Suffield Public Schools for a minimum of three (3) years. Release from obligations prior
to expiration of a three-year contract shall be according to detailed regulations.
E.
year.

No more than one sabbatical leave application will be approved in any one school

F.
Application: Application for sabbatical leave shall be made by December l of the
prior school year. Detailed plans for the sabbatical must be submitted by March 1 of the
prior school year.
G.
Salary: Sabbatical grantee shall receive a stipend of 80% of the salary to which
the grantee is entitled during the year of the sabbatical leave.
H.
Benefits: Sabbatical grantee shall receive the benefits to which they would be
entitled if they were actively teaching.
I.
Retirement: By law, seven and a quarter percent (7.25%) of the sabbatical stipend
shall be deducted for retirement purposes. Teachers may claim a full year toward
retirement according to State Retirement Board regulations by paying a total of seven and
a quarter percent (7.25%) of the full salary which would have been earned during the
sabbatical year. The Suffield Board of Education assists the teacher in making this
payment by a direct payment to the teacher of seven percent and a quarter (7.25%) of the
twenty percent (20%) of annual salary which is not granted as a stipend. This is a one
time direct payment by June of the sabbatical year.
J.
Selection: Award of sabbatical leave is at the discretion of the Board of
Education. Its decision shall be final. Criteria including, but not limited to, the following
shall be used by the Board in its consideration of applications: sabbatical year plan, needs
of the school system, the applicant’s past and potential contribution to the school system
and budget consideration.
K.
Obligations: (a) Grantees shall contract for three (3) years services to the Suffield
Public Schools immediately following the sabbatical year.
ARTICLE 33
EXCHANGE TEACHERS LEAVE
In any year, teachers may be exchanged for teachers from some other school district in the
United States or in a foreign country. Such exchange shall be initially applied for by the
teacher and recommended by the Superintendent to the Board of Education, which shall
recommend final action. All rights and privileges of the exchanged teacher shall continue
in full force and effect during the exchange period.

33

ARTICLE 34
PREGNANCY DISABILITY LEAVE
The Board and the Association recognize that teachers are entitled to leaves for maternity
related disabilities in accordance with the law.

ARTICLE 35
CHILDREARING LEAVE
A.
Upon request, any teacher who is expecting a child, or whose spouse is expecting
a child, or who has received acceptance to adopt a child, shall be granted a long-term
leave of absence for childrearing purposes. The Board will comply with all mandatory
provisions of the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993.
Such a leave shall normally be for a maximum of one year.
•

The request for childrearing leave shall be made at least thirty (30) days prior to its
commencement.

•

Such leave request must establish in writing the beginning and ending dates of the
proposed leave as well as the use of days being requested, i.e. FMLA, sick days,
unpaid days. A form will be completed by the teacher and submitted to Central
Office that will determine the status of the leave (sick leave, FMLA, etc.).

•

Leaves commencing February 1 through August 31 of any year shall terminate at the
end of the second marking period of the following school year.

•

If the Board determines that the educational program of the students directly involved
will be seriously affected, said leave shall terminate at the beginning of the following
school year.

•

The teacher shall receive at least 60 calendar days notice of a Board decision to
postpone termination of the leave.

•

Such leave can be terminated earlier by mutual agreement of the parties.
Upon return, the teacher shall be reassigned to the same position or an equivalent
position at the discretion of the administration.
Teachers whose leave terminates at the beginning of a school year and who intend to
return shall reconfirm their intention to return by giving the Superintendent written
notice of such intent by June 1 of the prior school year.
34

All other teachers must reconfirm their intention to return by giving the
Superintendent sixty (60) calendar days notice of such intent.
Failure to provide such notice or failure to return to work as scheduled upon
termination of a leave shall be considered a resignation of employment.
•

B.

As in the case of other leave without pay, the teacher is entitled to participate in fringe
benefit programs beyond the initial FMLA twelve (12) week period at the teacher’s
own expense.
Leaves of absence under Section A, above, shall be without pay.

C.
Any person employed by the Board of Education to fill the position of any
certified professional employee on leave, shall be notified in writing by the
Superintendent of Schools at the time of employment that said person’s contract shall
expire upon return to active service of the employee on leave whose position is being
temporarily filled, unless some other position exists to which the person employed to fill
the temporary vacancy may be appointed, if qualified.
D.
A teacher on leave according to the terms of this Article shall not have this
absence, if a year or more, counted in his/her total years of experience in the Suffield
Public Schools; however, the leave of absence shall not disrupt the number of years of
continuous employment.
ARTICLE 36
ASSOCIATION LEAVE
A.
A leave of absence may be granted for a period not to exceed two (2) school years
for the purpose of serving as an officer of the CEA or NEA.
B.
No benefits or seniority shall accumulate during the time the employee is off on
such leave.
C.
Upon return from such leave, the teacher shall be placed at the same position on
the salary schedule and entitled to reinstatement of accumulated sick leave and other
benefits as they would enjoy had he/she been teaching in the Suffield School System.

35

ARTICLE 37
LEAVE FOR NEGOTIATION AND GRIEVANCE REPRESENTATION
A.
If negotiation meetings between the Board and the Association are scheduled
during normal working hours of a school day, not more than two (2) representatives of the
Association shall be relieved from all regular duties without loss of pay, as necessary, in
order to permit their attendance at such meetings.
B.
One Association representative per day is allowed to attend grievance procedure
hearings. Prior notice will be given to supervisors and/or principals. Appearances will be
without loss of pay.
C.
Any teacher whose appearance in such meetings or hearings as a witness is
necessary, shall be accorded the same rights.
ARTICLE 38
CONFERENCE LEAVE
A.
The Superintendent may grant convention or conference leaves, or permission to
observe an activity in another building or school system to teachers without loss of pay.
The administration shall use their best efforts to grant leave equitably when there are
several individuals who could benefit from the conference.
B.
The Board agrees to reimburse all teachers for all approved expenses incurred in
attending a convention or conference, or observing activities in another school system.
C.

Expenses may include mileage, parking, registration, meals, and lodging.

D.
Teachers attending conferences or conventions under the terms of this Article
shall submit a summary report to the Superintendent.
E.
All Teachers shall be required to fill out a “Professional Day Report” upon his/her
return from the day.
F.
The Board will make every effort to provide adequate funding for convention and
conference leaves.
ARTICLE 39
GENERAL LEAVE
A.
A teacher may be allowed leave, without loss of salary, to begin programs of study
that result from foundation or scholarship grants and which necessitate personal presence
in advance of the close of the school year.
B.
Extended leaves of absence, with or without salary, may be granted by the Board
of Education. In requesting such leave, the teacher shall specify a date of commencement
36

and a date of termination. Teachers intending to return from such leave shall give the
Superintendent ninety (90) calendar days notice. Failure to provide such written notice or
failure to return from such leave shall be considered a resignation of employment.
C.
A teacher on leave according to the terms of this Article shall not have this
absence, if a year or more, counted in his/her total years of experience in the Suffield
Public Schools, however, the leave of absence shall not disrupt the number of years of
continuous employment. A teacher must notify the Superintendent in writing prior to
April l of his/her intent to continue employment in Suffield.
ARTICLE 40
JOB SHARING
Job sharing shall be defined as an agreement initiated by a tenured staff member(s) to
share a teaching position for a defined period. A job may be shared with a tenured,
nontenured or newly hired staff member.
A.
Teachers who elect to request such an agreement shall notify the Superintendent
by the close of the school year prior to the year that he/she wants the job sharing to
commence. The Board or its designee shall have the final decision on all requests.
B.
The delineation of time requirements and responsibilities shall be mutually
developed by the teacher(s), the Superintendent and the building administrator(s). The
program shall be put into writing and distributed to all parties affected by the agreement.
The Board or its designee shall have the final decision on the program and contents of job
sharing proposals should the above parties disagree.
C.
Benefits for the two persons involved in the job sharing situation shall not
exceed 100% of the benefits normally due one full time equivalent teacher. Such benefits
will be mutually agreed upon at the time of entering the job sharing situation by the
teachers involved, Superintendent and the Association President. Teachers shall be
allowed to pay in the remaining cost of the benefits.
D.
A one year job sharing may be extended for additional years, by mutual
agreement between the Superintendent and the teachers involved. Any additional
teachers hired to fill positions vacated due to a one year job sharing situation shall be
given a one year letter of appointment.
E.
Tenured teachers who initially elect to participate in a permanent job
sharing agreement shall have proprietary rights only on that portion of their job that is
defined as job sharing. Their contract shall be revised to reflect the F.T.E. revision.
Example: Two teachers with an approved job sharing agreement each teaching half time.
Both teachers would thus be issued a .5 contract.
F.
Additional teachers hired to fill positions due to a permanent job sharing situation
shall be given a contract.
37

ARTICLE 41
TEACHING ASSIGNMENTS
Teaching assignments shall be defined as any certified teaching position to which a
teacher may be assigned within the four program levels. The current organizational
pattern of the school system defines these levels as Primary (pre-kindergarten – 2),
Intermediate (3 - 5), Middle (6 – 8), and High School (9 – 12). It is the intent of the
parties that changes in the organizational pattern will be reflected in the grade level
designations in this Article. The Board will notify the Association of a change in
program levels sixty (60) days prior to the implementation of the change.
Teachers initially employed by the Board of Education shall receive their building grade
and/or subject assignments from the Superintendent’s Office.
Teachers already in the system shall receive notification of their programs for the ensuing
school year prior to the close of the current school year.
Teachers shall be notified in writing of any changes in their programs and schedules for
the ensuing school year, including the schools to which they will be assigned, the grades
and/or subjects that they will teach, and any special or unusual classes or assignments that
they will have. In the event of a change in circumstances or conditions from the close of
school through August (e.g., resignations, death, promotion, and leave of absence) such
assignments may be changed only as required thereby, with prompt notice in writing to
both the teacher and the Association.
In the determination of assignments, the convenience and wishes of the teacher shall be
honored to the extent that these considerations do not conflict with the instructional
requirements and best interest of school system and the pupils as determined solely by the
Board of Education, with the advice of appropriate administrators.
In arranging schedules for teachers who are assigned to more than one school, every
reasonable effort shall be made to limit the amount of inter-school travel.
ARTICLE 42
TEACHER TRANSFERS
A.
Teacher transfers shall be defined as the voluntary or involuntary placement of a
teacher into another program level for which the teacher is certified. The current
organizational pattern of the school system defines these levels as Primary (prekindergarten – 2), Intermediate (3 - 5), Middle (6 – 8), and High School (9 – 12). It is the
intent of the parties that changes in the organizational pattern will be reflected in the
grade level designations in this article. The Board will notify the Association of a change
in program level sixty (60) days prior to the implementation of the change.

38

B.

Transfers shall be subject to the following rules:

When a reduction in the number of teachers in a school is necessary, volunteers shall be
transferred first. When all other things are equal, seniority in the system shall be
considered in selecting a volunteer. When involuntary transfers are necessary, a teacher
with the least seniority among those with substantially equal qualifications for the
position shall be transferred first.
C.
An involuntary transfer shall be made only after a meeting between the teacher
involved and the Superintendent or his designee, at which time the teacher shall be
notified of the reasons for the transfer.
D.
Teachers who desire to transfer to another building shall file a written statement
of such desire with the Superintendent no later than January 1 of each year or within ten
(10) days of posting of a vacancy. Such statements shall include the grade and/or subject
to which the teacher desires to be assigned or schools (in order of preference, if the
teacher has preferences) to which he/she desires to be transferred.
E.
Any teacher who, through position reductions, has been involuntarily transferred
to another position or building, shall have the right of first refusal (behind teachers
reduced from positions, see Article 16G #2) for a position opening in the same
department at the same organizational level from which he/she was transferred.
ARTICLE 43
VACANCIES
Notice of all vacant bargaining unit positions, with Board of Education approved job
descriptions attached for new positions or those positions having significant job
responsibility modifications, shall be posted in each school for a minimum of seven (7)
calendar days prior to assigning a teacher to the position.
Notice of all bargaining unit vacancies shall be sent to the President of the Association,
electronically before posting in each school.
When school is not in session during the summer, notices of vacancies will be sent to the
Association President electronically and maintained in a computer file available from the
Central Office.

39

ARTICLE 44
PROMOTIONS
A.
Position as used in this section, means any position within the bargaining unit
which pays a salary differential and/or involves an additional or higher level of
responsibility.
B.
Vacancies of positions which are caused by death, retirement, discharge,
resignation, or by creation of a new position shall be filled pursuant to the following
procedures:
1.

The existence of vacancies of a position shall be adequately publicized,
both within and outside the system, including a notice posted in every
school as far in advance of the date of filling such vacancy as possible (at
least seven (7) days in advance of the date of filling such vacancy). Where
need to fill a vacancy of position arises during the summer months, notice
will be sent to the Association President electronically and maintained in a
computer file available from the Central Office.

2.

Said notice of vacancy of positions shall clearly set forth the
qualifications for the position.

3.

Teachers who desire to apply for such vacancies of position shall file their
application in writing with the Superintendent within the time limit
specified in the notice.

4.

Such vacant positions shall be filled on the basis of qualifications for the
vacant position.
ARTICLE 45
GENERAL PROVISIONS

A.
There shall be no reprisals of any kind taken by either party against any teacher by
reason of his/her membership or non-membership in a professional organization or
participation or non-participation in its activities.
B.
The Board shall, at its expense, provide each teacher with a complete text of this
Agreement or any Successor Agreement.
C.
Board Policies are available to the Association on the school website or by other
electronic means.
D.
This provision and the provisions of Article 48 (Non-Discrimination Clause) are
for informational purposes only and shall not be subject to the grievance procedure.

40

ARTICLE 46
NO STRIKE
The Association agrees, during the duration of this contract, that it will not authorize,
instigate or sanction any violation of 10-153(e) of the Connecticut General Statues.
ARTICLE 47
NON-DISCRIMINATION CLAUSE
In the application of the provisions of this contract, no unlawful discrimination shall be
made on the basis of race, creed, age, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national
origin, ancestry, handicap, marital status or other applicable unlawful discriminatory
standard.
ARTICLE 48
SEVERABILITY
In the event that any provision or portion of this Agreement is ultimately ruled invalid for
any reason by an authority of established and competent legal jurisdiction, the balance
and remainder of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect. The invalid
provision or portion shall be severed from this Agreement.
ARTICLE 49
ASSOCIATION RIGHTS
A.
The Association will have the right to use school buildings without cost at
reasonable times for meetings, provided however, that the Association will be required to
pay for any additional custodial costs involved by reason of said meetings.
B.
There will be one (1) bulletin board in each school building, which will be placed
in the faculty lounge, for the purpose of displaying notices, circulars, and other
Association materials. Copies of all such materials will be given to the building
principal, but his/her advance approval will not be required, except that libelous material
shall not be allowed to be posted.
C.
The President of the Association may elect not to be assigned non-teaching duties,
except for home room, during his/her term in office.
D.
The Board or its designee shall provide classroom coverage for the SEA President
to carry out Association business to the extent the Board or its designee requests the
attention of the SEA President to such business during classroom hours.
E.
The President of the Association shall be provided with a copy of the approved
minutes of all official Board meetings. A copy of the agenda of said Board meetings will
be given to the President of the Association prior to any official Board meetings.
41

ARTICLE 50
PERSONNEL DATA SHEETS
Mutually agreed to personnel data sheets and service increments updated through August
1, shall be distributed to each teacher by the Central Office at the teachers’ meeting prior
to the opening of school. In any conflict between such personnel data sheet and the
provisions of this Agreement, the provisions of this Agreement shall prevail.
ARTICLE 51
TRANSPORTATION ALLOWANCE
Teachers shall be remunerated for all Board approved travel related to their positions at
the current IRS rate.
ARTICLE 52
FIFTH DISEASE
Upon request from her physician, subject to consultation with the school medical advisor,
a pregnant teacher may be excused from her duties when there exists a risk of contagion
of a disease potentially harmful to the fetus (including but not limited to Fifth Disease).
Such leave shall be charged to sick leave to the extent accrued and shall thereafter be
without pay but with benefits. Such teachers shall return after tests established immunity
from the disease or when otherwise her physician, in consultation with the school medical
advisor, determines the teacher may return to work. The Board shall bear the cost of any
consultation with the school medical advisor.
ARTICLE 53
SUMMER SCHOOL
Any summer school program or other such instructional service initiated by the
administration to function beyond the normal school day or year shall follow the
guidelines below:
A.
Qualified bargaining unit members shall be given first priority for such positions.
Participation in the summer program shall be voluntary. In the event no one volunteers,
the position can be filled by non-bargaining unit people.
B.

Summer positions shall be posted according to Article 43.

C.

The rate of pay shall be listed in Appendix E.

42

ARTICLE 54
EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION
Upon receipt of notification by the State Board of Education of the name of teachers
whose provisional certificate will expire during the period of twelve months following
such notice, the Suffield Board of Education shall notify said teachers that their
provisional certification will expire. Such notice shall be in writing stating the expiration
date of the teacher’s provisional certificate and will be forwarded to the affected teachers
within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice from the State Department of Education.
The Suffield Board of Education shall also supply in writing to the SEA the list of
teachers so affected at the time such list is received from the State Department of
Education.
Upon receipt of notification that a Professional Educator Certificate is to expire, the
Suffield Board of Education shall notify the employee and supply the reapplication form.
Any C.E.U./C.E.U. Equivalent earned through the Suffield Board of Education shall be
recognized by a certificate that states the date and number of C.E.U.’s earned within 45
days after the activity(ies) took place.
The Suffield Board of Education shall keep records for seven (7) years of all
C.E.U./C.E.U. Equivalents granted and provide copies to the employees upon request at
no cost to the employee.
The Suffield Board of Education shall provide to the Association a list of all Professional
Educators whose certificates are up for renewal by June 1 of each year.
ARTICLE 55
TUITION REIMBURSEMENT
Subject to the following provisions of this Article, teachers shall be reimbursed for the
cost of graduate courses successfully completed with a minimum grade of B or the
equivalent. To qualify for reimbursement of each course teachers must receive prior
approval of each course from the Superintendent. Teachers may be reimbursed for up to
six (6) credit hours per year. The reimbursement rate shall be fifty percent (50%) of the
in-state per credit cost of similar graduate courses at the University of Connecticut. To
the extent the aggregate of the amount for course reimbursement for any year of this
contract (July 1 through June 30) exceeds the amount specifically budgeted by the Board
of Education for this period, all reimbursements to applicants shall be reduced on a
prorated basis, except that tuition reimbursement will not be granted to any teacher who
leaves the district of his/her own accord or whose contract has not been renewed for
cause. The amounts budgeted by the Board for tuition reimbursement shall not be less
than $7,500 for 2013-14, $8,500 for 2014-15 and $9,500 for 2015-16.

43

ARTICLE 56
TEMPORARY REPLACEMENT TEACHERS
This article addresses the appointment of replacement teachers to fill positions of
vacancies due to the absence of a certified teacher, specifically those vacancies that result
from a certified teacher who is on a full or nearly full year leave.
A.

Individuals appointed as a temporary replacement teacher for a period of up to one
(1) year shall be covered by the terms and conditions of this Agreement except for
Article 15 (Separation and Recall), Article 27 (Just Cause), Article 42 (Teacher
Transfers) and Article 44 (Promotions).

B.

Individuals appointed as a temporary replacement teacher shall not accrue
seniority or length of service for any purpose under this Agreement.
Notwithstanding the above, if a temporary replacement teacher is retained by the
Board as a certified teacher, with no break in service, the teacher shall be credited
with seniority and length of service for all purposes under this Agreement,
retroactive to the first date of hire by the Board.

C.

The Board shall have the right to exercise its discretion not to renew and/or
terminate the employment of the temporary replacement teacher at any point
during the school year. The temporary replacement teacher shall have no right to
file and/or pursue a grievance under this Agreement relating to non-renewal or
termination.

D.

The appointment of a temporary replacement teacher shall expire at the end of the
school year.
ARTICLE 57
RETIREMENT NOTICE

A.
Teachers who provide the Superintendent of Schools with written notice of
retirement no later than February 1, for a retirement to become effective at the end of that
school year, shall receive a payment of one thousand dollars ($1000), which shall be
payable upon retirement.
B.
For the purposes of this provision, the term “retirement” shall mean that the
teacher retires under the provisions of the Teachers’ Retirement Act.

44

ARTICLE 58
VIRTUAL LEARNING
A) The intent and purpose of Virtual Learning is to provide a vehicle for the cooperative
offering, exploration and sharing of educational opportunities among districts.
B) The Board will notify the Association of any Virtual Learning classes and consider the
input of the Association concerning the offering and staffing of these classes.
C) The Board shall provide training if necessary to prepare teachers for Virtual Learning
and distance learning assignments. The Board shall provide additional training as
necessary as part of professional development for teachers so assigned. All technological
equipment and support services shall be provided by the Board.

45

46

APPENDIX A

Step
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

2013-2014 SALARY SCHEDULE
BA
MA
MA+30
43,690
45,981
48,270
50,557
52,849
55,175
58,075

46,158
48,501
50,963
53,550
56,268
59,123
62,123
65,275
68,586
72,064
75,423
79,570

49,954
52,346
54,851
57,477
60,228
63,110
66,130
69,294
72,609
76,082
79,514
83,775

MA+45
50,267
53,005
55,891
58,933
62,141
65,523
69,089
72,848
76,811
81,141
84,995
89,737

Teachers below top step in 2012-13, shall advance one step in 2013-14.

Step
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

2014-2015 SALARY SCHEDULE
BA
MA
MA+30
43,690
45,981
48,270
50,557
52,849
55,175
58,946

46,158
48,501
50,963
53,550
56,268
59,123
62,123
65,275
68,586
72,064
75,423
80,763

49,954
52,346
54,851
57,477
60,228
63,110
66,130
69,294
72,609
76,082
79,514
85,032

MA+45
50,267
53,005
55,891
58,933
62,141
65,523
69,089
72,848
76,811
81,141
84,995
91,084

Teachers below top step in 2013-14, shall advance one step in 2014-15.

47

Step
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

2015-2016 SALARY SCHEDULE
BA
MA
MA+30

47,048
49,390
51,730
54,075
56,455
58,384
60,314

49,626
52,145
54,792
57,573
60,495
63,564
66,789
70,177
73,736
77,173
79,905
82,637

53,560
56,124
58,810
61,625
64,574
67,664
70,902
74,294
77,847
81,359
84,182
87,005

MA+45

54,235
57,188
60,300
63,583
67,043
70,692
74,538
78,593
83,023
86,967
90,082
93,197

Teachers at the maximum step of their degree track in 2014-15 shall move to the new
maximum step in 2015-16. For teachers below the maximum steps in 2014-15 there shall
be no step movement in 2015-2016.

48

APPENDIX B
EXTRA PAY FOR SUPERVISORY POSITIONS
A.

Curriculum/Guidance Chairs
In addition to his/her regular teaching, each Curriculum/Guidance Chairperson
will be paid annually $8,500 in 2013-14, $8,585 in 2014-15 and $8,671 in 201516 and be released of all non-teaching duties.

B.

Agricultural Science Teachers
The Board shall establish an eleven (11) month schedule for Vocational
Agricultural Science teachers (other than the Director). Employees with such
assignments shall be paid on a ratio of 1.1 times their appropriate rate on the
salary schedule.

C.

Curriculum Coordinators
The Board shall establish an eleven (11) month schedule for Coordinators of
Language Arts, and Math and Science. Employees with such assignments shall be
paid on a ratio of 1.1 times their appropriate rate on the salary schedule.

D.

District Fine and Applied Arts Coordinator
The District Fine and Applied Arts Coordinator, in addition to his/her regular
salary, will be paid annually $3,200 in 2013-14, $3,232 in 2014-15 and $3,264 in
2015-16.

E.

District Title IX Coordinator
The District Title IX Coordinator shall be paid annually $2,500 in 2013-14,
$2,525 in 2014-15 and $2,550 in 2015-16 plus a reduction of his/her class
workload to .8.

F.

District International Studies Coordinator
The District International Studies Coordinator shall be paid annually $2,500 in
2013-14, $2,525 in 2014-15 and $2,550 in 2015-16.

G.

District Business Information and Technology Coordinator
The District Business Information and Technology Coordinator shall be paid
annually $3,200 in 2013-14, $3,232 in 2014-15 and $3,264 in 2015-16 plus a
reduction in his/her workload to .5.
49

H.

District Athletic Coordinator
The District Athletic Coordinator shall be paid annually $6,000 in 2013-14,
$6,060 in 2014-15 and $6,121 in 2015-16. Furthermore, the District Athletic
Coordinator shall be assigned to teach .2 FTE of a 1.0 FTE position with the
remainder of his/her time dedicated to the Administration of the Athletic
programs in the Suffield School District.

I.

District Hygiene Officer
The District Hygiene Officer shall be paid annually $3,100 in 2013-14, $3,131 in
2014-15 and $3,162 in 2015-16.

J.

Mentor Teacher
Mentor Teachers shall be paid annually $850 in 2013-14, $859 in 2014-15 and
$868 in 2015-16.

K.

Team Leader
Team Leaders shall be paid annually $1,100 in 2013-14, $1,111 in 2014-15 and
$1,122 in 2015-16.

L.

Grade Level Leader
Grade Level Leaders shall be annually $1,100 in 2013-14, $1,111 in 2014-15 and
$1,122 in 2015-16.

M.

Master Teacher
Master Teachers shall be paid annually $3,000 in 2013-14, $3,030 in 2014-15 and
$3,060 in 2015-16.

N.

SMS Technology Coach
The SMS Technology Coach shall be paid annually $3,200 in 2013-14, $3,232 in
2014-15 and $3,264 in 2015-16 and have his/her teaching workload reduced to .4.

All positions will be posted annually at the discretion of the Superintendent of Schools.
The Superintendent of Schools shall appoint all positions.

50

APPENDIX C

Sport

Coaching Stipends 2013-14
1-3 Years
4-6 Years

7+ Years

Varsity
Basketball
Hockey

4,620
4,620

5,082
5,082

5,641
5,641

Wrestling
Swimming

3,860
3,860

4,158
4,158

4,804
4,804

Softball
Baseball
Soccer
Lacrosse
Track
Track – Assistant
Field Hockey
Indoor Track
Volleyball

3,512
3,512
3,512
3,512
3,512
2,500
3,512
3,512
3,512

3,788
3,788
3,788
3,788
3,788
2,800
3,788
3,788
3,788

4,342
4,342
4,342
4,342
4,342
3,200
4,342
4,342
4,342

Tennis
Golf
Cross Country
Dance
Cheerleader

2,800
2,800
2,800
1,400
1,400

3,000
3,000
3,000
1,600
1,600

3,200
3,200
3,200
1,800
1,800

3,200
2,400
2,400
2,608
2,400
2,400
2,400

3,450
2,600
2,600
2,980
2,600
2,600
2,600

3,780
3,100
3,100
3,354
3,100
3,100
3,100

2,608

2,980

3,354

Middle School
Cross Country
Basketball
Track
Field Hockey

1,400
1,900
1,900
1,900

1,900
2,100
2,100
2,100

2,500
2,500
2,500
2,500

Asst Varsity Coach

1,200

1,200

1,200

Junior Varsity
Basketball
Baseball
Softball
Lacrosse
Soccer
Field Hockey
Volleyball
Freshman
Basketball

51

Coaching Stipends 2014-15
Sport

1-3 Years

4-6 Years

7+ Years

Varsity
Basketball
Hockey

4,666
4,666

5,133
5,133

5,697
5,697

Wrestling
Swimming

3,899
3,899

4,200
4,200

4,852
4,852

Softball
Baseball
Soccer
Lacrosse
Track
Track – Assistant
Field Hockey
Indoor Track
Volleyball

3,547
3,547
3,547
3,547
3,547
2,525
3,547
3,547
3,547

3,826
3,826
3,826
3,826
3,826
2,828
3,826
3,826
3,826

4,385
4,385
4,385
4,385
4,385
3,232
4,385
4,385
4,385

Tennis
Golf
Cross Country
Dance
Cheerleader

2,828
2,828
2,828
1,414
1,414

3,030
3,030
3,030
1,616
1,616

3,232
3,232
3,232
1,818
1,818

3,232
2,424
2,424
2,634
2,424
2,424
2,424

3,485
2,626
2,626
3,010
2,626
2,626
2,626

3,818
3,131
3,131
3,388
3,131
3,131
3,131

2,634

3,010

3,388

Middle School
Cross Country
Basketball
Track
Field Hockey

1,414
1,919
1,919
1,919

1,919
2,121
2,121
2,121

2,525
2,525
2,525
2,525

Asst Varsity Coach

1,212

1,212

1,212

Junior Varsity
Basketball
Baseball
Softball
Lacrosse
Soccer
Field Hockey
Volleyball
Freshman
Basketball

52

Coaching Stipends 2015-16
Sport

1-3 Years

4-6 Years

7+ Years

Varsity
Basketball
Hockey

4,713
4,713

5,184
5,184

5,754
5,754

Wrestling
Swimming

3,938
3,938

4,242
4,242

4,901
4,901

Softball
Baseball
Soccer
Lacrosse
Track
Track – Assistant
Field Hockey
Indoor Track
Volleyball

3,582
3,582
3,582
3,582
3,582
2,550
3,582
3,582
3,582

3,864
3,864
3,864
3,864
3,864
2,856
3,864
3,864
3,864

4,429
4,429
4,429
4,429
4,429
3,264
4,429
4,429
4,429

Tennis
Golf
Cross Country
Dance
Cheerleader

2,856
2,856
2,856
1,428
1,428

3,060
3,060
3,060
1,632
1,632

3,264
3,264
3,264
1,836
1,836

3,264
2,448
2,448
2,660
2,448
2,448
2,448

3,520
2,652
2,652
3,040
2,652
2,652
2,652

3,856
3,162
3,162
3,422
3,162
3,162
3,162

2,660

3,040

3,422

Middle School
Cross Country
Basketball
Track
Field Hockey

1,428
1,938
1,938
1,938

1,938
2,142
2,142
2,142

2,550
2,550
2,550
2,550

Asst Varsity Coach

1,224

1,224

1,224

Junior Varsity
Basketball
Baseball
Softball
Lacrosse
Soccer
Field Hockey
Volleyball
Freshman
Basketball

53

APPENDIX D
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN
SUFFIELD, CONNECTICUT
Purpose
The goal of professional development is to allow the individual to participate in
professional growth experience beneficial to him/her and to the school system.
Professional Development Activities
The following activities are acceptable for credit toward advancement on the salary
schedule subject to the guidelines and restrictions stated.
A.
Course work leading to a graduate level degree, diploma, or certificate in a
teacher’s area or educational specialty.
B.

Graduate level courses concerning:
1.

Knowledge of the individual’s teaching or special assignment.

2.

Professional skills related to carrying out one’s professional assignment
(i.e., classroom management, classroom applications or computer
technology).

3.

Understanding of the different types of learners and learning styles (i.e.,
characteristics of the pre-adolescent nature, of learning disabilities,
problems in coping with divorce, right-left hemisphere dominance,
concept formation).

4.

Knowledge of the school’s role in the local community as well as in the
broad society, the school’s organization, and/or the school’s operation.

5.

Development and/or refinement of the individual’s interpersonal
communication skills.

C.
Workshops, institutes, and in-service training which meet the content criteria for
graduate level courses as specified in Section B, above, subject to the following
restrictions:
1.

Credit will be given on an hourly, pro-rated basis: fifteen (15) hours of
instructional course time is equivalent to one (1) credit.

2.

Documentation of the time commitment and workshop scope must be
provided to the Professional Development Committee.

D.
An individual professional development activity designed to contribute to the
growth of the educator as a professional (i.e., creating a substantial curriculum unit). One
54

such activity will be allowed toward each salary scale past the Master’s. A maximum
three credits will be issued upon successful completion of a program which meets the
following criteria:
1.

The activity must be accepted by the Professional Development
Committee.

2.

There is a detailed plan based on clearly stated objectives.

3.

There are a minimum of thirty (30) hours spent on research and
development.

E.
Undergraduate courses may be accepted by the Professional Development
Committee if the course content:
1.

Is not available at the graduate level and/or

2.

Is a prerequisite to graduate level work which the individual intends to
pursue.

Such undergraduate credits will be limited to a total of nine (9) credits for
advancement on the salary scale during the teacher’s employment by the Suffield
School System.
Guidelines and Restrictions
1.

The educator’s professional development plan may correlate with his/her yearly
objectives as established with the individual’s supervisor.

2.

The educator’s professional development plan must include a meaningful timeline
and the criteria to judge attainment of the plan, when appropriate.

3.

There shall be no duplication of courses, course content or activities.

4.

Teacher initiated professional development activities must occur on non-school
time (i.e., after school, weekends).

5.

Professional development activities for which teachers are reimbursed by the
school district do not qualify for advancement on the salary schedule. However,
when the school district requests an individual to develop expertise to meet a
building or system need, the individual is eligible for advancement on the salary
schedule, whether or not the school district has paid for the necessary training

6.

It is suggested that first-year, inexperienced teachers not take courses during their
first semester of teaching and only take courses subject to the approval of their
supervisor during the second semester.
55

7.

All requests for approval of professional development activities must be
submitted to the Committee on the proper forms. Forms are to be filed in the
Office of the Superintendent of Schools.

8.

All requests for summer courses must be submitted by May 15 and the Committee
decisions must be made prior to June 15.

9.

If the Professional Development Committee does not act on the request for
approval within forty-five (45) calendar days after the date the form is filed in the
Office of the Superintendent of Schools, the activity is automatically approved
with the exception that forms filed between June 2 and August 25 must be acted
upon by September 15.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES

A.
Committee deliberation and voting will be done in executive session. The
educator involved and/or his representative may be present during Committee discussion.
B.
In situations in which the Administration recommends alternatives in a staff
member’s program on Form I, Line 16, or on Form II, Line 15, the Committee may
request that the Administrator attend the meeting to clarify his/her recommendations.
C.
In any area where the Committee has limited knowledge, the Committee may seek
appropriate information or expertise before making a decision.
D.
The Committee quorum shall be no less than four (4). An alternate may be
appointed by the Committee, if there is a need.
E.

Committee decisions will be by a majority vote.

F.
If a request to advance on the salary schedule is disapproved, the educator
involved will receive a letter stating the reason for disapproval, the right to a hearing for
reconsideration, and the right to grieve, in accordance with contract in effect.
G.

The Professional Development Committee will have four (4) members as
follows:
1.
2.
3.

Two (2) members shall be appointed by the Suffield Education
Association
One (1) member shall be the Superintendent of Schools
One (1) member shall be an administrator appointed by the Superintendent
of Schools.

H.
The Committee will schedule a meeting each month, September – June. The
Superintendent may cancel a monthly meeting if there is no business to transact.

56

APPENDIX E
EXTRA REMUNERATION FOR EXTRA DUTY
All positions are to be posted annually. All appointments are by the Superintendent of
Schools only. New positions may be created only by the Board of Education upon the
recommendation of the Superintendent of Schools
2013-14
Suffield High School
Best Buddies
Best Buddies
Art Club
Book Club
Earth Club
Gay/Straight Alliance
Giraffe Club
Interact Club
Wildcat Outreach
Literary Magazine
National Honor Society
National Honor Society
World Language Society
Ski Club
Freshman Advisor
Freshman Advisor
Sophomore Advisor
Sophomore Advisor
Transition Coordinator
Student Senate
Student Senate
FFA Advisor
FFA Advisor
FFA Advisor
FFA Advisor
SAE Advisor
SAE Advisor
SAE Advisor
SAE Advisor
Math Team
Debate Team
Quiz Team
Drama Club
Junior Advisor
Junior Advisor

400
400
800
800
800
800
800
800
800
800
900
900
900
900
900
900
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,100
1,100
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,300
1,300

2014-15
404
404
808
808
808
808
808
808
808
808
909
909
909
909
909
909
1,010
1,010
1,010
1,111
1,111
1,212
1,212
1,212
1,212
1,212
1,212
1,212
1,212
1,212
1,212
1,212
1,212
1,313
1,313

2015-16
408
408
816
816
816
816
816
816
816
816
918
918
918
918
918
918
1,020
1,020
1,020
1,122
1,122
1,224
1,224
1,224
1,224
1,224
1,224
1,224
1,224
1,224
1,224
1,224
1,224
1,326
1,326
57

AFS Advisor
Mountain Bike Club
Senior Advisor
Senior Advisor
Band Director
Robotics
Yearbook
Newspaper
TV Advisor
Musical Director
Drama Director
Music Assistant (Musical)
Technical Assistant (Musical)
Technical Assistant (Drama)
Choreography Assistant (Musical)
Suffield Middle School
SOURCE
SOURCE
MILD Advisor
MILD Advisor
Strategic Gaming
Walking Club
Promise Advisor
Dance Team
Math Counts
Giraffe Club
Photography Club
Peer Mediation
Peer Mediation
Math Olympiads (6th gr)
th

th

Math Olympiads (7 & 8 gr)
Ski Club
Robotics
Healthy Lifestyles
Student Council
Student Council
Yearbook
Newspaper
Intramural Director
Band Director
Drama Production

2013-14
1,300
1,400
1,700
1,700
1,700
2,000
2,400
2,400
2,600
3,000
3,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000

2014-15
1,313
1,414
1,717
1,717
1,717
2,020
2,424
2,424
2,626
3,030
3,030
2,020
2,020
2,020
2,020

2015-16
1,326
1,428
1,734
1,734
1,734
2,040
2,448
2,448
2,652
3,060
3,060
2,040
2,040
2,040
2,040

500
500
600
600
600
600
600
600
700
800
800
800
800

505
505
606
606
606
606
606
606
707
808
808
808
808

510
510
612
612
612
612
612
612
714
816
816
816
816

800

808

816

800
900
1,000
1,100
1,100
1,100
1,400
1,400
1,600
1,700
2,400

808
909
1,010
1,111
1,111
1,111
1,414
1,414
1,616
1,717
2,424

816
918
1,020
1,122
1,122
1,122
1,428
1,428
1,632
1,734
2,448
58

2013-14
Elementary School
Expanding Horizons

2,900

2014-15

2015-16

2,929

2,958

In the event that an extra-duty position is approved by the Superintendent and created by
the Board, compensation for that position shall be negotiated by the Board and the
Association.
A.

Payment for Non-classroom Services beyond the Employment Year
1.

Vocational-Agriculture teachers. Agri-Science teachers required to work a
12 month year shall be paid on a ratio of 1.25 times their appropriate rate
on the salary schedule.

2.

Guidance Counselors. Guidance personnel may be required by the
Superintendent to work prior to the opening of school and after the close
of school, contiguous with the teacher work year for up to five (5) days at
the per diem rate based on the guidance counselor’s salary for the school
year in which the service is provided.
Other Non-classroom Service. Any other non-classroom services
requested of members of the bargaining unit beyond the
employment year shall be voluntary, including appearances in
accordance with Public Act 75-609, and shall be paid no less than
$30 per hour in 2013-14, $30.30 per hour in 2014-15 and $30.60
per hour in 2015-16.

3.

Remuneration rate for teaching in summer school shall be $30.00 per hour
in 2013-14, $30.30 per hour in 2014-15 and $30.60 per hour in 2015-16.

4.

Remuneration rate for SMS intramurals shall be $30.00 per hour in 201314, $30.30 per hour in 2014-15 and $30.60 per hour in 2015-16.

59
