AGENDA
VILLAGE OF ROUND LAKE
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE MEETING
February 18, 2020
442 N. Cedar Lake Road
To Follow the Regular Board Meeting
The Regular Board Meeting is 7:00 P.M.

CALL TO ORDER
1. ROLL CALL
2. APPROVAL OF MINUTES
2.1

Approve the Minutes of the Committee of the Whole Meeting of February 3, 2020

3. PUBLIC COMMENT
4. COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE






Community Development
Police
Human Resources and Finance
Public Works, Facilities and Capital Assets, and Engineering
o Complete Streets Policy
o Parkway Tree Program
Administration
o Administration Reorganization

5. EXECUTIVE SESSION
ADJOURN

MINUTES
VILLAGE OF ROUND LAKE
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE MEETING
February 3, 2020
442 N. Cedar Lake Road
To Follow the Regular Board Meeting
The Regular Board Meeting is 7:00 P.M.

CALL TO ORDER
The Committee of the Whole Meeting of the Village of Round Lake was called to order by Dan MacGillis,
Village President at 7:06 p.m.
1. ROLL CALL
Present: Trustees Foy, Kraly, Mandelman, Patel
Absent: Trustees Frye, Newby
2. APPROVAL OF MINUTES
2.1

Approve the Minutes of the Committee of the Whole Meeting of January 20, 2020
Motion by Trustee Mandelman, seconded by Trustee Patel to approve the Minutes of the
Committee of the Whole Meeting of January 20, 2019. Upon a unanimous voice vote, the
Mayor declared the motion carried.

3. PUBLIC COMMENT
4. COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE


Community Development
o 2020 Zoning Map
Community Development Director Katie Parkhurst recommended approving the
Ordinance to Adopt the Official 2020 Zoning Map.
The Mayor and Board agreed to move to the next Consent Agenda



Police
o Parking Violation Fines and Penalties
Police Chief Michael Gillette recommended adopting Ordinance revisions to the Illinois
Vehicle Code Chapter 5. Between the day of issuance of notice of violation up to and
including the 15th day the fine shall be fifty dollars $50.00. Beginning day 16 past the
violation and on, the fine shall be $100. 00. Any existing Ordinance of this village which
provides a minimum fine of $25 or less and a maximum fine of not more than $500 is
amended to provide a minimum fine of $50 and a maximum fine of $750 and the costs of
prosecution, as aforesaid, for each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues
under any other Ordinance of this Village. All violators shall be notified in writing of the
initial ordinance violation and of the delinquency date causing the increased fine. The
notices required hereunder need only be issued at the location of the Violation. The
Adjudication Hearing process will be served at the time of the initial issuance of the
violation notice.
The Mayor and Board agreed to move to the next Consent Agenda

Minutes – COTW Meeting




February 3, 2019

Page 2

Human Resources and Finance
Public Works, Facilities and Capital Assets, and Engineering
o Fiscal Year End 2015 MFT Allocation Resolution
Public Works Director Adam Wedoff recommended authorizing $150,780.00 of Motor
Fuel Tax (MFT) funds to be allocated for 2015 General Maintenance work that included
gravel, liquid de-icer, asphalt patching, pavement marking, day labor and sidewalk repairs.
Staff and Baxter & Woodman have been self-auditing MFT projects to make sure all
required paperwork has been submitted to IDOT.
The Mayor and Board agreed to move to the next Consent Agenda



Administration

5. EXECUTIVE SESSION
ADJOURN
Trustee Foy moved, seconded by Trustee Mandelman to adjourn. Upon a unanimous voice vote, Mayor
MacGillis declared the motion carried and the meeting adjourned at 7:16 p.m.

APPROVED: February 18, 2020

__________________________
Deborah Perlini
Village Clerk

_______________________________________
Daniel A. MacGillis
Village President

VILLAGE OF ROUND LAKE

AGENDA ITEM SUMMARY

Ag e nda It e m No . CO T W

TITLE: COMPLETE STREETS POLICY
Executive Summary

Staff recommends adopting the attached Complete Streets Policy. A Complete Street is defined
as one that provides safe and convenient access for all users of the road, including pedestrians,
bicyclists, transit users, and vehicular traffic. Numerous jurisdictions in the United States have
adopted Complete Streets Policies, including the State of Illinois, and the Counties of Cook, Lake
and McHenry.

Recommended Action

Discuss adopting a Complete Streets Policy.
Committee: PW/F&CA and Engineering

Meeting Date(s): 02/18/20

Lead Department: Public Works

Presenter: Adam Wedoff, Director of Public Works

Item Budgeted:

Other Items

Account(s)
Yes

No

X N/A

If amount requested is over budget, a detailed
explanation of what account(s) the overage will
be charged to will be provided in the Executive
Summary or attached detail.

Item Requested
YTD Actual
Amount Encumbered

Budget

Expenditure

$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00

$0.00
Request is over/under budget:
Under Over -

A RESOLUTION ADOPTING A COMPLETE
STREETS POLICY
WHEREAS, transportation, quality of life, and economic development are all connected through
well-planned, well designed, and context sensitive transportation solutions; and
WHEREAS, a Complete Street is defined as one that provides safe and convenient access for all
users of the road, including pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, and vehicular traffic; and
WHEREAS, the Village of Round Lake views all transportation improvements as an opportunity
to connect neighborhoods, calm traffic and improve safety, provide greater access and mobility for
users of the public way, and recognizes bicycle, pedestrian, and transit modes as integral elements
of the transportation system; and
WHEREAS, the Village of Round Lake’s mission is to promote a transportation principle that
Round Lake residents should be able to drive, walk, or bike safely and conveniently throughout the
Village for daily needs and activities; and
WHEREAS, numerous jurisdictions in the United States have adopted Complete Streets Policies,
including the State of Illinois, the Counties of Cook, Lake and McHenry; and
WHEREAS, the Village strives to provide transportation options to maximize the independence
and mobility of its aging population;
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED by the Village President and Village Board of Trustees
of the Village of Round Lake, Illinois that the Village of Round Lake hereby adopts a Complete
Streets Policy, the goals, elements, and procedures of which are as follows:

1

SECTION 1: Goals. Complete Streets can be achieved through network level improvements,
through integration into single location projects, or incrementally, through a series of small
improvements or maintenance activities. Decisions regarding the public right-of-way shall consider
use by pedestrians, bicyclists, public transit and motor vehicles, in a safe and effective manner
taking into account the surrounding community context and land uses. The Village shall strive to
create a comprehensive, integrated and connected network of transportation options for all modes
of conveyance, designed and operated to enable appropriate and safe access for all users.
SECTION 2: Applicability. The Complete Streets policy shall be applied to all projects involving
roadway improvements and the movement of people when feasible. It is understood that there may
be circumstances in which it may not be practical or feasible to apply the Policy. Such circumstances
include the following:
a. The scope of the relevant project is limited to maintenance activities intended to keep the
roadway in serviceable condition.
b. There is sufficient documentation that there is no feasible way to accommodate
improvements for non-vehicular traffic with a project's scope.
c. There is no documented current or anticipated need for accommodations of non-motorized
roadway users or the road is not a current or planned transit route.
d. The cost for a particular Complete Streets design recommendation would be excessively
disproportionate to the need of that particular improvement, with due consideration given
to future users, latent demand, and the social and economic value of providing a safer and
more convenient transportation system for all users.
e. Documented environmental constraints or unsafe transportation issue.
A "fee in lieu of” by the applicant to the Village may be considered so that other areas in the
community could benefit from Complete Streets elements. However, a written request justifying
the reasons why a project cannot incorporate Complete Streets elements must be reviewed and
approved by the Complete Streets Committee.
SECTION 3: Development Review Process. The following procedures shall be used in order to
ensure that the various projects within the Village advance the goals of the Complete Streets
Policy.
a. Village of Round Lake Projects: During the planning and design phase of any public
transportation improvement project, the Complete Streets Committee, which shall consist
of the Village Administrator, Village Engineer, Director of Public Works, Director of
Community Development, Chief of Police or their designee, shall conduct a review of the
project relating to the incorporation of Complete Streets elements into the project. The
review shall be made with reference to current best practices.
A Complete Streets project checklist shall be developed and used to assist with and to document
the Complete Streets review.
b. Other Public Agency Projects: The Village shall coordinate with external agencies,
including the Illinois Department of Transportation, Lake County Department of
Transportation and Avon, Fremont and Grant Township Road Districts to provide such
Complete Streets technical assistance as is accepted by the other agency.

2

As with the review process for the Village of Round Lake projects, outside agency projects
will be reviewed by the Complete Streets Committee for comments.
c. Private Development Projects: The Village shall review all private development proposals with
reference to the incorporation of Complete Streets elements and general consistency with the
Complete Streets Policy.
The Village shall establish a Complete Streets project checklist, which shall be used to assist
with and document the Complete Streets review process. Any private development that is
unable to incorporate complete street elements and does not meet the applicability standards
as outlined in Section 2, may seek relief by providing written justification that must be
reviewed by the Complete Streets Committee.
SECTION 4: Standards. To create a connected network of facilities accommodating each mode of
travel that is consistent with and supportive of the local community, recognizing that all streets are
different and that the needs of various users will need to be balanced in a flexible manner.
The Village will generally follow accepted or adopted best practice design standards when
implementing improvements intended to fulfill this Complete Streets Policy, but will also consider
innovative or non-traditional design options to fit within the context of the community, provide the
needed flexibility based on the characteristics of the corridor, and provide a comparable level of
safety and connectivity.
The Village will provide training opportunities to staff and elected officials tasked with
implementing the Complete Streets policy as needed. All relevant Village staff shall review and
update as necessary their plans, manuals, rules, regulations, and programs to reflect the principals
of this Complete Streets Policy.
SECTION 5: Implementation and Monitoring. In order to evaluate the Village's progress towards
implementation of the Complete Streets approach, the Village will use the following performance
measures:
a. The Village shall incorporate Complete Streets into budgeting processes, work plans and
staffing projections and consider Complete Streets as one of the priorities in roadway
planning and funding decisions.
b. Staff shall prioritize the safe movement of pedestrians, bicycle and public transportation
traffic in decisions regarding the use of limited public right-of-way, with consideration given
to roadway context and land use.
c. Improvements in safety for all roadway users; increased capacity for all modes of
transportation; miles of new and repaired bicycle facilities; blocks of new and repaired
sidewalks; number of new and repaired marked street crossings; amount of new and repaired
signage; number of new and repaired curb ramps. Such measures shall be incorporated into
relevant plans, manuals, policies, processes and programs. Such plans, manuals, rules,
processes, and programs shall be reviewed no less than every five years.
d. Staff will review and revise as necessary plans, manuals, policies, processes and programs
to encourage the implementation of Complete Streets.
e. Annual progress meetings of the Complete Streets Committee.

3

VILLAGE OF ROUND LAKE

AGENDA ITEM SUMMARY

Ag e nda It e m No . CO T W

TITLE: PARKWAY TREE PLANTING
Executive Summary

Staff recommends approving spending up to the proposed FY 2021 budgeted amount of $65,000
for Acres Group to supply and plant trees in Village parkways. The Village signed a contract
with Acres Group in 2017 for this work and the contract can be extended for up to two years.
This would be the final extension.
Acres Group did a good job the last few years supplying and planting parkway trees. Staff is
requesting permission to have the nursery inspect and tag trees for the Village for spring planting.
This reserves the trees for the Village and is important because nurseries can run out of stock.
The tree planting is expected to all be completed in the spring. Staff recommends planting as
many trees as possible without exceeding the proposed budgeted amount of $65,000 for FY 2021.
This will be enough to plant approximately 225 trees. Staff estimates there will be 825 trees that
still need to be replanted after this spring.
Recommended Action

Discuss spending up to the proposed FY 2021 budgeted amount of $65,000 for Acres Group to
supply and plant trees in Village parkways.
Committee: PW/F&CA and Engineering

Meeting Date(s): 02/18/20

Lead Department: Public Works

Presenter: Adam Wedoff, Director of Public Works

Account(s)
Item Budgeted: X Yes

No

N/A

If amount requested is over budget, a detailed
explanation of what account(s) the overage will
be charged to will be provided in the Executive
Summary or attached detail.

Budget

Expenditure

Other Items

$70,000.00

Item Requested
YTD Actual
Amount Encumbered

$65,000.00

$65,000.00
$0.00
$0.00

35-20-80-88028
$135,000.00
Request is over/under budget:
Under
Over -

$65,000.00
$70,000.00

VILLAGE OF ROUND LAKE

AGENDA ITEM SUMMARY

Agenda Item No. COTW

TITLE: ADMINISTRATION REORGANIZATION
Executive Summary:

With the recent resignation of the Director of Finance, staff used the vacancy as an opportunity to review
the Administration Department structure. As part of the review, job descriptions for all positions were
reviewed, an outstanding project list was compiled, operating tasks listed, and areas of possible
consultant duties were gathered.
With the recent efficiencies in processes due to software advances and streamlining practices, staff also
discussed future methods of service delivery. Finally, the cost impact of any changes to the department
structure was considered. Based on our evaluation, staff is recommending that the Village Board agree
to creating a Director of Administration Position, adding an Accounting Specialist Position, and
outsource certain financial functions. Attached to this memorandum is an Amended Compensation Plan
for the position changes.
Staff believes that the options presented will move the Administration Department in a direction that
enables optimal delivery of services (internal & external) and commits to building a more effective and
efficient operating process without an undue cost burden to the Village.
Recommended Action:
Discuss for future staff and Village Board action.
Committee: -

Meeting Date: February 18, 2020

Lead Department: Administration

Presenter: Steven J. Shields, Village Administrator

Item Budgeted:
- Yes

X No

Account(s)

If amount requested is over budget, a
detailed explanation of what account(s)
the overage will be charged to will be
provided in the Executive Summary or
attached detail.
Notes:

Budget

Expenditure

- N/A

Item Requested
Encumbered
Actual
Total:
Request is over/under budget:
Under Over -

$0.00

$0.00

V:\Meeting Packets\Departments - Admin, Finance, PD, PW\AIS - Agenda Item Summary\Administration\02-1820\AIS Administration Reorganization.docx

Village of Round Lake

442 N. Cedar Lake Road Round Lake, IL 60073
Ph. 847-546-5400 Fax 847-546-5405
www.eroundlake.com
February 12, 2020

To:

Mayor Daniel MacGillis

From:

Village Administrator Steven Shields

Subject: Administration Department Evaluation

Purpose of the Evaluation:
With the recent resignation of the Director of Finance, staff is using the vacancy as an opportunity
to review the Administration Department structure. At the start of the fiscal year, there were 6.5
full-time equivalent positons authorized in the 2020 Salary Ordinance and in the Fiscal Year End
2020 Budget as shown in the chart below.
Village of Round Lake
Administration Organizational Chart

Village
Administrator

Assistant to the
Village
Administrator

Director of
Finance

Accounting
Manager

Administrative
Assistant -

Administrative
Assistant -

Utility Billing

Cashier

Part-Time
Customer
Service Assistant

Administration Department Reorganization

Page 2

It should be noted that, although budgeted, the Administrative Assistant - Cashier retired in June.
At that time, staff requested and were authorized to advertise for two part-time positions to replace
the full-time position vacated. Staff also amended the 2020 Salary Ordinance adding two part-time
Customer Service Assistant positions at Grade 1 and eliminating one full-time Administrative
Assistant position at Grade 2.
Background
As part of the overall analysis staff reviewed and/or discussed:
•
•
•
•
•

Current Job Descriptions
Department Operating Tasks
Outstanding Project List
Position Workload Balance
Short Term and Long Term Needs

With the recent efficiencies in processes due to software advances and streamlining practices, staff
also discussed future methods of service delivery. Finally, the cost impact of any changes to the
department structure was considered.
Recommendation
Staff is recommending the following:
•
•
•

Create a Director of Administration Position
Create an Accounting Specialist Position
Outsource Certain Financial Functions
o Eliminate the Director of Finance Position

Create a Director of Administration Position
The position would be responsible for the day to day direction and leadership of Administration
staff, which includes planning, developing, and supervising all aspects of the Administration
Department. It would also include working with the Village Administrator and consultants to
support finance operations. Based on the completion of a Job Analysis Questionnaire (JAQ), it is
recommended that the new position be slotted in at Grade 8 in the Compensation Plan, a range of
$88,434 to $123,808.
It is recommended that the Assistant to the Village Administrator be promoted to the Director of
Administration position.
Create an Accounting Specialist Position
This position would primarily focus on accounts payable, accounts receivable, and contract
management. The position would also research pricing for a variety of services/products, process
department PO’s, and provide backup for other functions within the department as needed. Based

Administration Department Reorganization

Page 3

on the completion of a JAQ, it is recommended that the new position be slotted in at Grade 2 in
the Compensation Plan, a range of $42,500 to $57,376.
It is recommended that the position be advertised as soon as possible so that finance operating
needs are addressed immediately.
Outsourcing Certain Financial Functions
Staff met with Lauterbach & Amen, LLP to discuss financial services activities. The cost of the
services is dependent on the amount of use staff believes is needed to perform normal operating
duties, larger program involvement (audit prep), and any other support necessary to manage
financial activities. A proposal has been requested of Lauterbach & Amen, LLP for financial
services functions.
It is recommended that Lauterbach & Amen, LLP perform certain finance functions (dependent
on proposal costs) and the Director of Finance Position be eliminated.
Financial Information
The chart below shows the total savings of the two full-time positions that are now vacant. The
numbers in red are the reduction in the savings should the Village Board approve the recommended
changes to the Administration Department structure. The remaining $136,336 are the funds that
can be used for outsourcing certain duties and functions of the department.

Description
Salary
Social Security
Medicare
Vision Insurance
Dental Insurance
Life Insurance
Health Insurance
IMRF
IGFOA Dues
GFOA Dues
IGFOA Conference
Total Annual Cost

Director of
Finance
Cost
Savings
$104,750
$6,495
$1,519
$95
$1,040
$111
$12,339
$9,029
$350
$200
$1,750
$137,677

Administrative
Assistant
Cost
Savings
$57,663
$3,575
$836
$48
$446
$111
$6,485
$4,995
$0
$0
$0
$74,160

Total
Savings
$162,413
$10,070
$2,355
$143
$1,486
$222
$18,824
$14,024
$350
$200
$1,750
$211,837

Director of
Administration
Changes
($10,374)
($643)
($150)
$0
$0
$0
$0
($980)
$0
$0
$0
($12,148)

Accounting
Specialist
Amounts
($42,500)
($2,635)
($616)
($95)
($1,040)
($111)
($12,339)
($4,016)
$0
$0
$0
($63,353)

Net For
Outsourcing
$109,539
$6,791
$1,588
$48
$446
$111
$6,485
$9,027
$350
$200
$1,750
$136,336

Although monetary considerations are necessary due to the financial implications facing the
Village in the near future, the evaluation also considered how the Administration Department
should be positioned for the future. We also reviewed immediate concerns such as Police Pension
Fund financial activity, coverage at the front counter, current operating programs, such as budget
preparation, and in general, support for normal financial activities.

Administration Department Reorganization

Page 4

Other
As with any changes, should the Village Board approve restructuring, staff will continue to review
operations, duties, and functions of Administration staff to be sure we continue to provide the
services expected in an efficient manner.
The following would be the new organizational chart for the Administration Department.

Village
Administrator

Director of
Administration

Financial Services
Consultant

Accounting
Manager

Accounting
Specialist

Part-Time
Customer Service
Assistant

Utility Billing
Specialist

Finally, as mentioned previously, job descriptions for all positions were reviewed, an outstanding
project list was compiled, operating tasks listed, and areas of possible consultant duties were
gathered. Should information deemed necessary for future Board action, such documents can be
submitted for review.
Attached to this memorandum is an Amended Compensation Plan adding the Director of
Administration position, the Accounting Specialist position, and removing one Part-time Customer
Service Assistant. In addition to the Amended Compensation Plan, should the Village Board
approve the restructuring, the following two items staff will work on and present at a future
date:
•
•

The Lauterbach & Amen, LLP Contract Needs Board Approval
o Staff will work with them for specific responsibilities
A Village Treasurer Appointment is Needed

Administration Department Reorganization

Page 5

There will also be minor expenses for new business cards, name plates, and other such expenses
with new hires and promotions.
In conclusion, staff believes that the options presented will move the Administration Department
in a direction that enables optimal delivery of services (internal & external) and commits to
building a more effective and efficient operating process without an undue cost burden to the
Village.

Respectfully submitted,

Steven J. Shields
Steven J. Shields
Village Administrator

ORDINANCE NO. 20-O-XX

AMENDING AN EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION PLAN

WHEREAS, in December 2016, the Village Board approved a compensation study and
staffing analysis to review current job classifications and provide the Village with
recommendations regarding internal and external pay equity; and
WHEREAS, the Village Board deemed it appropriate at the June 19, 2017 Village Board
meeting to accept the recommendations in the Employee Classification and Compensation Study
Report that included a new classification and compensation plan that is internally equitable and
externally competitive; and
WHEREAS, such compensation plan applicable to Village employees shall be
confirmed by the yearly budget approved by the Village Board and further conditioned in this
ordinance; and
WHEREAS, the Metropolitan Alliance of Police bargaining unit employees have an
agreement which specifies a compensation plan for such members; and
WHEREAS, the International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 150, AFL-CIO
bargaining unit employees have an agreement which specifies a compensation plan for such
members; and
WHEREAS, the fiscal year end 2020 compensation plan was approved on May 6, 2019
and amended on August 5, 2019 and January 20, 2020; and
WHEREAS, changes to the fiscal year end 2020 compensation plan includes the
addition of one (1) Accounting Specialist, one (1) Director of Administration and the reduction
of one (1) Part-time Customer Service Assistant, attached as Exhibit #1.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD
OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF ROUND LAKE, LAKE COUNTY, ILLINOIS as
follows:
SECTION 1: The foregoing findings and recitals, and each of them, are hereby adopted
as Section 1 of this Ordinance and are incorporated by reference as if set forth verbatim herein.
SECTION 2: That the Guidelines for Employee Compensation are hereby confirmed as
the applicable guidelines to be confirmed yearly by approval of the Village Budget, or as set
forth in a duly approved collective bargaining agreement.
SECTION 3: All Ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance, to the extent of such
conflict are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form.

APPROVED:

Daniel A. MacGillis, Village President
ATTEST:

Deborah Perlini, Village Clerk

PASSED:
APPROVED:
AYES:
NAYS:
ABSENT:
PUBLISHED IN PAMPHLET FORM:

2

EXHIBIT 1

Village of Round Lake, Illinois - Amended Compensation Plan
For the Fiscal Year Ended April 30, 2020
Cost of Living Adjustment: 2.0%

Grade
1

Open Range
Midpoint

Minimum
Part-time Customer Service Assistant (2) (1)
$39,535

$46,454

Maximum

$53,373

2

Records Clerk (2), Part-time Community Service Officer (3), Part-time Permit Technician (1)
Administrative Assistant (2), Part-time Administrative Assistant (2)
Accounting Specialist (1)
$42,500
$49,938
$57,376

3

Records Supervisor (1), Facility/Fleet Coordinator (1), Code Enforcement Officer (1)
$45,688
$53,684

$61,679

4

Community Development Specialist /Deputy Clerk (1), Building Inspector/Plan Reviewer (1)
$48,379
$58,054
$67,730

5

No Positions in Grade
$55,636

6

7

8

9

10

11

$66,763

$77,889

Accounting Manager (1), Part-time Police Officer (2)
$63,981
$76,777

$89,573

Public Works Superintendent (1), Assistant to the Village Administrator (1)
$73,578
$88,293

$103,009

Commander (2), Director of Economic & Community Development (1)
Director of Administration (1)
$88,434
$106,121

$123,808

Director of Public Works (1), Director of Finance (1), Deputy Chief of Police (1)
$97,277
$116,733

$136,188

Chief of Police (1)
$107,005

$128,406

$149,807

Village Administrator (1)
$119,646

$146,566

$173,487

Other Part-Time Employee Rates
Position Description
Public Works Seasonal Laborer
On-call Snow Plow Operators
Operator (Hydrant/Sidewalk Snow Removal)

Hourly Rate
$12.00 - $14.00
$19.50
$14.00 - $16.00

Note: The number after the position description represents positions authorized in the budget document. The grades
that state "No Positions Authorized in this Grade" means for the current fiscal year end those grades have no
budgeted positions.
