MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
CITY OF BROCKTON (THE CITY)
AND
MASSACHUSETTS LABORERS' DISTRICT COUNCIL
ON BEHALF OF
BROCKTON CITY HALL
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES ASSOCIATION (THE UNION)
(JULY 1, 2019 - JUNE 30, 2022)

This Memorandum sets forth the material terms of a successor collective bargaining
agreement reached between the Union's and the City's negotiating teams, subject to ratification
by the Union membership of the Union, and funding by the Brockton City Council as required by
law. For purposes of further negotiations and/or impasse procedures, this Memorandum shall be
considered off-the-record until ratification and funding occur. Failing such ratification or funding,
both parties will be free to revert to their on-the-record positions.
The collective bargaining agreement (CBA), which expired on June 30, 2019, shall be
extended without change for a period of three years, through June 30, 2022. The parties agree to
)

integrate the amendments set forth herein with the existing CBA, as well as make non-substantive
modifications to the form of the agreement to correct any typographical, grammatical or formatting
errors. Upon bargaining unit ratification, joint execution of the Memorandum of Agreement, and
requisite City Council adopting action, the Union and the City agree to begin negotiations for a
successor Memorandum of Agreement to begin on July 1, 2022.
The following provisions represent the material changes to the parties' agreement for an
agreement through June 30, 2022.
1. Base Wages:

Effective July 1, 2021, base wages shall be increased for all unit members by two dollars
($2.00) per hour. The parties agree that there shall be no retroactive base wage increase for
FY2020 and FY202 l.

The existing wage scales shall be amended and listed in Appendix "A" to reflect the $2.00
per hour base wage increase.
Quoted salary amounts in Appendix "A" are subject to verification of mathematical
calculations by the Auditor's Office.

1. Janus v. AFSCME:
To comply with Janus v. AFSCME, the parties agree to strike Article II in its entirety and
replace the Article with the following:

ARTICLE II DUES DEDUCTION
Any employee who elects to join the Union shall sign and submit to the
City the authorization of dues forms.
Any employee may elect to pay an Agency Fee, equal to the dues
amount, to the Union by executing an Agency Fee authorization form,
expressly authorizing the City to deduct the Agency Fee.
Upon receipt of an authorization of dues/agency form, the Employer
agrees to deduct, each week, union membership dues or agency fees
levied in accordance with the Constitution of the Union from the pay of
each employee in the unit who executes or has executed said form.
No such deductions shall be made without an authorization dues/agency
form. Deductions may be made for all bargaining unit employees who
have executed said form, regardless of their probationary status.
The Union shall be responsible for providing a welcome packet to all
new employees who are members of the bargaining unit, with the forms
required herein.
In consideration of the employer's entering into this collective
bargaining Agreement, which Agreement includes union dues and
agency service fee provisions, the Union hereby agrees to indemnify the
said employer and hold it harmless from any and all claims, liabilities
or costs of the employer which arise out of entering into or enforcement
of said provision or which arise out of the payroll deduction of the union
dues and agency service fees.
There shall be no discrimination by Department Heads/Supervisors or
other agents of the Employer against any employee because of their
activity or membership in the Union (pursuant to M.G.L. c. l SOE s. l 0).
There shall be no discrimination by union members against any
employee because of his/her refusal to join the Union or pay an Agency
Fee. The Employer further agrees that there will be no discrimination
2

against any member for his/her adherence to any provision of this
Agreement.

2. Housekeeping:
a. Health Insurance:
The parties agree to amend the CBA to remove language relative to health insurance
benefits, including, but not limited to, health insurance plans, plan designs, contribution rates, or
policies between the City, as the City has accepted M.G.L. c. 32B, § 19, and such provisions have
been deemed superseded by the Public Employee Committee (PEC) Agreement. Specifically, the
parties agree to amend the Collective Bargaining Agreement as follows:

Delete:

ARTICLE XXIII: MEDICAL/LIFE INSURANCE COVERAGE &
CAFETERIA PLAN/FLEX SPENDING COVERAGE in its entirety

Replace With:
ARTICLE XXIII MEDICAL/LIFE INSURANCE COVERAGE
16.1 Changes in Plan Design
A. All Health Insurance Change are to be under the jurisdiction of the
Public Employee Committee (PEC) and the parties agree to be bound
by the effective PEC Agreement.

B. Nothing herein shall preclude the City from offering additional plans as
determined by the City to be in the best interest of the City, so long as
the addition of plans does not affect the cost or plan design of the Plans
specified above.
16.2

Insurance Waiver Stipend

A. Any Union member who is enrolled in any one of the City-offered
health insurance plans and who thereafter waives his/her right to
coverage under any of those plans will receive an insurance waiver
stipend that will be payable in three equal lump sum payments with the
first such stipend being paid within thirty (30) calendar days of the
waiver and with the second and third such stipends being paid on the
first and second anniversaries respectively of the payment of the first
such stipend. The lump sum amounts of each of the three stipends will
be computed as follows:

1. By first determining the amount of the City's total annual
premium contribution for the particular type of coverage (i.e.
family or individual) that the Union member has under the

3

particular City-offered health insurance plan in which he/she is
enrolled at the time of the waiver.
2. By then taking 50% of that amount and dividing it by three (3).
3. The resulting figure will be the amount of each of the three
annual insurance waiver stipends.
B. In order to be eligible for this insurance waiver stipend, a union member
must first provide the City with written verification that he/she is
covered by an alternative health insurance plan, either as the
employee/subscriber or as a dependent of an employee/subscriber,
which provides a level of coverage that is substantially equivalent to the
level of coverage that is provided under the least expensive health
insurance plan that is offered by the City at the time of the waiver. Union
. members who access the health insurance waiver stipend will be
permitted to subsequently enroll in one of the City-offered health
insurance plans during any subsequent open enrollment period.
However, such Union members will be permitted to enroll in one of the
City-offered health insurance plans at any time between the open
enrollment periods upon a showing of changed circumstances (such as,
for example, the loss of or unavailability of the alternative health
insurance plan by which he/she was covered at the time of the waiver,
the onset or deterioration of a significant medical condition since the
exercise of the waiver, the death of or divorce from a spouse or the
dissolution of a partnership with the employee/subscriber under whose
alternative health insurance plan the Union member was covered at the
time of the waiver) or for some other valid reason.
C. Any Union member who has received either one, two or all three of the
insurance waiver stipends will, if he/she (or his/her spouse both at the
time of the waiver and at the time of any subsequent re-enrollment)
subsequently enrolls in one of the City-offered health insurance plans at
any time thereafter, refund to the City an amount that is equal to onehalf of the total amount of the insurance waiver stipends that he/she
received pursuant to this section.

Life Insurance: In the amount of $5,000.00.

4

'J'y

Dated this -1,\ day of September, 2021.

MA LABORERS' DISTRICT COUNCIL,
LOCAL 1162,

CITY OF BROCKTON,

By Its Mayor,

~~-?!-~(

ROBERTF. SULLIVAN

Q

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

Law Department

5

------
