Town of Derry
and
Derry Police Supervisors
Chapter 35
State Employees Association of New Hampshire
Local 1984
Service Employees International Union

For the period July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2029

1

Contents
I.

Preface ............................................................................................................................... 3

II.

Recognition ....................................................................................................................... 3

III.

Non-Discrimination ........................................................................................................... 3

IV.

Management Rights ........................................................................................................... 3

V.

Union Rights...................................................................................................................... 4

VI.

Union Representative ........................................................................................................ 5

VII.

Consultation....................................................................................................................... 5

VIII.

Health and Safety .............................................................................................................. 5

IX.

Grievance Procedure ......................................................................................................... 6

X.

Disciplinary Actions .......................................................................................................... 7

XI.

Seniority. Vacancies. Probation ........................................................................................ 8

XII.

Compensation .................................................................................................................... 9

XIII.

Hours of Work and Schedules ......................................................................................... 10

XIV.

Overtime and Court Appearances ................................................................................... 11

XV.

Holidays........................................................................................................................... 13

XVI.

Leave Administration and Maintenance of Standards .................................................... 14

XVII.

Insurance and Medical Coverage .................................................................................... 23

XVIII. Outside Details ................................................................................................................ 26
XIX.

Miscellaneous .................................................................................................................. 27

XX.

Stability of Agreement .................................................................................................... 28

XXI.

Duration ........................................................................................................................... 29

Appendix A-1

Revised Wage Scale ........................................................................................... 30

Appendix A-2

Placement of Employees, Effective 6/30/2024 and 7/1/2024 ............................ 31

2

I.

Preface
1.1.

This Agreement entered into by and between the Town of Derry, New Hampshire,
Association of New Hampshire, SEIU Local 1984, hereinafter referred to as the
relations between the Town and the Union, and the establishment of an equitable
and peaceful procedure for the resolution of differences arising between them.

II.

Recognition
2.1.

III.

IV.

The Employer recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for
the purpose of collective bargaining for all permanent employees in the positions
of sergeant and lieutenant. In addition, the Parties agree that any employee in a
promotional probationary status in a unit position shall have his/her terms and
conditions of employment administered under this Agreement. Employees on a
promotional probationary status shall not, however, have any rights to appeal
through the grievance procedure a determination by the Town that such employee
has failed to fulfill the requirements of his/her probationary period. Employees
hired into unit positions from outside the police department shall be treated as new
employees of the Town for probation purposes in that they are considered nonpermanent until completion of their probation.

Non-Discrimination
3.1.

The Employer and the Union agree that the provisions of this Agreement shall be
applied to all employees without discrimination due to age, sex, transgender status,
race, color, creed, marital status, familial status, physical or mental disability,
pregnancy, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, religious belief, any other
legally protected classification, or membership or non-membership in the Union.

3.2.

The Parties agree to honor and to be bound by the provisions of RSA 273-A and
RSA 354-A, as amended, with respect to the rights of employees and protection
from discrimination.

3.3.

Employees have and shall be protected in the exercise of the right, freely and
without fear of penalty or reprisal, to join and assist the Union. Nothing in this
Article or Agreement implies that any member of the unit must join the Union as a
condition of employment or continued employment.

Management Rights
4.1.

Except to the extent that there is contained in this Agreement an express and
specific provision to the contrary, all of the authority, power, rights, jurisdiction,
and responsibility of the Town and the police department are retained and reserved
3

exclusively to the Town and the Chief of Police, including, but not limited to, the
right to manage the affairs of the Town and the department and to maintain and
improve the efficiency of its operations; to determine methods, means, process, and
personnel by which operations are to be conducted; to determine the size and direct
the activities of the police department; to determine the schedule and hours of duty
consistent with the statutes and the assignment of employees to work; to establish
new job classifications and job duties and functions and to change, reassign,
abolish, continue, and divide existing job classifications for all jobs; to require from
each employee the efficient utilization of his/her services; to hire, promote, assign,
and retain employees, for just cause and reason; to discipline, suspend, demote, and
discharge employees; to promulgate and support reasonable rules and regulations
pertaining to the operations.
4.2.

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to limit the right of the Chief of Police
or other Division Commander to command the police department as their judgment
directs them in any and all emergency situations as they deem to be appropriate.

4.3.
situation unexpected and/or out of the ordinary which requires action to avoid
danger to life or property.
V.

Union Rights
5.1.

The local chapter of SEA covering Derry police employees or committees of that
chapter shall be allowed the use of the facilities of the Town for meetings when
such facilities are available and such meetings would not conflict with the business
of the Town. Requests for the use of facilities should be made in writing to the
Chief of Police at least one (1) week prior to the requested date.

5.2.

Staff representatives of the Union shall be allowed to visit with employees during
working hours and confer on conditions of employment to the extent that such
visitations do not take place in work areas and visits are made known to the Chief
of Police at their commencement.

5.3.

The Town shall provide a bulletin board located in the police station and located at
a mutually agreeable place to be used by the Union for the posting of notices
concerning Union business and activity.

5.4.
weekly salary at a rate to be specified by representatives of the Union. Deductions
shall only be made from checks drawn against the Town of Derry. Dues withheld
hereunder shall be transmitted by the Town to the local chapter treasurer at least
monthly, along with a list of employees for whom dues are being paid and the
applicable payroll dates.

4

VI.

VII.

5.5.

An individual who is not a member of the Union who requests services of the Union
in a grievance representation shall be charged the full fair cost to the Union of such
representation. The Town shall be held harmless in any dispute arising out of the
collection of such charges.

5.6

In addition to a dues deduction, the Union shall be allowed to designate one (1)
payroll deduction for any group program.

Union Representative
6.1.

The Town agrees to recognize the Steward duly authorized by the Union.

6.2.

The Union shall furnish the name of the Steward to the Town and keep the Town
advised of any changes.

6.3.

The Town shall authorize a reasonable amount of time during the regular working
hours without loss of time or pay to permit the Steward to carry out his/her
responsibilities in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement. The Union
agrees that it shall guard against the use of excessive time in handling such
responsibilities.

Consultation
7.1.

VIII.

Representatives of the Union may meet with the Chief of Police or his/her designee
once a month to discuss matters of mutual concern, at a mutually agreed time and
place, including those matters necessary to the implementation of this Agreement.
A written agenda shall be exchanged between the Union and the Chief of Police no
less than five (5) days before the scheduled date of the meeting. At the discretion
of the parties, additional matters for discussion may be placed on the agenda.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Chief of Police or his/her designee and
the Union from meeting on a more or less frequent basis on mutual agreement, or
if matters of mutual concern arise.

Health and Safety
8.1.

A representative of the bargaining unit shall be allowed to participate in the Townwide Joint Loss Management Committee for the purpose of bringing to the attention
of the Town conditions which, in the opinion of the representative, may be
detrimental to the health and/or safety of unit employees, and for the purpose of
making recommendations for the elimination of such conditions. The composition
obligations under RSA 281-A:64, III.

5

IX.

Grievance Procedure
9.1.

Definition: A grievance under this article is defined as a complaint, dispute or
controversy which arises between one or more employees and the employer and/or
his/her agent, or an alleged violation of any provision of this Agreement, in which
the individual grievant alleges a personal loss or injury. However, all cases of
discipline and discharge are grievable.

9.1.1. An employee who has a complaint must take up the complaint with his/her Captain
verbally before he/she can process the complaint as a formal grievance. The
Captain shall give his/her answer within two (2) days. It is anticipated that nearly
all complaints can be resolved informally without grievance.
9.1.2. Each grievance must be submitted in writing by the Union and must contain a
statement of the facts surrounding the grievance, the provision(s) of this Agreement
allegedly violated, the relief requested and the extent to which the grievant has
sought an informal adjustment of the grievance.
9.2.

Procedure

9.2.1. STEP ONE - An employee desiring to process a grievance must file a written
statement of the grievance to the Chief of Police no later than ten (10) business days
after the employee knew the facts on which the grievance is based, and in no case
more than one (1) year from the occurrence of the act by the Town causing the
grievance. The Chief shall meet with the employee within three (3) business days
following receipt of the notice and shall give a written decision within three (3)
business days thereafter.
9.2.2. STEP TWO - If the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the Chief, he/she
appeal with the Town Administrator setting forth the specific reasons why he/she
believes the Agreement is being violated by the Town action in question. Within
ten (10) business days following receipt of the appeal, the Town Administrator shall
either issue a written decision or schedule a hearing. Said hearing shall be held no
later than thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the appeal and a written
decision shall be rendered within five (5) business days thereafter.
9.2.3. STEP THREE If the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the Town
Administrator, the Union may file, within twenty (20) business days following the
receipt of the decision of the Town Administrator, a request for arbitration to the
Public Employees Labor Relations Board under its rules and regulations. The
decisions of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the Parties.
9.23.a STEP THREE AND ONE HALF Grievance Mediation can take place after the
last step of the in-house grievance procedure before arbitration if agreed to by both
6

parties. Mediator services through the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service
shall be used. Information at this mediation step cannot be used in arbitration if
resolution at this step is not obtained.

X.

9.3.

The cost of arbitration shall be borne by the party for whom the arbitration has ruled
against.

9.4.

The foregoing time limitations may be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.

9.5.

Failure of the grievant to abide by the time limits set out in this article shall result
in the grievance being deemed settled on the basis of the last decision made by the
Town. Failure of the Town or its representatives to provide a decision at any step
of the procedure shall result in the grievance automatically progressing to the next
step of the procedure.

9.6.

The grievant may be present at all the steps of the procedure.

9.7.

The grievant has the right to be represented at any step of the grievance procedure
by a representative of the Union.

Disciplinary Actions
10.1.

The Town shall not discharge or take other disciplinary action against any unit
employee without just cause.

10.2. The Parties jointly recognize the constructive value of disciplinary action.
Accordingly, the Town will:
A.

Act promptly to apply discipline within a reasonable time of the offense;

B.

Utilize a procedure of progressive discipline, in increasing order of
significance:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Oral reprimand
Written reprimand
Suspension without pay
Demotion
Dismissal

The Parties agree that there may be appropriate cases that may warrant the Town
by-passing some of the discipline steps.
10.3.

All disciplinary actions, including references to oral reprimands, shall be written
actions shall narrowly and specifically identify the alleged action or non-action for
7

which the discipline is being given, and shall cite the particular contract provision
or published rule or regulation which is alleged to have been violated.
10.4.

XI.

Written records relating to reprimand, suspension, and commendation are
considered to be of decreasing significance with the passage of time. Current
information is given far greater weight than historical data. Pursuant to RSA
275:56, as amended, if, upon inspection of his/her personnel file(s), an employee
feels a record contained therein should be removed or corrected in writing, he/she
may so request of the Chief of Police. If the request is denied, the employee may
submit a written statement for the file(s) explaining his/her version of the
information contained therein with evidence supporting such version. Such

Seniority. Vacancies. Probation
11.1.

Seniority shall mean the length of full-time service within the police department,
beginning with the first day after the employee satisfactorily completes the initial
probationary period.

11.2.

The Chief of Police shall establish a seniority list containing the names and
seniority of all employees in the unit. The list will indicate; a) the date of
employment; and b) seniority within the department. A current list must be posted
at least once each year. Any objections to the seniority list as posted shall be
reported in writing to the Chief of Police within ten (10) days, or the list will stand
approved.

11.3.

For purposes of computing length of service, as it applies to the wage schedule,
service shall be computed from the date of appointment to the rank.

11.4.

The Town shall post all open positions on employee bulletin boards for a period of
not less than five (5) working days. The position posting shall contain the
following:
Title of Job Description, Application Closing Date, Application Process,
Minimum Qualifications.
Employees shall be notified in the posting of the composition of the examination
process and the weighting of the various components thereof.

11.5.

Permanent employees who are promoted and who fail the probationary period
associated with that promotion, which shall not exceed twelve (12) months, if any,
shall be returned to a position within the rank from which they promoted.

11.6

Employees promoted into or within the bargaining unit shall be paid in accordance
with the Wage Schedule set forth in Appendices A-1 and Article 12.1. The
8

employer agrees that any employee promoted into the bargaining unit shall be paid
no less than 5% more than his or her previous hourly wage.
XII.

Compensation
12.1

Employees shall be paid in accordance with the wage rates as provided in Appendix
A-1, as it may be modified as outlined below, and A-2.
a. Effective July 1, 2024, all members of the unit will be placed on the revised
Wage Scale (Appendix A-1) as outlined in Appendix A-2.
b. Effective July 1, 2025, the Wage Scale shall be increased by a COLA equal
to the Northeast CPI-U in effect for December of the preceding calendar
year, but not less than 2% nor greater than 4.5%.
c. Effective July 1, 2026, the Wage Scale shall be further increased by a COLA
equal to the Northeast CPI-U in effect for December of the preceding
calendar year, but not less than 2% nor greater than 4.5%.
d. Effective July 1, 2027, the Wage Scale shall be further increased by a
COLA equal to the Northeast CPI-U in effect for December of the
preceding calendar year, but not less than 2% nor greater than 4.5%.
e. Effective July 1, 2028, the Wage Scale shall be further increased by a
COLA equal to the Northeast CPI-U in effect for December of the
preceding calendar year, but not less than 2% nor greater than 4.5%.
Upon promotion to a higher rank, bargaining unit employees shall be placed on
the new wage matrix on the first step in the appropriate lane that would provide
them with at least a 5% increase in pay. For the purposes of step progression
under the new wage matrix, employees shall step in accordance with 11.3
(Anniversary Date of Promotion), except as otherwise expressly agreed by the
parties regarding the first year of this Agreement (July 1, 2024 through June 30,
2025).

12.2.

Shift Differential Pay
A shift differential shall be paid to employees assigned to a full shift, or who are
assigned to cover employees usually assigned to that shift. Applicable rates are as
follows:
Shift
11 p.m. to 7 a.m.
3 p.m. to 11 p.m.

Additional Differential
$2.00 per hour worked
$1.00 per hour worked

9

12.3.

Any unit employee hired before July 1, 2016 who has five years regular appointed
service with the Derry Police Department will be paid five dollars ($5.00) per week
in addition to his/her regular weekly salary. For each additional five (5) years of
service thereafter, an additional five dollars ($5.00) per week above the normal
weekly wage will be paid.
Any unit employee hired on or after July 1, 2016 who has five years regular
appointed service with the Derry Police Department will be paid $2.50 per week in
addition to his/her regular weekly salary. For each additional five (5) years of
service thereafter, an additional $2.50 per week above the normal weekly wage will
be paid.
In the event the parties have not agreed to terms and conditions for a successor
Agreement prior to the June 30, 2029 expiration date of this Agreement, the parties
agree to freeze longevity increases at the June 30, 2029 levels.

12.4.

Unit employees, when assigned for more than five (5) consecutive days to the rank
of Captain or Lieutenant, shall be entitled to the rate of pay of said higher rank
which is at least five percent (5%) higher than their current rate of pay. When patrol
supervisors act in the position of shift supervisor they shall be paid the appropriate
Sergeant B rate.

12.5

Special Supervisory Pay
Effective July 1,2000, sergeants assigned as on-scene supervisors for special tasks
such as Crash Reconstruction or similar tasks shall be compensated at the level of
Shift Supervisor for time spent at the scene directing others.

XIII.

Hours of Work and Schedules
13.1.

The normal work schedule for unit employees shall be as follows: Patrol Division
employees shall work four (4) eight-hour days followed by two (2) days of rest;
Division of Investigative Services employees shall work the "modified 4-2"
schedule, so-called.

13.2. Roll Call: Patrol Division employees shall be required by the Chief to make
themselves available (work) for roll call and the person responsible for roll call
preparation shall report for duty fifteen (15) minutes prior to roll call. Such time is
part of the duty shift. It is paid time. A meal period equal to the roll call and
preparatory time will be provided mid-shift, without pay, to equate the total number
of hours of work to eight (8) in a duty shift.
Employees assigned to Division of Investigative Services, although not required to
attend roll call, do also serve an eight (8) hour duty shift with a one-half (½) hour

10

lunch period, without pay, thus making the time between the start of the shift and
its conclusion equal to eight and one-half (8 ½) hours.
13.2.1
taken at Police Headquarters and shall be paid time except as provided in 13.2.2.
13.2.2 In the absence of a patrol supervisor REASONABLE efforts may be made to cover
-assignment of another on duty
recognized by the Union and the Town that there may be circumstances when reassignment of another supervisor is possible but impractical. In those cases 13.2.1
shall prevail. GOOD JUDGEMENT and COMMON SENSE shall dictate the
reasonable application of this provision.
13.2.3 Supervisors shall be allowed a total of fifteen minutes of travel time to reach and
return from their destination when taking meal breaks in addition to the meal
period.
13.3.

Each officer covered by this Agreement shall make himself available for a
maximum of four (4) hours per month. Employees who are off duty during all or
time shall be used for full department meetings, firearms training, or other jobrelated training as designated by the Chief of Police. Said time shall in no instance
be used to cover any overtime which would otherwise be paid. The four (4) hours
as aforementioned shall be scheduled in advance by the Chief of Police for a
minimum period of thirty (30) days. The thirty (30) day notice shall not apply in
cases of emergency. The thirty (30) day notice may be waived by mutual consent
of the Union and the employer. Any cause for absence shall have to meet the same
standard as failing to report for a regularly scheduled shift.

13.4.
employee assignments. The department shall make every effort to provide no less
however, this provision shall not prevent a reassignment on less than seven (7)
Chief or designee, require reassignment on shorter notice.
XIV. Overtime and Court Appearances
14.1. Until revised as provided herein, employees covered by this Agreement shall be
entitled to pay at the rate of time and one-half their respective hourly rate for all
hours in excess of their regularly scheduled hours worked in any given work week.
Officers are eligible to work up to 72 hours in a workweek but not more than 16
per day, unless otherwise authorized by the Chief or his designee.

11

14.1.1.

Loss of time due to job-related injury, earned time, bereavement and holidays (for
employees on a five (5) day forty (40) hour work schedule) shall be considered
as time worked for the purpose of computing overtime; any other absence from
work shall not be considered as time worked.

14.1.3.

Time spent on outside or private work detail will not be counted in determining
the number of hours worked for overtime purposes.

14.1.4.

No employee shall be relieved of duty during the regular shift hours in his/her
basic work week in order to compensate or offset overtime hours worked or
anticipated unless he/she agrees to be so relieved.

14.2.
for the purpose of computing eligibility for overtime compensation.
14.3.

14.3.1.

Until revised as provided herein, any unit employee who is required to make off
duty court appearances on behalf of the employers shall, when said appearance is
made, be compensated
. Court time includes onehalf (½) hour travel time each way for appearances outside the Town of Derry.
The Town will pay employees time and one-half (1-1/2) the normal rate of pay
for all court time actually spent in Circuit Court or time spent in Superior Court
plus:
a. Travel time of two (2) hours total will be added when attending 10th Circuit
Court District Division - Portsmouth.
b. Travel time of one and one-half (1½) hours total will be added when
attending Rockingham or Merrimack County Superior Courts.
c. Travel time of one (1) hour total will be added when attending 10th Circuit
Court District Division - Salem.
d. Effective on the first full pay period following signing of this Agreement,
the Town will pay employees time and one-half (1.5) the normal rate of pay
for a minimum of three (3) hours or time actually spent in circuit or superior
court, whichever is greater, to include compensation as provided in a., b.,
and c. above. Employees reporting to court while off duty will receive the
three (3) hour minimum as provided for above upon signing over any court
witness fee exclusive of mileage. Employees called to court while on duty
and are required to remain beyond his/her work day shall be compensated
for time actually spent in court beyond said work day.
The following procedure shall apply upon cancellation of scheduled court:

12

1. Off-duty employees who are scheduled for court and are not notified of
cancellation of such obligation by at least 5 PM the day before the scheduled
appearance shall receive one (1) hour pay at time and one half. Off-duty
employees who are notified of the cancellation by 5 PM the day before the
scheduled appearance are ineligible for this compensation.
2. If the employee is eligible to receive a witness fee as a result of a negotiation
between the prosecution and defense when a case is continued or resolved,

14.4.

Employees called back to work outside of their regular shift shall receive a
minimum of three (3) hours pay at their appropriate rate.

14.5.

When an employee is absent from work and charges such time against his/her
earned time benefits, such time shall be considered as time worked for computation
of overtime, provided that the inclusion of such earned time exceeds 40 hours.

14.6. Employees shall only be paid for hours actually worked unless otherwise
specifically provided for herein.

XV.

14.7

When an employee has volunteered to serve on a committee he/she shall be entitled
to a minimum of two hours pay or the actual number of hours spent at the meeting
whichever is greater at his/her appropriate rate.

14.8

Patrol Supervisor shifts, that go unfilled, may be filled by Lieutenants, unless the
shift supervisor position during that shift is being filled by a Sergeant. In such
circumstances, the Lieutenant shall fill the shift supervisor position, and the
Sergeant shall be automatically reassigned to fill the patrol supervisor position and
shall continue to receive their base rate of pay.

Holidays
15.1. The following are the official holidays for the term of this Agreement:
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Martin Luther King Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
15.2.

Thanksgiving Day
Christmas

When the holiday falls while an employee is on vacation, the employee will receive
holiday pay and the day will be charged against his/her leave.

15.3.
listed in 15.1. above in addition to his/her regular weekly pay.
13

15.4.

In order to receive holiday pay, the employee must be receiving pay from the Town
of Derry for the workweek in which the holiday falls.

15.5.

Bureau of Investigative Services and Bureau of Administrative Services employees
shall be given holidays off with pay in lieu of additional compensation for the
holiday.

15.6
Thanksgiving and Christmas shall be paid at the rate of time and one half for all
hours worked in addition to the paid holiday.
XVI. Leave Administration and Maintenance of Standards
EARNED TIME
16.1. Earned time is an alternative approach to the traditional manner of covering absence
for vacation, maternity leave, military leave, and sick leave. Instead of dividing
benefits into a specific number of days for each benefit, Earned Time puts these
days together into a single benefit. Earned Time days can be used for a variety of
purposes, including a payment in cash at time of termination. Earned time is
available as soon as it is "earned". The exact number of Earned Time days available
each year will depend on the years of service to the Town.
16.1.1. Coverage
Employees who are employed in a full time position are covered by Earned Time.
The accrual rates are as follows:
Year of Service

Fraction of a Earned
Per Hour

Days Accrued per
month

Annual
Days

0 thru 5th

.012

2.09

25

6 thru 10th

.0144

2.50

30

11 thru 20th

.0173

3.00

36

after 20

.0197

3.42

41

Below please find the earn rate which is allowed for the respective years of service.
a.

From the date of hire through 5 years of service the employee shall
earn 2.09 days per month of service. For example, month 1 - 2.09
earned and month 60 - 2.09 earned.
14

b.

The first month of his/her 6th year of service (month 61) through 10
years of service (month 120) he/she will earn 2.50 days per month.

c.

The first day of his/her 11th year (month 121) through 20 years of
service (month 240) he/she will earn 3.00 days per month.

d.

The first day of his/her 21st year (month 241) and thereafter he/she
will earn 3.42 days per month.

16.1.2.

For the purposes of the earned time benefit, years of service will be calculated
from the initial date of employment. Employees may accumulate earned time
based on regularly scheduled hours worked or in pay status up to those hours
budgeted for the position (other non-status hours worked in supplemental
compensation such as overtime are excluded) and on years of service to the Town.

16.1.3.

Earned time may accrue up to 90 days.

16.1.4.

The Town shall buy back Earned Time Days on demand by the employee
(employee option) at a rate of 1 earned day for 1 days pay, any Earned Time days
(Example: An officer earning 36 Earned Days per year would have to have not
less than 36 days in his/her Earned Time Bank before being allowed to cash in
any Earned Days. Should his/her accumulated Earned Day total fall below his/her
annual accrual number, he/she would have to wait until his/her accumulated
Earned Day total rose back up over the annual accrual number, before cashing in
any more Earned Days.) Such buy backs shall be exclusive of the minimum usage
requirement.
a.

Employees who enter or have entered the unit with a bank of earned time
will be grand fathered and allowed the total earned equivalent as their
maximum accrual should it be greater than what is hereby allowed. For
example, patrolmen earned days are equi

Specified in 16.1.11.
16.1.5.

Termination* and Restoration of Service Credit: An employee whose break in
service from the Town is less than one year will have his/her service bridged for
purposes of computing earned time accrual. For breaks of more than one year any
consideration for prior service shall be at the sole discretion of the Town
Administrator. For breaks of more than one year due to health reasons or layoff,
prior service shall be bridged.
* For the purpose of this section, termination shall include any approved leave
of absence such as for health reasons, military leave, and also includes layoffs.
15

16.1.6.

Usage
Earned Day may be used any time after being earned, including during an
notice Earned Time will be mutually agreed upon. When earned time is denied,
the supervisor shall inform the employee of the reason for the denial. Such
reasons may be but not limited to, manpower strengths, emergency situations, or
anticipation of inordinate demands for police services.
Employees may use up to sixteen (16) hours of planned earned time in two (2)
hour blocks at the beginning or end of a shift. Such planned earned time may not
be used more than once in the same month. All other planned earned time may
only be used in units of four (4) hour blocks of time.

16.1.7. I. PLANNED EARNED TIME
(a)

All employees will submit requests for earned time to their respective
supervisors for approval.

(b)

All employees requesting earned time will first check the
earned time tracking system to determine what dates and times are
available, prior to submitting the request forms.

(c)

All employees should note the date and time they are planning to request on
the
earned time tracking system and in their request to their
supervisor

(d)

From the time an employee requests any earned time, he may be bumped
by a senior employee within a 14 day period. After the 14 day period your
earned time is locked in.

(e)

Seniority shall be by time in unit. For example, a lieutenant would be junior
to a sergeant with more time in the unit than he.

(f)

For all unplanned short notice earned time requested, within a two week
period, seniority will prevail. A senior employee can bump another
employee up until twenty-four hours prior to the less senior employees
earned time.

(g)

Any employee planning to bump a less senior employee, who has already
been granted earned time will advise that less senior employee that he has
in fact been bumped and must report for scheduled duty.

(h)

Anytime a bump takes place the appropriate division commander shall be
notified.
16

16.1.8.

16.1.9.

II. EMERGENCY EARNED TIME
(a)

Emergency earned time will be granted upon request (to include but not
limited to mental and physical sickness, and personal emergencies). Upon
request of emergency earned time the employee shall state the nature of the
emergency. For example, nature of illness, personal emergency, etc.

(b)

Emergency earned time will not effect any other employee who has all
ready been granted planned earned time or unplanned short notice earned
time.

(c)

Employees utilizing emergency earned time while on duty will only be
docked for the actual amount of time taken for the stated emergency (for
example, if an employee leaves his scheduled shift an hour early because of
illness, he will only be docked one hour).

Minimum Usage
There is a minimum usage of earned days required each year. See schedule below:
YEARS OF SERVICE

MINIMUM USAGE PER YEAR*

0 thru 5th
6 thru 10th
11 and after

13 days
15 days
18 days

Computation of minimum usage will occur as of December 31st of each year.
Employees with less than six months of service are exempt from minimum usage
requirements.

16.1.10.

a.

Earned days may be taken to cover absence for any reason, including illness,
vacation, dentist or doctor visits, as long as the total number of days taken
meets or exceeds the minimum required usage as indicated.

b.

Two weeks of earned days shall be used by each member during the course
of the year. Weeks shall mean a regularly scheduled work week of 5 days
or 4 days for an employee working on a short week, in addition to any other
earned time used. The weeks do not have to be consecutive.

Termination
All unused earned time days will be paid at the time of termination or
retirement.
a. Earned time is paid at the base pay rate at time of termination.
17

b. In the event of the death of an employee, his/her earned time benefit shall
be paid to his/her beneficiary in full as noted on the life insurance policy
provided by the Town of Derry.
16.1.11.

Sick Leave Pool
a. The Sick Leave Pool is intended to provide security to supplement other

mpensation benefits are less than normal
a 1:3 basis. Similar to purchasing insurance, the employee may pick a given
number of days to exchange for coverage in case of extended disability.
b. Pool days are available for use only under the condition listed below, and
are not eligible for pay out at retirement or termination.
1.

Use of Pool days may begin on the sixth consecutive work day
absence due to illness, injury or other disability.

2.
3.

It is not necessary to use up all Earned Days before using Pool days.

4.

The employee may continue using Pool days until his/her Pool is
exhausted or until no longer disabled.

5.
6.

The maximum Pool day accrual is 150 days (i.e., the maximum
conversion of Earned Days is 50, which would convert to 150 Pool
days). If Pool days are used, or if an employee wishes to add to
his/her Pool days, more Earned Days may be added each December
and July (to a total of 150 Pool days). Earned time may not be
converted to Pool days at any other time.

7.

An exception to (b)(l) above, regarding use of five (5) Earned Days
to access the Sick Leave Pool may be granted when:
-An employee returns to work after using sick pool days, but
is disabled within 10 working days of return;
-the disability is from the same cause as the original sick
pool usage;
18

-the disability is certified by a physician to be the same as
the original use;
-under these circumstances, the Town Administrator may
grant an exception to the five (5) Earned Time Day
requirement.
16.2.

Bereavement Leave: Bereavement leave of up to five (5) consecutive working days
with pay shall be granted an employee in the event of the death of his/her:
Spouse
Father
Mother
Step-parent
Father-In-Law
Son-In-Law
Or

Sister
Brother
Child
Step-child
Mother-In- Law
Daughter-In-Law

Bereavement leave of up to three (3) consecutive working days with pay shall be
granted an employee in the event of the death of his/her:
Grandchild
Grandmother
Grandfather
Aunt
Uncle

Sister-In-Law
Brother-In-Law
Niece
Nephew

Bereavement leave must be utilized within thirty (30) days of the death, except as
approved by the Chief or designee upon a showing of good cause. An additional
discretion.
16.3.

Unit employees shall have one (1) personal leave day for their use during each
contract year.

16.4. Supervisory officers absent from work shall receive their pay directly from the
insurance shall sign the insurance carrier s check over to the Town for up to one
year.
16.5. FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVES OF ABSENCE
16.5.1. General Provisions
19

employees who worked at least 1,250 hours during the prior twelve (12) months
are entitled to take not more than twelve (12) work weeks unpaid FMLA leave of
absence in a twelve (12) month period (as defined below) in the event of:
a.

the birth of a child in order to care for the child (leave must be taken within twelve
(12) months of the birth);

b.

an adoption or foster care placement of a child in order to care for the child (leave
must be taken within twelve (12) months of placement);

c.
child when the ill person is not capable of self-care and the employee is needed for
such care.
d.
to perform his or her job.
As stated above, an eligible employee is entitled to a total of twelve (12) work weeks of
leave during any twelve (12) month period. That twelve (12) month period is
an employee begins any FMLA leave. Each time an employee begins a FMLA
leave, he is eligible to use any of the maximum of twelve (12) weeks leave not used
in the prior twelve (12) months. For example, if an employee has used eight (8)
weeks of FMLA leave during the twelve (12) months prior to a new leave request,
the employee is then eligible to take an additional four (4) weeks of leave. As
further example, if an employee takes four (4) weeks of FMLA leave beginning
September 1, 2003, and four (4) weeks of FMLA leave beginning December 1,
2003, an employee requiring additional FMLA leave on March 1, 2004, would have
four (4) weeks of FMLA leave available. In other words, the number of weeks
which an employee has available upon the beginning of a FMLA leave shall be
twelve (12) weeks less the number of FMLA leave weeks taken in the twelve (12)

FMLA leaves for the birth or placement for adoption or foster care of a child, as described
in paragraphs A and B above, must be taken all at once unless otherwise agreed to
by the Town Administrator. If medically necessary, FMLA leaves due to illness as
described in paragraphs C and D above may be taken on an intermittent or reduced
leave schedule. If FMLA leave is requested on this basis, the Town Administrator
may require the employee to transfer temporarily to an alternate position which
better accommodates periods of absence or a part-time schedule, provided that the
position has equivalent pay and benefits.

20

When a FMLA leave is approved, an employee s accrued, unused earned time, exclusive
of the employees annual minimum usage requirement, will be included as part of
the twelve (12) week leave requirement for an A, and B FMLA leave listed above.
For example, an employee with two (2) weeks accrued, unused earned time is
required to use that time before taking not more than ten (10) additional unpaid
weeks. In addition, for type A or B FMLA leave the employee may at his/her option
utilize accrued unused earned time to cover any period of otherwise unpaid leave.
(For type D leave, an employee eligible for Short Term Disability (may) use unused
accrued earned time to supplement the difference between the Short Term
Disability benefit and his/her regularly weekly wages, exclusive of overtime). In
the event an employee exhaust Short Time Disability benefits or in the use of a type
C leave, an employee must use any accrued unused earned time in excess of fortyfive (45) days and further provided may convert such days in excess of forty-five

When an employee requests any leave of absence which qualifies as leave under the
FMLA, the Town Administrator may designate such leave as FMLA leave upon
written notification to the employee.
16.5.2. Status of Employee Benefits

health insurance in the same manner as employees not on FMLA leave. In the event
of unpaid FMLA leave, an employee shall pay the Town Chief Financial Officer
re of any medical insurance premiums once per month in
advance on the first day of each month. For contributions to a flexible spending
account, if any, during any unpaid FMLA leave, such amounts must be withheld
. In the event that the employee elects
not to return to work upon completion of a FMLA leave of absence, the Town may
o work was for reason

Benefit entitlements based on length of service will be calculated as of the last paid
work day prior to the start of the leave of absence, for example, an employee on
leave will not accrue earned time. At the end of an authorized FMLA leave, an
employee will be reinstated to his/her original or a comparable position.
16.5.3. Basic Regulations and Conditions of Leave
The Town will require medical certification to support a claim for FMLA leave for

include a statement that the employee is unable to perform the functions of his/her
position. For FMLA leave to care for a seriously ill child, spouse or parent, the
21

certification must include estimate of the amount of time the employee is needed to
provide care. In its discretion, the Town may require a second medical opinion and
periodic re-certification at its own expense. If the first and second o pinions differ,
the Town, at its own expense, may require the binding opinion of a third health care
provider, approved jointly by the Town and the employee.
16.5.4. Notification and Reporting Requirements
When the need for FMLA leave is foreseeable, such as the birth or adoption of a
child, or planned medical treatment, the employee must provide reasonable prior
notice, and make efforts to schedule leave so as not to disrupt Town operations. In
cases of illness, the employee will be required to report periodically on his/her
FMLA leave status and intention to return to work. At the expiration of any FMLA
authorization from his/her doctor stating that the employee is ready to return to
work.
16.5.5. Procedures
a.

A request for Family and Medical Leave of Absence Form must be
originated in duplicate by the employee. This form should be completed in
detail, signed by the employee, submitted to the Town Administrator or
his/her designee for proper approvals. If possible, the form should be
submitted thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date of the FMLA
leave.

b.

All requests for FMLA leaves of absence due to illness must include the
following information attached to a completed Request for Family and
Medical Leave of Absence Form:

Sufficient medical certification stating:
i.

the date on which the serious health condition commenced;

ii.

the probable duration of the condition; and

iii.

the appropriate medical facts within the knowledge of the health care
provider regarding the condition.

In addition, for purposes of FMLA leave to care for a child, spouse or parent, the
certificate should give an estimate of the amount of time that the employee is
illness, the certificate must state that the employee is unable to perform the
functions of his/her position. In the case of certification for intermittent FMLA
leave or FMLA leave on a reduced leave schedule for planned medical treatment,
22

the dates on which such treatment is expected to be given and the duration of such
treatment must be stated.
16.5.6. Coordination with Maternity Leave
The Town provides employees a leave of absence for the period of temporary
physical disability resulting from childbirth and related medical conditions. A
maternity leave begins when an employee is medically determined to be disabled
and ends when medically determined to be able to return to work.
Maternity leave will be treated in the same manner as a type D FMLA leave of
absence; that is, the employee is required to exhaust accrued, unused earned time
followed by use of unused vacation and personal days, respectively, as may be
needed time before taking any unpaid leave. However, maternity leaves are not
limited by any measure other than the period of medical disability.
An employee who uses less than the Available Leave Weeks for type D leave for
maternity may take additional type A FMLA leave after the end of the disability
period for a period not to exceed the Available Leave Weeks.
16.5.7. Coordination with other Town Policies; Reference to FMLA and the FMLA federal
regulations issued by the US Department of Labor contain many imitations and
qualifications for entitlement and governance of FMLA leave not herein. The terms
of the FMLA and the FMLA federal regulations are incorporated here and will be
applied in all instances of requested or designated FMLA leave.
XVII. Insurance and Medical Coverage
17.1.1.
Effective January 1, 2017, the Town shall provide employees with
the option to enroll in either the Lumenos plan or the AB15IPDED-RX 10/20/45
plan provided by HealthTrust for single, two person, or family coverage.
Employees will provide to the Town, through 48 equal payroll deductions per
fiscal year, an insurance premium cost-sharing of the following percentages of
the total monthly premium
12.5% for the
Lumenos plan and 12.5% for the AB15IPDED plan.
17.1.1.1

Employees who opt to enroll in the Lumenos plan are eligible to
below. During the
term of this contract, for each year an employee is enrolled in the Lumenos plan
the Town shall contribute $2,000 for employees enrolled in family or two-person

contributions shall be made in equal installments on a semiannual basis.
Employees enrolled in the Lumenos plan may contribute to their HSA through
payroll deduction, but not in excess of the amount that would cause the health
23

insurance plan to be subject to the Cadillac Tax after consideration of the total
on
to the HSA, as stipulated above. Upon the effective date of the Cadillac Tax, the
Town shall annually notify employees enrolled in the Lumenos plan of the
employees HSA contribution limit pursuant to this provision.
If, in any year of the contract, the combination of the total premium cost for the
Lumenos plan and the HSA contribution as stipulated above will cause the health
will be reduced by the amount necessary to prevent the plan from becoming
subject to the Cadillac Tax. In the event such a reduction is necessary, the Town
will provide affected employees with a wage stipend in an amount equal to the
reduction amount.
17.1.1.2
Employees enrolled in the AB15IPDED plan are not eligible to open
an HSA account. Such employees are eligible, however, to participate in a
which provides for reimbursement of qualifying medical expenses per the
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code and the Affordable Care Act.
17.1.1.3
Employee health insurance premium costs for the Lumenos or the
AB15IPDED plan and Town HSA contributions in effect on June 30, 2029 shall
remain frozen at those rates until such time as a successor agreement is reached.
17.1.1.4
Employees may also enroll in AB10 RX10/20/45 provided by
HealthTrust for single, 2-person, or family coverage. The Town shall share the
cost of enrollment in the AB10 RX10/20/45 with participating employee up to
the dollar value contributed by the Town to employees enrolled in the
AB15IPDED plan. The remainder of the premium cost for the AB10
RX10/20/45 shall be paid by the employee through equal weekly payroll
deductions.
In the event that any portion of the AB10
RX10/20/45 will trigger the
application of the sounilaterally discontinue offering the AB10
RX10/20/45 for employee
enrollment and shall have no obligation to engage in impact bargaining related to
its discontinuance.
17.1.2 Members hired before 5/6/05 may receive a buy-out (in lieu of health insurance) at
rates in effect on July 1, 2007, which are $633.03 monthly for 2-person and $854.59
monthly for family. Members hired after 5/6/05 may receive an annualized buyout of $2500 family and $2500 two-person. This is available for employees who,
-out shall be
upon
at the coverage level for which the employee is eligible with payments made
monthly. In order to be eligible to receive a buy-out in lieu of health insurance,
24

employees must provide proof that they are enrolled in an alternative employersponsored health insurance plan.
review all possible Health Insurance Package Options. The Committee shall be
comprised of one member from each bargaining unit, the Human Resources
Director or designee and the Administrator or designee. When the Committee
agrees upon an option, advertises (RFP/RFQ) and selects a provider, then the
selected option shall be subject to being negotiated into this Agreement by the
parties. The Human Resources Director shall serve as the facilitator of the
committee and one union representative shall serve as co-facilitator.
17.2

Dental Insurance The Town agrees to make available dental insurance as provided
by the New Hampshire Municipal Association Health Insurance Trust Ins., Option
I - Coverage A - 100%; Coverage B - 80%; Coverage C - 50%; Coverage D - 50%
with $25/$75 deductible and $1,000 maximum per person. The Town shall pay
expense, two-person and family coverage, which shall be payroll deducted from

17.2.1 A buy-out of dental insurance premium shall be available at the value of fifty percent
(50%) of the total single coverage premium for employees who, upon proof of

17.3

In the event of the death of a unit employee, his/her beneficiary shall be paid the
equivalent of one (1) times annual salary with AD & D rider to be paid in
accordance with terms of the insurance policy.

17.4

A Short Term Disability insurance plan will be provided, which provides
compensation for lost time because of illness or injury. The plan will begin on the
ninth day for disability due to illness, and on the second day in the case of disability
due to injury. The maximum weekly coverage is one thousand dollars ($1000.00)
and the maximum duration of benefits is 26 weeks.

17.5

Employees shall be provided industry standard, commercially available Long Term
Disability insurance coverage designed to provide a wage continuation benefit
equal to 60% of basic monthly earnings to a maximum of $5,000; less other income
benefits, up to age sixty-five (65).

17.6

Employee deductions for health insurance premiums and other benefits deductions
will be made on a pre-tax basis as permitted under the provisions of a Section 125
Plan. The Town shall make available to employees Section 125 Plan Health Care
and Dependent Care Flexible Spending accounts.

25

17.7

The Town shall make a 457 Savings Plan available to employees of this unit.
Employees opting to participate may make payroll deducted contributions to the
Plan by designation of Earned Time (exclusive of minimum usage provisions)
and/or wages up to the allowable maximum.

17.7.1 For employees of the unit who commenced service, as defined by RSA 100-A, on
or after July 1, 2011, who have opted to participate in a 457 Savings Plan through
the Town, and who have not elected to receive loan reimbursement as outlined in
Article 17.8, the Town will, for all detail pay earned by such employee, contribute

employees who commenced service before July 1, 2011. Such contributions shall
shall be automatically void, and have no further force and effect without the need
for further bargaining, if RSA 100-A is amended in a manner that provides
-A, credit for detail-related compensation.
17.7.2 Except as outlined in Article 17.7.1, the Town will make no contributions to the
457 Plan.
17.8

For employees of the unit who commenced service, as defined by RSA 100-A, on
or after July 1, 2011, who submit documentation to Human Resources by June 30th
of each year demonstrating payments made towards student loans during the
applicable year, and who have not elected to receive a Town-funded 457 Savings
Plan contribution as outlined in Article 17.7.1, the Town will reimburse such
p II employees who commenced service
before July 1, 2011 for all detail pay earned by such employee during the applicable
year, up to the amount paid by the employee toward their student loans during the
applicable year. Such amount shall be paid on a post-tax basis within thirty (30)

outlined in Article 18.6. This subsection shall be automatically void, and have no
further force and effect without the need for further bargaining, if RSA 100-A is
amended in a manner that provides employees who commenced service on or after
-A, credit for
detail-related compensation.
XVIII. Outside Details
18.1.

Outside details are offered or denied at the discretion of the Chief of Police. Such
details may be withheld, for example,
regular duty assignments or extra duty assignments as offered by the department.

26

18.2.

Outside details are paid through the police department budget, but reimbursed by a
third party. Employees working outside detail will be paid the rate of one and onehalf times the hourly rate for a Senior Master Patrol Officer for a minimum of four
(4) hours, when assigned to such work.

18.3.

Outside details shall be subject to a minimum of four (4) hours pay for each detail
for private employers.

18.4.

Supervisors who are assigned to work an outside detail and are assigned to act in
the capacity of a supervisor shall be paid at a rate of one and one half times their
regular hourly rate of pay.

18.5

Outside details may be worked in communities that have a Mutual Aid Agreement
in effect with the Town of Derry and request same through the department. This
shall be in accordance with applicable rates and agreement as negotiated with the
Police Chief and Union.

18.6

Employees in the unit who commenced service, as defined by RSA 100-A, before
July 1, 2011 shall receive NHRS contributions related to their outside detail work,
as dictated by RSA 100-A. Employees in the unit who commenced service, as
defined by RSA 100-A, on or after July 1, 2011 can annually elect either to receive
a Town-funded 457 Savings Plan contribution, as outlined in Article 17.7.1, or
Town-funded Student Loan Reimbursement, as outlined in Article 17.8. Eligible
employees must submit their elections to Human Resources for the following
contract year by July 1st of each year. Once submitted, such elections shall be
irrevocable for the applicable contract year. This subsection shall be automatically
void, and have no further force and effect without the need for further bargaining,
if RSA 100-A is amended in a manner that provides employees who commenced
100-A, credit for detail-related compensation.

XIX. Miscellaneous
19.1.

The Parties recognize the responsibility of the Town to indemnify its employees
from claims against them arising from the performance of their duties. The Town
agrees to do so within the limits established by the Police Professional Liability
Insurance coverage provided by the Town pursuant to RSA 31:105, 106, 107 to
fulfill such responsibility.

19.2. To provide a clear understanding of the contents of the Agreement, the Town agrees
to provide sufficient copies of the Agreement to a union representative for
distribution to each member of the local.
19.3.

Members who submit to and successfully pass the entry level age- and genderspecific physical fitness standards as set forth by Police Standards and Training
27

Council (at least sixty days prior to the test date) for entry into the academy, shall
receive $500.00 per contract year for achieving the 35th percentile of standards or
$1,000 per contract year for achieving the 50th percentile of such standards. The
Town and the Union will meet and confer once per year to confirm the 50th
th

percentile standards. These stipends are non-cumulative.
19.3.1. The Department will provide an opportunity for physical fitness testing at least
twice in a calendar year. Notice of scheduled testing will be no less than thirty (30)
days prior to the test date. A reasonable number of bargaining unit members on
duty during any testing period shall be allowed time to participate in the test and
suffer no loss of pay. Bargaining unit members that are off duty shall be entitled to
pay for time actually spent testing.
19.4.

Uniforms and Clothing: Unit employees will be provided with uniforms as required
by the Town. Such uniforms shall be maintained, updated and replaced as may be
approved by the respective Division Commander. Employees on plain clothes
assignments shall also be reimbursed up to three hundred seventy five dollars
($375.00) per year to maintain their work attire. Clothing eligible for
reimbursement shall be business attire to be worn on duty and shall not include
under garments, socks, and leather gear. Purchases / reimbursements must be
approved by the Chief.

19.5.

Cleaning: Unit employees will have up to four (4) garments per week two hundred
eight (208) and two (2) outer garments per contract year cleaned at Town expense.

19.5.1 Garments shall mean those items of clothing that are required to be and are actually
worn on duty while conducting the business of the police department to include
uniforms, fatigues and appropriate business attire (required for court, training, etc.).
19.5.2
notation on the cleaning log sheet indicating what required department business the
11/18/03 special assignment (brief description), training 11/21/03, etc.
XX.

Stability of Agreement
20.1. This instrument constitutes the entire Agreement of the Town and the Union,
arrived at as a result of collective bargaining negotiations, except such amendments
hereto as shall have been reduced to writing and signed by the Parties.
20.2.

The Parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which resulted in this
Agreement, each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands with
respect to any subject or matter not removed by law from the areas of collective
bargaining, and that the understandings and agreements arrived at by the Parties
28

after the exercise of that right and the opportunity are set forth in this Agreement.
Therefore, the Town and the Union, for the life of this Agreement, each voluntarily
and unqualifiedly waives the right, and each agrees that the other shall not be
obligated to bargain collectively with respect to any subject or matter referred to or
covered by this Agreement, or with respect to any subject or matter not specifically
referred to or covered in this Agreement, even though such subjects or matters may
not have been within the knowledge or contemplation of either or both of the Parties
at the time that they negotiated or signed this Agreement.
20.3.

In the event any provision of this Agreement in whole or in part is declared to be
illegal, void, or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction or any administrative
agency having jurisdiction, all of the other terms, conditions, and provisions of this
agreement shall remain in full force and effect to the same extent as if that provision
had never been incorporated in this Agreement and in such event, the remainder of
this Agreement shall continue to be binding upon the Parties hereto.

20.4.

Waiver by either party of the others non-Performance or violation of any term or
condition of this Agreement shall not constitute a waiver of any other nonperformance or violation of that term or condition or of any other term or condition
of this Agreement, or of the same or other non-performance or violation in the
future.

20.5.

No amendment, alteration, or variation of the terms or provisions of the Agreement
shall bind the parties hereto unless made and executed in writing and agreed to by
both parties.

20.6.

In accordance with RSA 273-A:13, the Parties agree not to cause, condone, sanction
or participate in any strike, slowdown or other job action.

20.7. Since it is to the benefit of all that harmonious relations prevail in the police
department, the Chief of Police may request that the Steward make an effort to
resolve differences between or among unit employees in cases where disputes arise
which have major consequences for the performance of the employees or the
department.
XXI. Duration
This Agreement shall be in full force and effect from July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2029.
For the Town of Derry

For the Derry Police Supervisors

David R
Caron
_______________________________

Ryan J.
O'Rourke
_________________________________

David Caron, Town Administrator

Ryan

Digitally signed by Ryan J. O'Rourke
DN: cn=Ryan J. O'Rourke, c=US,
email=ryanorourke@derrynh.org
Reason: I have reviewed this
document
Date: 2024.03.10 01:27:50 -05'00'

Digitally signed by David R Caron
DN: cn=David R Caron, c=US, o=Town
of Derry, ou=Administration,
email=dcaron@derrynh.org
Reason: I am approving this document
Date: 2024.03.07 15:21:54 -05'00'

29

Appendix A-1 Revised Wage Scale

30

Appendix A-2 Placement of Employees, Effective 6/30/2024 and 7/1/2024

31
