BEFORE THE ARBITRATOR
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - :
In the Matter of the Arbitration
:
of a Dispute Between
:
: Case 9
WAUNAKEE SCHOOL DISTRICT
: No. 46802
: MA-7073
and
:
:
WAUNAKEE TEACHERS ASSOCIATION
:
:
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Appearances:
Ms. Alice O'Mahar, Director, Capital Area UniServ-North, 4800 Ivywood
Mr. Michael J. Westcott, Esq., Axley, Byrnelson, Attorneys at Law,
Two East
Mifflin Street, P.O. Box 1767, Madison, Wisconsin
537011767,
appeared on behalf of the District.
ARBITRATION AWARD
On January 3, 1992, the Waunakee School District and the Waunakee
Teachers Association filed an arbitration request with the Wisconsin Employment
Relations Commission, asking the Commission to appoint William C. Houlihan, a
member of its staff, to hear and decide a grievance pending between the
parties. A hearing was conducted on May 7, 1992 in Waunakee, Wisconsin. The
proceedings were not transcribed.
Post-hearing briefs were filed and were
exchanged by June 11, 1992.
This Award addresses the right of the School District to rotate middle
school bus duty in a way that avoids additional compensation to teachers
performing that task.
BACKGROUND AND FACTS:
The facts underlying this dispute are not meaningfully in question.
During the course of the hearing the parties entered into the following
stipulation: "For the last several years, teachers have been assigned afterschool bus supervision in lieu of a one-half study hall".
It appears that
since the early 1980's at least two middle school teachers have been given bus
duty supervision in lieu of a one-half study hall.
Given this method of
assignment bus duty has been tacitly if not overtly recognized as a supervisory
assignment. Bus supervision required the assigned teacher, on a daily basis,
to wait outside of the middle school from 3:20 p.m. until such time as the
buses depart. Typically, this is no later than 3:45 p.m., and most commonly is
earlier.
The purpose of the assignment is to maintain order among the
students.
During the negotiations leading to a 1991-93 collective bargaining
agreement, the parties changed the language applicable to this dispute.
The
changes were made during the spring of 1991 and are set forth below in their
entirety.
On or about August 15, 1991, middle school Principal Dick Hagen advised
his staff that bus supervision would be performed on a rotational basis during
the coming year. Hagen issued the following memo:
WAUNAKEE COMMUNITY MIDDLE SCHOOL
MEMO
TO:

Middle School Staff

FROM: Dick Hagen, Principal

Trail,

RE:

PM Bus Supervision for 1991-92

DATE: August 15, 1991
Bus supervision this year will be on a
rotational basis (just like hall supervision) with all
available teaching, administrative, and guidance staff
assigned. Two staff members will be assigned with the
following duties.
North end of South Street ... 3:23 P.M. until the first
4 buses leave:
Be at the North driveway entrance on South
Street supervising students waiting for buses
and students on bikes leaving school grounds.
Students waiting in line must be kept orderly
and behind the yellow lines until the bus comes
to a complete stop before loading.
Bikers must stop at the exit and wait
traffic and the buses as they are loading.

for

South end of Buses on South Street ... 3:23 P.M. until
the last bus leaves:
Supervise the waiting and loading of buses for
the last four bus lines. Keep students orderly
and behind the yellow lines until the bus comes
to a complete stop for loading.
As often as possible, I will be out at the buses
to supervise the loading.
Thank you for your help and assistance in this
supervisory assignment.
ATTACHED:

PM Bus Supervision Assignment Sheet (green)

The effect of the memorandum was to alter the system of bus supervision from
the prior system where two individuals did all of the supervision and received
a study hall offset, to one where all faculty members were required to rotate
through bus supervision, and none of them received an offset of any sort. The
rotation results in an individual teacher being required to perform the duty 10
or 11 times per year. Each teacher is required to attend to bus duty until the
last bus leaves. 1/
It is a fair summary of all testimony that the buses
rarely leave after 3:45 p.m. and that the duty typically takes somewhere
between five and 15 minutes dependent upon the promptness of the buses. It was
Hagen's testimony that he is available to cover for a teacher in the event that
teacher needs to absent him or herself for unforseen reasons.
Hagen's memo, and its concomitant change, prompted a response from David
Chalgren, the Association's grievance committee representative. Mr. Chalgren's
memo is set forth in its entirety:
Aug. 30, 1991
1/

The contractual work day ends at 3:45 p.m.

-2-

To:

Mr. Hagen

From: David
Chalgren,
representative.

grievance

committee

Dick, as you can see I've added a new responsibility
this year by serving on the grievance committee.
In
regards to this position I will be looking at a
possible grievance concerning the scheduling of bus
duty.
Many of my colleagues have expressed frustration and
concern with this added duty. Much of the discussion
has centered around the fact that this has always been
a paid duty and in the past several of us have assumed
this duty in lieu of other class room assignments.
Another aspect of this duty is that it will cut into
our teaching obligations like:
meeting with students
after school, committee meetings, prep time, and many
other emergency student needs that should be dealt will
(sic) immediately after school.
The very fact that bus duty might even extend our day
over contractual agreement, ie. buses that arrive after
3:45, has many teachers upset.
Our Middle School teachers have always responded to
administrative requests in the past, like taking
detention duty, but, we feel we are being put into a
difficult situation with this new duty.
If we
complain, it sounds like we don't care, and yet it
(sic) we simply accept this duty we are vulnerable for
other duties that may pop-up resulting in even less
prep time.
I would like this meeting to be on an informal basis
for
discussion
purposes
only
and
give
you
an
opportunity to respond to these concerns.
Could you please set a date at your convenience.
would prefer to meet after school.

I

Thanks for your concern in this matter.
Sincerely,
David Chalgren
The matter was not resolved and the Association proceeded to file a grievance.
Hagen investigated the Association grievance and provided the following
Step 2 response:
TO:

David Chalgren
David Lucey
-3-

FROM: Richard Hagen, Middle School Principal
DATE: Oct. 7, 1991
RE:

Grievance No. 91-1 - Bus Duty

After further investigation, this is my written
reply to your grievance submitted to me, in writing, on
September 30, 1991.
This is to indicate that this
grievance is being denied at level 2 for the reasons
indicated below. These are as follows:
1.

Bus duty is a 5 to 15 minute duty that is
comparable to morning hall duty and should not
be linked with a regularly scheduled and
assigned 45 minute study hall or a 35 minute
lunch supervision.
As such bus duty at the
middle school only occurs once every 17 school
days or ten or eleven times a year for each
staff member on the rotational schedule.

2.

Page 26, article A, section 2 groups (study hall
or supervision) together with commas and does
not indicate all the other administrative or
non-teaching activities.
This indicates to me
that the supervision, for work load purposes,
should be comparable. A rotational bus duty or
an occasional morning hall duty should not be
linked with study hall in this instance.
I
don't believe that this was the intention of
those parties that agreed to this wording by
intentionally linking supervision with study
hall and their use of commas.

3.

Bus duty is not considered a supervisory
assignment as part of the normal teaching load
in the district.
At the elementary center
teachers are assigned after school duties of
crossing guard, bike duty and the loading of
buses without regard to work load.
Summer
school teachers of all grade levels share this
duty during the summer school without additional
compensation.
In the past, guidance counselors
and administrators have been assigned this duty
at the middle school and the high school.
It
has not always been a paid position.

4.

Page 3, article C - Management Rights - number 5
indicates the management right "to determine
class schedules, hours of instruction and the
duties and responsibilities and assignments of
teachers and other employees with respect there
to, and with respect to administrative and nonteaching activities and the terms and conditions
of employment." This gives management the right
to assign morning hall supervision and bus
supervision as duties within the contracted
school day.

5.

The bus duty supervision is within the 7:45 a.m.
-4-

to 3:45 p.m. grade 6-12 teachers' school day
described on page 27, article B, section 2.
Distribution:

Building Principal's Grievance File
Grievants
District Administrator

The denial was appealed to the Superintendent of Schools, Eugene J.
Hamele.
Mr. Hamele considered the grievance and denied it.
His denial
included the following explanation:
Bus duty, hallway duty, and/or playground duty are
duties which have been assigned to staff in this
district on a rotating basis as a practice for many
years.
They have not been and are not defined or
considered "a supervisory duty" in the language of
Article A, Section 2 on Page 26.
They are simply
shared responsibilities that are rotated regularly
among staff.
"Supervisory duties" in Article A, Section 2 includes
study hall, permanent (semester or year long) lunch
supervision duty or other duty in lieu of a study hall
or a teaching assignment and would be for a period of
time similar to a regular class period.
Therefore, your grievance is denied.
The Association grievance committee was not satisfied with Mr. Hamele's
response. That committee submitted the following letter to the Waunakee Board
of Education, in an attempt to explain their objection to the new method of bus
duty:
Nov. 11, 1991
To:

Board of Education

From: Grievance committee, David Lucey, John Webber,
Don Jarvis, Bill Blobner, Randy Enge, Lori Meyer, David
Chalgren, representative
Re:

Bus duty grievance 91-1

Middle school teachers have expressed frustration and
concern this year because of the added duty of bus
supervision.
After many complaints were raised, and
after a meeting with Mr. Hagen did not produce a
satisfying solution, the grievance committee decided to
file a grievance on behalf of middle school teachers.
We believe that bus supervision violates the 1991-93
Educational Agreement under Article A, sections 2, and
5 page 26 and Article B, Section 2, page 27.
The grievance centers around 3 issues:
1.
In the past, two to three middle school staff
members have accepted bus supervision in lieu of a
study hall or a classroom assignment. I have included
three letters testifying to that condition from Pete
-5-

O'Neil, Randy Enge, and Bill Blobner.
The 89-90 Middle school schedule also support this
fact. It shows:
Bill Blobner with 5 classes, a T.A., and bus
supervision.
Pete O'Neil with 5 classes, a T.A., and bus
supervision.
(normal load is 5 and 1/2 classes, plus a T.A.
The 85-86 Middle School schedule shows:
Randy Enge with 5 classes, a T.A. and
supervision
Pete O'Neil with 5 classes, a T.A. and
supervision.

P.M.

Bus

P.M.

Bus

2.
Bus supervision can extend beyond the normal
working day, ie., past 3:45 pm. It is unreasonable to
suppose that the bus supervisory will simply "go off
duty" at this time or find an administrator to act as a
replacement.
This duty after school interferes with
other teaching responsibilities like preparation time,
committee meetings and working on immediate student
needs.
3.
A genuine concern for student's
expressed by many staff members based
conditions:

safety was
on several

The inconsistency of staff members to determine proper
safety precautions and procedures.
Even now, after
written instructions have been received, inconsistency
remains a concern.
Some staff members are not able to leave their classes
promptly at 3:21 to get to the bus lines. Some staff
members
have
completely
forgotten
about
their
assignment because they became involved in student
matters that needed immediate attention.
Our solution/remedy to this grievance is as follows:
1.
No Middle School staff member with a full load
be assigned bus supervision.
2.
Next year we return to the past practice of
assigning bus supervision in lieu of study hall or
another class.
Thank-you for your attention in this matter.
Sincerely,

David Chalgren, grievance committee representative
The grievance was denied by the Board, ultimately leading to this arbitration.
Middle school teachers have other rotational assignments.
-6-

There is a

morning hall supervision rotated among faculty members.
That supervision,
conducted from 8 to 8:20 a.m. each morning is assigned each teacher at the
middle school approximately 7 or 8 times per year. The practice of assigning
teachers in this fashion is long-standing, and has never been the subject of a
grievance.
Additionally, detention supervision is assigned members of the
middle school faculty on a rotational basis. Such detention occurs from 3:20
to 4:00 (running as late as 4:10 p.m.) once per week. Each teacher is assigned
such supervisory responsibility a few times per year. This task was formerly a
compensated task but sometime in the early 1980's compensation was withdrawn
and teachers were placed in non-pay status while performing the work.
David Lucey, a member of the bargaining unit who participated on the
negotiations team and was twice the chief negotiator for the Association,
provided some background on the history of the detention supervision.
According to Mr. Lucey, detention supervision was paid at one time.
For a
number of years a man by the name of O'Neil was paid to perform such duty.
There arose what Lucey describes as a financial crunch, and the Principal was
advised that he was to save money. One method by which the Principal intended
to save money was to cease paying for detention supervision.
Teachers were
told that they would handle detentions in their own room and that central
detention would be eliminated.
The staff protested the move.
According to
Lucey it was the universal belief of the faculty that the children are kept
under much better control in a central after-school setting than in an
individual room setting. In an effort to maintain the centralized after-school
detention teachers volunteered to do it at no charge rather than have it done
in their rooms. It was made clear to the District that their willingness to do
this would last only until the budget was restored.
Time passed, and the
budget was never restored.
Staff continued to perform the work without
additional compensation for approximately a decade. According to Mr. Lucey the
staff decision to perform the work was one made in the best interest of the
system. Individuals knew they were performing work they were not required to
do and never grieved.
Lucey indicated it may have been a mistake not to
grieve.
ISSUE:
The parties stipulated to the following issue:
Did the District violate Part V, Article A(2) (page 26)
of the collective bargaining agreement by assigning
after-school bus supervision on an uncompensated
rotating basis among all available middle-school staff,
when it formerly assigned such duty to two (2)
individuals on an on-going basis, each of whom
performed the work in lieu of a one-half (1/2) study
hall?
RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE 1989-1991 AGREEMENT:
. . .
J.

Normal Teaching Load:
1)

A normal elementary (K-5) teaching load
(per day) shall consist of 360 minutes of
instructional teaching averaged per week,
plus a duty free lunch period of 30
minutes and 30 minutes of preparation time
per teaching day averaged per week.
Maximum
class
load
per
teacher
is
-7-

2)

according to Board Policy IEC - Class
Size.
A normal middle school (6-8) teaching load
shall be based on an 8 period day and
shall
consist
of
5.0
classes
of
instruction, one preparation period, one
teacher/advisor group and .5 study hall.
If a teacher so accepts having 6 classes
of instruction the entire school year and
a preparation period, they shall be
compensated 8.15% of their base salary
upon completion of the semester assignment
with payment on or by 6/15/87.
The
principal
shall
be
responsible
for
scheduling and assigning classes.
The following departments are excluded in
6-8 normal teaching load:
Guidance and
Counseling and Library Services.
. . .

RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE 1991-1993 AGREEMENT:
Part XIV, Article A, Section 1.
. . .
5.

Decision of the Arbitrator: The decision of the
arbitrator shall be limited to the subject
matter of the grievance and shall be restricted
solely on interpretation of the contract in the
area where the alleged breach occurred.
Any
modification and addition to or deletion from
the strict terms of this Agreement by the
arbitrator
shall
be
considered
a
per
se
violation of Sec. 298.10 of Wis. Stats.
. . .

Part III, Grievance Procedure, Article F
. . .
2.

A normal middle school (6-8) teaching load shall
be six class periods to include classroom
instruction, study hall or supervision, or
teacher-advisor class.
There shall be no less
than eight periods in the normal day.
If a
teacher
so
accepts
having
an
additional
assignment in a semester, he/she shall be
compensated 8.15% of his/her base salary upon
completion of the semester assignment with
payment on or by 6/15.
The principal shall be
responsible
for
scheduling
and
assigning
classes.
Study hall ratio of students to
teacher is not to exceed 50 to 1.
Teacheradvisor classes must average 20 students or less
per section.
-8-

. . .
4.

The following departments are excluded in the
normal teaching load outlined above:
library
services, guidance and counseling, and teachers
of exceptional needs students.

5.

In order to facilitate flexibility in scheduling
classes,
teachers
may
accept
teaching
assignments outside of the normal workday or
structure in lieu of the normal assignment, or
for additional compensation at the per diem
hourly rate, as agreed upon by the Board and
individual teachers. The WTA will be consulted
on such agreements.
. . .

Article B - Workday
1.

K-5 Teachers' school day will be 7:30 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.
Teachers may leave at 3:15 p.m. on
Fridays and days preceding a holiday.

2.

6-12 Teachers' school day will be 7:45 a.m. to
3:45 p.m. or those teaching "zero hour" will be
7:15 a.m. to 3:15 p.m.
Teachers may leave at
3:30 p.m. or 3:00 p.m. on Fridays and days
preceding a holiday.
. . .

PART XIV - EDUCATIONAL AGREEMENT
Article A - Entire Memorandum of Agreement
1.

This
Agreement
supersedes
and
cancels
all
previous agreements, verbal or written or based
on alleged past practices, between the School
District and the Association and constitutes the
entire agreement between the parties.
Any
amendment or agreement supplemental hereto shall
not be binding upon either party unless executed
in writing by the parties hereto.

2.

The parties further acknowledge that during the
negotiations which resulted in this Agreement
each had the unlimited right and opportunity to
make demands and proposals with respect to any
subject or matter not removed by law from the
are (sic) of collective bargaining and that the
understandings and agreements arrived at by the
parties after the exercise of that right and
opportunity are set forth in this agreement.
Waiver of any breach of this agreement by either
party shall not constitute a waiver of any
future breach of this Agreement.

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES:
-9-

The Association contends that Article A(2) defines the workload.
Bus
duty is an assignment, and as such teachers have the option to decline. Here,
teachers were directed to perform the work, they did so, and filed a grievance.
Their redress is available in the 8.15% overload pay which should be paid
and/or prorated as is appropriate.
The Association contends that the
District's view that only certain types of assignments qualify invites
mischief.
For instance, lunch duty could become rotational and unpaid under
the District theory. According to the Association, the District would be free
to rotate certain class assignments and therefore avoid paying.
The
Association contends that neither of these potential outcomes nor the bus
assignment rotation promulgated by the District were anticipated by the parties
during their negotiations.
The Association contends that the history of the clause supports its
position.
Prior to adding "or supervision" to the workload language the
practice was that bus duty was considered a part of workload in lieu of study
hall.
During negotiations leading to the change in language, bus duty was
never discussed.
With the change, the District assured the Association
negotiators that no change was contemplated. The Association offered evidence
that the parties had an exchange at the bargaining table that resulted in
District assurances that no change in interpretation was intended by the change
in the clause.
The Association contends that this arbitrator is not free to disregard
the practice in favor of the zipper clause.
The District referred to and
relied upon the practice throughout the processing of the grievance and is not
free now to raise the zipper clause as a shield. Both parties have relied upon
the practice, and the District is not free to repudiate it. The Association
believes the history of the use of the duty supports its position. It regards
after-school detention as an exception, one which was well-meaning and should
not now come back to haunt the Association.
The District points to the entire memorandum of agreement provision and
describes it as a common clause with a clear purpose. That purpose, argues the
District is to wipe out prior practices. The District notes that practices in
preceding years are of little probative value anyway since they occurred under
different contract language.
The current contract added the words
"supervision" and "additional assignment". Those terms change the substantive
meaning of the provision to which they were added. The existing language has
been in effect for approximately 9 months.
During that term, all rotational
assignments have been uncompensated (i.e. hall and detention). To the extent
this arbitrator is inclined to look at any interpretative practice, the
appropriate practice, argues the District is the nine-month term of the
agreement in which the language under consideration has been interpreted.
Neither the hall supervision nor the detention supervision have ever been
grieved.
Even a consideration of the practice leads to a conclusion that there has
been no violation of the collective bargaining agreement. Hall supervision has
existed and has historically been unpaid. Detention was at one point paid and
then pay was removed.
The District argues that even the previous agreement,
the 1989 through 1991 agreement, would not have been violated by its actions in
this regard.
That agreement only provided for additional compensation where
the teacher took on an additional class of instruction. That is not the case
here and would not warrant additional compensation even under the prior
agreement. In the District's view, a teaching load is not the equivalent of
working load.
It is the District's view that teachers are paid to work from 7:45 a.m.
to 3:45 p.m. The work in question is already paid for.
-10-

The District contends that it is not the job of this arbitrator to decide
what is right or equitable, but rather to interpret the contract so as to
determine whether or not there has been a breach. In this case, there has been
no breach argues the District.
The District contends that Article A, Section 2 is straightforward.
Normal teaching load is 6 class (emphasis by the District) periods.
Class
periods are then defined.
The only reasonable construction is that an
assignment must be akin to the defined class periods. That language cannot be
construed as the Union would, especially in the face of morning hall
supervision and detention. Teachers are entitled to 8.15% only upon completion
of a semester assignment.
This language reflects the value of an additional
class period for an entire semester. Rotating bus duty does not begin to rise
to that level of commitment.
DISCUSSION:
Among the changes negotiated into the 1991-93 collective bargaining
agreement include a provision in Article F, paragraph 2 providing that "study
hall ratio of students to teachers is not to exceed 50 to 1." According to the
testimony of Principal Hagen, this provision caused the District to seek out
additional study hall teachers.
In an effort to honor this provision with
existing resources, the District determined to rotate bus supervision and
eliminate the exemption for study hall, thus creating more study hall teachers.
There is little dispute that prior to 1991 bus duty was treated as a
supervision. There is also little dispute, or there can be little dispute that
effective with the 1991-92 school year, rotated bus duty was not treated as a
supervision.
The question presented here is whether or not the District had
the contractual ability to rotate bus duty and eliminate it as a supervision.
Article F, paragraph 2 does not, on its face, preclude the District from
rotating bus duty.
I agree with the Union's contention that the first two
sentences define the workload of employes covered by the Agreement.
That
workload, according to the first sentence "includes classroom instruction,
study hall, supervision, teacher/advisor class". Read together, the first and
second sentences assure teachers that the day will have no fewer than eight
periods, no more than six of which will be assigned to perform the included
work.
On its face, the clause appears to me to outline the basic workload
performed by members of the bargaining unit.
As such, the references in
Article F(2) to assignments and supervisions can only make sense where they
refer to ongoing, daily periods as that term is used in the Article.
It is
difficult to read these words to include a ten to 20-minute assignment
performed a dozen or so times a year. This construction is confirmed by the
third sentence which provides additional compensation for "an additional
assignment in a semester". If "additional assignment in a semester" refers to
episodic and brief work assignments, the 8.15% of base is indeed generous
compensation. On the other hand, if the "additional assignment in a semester"
language refers to daily class periods, the 8.15% is perfectly logical as a
percentage of the salary normally earned by the teacher. There is nothing in
this clause that addresses pro rata compensation.
The Union is concerned that should the Board's construction of
Article F(2) be sustained, it provides an opening for mischief. This mischief
is described as the possibility of the District including lunchroom supervision
as a rotating assignment and possibly even including classroom instruction on a
rotating, unpaid basis. Those are matters not before me, and I would offer no
speculation as to what the Board might do should it prevail in this matter. I
would only note, that the reverse is equally true.
Should the Association
prevail in this matter, there appears to be no end to mischief that it or its
-11-

members might bring by claiming compensation for any and all ministerial tasks
surrounding and a part of, the workday. I would also point out that Hagen's
October 7 grievance draws a distinction between the relatively brief bus duty
periods and the lengthier study hall and lunch supervisions.
The District contends that part 14, Article A, Entire Memorandum of
Agreement, precludes consideration of whatever practice may have existed
between the parties.
I agree.
The "zipper" clause specifically "supercedes
and cancels all previous agreements, verbal or written, or based on alleged
past practices. . ." The parties have specifically agreed to cancel all past
practices. They could not have done so more clearly. I am not free to ignore
this provision of the Agreement.
The Union has in essence argued that the
District has waived its right to invoke the "zipper clause".
The Union
contends that an examination of the practice and the history of the parties
with respect to their grievances precludes the District from raising the
"zipper". The Union notes that the answers to the grievance comment upon the
practice between the parties.
According to the Association, the "zipper
clause" is void and/or unenforceable. I disagree. The "zipper clause" is a
part of the collective bargaining agreement itself.
The Union points to
collateral documents (i.e., bargaining history, the grievance procedure
answers, and the actions of the parties in conducting their business) as
forming the basis to remove the contractual provision.
Ironically, the
contractual provision is one which has as its fundamental purpose, the
elimination of all of these extra contractual measures from arbitral
consideration. That is, the purpose of the "zipper clause" is to preclude my
examination of the grievance history, the past practice of the parties, and
other matters which led to the formation of this agreement.
The Union has urged an examination of the parties' practice and of their
bargaining table conduct relative to interpreting the language.
As noted, I
regard the "zipper clause" as precluding meaningful examination of either the
practice or the bargaining history. The District has encouraged an examination
of the practice in such a way that excludes prior years and includes the
current year.
Changed language notwithstanding, I don't believe such a
distinction is appropriately drawn.
It appears to me that for whatever the
reason, hall supervision and detention have been performed by bargaining unit
members on an unpaid basis for a considerable period of time. The District has
treated bus duty differently.
However, I see no meaningful distinction,
contractual or otherwise, between hall supervision, bus duty and detention. If
anything, detention could be singled out on the basis that it exceeds the
normally-scheduled workday. From all the testimony it appears to me that bus
duty rarely, if ever, extends beyond 3:45, the end of the workday for Middle
School teachers.
In summary, it is my reading of the collective bargaining agreement that
it does not specifically bar the rotation of bus duty. The "zipper clause" in
my view meaningfully excludes consideration of extra-contractual practices and
bargaining table conduct. Should the practice as I understand it to exist be
considered, in my view it would tend to lend more support to the District's
construction of the language than it would to that of the Association.
AWARD
The grievance is denied.
Dated at Madison, Wisconsin this 10th day of September, 1992.
By

William C. Houlihan /s/
William C. Houlihan, Arbitrator
-12-

gjc
G9051G.18

-13-
