Request for Proposal
Compensation Study

The City of Villa Rica, Georgia, (“City”) is requesting proposals for consulting services to conduct a Citywide Compensation Study as described herein.
Goals and Objectives: The purpose of the Compensation Study is to address changes in City staffing over
the past years, which may have affected the level of compensation and work being performed.
City of Villa Rica Profile:
Is a city in Carroll and Douglas counties in the U.S. state of Georgia, located roughly 30 miles west of
Atlanta. The city has a residential population estimated at 16,058 in 2019. The city operates under a
council-manager form of government with an appointed City Administrator and an elected Mayor. The
City is divided into five wards with one councilperson elected from each ward to serve stagged four-year
terms.
The city has within its structure, six functional departments, which are: Administration, Community
Development & Building Maintenance, Economic Development, Public Safety, Public Works, and
Recreation. The City Administrator serves as the Chief Executive Officer with department heads
reporting to the City Administrator or the Deputy City Administrator. The city currently has 183
employees of which 163 are full-time, FY 2023 total adopted budget of $7,717,449 which includes a 5%
Cost of Living Increase for all employees.
The city has 123 unique positions currently organized within a salary structure with 33 salary ranges.
The current system was created in 2018 when the last salary study was completed.
The City’s Objectives:
1. Attract and retain qualified employees.
2. Ensure positions performing similar work with essentially the same level of complexity,
responsibility, and knowledge, skills, and abilities are classified together.
3. Provide salaries commensurate with assigned duties.
4. Clearly outline promotional opportunities and provide recognizable compensation growth.
5. Maintain a competitive position with other comparable government entities and private
employers within the same geographic areas.
6. Ensure current job descriptions, responsibilities are current and in line with the needs of the
Organization.
All work will be done with regular involvement of the City Manager, Deputy City Manager, the Finance
Director, and the Human Resource Director. Department Heads and other key personnel will be involved
as necessary. Regular presentations and meetings with these individuals or groups, incorporating their
1

input into the process, are expected. Presentation to the City Council upon completion of the project is
also expected.
The study shall evaluate the present salary structure as compared to the specific job market for
comparable positions in the public sector. The consultant shall perform or provide the following:
Scope of Services:
1. Conduct a comprehensive benchmark market analysis of all City positions with comparable and
surrounding (regional) jurisdictions, institutions of higher education, and applicable
private/public sector competitors.
2. Identify potential pay compression issues and provide potential solutions.
3. Review existing position descriptions to ensure current and accurate Fair Labor Standards Act
(FLSA) exemption status, essential functions, minimum qualifications for education and
experience, required knowledge, skills, and abilities, special requirements, and physical and
environmental conditions; Update the descriptions as needed.
4. Gain an understanding of the City’s existing classification, grouped positions and compensation
structure and revise where needed.
5. Review all background materials including, but not limited to, existing salary scale,
organizational charts, classification specifications, etc.
6. Perform a pay compression analysis of all City positions.
Informational Meetings:
1. Consultant to schedule an initial meeting with City Manager, Deputy City Manager, Finance
Director, and Human Resources Director to discuss the process and tasks to be performed in the
study to include reasonable dedication of key personnel.
2. Consultant to meet with department heads to explain study and process to be used.
3. Consultant to provide frequent updates to Human Resources Director, point of contact.

Compensation Study:
1. Consultant to review current compensation plan (salary grade levels and steps) and understand
current challenges in recruiting and retaining employees.
2. Consultant to recommend and identify a consistent and competitive market position that the
city can strive to maintain.
3. Consultant to recommend comparable labor markets, including both private and public-sector
employers for compensation survey.
4. Consultant to develop and conduct a comprehensive compensation and benefits survey.
5. Consultant to recommend appropriate salary range for each position based on the classification
plan, the compensation survey results, and the internal relationships and equality. Prepare a
new salary structure based on the results of the survey and best practices.
6. Consultant to develop guidelines to assist City staff with determining the starting pay for new
employees based on knowledge and experience above the minimum requirements of the
position, how difficult the position is to fill, and market competitiveness.

2

7. Consultant to identify any extreme current individual or group compensation inequities and to
provide a recommended corrective action plan and process to remedy these situations.
8. Consultant to make recommendations and to provide implementation strategies related to
other key compensation practices, based on market demands, including pay for performance,
skill pay, special assignment pay, certification pay, bilingual pay, promotional pay, and acting
assignment pay.
9. Consultant to provide system documentation and computer formats/software to administer
compensation plan.
10. Consultant to provide recommendations for the ongoing internal administration and
maintenance of the proposed compensation plan. Maintenance should include annual activities
such as market survey.
11. The city will provide copies of all pay ranges, job classifications, and any other available in-house
information requested by the selected consultant that may be required to complete the study.
Proposal Format and Requirements:
The offeror shall submit one original (conspicuously marked “ORIGINAL”), five complete copies, and one
CD or memory stick of their written proposal that presents their qualifications and understanding of the
work to be performed. Include all information requested, organized in tabbed sections clearly identified
in a table of contents as described in the paragraphs that follow. Any other information thought to be
relevant, but not applicable to the enumerated categories, may be provided as a separate appendix to
the proposal. The following information/documents shall be included in the proposal package to be
considered responsive to the Request for Proposals:
A. Agents and Address
Identify who will be the project manager and key staff assigned if awarded. Provide resumes
summarizing the qualifications and experience of the individuals who will be conducting the
study. Include specific information on the staff’s experience with public sector compensation
including public safety. Describe successful outcomes, list the address, e-mail address, and
telephone number of the office from which the services are to be provided. Promotional
literature and other public relations documents should NOT be included.
B. Statement of Methods and Procedures
Provide a statement describing the scope of work as you understand it. Describe the approach,
means, methods, and procedures to be used to gather the data, analyze findings, and develop
recommendations as requested. Provide a sample of reports and/or other correspondence.
C. Management Synopsis
Provide a synopsis prepared for management review, covering the significant features of the
proposal including overall costs and term of work.
D. Structure and Content of Work Product
Provide a detailed breakdown and description of the specific steps, services, and study products
that will be provided. Describe how the final product will be structured and presented upon
completion. Include any computer/software compatibility information. Firms may elect to
include in the section any innovative methods or concepts that might be beneficial to the City of
Villa Rica as long as the minimum requirements set out in this RFP are met.
E. Work Schedule
3

F.

G.

H.

I.
1.

2.

Provide a timeline indicating tasks required and the start and completion dates for each. It is
expected that the work will commence as soon as possible after the contract is awarded.
References
Include the name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address for contact persons at three
(3) other public entities for which comparable services have recently been rendered. Please
provide a short summary of the project with each reference.
Cost of Services
Total fee with cost breakdown, including hourly rates. Estimate the total hours or work need
based off the scope of services. Standard payment schedule.
Final Product
a. Provide a statement that the proposer agrees to:
1. Deliver at least one (1) original, five (5) copies, and a flash drive of the final
report to the City Manager
2. Provide the final report, tables, schedules, charts, spreadsheets, salary
surveys, and other materials necessary for the implementation and
maintenance of the compensation/classification system in an electronic
medium (flash drive); and
3. Appear at a scheduled Council meeting to discuss the recommendations and
final report.
4. Additional Services (Optional)
b. Provide any other related and recommended products or service not specified in the
RFP which may be considered essential or beneficial by the firm. These services should
be priced separately from “G” above and shown here.
Other
The complete (all pages) Request for Proposal documents with any addenda acknowledgements
filled out, initialed, and signed as required. The person that signs the RFP shall have the
authority to negotiate the full scope of services on behalf of the organization and shall be
authorized to bind the contract to the terms and conditions of this RFP.
The classification and compensation system to be recommended as responses to this RFP must
adhere to the following basic elements and characteristics: (a) the system must meet all legal
requirements, (b) be totally nondiscriminatory and provide for compliance with all pertinent
federal, state, and local requirements (e.g., ADA, FLSA, EEO, etc.).
i. The system must be easy for management to administer, maintain, and defend.
ii. The system must easily accommodate organizational changes and growth.
iii. The system should be based on sound compensation principles in which internal
and external equity are considered within the pay structure, as well as the
concepts of equal pay for equal work, equal pay for similar work, and equal pay
for comparable work.
iv. The system should provide for new positions to be incorporated into the
compensation plan, as well as regular adjustments to maintain the plan’s
competitiveness.
v. The system should be compatible with current City of Villa Rica payroll
programs/software.

4

vi. The city requests that all information submitted by the successful consulting
firm be in electronic format (Word, Excel) on CD, flash drive, and in hard copy.
The city further requests the complete use of the material developed for the
ability to update or change it as needed. All work provided by the consultant
under contract with the City of Villa Rica shall belong exclusively to the City.
Cost Proposal
This request for information does not, under any circumstance, commit the City to pay any costs
incurred by any proposer in the submission of qualifications. The proposer is responsible for all costs
associated with response to this request.
General Information is on the city’s website-www.villarica.org. The City of Villa Rica’s current budget can
be found on the city’s website.
Addenda
It is the proposer’s responsibility to check the website for any addenda. Go to www.villarica.org.
Criteria and Selection
After city staff has reviewed the proposals, final selection will be determined. The successful contractor
will be required to enter into an agreement for professional services with the City of Villa Rica.
All proposals must be delivered to the city no later than February 23, 2023. Proposals must be
delivered to the City of Villa Rica, Attn.: Lena Taylor, HR Director. 571 West Bankhead Highway. Villa
Rica, GA 30180. Proposers will be responsible for delivery of their proposals to the City before the
deadline. Any proposal received after the deadline will not be considered.
The City of Villa Rica reserves the right to reject any or all proposals at any time with no penalty and to
waive immaterial defects and minor irregularities in proposals.
The evaluation of proposals will be done by City personnel who will then forward a recommendation to
the City Council for consideration. Fee proposals, which are to be submitted with the qualification
proposal will also be taken into consideration. The duration of this consultant agreement has not been
determined. The City of Villa Rica does not discriminate on the basis of race, creed, color, ethnicity,
national origin, sex, age or marital status.
Any proposals received are the property of City of Villa Rica.
Any questions should be submitted via email to Lena Taylor, HR Director, ltaylor@villarica.gov.

5
