05/20/2021
2607-02
21-MED-03-0443
40327
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE
UPPER SANDUSKY SUPPORT STAFF
OEA/NEA
AND THE
UPPER SANDUSKY
EXEMPTED VILLAGE SCHOOL DISTRICT
BOARD OF EDUCATION

JULY 1, 2021 through JUNE 30, 2024

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preamble

1

Article I

Recognition

1

Article II

Association Rights

2

Article III

Board Rights

3

Article IV

Negotiations Procedure

3

Article V

Employment Contracts

4

Article VI

Grievance Procedure

5

Article VII

Leaves

8

Article VIII

Insurance Fringe Benefits

13

Article IX

Compensation

16

Article X

Layoff and Recall

22

Article XI

Job Vacancies

23

Article XII

Bus Route and Trip Assignments

24

Article XIII

Discipline Procedure

27

Article XIV

Labor-Management Conferences

28

Article XV

Medical Examinations

28

Article XVI

Smoke-Free Work Environment

28

Article XVII

Personnel Files

28

Article XVIII

Occupational Safety and Health

29

Article XIX

Reproduction of Agreement

30

Article XX

Evaluations

31

Article XXI

Professional Development

31

i

Article XXII

Entire Agreement/Severability

31

Article XXIII

Duration

32

Appendix A – Grievance Form
Appendix B – Wage Rates
Appendix C – Evaluation
Appendix D – Insurance Benefit

33
35
42
44

ii

PREAMBLE

This collective bargaining agreement ("Agreement") is entered into by and between the Upper
Sandusky Support Staff, an affiliate of the Ohio Education Association and the National Education
Association ("Association") and the Board of Education of the Upper Sandusky Exempted Village
School District ("Board").
ARTICLE I
RECOGNITION

A. Consistent with the certification of election results by the State Employment Relations Board in
Case No. 92-REP-05-0104, the Board recognizes the Association as the sole and exclusive
representative for the purpose of collective bargaining as defined in Chapter 4117 of the Ohio
Revised Code, for the bargaining unit described in Section B of this Article.
B. The bargaining unit shall include all full-time and regularly employed part-time Custodians, Bus
Drivers, Secretaries, Educational Assistants, Mechanics, Maintenance Employees, Food Service
Employees, Delivery Drivers, and Clerks, but excluding all Management-Level, Supervisory,
Confidential, Substitute, Seasonal, and Casual Employees (among those excluded are the
Superintendent, Treasurer, Assistant Treasurer, Superintendent's Secretary, Treasurer's Secretary,
Buildings and Grounds Supervisor, Transportation Supervisor, Food Service Supervisor, and
employees in other bargaining units).
C. For purposes of this Agreement, a “full-time” bargaining unit employee is an employee regularly
assigned to a bargaining unit job classification whose normal work schedule consists of at least one
hundred eighty (180) work days per school year (July 1 through June 30) with each day consisting
of at least the following number of scheduled hours:
Custodian - 8 hours
Maintenance - 8 hours
Mechanic - 8 hours
High School Secretary (Status 1) - 8 hours
Other Secretaries (Status 2) – 7.5 hours
Food Service Classifications - 7 hours
Educational Assistant - 6.5 – 7 hours (pending assignment)
*Bus Driver/Delivery Classifications - 6 hours
*Employees with 4 hour shifts and with 10 years of service to the district now qualify for
health insurance
D. All bargaining unit employees are entitled to all rights and benefits of this Agreement unless
otherwise specified.

1

ARTICLE II

ASSOCIATION RIGHTS
A.

An Association representative may transact official Association business relevant to the
bargaining unit on school property as long as such activity does not interfere with the work
schedule of any bargaining unit employee. The representative must report his/her presence in
advance to the office. The use of a room within a building shall be cleared in advance with the
principal. The Association will be charged for any special custodial services that may be required.

B.

Any use of school equipment by the Association must be cleared in advance with the
Superintendent. The Association will be charged for the cost of any supplies used and, depending
on the amount of use, may be charged a reasonable fee for maintenance.

C.

The Association may install a bulletin board in each building for the posting of materials of
Association concern. The location and size of the bulletin board shall be agreed to by both parties.
The Association shall also have the privilege of using employee mailboxes and the internal mail
system of the school for communications to employees.

D.

The Association President will be notified of the time and place and furnished a copy of the
agenda of each non-emergency Board meeting. The agenda will be dispatched to the Association
President at the same time it is dispatched to Board members. The Association President will be
furnished a copy of the approved minutes of a Board meeting upon request.

E.

The Association President will be furnished all financial and other relevant information, and any
public records, within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of a request for such information.

F.

The Association President shall receive at least thirty (30) calendar days advance written notice of
any subcontracting or privatization of work currently performed by bargaining unit employees.
Prior to any official Board action to implement such subcontracting or privatization, the
Association will be afforded an opportunity to have input with respect to such action. For this
purpose, “subcontracting or privatization” means the transfer of work from the bargaining unit to
another source that causes the permanent elimination of a bargaining unit job classification(s) or
the permanent elimination of employees holding positions within a bargaining unit job
classification(s). This provision is not intended to preclude subcontracting or privatization that
does not have such an effect(s).

G.

Secretarial or paraprofessional staff shall not be responsible for overseeing students detained in the
office without proper supervision in the area without consent before and/or after school.

H.

One (1) classified bargaining unit member will be on the district calendar committee.
The member will be appointed by the President of the USSS.

I.

The Association President or his/her designee shall be provided up to one (1) day of Association
release time to each year, to be used as the Association deems necessary, to conduct Association
business at no loss of salary or other benefits.

2

ARTICLE III
BOARD RIGHTS

Except as modified by an express term of this Agreement, the Board retains and reserves all rights,
authority, and responsibilities conferred upon and vested in it by law including, but not limited to, the
rights to: determine matters of inherent managerial policy (which include, but are not limited to, areas of
discretion or policy such as the functions and programs of the Board, standards of services, its overall
budget, utilization of technology and organizational structure); direct, supervise, evaluate, or hire
employees; maintain and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of school operations; determine the
overall methods, process, means, or personnel by which school operations are to be conducted; suspend,
discipline, demote, terminate, lay off, transfer, assign, schedule, promote, or retain employees; determine
the adequacy of the work force; determine the Board’s overall mission; effectively manage the work force;
and take actions to carry out the Board’s mission. The decision to exercise any of the foregoing rights, and
the effects of any such decision, requires neither prior bargaining with, nor the agreement of, the
Association.
ARTICLE IV
NEGOTIATIONS PROCEDURE

A.

Between sixty (60) and one hundred twenty (120) calendar days prior to the expiration of this
Agreement, either the Association or the Board may initiate negotiations by submitting a letter
requesting negotiations to the other party. If the Association is the initiating party, the letter shall
be served on the Superintendent; if the Board is the initiating party, the letter shall be addressed to
the Association President. In either case, the initiating party shall also serve a copy of the letter
and copy of this Agreement upon the State Employment Relations Board. Within fifteen (15) work
days after receipt of the letter, or at some other mutually agreeable date, the parties shall hold their
first bargaining session. Agendas and dates for subsequent sessions shall be set by the bargaining
teams. Each party shall be represented by a team consisting of no more than five (5) members. If
neither party timely initiates negotiations under this Section, this Agreement in its entirety shall
automatically be extended without alteration for one (1) year.

B.

The agenda for the first meeting shall be the presentation of the full and entire written proposals of
both parties. Thereafter, neither party shall be permitted to submit additional items of negotiations
unless agreed to by both parties. All sessions shall be closed to the press and the public. During a
session, either party may caucus at any time.

C.

As Tentative agreement is reached on particular items, the tentative agreement shall be reduced to
writing and initialed by each party. After tentative agreement is reached on all issues, the entire
successor agreement shall be reduced to writing and submitted to the bargaining unit for
ratification. If ratified, the agreement will then be submitted to the Board for ratification.
3

D.

Pursuant to Section 4117.14 of the Ohio Revised Code, the parties hereby establish mediation, as
described in Section E of this Article, as their alternative, mutually agreed bargaining impasse
resolution procedure which supersedes all of the procedures set forth in Section 4117.14. Those
procedures are hereby waived.

E.

If agreement for a successor agreement is not reached by forty-five (45) calendar days prior to the
expiration of this Agreement, either the Board or the Association may declare a bargaining
impasse, in which case the parties shall jointly request the services of mediator from the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service. Unless otherwise mutually extended to a date certain in
writing, the mediation period shall terminate with the expiration date of this Agreement. Section
4117.14 (D) (2) of the Ohio Revised Code shall then apply.
ARTICLE V
EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS

A.

The initial contract of employment for each bargaining unit employee shall be for a period of not
more than one (1) year.

B.

An employee who has successfully completed their first contract under Section A above, shall
upon re-employment, be issued a limited contract of employment for two (2) years.

C.

An employee who has successfully completed three (3) two (2)-year limited contracts under
Section B above, shall, upon re-employment, be issued a continuing contract.

D.

Contract Renewal, Non-Renewal, and Termination
1.

A one (1) or two (2) year limited contracts may be terminated during its term as provided in
Section 3319.081 of the Ohio Revised Code. One (1) and two (2) year limited contracts may
be renewed or non-renewed at the discretion of the Board. Written notification of nonrenewal shall be furnished to the employee prior to June 1 and shall be effective July 1.

2.

A continuing contract is not subject to non-renewal and may be terminated as provided in
Section 3319.081 of the Ohio Revised Code.

3.

Procedural errors – that is, whether timely notice was furnished and whether any evaluation
required under Article XX of the Agreement was in fact performed (but not the substance of
such evaluation) – in the non-renewal of a one (10 or two (2) year limited contract shall be
subject to the grievance procedure. Termination of one (1) or (2) year limited contracts and
of continuing contracts shall be subject to the grievance procedure. However, an employee
who elects to pursue a claim of improper non-renewal for procedural reasons or termination
through the grievance procedure shall not be entitled to pursue such a claim in any other
forum.
4

ARTICLE VI
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
A.

B.

Definitions
1.

"Grievance" means a claim that a specific provision(s) of this Agreement has been violated,
misinterpreted or misapplied.

2.

"Grievant" means a bargaining unit employee who files a grievance.

3.

If more than two (2) bargaining unit employees are personally affected, a class grievance
may be filed with the signature of a single grievant so long as members of the class are
clearly identified (by name, job title, or otherwise) on the fact of the grievance.

4.

Should the Association believe that a grievance has occurred but the aggrieved employee
does not wish to file a grievance, the Association may give written notice to the
Superintendent about the matter within the Step One time limit that appears in Section
C, Paragraph 2, subparagraph (a.) of this Article. Such timely notice by the Association
shall preclude any; reliance on such matter as tending to establish a past practice.

5.

Failure of the grievant to comply with a time limit shall entitle the grievant to proceed
to the next step of the grievance procedure.

6.

"Days" means week days exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and state or federal holidays.

General Provisions
1.

The grievant has the right to Association representation at all formal meetings and hearing
involving the grievance.

2.

The Association has the right to be present for the adjustment of any grievance. The
Association President will be furnished a copy of all grievance responses beginning at
Step One of the grievance procedure. Upon request, the Association shall receive copies
of all other grievance communications beginning at Step One.

3.

The Association has the exclusive right to determine whether to process a grievance to
the arbitration step of this grievance procedure.

4.

Time limits at any step of the grievance procedure may be extended only by written mutual
agreement of the parties.

5.

Failure of the grievant to comply with a time limit shall result in the grievance being
dismissed.
5

C.

6.

Failure of the administration to comply with a time limit shall entitle the grievant to
proceed to the next step of the grievance procedure.

7.

No reprisals shall be taken against any bargaining unit employee by reason of his/her filing
or taking part in the processing of any grievance.

8.

A grievance may be withdrawn at any time without prejudice.

Procedure
1.

Informal Step:
A grievant shall first discuss the grievance with the grievance's immediate supervisor.

2.

3.

4.

Step One:
a.

If the grievant is not satisfied with the informal attempt to resolve the grievance, the
grievant may submit the grievance in writing, on the grievance form appearing in
Appendix A, to the immediate supervisor within the (10) days of the act or occurrence
giving rise to the grievance. The grievance shall be signed by the grievant, concisely
state the facts upon which the grievance is based, and identify the specific provisions(s)
of this Agreement alleged to have been violated, misinterpreted, or misapplied. The
immediate supervisor will schedule a hearing with the grievant within ten (10) days
after receipt of the written grievance.

b.

Within ten (10) days after the hearing, the immediate supervisor will provide a written
response to the grievant.

Step Two:
a.

If the grievant is not satisfied with the immediate supervisor's response, the grievant
may file a written appeal with the Superintendent within ten (10) days of receipt of the
response.

b.

Within ten (10) days of receipt of the appeal, the Superintendent, or the
Superintendent's designee, will hear the appeal. Within ten (10) days after the hearing,
the Superintendent, or designee, will provide a written response to the grievant.

Step Three:
If the Union and the aggrieved are not satisfied with the disposition on Step 2, the Union may
request that the issue be presented at a mediation conference, which shall be presided over by
a mediator. Such request must be made in writing within ten (10) days after the aggrieved
receives the Step 2 disposition. The Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service shall be
requested to appoint one of its mediators to conduct mediation conferences as requested by
either of the parties.

6

Mediation conferences will be scheduled at the earliest date that the mediator, the parties, and
their representatives are reasonably available for such purpose. Mediation conferences will
be held at Central Office or at such other suitable place as the mediator directs. Mediation
conferences will be conducted informally. No record of the conference will be made, and
everything said at the mediation conference by the parties and their representatives will be
regarded as settlement discussions. The mediator shall have the authority to meet separately
with any person or persons having knowledge of the grievance. The mediator will keep
confidential anything stated to him in a private session unless the person or persons involved
agree otherwise.
If the parties resolve the grievance through mediation, they shall reduce the terms of their
settlement agreement to writing. Unless the Administration and the Union agree otherwise,
the resolution of the grievance through mediation shall be on a “no-precedent” basis.
5.

Step Four:
a.

If no settlement is reached during mediation, the grievant may file a written appeal to
arbitration within ten (10) days after the mediation conference at Step 3 is concluded.
The appeal shall be filed with the Superintendent.

b.

The Association President shall notify the Superintendent in writing of the
Association's intent to proceed to arbitration within ten (10) days after the mediation
conference at Step 3 above is concluded. The Association shall petition the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS) in writing to provide the Association
representative and the Superintendent with a panel of nine (9) arbitrators from which an
arbitrator may be selected. A copy of the Association's petition shall be furnished to
the Superintendent. Selection of the arbitrator shall be by the alternate strike process,
with the party striking the first name determined by the flip of a coin. Either party may
reject
the first panel of names and request that a second panel consisting of an
additional nine (9) names be submitted by FMCS, in which case the parties shall select
an arbitrator from such second panel.

c.

The arbitrator shall have no authority to add to, subtract from, or alter any provision(s)
of this Agreement, or modify its language in deciding the issue(s) presented. The
arbitrator shall have no authority to decide any issue not submitted to him/her for
resolution.

d.

The award of the arbitrator shall be final and binding. The arbitrator shall not interfere
with the Board's managerial prerogatives except as otherwise specified in this
Agreement. No grievance shall be arbitrated together with any other grievance except
by the parties' mutual agreement.

e.

The FMCS's administrative fee and the arbitrator's fee shall be borne in equal shares by
the Board and Association.

f.

Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this Agreement, this grievance procedure shall
be the sole and exclusive remedy for any alleged violation of this Agreement.
7

ARTICLE VII

A.

LEAVES

Sick Leave
1.

Sick leave shall be defined as paid leave from duty under Section 3319.141 of the Ohio
Revised Code because of personal illness, injury, medical appointment, exposure to
contagious disease, pregnancy, illness, or death for the bargaining unit member or within the
bargaining unit employee's immediate family.
Each full-time employee must be paid for all time lost when the schools are closed
an epidemic or other public calamity.

due to

Sick leave shall only be used upon approval of the responsible administrator. Each
bargaining unit employee shall furnish a written signed statement on forms prescribed
by the Board to justify the use of sick leave. In addition, the Superintendent may ask
the employee for further information when he/she has reason to believe the sick leave
request is not justified.
Except as otherwise stated in this paragraph, sick leave may be used in one-fourth (1/4) day
increments if the Administration determines that a sub is not needed for coverage or, if a sub
is needed, a qualified sub is obtained. (No effect on bus drivers’ current 1/3 day
increments.) In the case of a bus driver whose regular duties include a mid- day function
(whether driving or some other function) in addition to a morning and afternoon route, sick
leave may be used in one-third (1/3) day increments.
2.

Cumulative Sick Leave
In accordance with statutory regulations, each full-time bargaining unit employee shall earn
one and one-fourth (1-1/4) days of sick leave with pay for each month of completed service,
or a total of fifteen (15) days per year. A part-time bargaining unit employee shall earn sick
leave on a prorated basis in accordance with Section 3319.141 of the Ohio Revised Code,
with the further understanding that if a part-time employee should become a full-time
employee, or vice versa, the number of unused accumulated days shall remain the same
without a mathematical adjustment at the time of the change in status. Unused sick leave
shall be cumulative from year to year to a maximum of two hundred-seventy-five (275)
days. Each new employee shall be granted five (5) days of sick leave when he has begun
his duties of full-time employment. These five (5) days shall be part of the total number of
cumulative days to which the employee shall be entitled for the first year of employment.

3.

Definition of Immediate Family and Limits on Usage
a.

Immediate family shall be defined as the bargaining unit employee's spouse, father,
mother, brother, sister, child, grandchild, parent-in-law, or any member of the
household who has clearly stood in the same relationship with the employee including
step-relations (with the approval of the Superintendent).
8

4.
B.

b.

An absence due to death in the immediate family of an employee shall not exceed five
(5) work days unless this limitation is specifically waived by the Superintendent. When
a waiver is granted the exact number of days shall be determined by the family
relationship and the circumstances surrounding the death. If the immediate family of
the spouse is ill or dies, sick leave use is a maximum of three (3) days.

c.

Leave may be granted to attend the funeral of an employee’s and their spouse’s
grandparents, niece, nephew, first cousin, aunt, uncle, daughter-in-law, son-in-law,
step-relations, upon approval of the Superintendent. The time shall be limited to two
(2) days. Additional time not to exceed two (2) days shall be granted without loss of
pay when it is necessary to travel in connection with the death of a relative.

d.

For a funeral of someone other than the relatives listed, if the employee’s personal
leave has been exhausted, the employee may request using one sick leave day with
Superintendent approval for the funeral.

Within any given school year (defined July 1 through June 30) sick leave will be paid at
100% of the bargaining unit employee's regular compensation.

Assault Leave
The Board shall grant paid assault leave not to exceed thirty (30) work days for a period of
physical disability that results from an assault upon a bargaining unit employee while that
employee is performing in the course and scope of assigned job duties. A certificate must be
furnished by the treating physician stating the nature of the disability and the anticipated period of
disability. To be entitled to assault leave, the employee must:
1.

File a written report with the Superintendent within one (1) work day (unless precluded
from doing so by the physical disability, in which case the report shall be filed as soon as
the employee is physically capable), stating the facts, identifying the assailant, if known,
and stating the name and address of all known witnesses;

2.

File a criminal complaint against the assailant;

3.

Cooperate fully with the prosecutor in preparing a case against the assailant;

4.

Be ready, able, and willing to testify about the assault and against the assailant;

5.

If the employee drops the case or instructs the prosecutor to withdraw or dismiss the case,
the employee shall forfeit all assault leave pay.

During the employee's period of absence, pending application for assault leave, days absent will be
charged to sick leave. After eligibility for paid assault leave is established, the sick leave days
taken will be credited back to the employee and those days will be charged to assault leave. The
Superintendent may review any unusual situation for special consideration and make a
recommendation to the Board that the eligibility provisions of this Section be waived in whole or
part, but the recommendation, to be effective, requires Board approval. The Board may, at its
expense, have the employee examined by a Board-designated physician.
9

C.

Personal Leave
1.

Subject only to the provisions appearing below, all employees shall be eligible for three (3)
unrestricted personal leave days per school year. Requests for personal leave must, except
in case of emergency, be made to the immediate supervisor at least twenty-four hours prior
to such leave. The personal day shall not be taken immediately before or after a holiday
unless prior permission has been granted by the immediate supervisor or the superintendent.
Up to two (2) personal leave days per year may be banked and/or carried forward to the
following year, to a maximum of five (5) days total, for future use by an employee.
Personal days not used or banked by an employee can be paid to the employee as a stipend
at seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each day.
The employee will complete and submit the Personal Leave Payment Form to the Upper
Sandusky Support Staff Association Secretary no later than May 15 to be eligible for
payment under this section. Payment will be made by the Board on or before June 30th.

D.

2.

In no event will more than three (3) bus drivers be permitted to take personal leave on the
same day; preference under this provision will be given to those employees who first apply
for leave.

3.

Except as otherwise stated in this paragraph, personal leave may be used in one-quarter
(1/4) day increments. In the case of a bus driver whose regular duties include a mid-day
function (whether driving or some other function) in addition to a morning and afternoon
route, sick leave or personal leave may be used in one-third (1/3) day increments.

4.

No personal leave days may be taken after May 15 unless special circumstances approved
by the employee’s immediate supervisor and Superintendent are pre-approved, if possible,
two (2) weeks in advance of the requested date of the leave. The immediate supervisor will
provide a written reason for any denied requests after May 15. Bargaining unit members
who request leave to chaperone Upper Sandusky Exempted Village field trips scheduled
after May 15, shall receive approval. Twelve (12) month employees are not subject to this
provision.

Work-Related Leave
Absences to attend meetings, conventions, conferences, or workshops that serve to advance the
welfare of the District may be granted by the Superintendent without loss of pay or benefits to a
bargaining unit employee.

E.

Unpaid Leave
1.

Period of Leave
The Board may grant a leave without pay or benefits for professional, educational, or other
purposes for not more than two (2) school years. Any person employed from outside the
bargaining unit to replace a bargaining unit employee on leave shall be on a probationary
contract.
10

2.

Application for Leave
A request for leave must be submitted to the Superintendent in writing, state the specific
dates requested, and be accompanied by all documentation relevant to justification for the
leave.

3.

Return from Leave
Upon return to service at the expiration of leave, the employee shall resume the contract
status held prior to leave. Approved leave time shall not count toward continuing contract
status.

4.

Purchase of Insurance
A bargaining unit employee on approved leave may purchase medical, dental, and/or vision
insurance at the Board rates, subject to the following conditions:

F.

a.

The employee must submit to the Treasurer a written request to purchase such
insurance by the date leave is approved by the Board.

b.

The employee must pre-pay the total premium for the selected insurance(s) by not later
than ten (10) days before the end of month for the next ensuring month.

c.

Failure to meet the above conditions shall result in cancellation of insurance for the
employee on leave.

Family and Medical Leave Act
1.

A bargaining unit employee may use unpaid family leave for the purposes and on the
conditions set forth in the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. The Superintendent must
be notified of the desire to use leave at least thirty (30) calendar days in advance if the need
for leave is foreseeable; otherwise, the written notice shall be given as soon as possible after
the employee learns of the need for leave. The notice must specify that "Family Leave" is
the type of leave being taken.

2.

The twelve-month period during which an eligible employee may use up to twelve (12)
weeks of unpaid leave is a rolling twelve-month period assured backward from when the
employee uses leave under the Act.

3.

During leave under this Section, the Board will continue to pay the contributions it makes
for an employee on the active payroll to continue participation in insurance fringe benefits
under Article X of this Agreement.

4.

In lieu of “Certification of Health Care Provider for Employee’s Serious Health Condition”
(Family and Medical Leave Act) being completed, medical certification from an employee’s
health care provider is acceptable, as long as the following information is included:
11

Provider’s name/phone number/address/type of practice/medical specialty.
Beginning and end dates of leave.
Was medication, other than over the counter medication prescribed?
Is the employee unable to perform any of his/her job functions due to the condition?
If so, said job functions must be listed. *specialized equipment needed to assist in our job
functions must be listed.
Will this condition cause episodic flare-ups for the employee to be absent from work for
intermittent leave? *estimated duration of flare-ups over the next six months
Signature of health care provider
G.

Jury Duty Leave
With respect to any scheduled work day on which a bargaining unit employee must perform jury
duty, the employee will receive his/her regular compensation minus any compensation received
from the court for that day, provided written proof of jury duty service is presented to the
Superintendent. Time served for jury duty will not be charged to sick leave or personal leave.

H.

I.

Absence Without Pay
1.

A bargaining unit employee needing to be absent for a reason(s) not governed by Section A
through G of this Article may request to be absent without pay. A request must be submitted
to the Superintendent in writing, specify the dates of requested absence, and be signed by
the employee. Such a request shall be limited to no more than three (3) work days within a
school year, except that the initial use in a particular year may be for five (5) consecutive
work days. During the first year of employment, the employee may not apply for absence
without pay, however this provision may be waived under unusual or emergency
circumstances at the discretion of the Superintendent.

2.

Requests must be approved by the Superintendent at least two (2) work days in advance.
The Superintendent will consider the availability of
substitutes, the nature of the job, the
impact on the smooth functioning of District schools, and the employee's work/absence
record when determining whether to approve a request. The advance notice requirement
may be waived under unusual or emergency circumstances, at the discretion of the
Superintendent.

Notice of Leave
1.

J.

A bargaining unit shall, using the appropriate form, furnish as much advance notice of the
need for leave as is practicable. If urgent circumstances preclude advance notice, the
paperwork should be filled out as soon as possible. If leave for more than five (5)
consecutive work days is needed, the employee will notify the District’s Human Resource
Coordinator by submitting the appropriate documentation from the employee’s physician.

Sick Leave Donation Program
1.

In the event of a catastrophic event, pregnancy or situation involving a staff member and/or
his immediate family, the Association President and the Superintendent may need to set up a
sick leave donation plan. It is further understood that a medical surgery or procedure that can
12

be scheduled so as not to necessitate the need for days from the Bank does not qualify.
Although the specific details of the plan are to be discussed, the minimum guidelines of such
a plan shall be:
a.

The employee must exhaust his or her own sick leave and personal leave first;

b.

Donations from an employee must be made in whole day increments up to five (5) days
per request used in order of submission and submitted in one (1) day increments.

c.

The employee who is using donated sick leave will not earn additional sick leave while
receiving the donated days; and

d.

The employee who is using donated sick leave must use the sick leave in increments of
at least one (1) day.

ARTICLE VIII
INSURANCE FRINGE BENEFITS

A.

Medical Insurance
1.

The Board shall continue to provide current medical insurance coverage and benefit levels
which will conform with the attached Appendix D, with the further understanding that the
maximum age of a full-time student dependent will be changed from 23 to 25.
Allocation of the monthly cost between the Board and employee shall be shared 85% by the
Board and 15% by the employee for either family or single coverage.
The Board shall contribute 50% of the HSA deductible. Beginning January 1, 2022, the
Board’s annual contribution will be equal to 60% of the amount of the deductible for the
enrolled coverage. The money will be placed in the account in monthly equal payments.

2.

For employees who regularly work less than full-time, the Board's contribution to the
monthly premium shall be reduced proportionately from the amount otherwise payable by the
Board under Paragraph 1 of this Section, with the numerator being the number of hours
worked per day and the denominator being the number appearing in Article I, Section C of
this Agreement for the employee's particular job classification, but in no event more than
seven (7). If the employee elects insurance coverage under this Section, the employee shall
pay the difference between the Board contribution and the actual premium by payroll
deduction. An employee regularly scheduled to work fewer than four (4) hours per day
shall not be entitled to a Board contribution under this Section, but may elect to purchase the
insurance fringe benefit solely at his/her expense during the enrollment period applicable to
the benefit.

13

B.

Dental Insurance
The Board shall continue to provide current dental insurance benefits for bargaining unit
employees. Allocation of the monthly cost between the Board and employee shall be shared 85%
by the Board and 15% by the employee for either family or single coverage. For employees who
regularly work less than full-time, the Board's contribution to the monthly premium shall be
reduced proportionately, with the number appearing in Article I, Section C of this Agreement for
the employee's particular job classification, but in no event more than seven (7). If the employee
elects insurance coverage under this Section, the employee shall pay the difference between the
Board contribution and the actual premium through payroll deduction. An employee regularly
scheduled to work fewer than four (4) hours per day shall not be entitled to a Board contribution
under this Section, but may elect to purchase the insurance fringe benefit solely at his/her expense
during the enrollment period applicable to the benefit.

C.

Vision Insurance
The Board shall continue to provide current individual vision insurance benefits for bargaining unit
employees and their families. The monthly amount to be paid by the Board for each employee
shall be 85% of the plan, and the employee will pay 15%. For employees who regularly work less
than full-time, the Board's contribution to the monthly premium shall be reduced proportionately,
with the numerator being the number of hours worked per day and the denominator being the
number appearing in Article I, Section C of this Agreement for the employee's particular job
classification, but in no event more than seven (7). If the employee elects insurance coverage
under this Section, the employee shall pay the difference between the Board contribution and the
actual premium through payroll deduction. An employee regularly scheduled to work fewer than
four (4) hours per day shall not be entitled to a Board contribution under this Section, but may
elect to purchase the insurance fringe benefit solely at his/her expense during the enrollment period
applicable to the benefit.

D.

Medical, Dental, and Vision Insurance Study Committee
Either party may request (in writing) that a committee be formed to review cost saving options
relative to medical or dental, or vision insurance. When such a request is made, each party may
name up to seven (7) persons to committee and the initial meeting shall be convened within thirty
(30) days of the receipt of the written request.

E.

Life Insurance
The Board shall provide group term life insurance for bargaining unit employees. The amount of
coverage shall be $50,000. The Board will pay the monthly premium cost.

F.

Liability Insurance
Liability insurance shall be provided for bargaining unit employees at no cost which minimally
complies with the applicable provisions of the Ohio Revised Code.

14

G.

Insurers
The Board reserves the right to self-insure or to change the insurance carrier for any benefit
provided under this Article. At least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to implementing any
change, the Board will give the Association President written notice of the change.

H.

For purposes of Section A through G of this Article, if a bargaining unit employee is regularly
assigned to more than one (1) job classification, in calculating the Board's contribution to the
monthly insurance premium the numerator will be the sum or the regular hours of the
classifications to which the employee is assigned and the denominator will be seven (7).

I.

Health Insurance Option
A full-time employee who waives his/her right to health insurance coverage under this Article
shall receive a payment each year subject to the following conditions:
1.

The employee must enroll or waive his/her right to coverage online, print the
enrollment/waiver forms, sign and submit the enrollment/waiver form to the Human
Resources Director no later than November 30.

2.

Coverage must be waived for the period of the District's insurance year.

3.

Declining health insurance option shall result in a payment of 20% of the Board share of the
premium for the HDHP insurance plan (Plan C) to the employee.
a.

Family Coverage: Employees who are married and/or who have dependent(s) shall be
entitled to 20% of the Board share of the premium for the Family policy (Insurance
Plan C).

b.

Single Coverage: Employees who are not married and do not have dependent(s) shall
be entitled to 20% of the Board share of the premium for the Single policy (Insurance
Plan C).

c.

In a case where both spouses are employed within the District, a spouse who waives
direct coverage under this provision but remains covered as a family member under the
other spouse’s insurance will be entitled to the single coverage payment.

4.

An employee who uses this option and who then loses alternative health coverage through
the layoff, death, or divorce of a spouse will be permitted to enroll in the Board's health
insurance plan, provided that the employee will forfeit any payment he/she has received or
becomes eligible to receive, prorated to the part of the year the employee resumes Board
coverage.

5.

This provision shall automatically renew for each succeeding insurance year unless the
Superintendent gives the Association President written notice by September 1 of the Board's
intent not to continue this option, in which case this provision will expire at the end of that
insurance year.
15

J.

Section 125 Plan
The Board will continue to provide an Internal Revenue Code Section 125 Plan as to employee
contributions toward monthly insurance premium costs, unreimbursed employee medical expenses,
and child-care expenses for the duration of this agreement.
ARTICLE IX
COMPENSATION

A.

General
1.

Compensation shall be at an hourly wage rate as established by placement on the appropriate
wage schedule set forth in Appendix B. All salary schedules shall receive a 2% increase for
2021-2022, a 2% increase for 2022-2023, and a 2% increase for 2023-2024. Beginning July
1, 2021, a salary schedule with Steps shall be implemented for Pony Driver (see Appendix
B). An employee who has worked in the District and been compensated for at least 120 days
shall be advanced one (1) step vertical on the pay scale, effective the next ensuing July 1. An
employee who has worked and been compensated for 119 or fewer days in a given school
year shall not be entitled to a vertical step advancement on July 1. In addition to the salary
schedules outlined above, all bargaining unit members shall receive an annual stipend in the
amount of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), to be issued on the first pay in November 2021,
November 2022, and November 2023.

2.

A new bargaining unit employee may receive up to two (2) steps of vertical wage
schedule placement credit upon being hired, with the further understanding that
additional vertical placement credit may be granted by the Superintendent on a case-bycase basis.

3.

If an employee transfers to a related job classification (e.g., from a Secretary #3 to a
Secretary #2), the employee will be credited on the wage schedule in the new classification
with all years of experience previously credited in the related classification.

4.

If an employee transfers to an unrelated job classification (e.g., from a bus driver to a
custodian), the employee will be placed on the wage schedule as follows:

5.

a.

An employee with 0-4 years of employment in the district will start at step 0

b.

An employee with 5-24 years of employment in the district will start at step 4

c.

An employee with 25 or more years of employment in the district will start at step 7

The Board will make an annual longevity payment for vertical wage schedule placement
beginning with fifteen (15) years at $250.00 annually, twenty-five (25) years at $450.00
annually, and thirty (30) or more years $600.00 annually. This payment will be made on the
last regularly scheduled payday in June of the school year in which the years of service of
16

vertical credit are achieved if the employee completes the school year; however, if an
employee starts the school year as an active employee and dies prior to the end of the school
year, the entire payment will be paid on the June payday in accordance with Section 2113.04
of the Ohio Revised Code or to the employee's estate.
B.

Extra Bus Trips
Pay for extra bus trips shall be at the hourly rate of $15.50 for time not regularly scheduled. No
driver shall lose regular pay if unable to make a regular run because of an extra bus trip. This pay
shall be increased to $16.00 per hour, effective July 1, 2021; $16.50 per hour, effective July 1,
2022; and to $17.00 per hour, effective July 1, 2023.

C.

Worker's Compensation
An employee shall report all injuries suffered while in the course and scope of his employment to
his supervisor prior to the end of the work day, and shall then fill out an application for Workers'
Compensation.

D.

Association Dues Deduction
Bargaining unit employees may authorize the Board to make payroll deductions for periodic
Association due, initiation fees, and assessments as follows:

E.

1.

The Association will submit a written deduction authorization form signed by the individual
employee to the Treasurer on or before the first Friday in October of the school year in which
deductions are to begin. Unless revoked in accordance with Paragraph 3 below, an
authorization will continue from year to year.

2.

Authorized deductions will be made in equal installments from the last paycheck each
month from November through August.

3.

Any revocation of dues deduction authorization must be in writing and submitted to the
Treasurer.

4.

The Treasurer will remit monthly the aggregate authorized amount deducted to the
Association.

Other Payroll Deductions
Other payroll deductions as required by law will be made in accordance with procedures set by the
Treasurer.

F.

Call Outs
A bargaining unit employee who is specifically required to report for duty for a period of time that
is not contiguous with his/her normally assigned work hours will receive pay for not less than one
(1) hour irrespective of whether time on such job take a full hour.
17

G.

Overtime
1.

a.

Meal periods do not count as hours worked unless the employee is required to perform
work duties during such periods.

b.

Break periods of fifteen (15) minutes or less do count as work time.

c.

Any period of leave during which the employee does not actually work does not count
as hours worked.

2.

Employees who begin work earlier or who work later than their regularly assigned hours
must receive prior authorization from the immediate supervisor.

3.

Employees who work more than forty (40) hours during any particular work week will either
be paid overtime for such hours in excess of forty (40) at the rate of time and one-half or, if
the employee prefers, receive compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay on a time and
one-half basis to the extent permitted by law.

4.

H.

Hours worked means all hours during which the employee is required to be on duty generally from the required starting time to the normal quitting time. Overtime applies
only where an employee actually works more than forty (40) hours in a particular work week.

a.

Efforts will be made to permit any compensatory time off at a time mutually agreed
upon by the employee and his supervisor. However, where an absence would disrupt
District operations, the Board retains the right to postpone compensatory time usage. In
all cases, compensatory time earned during a school year must be taken by the end of
that school year (June 30), except that compensatory time earned after June 15 may be
taken between June 15 and the following September 1. An employee who resigns from
the District will be paid, at his/her regular rate, for all unused compensatory time.

b.

Employees with unused compensatory time who are terminated or who terminate their
employment are expected to use such compensatory time to the maximum extent
possible prior to the last day of employment.

No overtime will be worked unless specifically authorized by a supervisor in advance.
Further, the Board shall attempt to contain costs by assigning extra hours to person with
lower hours worked so as to hold hours worked to or below forty (40) hours in any work
week.

Holidays
1.

Bargaining unit employees regularly employed on an eleven (11) or twelve (12) month basis
are entitled to the following paid holidays: New Year’s Eve; New Year's Day; Martin Luther
King Day; President's Day; Good Friday; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day;
Fair Day; Thanksgiving Day; the day after Thanksgiving; the day before Christmas; and
Christmas Day. Bargaining unit employees regularly employed on a nine (9) or ten (10)
month basis are entitled to the same paid holidays with the exception of Independence Day,
Fair Day and New Year’s Eve. Bargaining unit employees regularly employed for less than
18

nine (9) months in a school year are entitled to the paid holidays enumerated above, if any,
that fall within the particular employee's time of employment with the school year.

I.

2.

To be eligible for holiday pay, an employee must actually work all of the employee's
scheduled work day next preceding and next following the holiday, unless properly
excused from attendance on either or both days.

3.

If a holiday falls on a Saturday, the immediately preceding Friday shall be celebrated as the
holiday (if Christmas falls on Saturday, the preceding Thursday will be regarded as the
day before Christmas). If a holiday falls on a Sunday, the immediately succeeding
Monday shall be celebrated as the holiday.

4.

An employee required to work on a holiday to which the employee is entitled under this
Article shall be paid double-time (that is, straight-time pay plus holiday pay) for the hours
actually worked (if Christmas falls on Sunday or Monday, the preceding Friday will be
regarded as the day before Christmas).

5.

A bargaining unit employee assigned to work on the day before New Year’s Day will be
released without a loss in pay one-half (1/2) day early on such day.

Vacations
1.

Bargaining unit employees regularly employed on an eleven (11) or twelve (12) month
basis are entitled, after one (1) year of full-time service, to annual paid vacation time as
follows:
Years of Full-Time Service
Vacation Days
1 through 9
10
10 through 19
15
20 or more
20
A year of full-time service under this paragraph means a year in which the employee was in
service for not less than eleven (11) months. Vacation benefits are earned based on the
employee's anniversary of employment.

2.

Pay for vacation days shall be at the regular straight-time rate the employee would have
received had the employee worked the days in question. Vacation days may be taken in one
quarter (¼) day increments.

3.

To the extent practicable, vacation will be scheduled at the time requested by the employee,
but the Superintendent shall have the final right of approval in order to prevent undue
disruption of school operations. A vacation request must be submitted in the appropriate
form to the employee's immediate supervisor (the Superintendent during the summer recess)
at least five (5) work days in advance. However, if the employee does not receive
verification (acceptance or denial) of the request within three (3) work days after submission,
the request shall be deemed approved. If two (2) or more employees request the same time
for vacation, the employee with the greater length of continuous service will be given a
preference provided the employee's request was communicated to the Superintendent in
writing at least thirty (30) days in advance.
19

J.

K.

4.

If a holiday enumerated in Section H of this Article falls during the scheduled vacation of an
employee, the employee shall be granted an additional day's paid vacation at the end of the
vacation period.

5.

Upon separation from employment, except in the case of termination for misconduct, an
employee shall be entitled to compensation for all accrued and unused vacation credited
during the two (2) years immediately preceding separation and a prorated portion of earned
but unused vacation time for the current year. In case of death, such compensation shall be
paid in accordance with Section 2113.04 of the Ohio Revised Code or to the employee's
estate.

Severance Pay
1.

A bargaining unit employee with ten (10) or more years of service with the State of Ohio, a
political subdivision, the Board, or any combinations thereof, and who applies for and
qualifies for service retirement under Chapter 3309 of the Ohio Revised Code within one
hundred twenty (120) calendar days after the employee's last day of employment by the
Board shall be eligible for severance pay.

2.

The amount of severance pay shall equal one-fourth (1/4) of the value of the employee's
accrued but unused sick leave days but in no event more than sixty-seven and one-half (67
½) such days. Payment shall be based on the employee's regular straight-time rate at the time
of retirement. Payment for bargaining unit members who work in multiple categories shall be
based upon the average of their combined regular straight time rates at the time of retirement.
Payment under this Section shall eliminate all accrued sick leave credited to the employee.
An employee giving at least ninety (90) days notification will receive an additional bonus of
five (5) days of severance pay. The employee must include the request of extra five (5) days
with the official notification of retirement.

3.

Once an employee meets School Employees Retirement System retirement qualifications,
he/she may retire at any point during the school year. The employee must supply the
district’s treasurer with retirement verification information.

4.

Payment will be made within sixty (60) days after verification of the first retirement.

5.

If an employee with ten (10) or more years of service with the District dies prior to
retirement, the amount of severance pay to which the employee would have been entitled, as
calculated in accordance with the above formula, shall be paid to the estate of the employee.

Mileage Reimbursement
If the Board requires a bargaining unit employee to travel in his/her own vehicle for job-related
purposes (other than commuting to and from work), the employee will receive mileage
reimbursement at the rate of fifty-five cents (.55) per mile after completion and submission of any
required expense forms. Should the rate for any other bargaining unit be set above fifty-five cents
(.55), the rate for employees in this bargaining unit will automatically be adjusted to that amount.
20

L.

M.

N.

Pay Days
1.

Bargaining unit employees will be paid in twenty-six equal pays. It is mutually recognized
that a three (3) week hiatus between two (2) pays occurs every few years in order to avoid a
twenty-seventh (27th) pay in a fiscal year. In no case shall there be less than two (2) weeks
between pays. If a pay day falls on a holiday, the preceding work day shall be the pay day.
Any overtime or extra work pay to which an employee may be entitled will be paid by not
later than the scheduled pay day applicable to the first full pay period following receipt by
the Treasurer of any required documentation for such pay.

2.

With respect to bargaining unit employees regularly employed on a twelve (12) month basis,
in annualizing an employee's pay for purposes of calculating twenty-six (26) equal pays
under this Section the employee's actual number of regularly scheduled work days over the
course of the particular school year (July 1 through June 30) will be determined and used as
the basis for the calculation. The employee's daily rate for that school year will equal the
annualized amount thus calculated multiplied by a fraction with numerator being one (1) and
the denominator being the employee's actual number of regularly scheduled work days for
the school year in question.

3.

All bargaining unit employees will be paid by direct deposit into the account authorized by
the employee in writing to the Treasurer. Employees may choose to have direct deposit pay
stubs e-mailed to them. However, if the employee wishes to receive paper stubs in lieu of
email notices during the summer recess and informs the Treasurer’s office of that choice, the
employee’s summer payroll notices may be picked up, in sealed envelopes, at the District’s
central office by 11:00 a.m. on paydays.

Calamity Days
1. All bargaining unit employees will be paid their appropriate rate of pay for all days or part of
a day when schools in which they are employed are closed because of an epidemic or other
public calamity.
2. If the Board is required to make up a calamity day in order to satisfy the requirements of
Section 3317.01 of the Ohio Revised Code, employees will not be paid for work performed
on the make-up day except to the extent, if any, that such work by a particular employee
exceeds the hours for which that employee was paid without having to work on the calamity
day being made up.
3.

If an employee works during a time when schools are closed due to an epidemic or other
public calamity, the employee will receive an equal amount of comp time to be used when
school is not in session.

4.

In the event schools are delayed due to an epidemic or other public calamity, employees may
be requested by their supervisor to adjust their hourly schedule for that day. This provision
only applies to three (3) hour delay days.

SERS Pick-Up
The Board will continue to pick-up the contributions of bargaining unit employees to the School
Employees Retirement System through the salary restatement method.
21

O.

An employee must give ten (10) work days advance written notice of resignation. If the employee
fails to give such notice, the Board may deduct from the employee's pay his/her daily rate
multiplied by the days equal to the difference between ten (10) work days and the number of work
days advance notice was actually given.

P.

Reimbursement for Criminal Background Checks
The Board agrees, not more than once every five (5) years, to pay for the actual cost of a legally
required BCI&I/FBI criminal background check up to a maximum cost of forty-seven dollars and
fifty cents ($47.50). This provision, however, does not apply to the cost of the initial background
check made in connection with the Board’s hiring of the employee, except in the case of bus
drivers.
ARTICLE X
LAYOFF AND RECALL

A.

The Board may make a reduction in force by reason of decreased pupil enrollment, the return to
duty of regular employees after leaves of absence, the suspension of schools or territorial changes
affecting the District, or financial reasons. Should the Board decide to implement such a reduction
in force in a particular job classification, it shall be based upon seniority. Recall from a reduction
in force shall also be to the job classification and based upon seniority.

B.

An employee to be laid off will be given at least ten (10) calendar days advance written notice. A
copy of the notice will be furnished to the Association President. The notice shall state the reason
for the reduction in force and the effective date of the layoff.

C.

Employees shall retain recall rights for twenty-four months from the date of layoff. During a time
of layoff, an employee must advise the Superintendent (in writing) of any change in name, address,
or telephone number and must accept or reject a recall to the job within three (3) calendar days.
Failure to advise the Superintendent of any change in name, address, or telephone number or
failure to respond to a certificated mail notice of recall within seven (7) calendar days of mailing
shall terminate any and all recall rights.

D.

An employee may continue insurance fringe benefits while on layoff by prepaying the monthly
premium in full. Such option shall end when the employee is recalled, is hired by another
employer who provides insurance benefits, or after expiration of federal COBRA requirements,
whichever should come first.

E.

"Seniority" is defined as an employee's length of continuing full-time or part-time service in the
District (irrespective of paid or unpaid status and full time or part time) under a regular contract of
employment. A contract for casual, as-needed, or substitute service is not a regular contract for
this purpose. If two (2) or more employees have identical seniority, the tie will be broken based
upon the date the employee(s) accepted their position.

22

F.

By November 1 of each school year, the Board will post in a conspicuous place in each building
where employees work a seniority list applicable to the bargaining unit. Each employee shall have
only one (1) seniority date. If an employee disputes his/her seniority date, the employee shall file a
written protest with the Superintendent by not later than November 10; should November 10 fall
on a weekend or holiday, this deadline shall be extended to the next succeeding scheduled work
day.
ARTICLE XI
JOB VACANCIES

When a vacancy occurs in any classification in the bargaining unit, it shall be posted via email, unless the Board
elects not to fill the vacancy. A copy of the posting will be furnished to the Association president. In filling
vacancies, the following shall apply:
A.

The posting shall include the title of the position, any special job qualifications (such as a CDL or
other credential) that may be required, the entry wage rate, the location where the work is to be
performed (if known), the date of posting, and the last date for which an application for the
position can be submitted. Postings shall be simultaneously posted internally and externally.

B.

The purpose of the posting is to allow current employees to express an interest in transferring to
the posted position.

C.

An employee wishing to be considered for transfer to the posted position must file the required
application documents per the posting requirements by the cutoff date as stated in the posting.

D.

If a vacancy occurs during the summer recess when schools are not in session, a copy of the
posting will be mailed to a less-than-12-month employee if such employee has requested to be
notified of such vacancies and has furnished the Treasurer with an adequate number of selfaddressed, stamped envelopes for this purpose. The cutoff date dated in the posting shall apply,
and the Board shall not be held responsible for any delay that may occur in the postal service.

E.

If an employee is awarded a new position which places the employee in a different classification
and the employee's proves unsatisfactory, or the employee is dissatisfied with the position, such
employee may be returned to his/her former classification (same total hours and appropriate wage
placement) within twenty (20) work days of beginning the new position. No seniority right shall
be lost due to the return to classification.

F.

An interested current employee having appropriate qualifications will be interviewed and
considered for the position. Employees who have been refused a transfer will receive written
reasons for the refusal upon request.

23

ARTICLE XII
BUS ROUTE & TRIP ASSIGNMENTS

A.

Bus Route Assignments
This Article applies only to bargaining unit bus drivers. During the fourteen (14) calendar day
period immediately preceding the opening of schools for a particular school year, all drivers will
be afforded an opportunity in accordance with the provisions of this Section to apply for all bus
routes that will be operating as of the opening of schools that year if, and only if, either of the
following two (2) conditions applies:
1.

The total number of routes that will be operating as of the opening of schools is different
from the total number of routes that operated as of the beginning of the immediately
preceding school year; or

2.

Each route making up at least one-quarter (25%) of all the routes that will be operating as of
the opening of schools deviates in terms of its operating time by not less than fifteen (15)
minutes from the time allocated to that route as of the end of the immediately preceding
school year.
If such a system wide opportunity for drivers to apply for routes is triggered by operation of
the above provisions of this Section, the driver with the greatest seniority (as defined in
Article X, Section D of this Agreement) will be accorded the first selection of routes
followed by the driver with the next-greatest seniority followed by a repetition of this
procedure until all drivers have been awarded routes; if for any reason a driver is not awarded
the route to which his/her seniority would otherwise entitle him/her under this Section, the
Board will either (1) assign that driver to a route with at least the same amount of time, or (2)
assign that driver to a route with less time but compensate the employee (both in terms of
wage rate and insurance fringe benefit entitlements) as if he/she had been awarded the route
for which he/she applied.
When a vacancy occurs that does not trigger the above procedures, the general job vacancy
provisions of Article XI shall apply.

B.

C.

Extra Trips Defined
1.

Extra trips for regular route drivers are trips which are available during non-scheduled
driving times.

2.

Extra trips which overlap or otherwise interfere with a regular bus route will normally
be assigned to substitute drivers.

Extra Trip Assignment Procedure
1.

For purposes of implementing the provisions described below regular drivers interested in
taking extra trips will make their interest known in writing to the Transportation Director
24

prior to August 1 of each year. This opportunity to declare an interest in taking extra trips
will occur during the last two (2) full weeks of October and again during the last two (2) full
weeks of February. An extra trip roster will be developed after each declaration period with
all such drivers listed by seniority. A new driver employed after July 1 shall notify the
Transportation Director in writing within ten (10) work days following employment of
whether he/she wishes to be placed on the roster.
2.

During the week immediately prior to the start of school, all extra trips will be posted and
drivers on the trip roster developed under Paragraph 1 above will select one (1) trip by
seniority until all trips have been selected. The selection will occur at a meeting of drivers
convened for this purpose. A driver cannot select a trip that conflicts with his/her regular
route(s), or a trip that conflicts with a trip he/she previously has selected.

3.

The selection process described in Paragraph 2 above shall be repeated during the first week
of November to determine extra trips for the next season. This process shall then be repeated
again during the first week of March to determine extra trips for the next season.

4.

Not later than one (1) week after any selection under Paragraphs 2 or 3 above, the
Transportation Director will post on the bus garage bulletin board a list showing each
participating driver's name and all trips drawn by that driver (including the dates and times
of the trips).

5.

Extra trips that become available and are scheduled after the applicable selection period,
and summer extra trips, shall be posted at least seven (7) days in advance. Those drivers
available and interested shall apply in writing to the Transportation Director for such trips.
The assignment of trips under this provision shall be made on a rotating seniority basis. If a
driver chooses to refuse a trip, written notice of the refusal must be submitted to the
Transportation Director within twenty-four (24) hours. If a driver refuses or is unable to take
the trip because of a conflict with the driver’s regular route or other obligations in the
District, he/she shall be rotated to the bottom of the list.

6.

If cancellation of an extra trip occurs without at least one (1) hour's advance notice to the
driver, the driver shall be paid one (1) hour at the extra trip rate. A driver who loses a trip
due to such cancellation will be offered a future rescheduled cancelled trip or new trip for
which the driver, based on his/her work schedule, is available; such offer will only be made
once as to a particular lost trip.
At the beginning of each season, those drivers interested in driving extra trips during
tournament play shall notify the Transportation Director in writing of such interest. If drivers
are needed for tournament play, the Transportation Director shall, with respect to the names
submitted, assign such trips on a rotating seniority basis.

7.

8.

The Transportation Director reserves the right to assign a driver to a trip in the event a trip is
not assigned through the lottery process described in Paragraphs 2 and 3 above or the
seniority rotation process described in Paragraph 5 above; this would include trips, for
example, where less than seven (7) days’ notice has been provided to the Transportation
Department, or driver illness, etc.

25

D.

9.

Bus drivers who take an extra trip will be paid for a minimum of two hours for the trip even
if the trip is less than two hours of actual time.

10.

Any errors made in any area concerning trips will be addressed but are not grievable. Any
necessary adjustment will be made as soon as practicable.

Bus Parking
Buses will be parked at the Bus Garage unless authorized by the Transportation Director to be
parked elsewhere.

E.

Pre-Trip Inspection
Each bus route shall have a total of thirty (30) minutes over and above actual driving time for pretrip inspections. The inspections must be documented on the prescribed form.

F.

Bus Washing and Cleaning
Each regular driver shall be allowed up to twenty (20) washings and cleanings of his/her assigned
bus per school year, to be paid at the current trip rate. Time allowed for each washing and cleaning
shall not exceed one (1) hour. Time slips for this function shall be turned in to the Transportation
Director - no more than seven (7) bus washings and cleanings within a particular quarter (3
months). The Treasurer shall establish the calendar quarters applicable to each school year.

G.

CDL Renewal
With respect to a regular driver's CDL renewal (but not a driver's initial CDL), the Board will pay
the driver the difference between the cost of the CDL renewal and the cost of a normal operator's
license. The Board will also pay the cost of a regular driver's annual abstract, unless the abstract
disqualifies the driver from driving for the Board.

H.

A regular driver who reports for work on a delay day due to inclement weather, and the route is
later rerun, will be compensated for not less than one (1) hour at his/her regular rate for the initial
delayed route. This provision does not apply if the driver arrives for work more than thirty (30)
minutes prior to the driver’s regularly scheduled route departure time.

I.

Each regular driver shall maintain a current seating chart for each of his/her routes.

J.

All personnel assigned to the Transportation Department may be assigned to driving duties if the
need arises.

26

ARTICLE XIII
DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE

A.

The Board agrees to follow traditionally recognized principles of progressive discipline to insure
the fair, timely and equitable treatment of its employees in disciplinary action. Disciplinary
action may range from a verbal reprimand to a written reprimand to a suspension for a definite
period to termination. Each employee may have a representative present at any disciplinary
meeting.

B.

When disciplinary action is taken against an employee, the following procedure will be used
for similar or like infractions:
1st Level - Verbal reprimand by the employee's immediate supervisor. This verbal reprimand
will be recorded, but if no further infraction occurs, the record will not be placed in the
employee's personnel file.
2nd Level - A written reprimand will be sent to the employee by his/her immediate supervisor
within ten (10) work days of the infraction or of when the supervisor may reasonably be charged
with knowledge of the infraction. If requested by the employee, a meeting will be held with the
employee, the employee's representative and the immediate supervisor. A copy will be dated
and given to the affected employee and another copy will be placed in the employee's personnel
file.
3rd Level - An employee who continues the behaviors necessitating the use of disciplinary
action, will, after the third occurrence, be suspended for three (3) work days without pay. Upon
the employee's return from suspension, a meeting will be held with the employee, the employee's
representative and the employee's immediate supervisor to discuss the problem and to design a
specific course of corrective action. The Superintendent, as the Board's designee, shall be
responsible for suspending the employee.
4th Level - Termination

C.

A supervisor, at his/her option, may bypass lesser degrees of discipline for misconduct by the
employee (e.g.: intoxication on the job; destruction or threat of destruction of property) of such
severity that it warrants the employee's immediate removal from the premises. The
Superintendent may take action up to and including termination in cases of intolerable
misconduct.

D.

Discipline will not be imposed under this Article arbitrarily or capriciously, and may be
reviewed on that basis under the terms of the grievance procedure appearing in Article VI. This
Article shall not be construed to subject to review decisions that are not subject to the
grievance procedure under the terms of Article V, Section E of this Agreement.

E.

The termination of an employee under Section 3319.39 of the Ohio Revised Code shall be
governed solely by the terms of that statute and no provision of this Agreement shall apply.
27

ARTICLE XIV
LABOR-MANAGEMENT CONFERENCES

A.

Three (3) persons appointed by the Superintendent and three (3) persons appointed by the
Association President shall meet from time to time as the Superintendent and Association
President shall mutually agree for the purpose of discussing matters of mutual concern.

B.

Such meetings shall not interfere with any bargaining unit employee's work schedule, shall be
compensated, and shall not exceed two (2) hours in length, unless otherwise mutually agreed.
ARTICLE XV
MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS

If the Board requires an employee to undergo a physical or psychiatric examination by a Board designated
physician, the Board will pay the full cost of such examination.

ARTICLE XVI
SMOKE-FREE WORK ENVIRONMENT

Smoking or any use of tobacco products shall be prohibited in school buildings and school vehicles and on
school grounds at all times.
ARTICLE XVII
PERSONNEL FILES

A.

An official personnel file shall be maintained for each bargaining unit employee in the Board
office.

B.

No anonymous complaint or letter shall be included in an employee's personnel file.

C.

Access to the personnel file shall be available during regular office hours to the employee and
his/her representative. No part of the file may be removed from the office. Privileged information
such as confidential credentials and personal references are exempted from review. The Board
will provide the employee with a copy of any requested file material at a charge of five cents
($.05) per page. The employee may attach a response to any file item the employee deems
derogatory.

28

ARTICLE XVIII
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH

A.

Before exercising any right under Section 4167.06 of the Ohio Revised Code, an employee must
contact his/her immediate supervisor or the Superintendent and review all relevant facts. The
employee may be temporarily reassigned without regard to other provisions of this Agreement.
Before providing notice pursuant to Section 4167.06 (B) of the Revised Code, the employee must
exhaust the procedure set forth in paragraph C of this Section.

B.

An employee who wishes to assert a claim of discrimination as defined in Section 4167.13 of the
Revised Code shall use the following procedure to assert such a claim, which procedure shall be
exclusive means of asserting such a claim, to the exclusion of a lawsuit or any other means of
challenge.

C.

The parties mutually wish to deal with safety and health complaints, and to attempt to correct any
health or safety violations, internally. Accordingly, neither the Association nor a bargaining unit
employee may file a complaint alleging a health or safety violation with the Ohio Department of
Industrial Relations under Section 4167.10 of the Revised Code until the following procedure has
been exhausted:

D.

1.

The employee or Association representative shall first bring an alleged health or safety
violation to the attention of the affected employee's immediate supervisor, within two (2)
work days of the occurrence of the alleged violation.

2.

If the immediate supervisor does not resolve the alleged violation to the employee's
satisfaction, the employee or Association representative may file a formal complaint with the
Superintendent within two (2) work days after the conference with the immediate supervisor.
The Superintendent will prescribe a form for the written complaint, which will include space
for the standard alleged to be violated, the specific facts on which the allegation is based, and
the precise remedy sought. The Superintendent will meet with the employee or Association
representative within two (2) work days in an attempt to resolve the alleged violation. The
Superintendent will respond to the complaint within five (5) work days after this meeting.

Communicable Disease: Health and Safety Committee
The Board of Education and the Association shall establish and maintain a joint Health and Safety
Committee comprised of four (4) members appointed by the Board of Education and four (4)
members appointed by the Association President. The committee shall be called to meet, as
needed, by either the Board or the Association.
The committee shall be responsible for creating and monitoring the District’s preparation for and
response to any communicable disease which threatens the health and safety of students and staff
including, but not limited to:
1.
2.

Building closure and reopening
Maintenance of social distancing protocols
29

3.
4.

Professional development of staff in proper communicable disease mitigation techniques
Establishing and maintaining a list of approved cleaning and sanitizing chemicals for use in
the District
5. Proper cleaning and sanitization protocols and the determination of any required personal
protective equipment (PPE) for use in District facilities and vehicles
6. Response protocols for students, staff, families, and guardians who are at higher risk from the
communicable disease
7. Procedures for when a student or staff contracts a communicable disease
8. Communications plan to ensure the entire school community will be informed on a consistent
basis
9. Findings and reports of facility or vehicle inspections and confirm that appropriate corrective
measures are implemented
10. Review reports of unsafe and unhealthy conditions where the hazard has been disputed
While the committee is expressly given the authority to make decisions, the responsibility for
implementation shall reside with the Board of Education and/or its designee. The Superintendent, or
their committee member designee, shall provide a written report of the committee’s actions.
The parties agree that all applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations, guidance, and best
practices shall be the basis for all decisions made by the committee.
The Health and Safety Committee does not have the authority to create, modify, or terminate any term
or condition of employment, nor does it have the ability to alter the terms of the collective bargaining
agreement currently in effect. Any recommendation that impacts the collective bargaining agreement
or a term and condition of employment shall be forwarded to the appropriate representatives of the
Association and Board of Education for possible negotiation under Chapter 4117 of the Ohio Revised
Code and applicable provisions of the collective bargaining agreement.

ARTICLE XIX
REPRODUCTION OF AGREEMENT

Following ratification of this Agreement by both parties, a final copy of the Agreement shall be provided
to each bargaining unit employee, each Board member, and each administrative or supervisory employee
whose duties are relevant to the bargaining unit. In addition, the Association shall be provided ten (10)
copies and the Board shall be provided thirty (30) copies. The cost of reproducing the Agreement shall
be shared equally by the Association and the Board.

30

ARTICLE XX
EVALUATIONS

A.

A bargaining unit employee will be evaluated at least once per contract year. If an employee is
unsure of whom his/her evaluator is, the employee may ask his/her building principal or immediate
supervisor for the evaluator's identity. If the identity is still not known, the employee may ask the
Superintendent, who will identify the employee's evaluator.

B.

All bargaining unit employees whose contracts are expiring are to be evaluated no later than March
15. All other employees whose contracts are not expiring shall be evaluated no later than May15.

C.

Not later than five (5) work days after completing the evaluation form, the evaluator will have a
conference with the employee to discuss the contents of the evaluation; this deadline
will
be
reasonably adjusted if the evaluation employee is absent during all or part of this period due to
unforeseen circumstances. The evaluator and employee will sign the evaluation form at the end
of the conference. The employee's signature does not necessarily indicate agreement with the
substance of the evaluation. The employee may, within twenty (20) calendar days after the
conference, attach any documents relevant to the evaluation.

D.

One (1) copy of the completed form will be included in the employee's personnel file and one (1)
copy will be given to the employee. The employee will be afforded access to evaluation reports in
his/her personnel file.

E.

A bus driver will not receive an evaluation immediately preceding his/her assigned bus run.
ARTICLE XXI
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT

With respect to training seminars, professional conferences, and the like, the Board will continue to assess
any application received case-by-case. If participation in the activity is approved by the Board, the
employee will be reimbursed for expenses as specified by the Board at the time of approval.

ARTICLE XXII
ENTIRE AGREEMENT / SEVERABILITY

A.

This Agreement represents the entire agreement of the parties. Upon adoption by the Board, it
shall take precedence over any Board policies, rules, or regulation which may be inconsistent with
this Agreement.

B.

Should any provision of this Agreement be found unlawful by the State Employment Relations
Board or any court of competent jurisdiction, and if all appeals or time limits for appeals have been
exhausted, that provision shall automatically terminate but all other provisions of this Agreement
shall remain in full force and effect.
31

ARTICLE XXIII
DURATION

This Agreement shall be effective from July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2024.

32

APPENDIX A
Page 1 of 2
UPPER SANDUSKY SUPPORT STAFF
GRIEVANCE FORM
Grievance Number

Grievant's Name______________________________________________________________________
Job Classification_____________________________________________________________________
Date Grievance Occurred_______________________________________________________________
Statement of Facts: (attach additional sheet, if necessary)
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
Agreement Provisions Violated:__________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
Relief Sought:________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
Signature:___________________________________________________________________________

33

APPENDIX A
Page 2 of 2
Step 1: Immediate Supervisor
Date Grievance Filed___________________________________________________________________
Date Received by Immediate Supervisor___________________________________________________
Step 1 Response_____________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
Signature:___________________________________________________________________________
Date Step 1 Response received by USSS__________________________________________________
Step 2: Superintendent
Date Appealed to Step 2________________________________________________________________
Date Received by Superintendent_________________________________________________________
Superintendent's Response______________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
Signature:___________________________________________________________________________
Date Step 2 Response Received by USSS__________________________________________________
Step 3: Arbitration
Date Appealed to Arbitration____________________________________________________________

34

APPENDIX B
Page 1 of 7

Secretary I (12 Months)
Exp

2021-22

2022-23

0

$ 34,856.76

$ 35,553.90

1

$ 35,864.68

2

Secretary II (10 months)
2023-24

Exp

2021-22

2022-23

2023-24

$

36,264.98

0

$16.51

$16.84

$17.18

$ 36,581.97

$

37,313.61

1

$16.96

$17.30

$17.65

$ 36,947.59

$ 37,686.54

$

38,440.27

2

$17.42

$17.77

$18.13

3

$ 37,959.89

$ 38,719.09

$

39,493.47

3

$17.86

$18.22

$18.58

4

$ 38,971.85

$ 39,751.29

$

40,546.32

4

$18.21

$18.57

$18.94

7

$ 39,632.77

$ 40,425.43

$

41,233.94

7

$18.52

$18.89

$19.27

10

$ 40,295.93

$ 41,101.85

$

41,923.89

10

$18.86

$19.24

$19.62

12

$ 42,454.25

$ 43,303.34

$

44,169.41

12

$19.89

$20.29

$20.70

15

$ 43,435.34

$ 44,304.05

$

45,190.13

15

$20.31

$20.72

$21.13

17

$ 43,978.30

$ 44,857.87

$

45,755.03

17

$20.56

$20.97

$21.39

20

$ 44,521.24

$ 45,411.66

$

46,319.89

20

$20.82

$21.24

$21.66

24

$ 46,302.08

$ 47,228.12

$

48,172.68

24

$21.65

$22.08

$22.52

27

$ 48,075.45

$ 49,036.96

$

50,017.70

27

$22.48

$22.93

$23.39

Athletic Director Secretary Supplemental Pay- Conference Pass plus Upper Sandusky All Sports Pass

35

APPENDIX B
Page 2 of 7

Educational Assistant (9 months)

Cashier-Satellite

EXP
0

2021-22
$ 12.67

2022-23
$ 12.92

2023-24
$ 13.18

EXP
0

2021-22
$12.28

2022-23
$12.53

2023-24
$12.78

1

$ 14.06

$ 14.34

$ 14.63

1

$12.56

$12.81

$13.07

2

$ 14.49

$ 14.78

$ 15.08

2

$12.65

$12.90

$13.16

3

$ 14.70

$ 14.99

$ 15.29

3

$13.03

$13.29

$13.56

4

$ 14.94

$ 15.24

$ 15.54

4

$13.31

$13.58

$13.85

7

$ 15.13

$ 15.43

$ 15.74

7

$13.40

$13.67

$13.94

10

$ 15.31

$ 15.62

$ 15.93

10

$13.50

$13.77

$14.05

12

$ 16.07

$ 16.39

$ 16.72

12

$14.23

$14.51

$14.80

15

$ 16.40

$ 16.73

$ 17.06

15

$14.46

$14.75

$15.05

17

$ 16.61

$ 16.94

$ 17.28

17

$14.65

$14.94

$15.24

20

$ 16.82

$ 17.16

$ 17.50

20

$14.82

$15.12

$15.42

24

$ 17.48

$ 17.83

$ 18.19

24

$15.41

$15.72

$16.03

27

$ 18.15

$ 18.51

$ 18.88

27

$15.99

$16.31

$16.64

36

APPENDIX B
Page 3 of 7

EXP
0

Assistant Cook
2021-22
2022-23
$
12.65 $ 12.90

2023-24
$ 13.16

EXP
0

1

$

13.03

$

13.29

$

13.56

1

$15.53

$15.84

$16.16

2

$

13.31

$

13.58

$

13.85

2

$15.76

$16.08

$16.40

3

$

13.42

$

13.69

$

13.96

3

$16.12

$16.44

$16.77

4

$

13.76

$

14.04

$

14.32

4

$16.33

$16.66

$16.99

7

$

13.91

$

14.19

$

14.47

7

$16.52

$16.85

$17.19

10

$

14.05

$

14.33

$

14.62

10

$16.73

$17.06

$17.40

12

$

14.81

$

15.11

$

15.41

12

$17.21

$17.55

$17.90

15

$

15.12

$

15.42

$

15.73

15

$17.58

$17.93

$18.29

17

$

15.30

$

15.61

$

15.92

17

$17.81

$18.17

$18.53

20

$

15.49

$

15.80

$

16.12

20

$18.04

$18.40

$18.77

24

$

16.11

$

16.43

$

16.76

24

$18.76

$19.14

$19.52

27

$

16.72

$

17.05

$

17.39

27

$19.47

$19.86

$20.26

37

M.S. Café Manager
2021-22 2022-23
$15.32
$15.63

2023-24
$15.94

APPENDIX B
Page 4 of 7

EXP
0

Custodian
2021-22 2022-23
$15.85
$16.17

2023-24
$16.49

EXP
0

High School Manager
2021-22
2022-23
$15.30
$15.61

2023-24
$15.92

1

$16.54

$16.87

$17.21

1

$15.64

$15.95

$16.27

2

$17.03

$17.37

$17.72

2

$15.73

$16.04

$16.36

3

$17.50

$17.85

$18.21

3

$16.13

$16.45

$16.78

4

$18.05

$18.41

$18.78

4

$16.26

$16.59

$16.92

7

$18.29

$18.66

$19.03

7

$16.45

$16.78

$17.12

10

$18.52

$18.89

$19.27

10

$16.62

$16.95

$17.29

12

$19.56

$19.95

$20.35

12

$17.44

$17.79

$18.15

15

$20.08

$20.48

$20.89

15

$17.75

$18.11

$18.47

17

$20.33

$20.74

$21.15

17

$17.95

$18.31

$18.68

20

$20.58

$20.99

$21.41

20

$18.18

$18.54

$18.91

24

$21.41

$21.84

$22.28

24

$18.90

$19.28

$19.67

27

$22.23

$22.67

$23.12

27

$19.61

$20.00

$20.40

38

APPENDIX B
Page 5 of 7

EXP
0

Maintenance
2021-22
2022-23
$17.78
$18.14

Building Manager/HS Custodian
EXP
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
0
$16.81
$17.15
$17.49

2023-24
$18.50

1

$18.17

$18.53

$18.90

1

$17.50

$17.85

$18.21

2

$18.55

$18.92

$19.30

2

$17.99

$18.35

$18.72

3

$19.01

$19.39

$19.78

3

$18.46

$18.83

$19.21

4

$19.49

$19.88

$20.28

4

$19.01

$19.39

$19.78

7

$19.77

$20.17

$20.57

7

$19.25

$19.64

$20.03

10

$20.03

$20.43

$20.84

10

$19.49

$19.88

$20.28

12

$21.17

$21.59

$22.02

12

$20.56

$20.97

$21.39

15

$21.69

$22.12

$22.56

15

$21.07

$21.49

$21.92

17

$21.96

$22.40

$22.85

17

$21.32

$21.75

$22.19

20

$22.23

$22.67

$23.12

20

$21.60

$22.03

$22.47

24

$23.12

$23.58

$24.05

24

$22.46

$22.91

$23.37

27

$24.00

$24.48

$24.97

27

$23.33

$23.79

$24.27

39

APPENDIX B
Page 6 of 7

EXP
0

Head Mechanic
2021-22 2022-23
$20.57
$20.98

2023-24
$21.40

EXP
0

Bus Driver
2021-22
2022-23
$18.00
$18.36

2023-24
$18.73

1

$21.02

$21.44

$21.87

1

$18.43

$18.80

$19.18

2

$21.48

$21.91

$22.35

2

$18.86

$19.24

$19.62

3

$21.94

$22.38

$22.83

3

$19.38

$19.77

$20.17

4

$22.85

$23.31

$23.78

4

$19.85

$20.25

$20.65

7

$23.32

$23.79

$24.27

7

$20.05

$20.45

$20.86

10

$23.78

$24.26

$24.75

10

$20.27

$20.68

$21.09

12

$25.41

$25.92

$26.44

12

$21.32

$21.75

$22.19

15

$26.33

$26.86

$27.40

15

$21.86

$22.30

$22.75

17

$26.65

$27.18

$27.72

17

$22.12

$22.56

$23.01

20

$26.99

$27.53

$28.08

20

$22.40

$22.85

$23.30

24

$28.06

$28.62

$29.19

24

$23.31

$23.78

$24.26

27

$29.13

$29.71

$30.30

27

$24.19

$24.67

$25.16

40

APPENDIX B
Page 7 of 7

EXP
0

Pony Driver
2021-22
2022-23
$
14.66 $ 14.95

Special Education Assistant
2021-22
2022-23
2023-24
$14.71
$15.00
$15.30

$

2023-24
15.25

EXP
0

1

$

15.09

$

15.39

$

15.70

1

$16.10

$16.42

$16.75

2

$

15.51

$

15.82

$

16.14

2

$16.53

$16.86

$17.20

3

$

16.03

$

16.35

$

16.68

3

$16.74

$17.07

$17.42

4

$

16.50

$

16.83

$

17.17

4

$16.98

$17.32

$17.67

7

$

16.92

$

17.26

$

17.61

7

$17.17

$17.51

$17.86

10

$

18.07

$

18.43

$

18.80

10

$17.35

$17.70

$18.05

12

$

19.13

$

19.51

$

19.90

12

$18.11

$18.47

$18.84

15

$

19.67

$

20.06

$

20.46

15

$18.44

$18.81

$19.19

17

$

19.93

$

20.33

$

20.74

17

$18.65

$19.02

$19.40

20

$

20.24

$

20.64

$

21.05

20

$18.86

$19.24

$19.62

24

$

21.14

$

21.56

$

21.99

24

$19.52

$19.91

$20.31

27

$

22.03

$

22.47

$

22.92

27

$20.19

$20.59

$21.00

*When a current Special Education Assistant position is eliminated, the administration will make every effort to
keep the employee within the Special Education Assistant category, if the employee requests in writing to the
Special Education Coordinator. If unable to fulfill within the Special Education Assistant category, the
employee will be returned to the Regular Education Assistant category without loss of seniority or steps.

41

APPENDIX C

UPPER SANDUSKY SUPPORT STAFF EVALUATION
Employee Name

Building

Evaluator

Evaluator’s Position

Employee’s Positions (Check all that apply)
Transportation/Mechanic
Custodial/Maintenance
Food Service

Educational Assistant
Secretary
Pony Driver

The following guidelines are offered to promote a mutual understanding of the evaluation factors included on this evaluation
instrument. All employees will be evaluated at least once per contract year. All employees whose contracts are expiring are to be
evaluated no later than March 15. All other employees whose contracts are not expiring shall be evaluated no later than May 15.
The evaluator will circle a number from one (1) to five (5), with five being the highest, that corresponds with the category. For
transportation employees, the job knowledge check list and pre-trip inspection check list will also be used in conjunction with the
evaluation instrument.
The evaluator will consider each of the following categories:

1= Unsatisfactory

2=Below Average

3=Average

4=Above Average

5=Excellent

JOB KNOWLEDGE
1
2
3
4
5
a.
The degree to which the employee understands the essential methods, procedures and techniques of his/her job, gained through
experience and/or training.
b.
The degree to which the employee knows how to complete, file and use the appropriate reports and records.
DEPENDABILITY
1
2
3
4
5
a.
The employee’s punctuality and attendance pattern.
b.
The degree to which the employee exhibits an industrious nature.
c.
The degree to which the employee exercises initiative while remaining within the framework of his/her job description.
ATTITUDE
1
a.
Expressed feelings toward teachers, administration, other personnel and students.
b.
Ability to work and live in the framework of the policy of the board of education.
c.
The employee’s attitude toward his work.

4

5

WORKS COOPERATIVELY
1
2
3
4
a.
The employee’s willingness to work with and for others.
b.
The degree to which the employee exhibits tact, diplomacy and discretion in their relations with others.

5

PERSONAL APPEARANCE
1
2
3
4
The appropriateness of the employee’s personal grooming and dress as it relates to their job responsibilities.

5

42

2

3

Upper Sandusky Support Staff Evaluation
1= Unsatisfactory

2=Below Average

Page 2
3=Average

4=Above Average

5=Excellent

CONCERN WITH HEALTH & WELFARE OF STUDENTS
1
2
3
4
5
The degree to which the employee accepts the responsibility for helping to maintain a safe and clean environment for the student
body.
QUALITY OF WORK
1
The adequacy and thoroughness with which the employee completes their job tasks.

2

3

4

5

RELATIONSHIP WITH PUBLIC
The politeness and courtesy the employee extends to school visitors.

2

3

4

5

1

COMMUNICATION SKILLS
1
2
3
4
a.
The employee’s proficiency in following both oral and written objectives.
b.
The politeness and courtesy the employee extends to the general public, staff, faculty, students and parents.

5

RELATIONSHIP WITH STUDENTS AND FACULTY
1
2
3
The effectiveness of the employee when communicating with staff, faculty, students and parents.

5

4

MORAL CONDUCT
1
2
3
4
5
The employee’s moral conduct as it relates to community standards and affects the administration-students-employee-parent
relationship.
Evaluator’s Comments/Suggestions for Improvement: (Attach any additional sheets, if necessary)

Employee’s Comments:

Evaluator’s Signature

Employee’s Signature

Date

Date

*Employee’s signature does not necessarily signify agreement with the evaluation, just that they have read and reviewed the contents
of the evaluation.
Original Copy to Employee’s Personnel File
Copy to employee

Revised August, 2000
43

APPENDIX D

44

I

Benefits

Network

I

Non-Network

lnoatient Facilitv
Semi- Private Room and Board
90% after deductible
70% after deductible
Maternitv
90% after deductible
70% after deductible
Skilled NursinQ Facilitv
90% after deductible
70% after deductible
Addit ional Services
Aller~• T esti= and Treatments
90% after deductible
70% after deductible
90% after deductible
70% after deductible
AmbuJlance
90% after deductible
70% after deductible
Durable Medical Eauioment
Home Health Care
90% after deductible
70% after deductible
90% after deductible
70% after deductible
Hosoi ce
Oman Transolants
90% after deductible
70% after deductible
90% after deductible
70% after deductible
Privat e Dutv Nursinn
Mental Health and Substance Abuse - Federal Ment al Health Pariru
Inpati ent Mental Health and Substance Abuse
Benefits paid are based on c.or responding medical benefits
Services
Outpatient Mental Health and Substance
Abuse
Presc riot ion Druos' Includes Diabetic Sun lies and Oral Contraceotive Coveraoe'
$5 Generic I $25 Formulary Brand /
Retail - 30 Day Supply
$40 No11-Formulary Brand
$10 Generic I $62.50 Formulary Brand I
Home Delivery - 90 Day Supply
$100 Non-Fom1ulan, Brand
Note:

Services requiring a copayment are not subject to the single/famity deductible.
Deductible and coinsurance expenses incurred for services by a non-network provider will also apply to the
network deductible and coinsurance out-of.pocket limits. Deductible and coinsuran ce expenses incurred for
services by a network provider wil l also apply to the non-network deductible and coinsurance out-0f pocket
limits .
Non Contracting and Facility Other Providers will pay the same as Non-Network.
4

Benefits will be determined based on Medical Mutual's medical and adm inistrative policies and procedures.
This document is only a partial listing of benefits. This is not a contract of insurance. No person other than
an officer of Medical Mutual may agree, orally or in writing, to change the benefits listed here. The contract or
certificate will contain the complet e listing of covered services.
In certain instances, Medical Mut:ual's payment may not equal the per centage listed above. However, the
covered person's coinsurance will always be based on the lesser of the provider's billed charges or Medical
Mutual's negotiated rate with the provider.

Maximum family deductible. Member deductible is the same as single deductible.
The office visit copay applies to the cost of' the office visit onty.

2

1Fai1ure to present an 10 card may result in decneased benefits.
4

lncludes over-the-counter items, as well as insulin, syringes and needles.

45

46

47

48

Non-Network
Network
Benefits
I
I
Inpat ient Facility
100% after deductible
60% after deductible
Semi -Private Room and Board
Matemitv
100% after deductible
60% after deductible
Skilled NursinQ Faciliw
100% after deductible
60% after deductible
Additional Services
Allerav T esti= and Treatments
100% after deductible
60% after deductible
Ambulance
100% after deductible
60% after deductible
Durable Medical Eauioment
100% after deductible
60% after deductible
Home Health Care
100% after deductible
60% after deductible
Hosoice
100% after deductible
60% after deductible
Oraa,1 Transrnants
100% after deductible
60% after deductible
Private Dutv Nursi=
100% after deductible
60% after deductible
Mental Health and Substance Abuse - Federal Mer1tal Health Pariw
Inpatient Mental Health and Substance Abuse
Benefits paid are based on c.orresponding medical benefits
Services
Outp.atient Mental Health and Substance
Abuse
Prescriotion Druos' Includes Diabetic Sun lies and Oral Contraceotive Coveraoe'
Deductible applies then:
Retail - 30 Day Supply
$5 Generic/$25 Formulary Brand/
$40 Non-Forrnulary Brand
Home Delivery - 90 Day Supply
Deductible applies then:
$10 Generic/ $62.50 Fonnulary Brand/
$100 Non-Fom1ulary Brand
Note:

Services requiring a copayment are not subject to the single/famity deductible.
Deductible and coinsurance expenses incurred for services by a non-network provider will also apply to the
network deductible and coinsurance out-of-PQcket !limits. Deductible and coinsurance expenses incurred for
services by a network provider will also apply to the non-network deductible and coinsurance out-of pocket
limits.
Non Contracting and Facility Other Providers will pay the same as Non-Network.
4

Benefits will be determined based on Medical Mutual's medical and administrative policies and procedures.
This document is only a partial listing of benefits. This is not a contract of insurance. No person other tha n
an officer of Medical Mutual may agree, orally or in writing, to change the benefits listed here. The contract or
certificate will contain the complete listing of covered services.
In certain instances, Medical Mutual's payment may not equal the percentage listed above. However, the
covered person's coinsurance will always be based on the lesser of the provider's billed charges or Medical
Mutual's negotiated rate with the provider.

Maxi mum family deductible. Member deductible is the same as single deductible.
1

Fai1ure to present an 10 card may result in decreased benefits.

3

1ncludes over-the-counter items, as well as insulin, syringes and needles.

49

50

51
