01/25/2021
2482-04
20-MED-10-1311
39912

BY AND BETWEEN

THE BOARD OF
CLEARCREEK TOWNSHIP TRUSTEES

AND

CLEARCREEK PROFESSIONAL
FIREFIGHTERS LOCAL UNION # 4207
FIREFIGHTER/ EMT'S,
FIREFIGHTER/PARAMEDICS,
LIEUTENANTS, and CAPTAINS
FROM

JANUARY 1, 2021
THROUGH

DECEMBER 31, 2023

Clearcreek Professional Firefighters L,ocal
4207 Contract 2021. 2022 & 2023

INDEX
TITLE
INDEX
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE

PAGE

I
2
3
4

AGREEMENT
MISSION STATEMENT AND PURPOSE
RECOGNITION
INTEGRITY OF AGREEMENT
MANAGEMENT'S RIGHTS
DUES DEDUCTION
NO STRTKE AND LOCKOUTS
NON-DISCRIMINATION
SAVINGS CLAUSE
PROBATIONARY PERIODS
LABOR MANAGEMENT RELATIONS
SAFETY AND HEALTH
UNION BUSINESS
ALCOHOL AND DRUG TESTING POLICY
PHYSICAL FITNESS AND WELLNESS
SENIORITY
LAYOFF AND RECALL
DISCIPLINE
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
WAGES
HOURS OF WORK
OVERTIME
ARTICLE REMOVED
CALL BACK AND CALL-IN PAY
PERSONAL DAYS
SICK LEAVE
OCCUPATlONAL INJURY LEA VE
VACATIONS
BEREAVEMENT LEA VE
HOLIDAY PAY
JURY DUTY
MEDICAL AND LIFE INSURANCE
OFFICER fN CHARGE
UNIFORMS AND P.P.E.
EDUCATION INCENTIVE
TRAINING
SHIFT/STATION REASSIGNMENT
SUPERVISOR RESPONSIBILITIES
TERMS OF AGREEMENT

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

13
14
15
16
17
18

19
20

21
22

23
24

25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

36
37

38
39

APPENDIX

A

SALARY SCI IEDULE

2

2
3
3
3

4
4

6
7
-:;

8
8
9
9
9
11
17
18
19
20
21
24
24

25
27
27

27
28
30
31

32
33
34
34
35
35
36

36
36
37

38
39

Clearcreek Professional l'i rcfightcrs Loaal
4207 Contract 2021, 2022 & 2023

ARTICLE 1
AGREEMENT
Agreement by and between Clearcreek Township, Ohio and Clearcreek Professional
Firefighters Local 4207 used hereinafter in this Agreement, the term "Employer" and
"Township" shall mean Clearcreek Township and the term "Union" shall mean Clearcreek
Professional Firefighters Local 4207.

ARTICLE2
MISSION STATEMENT AND PURPOSE
The mission of the Clearcreek Fire District is to proudly serve with compassion, integrity,
and professionalism.
The purpose of this agreement is to promote and maintain a harmonious relationship
between the Employer and the Union. Employer and Union leadership must commit to
communication and participation. It is the trust in this process that makes this agreement
and the organization successful.

ARTICLE3
RECOGNITION
SECTION 3.1 - RECOGNITION
The Employer recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive representative and bargaining
agent for all full-time Captains~ Lieutenants, Firefighters, and Paramedics excluding all
other employees including, but not limited to the Chief, the Assistant Chief(s), the Deputy
Chicf(s), and all part-time, seasonal and casual employees. This is the bargaining unit
certified by SERB in Case No. 02-REP-11-0240.

SECTION 3.2 - MALE PRONOUN
Whenever the male pronoun or adjective is used in this Agreement, it shall be deemed to
also include the female, unless otherwise indicated.

SECTION 3.3 - UNION RECOGNITION
The employer recognizes the IAFF's exclusive right to manage its affairs and the union
retains and reserves unto itself all powers, rights, authority, duties and responsibilities
conferred upon and vested in it by the laws and constitutions of the State of Ohio and of
the united states. Further 1 all rights which ordinarily vest in and are exercised by employee
organizations except such as are specifically relinquished herein are reserved to and remain
vested in the union. The employer agrees to manage its affairs in regards to employee rights
within the scope of ORC 4117 and in a manner that does not interfere restrains or coerces
employees in the exercise of their protected activities, as guaranteed by statute.
3

Ckarorcck Professional Firetightcrs Local
4207 Contracl 202 1, 2022 & 2023

ARTICLE 4
INTEGRITY OF AGREEMENT
SECTION 4.1 - SUPERSEDES ALL PREVIOUS AGREEMENTS
The Employer and the Union agree that the terms and provisions contained in this written
Agreement constitute the entire agreement between the parties and supersede all previous
communications, understandings, or memorandum of understandings, pertaining to any
matters set forth in this Agreement, or to any other matter. This Agreement expresses all
obligations and restrictions imposed on each of the respective parties during hs term.

ARTICLES
MANAGEMENT'S RIGHTS
SECTION 5.1 - MANAGEMENT'S RIGHTS
The Employer shall retain all of the rights, powers and authority vested in it prior to the
date of this Agreement. Unless the Employer has specifically set forth in this Agreement a
limitation upon the Employer's or the Chief's right or duty to manage the Fire District, the
Employer shall retain all rights imposed upon it by law, to carry out the administration of
the Employer and the Fire District. Except where specifically and expressly provided to
the contrary in this Agreement, the provisions of the Clearcreek Township Employee
Handbook and Clearcreek Fire District Policy and / or Procedures manual effective as of
the signing of this Agreement, and as amended from time to time, are recognized as an
appropriate exercise of the Employer' s reserved rights. The sole and exclusive rights of
management, which are not abridged by this Agreement, shall include (by way ofexample
and not by way of/imitation):
A - The right to direct, supervise, hire, promote, demote, layoff, suspend, discipline,
or discharge, for just cause; trnnsfer, assign, schedule and retain employees
terminate or otherwise relieve employees from duty for lack of work or
other legitimate reason.
B- The right to relieve employees from duty and determine the number ofpersonnel
needed in the Fire District, or to perform any function; determine the
services to be rendered, the operation to be performed, utilization of
technology, and overall budgetary matter.
C - The right to purchase equipment, material or services, or to contract for services
ifnecessary for the efficient management of the Fire District.
D - The right to determine the appropriate job duties and personnel by which
operations arc to be conducted; determine the overall mission of the Fire
District; maintain and approve the efficiency and effectiveness of the Fire
District, and the Employer.

4

Clellfcrcck Professional Firefighters l~o al
4207 Conu-11ct 202 l, 2022 & 2023

E - The right to make reasonable rules to regulate the Fire District, and to establish
and amend policies procedures general orders, special orders and
guidelines and necessary rules relating to lhe operation ofthe Fire District
in regard to any matter. To establish and enforce reasonable mles for the
maintenance of discipline.
F - The right lo take any necessary actions to carry out the mission of the Fire
District in situations of emergency; and to take whatever actions may be
necessary to carry out the wishes of the public not otherwise specified. The
right to hire and set the starting rate of pay within contractual salary ranges
as per the contract and to determine starting and quitting time and the
number of hours to be worked, including overtime, meals, breaks, rest
periods and cleanup times: to dete1mine the amount of supervisioo
necessary, work schedules and the method and process by which work is
performed. othing contained herein shall be construed as preventing the
Employer from restructuring the normal workday or workweek for the
purpose of promoting efficiency or improving services.
G - The right to determine equipment to be used; the processes, techniques, methods
and means of operations, schedules of shifts and working hours, maintain
and amend occupational classifications and job descriptions and establish
working rules, regulations, policies and procedures governing the conduct
of the employees. To discontinue processes or operations or to discontinue
their performance by employees of the Employer.

ll -

The power to determine the geographical location of Employer facilities, to
estabhsh new units and relocate or eliminate existing units or facilities in
part or in total.

I - The authority to assign shifls and duties.
J-

The right to determine the methods, means and number of personnel
needed to carry out Fire District responsibilities.

K-

The right to take such actions as may be necessary to carry out services as
determined by the Employer or the Chief and/or his designee.

L-

1 he right to introduce new or improved methods, operations, equipment or
facilities.

M-

The right to schedule overtime work as required.

N - The right to determine the need for additional educational courses, training
programs, and on-the-job training.
0 - To suspend, discharge or otherwise discipline employees for cause and
otherwise lo take such measures as Management may determine to be
necessary for the orderly, efficient and profitable operation of the business
including changing or abolishing past work customs and practices.

5

Clearcreek Professional Firefighters I.ocul
4207 Contract 2021. 2022 & 2023

SECTION 5.2 - MANAGEMENT'S RIGHTS
This listing ofspecific rights in this Agreement is not intended to be, nor shal I be, restrictive
of or a waiver of any of the rights of Management not listed and specifically surrendered
herein, whether or not such rights have been exercised by the Employer in the past. To the
extent the listed rights arc specifically limited by later provisions of this agreement the
alleged violations shall be subject to the grievance and arbitration procedures.

ARTICLE6
DUES DEDUCTION
SECTION 6.1 - DUES DEDUCTION
The Employer will deduct from the wages and tum over to the appropriately designated
person of the Union all periodic dues, initiation fees, and assessments of members of the
exclusive representative upon presentation of a written deduction authorization by the
employee; all such deductions shall be made in equal amounts during each pay period. The
authorization herein above mentioned shall specifically and in writing require the employee
and the International Association of Firefighters to agree to hold the Employer harmless
for any payments made to the Union by the Employer during the term of the voluntary
assignment.
Such dues and assessments shall be transmitted by the Employer to a representative
designated in writing by the Union. Such designation shall be filed with the Clearcreek
Township Fiscal Officer. Any change in designation shall immediately be made known to
the Clearcreek Township Fiscal Officer in writing.

SECTION 6.2 - DUES DEDUCTION
Any amount deducted from the employee's paycheck as voluntarily authorized and
provided above shall be turned over to the Union no later than thirty (30) days following
such deduction. Individual authorization shall be filed with the Employer and shall
continue in effect until revoked by written notice to the Employer by the employee.

6

Clearcreek ?ro fbssional Fire fighters Local
42()7 Conlract 2021. 20.22 & 2023

ARTICLE 7
NO STRIKE AND LOCKOUTS
SECTION 7.1 - NO STRIKE AND LOCKOUTS
During the life of this Agreement, the Union will not cause, authorize pen11it participate
in, or condone any sh·ike, slowdown, sit-down, work stoppage or other employee meetings
during working hours (except meetings called by the Employer), or other concerted
interruption or interference wjth the business of the Employer, including picketing of the
Employer's premises. Complete or partial reduction of operations or the complete
discontinuance, either temporarily or permanently, of any operation by the Employer for
economic reasons shall not be considered a lockout. During the tenn of this agreement,
the Employer shall engage in no lockout of employees covered by this agreement.

SECTION 7.2 - NO STRIKE AND LOCKOUTS
Any violation of Section 7.1 hereof by an employee shall constitute cause for discharge of
the employee or employees who participate therein.

SECTION 7.3 - NO STRIKE AND LOCKOUTS
In the event of any violations of Section 7.1 hereof, the International Union and Local
Union officers will take whatever steps are necessary to terminate said strike, slowdown.
sit-down, work stoppage or other concerted activities, which interrupt operations of the
Employer, or picketing in violation of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 8
NON-DISCRIMINATION
SECTION 8.1 - NON-DISCRIMINATION
Neither the Union nor the Employer shall discriminate against any employee based on age,
sex, race, color, religion, disability, or national origin. The Union shal l share equally with
the Employer the responsibility for applying this provision to the Agreement.
There shall be no discrimination, interference, restraint, coercion, or reprisals against any
employee because of Union membership, non-membership, or participation or nonparticipation in any lawful activity on behalf of the Union.

7

Clearcreek Professional Firefighters Locul
4207 Contract 2021, 2022 & 2023

ARTICLE9
SAVINGS CLAUSE
SECTION 9.l - SAVINGS CLAUSE
Should any part hereof or any provision herein contained be rendered or declared invalid
by reason of any existing or subsequently enacted legislation or by any decree of a court
of competent jurisdiction, such invalidation ofsuch part or portion of this Agreement shall
not invalidate the remaining portions thereof, and the remaining parts or portions remain
in full force and effect.

ARTICLE 10
PROBATIONARY PERIODS
SECTION 10.l -PROBATIONARY PERIODS
Each new career employee shall be required to serve a probationary period of twelve (12)
months from the commencement of his or her employment. The newly hired probationary
employee may be discharged for any reason during the probationary period at the sole
discretion of tbe Employer.
A newly promoted Clearcreek Township Bargaining Unit Employee shall be required to
serve a probationary period of twelve (J 2) months from the date of promotion. A newly
promoted Bargaining Unit employee may be demoted to the prior position at the discretion
of the Chief for unsatisfactory pcrfo1mance during the promotional probationary period.

SECTION 10.2 - NO APPEAL WHILE ON PROBATION
A newly hired probationary employee may receive a verbal reprimand, written reprimand,
suspension without pay, or te1mination any time within his probationary period and shall
have no appeal through the grievance procedure.

SECTJON 10.3 - EMT TO PARAMEDIC TRANSITION
An employee who is hired as a Fire fighter/EMT and obtains certification as a Paramedic
is not subject to additional probation beyond their original twelve (12) months. An
employee who possesses a valid State of Ohio Paramedic certification after successfully
completing probation will advance to Step I one (1) on the Fire District Salary Schedule
for Firefighter/Paramedic and proceed per Article 20.2.

8

Clearcreek Professional f irctighlers Local
4207 Co ntract 2021, 2022 & 2023

ARTICLE 11
LABOR/MANAGEMENT RELATIONS
SECTION 11.1 - LABOR/MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
In the interest of sound relations between the Union and the Employer, a joint committee
of the Chief and his dcsignee(s) shall meet with not more than three representatives from
the union. This committee will convene as necessary or on a more frequent basis should
labor or management choose for the purpose of discussing heaJth and safety of the
employees and/or the operation, implementation or interpretation of this agreement; and to
promote a more harmonious labor/management rclatfonship. Both parties will submit to
the other an agenda no later than five working days in advance, with not more than I 0
agenda items. In the event an issue arises or comes to the attention of either party less than
five working days prior to the meeting, either party may revise the agenda despite the
general "five working day" general mle.

ARTICLE 12
SAFETY AND HEAL TH
SECTION 12.1 - SAFETY AND HEALTH
The employees covered by the terms of this Agreement shall, at all times, while in the
employ of the Employer, be bound by the safety, health and reasonable work rules and
regulations established by the Employer which the Employer expressly reserves the right
to change at its discretion. It is the policy of the Clearcreek Fire District to conduct all
operations in a manner that provides the highest level ofsafety and health for all employees.
The prevention of accidents, injuries and occupational illnesses is a primary goal of the
Fire District and all personnel shall cooperate, participate, and conduct their activities
accordingly. This concern for safety and health encompasses all personnel involved in any
type of Fire District activity. Safety concerns may be addressed during the
labor/management process established ARTICLE 11.

ARTICLE 13
UNION BUSINESS
SECTION 13.1 - UNION REPRESENTATIVES
An IAFF or OAPFF representative may consult with members of the bargaining unit and
be admitted to the Employer's facilities at all reasonable times upon prior notification to
the Chief or his designee.

SECTION 13.2 - UNION EXECUTIVE BOARD
The Union Executive Board consists ofthe President, Vice-President, Secretary/Treasurer,
and Trustees. The names of these individual's shall be furnished to
9

Clearcreek Professional Firefighters Local
4Z07 Contract 2021, 2022 & 2023

the Employer Administrator and Chief. This 1ist shall be kept current by the Union at all
times.

SECTION 13.3 - UNION PRESIDENT
The highest ranking Union official in the bargaining unit shall be designated as the Union
President. Union business shall be conducted through the Union President unless otherwise
specified. The Union President's functions shall consist of:
(a)
(b)

attendance at Labor-Management meetings;
assisting the Union in processing and investigating grievances.*

*

The President shall be granted reasonable time lo investigate and process
formal grievances on the employers property with no loss of pay, if
conducted during his regular working hours and provided that such time is
required and approved in advance by the Chief Nothing herein shall be
construed to permit the President or any other union official to be relieved
ji-om their obligation to respond to calls/or service.

SECTION 13.4 - RIGHT TO REPRESENTATION
The Employer will comply with all legal requirements for the right to representation.

SECTION 13.5 - UNION MEETINGS
The Employer agrees to allow the Union to conduct its business meetings in the evenings,
in Employer facilities, provided the appropriate facilities have not previously been reserved
for other purposes and have been properly reserved by the union. Also, management shall
allow the unioh to hold an emergency union meeting shall the need arise, provided the
appropriate facilities have not previously been reserved for other purposes and are properly
requested by the union. The union president or his designee shall submit a request in writing
to the Chief or his designee On-duty members will be allowed to attend such meetings,
provided that attendance does not interfere with the efficiency and operation of the Fire
District.

SECTION 13.6 - BULLETIN BOARDS
The Employer agrees to provide bulletin board space in an agreed upon area at all stations
for use by the Union. Postings shall be confined to matters of Union concerns; no material
shall be posted which is deemed by the Employer to be negative, derogatory, sexually
explicit or unfavorable to the EmploycT in any way.

SECTION 13.7 - BARGAINING COMMITTEE
A bargaining committee not to exceed three (3) members shall be permitted to attend
negotiations during the term of the Agreement on a no loss, no gain basis.

SECTION 13.8 - NO WORKING TIME
No employee who conducts any union business outside regularly scheduled hours shall be
compensated.
IQ

Clearcreek Professional Firefi ghters Local
4207 Con lrnCI 2()21, 2022 & 2023

ARTICLE 14
ALCOHOL AND DRUG TESTING POLICY
SECTION 14.1 - PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
All Employees are subject to this Article. All employees covered by this Article are
prohibited from engaging in the following:

1.

Reporting to duty remaining on duty or performing any function while
having any alcohol concentration·

2

Reporting to duty remaining on duty, or performing any function while
using a controlled substance (including prescription drugs, unless the
physician has advised the employee that the substance does not adversely
q[fect the employee 's ability to June/ion) or if the employee tests positive
for controlled substances;

3.

Possessing alcohol while on duty;

4.

Using alcohol or controlled substances while on duty;

5.

Performing any functions within eight (8) hours after using alcohol;

6.

Using alcohol for eight (8) hours following an accident in which the
employee is required to take a post-accident alcohol test or until the
employee undergoes a post-accident alcohol test whichever occurs first;

7.

Refusing to submit to a post-accident, ra,ndom, reasonable suspicion or
follow-up alcohol or controlled substance test.

SECTION 14.2 -CONSEQUENCES
If an employee violates an.y of the prohibitions listed in Section 14.l of this Article, the
following consequences will result:
I.

The employee rnay be disciplined for any acts committed while under the
influence of alcoho1 or a controlled substance in accordance with the
disciplinary Article of this contract. An employee who tests positive will be
given an opportunity to participate in a rehabilitation program. An employee
shall be permitted only one (1) chance at rehabilitation. Disciplinary
conferences should be held within three (3) days of the notification of an
alleged violatjon, when possible.
lf the employee is not terminated, the employee may be required to apply
for accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal leave and compensatory
time, and Family and Medical Leave, if applicable, to cover any period of
absence. If the employee does not have sufficient paid leave to cover the
period of absence, the employee must request unpaid leave in accordance
with Employer policy.

2

The employee sha11 be immediately removed (taken out of service) from
any Employer function. Such removal is in accordance with federal

11

Clearcreek Professional r irelighlcrs Local
4207 Contract 2021, 2022 & 2023

regulations, and therefore not subject to any grievance procedure the
Employer follows.
At the Employer's discretion, an employee may be permitted to perform
non-safety sensitive functions, if the Employer determines that such a
position is available. If no such non-safety sensitive position is available,
and no paid leave is available, the employee can request an unpaid leave of
absence (e.g. Family and Medical leave, disability leave, or other unpaid
leave ofabsence).
3.

The employee shall be provided with information regarding the services
available for alcohol and substance abuse.

4.

The employee shall be evaluated by a substance abuse professional (SAP)
and may not perform any functions until all recommended counseling and
treatment is completed. These actions are in accordance with federal
regulation, and therefore not subject to any grievance procedtu-e the
Employer follows. If the SAP does not recommend any treatment or
counseling, then there shall be no further discipline under this policy unless
other provisions of this policy are violated or the employee has a blood
alcohol level greater than 0.04.
Failure to complete or participate in prescribed coW1seling rehabilitation
program shall result in the employee's termination. Any costs associated
with the prescribed counseling, treatment, or rehabilitation program are the
responsibility of the employee, unless otherwise covered by the Employersponsored medical benefit plan to which the employee participates.

5.

The employee will be subject to re-evaluation, return-to-duty testing and
unannounced follow•up tests for twelve (/ 2) months following the.
member's return to duty. These actions are in accordance with federal
regulations, and therefore not subject to any grievance procedure the
Employer follows.

SECTION 14.3 - REPORTING THE USE OF PRESCRIPTION/NONPRESCRIPTION MEDICINE
An employee is required to report the use ofany prescription or non•prescription medicines
containing alcohol or any of the prohibited controlled substances listed in Section 14.5,
below, to his supervisor. At the time the medication is prescribed, the employee shall
inquire as to whether the medication will impair the employee's ability to perform any
:functions. The employee shall be required to produce a signed statement from the treating
physician that any prescribed medication containing alcohol or a controlled substance (as
d~fined in Section US) does not impair the employee's abiUty to perform any functions
and/or does not interfere with the safe performance of the employee's job.
If the treating physician determines that the medication will impair the employee's ability
to perform his functions, the employee will be permitted to use accumulated sick leave,
vacation, personal leave, compensatory time, or unpaid leave to cover the period of

12

Clearcreek Professional Fircfighlm Local
4207 Contract 2021, 2022 & 2023

absence. The employee may also be required to follow the Employer's FMLA policy and
procedures if applicable, if the absence qualifies.

SECTION 14.4 - REQUIRED TESTING
An employee will be required to submit to testing for alcohol and/or controlled substances
under the following circumstances:
1.

Pre-Employment Testing: Prior to the first time an employee performs any
Employer function the employee will be tested for controlled substances.
The employee will not be pennitted to perform any functions unless the
controlled substance test results are negative.

The Employer shall arrange the time and location for the pre-employment
test. The applicant is responsible for reporting to the collection site for the
test. The Employer will be responsible for only the cost of the test itself. AU
other costs incurred by the applicant concerning a pre-employment test are
entirely the applicant's responsibility.
2

Post-Acciden Testing: As soon as practicable following: (a) an employee
who suffers or causes an employee to suffer a service-connected injury or
illness incurred in the course of and arising out of employment with the
Employer, (b) an accident in which a fatality occurs, (c) an accident in
which an injury is treated away from the scene and the employee receives a
citation for a moving violation arising from the accident, {d) an accident in
which a vehicle is required to be towed from the scene and the employee
receives a citation for a moving violation arising from the accident, or (e)
when an employee causes a vehicle accident- the employee shall be tested
for alcohol and controlled substances. The Employer shall cease attempts to
administer the test eight
(8) hours following the accident for alcohol and after thirty-two (32) hours
for controlled substances.

The employee shall be transported to the collection site by a representative
of the Employer. Fol1owing the test, the employee shall be transported home
and the employee will not be pennitted to perform any filllctions until a
negative controlled substance test result is reported.
Following a breath alcohol test which shows no detectable amount of
alcohol, the employee will be permitted to apply for accumulated sick leave,
vacation, personal leave, compensatory time, or unpaid leave to cover the
period of absence until the controlled substance test results are available. If
the controlled substance test results are negative, the employee will be
credited for the used paid leave, or compensated for the period of leave
without pay at the employee's regular hourly rate of pay, unless other work
rule violation(s) have occurred.
Following a breath alcohol test, which shows any detectable level of
alcohol the employee will be taken home and permitted to apply for
accumulated paid leave. The employee may not perfonn any functions for
a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours. An employee with a breath alcohol
test of less than 0.04 shall also be subject to appropriate disciplinary
13

Clearcreek Professional Firelighters Local
4207 Contract 202 1. 2022 & 2023

measures in accordance with the Employer's Drug Free Workplace Policy
or other applicable policies.
Following a breath alcohol test result indicating any concentration, or
following a positive controlled -substance or illegal drug test result, if the
employee's employment is not terminated, the employee may request the
use ofaccumulated sick leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory time,
or unpaid leave and the consequences listed in Section 14.2 above will
result.

3.

Random Testin&; A minimum number of employees (currently 10 % for
alcohol and 50% for controlled substances) annually will be randomly
selected using a scientifically valid method in which each employee will
have an equal chance of being tested each time selections are made. The
dates for testing shall be unannounced and spread throughout the calendar
year. When an employee is selected for testing, he shall cease doing their
function and proceed to the test site immediately. If an employee is
randomly selected for an alcohol test and that employee is not currently
performing, just about to perform, or just finished performing their
Employer function, the employee's selection may be kept confidential until
the next time that employee performs an Employer function.
Following a breath alcohol test, which shows any detectable level of
alcohol, the employee will be taken home and pennitted to apply for
accumulated paid leave. The employee may not perform any functions for
a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours. An employee with a breath alcohol
test of less than 0.04 shall also be subject to appropriate disciplinary
measures in accordance with the Employer's Drug Free Work-place Policy
or other applicable policies.
Following a breath alcohol test result indicating any concentration or
following a positive controlled substance test result, if the employee's
employment is not terminated~ the employee may request the use of
accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory time, or
unpaid leave and the consequences listed in Section 14.2 above will result.

4.

Reasonable Suspicion Ic.stjne: A trained supervisor or official may
require an employee to undergo testing for alcohol or controlled substances
based upon specific, contemporaneous, articulable observations concerning
the appearance, behavior, speech, or body odors of the employee. If an
employee is required to undergo testing under this section, the employee
must immediately cease to perform their Employer function and he will be
transported to the collection site by a representative of the Employer. If an
employee is required to undergo reasonable suspicion controlled substance
testing, such employee shall not be permitted to perform any Employer
functions until a negative controlled substance test result is reported.
Following a reasonable suspicion controlled substance test, the employee
will be permitted to apply for accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal
leave, compensatory time, or unpaid leave until the test results are available.
If the controlled substance test results are negative and no other
14

Clearcreek Pcofcssional Firefighters Local
4207 Contract 202 1, 2022 & 102J

work ntle violation(s) have occurred, the employee shall be returned to his
position and credited for his entire used paid leave or compensated for the
period of leave without pay at the employee's regular hour]y rate of pay.
Following a breath alcohol test, which shows any detectable level of
alcohol, the employee will be taken home and pennitted to apply for
accwnulated paid leave. The employee may not perform any Employer
functions for a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours. An employee with a
breath alcohol test of less than 0.04 shall also be subject to appropriate
disciplinary measures in accordance with the mployer's Drug Free
Workplace Policy or other applicable policies.
Following a breath alcohol test result indicating any concentration or
following a positive controlled substance test result, if the employee's
employment is not terminated, the employee may request the use of
accumulated sick leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory time, or
unpaid leave and the consequences listed in Section 14.2 above will result.
The Employer will cease attempts to administer the test eight (8) hours after
the observation was made.
5.

Return..To Duty Testine: Before an employee who has been found to be
in violation of the prohibitions section of this Article, set out in Section
14.1 , may return to duty in a position requiring the performance of any
functions, the employee must undergo testing for alcohol and/or controlled
substances. The results of the alcohol test must show no concentration if the
offense involved alcohol and the controlled substance test must be negative
if the offense involved controlled substances. Any costs associated with this
test will be the responsibility of the employee at the time the test is
administered.
Follow-Up Testing;. When an employee has been found to be in violation
of the prohibitions sectjon of this Article, set out in Section 14.1, and the
substance abuse professional has determined that the employee needs
assistance in resolving alcohol or substance abuse problems, the employee
will be subject to a minimum of two (2) unannounced follow-up tests within
the first twelve (J 2) months as directed by the substance abuse professional.
Any costs associated with this test will be the responsibility of the employee
at the time the test is administered.

SECTION 14.5 - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Controlled substances for the purpose of this Article shall include all legal, illegal and
prescription drugs containing marijuana, cocaine, opiates (e.g. codeine, morphine, etc.)
PCP and amphetamines. All drug screening and confirmation tests shall be conducted by
a laboratory certified under the DHl IS "Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug
Testi ng Programs". The Employer and the laboratory shall have a clear and well~
documented procedure for collection, shipment and accessing of urine specimens. The
Employer, the collection site and the laboratory shall follow the procedures in 49 CFR Part
40, including an evidentiary chain of custody and control and split sample collection and
testing.
15

Clca.rcreek Professional Firefighters Local
4207 Contract 2021, 2022 & 2023

The collection site person is responsible for maintaining the integrity of the specimen
collection and transfer process. All procedures shall be outlined in writing and provided to
Employer representatives and donors. A separate sample will be made available for lhe
employee being tested. The member may request that the sample be sent to a neutral
laboratory certified under DHHS for testing. The cost of this test will be borne by the
bargaining unit member.

SECTION 14.6 - TRAINED TECHNICIAN
A trained breath alcohol technician (BAT) shall administer all alcohol breath tests or a law
enforcement officer certified to conduct such tests. Only evidential breath testing (BEY)
devices shall be used alone with the prescribed breath alcohol testing form. The Employer
and the testing facil ity shall follow the procedures in 49 CFR Pru.1 40.

SECTION 14.7 - REFUSAL TO SUBMIT
Refusal to submit to any of the alcohol ot controlled substance tests required by this Article
will result in the employee's immediate removal from the any Employer functions and may
result in disciplinary action. Refusal will be treated as a positive test and the employee will
be referred to a counseling program and subject to return-to-duty and follow-up testing.
Actions constituting a refusal to submit to a test include:
1.

Failing to provide adequate breath for alcohol testing;

2.

Failing to provide adequate urine for controlled substance testing;

3.

Engaging in conduct that clearly obstructs the testing procedure;

4.

Failing to remain readily available for a post-accident test.

SECTION 14.8 - ZERO TOLERANCE
Employees who have been tested for alcohol with the results showing any concentration
will not be permitted to perform any functions for twenty-four (24) hours following
administration of the test. Discipline may be administered in accordance with the
Employer's Drug Free Workplace Act Policy or in accordance with any labor agreement
between the parties and/or other disciplinary policies.

SECTION 14.9 - CALL OUTS
Where applicable, employees who are on call are responsible for infonning the Employer
when the employee is called if he is unable to repmt due to alcohol consumption. The
Employer will, whenever possible, notify employees of the likelihood of a call out
situation.

SECTION 14.10- EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Information regarding the effects ofalcohol and controUed substance use on an individual's
health, work, and personal life, and information about drug and alcohol counseling,
rehabilitation, and employee assistance programs is available through the Assistant
Administrator's Office or the Chief's Office, and will be periodically provided to
employees.
16

Clearcreek Pro fessional Fircfighters l..-0cal
4207 Contract 202 L, 2022 & 2023

Employees are encouraged to voluntarily admit problems with drugs and alcohol prior to
violating Employer policies. If an employee voluntarily enters into counseling or
rehabilitation he will be permitted to apply for an unpaid leave, personal leave, or other
leave of absence. The employee may also be permitted or required to use all available sick
leave, vacation, personal leave, compensatory time, and Family and Medical Leave, if
applicable. Any costs associated with a voluntary counseling or rehabilitation program are
the responsibility of the employee, unless otherwise covered by the Employer- sponsored
medical benefit plan to which the employee participates.

SECTION 14.11 - OBTAINING EMPLOYEES RECORDS
Upon written request from the employee, the Employer will promptly provide copies of
any records pertaining to the employee's use of alcohol or controlled substances including
the results of any tests. The Employer may charge a reasonable fee for copies. However
access to this information will not be contingent upon payment for records other than those
specifically requested.

SECTION 14.12 - COMPLIANCE TO ALL OTHER REGULATIONS
All bargaining unit employees are subject to this A1iicle and remain subject to all other
policies, procedures, rules, regulations, and collective bargaining agreements established
by the Employer under its independent authority, which are not inconsistent with the
requirements herein. All employees also remain subject to all other relevant federal, state,
and local laws and regulations.

ARTICLE 15
PHYSICAL FITNESS AND WELLNESS
SECTION 15.1 - ROUTINE PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS
Regular employees may have a minimum of one physical exa1J1ination biennially until the
age of forty-five ( 45) and annually thereafter. The township shall pay the cost of such
examinations. These examinations shall be performed by a qualified physician which shall
be designated by the township. These examinations shall be for the purpose or determining
the employee's abili ty to perform his duties with average efficiency. The e physicals will
be scheduled by the employee, off duty, in the month of their birthday.

SECTION 15.2 - ADDITIONAL EXAMINATIONS
Employees return ing from disability or sick leave shall be subject to physical performance,
fitness and/or medical examinations appropriate to the employee' s duties. These additional
physical examinations and supplemental medical evaluations may be ordered by the Chief
or lhe Township Administrator and paid for by the township. [f the employee chooses to
select his own physician for the physical examination, the fee shall be paid by the employee
and the medical report will be submitted to the physician chosen by the township to make
an evaluation of the employee's condition and overall fitness. However, the Chief or the
Township Administrator reserves the right to require additional physical examinations at
the township ' s expense. These examinations shall be
17

Clearcreek Professional Firefighters Locul
4207 Conlraot 202 1, 2022 & 2023

for the purpose of determining the employee' s ability to perform his duties with average
efficiency.

SECTION 15.3 - CORRECTIVE MEASURES
ln requiring a physical examination or medical evaluation, the Chief shall request that the
examining physician recommend measures be taken by the employee to correct or improve
any health or physical condition which impairs the employee in the performance of his
assigned duty. The Chief may direct the employee to follow such corrective measures
within the time frame recommended by the physician and order follow-up examinations.
Failure to follow corrective measure shall be grounds for d_isciplinary action up to and
including termination.

SECTION 15.4 - WELLNESS PROGRAM
To ensure the fitness and wellness of all employees, the employees are eligible to
participate in a wellness program at The Helen & Charles Coffman Family YMCA in
Springboro, Ohio. The Employer will participate in the YMCA of Metropolitan Dayton
Corporate Membership Program. This would entitle employees to become members at a
discounted rate. The employee may, by payroll deduction, have his membership fee
deducted from his paycheck. It is the intent of this program to enhance aerobic capacity,
improve strength and/or flexibility, non-passively improve ability to perform strenuous
work and actively assist the employee in reducing body fat to assist in any compliance with
Section 15.1 .

SECTION 15.5 - USE OF TOBACCO
Employee shall not use any type oftobacco products on duty. Employees shall not use any
type of non-tobacco products which arc smoked or any form of electronic cigarette while
on duty.

ARTICLE 16
SENIORITY
SECTION 16.1- SENIORITY
Seniority shall be defined as the length ofcontinuous, petmanent, full time employee's date
of first service with the Clearcreek Fire District. Seniority shall not be available to
employees during their probationary period, but shall be retroactive to the date of service
upon successful completion of the probationary period. Seniority shall be lost when an
employee:
12345-

Resigns;
ls discharged;
ls laid off and not recalled within one (}) calendar year;
Is off the payroll for any reason whatsoever, except military leave, for one
(1) calendar year; or
rs laid off by the Employer for a period of tl1eir Employer Seniority or one
(l) calendar year. whichever period is less.
18

Ch:arcrcck Pro fessional rirefightcrs Local
4207 Contrac t 202 1, 2022 & 2023

SECTION 16.2 - SENIORITY
For purposes of vacation picks seniority with.in rank will be based upon date of promotion.

ARTICLE 17
LAYOFFS AND RECALL
SECTION 17.1 - LAYOFF
Layoff of employees shal I be made in the inverse order of the date when an employee ftrst
entered into full time service with the Clearcreek Fire District. If it is found that two or
more employees have the same starting date, then layoff order for the employees involved
shall be determined by an established seniority list. A current list will be maintained by fire
administration and posted at fire headquarters.

BUMPING RIGHTS FOR LAYOFF
The Township reserves the right to determine the number of personnel requ ired at each
rank or classification within the fire district. Layoff may occur based on rank or
classification, as determined by the Township.
1f an employee has no opportunity to bump within the same class or rank then such
employee shall have bumping rights within his department against the least senior fulltime employee holding a position -in the next lower rank or class. Ifno bumping opportunity
-is afforded, the s&me right shall extend to the next and each lower rank or class until the
lower ranks or classes are exhausted.

SECTION 17.2 - RECALL
The Employer shall establish a recaH list for each classification in which a layoff has
occurred. The list shall consist of the names of laid off employees in the inverse order of
their layoff, with the most recently laid off person at the top of the list. Should the Employer
desire to fill a position within the Fire District in a classification to which a recall line
exists, that position shall be first offered to qualified person on the list in the inverse order
oflayoff, with the most recently laid off person receiving the offer first. The position must
be offered to every qualified person on the list in accordance with seniority before a new
employee is hired. At the time the recall is announced all laid off firefighters on the recall
list will be notified by regular mail at their last known address and instructed to notify the
Employer of their availability within seven (7) days of the post date of the notice.

SECTION 17.3 - RECALL RIGHTS
Employees shall have recall rights for one (1) year from the date of layoff or for the length
of seniority, which ever is less. An employee who declines a recall offer may be removed
from the recall Iist. An employee who is on lay-off for a period of twelve ( 12) months is
automatica1ly terminated and loses all seniority and eligibility for benefits except as
required by law.

19

Clearcreek l'rolcssional Firulighters 1.ocal
4207 Contract 2021 . 2022 & 2023

ARTICLE 18
DISCIPLINE
SECTION 18.1 - DISCIPLINE
No regular employee who has completed probation may be disciplined or discharged
except for just cause and/or for violation of the Fire District and/or Employer guidelines,
rules, regulations, policies, and procedures. Probationary employees may be disciplined or
discharged at the discretion of the Employer. Where it is appropriate, steps of discipline
are verbal counsel, verbal reprimand, written reprimand, paid or unpaid administrative
leave, suspension, and dismissal. Some or all of these steps may be eliminated where it is
appropriate or where the guidelines/rules call for it. Other types of discipline, such as
demotion, may also be involved where they are appropriate.
All disciplinary action will be in accordance with Fire District and/or Employer guidelines,
rules, regulations, policies, and procedures that are not in conflict with this agreement.

SECTION 18.2 - DISCIPLINARY PROCESS
The Chief shall approve all discipline regardless of the level. The Chief may designate
another member of management to act on behalf of the Chiefduring the discipline process.
Accordingly, the ''Chi.er• shall be read to include ''or the Chiefs designee" throughout this
Article. The exclusive means of appeal of a suspension or dismissal shall be the grievance
procedure set forth in Alticle 19, and shall begin at Step 4.
When the Employer commences a disciplinary action that may result in a suspension of
three (J) or more work days or dismissal, the following process shal l be utilized:
(1) Pre-disciplinary Hearing.

A pre-disciplinary hearing shall be scheduled to determine the merit of the allegations
against the employee. The pre-disciplinary hearing will be conducted by the Chief. The
Chief shall begin the pre-disciplinary hearing by informing the employee of the charges
against him. The pre-disciplinary hearing is not intended as an evidentiary hearing but only
as an opportunity for the employee to present his side of the facts and to prevent mistaken
initial determinations of the employee' s misconduct. The employee has the right to appear
in person at the pre-disciplinary hearing and to be represented by counsel and/ or a union
representative, provided, however, that the employee' s counsel and / or union
representative shall not hinder the finding of facts in any way. The Chief shall set a date
for the pre-disciplinary hearing within twenty-one (2 /) business days of the employee
being served with formal charges or being placed on unpaid leave. All time limits on the
grievance procedure will be held in abeyance pending the conclusion of this procedure.
Any time prior to the pre-disciplinary hearing, the employee may elect in writing to waive
his opportunity to have a pre-disciplinary hearing.

20

Clearcreek Professional Firefighters Locul
4207 Co ntract 2021 , 2022 & 2023

(2) Disciplina,y Hearing.

The Chief shall schedule a disciplinary hearing to occur no later than twenty-one (21)
business days following the conclusion of the pre-disciplinary hearing. At the disciplinary
hearing, the employee has the right to (J) appear in person and be represented by legal
counsel or a union representative of the employee's choosing, (2) examine any witnesses
which may be presented against the employee, (J ) present any witnesses or documents
which the employee may choose in their defense, an,d (4) answer all charges against them.
The employee must provide a list of witnesses that the employee intends to call and submit
all documents that the employee intends to introduce no later than seven (7) business days
before the disciplinary hearing. The Chief may issue discipline, up to and including
tennination, at the conclusion of the disciplinary hearing or within seven (7) business days.
During the disciplinary process established in this Section, the Chief may, at his discretion,
place the employee who is subject to potential discipline on administrative leave, with or
without pay, until the conclusion of the disciplinary process.

SECTION 18.3 - TIME LIMITS
The time limits imposed in this Article may be extended at any step by mutual written
consent of the parties in that step.

ARTICLE 19

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
SECTION 19.1 - DEFINITION AND STEPS
DEFINITION - A grievance is defined as an allegation that the terms of this written
Agreement have been violated. Resolution of grievances shall be pursued in accordance
with the following steps:

STEP I
An employee who has a grievance may discuss the grievance with his immediate supervisor
if an oral discussion may be conducive to resolving the matter. An oral djscussion will,
however, not relieve the employee from the obligation of filing a written grievance within
the time period set forth herein. A grievance shall be reduced to writing and set forth the
details of the grievance (i.e. , the facts upon which it is based, the approximate time ofthe
occurrence, the relief or remedy requested) and shall be submitted to the immediate
supervisor within ten ( / 0) business days after the grievance. The day following the date of
the occurrence shall be considered the first day ofthe ten
(10) business day period, The immediate supervisor should give his response in writing to
the Grievant within ten(/ 0) business days after the grievance was presented to him.

21

Clearcreek Professional Firelighters Local
4207 Contract 202 I. 2022 & 2023

STEP2
If the grievance is not resolved at STEP 1 to the satisfaction of the Grievant, it shall be
presented by the Grievant to the Assistant Fire Chief or his designee within ten ( / 0)
business days of the decision of the immediate supervisor. The Assistant Fire Chiefor his
designee should respond in writing within ten (10) business days of the date of the receipt
of the grievance.

STEP3
If the grievance is not resolved at STEP 2 to the satisfaction of the Grievant, it shall be
presented by the Orievant to the Chief or his designee within ten (10) business days of the
decision of the Assistant Fire Chief. The Chief or his designee, should respond in writing
within ten (10) business days of the date of the receipt ofthe grievance.

STEP4
Should the Grievant after receiving the written response to their grievance at STEP 3 of
this procedure still feel that the grievance has not been resolved satisfactorily; the Grievant
may appeal in writing within ten (J 0) business days to the Township Administrator. The
Township Administrator shall respond in writing within ten (J 0) business days of receipt
of the grievance.

STEPS
Should an employee/grievant, after receiving the written response to his grievance at STEP
4 of the Grievance Procedure still feel that the grievance has not been resolved to his
satisfaction he may, through the Clearcreek Professional Firefighters, request that it be
heard by an Arbitrator. The Clearcreek Professional Firefighters shall make application to
the Trustees or designee for arbitration within ten (10) business days of receipt of the
written response from STEP 4. Within ten (10) business days following the Trustees
receipt of the Clearcreek Professional Firefighters application for arbitration, the Trustees
and the Clearcreek Professional Firefighters representative or his designee will attempt to
select an impartial arbitrator by mutual agreement. If no agreement is reached, a joint letter
wilt be issued requesting the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to provide a list
of arbitrators. Upon receipt of such list, the Clearcreek Professional firefighters and the
Trustees shall alternately cross off one name until one name remains, that person being
selected as Arbitrator. A date will be set as soon as possible in accordance with the wishes
of the Trustees, the Clearcreek Professional Firefighters, and the availability of the
Arbitrator.

SECTION 19.2 - ARBITRATION
The decision of the Arbitrator shall be binding on all parties. The Township Trustees and
the Clearcreek Professional Firefighters agrees the loser will pay for the cost of the
arbitration. Any party producing the same shall pay the expense of the expert witness. The
employee filing the grievance shall have the right to have representation of legal counsel
or the Clearcreek Professional Firefighters at any time after STEP 2 of the Grievance
Procedure.
22

Clearcreek Professional Firelighters Local
4207 Contrac t 2021 , 2022 & 2023

SECTION 19.3 - TIME LIMITS
The time limits imposed in this Artjcle may be extended at any step by mutual written
consent of the parties in tbat step.

SECTION 19.4 - CLASS ACTION
In any grievance filed by a class of employees, that class shall select one employee to
represent it.

SECTION 19.5 - WAl VER OF TIME LIMITS
The titne limit set forth in this grievance procedure may be waived by mutual agreement
of the parties in writing. Unless such time restrictions are waived they shall be strictly
applied. The burden ofcomplying with the time t'cstrictions falls upon the grievant and the
Union pursuing the grievance. Failure by the grievant to comply with the time limits set
forth in this procedure shall result in the termination of the grievance. The events or acts
of the Employer giving rise to the grievance shall be deemed to have been within the proper
authority of the Employer, and not in violation of the terms of this Agreement. Failure on
the part of any supervisor the Chief or his designce, the Township Administrator or the
Trustees or their designee, to respond within the time limits set forth in this Agreement
shal I be the equivalent of a denial of the grievance, and shall not be construed as a default
or a granting of the relief requested.

SECTION 19.6 - EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATION
All grievances shall be brought exclusively lhrough the union by its designated
representative. Any grievance filed shall have at least two (2) signatures; that of the
president and the other ofeither ,the vice-president, secretary or trustees of the bargaining
unit. The employees covered hereunder shall be bound by any decision, determinations
agreements, or settlements which may be effectuated pursuant to invoking the grievancearbitration procedure including any determinations as to the merits or arbitrability of a
grievance, as shall be made by the authorized representative who is an employee covered
by this Agreement handling the grievance, provided however that such determinations
regarding arbitrability or merits shall be made upon the facts with which the authorized
representative is confronted.

SECTION 19.7 - GRIEVANCE AND/OR COMPLAINT RESOLUTION
This Agreement is to be used exclusively in the resolution of a grievance or complaint in
lieu of the Township Complaint Resolution Procedure described in the Employee
Handbook.

SECTION 19.8 - SUPERVISOR NO RESPONSE

rr a supervisor fails to respond during the timelines set forth in this agreement, the
requested grievance resolution is considered denied and the employee can move forward
to the next step.

23

Clearoreek Professiomil Firctii;htors Local
4207 Conlracl 202 1, 2022 & 2023

ARTICLE 20
WAGES
SECTION 20.1 - WAGE RATES
Bargaining unit members shall be compensated as provided for in Appendix A. The
salaries listed in Appendix A are based on twenty-four (24) hours on and forty-eight (48)
hours off shift schedule of 2704 hours per year. 2704 shall be divided by twenty-six (26),
the standard number of pay cycles in a calendar year, to determine the bi-weekly pay
amount. All regularly-scheduled work hours, not including Kelly Days shall count toward
the 2704. Kelly Days and bu.ilt~in overtime shall be paid throughout the calendar year. Ten
(10) hours ofpay will be added to each pay to account for Kelly Days and built in overtime.
This article is not intended to affect hours worked outside of the bargaining unit members'
regularly scheduled hours.
A bargaining unit members annual salary is calculated by multiplying lhe employees
hourly rate by their base pay (2704 hours), holiday pay (spread out over 26 pay cycles),
and 260, as defined above.
Bargaining unit members assigned to a forty (40) hour work week shall be compensated as
provided in Appendix A. The salaries listed in Appendix A shall be divided by 2080 (the
standard work hours in a year for administrative employees). 2080 hours shall be divided
by twenty-six (26), the standard number of pay cycles in a calendar year, to determine the
amount paid bi-weekly.

SECTION 20.2 - ANNUAL INCREASES
st
Contractual increases will take effect the first pay period following January 1 of each
contract year; step increases will take effect the first pay period following the employee
reaching his anniversary date, and will then take effect the first pay period following
January JS1 of each contract year. All step increases will be subject to the bargaining unit
member receiving at least a "Meets Expectations" on the cumulative score of his annual
evaluation. Tf an employee fails to receive the required cumulative score, then the employee
will not be eligible for the step increase until the following January, providing the employee
meets the required cumulative score on the next evaluation.

ARTICLE 21
HOURS OF WORK
SECTION 21.1 - HOURS OF WORK
Bargairung unit members will be assigned to either a twenty-four (24) hours on and fortyeight (48) hours off shift schedule or a forty (40) hour work week. Employees assigned to
24/48 shift can be temporarily assigned to a 40 hour schedule for temporary training
assignments, transitional work, or other reason determined by the Fire Chief with no loss,
no gain in pay or benefits.
24

Clearcreek Professional Fi relighters Local
4207 Con tract 2021 , 2022 & 2023

The Township agrees to compensate bargaining unit members at a rate o[ one-and-onehalfthe bargaining unit members' straight time hourly rate for those hours actually worked
outside of the bargaining unit members' normally scheduled hours of work. For this
Article, time spent on vacation leave, personal leave, sick leave injury leave, bereavement
leave, Kelly Days, and all other leaves will not count as hours worked for the purpose of
the payment of overtime.

SECTION 21.2 - KELLY DAYS
Bargaining unit members assigned to a twenty-four (24) hours on and forty-eight (48) hours
off shift schedule shall be assigned a Keliy Day. Kelly Days will fall on the same day of
the week, every six (6) weel<:s and shall not be traded. Kelly Days will be selected by
members in order of rank then seniority. Kelly Days for Captains shall be Tuesday
Wednesday, or Thursday. Kelly Days for Lieutenants shall be Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday. An attempt will be made to evenly distributed Kelly Days
throughout every day of the week. In the event a Kelly Day is vacated, that day can be bid
on based on the criteria stated above and will take effect the following January. Kelly Days
will be re~selected before January of the final year of this agreement to take effect the
following contract cycle.

SECTION 21.3 - MANDATORY TRAINING ON KELLY DAYS
Employees who attend mandatory training on a Kelly Day shall be paid half-time on lop
of their regular hourly rate for actual hours spent at training on the Kelly Day.

ARTICLE22
OVERTIME
SECTION 22.1 - OVERTIME
Overtime shall be paid in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act. It is understood
and agreed by the parties that when the Employ.er has determined that the operational needs
of the department require overtime, any or all employees may be required to work overtime.

SECTION 22.2 - DISTRIBUTION OF OVERTIME HOURS
After exhausting all resources and it is determined that overtime is necessary, overtime
will be offered to bargaining unit members using the following system:
The Fire District will maintain an overtime notification list for each employee. The lists
will be established by classification for the following: Firefighter/ Paramedic or EMT,
Lieutenant, and Captain. Each January 1st, the list will reset with the most senior Fire
District employee by current rank, listing all other employees in succession by their
seniority and ending with the least senior employee in that rank.
1. The Fire District will determine the need for overtime as soon as possible and
begin the notification process to fill the overtime in question as soon as possible.

2. All eligible employees in a classification will be notified electronically of
25

Clearcreek Professionnl Firelighters Local
4207 Con(ract 202 1, 2022 & 2023

available overtime. Employees will have at least fifteen (15) minutes to respond
regarding their interest in accepting the overtime. It is the employees
responsibility to make sure their contact information is kept up to date.
3. The person responsible for filling the overtime will keep a log of all personnel who
respond and arc interested in accepting the overtime. The employee who responds
that is highest on the list will be awarded the overtime, and will be notified of this and
asked to call back and confirm the award. The person that is awarded the overtime will
move to the bottom ofthe list.
4. The person responsible for filling the overtime will update the list accordingly,
and will duly note if the employee was ordered-in.
5. Except in an emergency situation, employees on the following leave will be
considered ineligible to be ordered in: FMLA, sick leave, bereavement leave,
disciplinary suspension, Kelly Day, personal leave, scheduled vacation, and
trades.
6. Leave ineligibilities begin immediately at the end of the employee' s regularly
scheduled shift, and end upon the employee' s return to duty on their next
regularly scheduled shift.
7. Employees on sick leave immediately priot to the overtime may not voluntarily
accept, or be ordered-in for overtime, until they have worked their next regularly
scheduled shift.
8. Scheduled overtime will generally be offered in 12-hour increments, with a
maximum of 48 consecutive hours worked by an employee.
9. If overtime is accepted but is later canceled by the employer, the employee will be
placed back to their original place on the list.
l0. If an employee accepts an overtime assignment of less than 6 hours, it will not
affect the employee's position on the list.
Use of the list, while desirable in all circumstances, is not required when there is less than
nine (9) hours' notice of the need for the overtime assignment. The nine (9) hour time
frame shall not be used as a means to avoid using voluntary overtime lists. In these
situations overtime may be offered electronically or through any appropriate means.
Employees may work overtime outside their current rank if overtime becomes available
inside the nine (9) hour window.
fn the event the position cannot be filled on a voluntary basis using the overtime list, the
lowest seniority person with appropriate qualifications will be required to fill the
position. Mandatory overtime will be rotated in a reverse seniority order, starting with
the least senior member in each classification. The mandatory overtime list will reset
every January 1si_ When appropriate, an overtime vacancy may be filled with someone
from another classification prior to using mandatory overtime. In the event of an
emergency situation, the employer may require all employees to work as required.
26

Clearcreek f>rofc~sional Pirefighters Locnl
4207 Contract 2021, 2022 & 2023

SECTION 22.3 - QUALIFICATIONS
When the Employer determines that overtime is necessary and special qualifications are
required, the award of overtime may be offered to the first member on the list that meets
the necessary qualifications.

ARTICLE23
ARTICLE REMOVED

ARTICLE 24
CALL BACK AND CALL-IN PAY
SECTION 24.1 - REPORTING PAY
An employee who reports to work at a scheduled starting time, who is sent home early,
shall receive a minimum of two (2) hours pay at the applicable straight or overtime rate
depending on the circumstances.

SECTION 242 - CALL BACK
Any employee called back for work outside his regularly schedu.led hours for a
departmental alarm shall be paid for actual hours worked at the applicable rate of pay.
Employees called back for office meetings, legal appearances, special inspections and
teaching, training assignments, and ''recall" for major incidents, shall be paid for a
minimum of two (2) hours at the applicable rate.

ARTICLE25
PERSONAL DAYS
SECTION 25.1 - PERSONAL DAYS
Each employee shall be credited with two (2) personal leave days per year. Personal leave
days shall not be deducted from earned sick leave. Personal leave days must be taken as
one full day of leave. Employees must schedule and use personal day leave on or before
December 31 ltl of each calendar year. A personal day not scheduled and used on or before
December 3 P.1 will be dropped. A third personal day may be used in the calendar year and
will be deducted from the employee s sick leave hours. Empl oyees can bump another
employee' s personal day based on seniority up to one hundred twenty (120) days prior to
the requested day.

27

Clearcreek Professional Pircfightcrs Local
4207 Contract 2021, 2022 & 2023

ARTICLE 26
SICK LEAVE
SECTION 26.1 - NOTIFICATION
An employee requesting sick leave shall notify the on-duty shift commander ofthe fact and
the reason as far in advance as possible but in no case later than (45) forty-five minutes
prior to the beginning of a scheduled shift. Sometimes, the notification can even be made
the evening prior to the scheduled duty day. This allows time for the supervisor or duty
officer to make arrangements for coverage. Upon the employee's request, vacation leave
may be used as sick leave after sick leave is exhausted.
Failure to notify the supervisor (45) forty-five minutes or more prior to the beginning of a
scheduled shift may result in the employee not being granted sick leave or being paid for
any absences; the employee will also be subject to disciplinary action up to and including
termination.

SECTION 26.2 - ACCRUAL
Sick leave credit, for those on a 24/48 schedule, shall be accrued at the rate of 6.5 hours
per pay cycle (two week,;;) for bargaining unit members, exclusive of ove1iime, unpaid leave
of absence or disciplinary suspension. The maximum amount of time permitted to
accumulate is 2162 hours.
Sick leave credit, for those working a 40 hour schedule, shall be accrued at the rate of 4.6
hours per pay cycle (two weeks) for bargaining unit members, exclusive of overtime,
unpaid leave of absence or disciplinary suspension. The maximum amount of time
permitted to accumulate is 1640 hours.

Conversion: An employee's hours will be multiplied by 0.76 percent when an employee
moves from 24/48 assignment to forty (40) hour assignment. An employee's hours will be
multiplied by 1.32 percent when moving from forty (40) hour assignment to 24/48
assignment. Any employee that has accumulated the maximum hours will remain at
maximum and not have a conversion formula applied.

SECTION 26.3- GRANT OF SICK LEAVE
Sick leave may be granted to the employee upon request for the following reasons:
l - TI!ness or injury of the employee or injury or illness of his or her immediate
family where the employee's presence is reasonably necessary.
2 - Exposure of employee or a member of his or her immediate family to a
contagious disease which would have the potential of jeopardizing the
health ofthe employee or the health ofothers.
3 - Employee childbirth and/or related medical conditions.
4- Any other medical condition qualifying for the Family Medical Leave Act.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as to require the Chief or designee to approve the
use of sick leave by an employee.
Should the Chief or designee determine, based on j ust cause, that an employee has not used
sick leave properly, payment may be denied, and the employee may be disciplined.
28

Clearcreek Profess ional Firelighters Local
421)7 Coniract 202 1, 2022 & 2023

Employees who do not report for work due to s.ickness and who have exhausted their sick
leave days, are subject to disciplinary action for being absent without approved leave. The
Chief or designee is authorized to approve leave without pay.

SECTION 26.4- IMMEDIATE FAMILY
Immediate fami ly, for purposes of the Article, shall be defined as: I) SPOUSE, 2)
PARENT, 3) CHILD, 4) STEPCHILD, and 5) ANY other person living in the employee's
household.

SECTION 26.5 - DOCUMENTATION
An employee absent on sick leave for more than one (1) day for 24/48 employees and more
than two (2) days for a day~time employee, or an employee that has been notified by the
Chief or his designee that the employee is suspected of abuse of sick leave, shall submit
docwnentation from a physician substantiating the reason for the leave. The Chief or his
designee also has authority to inform the employee that any future use of sick leave will
require emp1oyee to furnish documentation for any use of future sick leave. Failure to
submit documentation as required may result in leave without pay and a deduction in the
subsequent payroll period; an employee who refuses to submit documentation may be
disciplined up to and including termination. The doctor's documentation should be
forwarded to the Chief or his designee. A Return-to-Duty fonn requiring a physician
signature may be required at the discretion of the Chief or his designee.

SECTION 26.6 - SICK LEA VE PAID
Upon separation for any reason other than retirement, no sick leave payout will occur. Upon
retirement from Employer service the bargaining unit member will be paid one-half ( ½) of
the accumulated hours not to exceed a maximum of four hundred (400) net hours. Upon
separation for any reason other than retirement, no sick leave payout will occur.
For purposes of this section, retirement means that an employee has completed twelve
( 12) years of credited secvice with the Employer or is eligible to receive disability pension

benefits from the Ohfo Police and Fire Pension Fund immediately following separation
from employment with the Clearcreek Fire District.
Should an employee pass away while in active employment the surviving spouse or others,
as spelled out in Section 2 l 13.04 of the Ohio Revised Code, will be eligible to receive sick
leave payment for which the decedent would otherwise have qualified. Such payment shall
be based on the rate of pay of the employee at the time of death.

SECTION 26. 7 - SICK LEA VE SELL BACK
Employees may sell back up to, forty (40) hours for 40 hour employees and forty-eight
(48) hours for 24/48 hour employees, of accrued (non-transfe1Ted) sick leave in a
calendar year.

29

Clearccccl< Prorcsslonal Fircfight.:rs LocnJ
4207 Contract 2021, 2022 & 2023

ARTICLE27
OCCUPATIONAL INJURY LEAVE
SECTION 27.1 - ELIGIBLE FOR INJURY LEAVE
An employee who suffers a service-connected injury or illness incurred in the course of
and arising out of employment with the Employer shall be eligible for injury leave upon
the eighth (8l!!) day of lost time. Injury leave for seven (7) calendar days or fewer days of
lost time will be for medical claims only pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Bureau
of Workers' Compensation; the employee may utilize sick or other approved leave during
this time. Injw-y leave shall be available upon the eighth (81.!l) day for ninety
(90) calendar days from the date of injury and any leave used shall be re-credited to the
employee's leave balance. After ninety (90) calendar days, the employee may utilize sick
time or other approved leave of absence to supplement Workers' Compensation benefits.

SECTION 27.2 - EXECUTION OF AGREEMENT
When an employee applies for injury leave with pay, he must execute an agreement
assigning to the Employer any such pay form Workers' Compensation during the period of
the paid leave and all necessary forms to process to appropriate claims with the Ohio
Bureau of Workers' Compensation. The Employer will issue a Check to the employee each
pay period equivalent to the employee's base wage for a pay period. Any payment from
Workers' Compensation for a covered claim dw-ing the above ninety (90) calendar day
period shall be paid over to the Employer. When an employee and the Employer disagree
concerning an injury or illness, the employee may utilize sick or other approved leave.
Should the Industrial Commission rule favorably to the employee, the Employer shall recredit the leave used and the Employer shall be reimbursed with Workers' Compensation
disability payment.

SECTION 27.3 - REVIEW THE EMPLOYEE'S PHYSICAL AND
MENTAL STATUS
The Chief has the right to review the employee's physical and mental status each thirty
(30) days of absence in order to determine the member's ability to return to work. In the
event of a difference of opinion as to the employee's mental or physical status between the
employee's physician and the Employer's physician, the issue shall be submitted to an
Industrial Commission Specialist whose decision shall be final and binding on both parties.
The services of the third physician shall be paid by the Employer.

SECTION27.4-TIME LENGTH
The ninety (90) calendar day injury leave is available for each distinct, separate injury or
illness. Recurrence of the same injury/illness shall be charged to the original ninety (90)
calendar days.

SECTION 27.S - INFECTIOUS DISEASE EXPOSURE
fn the event an employee has been exposed to a toxic substance or to an infectious disease
in the course or scope of employment, and is· sent to the emergency department for testing,
30

Clearereek Pro/'css ionol Firelighters Local
4207 Contract 2021 , 2022 &. 2023

treatment, and or preventive measures; Worker' s Compensation subsequently detc1mines
that there was no injury sustained, shall have the insurance deductible up to
$150.00 paid by the Employer.

SECTION 27.6 - TRANSITIONAL WORK
Employees assigned to "transitional work" relating to an on duty injury or i1lness shall be
assigned to a forty (40) hour workweek.
The transitional work policy is available to any career employee who sustains a workrelated injury, occupational disease or illness that is likely to result in lost time from the
job. Each transitional work assignment will be treated independently of others. The
transitional work policy does not replace the existing occupational injury leave policy, but
is meant to be used in conjunction with it to allow a safe transition back to full duty tasks.
The transitional work program and the occupational injury leave policy are available for
each distinct, separate injury or illness for a maximum total of ninety (90) calendar days.
Recurrence of the same injury/illness shall be charged to the original ninety (90) calendar
days. The transitional work program period wit I begin with the date of release to limited or
restricted work established by the physician of record and will end upon the removal of the
restrictions or at the end of the ninety (90) day period, whichever occurs first. The injured
worker must return to his regular full duty assignment or another targeted job by the end
of the transitional work assignment. If the injured worker is unable to do so, he will be
entitled to whatever benefits are provided under Ohio workers' compensation. Employees
must also meet all of the following criteria:
1.

The employee must have had a work related injury, accident, illness or a
reoccurrence/exacerbation of a pre-existing work related condition;

2.

Has been released by the physician of record to participate in a transitional
work program.

3.

Has the potential of returning to his original job, or another targeted job that
may be identHied and perfonning the essential job functions after recovery.

Transitional work is a temporary accommodation. Our goal is to return all employees if
possible to their original employment positions within a reasonable timefratne of the
program.

ARTICLE 28

VACATIONS
SECTION28.1- VACATION ACCRUAL RATES
Upon reaching one-year full-time service, the employee is eligible for eight (80) hours for
forty ( 40) hour work week employees, one hundred six (/ 06) hours for fifty-three (53) hour
work week employees and one hundred twenty (120) hours for 24/48 shift employees.
Conversion: In the event that an employee' s schedule changes, the employee's hours will
be converted using a ratio that corresponds to the relationship between the different
vacation accrual rates listed below. After an employee reaches one-year full-time service,
vacation time will be accrued on January l thereafter.
3]

Clc11rcrcck Professional f'ire/ighters Local
4207 Conlracl 2021, 2022 & 2023

Vacation accrual rates (i11 hours):

4!,! Hr1

~

A.

After 1 year

80

120 (5 shifts)

B.

After 5 years

120

168 (7 shifts)

C.

After 10 years

160

216 (9 shifts)

D.

After 20 years

200

264 ( 11 shifts)

SECTION 28.2 - VACATION REQUESTS
Vacation can be requested at any time throughout the year up to one ( 1) year in advance.
At the time of request, bargaining unit members will identify the period of time they will
be unavailable for the purpose of overtime. Vacation will be granted in increments of four
(4) hours. Employees can bump other employees vacation based on seniority up to one
hundred twenty (120) days prior to the requested day.

SECTION 28.3 - VACATION CARRY OVER
An employee may carry accumulated vacation leave of a maximum seventy two (72)
hours or forty (40) hours to the next year based on their work schedule assignment. Any
unused vacation time will be paid to the employee upon termination of employment,
except, however, unused vacation time will not be paid to an employee who is separated
from employment because of a disciplinary discharge or who resigns in lieu of receiving
a disciplinary discharge.

ARTICLE 29

BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
SECTION 29.1 - PAY FOR BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
Bereavement leave is paid leave taken by an employee due to the death of another
individual as defined below. The time is usually taken by an employee to grieve the loss of
a close family member, prepare for, and attend a funeral, and/or attend lo any other postdeath matters. Proof of death and relationship ofthe deceased may be requested. Currently,
there are no federal laws that require employers to provide employees either paid or unpaid
leave.

SECTION 29.2-IMMEDIATE FAMILY
Bereavement leave of one (/) shift for 24/48 employee and three (J) days for a forty ( 40)
hour employee shall be granted for immediate family which is defined as:
l) SPOUSE, 2) PARENT, 3) PARENT-IN-LAW, 4) STEP-PARENT, 5) GUARDIAN, 6)
CHILD. 7) STEP-CHILD, 8) BROTHER, 9) SISTER, 10) HALF BROTHER, 11) HALF
SISTER, 12) BROTI CER-IN-LAW, 13) SISTER-TN-LAW, 14) SPOUS E'S SIBLINGS, 15)
SIBLING'S SPOUSES, 16) GRANDPARENT, 17) GRANDPARENT-IN-LAW. Other persons
living in the employee's household shall be considered as immediate family.
32

Clearcreek Professional ri re[rghtcrs Local
4207 Contra t 202 1, 2022 &2023

SECTION 29.3 - EXTENDED FAMILY
Bereavement leave of eight (8) hours shall be granted for extended family which is defined
as: l) AUNT, 2) UNCLE, 3) AUNT-IN-LAW, and 4) UNCLEe-IN- LAW, 5) COUSIN.

SECTION 29.4 - EXTENDED LEAVE
Upon approval by the Chief or designee, bereavement leave in excess of the required
amount may be charged to the employee's accrued sick leave or vacation leave balance.

ARTICLE30
HOLIDAY PAY
SECTION 30.1 - HOLIDAY PAY
Employees assigned to a 24/48 work schedule shall receive ten (JO) hours of holiday pay
whether that employee works the holiday or has the holiday off. Employees shall receive
eight (8) how-s of holiday pay whether that employee works the holiday or has the holiday
off, if they are assigned to a forty ( 40) hour work week. Administrative positions shall
receive holiday pay on the days observed by the Township.
In addition, the employee will receive pay at time and a half for working the holiday. Only
hours actually worked will be considered "hours worked" for overtime purposes. Any
employee working overtime (rime scheduled outside of his or her normal 24/48 shift, not
to include built in) on the Holiday, will be compensated at a rate of double time for the
overtime hours that are worked on the Holiday.
Holiday hours will start at the beginning of the shift of the actual day of the holiday and
conclude at the end of the shift. Holiday pay will be evenly distributed across 26 pay cycles
throughout the calendar year.

HoljdJys;
1) NEW YEARS DAY, 2) DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. DAY, 3)
PRESIDE T'S DAY, 4) MEMORIAL DAY, 5) lNDEPENDE CE
DAY, 6) LABOR DAY, 7) SEPTEMB ER 11th, 8) VETERANS DAY,
9) THANKSGIVING DAY, 10) CIIRJSTMAS DAY .

33

Clearcreek Professional l'irefighlers LoC,il
4207 Contract 2021. 2022 & 2023

ARTICLE 31
JURY DUTY
SECTION 31.1 - JURY DUTY
In the event that you arc requested to serve on jury duty, you must inform the Chief or
dcsignee at once. If you have to miss work as a result ofserving on jury duty, the Chief or
designee will assisl you wilh rearranging your work schedule, if possible, and in
completing your time sheet. The Employer wi11 compensate you at your regular hourly rate
of pay if you are required to miss work for jury duty. You will be expected to reimburse
the Employer for any jury duty payments you receive from the court for days on which you
arc paid by the Employer.
Employees must submit to the Chief or designee a letter from the Clerk of Court stating
the dates served and amount paid for this service.
Bargaining unit members are expected to return for the remainder of their scheduled tour
of duty; they will receive regular pay for time worked, bot will not be entitled to overtime
pay. No time is deducted from accrued benefits.
If time off would create a special hardship for the Fire District, the Chiefor designcc will
assist the employee in providing the court with the information necessary to request a
release from j ury duty.

ARTICLE32
MEDICAL AND LIFE INSURANCE
SECTION 32.1 - HOSPITAL, MEDICAL, DENTAL, VlSION,
PRESCRIPTION DRUG CARD AND LIFE INSURANCE
The Township shall provide hospital, medical, dental, vision, prescription drug card, and
life insurance as specifically described in the current plan documents.

SECTION 32.2 - TOWNSHIP AUTHORITY TO CHANGE INSURANCE
CARRIER
The Township shall continue to have the authority to change insurance carriers at any time,
or to institute a full or quasi self-insured plan, provided that the goal of such change is to
reduce costs while maintaining substantially similar benefit levels. The Township shall
immediately notify the Union prior to any change in carrier or benefits and will meet with
representatives of the bargaining unit to discuss such changes. In the event that the parties
disagree with the proposed changes, the parties agree to submit the issue to the Township
Trustees for final determination.

34

Clearcreek Professional Firefighters Local
4207 Contract 202 1, 2022 & 2023

SECTION 32.3 - COST TO TOWNSHIP
The Township shall pay eighty-five percent (85%) of the cost of the premiums for
hospital, medical, dental, vision, prescription drug card, and life insurance for each
employee and dependents in the bargaining unit.
For every year of this agreement, the Township will contribute seventy (70) percent of
the deductible of the healthcare plan into each employees Health Savings Account jn the
first complete pay period of the calendar year.
The insurance committee will continue to meet each year prior to renewal to make
recommendations to the Trustees prior to a decision being reached on health insurance
coverage for the following year.

SECTION 32.4 - SERVICE CONNECTED DEATH OR DISABILITY
Should an employee suffer a service-connected death or permanent disability
arising from employment, the employee, beneficiary, or next of kin shall receive
benefits in accordance with Ohio law.

ARTICLE33
OFFICER-IN-CHARGE
SECTION 33.1- OFFICER-IN-CHARGE (OIC) PAY
An employee who operates a position or rank above that which he normally holds (i.e.
lieutenant or captain), will be paid at the rate of a first step employee for that position or
rank, in accordance with Appendix A, while so acting. An employee operating as an
OIC on overtime or a holiday. shall be compensated per section 21.1 and 30.1 .

ARTICLE34
UNIFORMS AND P. P. E.
SECTION 34.1 - UNIFORMS AND PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
All career Fire District personnel will be furnished uruforms and personal protective
equipment (PPE) as identified in the Clearcreek Fire District General Operating
Guidelines. Uniforms and equipment will be replaced on an as needed basis.

35

Clearcreek Professfonal firefighters Local
4207 Contract 2021, 2022 & 2023

ARTICLE35
EDUCATION INCENTIVE
SECTION 35. t - DEGREE BONUS
In the first pay period of December of each year, qualified employees that have
completed their orientation period will receive the following benefit. This payment can
be applied to the employees HSA account:

A.

Associate's degree

$600.00 annually

B.

Bachelor's Degree

$800.00 annually

C.

Master' s Degree

$1,000.00 annually

ARTICLE36
TRAINING
SECTION 36.1 - NON-DEPARTMENTAL TRAININGS
Employees may attend non-departmental trainings during working hours with the prior
approval of the Chief. Off-duty employees who are granted permission to attend these
trainings, shall be reimbursed as identified in the Clearcreek Township Employee
Handbook for reasonable expenses incun-ed while attending outside trainings, seminars,
etc., including, for example meals, lodging, tuition and expenses associated with travel.

SECTION 36.2 - DEPARTMENTAL TRAINING
The Clearcreek Fire District will provide training throughout the year to keep all necessary
Fire and EMS certifications current. The education and trainings will be conducted during
regularly scheduled hours on duty. It is the responsibility ofeach bargaining unit member
to ensure that they are present for enough trainings throughout the year to keep all
certifications current.

ARTICLE37
SHIFT/STATION REASSIGNMENT
SECTION 37.1- SfilFT/STATION REASSIGNMENT
All bargaining unit members shall be given thirty (30) days notice prior to shift
reassignment and seven (7) days notice prior to a permanent station reassignment under
nonnal working conditions. A shorter notice period may be given if tbe township' s needs
so dictate.

36

Clearcreek. Professional Firefighters Local
'1207 Contracl 2021 , 2022 & 2023

SECTION 37.2 - VACATION DAYS UPON REASSIGNMENT OF
SHIFT
When a bargaining unit employee has been reassigned either permanently or temporarily
to another shift, the employees scheduled vacation day(s) off shall be honored by a1Iowing
the employee to move the day(s) into the shift before or after the employees scheduled day
off.

ARTICLE38
SUPERVISOR RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION 38.1 - SUPERVISOR RESPONSIBILITIES
Lieutenants and Captains (officers) are responsible for supervising firefighters and other
personnel assigned to them. They are further responsible for assisting in the management
of the fire department.
An officer shall not withhold discipline or corrective action because it is against a fellow
Union member. The officers will cooperate folly with the Township and Fire District to
help formulate policy and carry out policies.

37

C!ellrcrcck l'rofessionol Pirefight~rs Locnl
4207 Conlraot 2021 , 2022 & 2023

ARTICLE39
TERMS OF AGREEMENT
SECTION 39.1 - DURATION
This Agreement shaJI be in effect from the period 12:01 A.M., January 1, 2021 until 11 :59
P.M., Dec mber 31. 2023 , and shall continue thereafter for successive periods of twelve
(I 2) months, unless either party to this Agreement on or before sixty (60) days prior to the
expiration ofsuch period, notifies the other party in writing of its intention to terminate this
Agreement.

SECTION 39.2 - MODIFICATION OF AGREEMENT
Management and the Union hereby agree that circumstances may arise requmng a
modification and/or amendment of the tem1s of this agreement. Amendments and/or
modifications of this agreement shall be captioned as a "Memorandum ofUnderstanding,"
and be in writing, dated and signed by the authorized Employer designee and the Union
following Clearcreek Township Board of Trustee approval.
When such agreements are reached in writing between the Employer and the Union, then
these agreements shall become part of this agreement and subject to the provisions of this
agreement.

SECTION 39.3 - COPIES OF AGREEMENT
The Employer agrees to supply two copies of this Agreement to the Union.

SECTION 39.4 - SUCCESSOR AGREEMENT
This agreement shall be bindjng upon the successors and assigns of the parties hereto.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Employer and the Union have duly executed this
Agreement, this_ _ _day of December 2020.
THE BOARD OF CLEARCREEK
TOWNSHIP TRUST ~

CLEARCREEK PROFESSIONAL
IGHTERS, LOCAL #4207

38

Clearcreek Professional Firelighters Local
4207 Contrad 2021 , 2022 & 2023

Appendix A
Fire District Salary Schedule
2021- 2023

Rank
Captain
Probationary

Hourly
$33.20
$31.69

2021
3%
Salary
$101,715.75
$97,095.35

Lieutenant
Probationary

$30.1 8
$28 .82

$92,474.96
$88,289.81

$31.09
$29 .68

$95,249.21
$90,938.50

$32.02
$30.57

$98,106.69
$93 ,666.66

Firefiehter/PM
STEP4
STEP3
STEP2
STEP 1
Probationary

.$27.44
$25 .39
$24.53
$23.70
$22.90
$21.81

$84,071.19
$77,810.21
$75,165.20
$72,620.62
$70,176.51
$66,828.39

$28.26
$26.16
$25.27
$24.41
$23.59
$22.47

$86,593.33
$80, 144.52
$77,420.16
$74 799.24
$72,281.81
$68,833.24

$29.11
$26,94
$26.03
$25.14
$24.3 0
$23.14

$89, 191.13
$82,548.85
$79,742.76
$77,043 .22
$74,450.26
$70,898 .24

Firefi btcr/EMT

$19.47

$59,663.42

$20.06

$61 453 .32

$20.66

$63,296.92

Hourly
$34.19
$32.64

2022
3%
Salary
$104,767.22
$ I 00,008.21

Hourly
$35.22
$33.62

2023
3%
Salary
$107,910.24
$103,008.46

*Annual salary is calculated by multiplying the employees' hourly rate by 2704 (hours worked),
100 (holiday pay), and 260 (Article 20.1).

39

.
