STATE OF NEW JERSEY
PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS COMMISSION
PO Box 429
TRENTON, NEW JERSEY 08625-0429

www.state.nj.us/perc
ADMINISTRATION /LEGAL
(609) 292-9830

For Courier Delivery
495 WEST STATE STREET
TRENTON , NEW JERSEY 08618

CONCILIATION /ARBITRATION
(609 292-9898

FAX: (609) 777-0089
EMAIL : mail@perc.state.nj.us

UNFAIR PRACTICE /REPRESENTATION
(609) 292-6780

August 1, 2013
MEMORANDUM
TO:

Commissioners

FROM:

Counsel Staff

SUBJECT:

Report on Developments in the Counsel’s Office Since May 22, 2013

COMMISSION CASES
The Commission has received notices that appeals have been filed with the Appellate
Division of Superior Court seeking review of these decisions.
Boro of Tenafly and PBA Local 276, P.E.R.C. No. 2013-087, 39 NJPER (¶ 2013)
The PBA appeals from a decision affirming an interest arbitration award.
Township of Montclair and PBA Local No. 53, P.E.R.C. No. 2013-85, 39 NJPER (¶ 2013).
The Township appeals from the Commission’s dismissal of its scope of negotiations petition.
CASES RELATED TO COMMISSION CASES, PROCEDURES AND STATUTES
Primary jurisdiction over scope of negotiations disputes
In City of Jersey City and Jersey City PSOA, POBA, Jersey City Public Employees Local
246, IAFF Locals 1066 and 1064, P.E.R.C. No. 2013-38, 38 NJPER 387 (¶130 2012), app. pend.,
the Commission held that grievances filed by the majority representatives of both law
enforcement and civilian employees that challenged changes in the health benefits of already
retired employees could proceed to binding arbitration. Prior to filing its scope of negotiations
New Jersey Is An Equal1 Opportunity Employer

petition, the City had filed a lawsuit in the trial division of the Superior Court, seeking a
declaratory ruling that the grievances were not arbitrable. The trial court judge granted the
unions’ motion to dismiss the City’s suit holding that the Commission had primary jurisdiction
under its authority to resolve scope of negotiations disputes. On July 25, 2013, the Appellate
Division of the Superior Court in City of Jersey City v. Jersey City Police Officers Benevolent
Association (POBA), et al., 2013 N.J. Super Unpub LEXIS 1863 affirmed the trial judge noting
that:
C

The Commission had primary jurisdiction and had issued a scope of negotiations ruling
that was on appeal;

C

A trial court could exercise jurisdiction where a similar claim is filed by an individual
retiree, because only a majority representative can use binding arbitration to seek relief.

Deferral to arbitration; prosecution of grievance does not bar employee’s civil rights action
Cosimano v. Twp. of Union, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 97355
Cosimano, a police detective was advised that she would be demoted to patrol officer. In
order to keep her pension base at the higher Detective salary, she decided to retire rather than
take the demotion. That left her seven months short of 25 years service as a police officer even
though she had an additional year of public employment. The 25 years would have entitled her
to paid retiree health benefits. Her union filed an unfair practice charge which the Commission
deferred to arbitration. An arbitrator ruled that the other year of service did not count. The
award was upheld on appeal. However, in this case, the court holds that Cosimano’s lawsuit
alleging that her demotion was discriminatory, was not barred by the arbitrator’s ruling which
focused solely on the collective negotiations agreement. The court notes, citing federal
precedent, that because the union controls arbitration proceedings, an individual who alleges
discrimination, does not have the opportunity to advance that claim during arbitration. It allows
her to pursue her discrimination claims, with the caveat that the arbitrator’s ruling concerning
years of service cannot be challenged. But, the court notes, that proof of discrimination may
affect her creditable service time.
OPRA, attorney’s fees, public employer’s obligation to provide copies of contracts
Gelber v. Heck, 2013 N.J. Super. Unpub. LEXIS 1545 (Law Div.)
In a Superior Court lawsuit filed pursuant to the Open Public Records Act, a trial court
judge ordered that the City of Hackensack pay $12,000 in attorneys fees based on its failure to
provide to the OPRA requestor copies of collective negotiations agreements covering various
units of City employees. In a subsequent ruling, the Court denies the requestor’s motion for
additional attorneys fees.

-2-

NOTE: N.J.S.A. 34:13A-8.2, has, since 1968, required public employers to file copies of CNAs
with the Commission so that the Commission can maintain a file of such documents. However,
effective January 1, 2011, a new section of the Act, N.J.S.A. 34:13A-16.8d.(2), added by the
interest arbitration amendments, requires that all public employers file copies of CNAs with the
Commission 15 days after they are executed. The Commission maintains an accessible database
of CNAs on its web site.
Interest arbitration, bi-state agency, impact of changes in NJ interest arbitration statute.
FOP v. Del. River Port Auth., 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 100482
As both Pennsylvania and New Jersey have statutes requiring the use of interest
arbitration to resolve negotiations impasses for police, in 1999, New Jersey state courts ordered
the DRPA to submit to interest arbitration. Fraternal Order of Police, Penn-Jersey Lodge 30 v.
Delaware River Port Auth., 323 N.J. Super. 444, (App. Div. 1999), certif. denied, 162 N.J. 663,
(1999), cert. denied, 530 U.S. 1275, (2000). In this case the federal court rejects the DRPA’s
argument that because of differences between the terms of the PA and NJ interest arbitration
laws, the bi-state agency is not required to participate in interest arbitration. The court also
leaves to the arbitrator the initial determination as to whether the health care and salary cap
provisions contained in changes to New Jersey’s interest arbitration law are applicable.
OTHER CASES
Employee discipline, termination
Ruroede v. Borough of Hasbrouck Heights, ___ N.J. ____, 2013 N.J. LEXIS 598
A trial court and the Appellate Division of the Superior Court set aside the termination of
a police officer finding that the officer was denied due process because instead of live testimony
from witnesses, the Borough used hearsay statements from the internal affairs investigation and
testimony from the officer who prepared the internal investigation report. The Appellate Division
found that insufficient, non-hearsay evidence had been submitted at the hearing.
The Supreme Court reverses and holds that the officer’s termination did not violate due
process. It rules that the trial court should have determined whether sufficient, competent
evidence supported the charges. It finds the evidence was competent, and sufficient to support
the ultimate facts necessary to sustain the borough’s charges that plaintiff engaged in
inappropriate conduct unbecoming a police officer, warranting his termination. The hearing
officer's failure to call a witness to the altercation, and the officer's choice to proceed pro se, did
not violate his due process rights.
Pending grievance arbitration should not delay employee’s individual civil rights case

-3-

Barco v. N.J. Div. of Youth & Family Servs., 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 91722
A federal district court refuses to stay the federal civil rights and “whistleblower” lawsuit
of a terminated public employee pending arbitration of her discharge. The court rules that it does
not appear that the arbitration will have any significant bearing on the Court's analysis of
Plaintiff's statutory claims holding that the lawsuit does not concern the interpretation of the
collective negotiations agreement, but rather the meaning of a federal statute.
Police officer, indemnification, off-duty shooting
Godley, et al. v. City of Newark, et al. and Lamarr v. City of Newark, et al. 2013 N.J. Super.
Unpub. LEXIS 1912
The Appellate Division of the Superior Court holds that the City of Newark, the police
department and the housing authority are not liable for damages and attorneys fees awarded by a
federal court to a man who was shot by an off-duty police officer. The appellate tribunal upholds
a jury verdict finding that the officer “was not acting in his official capacity,” thus making the
indemnification clause in the collective negotiations agreement between the City and the
Fraternal Order of Police, inapplicable to the incident.
While off-duty, Newark police officer Lamarr visited an ex-girlfriend (Vasquez) during
her shift as a security guard at a Newark housing project. A male friend of the security guard
(Godley) initiated a heated verbal confrontation with the police officer that eventually resulted in
the police officer shooting and seriously wounding Godley. The officer was acquitted of criminal
charges, but served a 28 day disciplinary suspension.
Godley filed a federal court suit for damages. Godley and the officer entered into an
agreement that Godley would not seek damages from the officer but would use the
indemnification clause to seek damages from the City, the police department, and the housing
authority.1 The federal court dismissed the claims against the City. A jury awarded over two
million dollars in damages and 250,000 in attorneys fees.
1

The clause reads:

“Whenever any civil action is brought against any employee covered by this
Agreement for any act or omission arising out of and in the course of his/her
employment, the City shall defray all costs of defending such action, if any, and
shall pay any adverse judgment, save harmless, and protect such person from any
financial loss resulting therefrom.”
That language was found mandatorily negotiable and enforceable in City of Newark and Police
Superior Officers Ass’n, P.E.R.C. No. 2003-68, 29 NJPER 121 (¶38 2003), aff’d 31 NJPER 9
(¶6 App. Div. 2005).
-4-

Godley and his law firm, and Lamarr separately sued in the Superior Court to collect the
damages from the public bodies and for a ruling that the officer was not personally liable. The
jury was asked to determine whether the officer had acted “exclusively in his official capacity."
After the jury found that the officer was not acting in his official capacity, Godley and his
attorneys and Lamarr, filed separate appeals that were consolidated. The City cross-appealed in
the event the appellate court overturned the jury’s finding.

-5-
