. .'

Collective Bargaining Agreement

Town of Raynham
and
Raynham Employees Union
Highway Department Unit
Term:
July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2019

u

Pg. 1

Table of Contents
Cover Page
Table of Contents
Agreement
Article I - Recognition and Bargaining Unit
Article II - Management Rights
Article Ill - Classification and Wages
Article IV - Grievance Procedure
Article V - Sick Leave
Article VI - Holidays
Article VII - Vacation
Article VIII - Seniority
Article IX - Overtime
Article X - Clothing and Cleaning Allowance
Article XI - Health and Welfare
Article XI I - Existing Leave Policy
Article XIII - Hours of Work, Lunch Break, Rest Period
Article XIV - Summer Schedule
Article XV - Temperature Clause
Article XVI - Longevity Pay
Article XVII - Jury Duty
Article XVIII - Military Reserve Training Duty Pay
Article XIX - Union Representatives and Discrimination
Article XX - Duration of Contract
Article XXI - Miscellaneous

Article XXI I - Safety
Article XXI 11 - Classification
Article XXIV - Transfer/Recycling Shelter
Article XXV - Probationary Period
Article XXVI - Training and Education
Article XXVII - Highway Department Pay Schedule
Article XXVIII- Discipline
Pay Schedule

Pg. 2

Page 1
Page 2
Page 3
Page3
Page 3
Page 3
Page3
Page 4
Page 5
Page 6
Page 7
Page 8
Page 11
Page 12
Page 13
Page 14
Page 14
Page 14
Page 14
Page 15
Page 15
Page 15
Page 15
Page 16
Page 17
Page 18
Page 18
Page 18
Page 19
Page 20
Page 20
Appendix A

I

', ,

AGREEMENT
This Agreement is made and entered into by and between the Town of Raynham, a
municipal Corporation located in Bristol County, Massachusetts, hereinafter referred to
as the "Town," and the Raynham Employees Union, hereinafter referred to as the
"Union," upon the following covenants, stipulations, statements, terms and conditions.
Whereas, the Town and the Union are parties to a collective bargaining agreement for the
period July 1, 2015 through June 30, 2017; and
Whereas, the Town and the Union have, pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 150E, negotiated the terms of a successor collective bargaining agreement.
Now, therefore, the parties, in consideration of mutual covenants, agree as follows :
The terms and conditions set forth in the Collective Bargaining Agreement for the period
July 1, 2015 through June 30, 2017 shall continue in full force and effect for the period
July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2019, except as amended herein.

ARTICLE I
RECOGNITION AND BARGAINING UNIT

)
The Town hereby recognizes the Raynham Employees Union as the exclusive
bargaining agent for purposes of collective bargaining with respect to wages, hours and
other conditions of employment in accordance with General laws for the following
bargaining unit:
All full-time employees of the Raynham Highway Department and Transfer/ Recycling
Center, exclusive of the Highway Superintendent and administrative help.

ARTICLE II
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
It is agreed by the Town and the Union that this Agreement shall not in any way impair
or infringe upon the Town or its duly authorized representatives' rights to determine and
prescribe the methods and means by which the Highway Department shall be
conducted, except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this Agreement. The
Town reserves those rights of an employer to hire, fire, discipline, suspend or discharge
for just cause and to direct the operation of such employees.

Pg. 3

ARTICLE Ill
CLASSIFICATION AND WAGES
Effective July 1, 2017 the salary schedule shall be increased by 2.0%.
Effective July 1, 2018 the salary schedule shall be increased by 2.0%.
(See Attached Rate Schedule.)
Raynham Highway Department employees may be eligible for future Merit increases
based on exceptional performance or special achievement. Merit increases may
become effective on July 1 for each year of the contract on receipt of a written
evaluation and letter of recommendation from the Highway Superintendent and be
subject to approval by the Board of Selectmen. The Superintendent may also notify the
employee if their job performance falls below the satisfactory level resulting in the denial
of a merit increase prior to July 1. In the event that a merit increase is denied, the
employee may request that the Superintendent review his/her performance after six
months.

ARTICLE IV
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
For the purpose of this Agreement, a grievance shall be defined as a dispute between a
member of the bargaining unit covered by this agreement or the Union and the Town
over the interpretation or application of the provisions of this Agreement.
Level One: A grievant shall submit said grievance in writing to the Highway
Superintendent within five (5) days after the incident giving rise to the grievance has
occurred. The Highway Superintendent shall render his decision within ten (10) days
after receipt of the grievance.
Level Two: If the grievant is not satisfied with the disposition of said grievance at Level
One, he may submit said grievance in writing to the Board of Selectmen at the regularly
scheduled meeting next following receipt of the Highway Superintendent's decision. The
Board shall render its decision within fifteen (15) days after the Board meeting at which
the grievance was submitted.
Level Three: If the grievant is not satisfied with the decision of the Board of Selectmen,
the Union may, within fifteen (15) days after said decision, submit the grievance to
arbitration to the State Board of conciliation and Arbitration in accordance with said
Board's applicable rules.
A grievance submitted in accordance with this procedure shall be in writing, setting forth
in detail the nature of the grievance and the remedy requested.
Any time limit specified herein may be extended by agreement of the parties in writing .
Pg. 4

I

' '•

ARTICLEV
SICK LEAVE
Sick leave with pay shall be granted to the members of the bargaining unit covered by
this Agreement on the basis of fifteen (15) days per year cumulative to 270 days.
Credit shall be given upon the execution of this Agreement to those employees who
have unused Sick Leave, but in no event shall they be entitled to an accumulation
greater than the maximum accumulation of that contract year.
If the employee is absent for three (3) or more consecutive days, a doctor's certificate,
at the employee's own expense, may be required by the Highway Superintendent. The
doctor's note must identify the general nature and duration of the illness responsible for
the absence. In addition, the doctor's note must be legible.
If the employee is absent for five (5) or more consecutive days, the employee may be
required by the Highway Superintendent to submit a doctor's certificate, at the
employee's own expense, stating the nature of the illness and whether or not the
employee is able to return to work.
Initial sick day accumulation will be determined by obtaining the average number of sick
days taken, per year, going back to when the sick day records begin, and that average·
will be multiplied by the number of years of service and that total will be deducted from
the 15 sick days per year that is allowed under the provisions of Article V.
Up to five (5) available sick leave days for an employee may be taken as family member
sick days in order to attend to health needs or care of an immediate family member.

Sick Leave Incentive
If zero (0) sick days are used in a fiscal year, employee shall receive three (3) days'
pay; if one (1) day is used, employee shall receive two (2) days' pay; if two (2) days are
used, employee shall receive one (1) day's pay.
The sick leave incentive will be paid in the first pay period following July 1 each year, for
the previous year rendered.
Employees covered by this Agreement shall be compensated at the rate of $25.00 per
day for each day of the 15 sick leave days per year to which said employee is entitled
and does not take.
In the event an employee covered by this Agreement has reached the maximum of
unused accumulation of sick leave in each year of this Agreement, such employee shall
be compensated at the rate of $50.00 per day for each sick leave day not taken, not to
Pg. 5

exceed fifteen (15) days per year. For purposes of this paragraph, the maximum
accumulation of sick leave shall be defined as two hundred seventy (270) days.
The compensation herein provided shall be paid at the end of each fiscal year.
Sick Leave Buyback: After fifteen (15) consecutive years of service and only upon
retirement, resignation or death, an employee or his/her estate shall receive a lump sum
payment equivalent to 25% of accumulated sick days up to the maximum accumulation
of the current contract year at his/her then current rate of pay.

ARTICLE VI
PAID HOLIDAYS

The following days shall be recognized as Paid Holidays:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
Presidents Day
Patriots' Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day

Columbus Day
Veterans' Day
Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Half Day before Christmas
Christmas Day
Half Day New Year's Eve

Those employees assigned to the Transfer/Recycling Center shall work a full day on
Christmas Eve and will be entitled to take four (4) hours off at a time approved by the
Superintendent.
Employees shall receive holiday pay for each of the designated holidays regardless of
whether or not the employee works during such holidays and regardless of whether the
employee is on vacation, is injured or is•on sick leave on the occurrence of the holiday.
Paid holidays, at the option of the employee, shall mean a day's pay or compensation
time off.
Should any of the designated holidays fall on Saturday or Sunday, the succeeding
Monday shall be taken off.
An employee required to work a holiday shall, in addition to holiday pay, receive 1 and
one half times the employee's regular pay rate for all hours worked on the holiday.
Employees who fail to work their scheduled workday before and/or after a holiday shall
be disqualified for such holiday payments, except, however, when said failure to work
Pg. 6

' '

..

as provided above is caused by illness. In the event of any second or subsequent
absences for reasons of illness (before and/or after a holiday) in the same calendar
year, the Highway Superintendent, may, in his discretion, require a doctor's certificate at
the expense of the employee. Absence for other reasons satisfactory to the Highway
Superintendent will also permit the payment of holiday pay. This paragraph shall only
apply to single day absences and not to multiple day absences on account of illness,
vacations or bereavement leave. A holiday is defined as commencing at 12:01 AM. of
the holiday and ending twenty-four (24) hours thereafter.
Employees will be granted three (3) Personal Days equaling 27 hours time off per fiscal
year. Personal time may be used by the hour, half or full day with reasonable written
notification to the Highway Superintendent.
Members may accumulate up to 40 hours of compensation time in a fiscal year.
Compensation time may not be carried over to a new fiscal year ("use it or lose it").
ARTICLE VII
VACATION

Employees of the Highway Department covered by the terms of this Agreement shall be
entitled to an annual vacation with pay.
From hire date until two years of service is completed, time shall be granted in
accordance with the following schedule:
,
Upon completion of 6 months
Upon completion of 1 year
1 year - 2 years

20 hours
40 hours
3.5 hours per MOS

Full time employees hired after July 1, 2017 shall receive twenty (20) hours vacation
upon successful completion of their six (6) month probationary period. Upon an
employee's one year anniversary date, the employee will be granted forty (40) hours
vacation.
Employees who have completed fewer than two continuous years of service on July 1
shall be granted three and one-half (3.5) hours vacation time for each full month of
continuous employment, not to exceed eighty (80) hours.
If two continuous (2) years of service are completed prior to the start of the next fiscal
year, 80 hours will be granted on July 1.
After two (2) continuous years of service have been completed, time shall be granted in
accordance with the years of service which will be completed in the fiscal year (July 1 June 30), per the following schedule:
3 years to 4 years
5 years

80 hours
120 hours
Pg. 7

6 years
7 years
8 years
9 years
10 years to 15 years
16 years
17 years
18 years
19 years
20 years

129 hours
138 hours
147 hours
156 hours
160 hours
169 hours
178 hours
187 hours
196 hours
200 hours

Any employee granted 200 hours of vacation time must utilize the time in the same
fiscal year the time was awarded.
Subject to the needs of the Highway Department, vacations may be used any time
during the year. Employees must provide a reasonable written notice to the Highway
Superintendent or their designee requesting vacations.
Regular days off occurring during an employee's vacation will not be counted as
vacation days. Holidays occurring during an employee's vacation will not be considered
vacation days.
Upon termination of employment, for reasons other than discipline, the employee shall
receive payment equal to the amount of vacation he would have received had the
termination not occurred. If the termination is as a result of death of the employee, the
vacation payment shall be made to the employee's legal beneficiary.
During the period of November 26 to April 15, vacations will granted at the discretion of
the Highway Superintendent, and must meet the following terms and conditions:
•
•

•

•

•
•

The employee must provide written notice requesting vacations during this
period at least fourteen ( 14) day prior to the taking of the vacation.
The employee must secure coverage of his snow and ice responsibilities
(typically sander operations). In the event the backup is from outside the
bargaining unit, the employee must be qualified and available.
The employee must identify the individual who will be assuming his snow and
ice responsibilities including the means by which the Town can contact the
person who will be covering for him during the vacation.
Highway employees backfilling other employee's snow and ice responsibilities
will be compensated with a prorated amount of stipend designated for the
employee on vacation.
Only one employee at a time will be granted vacation during this time period.
Vacation requests will be granted in the order in which they are received.

Pg. 8

Employees may carry up to 40 unused vacation hours into the next fiscal year and said
hours must be used in the next fiscal year; that is, vacation days carried over cannot be
accumulated.
Subject to the Highway Superintendent's approval, members may take a week's vacation
as pay.

ARTICLE VIII
SENIORITY
Seniority shall commence from the date of employment by the Highway Department and
shall not be broken by vacation time, sick leave, injury leave, temporary layoff, voluntary
leave of absence or military leave. While laid off or under voluntary leave of absence,
seniority time will not be disrupted providing this period of time does not exceed ninety
(90) days.
If an employee resigns voluntarily or is discharged for just cause, he shall lose all
seniority governed by the terms of this Agreement.
Seniority will govern, subject to the needs of the Highway Department, in the
assignments of vacation and holiday leave.
)

For the purpose of this Agreement, layoffs will be strictly by seniority. This clause will be
reviewed for any future contracts.

.

ARTICLE IX
OVERTIME

An overtime rate of 1 and 1/2 times an employee's regular pay shall be paid to members
of this unit for all hours paid in excess of forty (40) hours in one week.
All scheduled overtime shall rotate between those willing to accept it.
An employee called back to work before or after his normal shift shall be entitled to a
minimum of four (4) hours pay at overtime rate.
An employee required to work past his normal quitting time shall be entitled to a
minimum of one-half (1/2) hour's pay at overtime rate.
The Highway Superintendent or their designee shall keep records in the Department
time book of all overtime work. In case of a grievance involving such records, they shall
be subject to the examination of the union representative or shop Steward and the
foreman involved.
Pg. 9

A record of all overtime hours worked by each employee shall be available upon
request by any employee that is covered by this Agreement.
Regular Highway department personnel shall have the right of first refusal for all
overtime work before any outside workers or workers from other departments are called
in. A rotation list shall be periodically updated beginning with the senior most person
then rotating around the list to the next eligible person. The list for overtime shall be
maintained in the Highway Superintendent's office or his designee, and the list will be
used for the assignment of non-emergency overtime. The intent is that overtime shall be
equally and impartially distributed to all eligible parties that are interested.
Effective July 1, 2007, 1 ¾ will be the overtime rate for overtime work that employees have
not been given 24 hours' notice. It was also agreed that there would not be any change in
the rates of pay for Sunday work. This additional overtime requirement does not include the
employee who is "on call" or an employee who is responding to emergencies or for
situations beyond the control of management, which do not allow the scheduling of
overtime within the 24-hour period.

Emergency Overtime
Any overtime, except emergency overtime, shall be voluntary on the part of the
employee. There shall be no discrimination, harassment or reprisals taken against an
employee who refuses to work non-emergency type of overtime.
Emergency overtime is defined as work that, left undone until regular working hours, will
result in unsafe conditions, excessive expense to the Town or serious inconvenience to
the residents.
Determination of emergency overtime shall be at the discretion of the Highway
Superintendent. The union may appeal the decision to the Selectmen; however, in no
case will the work be delayed during an appeal.
After 14 consecutive hours of work, however, employees shall be permitted, at their
request and scheduled by the Highway Superintendent on a rotating basis, to take a
three (3) hour break without loss of compensation if said break is taken during regular
work hours. It is agreed and understood that if the break occurs during non-work hours,
the employee shall not be compensated.
On-Call Program for Service and Emergency Overtime
Effective July 1, 2017, the on-call stipend shall be increased to $250 per week.
The Bargaining Unit must supply a minimum of 3 participants to have an active on-call
program. Compliance with the terms set forth below shall be a condition of employment
Pg. 10

..
I

for those members who are participating in the program and for all employees hired
after July 1, 1998.
The Bargaining Unit must provide the schedule with a rotating list of participants
covering continuous on call coverage for 24 hours per day, fifty-two weeks per year.
The minimum assignment for any single member is one (1) week. For these purposes,
"week" shall be defined as ending and beginning on Friday morning at 7:30AM.
During the period a member is on call, the Town shall provide a cell phone that the
member must carry with him at all times.
The minimum communication response time to caller is ten (10) minutes.
The response time to the Highway Garage is thirty minutes except in extenuating
circumstances when the member shall call the caller to explain the delay.
Active Members may swap assignment week with other Active members with the
responsibility of coordinating the change for the Member who will be on call for that
week.
Members who do not meet the intent and responsibilities of the on call program may be
subject to disciplinary action such as, but not limited to, non-payment of the weekly
stipend and removal from the program.
Members of the bargaining unit will be paid at the rate of one and one-half times their
rate of pay for either, at the member's option, the actual time worked or to remain at
work for the four (4) hour minimum and be assigned duties by the Superintendent or his
designee.
Anytime the on-call person is required to work, said work is to be paid at one and a half
(1 ½) times the employees hourly rate.
Snow and Ice Program
The Snow and Ice Program shall be for a period of approximately four and a half
months beginning November 26 and ending April 15 of any given year.
The bargaining unit must provide a list of 8 participants. This list of participants may be
made up from outside of the bargaining unit in the event that the bargaining unit cannot
provide the requisite number from the bargaining unit.
The overtime rate of pay will be increased for snow and ice events to 1 ¾ times the rate
of regular pay for all employees in the bargaining unit who work in excess of (40) hours
in one week.
Pg. 11

At the discretion of the Highway Superintendent, those employees may be directed to
spend time away from scheduled work time for the purpose of rest, said time being
given for no reason but for rest and rejuvenation. This time is granted to said
employees at the total discretion of the Highway Superintendent so as to perform snow
and ice activities safely. These employees can continue to receive regular pay but must
be using the time as designated. Any employee who is not utilizing the designated time
for rest and rejuvenation will not receive the regular pay and be subject to additional
disciplinary action. The Superintendent's decision is final and not negotiable.
The Bargaining Unit membership shall have the first right of refusal for the work. Once
the position is filled from outside of the Bargaining unit membership, the Town reserves
the right to continue this person in the program for that Snow and Ice season.
In the event that member program participation cannot be met under the methods
specified in paragraphs (2) and (3) above, the Town reserves the right to mandate
participation in the program from the Bargaining Unit as a condition of employment, in
order to meet the Public Safety responsibilities of the Highway department.
The participating members must be available for on call service and will be provided
beepers during the period specified in paragraph (1) and responding within ten (10)
minutes that a verbal message was received for on call service and the member is
responding.
Depending upon the distance the member's home is from the Highway Garage, a
reasonable response time is required but no longer than thirty minutes to report to the
Highway Garage with consideration for extenuating circumstances.
Members of the bargaining unit are required by terms of employment to participate in the
salting operation within the snow and ice program. All available equipment must have an
operator provided by the bargaining unit if there are sufficient members available. All
participants will receive a $1,000.00 stipend in two payments of $500.00 each plus a $500
bonus if called out for more than 10 events. The 10 events are defined as salting or full
plowing events that are not performed during normal work periods. First payment will be
in the last pay period of January and the final payment will be at the end of the program.
When the number of bonus events is reached, the bonus will be paid at the following pay
period.
Those members who do not sign up on or before November 26th of a given year to
participate in the snow and ice program and are required by the Highway
Superintendent to participate as a condition of employment in order to meet the public
safety responsibilities of the Highway Department, will receive a plowing stipend of
$500.00 in two payments. First payment will be in the last pay period of January and the
final payment will be at the end of the program.

Pg. 12

Members of the Bargaining Unit who do not meet the intent and specified requirements
of this Agreement will be subject to disciplinary action such as, but not limited to loss of
the stipend and removal from the program.
If the mechanic is a participant in the snow and ice program and is required to perform
mechanical duties, the union will provide a temporary replacement.
Senior employees will have first right of refusal for program participation. In the event
that all equipment is not covered at the end of the solicitation, the Highway
Superintendent will assign unassigned employees to the program from the most junior
to the most senior employee.
When it becomes necessary to hire additional personnel from outside the bargaining
unit to perform emergency activities and operate Highway Department vehicles, the
Town may hire said temporary employees on an as-needed basis at the rate of pay
which is not more than 1 3/4 times the rate of the lowest paid HMEO as long as the pay
rate of said employee(s) does not violate any state and/or federal laws.
Exclusion to the terms and conditions of hiring temporary emergency employees from
outside the bargaining unit: When an extreme emergency is declared by the Board of
Selectmen and in the opinion of the Highway Superintendent additional personnel are
needed to meet public safety concerns and the employees of the bargaining unit cannot
meet the requirements through no fault of their own, additional employees may be hired
above the specified rate of pay stated above.
Transfer/Recycling Facility employee arriving early to prepare facility for opening under
snow and ice conditions shall receive a stipend of $250 per year to be paid at the end of
the program (on or about April 15).

ARTICLE X
CLOTHING AND CLEANING ALLOWANCE
Members of the Bargaining Unit shall be paid clothing and cleaning allowance of as
follows;
Effective July 1, 2017, the cleaning/clothing allowance shall be increased by a $100 to
$1925 annually.
Effective July 1, 2018, the cleaning/clothing allowance shall be increased by $25 to $1950
annually.
Clothing & Cleaning Allowance will be totaled, divided by (52) weeks, and that amount
will then be added to the base pay of each step of the contract. That amount will then be
the base pay for each step of the contract. That base pay amount will be factored for
yearly salary, longevity, holiday pay, vacation pay, and sick incentive pay. The Town will
Pg. 13

continue to require that all employees covered under this Agreement will maintain the
required clothing which shall be presentable at all time, more specifically detailed as
follows:
(a)
Highway Employees will be required to wear at work blue work clothing that has
similarity within the department and with Raynham Highway Department clearly identified
on the shirt or coat. Approved safety colored clothing that is similarly labeled shall also be
allowed . .
(b)
Pants will be dark blue in color and can be dungaree material. (Jeans) and not
designer quality.
(c)
Program will include the purchase of all foul weather gear by the employee with the
exception of rain gear, gloves or specialized safety cloths.
(d)
Steel toe safety shoes will be required during work period with only exceptions when
special foot wear is required by management.
(e)
Management must provide a line item in the budget that will provide for specialized
and safety clothing.
(f)
The Highway Superintendent with the General Foreman's input shall determine if
clothing meets the intent of the contract to provide work clothing that is not necessary
suitable for other activities. Shirts and coats to have department name silk screened or
embroidered on the front in legible fashion.
(g) Cold weather clothes may be brown duck or safety colored.

ARTICLE XI
HEALTH AND WELFARE

The Town agrees to maintain at the same level or at a higher level, at its option, all
Town vehicles' liability, group accident and group insurance plans affording coverage to
employees covered by the terms of this Agreement in effect on the date of this
Agreement.
Effective July 1, 2007, bargaining unit members who are eligible for group health
insurance and are participating in one of the Town's family plans as of July 1, 2007, and
subsequently drop the Town's group health insurance plan for a full "health year," shall
receive a stipend of three thousand five hundred ($3,500.00) dollars payable in two
payments: one-half on or about December 31 and one-half on or about June 30th each
year. Likewise, members who have individual plans shall receive a stipend of One
thousand seven hundred and fifty ($1,750) dollars each year.
New employees hired after July 1, 2007, who are eligible for group health insurance but
elect not to participate, shall receive an annual payment of one thousand seven
hundred fifty ($1,750) dollars payable on or about June 30.
Health Insurance for new employees would be at 75% instead of the 86% family to 90%
individual. Employee agrees to the proposed changes to the Town's contribution to Blue
Pg. 14

Cross HMO for new employees only with the stipulation that it will only come into effect
if mutually agreed upon by all other bargaining units of the Town.
In the event that dental insurance is offered to the other Town unions, the Town will
offer the same plan to the Raynham Employees Union.
Members of the bargaining unit who enroll in a health club will be reimbursed $150 at
the end of the fiscal year, provided that the employee provides the Highway
Superintendent with adequate proof that he has utilized the health club at least 26 times
during the fiscal year.

ARTICLE XII
EXISTING LEAVE POLICY

Individual circumstances will prevail at the discretion of the Highway Superintendent.

BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

A.

An employee shall be entitled to the extent necessary, but not in excess of
four (4) days leave with pay for purposes of grieving, making funeral
arrangement and/or attending the funeral.

B.

Such leave shall be for the death of:
(1)
spouse, domestic partner, child, parent, sibling, step-family,
grandparent or grandchild of employee; or
(2)
child, parent, step-family, grandparent or grandchild of employees
spouse or domestic partner;
(3)
or any relative living in the household of the employee.

C.

An employee shall be entitled to one (1) day with pay for a relative who is not
listed above and/or any person living in the household of the employee.

D.

An additional day may be used and charged to sick leave.

)

ARTICLE XIII
HOURS OF WORK, LUNCH BREAK, REST PERIOD

1.
The hours of work shall be from 7:00 a.m. until 3:30 p.m. daily, unless otherwise
agreed upon by the Highway Superintendent.
2.
A lunch break of one-half (1/2) hour duration shall be granted to be taken as close
to 12:00 noon as possible.
Pg. 15

3.
The employee shall be granted a fifteen (15) minute rest period (coffee break) in
the morning and afternoon on site, or at the Highway Superintendent's discretion.
4.
Employees who work beyond their regular quitting time and into the next shift
shall, after ten (10) hours from their original starting time, receive a one-half (1/2) hour
meal break. In addition, they will be granted the regular rest periods occurring during the
shift.
5.
The transfer station will close 15 minutes prior to current scheduled closing to
allow the employees ample time for closing and cleaning up. Agreement will take effect
45 days after this Memorandum is signed by both parties.

ARTICLE XIV
SUMMER SCHEDULE
The summer schedule shall consist of four (4) days at nine (9) hours each and one (1)
day at four (4) hours to make up 40 hours per week. For purposes of Article VII
Vacation, 1 day will be equal to 9 hours.

ARTICLE XV
TEMPERATURE CLAUSE
Except in cases of emergency, when the weather becomes inclement, (to include either
heat or cold), the continuance of work for the duration of the shift shall be at the
discretion of the Highway Superintendent. Should the Highway Superintendent order
suspension of work for a portion of or for the remainder of the shift, the employees
involved will be paid straight time rates until the end of the shift. However, employees
will be reassigned to areas where the weather is not so oppressive as to warrant
consideration of a relief from work.

ARTICLE XVI
LONGEVITY PAY
Employees covered by this Agreement shall receive annual longevity payment as
follows:
Upon completion of 5 years of service
Upon completion of 10 years of service
Upon completion of 11 years of service
Upon completion of 12 years of service
Upon completion of 13 years of service
Upon completion of 14 years of service
Upon completion of 15 years of service
Upon completion of 16 years of service
Pg. 16

$250
1.0% of employee's base pay
1.1 % of employee's base pay
1.2% of employee's base pay
1.3% of employee's base pay
1.4% of employee's base pay
1.5% of employee's base pay
1.6% of employee's base pay

Upon completion of 17 years of service
Upon completion of 18 years of service
Upon completion of 19 years of service
Upon completion of 20 years of service
Upon completion of 21 years of service
Upon completion of 22 years of service
Upon completion of 23 years of service
Upon completion of 24 years of service
Upon completion of 25 years of service
Upon completion of 30 years of service
Upon completion of 35 years of service

1. 7% of employee's base pay
1.8% of employee's base pay
1.9% of employee's base pay
2.0% of employee's base pay
2.1 % of employee's base pay
2.2% of employee's base pay
2.3% of employee's base pay
2.4% of employee's base pay
2.5% of employee's base pay
3.0% of employee's base pay
3.5% of employee's base pay

Effective July 1, 2013, longevity pay will be paid on the employee's anniversary date.

ARTICLE XVII
JURY DUTY

The Town agrees to make up the difference between an employee's pay for jury duty
and his regular pay.

ARTICLE XVIII
MILITARY RESERVE TRAINING DUTY PAY

In an affirmation of its support of the National Guard and Armed Forces Reserve
programs, the Town agrees to pay an employee fifty (50%) percent of his regular salary
for up to two (2) weeks of annual military training duty.

ARTICLE XIX
UNION REPRESENTATIVES AND DISCRIMINATION

The Union Representative shall be granted reasonable time off (with pay) during
working hours to investigate and settle grievances and to transact other Union business
which cannot be taken care of during non-working hours, at the discretion of the
Highway Superintendent.
The Town shall not discriminate against any employee because of his participation in
the Union or because of his adherence to any provision of this Agreement or because of
his refusal to comply with any other order that would violate the terms of this
Agreement.

ARTICLE XX
DURATION OF CONTRACT
Pg. 17

This Agreement shall be in force and effect for the period July 1, 2017 through June 30,
2019.
It is understood and agreed by the parties that this Agreement is subject to all
applicable existing or future State laws or bylaws of the Town, unless exempted by the
provisions of G. L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 150E.
Should any Article, section or portion thereof of this Agreement be held unlawful or
invalid by any Court, Agency or Board of competent jurisdiction, or in conflict with
existing State laws, such decision shall apply only to the specific Article, section or
portion thereof directly specified in the decision. Upon issuance of such a decision, the
parties agree immediately to negotiate a substitute for the invalidated Article, section or
portion thereof, if requested by either party. The remaining parts or provisions shall
remain in full force and effect.
Either party may recommend any or all parts of the Agreement to be reopened for
negotiations provided one of the parties advises the other not later than one hundred
twenty (120) days prior to the termination date of this Agreement, by submission and
receipt in writing to the other party of such recommendations. The party receiving the
request for reopening of the contract will then be provided an opportunity to submit their
recommendations or proposals prior to the start of formal negotiations at a date not later
than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date.

ARTICLE XXI
MISCELLANEOUS
1.
The Town agrees to pay for the license renewal fee and upgrades of Hoisting
Engineer's' licenses and endorsements for heavy motor equipment operators, and CDL
Class A and Class B drivers' licenses.
2.
During snow and ice events, the Town will provide an opportunity to obtain a
meal at the restaurant of the employee's choice within the Town of Raynham. The
Highway Superintendent or his designated agent must approve the time of these meal
breaks. After every 14 consecutive hours of snow and ice operations, the Highway
Department employee will be paid a $30.00 stipend as compensation.
3.
When an employee other than a designated heavy equipment operator is
assigned to operate any departmental or rental equipment which requires a specified
hoisting license such as a front-end loader, skid steer, bulldozer, backhoe, sweeper,
catch basin cleaner, road-side brush mower, etc., shall be paid at the current base
hourly rate for a Heavy Motor Equipment Operator (HMEO) for the amount of time
actually assigned to the machine, and/or after two hours of assignment shall be paid
that rate for the whole day.
Pg. 18

...

4.
Any member of the bargaining unit who has received a HE-2A or 28, 4E and 4G
Hoisting Engineer's license from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of
Public Safety and has demonstrated to the Highway Superintendent and their designee
that they possess the necessary skill and ability to safely operate said equipment in
public streets may receive at minimum the base hourly rate of a heavy equipment
operator (HMEO) for the operation of equipment generally specified in Article XXI,
paragraph 3.
5.
Reclassification or upgrade of any employee not currently in a position designated
as an HMEO is at the discretion of the Highway Superintendent, subject to a skills and
safety evaluation, and approved budget appropriation. All employees classified as full
HMEO designation shall possess or obtain within a reasonable and agreed upon
designated time period (between 6 and 12 months) all the necessary licenses and
endorsements to operate all current and future departmental equipment critical to the
routine maintenance and repair of the Town's infrastructure. Minimum hydraulic Hoisting
Engineers licenses required for full HMEO designation consists of HE-2A (preferred) or
28 (required) and 4E and 4G. Employees hired before January 1, 2015 shall be exempt
(grandfathered) from the abovementioned licensing requirements and not be required to
upgrade licenses beyond their current levels as a condition of employment or be subject
to disciplinary action for failure to do so. Employees hired before January 1, 2015 shall
be required to maintain their currently documented individual level of licensing in good
standing.
6.
No one outside the bargaining unit shall perform work normally done by those
employees within the unit if the employees who normally perform such work are
available and able to do the work.
7.
The town shall pay for the cost of medical examinations required for obtaining
CDL and hydraulic licenses since these licenses are a condition of employment. If the
employee gets the examination at the Town-approved medical facility the invoice will be
directly sent to the Town for payment. In the event the employee chooses to use a
medical facility other than the Town's, the employee shall only be reimbursed the same
amount paid to Town's approved facility.

8.
No employee shall be directed to operate any vehicle or equipment for which he
does not hold an operator's license.
9.
The employee shall have the right to answer any material filed in his/her
personnel file and his/her answer shall be attached to the filed copy. Any employee
shall have the right, upon written request, at reasonable times, to examine all materials
in his/her personnel file which is neither confidential nor privileged under law, in the
presence of the employer or his/her legal designee. A copy of materials in an
employee's personnel file shall be furnished to an employee when he/she requests.
10. The Town shall provide Hepatitis 8 vaccinations to members of the bargaining
unit.
Pg. 19

11.
When a bargaining unit position becomes vacant and it is determined by the
Town that it is necessary to fill that position immediately, the Town may do so at a rate it
determines, but not more than the lowest paid employee in that position, for a period of
not more than ninety (90) days.
12.
Light duty position for an employee that is on injury, who is able to perform light
duty tasks, would be at the discretion of the Highway Superintendent and must be
considered a "non-grievable" issue. Opportunities would be on a case-by-case basis
and not a guaranteed option. Only one (1) employee is eligible for light duty at a time.
13.
The Highway Superintendent will purchase all weather gear for employees on an
as-needed basis.
14.
Effective July 1, 2017, any employee that has or obtains a CDL Class A license
shall receive an increase in pay of $0.25 per hour.

ARTICLE XXII
SAFETY

1.
A Safety Committee will be formed consisting of the Highway Superintendent, a
member of the bargaining unit, and a mechanic agreed to by the parties to review
equipment needs and evaluate the conditions of vehicles and other safety related
matters. Such Committee is to meet monthly.
2.
Protective covering -All vehicles and equipment shall be equipped with
weatherproof cabs or roofs with weatherproof side curtains for use in inclement
weather. No employee shall be required to operate any vehicle or equipment without
adequate protection from the weather.
3.
When the operator of a vehicle or any equipment that he has been assigned to
finds a defect in said vehicle or equipment, the operator is required to notify the
Highway Superintendent and mechanic in writing of said defect.
4.
Safety Glasses - Employees covered by this Agreement who normally require
corrective lenses in their day-to-day activities (not merely readi{lg glasses) shall have
provided by the Town one pair of prescription safety glasses. Such glasses shall be
repaired or replaced by the Town when broken or damaged in Town service.

ARTICLE XXIII
CLASSIFICATION

Pg. 20

. -·

1.

For the purpose of this contract, all regular and full-time employees of the
Raynham Highway Department, exclusive of the Highway Superintendent and
administrative help, shall be assigned one of the following classifications:

a) General Foreman
b) Highway Department Working Foreman
c) Solid Waste Foreman
d) Lead Mechanic/Shop Foreman
e) Heaw Motor Equipment Operator (HMEO)
f) Light Equipment Operator
g) Truck Driver
h) Laborer/Attendant
i) Tree Department Working Foreman
j) Tree Department Climber/Laborer
Nothing in this agreement shall prevent any employee from working in another position
within the Highway Department at or below their current job classification and
description. Refer to complete Job Descriptions for details of responsibilities and license
requirements for each classification.
2. Working Out of Job Classification:

)

a) If an employee is assigned to perform the duties of a position classified in a lower
level than the employee's then current classifications, the employee shall be
compensated at their regular rate of pay as if performing their regular duties.
b) If an employee is assigned to perform the duties of a position classified in a higher
level than the employee's then current classification, for a period of more than ten (10)
consecutive days, including holidays and one (1) sick days, the employee shall be
compensated at the lowest step necessary (in the higher position) to give the employee
and increase of at least 10% over their current rate. Employees who are required to
supervise seasonal employees when working at a higher classification will receive the
increase in pay for any days work beyond the initial five (5) day period.
c) The short term assignment of an employee to the work of another classification for
the purpose of training the employee to learn the work, or for emergency coverage,
shall not be deemed a promotion or temporary assignment.
Each employee shall be furnished with a copy of his/her job description.
If during the term of this agreement any new position is created within the bargaining
unit or any positions covered by this agreement has a change in its responsibilities, the

Pg. 21

wages, hours and working conditions for such positions shall be subject to negotiations
between the parties to this agreement.
The town agrees to add an additional position of Highway Department Working Foreman.
This position will be filled from within the bargaining unit. The vacated position will be
filled at the discretion of the Town.
ARTICLE XXIV
TRANSFER/RECYCLING SHELTER

The Town will provide a heated transfer/recycling shelter for use by the attendant.

ARTICLE XXV
PROBATIONARY PERIOD

New hires shall serve a six (6) month probationary period during which they may be
discharged without cause and any such discharge shall not be subject to the grievance
or arbitration procedures set forth herein. In the event that an individual hired pursuant
to Article XXI paragraph 10 is actually hired to fill a position, the first ninety (90) days
shall count toward the six-month probationary period.

ARTICLE XXVI
TRAINING AND EDUCATION

The employer agrees to entertain all reasonable requests, to the extent possible, by
employees for training at the work site.
The employer agrees to reimburse employees for the cost of job related courses,
provided that a written request is filed with and approved by the Highway
Superintendent prior to the beginning of the course and provided that a passing grade is
obtained. Proof of course completion shall be provided upon reimbursement. In the
event that a grade is issued for a course, a grade of C or 70 or better will be required for
reimbursement.
The Town may require and be willing to pay for a Town employee to obtain certifications
for handling of hazardous material such as but not limited to HAZ-WOPPER training.
Training is usually during an employee's normal work periods.
For the successful completion of the course with certification, the Town will pay a onetime stipend of $500.00 and an additional stipend of $500.00 for each year the
certification is renewed.
Such training is at the discretion of the Highway
Superintendent must be approved by him prior to the training sessions.

Pg. 22

.

. ,.. . '.

The Town will pay $1,500.00 for an individual from the bargaining unit as a stipend
payment for conducting landfill gas monitoring pursuant to DEP regulations 31 O CMR 19.
Amount will be paid in two payments, one at end of June the other at end of December.
This person must be qualified and successfully conduct the testing procedure. In the event
this person who normally conducts the test is not available and another member of the
bargaining unit performs the test successfully, then this individual will receive $200 for each
round of test completed successfully. All payments made to the alternate employee(s) will
be deducted from the $1,500.00 budget for this work and the balance paid to the employee
who normally conducts the test if they assume normal testing schedule.
Pesticide License-The Town will pay an annual stipend of $1,500 to one individual in the
bargaining unit for successful completion and maintenance (renewal) of the State
pesticide license as evidenced by a certificate. The Town will pay for all recertification
and training to maintain (renew) the license.
The Superintendent shall provide members with the opportunity to attend seminars or
events for professional development consistent with the member's job duties and subject
to adequate funding and staffing.
OVERTIME FOR TRAINING
(1) The Town shall pay the overtime rate for training and/or travel that causes the employee
to exceed the normal 40-hour work period. All training must directly relate to employee's job
or show substantial benefit to the Town and must be approved in advance by the Highway
Superintendent.
(a) In the event funding is not available, compensating time off [CTO] is an option
the Superintendent may choose.
(2) In the event that the training requires travel the Town will provide transportation or pay
mileage at rates set by Board of Selectmen.
(3) If the training involves overnight stay, employees will be paid for lodging, food and for a
normal work period not at the overtime rate.
(4) Under the classification of Employee Beneficial, the employee will not be paid at an
overtime rate when exceeding the normal 40-hour work week for attending professional
association shows and seminars. However, travel may be provided at the Superintendent's
discretion.
ARTICLE XXVII
HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT PAY SCHEDULE
Pay Schedule to be revised as an Addendum to this Agreement at a later date.
The following positions were previously added to the pay schedule:
Pg. 23

Groundskeeper 1 - Same as HMEO
Groundskeeper 2 - Same as Truck Driver
Groundskeeper 3 - Same as laborer
Craftsman A- Same as HMEO
Craftsman B - Same as Truck Driver

ARTICLE XXVIII
DISCIPLINE

A. An employee, at his/her request, must be allowed an official representative of the
Union to be present at any investigatory interview, conference, hearing, or
meeting which may reasonably be expected to result in disciplinary action.
B. No disciplinary action shall be placed in an employee's personnel file unless
he/she has first seen it and has signed it. Such signature does not signify
agreement with content.
C. If there is a disagreement with any information contained in such disciplinary
action, the removal or correction of such information may be mutually agreed
upon by the Employer and the employee, with or without the Union. If mutual
agreement is not reached, the employee may submit a written statement
explaining his/her position. The written statement will be attached to the original
information. The statement shall be included whenever the original information is
sent to a third party as long as the original information is retained.
D. In the event that the employee refuses to sign a disciplinary document, the date
and time of such refusal will be noted and the presenter will sign also verifying
that the presenter advised the employee that he/she was signing for receipt only
and the discipline will be placed in the employee's file.

E. Disciplinary action will be implemented within 90 days of the final decision but
after the appeal period has been exhausted. The Highway Superintendent has
the discretion, within the 90 day period, to implement the disciplinary action as he
sees fit.
Wherefore, the parties by their duly authorized representatives have caused this
Agreement to be executed this
day of .lf"'v
, 2017.

a

aL t.Jtl

Raynham Employees Union,
Highway Department Unit

Pg. 24
