AGREEMENT BETWEEN

THE SCHOOL COMMITTEE OF SOMERVILLE

AND

THE SOMERVILLE TEACHERS ASSOCIATION
UNIT A

Effective September 1, 2018
Expiring August 31, 2021

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE

I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
XIII
XIV
XV
XVI
XVII
XVIII
XIX
XX
XXI
XXII
XXIII
XXIV
XXV
XXVI
XXVII
XXVIII
XXIX
XXX
XXXI
XXXII
XXXIII
XXXIV
XXXV

PAGE NO.
Preamble
Recognition
Negotiation Procedure
Grievance Procedure
Salaries and Other Compensations
Teaching Hours and Teaching Load
Holidays and Vacations
Class Size
Textbooks and Curriculum
Teacher Employment
Teacher Assignment and Transfer
Teacher Evaluation
Promotions
Positions in Evening School and Under Federal Programs
Academic Freedom
Professional Development and Educational
Improvement
Special Subject Teachers and Special Programs
Relief from Non-Teaching Duties
Substitute Teachers
Sick Leave
Temporary Leaves of Absence
Extended Leaves of Absence
Sabbatical Leave
Protection
Insurance and Annuity Plan
Teacher Facilities
School Buildings
Consultation Procedure
Association Privileges
Payroll Deductions
Affirmative Action
Health and Safety
Next Wave/Full Circle
Summer Program Positions (209-day staff)_________________
Job Sharing
Child Care Facility and School Attendance of
Non-Resident Teachers’ Children

2

4
4
5
5[CL1]
10
17
29
30
31
31
37
41
42
44
44
45
48
49
49
50
53
55
59
59
61
61
62
62
63
65
66
66
66
67
69
70

ARTICLE

XXXV I
XXXVII
XXXVIII
Reading Services
XXXIX
XXXX
(CORI) Checks
XXXXI
XXXXII
XXXXIII
XXXXIV
XXXXV
Appendix A
Appendix B
Appendix C
Appendix D
Appendix E

PAGE NO.

Employees on Waivers and in Temporary Positions
Grants
Inclusion Services and Regular Education
72
Mentoring
Criminal Record Offender Information
75
Acceptable Use and Social Networking Policies
Resignation
Labor Management Committee ____________________
General
Duration
Teachers’ Salary Schedule
Extracurricular Activities
Coaching Positions
Educator Evaluations
Somerville High School Schedule

71
71

73

76
76
76
77
78
79
84
89
92
120

PREAMBLE ................................................................................................................................... 4
ARTICLE I: RECOGNITION ........................................................................................................ 4
ARTICLE II: NEGOTIATION PROCEDURE .............................................................................. 5
ARTICLE III: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ................................................................................. 5
ARTICLE IV: SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATIONS ................................................. 10
ARTICLE V: TEACHING HOURS AND TEACHING LOAD ................................................. 16
ARTICLE XLII: RESIGNATION ................................................................................................ 72
ARTICLE XLIII: LABOR/MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE ..................................................... 73
ARTICLE XLIV: GENERAL ...................................................................................................... 73
ARTICLE XLV: DURATION ..................................................................................................... 74
APPENDIX A - SALARIES ........................................................................................................ 75

3

PREAMBLE
Recognizing that our prime purpose is to provide education of the highest possible quality for the
children of Somerville, and that good morale within the teaching staff of Somerville is essential
to achievement of that purpose, we, the undersigned parties to this Collective Bargaining
Agreement ("Agreement"), declare that:
A.

Under the law of Massachusetts, the School Committee, elected by the citizens of
Somerville, has final responsibility for establishing the educational policies of the public
schools of Somerville;

B.

Under the Education Reform Act of 1993, the superintendent of schools has
responsibility for managing the system, and for carrying out the policies so established;

C.

Under the Education Reform Act of 1993, the principals are the educational
administrators and managers of their schools, and are responsible for supervising the
operation and management of their schools and school property, subject to the
supervision and direction of the superintendent and consistent with the policies of the
School Committee;

D.

The teaching staff of the public schools of Somerville has responsibility for providing in
the classroom of the schools education of the highest possible quality;

E.

Fulfillment of these respective responsibilities can be facilitated and supported by
consultations and free exchanges of views and information among the School Committee,
the superintendent, and the teaching staff in the formulation and application of policies
relating to wages, hours, and other conditions of employment for the teaching staff; and
so,

F.

To give effect to these declarations, the following principles and procedures are hereby
adopted.
ARTICLE I: RECOGNITION

A.

The School Committee of the City of Somerville (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the
"School Committee") recognizes the Somerville Teachers Association (hereinafter
sometimes referred to as the "Association") for the purpose of collective bargaining under
M.G.L. Chapter 150E as the exclusive bargaining agent for all professional employees of
the School Committee excluding the superintendent, the assistant superintendent of
schools, administrators and substitute teachers. Said recognition is for the following unit
of employees:

4

Unit A
Classroom Teachers
Guidance Counselors
Remedial Reading Teachers
Educational Testers
Adaptive Physical Education Teachers
B.

School Adjustment Counselors
Speech-Language Pathologists
Homebound Teachers
Teachers of the Visually Impaired

Except as specifically abridged, delegated, granted or modified by this Agreement or any
supplemental thereto, or by M.G.L. Chapter 150E, all of the rights, powers and authority
held by the School Committee prior to the effective date of said Agreement are retained
by the School Committee and the exercise of said rights, powers and/or authority shall
not be subject to the grievance procedure and/or arbitration.
ARTICLE II: NEGOTIATION PROCEDURE

A.

Except as this Agreement shall hereinafter otherwise provide, all conditions of
employment applicable on the effective date of this Agreement to employees covered by
this Agreement, shall continue to be so applicable during the life of this Agreement.

B.

This Agreement incorporates the entire understanding of the parties on all issues, which
were or could have been the subject of negotiation. Except as otherwise expressly
provided herein, during the term of this Agreement, neither party shall be required to
negotiate with respect to any such matter whether or not covered by this Agreement and
whether or not within the knowledge or contemplation of either or both of the parties at
the time they negotiated or signed this Agreement.

C.

This Agreement may not be modified in whole or in part by the parties except by an
instrument in writing duly executed by both parties.
ARTICLE III: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

A.

Definitions:
1.

A "grievance" is a claim based upon an event or condition which involves the
interpretation, meaning or application of any of the provisions of this Agreement
or any subsequent Agreement entered into pursuant to this Agreement. The term
"grievance" shall not apply to any matter as to which the School Committee is
without authority to act.

2.

An "aggrieved person" is the person or persons making the claim.

5

3.

B.

C.

A "party-in-interest" is the person or persons making the claim and any person
who might be required to take action or against whom action might be taken in
order to resolve the claim.

Purpose:
1.

The purpose of this procedure is to secure, at the lowest possible administrative
level, equitable solutions to the problems which may from time to time arise
affecting the welfare or working conditions of persons covered by this
Agreement. Both parties agree that these proceedings will be kept as informal
and confidential as may be appropriate at any level of the procedure.

2.

Nothing herein contained will be construed as limiting the right of any teacher
having a grievance to discuss the matter informally with any appropriate member
of the administration, and having the grievance adjusted without intervention of
the Association, provided the adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of this
Agreement and that the Association has been given the opportunity to be present
at such adjustment to state its views.

Procedure: Since it is important that grievances be processed as rapidly as possible, the
number of days indicated at each level should be considered as a maximum, and every
effort should be made to expedite the process. The time limits specified may, however,
be extended by mutual agreement. In the event that a grievance is filed on or after June 1
which if left unresolved until the beginning of the following school year could result in
irreparable harm to a party-in-interest, the time limits set forth herein will be reduced so
that the grievance procedure may be exhausted prior to the end of the school term or as
soon thereafter as is practicable.
1.

Level One:
A teacher with a grievance will first discuss it with his/her principal or immediate
superior, either directly or through a representative of the Association, with the
objective of resolving the matter informally.

2.

Level Two:
a.

If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the disposition
of his or her grievance at Level One, he/she or the
Chairperson of the Association’s Committee on
Professional Rights and Responsibilities (hereinafter
referred to as the “PR&R Chairperson”) may file the
grievance in writing with the superintendent within ten (10)
school days after receiving the Level One decision.
6

If no decision has been rendered within ten (10) school
days after presentation of the grievance at Level One, the
aggrieved person or the PR&R Chairperson may file the
grievance in writing with the superintendent within twenty
(20) school days after presentation of the grievance at
Level One.

3.

b.

The superintendent and/or designee will represent the
administration at this level of the grievance procedure.
Within ten (10) school days after receipt of the written
grievance by the superintendent, the superintendent and/or
designee will meet with the aggrieved person in an effort to
resolve it.

c.

If the aggrieved person or the PR&R Chairperson does not
file a grievance in writing with the superintendent within
thirty (30) school days after the person or the Association
knew, or should have known, of the act or condition on
which the grievance is based, then the grievance will be
considered waived.

Level Three:
a.

If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the disposition
of his/her grievance at Level Two, s/he or the PR&R
Chairperson may file the grievance in writing with the
School Committee within ten (10) school days after
receiving the Level Two decision.
If no decision has been rendered within ten (10) school
days after the aggrieved person first has met with the
superintendent, the person or the PR&R Chairperson may
file the grievance in writing with the School Committee
within twenty (20) school days after presentation of the
grievance at Level Two.

b.

Within thirty (30) school days or two (2) regularly
scheduled meetings after receiving the written grievance,
the School Committee or its designee will meet with the
aggrieved person for the purpose of resolving the
grievance.

7

4.

Level Four:
a.

If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the disposition of his/her
grievance at Level Three, the Association may submit the grievance to
binding arbitration within ten (10) school days after receiving the Level
Three decision.
If no decision has been rendered within ten (10) school days after the
aggrieved person first has met with the School Committee, the Association
may submit the grievance to binding arbitration within thirty (30) school
days after the Level Three meeting.

b.

In the event that either party elects to submit a grievance to arbitration, the
arbitrator is to be mutually selected by the School Committee and the
Association. If the School Committee and the Association cannot agree
within seven (7) school days after written notice of intention to arbitrate
has been received by either party, then the party demanding arbitration
shall within five (5) school days thereafter, upon written notice to the
other, request the American Arbitration Association to provide a panel of
arbitrators, said arbitrator then to be selected under the provision of the
Voluntary Labor Arbitration rules.

c.

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no dispute or controversy shall
be a subject for arbitration unless it involves meaning, interpretation or
application of the express language of a specific provision of this
Agreement. The arbitrator shall have no power to alter, add to, subtract or
modify any provision of this Agreement.

d.

The parties are agreed that no restrictions are intended on the rights and
powers of the School Committee except those specifically and directly set
forth in express language in specific provisions of this Agreement. The
arbitrator shall arrive at his/her decision solely upon the facts, evidence
and contentions as presented by the parties during the arbitration
proceedings.

e.

In determining whether there is a specific and direct violation of express
language of a specific provision of this Agreement, it is agreed that the
only criterion to be applied is the plain meaning of express language in the
Agreement and that evidence of past practice, past or present policy, oral
statements made during negotiations or at any time by either of the parties
shall be inadmissible to prove the meaning of express language, and shall
not be considered by the arbitrator.

f.

The arbitrator shall issue his/her written decision not later than twenty (20)
8

days from the date of the close of the hearing or from the date that final
statements and proofs are submitted to him/her. The decision of the
arbitrator shall be submitted to the School Committee and to the
Association and, subject to law, shall be final and binding, provided that
the arbitrator shall not usurp the functions of the School Committee or the
proper exercise of its judgment and discretion under law and this
Agreement.
g.

D.

The costs for the services of the arbitration, including per diem expenses,
if any, and actual and necessary travel and subsistence expenses, will be
borne equally by the School Committee and the Association.

Rights of Teachers to Representation:
1.

No reprisals of any kind will be taken by the School Committee or by any
member of the administration against any party-in-interest, any building
representative, any member of the PR&R Committee or any other participant in
the grievance procedure by reason of such participation.

2.

Any party-in-interest may be represented at Levels One, Two and Three of the
grievance procedure by a person of his/her own choosing, except that s/he may
not be represented by a representative or an officer of any teacher organization
other than the Association.
When a teacher is not represented by the Association, the Association shall have
the right to be present and to state its views at all stages of the grievance
procedure. Only the Association or the School Committee, but not individual
teachers, may seek to have the Agreement arbitrated, interpreted, applied or
enforced through litigation.

E.

Miscellaneous:
1.

If, in the judgment of the PR&R Committee, a grievance affects a group or class
of teachers, the PR&R Committee may submit such grievance in writing to the
superintendent directly, and the processing of such grievance will be commenced
at Level Two.

2.

Decisions rendered at Level One, Two or Three of the grievance procedure will
be in writing setting forth the decision and the reasons therefore and will be
transmitted promptly to all parties-in-interest and to the chairperson of the PR&R
Committee. Decisions rendered at Level Four will be in accordance with the
procedure set forth in Section C, Paragraph 4, Part c.

9

3.

All documents, communications and records dealing with the processing of a
grievance will be filed separately from the personnel files of the participants.

4.

Forms for filing grievances, serving notices, taking appeals, making reports and
recommendations and other necessary documents will be jointly prepared by the
superintendent and the Association and given appropriate distribution so as to
facilitate operation of the grievance procedure.
ARTICLE IV: SALARIES AND OTHER COMPENSATIONS

A.

Scope of the Article: The salary of each teacher in the Somerville school system shall be
determined in accordance with the following provisions of this article.

B.

Salary Schedules:

C.

1.

The salaries of all persons covered by this Agreement are set forth in Appendices
A, B and C, which are appended hereto and made a part hereof.

2.

If a new bargaining unit position is established, or if there are any substantial
changes in the duties of any existing bargaining unit positions, the School
Committee will negotiate with the Association regarding possible modification in
salary for such positions.

3.

The parties agree to establish a Joint Study Committee, comprise of three (3)
representatives of the Association and three (3) representatives of the School
Committee, to review, evaluate and make recommendations to their respective
bargaining teams relative to stipendiary positions in Appendices B and C. The
Joint Study Committee will submit its joint recommendations to the to the parties’
respective bargaining teams for negotiations and ratification by January 30, 2016.

Placement:
1.

Effective September 1, 2004, for purposes of the initial lane placement of teachers
who are new to the school district (i.e., those who have not been employed
previously for any period of time in the school district), the School Committee
will accept graduate level courses that were satisfactorily completed by the
teacher prior to his/her employment with the school district.
A.

The initial salary of each teacher who has been employed as a teacher in
another public school system in Massachusetts and is entering
employment in the Somerville school system shall be consistent with the
step and lane of the Basic Salary Schedule, which, with the exception of
vocational teachers and those teachers described below, shall not exceed
Step 11 of the Salary Schedule.
10

2.

B.

The initial salary of each teacher who has been employed as a teacher in a
public school system outside of Massachusetts, in an approved private
school, whether in or outside of Massachusetts, or a person who has prior
educational experience, and is entering employment in the Somerville
School system shall be consistent with the step and lane of the Basic
Salary Schedule up to Step 5 of the Salary Schedule, but shall not exceed
Step 5 without the written approval of the superintendent.

C.

The initial salary of each entering teacher other than those described above
shall be determined by the superintendent but shall not exceed Step 5.

Vocational and shop teachers with no degree shall be considered to have the
equivalent of a bachelor’s degree for salary schedule purposes because of the
required trade and technical training prior to being eligible for teacherships.
Vocational and shop teachers with an earned bachelor’s degree shall be paid on
the Master’s schedule.
A teacher who severs his/her employment during the term of the Agreement and
is reemployed during the term of the Agreement shall be placed on the
appropriate level in relation to his/her last placement on the Salary Schedule, and
will not be considered to be a new employee for purposes of this provision.

D.

E.

Mode of Compensation:
1.

The School Committee shall provide a salary statement to be given to every
teacher on the first payday in September. This shall include the status of the
individual teacher's sick leave.

2.

Teachers shall be paid in twenty-one (21) bi-weekly installments; however, the
last payment in June will be due within five (5) days after the close of the payroll
period, but in no event later than June 30, except that the School Committee may
hold individual paychecks for adjustments when a teacher may be owing money.
Paychecks will be placed in windowed envelopes.

3.

The parties agree to establish a Joint Study Committee, to review and assess the
feasibility of 26 paychecks as an option, and will report to their respective
constituencies the result of their study.

Increments:
1.

Annual Increments: The annual increment is granted from the minimum salary to
the maximum salary within the applicable lane. To be eligible for an annual
11

increment, (i) a bargaining unit member must have been on the payroll for at least
one hundred twenty (120) work days during one (1) work year (135 work days for
209-day staff), and (ii) his/her most recent summative evaluation must have been
no less than “needs improvement[CL2]” and the bargaining unit member must not
have been placed on an improvement plan. Compensation for fractional
increments will not be paid.
2.

Horizontal Adjustments:
a.

If a master's or any other advanced degree or certification is received
during the school year, and if the superintendent is presented with
evidence of completion of the study required for the degree or certificate
prior to February 1, a teacher shall be advanced to the new degree lane on
the same step as of February 1. If evidence of completion of required
study is submitted after February 1 of the school year, lane adjustment will
be made as of September 1 of the next school year.

b.

Effective August 31, 2015, a new lane shall be added to the salary
schedule for bargaining unit members who have earned a Certificate of
Advanced Graduate Studies (CAGS) or sixty (60) credits beyond a
Master’s degree. The new lane on each step shall be $1,250 higher than
the Masters + 45 lane for the corresponding step in effect on September 1,
2015. Bargaining unit members shall advance to the new lane if they
provide the superintendent with satisfactory evidence that they have
earned a CAGS, or, since September 1, 2012, have earned sixty (60)
credits beyond a Master’s degree in preapproved courses, including inservice courses, workshops or seminars, provided that courses taken
during the 2012-2013 work year will be counted for purposes of lane
advancement if, prior to February 1, 2014, the superintendent is presented
with satisfactory evidence of completion of such courses during the 20122013 work year and approves such courses in accordance with normal
practice.

c.

Vocational and Shop teachers who do not have a Bachelor’s degree but are
placed on a step in the Bachelor’s lane under Section C, Paragraph 2 of
this article will be eligible to move to the Bachelor’s+15 lane if they earn
15 credits in pre-approved college courses, workshops, seminars or inservice courses, and will be eligible to move to the Master’s lane, if they
earn a Bachelor’s degree. Vocational and Shop teachers who have a
Bachelor’s degree and are placed on a step in the Master’s lane under
Section C, Paragraph 2 of this article will be eligible to move to the
Master’s+15 lane, if they earn 15 credits in pre-approved university
courses, workshops, seminars or in-service courses, and will be eligible to
move to the Master’s+30 lane, if they earn a Master’s degree.
12

F.

Other Compensations:
1.

Summer Work: All members of Unit A who are required to work a full day
during the summer shall be paid 1/184th of the yearly salary per day. This
provision shall not apply to personnel working on curriculum as set forth in
Article VIII, Textbooks and Curriculum, Section B.

2.

Extra Instructional Duties: For the life of this Agreement, compensation for the
additional instructional duties listed below shall be as follows:
a.
b.
c.

3.

Evening School:
Curriculum Work:
Workshop Instruction:

$26/hour
$26/hour
$41/hour

Lead Teachers and Mentor Teachers:
a.

Academic lead teachers: The basic stipend for lead teachers in each
academic department shall be one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200)
for the life of the Agreement. In each academic department having more
than five (5) teachers, the lead teacher will receive an additional sixty
dollars ($60) per teacher beyond the five (5) teachers.

b.

Rules enforcement lead teachers: The stipend for lead teachers in this
category shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) for the life of
the Agreement.

c.

Career vocational technical education (CVTE) lead teachers: The stipend
for lead teachers in each CVTE Department shall be one thousand dollars
($1,000) for the life of the Agreement, provided that, effective as of the
2013-2014 work year, the stipend for newly appointed CVTE lead
teachers shall be five hundred dollars ($500) if there are fewer than two
(2) full-time teachers in the respective CVTE Department of the lead
teacher.

d.

All lead teachers remain subject to annual appointment, provided, that no
teacher shall fill a lead teacher position for more than three (3) consecutive
years.

e.

Mentor teachers shall receive a stipend at the rate of $1,300 for each
mentoring appointment during the 2013-2014 work year, and $1,500 for
each mentoring appointment during each succeeding work year.
13

f.

Mentor coordinators shall receive an annual stipend of $1,500.

4.

Extracurricular Duties. Teacher participation in certain extracurricular activities
(i.e., activities taking place outside of the regular work day) will be strictly
voluntary, and teachers will be compensated for participation in certain of these
activities in accordance with the provisions of Appendix B of this Agreement.

5.

CVTE teachers will receive four hundred fifty dollars ($450) above the teachers'
schedule.

6.

School adjustment counselors will receive two hundred dollars ($200) above the
teachers' schedule.

7.

Instructional Leadership Team Members will be paid a stipend at the rate of
$1,600 per year.

8.

On days when teachers are required to work at more than two (2) school
buildings, they shall be reimbursed at the rate of three hundred dollars ($300) per
year for the use of their automobiles. If a teacher does not travel every day,
his/her reimbursement shall be pro-rated based on the number of days that s/he
travels to more than two (2) school buildings.

9.

The rate for work performed by bargaining unit members outside of the regular
work day or work year that is not compensable under another provision in the
collective bargaining agreement will be $27 per hour.

10.

Tuition Reimbursement
a) The School Committee will reimburse unit members for up to $ 1,000.00 per
year, for college and university courses related to the field of education, their
assigned subject area, the acquisition of an advanced degree in the field of
education or administration or educator license with the advance written
approval of the Principal and Superintendent or designee. The reimbursement
will be for a grade of “B -” or better and will be made after provision of
official transcripts. Reimbursements will be on a “first come, first served”
basis. The School Committee shall not be required to expend more than
$40,000 per fiscal year in the aggregate under this article. Unit members will
not be eligible to receive educational benefits under this article until they have
completed 2 years of service in the bargaining unit, except that the
Superintendent or designee may elect to waive this requirement on a case-bycase basis. The School Committee and the Association will develop a form to
be used for purposes of seeking approval and reimbursement under this
article.
14

G.

Longevity Plan:
1.

a.

Effective September 1, 2015, a bargaining unit member shall be entitled to
an annual salary increase, over and above the applicable step of the Salary
Schedule then in effect, at the beginning of the years of service as a
bargaining unit member in the Somerville school system set forth below,
in the following amounts:
12th year of service:
15th year of service:
20th year of service:
25th year of service:
30th year of service:
35th year of service:

b.

Effective September 1, 2016, all longevity increments will be increased by
$300, as follows:
12th year of service:
15th year of service:
20th year of service:
25th year of service:
30th year of service:
35th year of service:

c.

$1,000
$1,350
$1,650
$2,000
$3,350
$3,600

$1,300
$1,650
$1,950
$2,300
$3,650
$3,900

Effective September 1, 2017, all longevity increments will be increased by
$250, as follows:
12th year of service:
15th year of service:
20th year of service:
25th year of service:
30th year of service:
35th year of service:

$1,550
$1,900
$2,200
$2,550
$3,900
$4,150

2.

A teacher must be on the payroll for at least one hundred twenty (120) work days
during one (1) school year for that year to count for purposes of longevity.

3.

Effective September 1, 2011, a teacher who has received supplemental longevity
and still is employed by the Somerville school district will be made eligible again
to receive regular longevity at the start of the third (3rd) school year following the
last school year in which the teacher received supplemental longevity.
15

H.

Other Adjustments:
1.

If a salary increase is to become effective as of the beginning of a school year, a
teacher who has given written notice of retirement as of October 1 of the school
year of his/her retirement shall receive said increase as of the January
immediately preceding the effective date of said salary increase, payable in a
lump sum at the time of retirement, provided that the teacher is fifty-five (55)
years old and has thirty (30) years of service, and provided further that the teacher
severs his/her employment no earlier than June 30 of the school year of his/her
retirement and no later than August 31 immediately thereafter.

2.

The per diem of all salaries shall be 1/184th of the annual salary for that position.
ARTICLE V: TEACHING HOURS AND TEACHING LOAD

A.

Work Year:
1.

a.

Classroom Teachers: The work year of teachers (other than new teachers
who may be required to attend professional development activities as early
as two days prior to the Wednesday before Labor Day. These professional
development days will not be considered to be part of the 184-day work
year for such members) will begin no earlier than September 1 and
terminate no later than the following June 30, but the actual work year for
teachers will, in no event, be longer than one hundred and eighty-four
(184) days. The “actual work year" will include days when students are in
attendance, orientation days at the beginning of the school year,
conference days, and any other days on which teacher attendance is
required. It is expressly understood that days on which teacher attendance
is not required because of inclement weather will not be included in
computing the actual work year of teachers.

b.

Effective at the start of the 2015-2016 work year –
i.

Teachers will report to work for four (4) hours during the period
from August 15 through the Tuesday prior to Labor Day to prepare
for the start of the new school year. Teachers will have discretion
with respect to the scheduling of such hours, which may be
scheduled over more than one (1) day, but must be scheduled
outside of required work hours. Teachers will provide their
principals with a record of the dates and times worked.

ii.

Teachers will work for an additional two (2) hours, outside of
required work hours, during the period from the last day of school
16

for students through one week following that day, to complete endof-year tasks.
c.

2.

Effective at the start of the 2016-2017 work year –
i.

Teachers will report to work for four (4) hours during the period
from August 15 through the Tuesday prior to Labor Day to prepare
for the start of the new school year. Teachers will have discretion
with respect to the scheduling of such hours, which may be
scheduled over more than one (1) day, but must be scheduled
outside of required work hours. For example, a teacher may
schedule two (2) hours on each of the (2) professional development
days (described below), or at such other time as the teacher elects
prior to start of the school year for students. Teachers will provide
their principals with a record of the dates and times worked.

ii.

Teachers will report for two (2) full days of professional
development activities on the Monday and Tuesday prior to Labor
Day.

iii.

Teachers will have a half-day of teaching on the Wednesday prior
to Labor Day, and will begin full days of teaching as of the
Thursday prior to Labor Day, provided that the Friday prior to
Labor Day will not be a work day for teachers.

iv.

The Friday prior to the Columbus Day holiday will be a full day of
teaching for teachers.

v.

Teachers will work for an additional two (2) hours, outside of
required work hours, during the period from the last day of school
for students through one week following that day, to complete endof-year tasks.

Guidance Counselors:
a.

For the purpose of this article, "high school guidance counselors" includes
the vocational counselor, the career counselor and the counselor educator.

b.

High school guidance counselors shall be required to work the five
(5) work days immediately preceding the beginning of the regular
teacher work year, provided that counselor educators in the
elementary schools shall work the two (2) work days, and shall be
required to work up to three (3) additional days if directed to do so
17

by the principal, immediately preceding the beginning of the
teacher work year.

3.

B.

c.

Each high school guidance counselor shall work four (4) days between the
close of school in June and July 30, provided that counselor educators in
the elementary school shall work two (2) days, and shall be required to
work up to two (2) additional days if directed to do so by the principal,
between the close of school in June and July 30. The headmaster or
principal will determine the schedule of work days following the close of
the school year in consultation with the high school guidance counselors
and counselor educators. Each high school guidance counselor/counselor
educator shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of Article IV,
Salaries and Other Compensations, Section F, Other Compensations,
Paragraph 1 for all additional full days (6½ hours) worked. With the
approval of the headmaster or principal, a guidance counselor/counselor
educator may schedule a full day’s work (6½ hours) over more than one
day.

d.

High school guidance counselors shall be required to work for three (3)
additional days during the summer vacation period, beyond those provided
for in paragraphs b and c above, to prepare student schedules. Each such
high school guidance counselor shall be paid in accordance with the
provisions of Article IV, Salaries and Other Compensations, Section F,
Other Compensations, Paragraph 1 for the additional full days (6½ hours)
worked. With the written approval of the headmaster, a guidance
counselor may schedule a full day’s work (6½ hours) over more than one
day.

Special Education Team Facilitators: Each special education team facilitator shall
be required to work up to a maximum of five (5) days immediately following the
week in which school closes for staff in June. Each special education team
facilitator shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of Article IV, Salaries
and Other Compensations, at his/her per diem rate of pay for these five (5) days.
Additionally, a special education team facilitator may be required to work more
than the required five (5) days referred to in the preceding sentence, and this work
shall be paid at his/her per diem rate of pay. These additional days shall not
exceed five (5) and shall be scheduled before the end of the 180-day school year
by mutual agreement of the special education team facilitator and the special
education director (or designee), with the approval of the superintendent.
Ordinarily, one (1) of these additional days shall be scheduled during the week
immediately preceding the start of the new work year for classroom teachers.

Work Day:
18

1.

School Hours: The starting and dismissal times for students will be established
by the School Committee, provided, however, that the present length of the
teacher's work day will not be increased without mutual agreement unless
required by statute or directive from the State Board of Education.

2.

Classroom Teachers: The work day for bargaining unit members in the
elementary schools, the Capuano Early Childhood Center and the Next Wave
Alternative Junior High School/Full Circle Alternative High School will be as
follows:
a.

In the elementary schools:
8:00 a.m.: Members arrive
8:10 a.m.: Students arrive, and homeroom period/morning activities
begin. During this time, students will get settled, attendance
will be taken, the pledge of allegiance will be said, morning
announcements will be made and other housekeeping activities
will take place.
8:25 a.m.: Student instruction begins
2:35 p.m.: Student instruction ends
2:45 p.m.: Members’ work day ends
Travel time for special subject teachers who are assigned to more than one
building will be thirty (30) minutes.
The School Committee will determine the time by which students must
arrive at school or be marked tardy, which time will be applied
consistently throughout the elementary schools and the Capuano
Kindergarten classes.

b.

In the Capuano:
i.

Kindergarten:

8:00 a.m.: Members arrive
8:10 a.m.: Students arrive, and homeroom period/morning activities
begin. During this time, students will get settled, attendance
will be taken, the pledge of allegiance will be said, morning
announcements will be made and other housekeeping activities
will take place.
8:25 a.m.: Student instruction begins
2:35 p.m.: Student instruction ends
2:45 p.m.: Members’ work day ends
19

ii.

Early Childhood Intervention Program:

8:00 a.m.: Members arrive
8:30 a.m.: Students arrive and student instruction begins
1:45 p.m.: Student instruction ends
2:45 p.m.: Members’ work day ends
iii.

SMILE Program:

8:00 a.m.: Members arrive
8:15 a.m.: Students arrive and student supervision begins
8:45 a.m.: Student instruction in classroom begins
1:45 p.m.: Student instruction ends
2:45 p.m.: Members’ work day ends
Dismissal of ECIP and SMILE students on half-days will be at 11:30 a.m.
c.

In Next Wave/Full Circle:
7:45 a.m.: Members arrive
8:00 a.m.: Full Circle students arrive, and homeroom period/morning
activities/student instruction begin.
8:20 a.m.: Next Wave students arrive, and homeroom period/morning
activities/student instruction begins.
2:30 p.m.: Student instruction ends
2:45 p.m.: Members’ work day ends

3.

Guidance Counselors: The regular work day for high school guidance counselors
shall commence fifteen (15) minutes prior to student arrival time. From Monday
through Thursday, it shall conclude forty-five (45) minutes after student dismissal
time. On Fridays and before holidays, it shall conclude fifteen (15) minutes after
student dismissal time.

4.

Non-Classroom Teachers: Personnel other than classroom teachers will work at
their assigned tasks for at least the length of the regular teachers' work day. It is
recognized, however, that the proper performance of their duties may require
these persons to work longer than the normal working day. The exact daily
schedule will be worked out on an individual basis.

5.

Upon agreement by the School Committee and the Association, a principal may
schedule a bargaining unit member (other than a classroom teacher) to begin
his/her workday either earlier or later than the workday described above, provided
that there will be no increase in the length of the workday.
20

6.

C.

The parties agree that only under extraordinary circumstances and with the
approval of the Special Education Director or Director of Student Services or
his/her designee IEP/504 meetings may be scheduled before, or after the regularly
scheduled work day. Such scheduling after consultation with staff, will only occur
after a parental rejection of two (2) proposed team meetings during the school
day. All such staff shall be afforded at least ten (10) calendar days’ notice of that
meeting, and will make a good faith effort to attend in light of their own personal
responsibilities. Staff will not be scheduled for such meetings more than two
times per year. Meetings will not be scheduled more than one hour before the
regular workday, and no meeting shall be scheduled to begin later than 4:45 and
must end by 6 PM. Unit members will be compensated for attendance at all such
IEP/504 meetings at the rate of $40.00 per hour, and shall be compensated for
“wait time” at the same rate for time between the end of their regular work day
and the start of an afternoon IEP/504 meeting. All unit members in attendance
shall be compensated for a minimum of one (1) hour for such a meeting.

Extended Days:
1.

For the 19-20 and 20-21 school years the 22.5 hours will be increased to 24 hours
for professional development. By the first work day of the school year in 19-20 and
20-21 the District will provide educators with a list of professional development
activities in which the educator may participate to satisfy this requirement. By the
end of September, the educator will submit to his/her Principal or Director a list of
the professional development activities that s/he will complete for the first
semester. For the second semester, a similar list will be prepared by the end of the
first week of work after the December vacation and by the last day of January
educators will submit to their Principal or Director the professional development
activities that s/he will complete by the end of the second semester. The
documentation of professional development activities will be accomplished
through My Learning Plan or whatever system of documentation is in place. In the
second and third years of this agreement the same process will be utilized for
development of a list of professional development activities for selection by staff.
In the 19-20 school year the Principal will be allocated fourteen (14) hours of this
time and the staff will be allocated ten (10) hours. In 20-21 school year the time
will be evenly divided, 12 hours to the Principal and 12 hours to the staff.
If both parties agree, the allocation utilized in 20-21 will continue beyond the 2021 school year. In the absence of an agreement to continue the 20-21 allocation, the
parties shall revert in 21-22 school year to the 22.5 hours and process utilized in the
17-18 school year until further modified by bargaining.
21

2.

Secondary school teachers may be required to be available for thirty (30) minutes
one (1) day per week, either before the student starting time or after the student
dismissal time to assist students with their studies, and, additionally, secondary
school teachers may be required to be available for thirty (30) minutes one (1) day
per week after the student dismissal time to attend departmental meetings. Each
teacher shall provide the principal with a copy of his/her schedule of days and
times when they are available for student assistance, and any changes to such
schedule.

3.

Elementary and secondary school teachers may be required to attend four (4)
parent/teacher conference meetings, which will include an open house, during the
school year. Each meeting will last 2.5 hours in duration. After consultation with
the faculty, the principal may decide to hold up to two (2) of the last three (3)
meetings in the afternoon.
Beginning in the 2019-2020 school year, the professional development day that is
scheduled on the November election day, also will be used for the purpose of
Parent/guardian conferences. In 2019-20 the first 2/3rds of the work day will be
used for professional development activities determined by the Principals and the
remaining 1/3 of the work day will be used for parent conferences. In 2020-2021,
the day will be evenly divided between professional development activities
determined by the Principal and parent conferences.

D.

Early-Release Days/Preparation Time:
1.

Kindergarten students will be dismissed after registration on the first day of
school. Kindergarten teachers will keep regular school hours.

2.

a.

All unit members in elementary school buildings shall be released at 12:00
noon on thirteen (13) Wednesdays during the school year, exclusive of the
Wednesday before Thanksgiving. The School Committee, upon the
recommendation of the superintendent after s/he has consulted with the
Association president, will determine annually, ordinarily during the
process of developing the school calendar, which two (2) early release
days will be eliminated during the school year from the following list,
provided that there shall be at least one (1) early release day during each
month between September and the following June.
September:

Two (2) early release days (one of which will be on the first
day of school for students)
22

October:
November:
December:
January:
February:
March:
April:
May:
June:

Two (2) early release days
One (1) early release day
One (1) early release day
Two (2) early release days
One (1) early release day
Two (2) early release days
One (1) early release day
Two (2) early release days
One (1) early release day

All teachers will be required to remain for the normal school hours on the
above mentioned days. Utilization of this time for the express purpose of
teacher preparation, parental conferences and individual student help is at
the teacher's discretion.
b.

As of the 2008-2009 work year, the following preparation time shall be
guaranteed:
i.
All unit members in the elementary organization (classroom,
bilingual, special education, etc.) will be guaranteed one forty (40)
minute preparation period for each full day of school. Every effort
will be made to provide such preparation periods one (1) per day.
ii.

All unit members with split elementary/secondary schedules will
be guaranteed one forty-minute (40) preparation period for each
full day of school. Every effort will be made to provide such
preparation periods one (1) per day.

iii.

All unit members assigned to the special education central office or
the bilingual department central office will be guaranteed one
forty-minute (40) preparation period for each full day of school.
Every effort will be made to provide such preparation periods one
(1) per day.

3.

All secondary school teachers will be guaranteed five (5) preparation periods per
week, one (1) each day.

4.

Elementary special subject teachers (K-8) in art, music, physical education,
practical arts, exploratory foreign language and library shall be assigned six (6)
forty (40) minute special subject periods per full day system-wide. Other
professional responsibilities may be assigned by the principal with the approval of
the superintendent.

5.

The parties agree to establish a Joint Study Committee, consisting of four (4)
representatives of the Association and four (4) representatives of the School
23

Committee to make a joint recommendation to the School Committee for a
comprehensive Common Planning Time model that will not take away from
current contractually required individual prep time. The Committee will include
in its study, an assessment of current practices of common planning time in the
Somerville Public Schools. The Joint Study Committee will complete its work
prior to June, 2019 and will submit its joint recommendations to the parties’
respective bargaining teams for negotiations and ratification by January 1, 2020.

E.

Duty-Free Lunch: All teachers will have a duty-free lunch period of no less than thirty
(30) minutes.

F.

Teaching Load:
1.

a.

Secondary school teachers (grades 9-12) shall not be required to teach in
more than two (2) subject areas at any one time. A subject area shall be
defined as a seniority category as listed in Article IX, Teacher
Employment, Section B, Reduction in Force, Paragraph 5, Part a.

b.

Secondary school teachers will not be required to teach more than a total
of three (3) teaching preparations per day within said two (2) subject
areas, except as provided in Paragraph 1, Part c of this Section F.

c.

Secondary school teachers in foreign language, bilingual (but not Englishas-a-Second-Language), art and music may be required to teach more than
three (3) teaching preparations per day for the purpose of preserving an
academic program or course offering. Such teacher shall be relieved of all
administrative duties and shall be scheduled for two (2) preparation
periods per day. In no case shall such teacher be required to teach more
than five (5) teaching preparations within two (2) subject areas.

2.

Both parties recognize the desirability of requiring seventh and eighth-grade
teachers, other than special subject teachers, to teach not more than five (5)
teaching periods per day in not more than two (2) major disciplines (reading,
science, English, math, social studies).

3.

a.

b.

The School Department will use its best efforts to insure the equitable
distribution of student-teacher load among secondary teachers in each
department.

The schedule for Somerville High School will be revised in accordance with the
schedule recommended by the Joint Study Committee on the high school schedule
in the February 2013 report entitled “Proposed Somerville High School
Schedule,” except that the schedule will be modified to provide for two (2) non24

teaching duty periods per week, with the third non-teaching duty period to be
converted to additional preparation time for bargaining unit members. The
schedule recommended by the Joint Study Committee is attached hereto as
Appendix E and incorporated herein. The parties reserve their rights under G.L.
c. 150E with regard to any changes to the schedule affecting the terms or
conditions of employment of bargaining unit members. The parties further agree
that the Joint Study Committee will monitor and review the implementation of the
new schedule during the 2013-2014 work year and will make further
recommendations to the parties, if the Joint Study Committee determines that any
changes are necessary or desirable, and the parties will negotiate over such
changes in accordance with G.L. c. 150E.
c.

Effective with the 2018-2019 school year guidance counselors at the high school
shall be scheduled for one (1) non- teaching duty per week.

G.

Exceptions to the provisions of Section E and Section F, Paragraph 1 above may be made
only if it is necessary to do so in the best interests of the educational process. A
disagreement over whether an exception is justified will be subject to the grievance
procedure and will be initiated at Level Two thereof.

I.

Instructional Leadership Team Members: The role of the Instructional
Leadership Team (ILT) member is to work under the school principal’s direction to
help identify and implement a school-wide instructional focus and to provide
classroom-level support for school improvement efforts.
1.

Within this general goal, members of the ILT will have the following specific
responsibilities:
a.

Work with school administration and other team members to
determine school improvement needs at the school (professional
development, student support, etc.).

b.

Work together to identify and implement a school wide instructional
focus and to monitor progress on the plan.

c.

Support professional development efforts at the school.

d.

Facilitate small group work at teacher team and grade-level meetings
during contractual professional development time.

e.

Represent school and grade level colleagues at the ILT meetings.
25

f.

Work collaboratively to ensure high quality professional development
and collaboration time across grade levels and departments.

g.

Learn (through formal training, self-study, reflection, discussion and
dialogue) about the improvement process and what works to make
good schools better.

h.

Work with the school principal and other ILT members to support a
positive culture at the school.

2.
The ILT member will be given five (5) early release days during the 180-day
school year, and will be required to make a time commitment of one (1) additional hour
a week for forty (40) weeks, plus eight (8) additional hours to be scheduled at a mutually
agreeable time. The principal may bundle the hours based on the team preference at the
school.
J.

Evidence of Planning: Each bargaining unit member who has not acquired Professional
Teacher Status will be required to demonstrate to their principal on a weekly basis, in
writing, on a form to be developed by the superintendent after consultation with the
Association president, that the member’s daily instruction is consistent with the state
curriculum frameworks and the school district’s curriculum guide.
Within three work days of a request from the principal, each bargaining unit member
with PTS will be required to demonstrate to their principal evidence of the teacher’s
lesson plans that reflects the member’s daily instruction consistent with the state
curriculum frameworks and the school district’s curriculum guide. Within three work
days of receipt of lesson plans, the educator will receive timely constructive feedback that
encourages teacher growth and planning.

K.

Home/School Communications: Teachers may utilize a range of options for
communicating with the parents/ guardians of their students, including many of the forms
of home/school communication that they are currently using, such as Blackboard Engage
or another similar home/school communications platform.
At the beginning of the school year, all teachers of students in grades Pre-Kindergarten
through 8 will have contact with the parents/guardians of their students to introduce
themselves to the families. Contact may be in person, by telephone, in writing or
electronically, at the teacher’s discretion.
By the end of the second week of a course, teachers of students in grades 9 through 12
will provide parents/guardians and students with the course syllabus and grading rubric.

26

Teachers will post class attendance each day. For teachers in grades 6-12, all efforts will
be made to post grades weekly in X2 or another electronic informative portal utilized by
the Somerville Public Schools to inform students, parents/guardians and administrators of
daily attendance and academic progress. During the 2018-2019 school year, the
Committee will provide voluntary training for staff, students and parent/guardians in the
use of X2 (Aspen) or, in future years training for whichever record keeping program the
district uses.
L.

For the 2019-2020 school year, after consultation with the STA, the Committee may
endeavor to provide five (5) days per week programming for students in the ECIP.
ARTICLE VI
HOLIDAYS AND VACATIONS

A.

The following shall be the holidays and vacations granted to all the schools:
1.

Holidays: Indigenous Peoples Day; Veterans' Day; Thanksgiving Day, together
with the afternoon preceding and the Friday following it; Christmas Day; New
Year's Day; Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday; Presidents' Day; Good Friday;
Patriots' Day; and Memorial Day.
Whenever any holiday falls on Sunday, the schools shall be closed on the
following day.

2.

Vacations: The period from and including December 24 through January 1; the
week in which Presidents' Day is celebrated; the week in which Patriots' Day is
celebrated; from the close of the school year to the time fixed for its beginning.

3.

Joint Study Committee on Religious Holidays. The parties agree to establish a
Joint Study Committee, consisting of four (4) representatives of the Association
and four (4) representatives of the School Committee to make a joint
recommendation to the School Committee concerning religious holidays and the
school calendar. The Joint Study Committee will have the authority to solicit
input from members of the public, including local religious leaders and parents, in
considering such issues as the need to respect religious diversity in the schools
and the community in an equitable manner, and the financial impact on the
schools and families of providing paid or unpaid time off or closing the schools to
allow for the observance of religious holidays. The Joint Study Committee will
complete its work prior to December 1, 2013 and will submit its joint
recommendations to the to the parties’ respective bargaining teams for
negotiations and ratification by January 30, 2014. In the event that the parties do
not reach agreement, or the agreement is not ratified, no changes to religious
holidays will be made.
27

ARTICLE VII
CLASS SIZE
A.

To the extent possible within existing facilities, the maximum number of students per
class shall be as follows:
Kindergarten (One Teacher) 30
Grades 1-6
30
Grades 7-9
30
Grade 10
32
Grades 11 and 12
30

Special Class
Bilingual
Physical Education
Vocational
Secondary Corrective Reading

18
20
30
20
15

B.

The foregoing standards are subject to modification for educational purposes such as the
avoidance of split grade classes, team teaching, special instruction (e.g., music, driving,
typing) and/or experimental programs.

C.

Upon request, the Association will be furnished with the principal's forecast on or before
June 15, and be given an opportunity to discuss the projected class sizes with the
superintendent or his/her designee.

D.

The School Committee agrees that if the maximum class size set forth in Section A above
is exceeded at the elementary level by four (4), a cooperating teacher will be assigned if
requested.

ARTICLE VIII
TEXTBOOKS AND CURRICULUM
A.

Teachers will notify principals/department heads in writing at the start of each semester
of any books, materials, supplies or furniture that they believe they need to perform their
expected duties. They also will notify principals/department heads of any surplus books,
materials, supplies and furniture in their rooms.

B.

Teachers will take part in curriculum revision when assigned during regular work hours
and during required after-school hours, pursuant to Article V, Teaching Hours and
Teaching Load. Those teachers who, upon recommendation of the department head
and/or other immediate supervisor, and with approval of the superintendent, volunteer to
work on curriculum revision during non-school hours, shall be compensated at the
applicable hourly rate under Article IV, Salaries and Other Compensations, Section F,
Other Compensations, Paragraph 2 or, at the teacher's option, shall be credited with one
(1) hour of in-service credit for each twelve (12) hours of work. Twelve (12) hours of
curriculum work equals one (1) in-service credit.

C.

Every effort will be made to limit class interruptions.
28

D.

Except in emergency situations or for educationally sound reasons, pupils will not be
taken from class.
ARTICLE IX
TEACHER EMPLOYMENT

A.

B.

Eligibility and Selection Requirements: The School Committee's Rules, including its
Affirmative Action Policy, shall govern the eligibility and selection of applicants for hire,
subject to the following:
1.

Except as provided for in Article IV, Salaries and Other Compensation, Section
C, Placement, no teacher shall be hired at a salary that is higher than that received
by any other teacher with comparable training and experience.

2.

Teachers shall not be assigned to teach grade levels, subjects or areas other than
those for which they are licensed or have been granted a waiver. The decision
whether to seek a waiver for a bargaining unit member shall be within the sole
discretion of the superintendent.

3.

a.

Upon assignment of all teachers new to the system, such teachers will
be immediately notified of the availability of texts, curriculum guides, and
tentative schedules.

b.

Before school opens, all new teachers will have been given a general
orientation session in the areas of rules and regulations of the school
system, building procedures, and subject matter. These matters shall be
handled at the appropriate levels.

c.

Further orientation at the secondary level shall be handled at departmental
meetings within the building. At the elementary level, it will be handled
at the meetings called by the appropriate supervisor.

Reduction in Force: If a reduction-in-force becomes necessary, members of the unit
shall be laid off in the following manner:
1.

Whenever possible, attrition will be utilized before layoffs. Subsequent to any
attrition, the district will solicit volunteers.

2.

a. Pursuant MGL, c.71, section 42, nothing in this section shall affect the right of
the superintendent to lay off teachers pursuant to a reduction in force or
reorganization resulting from a declining enrollment or other budgetary
reductions.
29

b. No teacher with professional status shall be laid off pursuant to these reasons if
there is a teacher without such status for whose position the affected teacher with
such status is certified at the time of the layoff, or if there is a less qualified
teacher holding the same or similar position for which the senior teacher is
certified at the time of the layoff.
c. There are two factors to be used in determining qualifications. One will be
overall ratings resulting from a comprehensive evaluation conducted pursuant to
section 38 of MGL, c.71 and the second will be the best interests of the pupils in
the school or district. In comparing the relative ability of staff based on
evaluation, no distinction shall be made between teachers when the overall
performance ratings established by the DESE are determined to be proficient or
exemplary. The number of summative evaluations compared will include all
those evaluations written for teachers during the time equal to the most recently
hired professional status teacher in the targeted discipline.
The best interest of the students shall be considered equal unless there is written
finalized discipline, at the level of suspension, related to classroom conduct over
the previous 3 years.
If there is a tie using the above criteria, the tie shall be broken by seniority, with
the least senior teacher in the discipline targeted laid off first.
3.

4.

Layoffs shall be accomplished by seniority in the Somerville Public Schools,
those employees with less seniority being laid off before employees with more
seniority, within their seniority category.
Seniority shall be defined as the total number of years and days of continuous
service (including paid leaves of absence) as a teacher in the Somerville Public
Schools. Leaves of absence without pay shall not be included in the computation
of total number of years and days. However, said unpaid leaves shall not be
considered a break in service. When all employees tied in seniority appear on a
hiring list, such hiring list shall be used as the tie-breaker. When one or more
employees tied for seniority do not appear on a hiring list, ties shall be broken in
order by:
a.
b.
c.
d.

the number of degrees attained;
the number of credits earned;
the number of teacher licenses held;
lottery.

As soon as practical after the signing of the memorandum of agreement, the
School Department shall publish an updated seniority list. If an employee fails to
30

grieve placement on such list within twenty (20) school days after publication of
the updated list, such grievance shall be deemed to have been waived.
5.

a.

Said seniority in the Somerville Public Schools shall be accrued within
seniority categories as follows:
Seniority Categories
1.

Elementary K – 8

Secondary Subjects (9-12)
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

English
Mathematics
Social Studies
Business Subjects
French
Spanish
Italian
Latin
Portuguese
Science
Painting and Decorating
Cosmetology
Drafting
Carpentry
Health Assistants
Automotive Mechanics
Auto Body
Graphic Arts
Electronics
Electrical
Machine Shop
Metal Fabrication/Welding
Culinary Arts
Heating/Ventilation/Air Conditioning

Special Subject Teachers (K-12)
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

Art
Music
Physical Education
Reading
Library
31

31.
Guidance
32.
Industrial Arts/Technology Education
33.
Home Economics
34.
Special Education Teachers
35.
School Adjustment Counselors
36.
Instructional Technology Specialist
37.
Tester
Special Subject Teachers (K-8)
38.
39.
40.

Sheltered English Immersion Program
English Language Learner
Redirect

Special Subject Teachers (9-12)
41.
42.
43.

Sheltered English Immersion Program
English Language Learner
Redirect

Alternative Teachers (7-12)
44.

Next Wave/Full Circle

b.

Elementary language teachers shall continue to be included in the seniority
category for their language as listed under Secondary Subjects (9-12).

c.

During the life of this Agreement, the School Committee may create a
new position which is intended to be experimental for not more than two
(2) years. An employee who is assigned to such position shall retain
seniority within his/her seniority category immediately prior to such
assignment and shall retain a right of return to his/her former position as if
on leave of absence for not more than one (1) year.
If, during this Agreement, the School Committee creates a new, permanent
bargaining unit position not assigned to any seniority category, or if an
experimental position has been in the organization for two (2) years,
placement of such position in an existing or new seniority category shall
be a subject of impact bargaining between the parties.

6.

Employees will be placed in that seniority category in which they are teaching
during the current school year, and seniority will be based on total number of
years and days of continuous service in the Somerville Public Schools.

32

7.

An employee who taught in more than one of the above-mentioned seniority
categories during the current school year shall be placed in that disciplinary
category in which s/he taught more than fifty (50) percent of his/her time during
the current school year.

8.

a.

The superintendent will compile a seniority list and provide a copy to
the Association president by December 1 of each contract year.

b.

i.

Any teacher who believes that his/her seniority data is incorrect
may file a challenge with the superintendent and the Association
president by no later than January 1 of the same contract year.
Such challenge must be in writing and must include an explanation
for the basis of the challenge and any documentation or evidence
within the teacher's possession, custody or control that supports the
teacher's claim relative to his/her seniority. Any challenge that
does not include such explanation and documentation or evidence
will be deemed incomplete.

ii.

The seniority data for any teacher who does not file a completed
challenge by January 1 will be deemed to be correct for all
purposes for that contract year.

iii.

If necessary, the superintendent and/or his/her designee shall meet
with the teacher who has filed a timely, completed challenge. The
superintendent will provide a written response to such challenge to
the teacher and the Association president by no later than January
25 of the same contract year.

iv.

If the superintendent's response is not accepted by the teacher, the
Association may file for expedited arbitration within five (5)
school days of the receipt of the superintendent's response.
In no event shall this expedited procedure extend beyond March 1
of the contract year.

v.

vi.

9.

A teacher may challenge his/her seniority data in any subsequent
contract year if s/he fails to file a timely, completed challenge in a
previous contract year or if his/her seniority data changes.

An employee who faces layoff from his/her position shall be eligible to transfer
into another seniority category if s/he is licensed to teach in that category. If there
are no vacancies to which such employee is eligible to transfer, s/he shall be
entitled to bump the least senior employee in all seniority categories, provided the
more senior employee is licensed to teach in that category.
33

10.

Employees shall be recalled in inverse order of their layoff to their disciplines.
The recall period for a laid-off teacher shall extend for two (2) full school years.
Said period shall begin with the commencement of the school year immediately
following the last school year in which the employee taught before being laid off.
Recall rights terminate if a teacher refuses a full-time full-year recall offer in an
area in which s/he is licensed. A full-time employee facing layoff who transfers
or bumps into a regular part-time position shall be considered to have been laid
off from his/her full-time position and shall retain recall rights under Section B,
Reduction in Force, Paragraph 11 of this article while working in the regular parttime position.

11.

If a position becomes vacant, the superintendent will notify laid-off employees by
certified mail. The laid-off employee shall be responsible for replying to such
registered mail no later than two (2) weeks after his/her receipt of same. The laidoff employee will be responsible for notifying the superintendent, in writing, of
any change in his/her mailing address. The School Committee will not be
responsible if a laid-off employee does not receive a notice of position opening if
such non-receipt is due to the employee's failure to notify the superintendent of a
change in mailing address. If an employee elects to be placed on the recall list,
s/he shall sign a waiver of his/her right to a hearing under M.G.L. Chapter 71,
Section 42. If the waiver is signed, the employee, if recalled, shall retain all
contractual rights and tenure status that s/he had immediately prior to the effective
date of layoff. Employees on the recall list shall remain on the group health
insurance plan, provided said employees pay one hundred (100) percent of the
premium cost. If an individual does not elect to sign a written waiver, s/he will
not be placed on the recall list and will be dismissed.
ARTICLE X
TEACHER ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER

A.

Definitions:
1.

Assignments shall be defined as courses and/or grade level(s) taught.

2.

Reassignment is defined as:
a.

Secondary Teachers and Special Subject Teachers: Any change in
assignment within the same discipline within the same building.

b.

Elementary Teachers and Special Education Teachers: Any change in
assignment within the same building. Voluntary reassignment shall be
defined as a reassignment that a teacher actively seeks. Involuntary
34

reassignment shall be defined as a reassignment that a teacher does not
actively seek, such as a reassignment triggered by a job closeout.
c.

B.

The Association will cooperate with the School Department whenever
during a school year, in an effort to equalize caseloads, it may become
necessary to reassign speech/language pathologists, school adjustment
counselors, facilitators (special education teachers on assignment),
adaptive physical education teachers or teachers of the visually impaired
outside their building.

3.

Transfer shall be defined as any change to another discipline and/or building.

4.

Involuntary transfer shall be defined as a change resulting from a school closing;
grade closeout, which is not handled by a reassignment within the building;
decline in enrollment; or some other planned restructuring by the School
Committee.
a.

The involuntarily transferred teacher shall be the least senior teacher in the
elementary grade or in the discipline from which the involuntary transfer
is taking place, unless a more senior teacher opts to take the involuntary
transfer.

b.

Teachers involuntarily transferred during the school year, prior to October
15, shall be placed immediately in the school or discipline where a
vacancy exists.

c.

If prior to the commencement of a school year a class or program is
moved from one building to another, the teacher shall have the option of
going with his/her class or going into the involuntary transfer pool.

5.

Voluntary transfer shall be defined as a transfer that a teacher actively seeks.
Teachers who are unlicensed and employed under a waiver from the
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education are not
eligible to apply for voluntary transfers. See Article XXXV, Employees on
Waivers and in Temporary Positions, Section A, Paragraph 3.

6.

Seniority is the same as defined under Article IX, Teacher Employment, Section
B, Reduction in Force, Paragraph 4.

Assignment, Reassignment and Transfer Procedures:
1.

The School Committee reserves the right to determine whether any vacancy exists
and to recruit and hire at any time, provided that new hires shall not be assigned
to specific vacancies until the procedures set forth below have been completed.
35

2.

All vacancies that the School Committee intends to fill on a permanent basis will
be posted electronically on the school district’s website or intranet. Such posting
may occur any time after the vacancy has been identified and shall remain open
until at least May 1, provided that the School Committee may fill such vacancies
that occur after the start of the work year following a reasonable posting period.

3.

Any bargaining unit member desiring a reassignment within his/her school or a
voluntary transfer shall notify his/her principal or headmaster in writing before
April 1 or as soon as practicable after s/he knows or should have known of the
vacancy. All requests will be acknowledged in writing. Requests must be
renewed annually.

4.

By no later than May 1, the superintendent/designee and the Association
president/designee shall meet and identify the vacancies to be filled at that time.
Subject to Paragraphs 6 and 7 below, bargaining unit members then shall select
positions in order of seniority, beginning with the most senior member, in the
meeting or by conference call with the member, superintendent/designee and
Association president/designee, in the following order:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

Involuntary reassignments
Involuntary transfers
Voluntary reassignments
Bargaining unit members returning from unpaid leave
Voluntary transfers
Voluntary transfers to positions vacated by members transferring under
Paragraph 4(e) above

In the event of a job closeout, the least senior teacher in the elementary grade or
in the discipline in which the closeout is taking place will be involuntarily
transferred or involuntarily reassigned, unless a more senior teacher opts to take
the involuntary transfer or involuntary reassignment. If a more senior teacher
opts to take the involuntary transfer or involuntary reassignment, s/he will select a
position after the involuntary transfers and involuntary reassignments have been
completed, regardless of the senior teacher’s seniority. In the event that more
than one senior teacher in the district opts for an involuntary transfer or
involuntary reassignment, then seniority will determine the order in which those
teachers select a position after the involuntary transfers and involuntary
reassignments have been completed.
5.

a.

Subject assignments to secondary teachers within a discipline, whenever
made, shall be at the discretion of the principal or department head.

36

b.

Changes in grade assignments in elementary schools will be voluntary. A
teacher may elect to be reassigned to a vacancy in the seventh (7th) or
eighth (8th) grade in the building provided that the teacher is licensed and
highly qualified for this assignment and the reassignment is approved by
the principal.

6.

A bargaining unit member who applies for a voluntary reassignment in
accordance with Paragraph 3 above will be granted such reassignment only if s/he
has acquired Professional Teacher Status, has been employed in a bargaining unit
position in the Somerville Public Schools for at least five (5) full work years, and
has served in his/her position for at least two (2) full work years.

7.

Voluntary transfers are subject to the mutual consent of the bargaining unit
member, the principal in whose building the vacancy exists and the
superintendent.

8.

After the process described in Paragraph 4 above has been completed, there will
be no reassignments or transfers, except under the provisions of Paragraphs 9 and
10 below.

9.

Vacancies that remain unfilled following the meeting referred to in Paragraph 4
above, together with vacancies arising following the meeting by reason of
termination of employment for any reason prior to the second Friday in August,
shall be filled as follows:
Any bargaining unit member may volunteer to be reassigned or transferred to
such unfilled vacancy between the second Tuesday in June and the second Friday
in August. Such reassignment or transfer is subject to the provisions of Paragraph
6 or 7 above, as applicable. Vacancies created by the reassignment or transfer of
members under this provision are not subject to further reassignment or transfer,
except as provided in Paragraph 10 below.

10.

Vacancies that remain unfilled as of the second Friday in August may be filled by
involuntary transfer or involuntary reassignment of the least senior teacher in the
discipline or the building, who is qualified for the vacancy, or with a new hire.

11.

The School Committee will continue its policy of assigning teachers to their area
of licensure and will not assign teachers outside the scope of their teaching license
except temporarily, not to exceed a full school year, and for good cause.

12.

A teacher returning from maternity leave is entitled to the same position she left at
the commencement of her leave.

37

13.

To be eligible to fill a vacancy in the seventh (7th) or eighth (8th) grade, the
teacher must be licensed and highly qualified for the assignment.

14.

Notwithstanding the above, application for voluntary transfer by special education
teachers without professional teacher status or ELL/ESL teachers shall not be
honored under paragraphs 4, 6 or 9, unless the employer determines that it is able
to fill the vacancy created by such transfer.

15.

A bargaining unit member who is involuntarily transferred because of a job closeout into a position with which s/he is dissatisfied may, during the following year’s
transfer procedure, place himself/herself on the involuntary transfer list in his/her
appropriate seniority slot. If such a member participates in the transfer procedure
for two years in a row, the member will be deemed to have relinquished the
position that s/he held during the second year, and the position will be added to
list of available vacancies. After participating in the involuntary transfer
procedure for the second year in a row, the member will have no further rights to
an involuntary transfer under this paragraph. A member who chooses to exercise
his/her rights under this paragraph shall notify the superintendent in writing by no
later than April 20.

16.

A bargaining unit member who is involuntarily transferred from a building under
Section C will not be accepted to transfer back to such building.

17.

All bargaining unit members whose positions will be changed in the upcoming
work year shall be notified of their new assignments in writing, which may be
sent by electronic mail to the members’ school-district-provided e-mail accounts.

C.

Special Involuntary Transfers: In those cases where an involuntary transfer is
advisable because of some documented incompatibility with the teacher's assignment,
and the teacher objects to the involuntary transfer, the teacher shall meet with his/her
principal, at which time the teacher will be notified of the reasons for the transfer. The
Association shall be invited to send a representative. If the teacher still objects to the
transfer after this meeting, the superintendent or assistant superintendent shall, upon
request, meet with the Association's representative and the teacher to discuss the transfer.
If the cause(s) cited as a basis for the transfer are not acceptable to the Association, then,
at the request of the Association but not the individual teacher, the matter will be
submitted directly to expedited arbitration as provided under the rules of the American
Arbitration Association. Notice of involuntary transfer under this section shall be made
prior to the third Tuesday in May.

D.

Miscellaneous:
1.

The Association shall oversee every step of this process from beginning to end.
38

2.

The directory of the Somerville Public Schools shall be distributed to each teacher
by November 15. The staff directory will be disseminated by posting on the
intranet and an electronic copy will be provided to the Association.

3.

Assignments and transfers will be made in compliance with the School
Committee's Equal Employment Opportunity Policy.

4.

Any unit member who has been involuntarily transferred or bumped out of his/her
teaching assignment shall have rights to return to his/her former teaching
assignment if and when it is reinstated. These rights shall continue for the next
school year after the involuntary transfer. This provision does not apply to Unit
members who have been involuntarily transferred under Section C, Special
Involuntary Transfers, of this article.

ARTICLE XI
TEACHER EVALUATION
A.

Members of the bargaining unit will be formally observed and evaluated in accordance
with the Memorandum of Agreement, dated October 1, 2012, regarding Educator
Evaluation Instrument and Procedures, a copy of which is attached hereto as Appendix D.

B.

Any complaints regarding an employee made to any member of the administration by any
parent or other person, except a pupil, will be promptly called to the attention of that
employee in private consultation. Upon request, the individual will be informed who
made the complaint.

C.

The Association recognizes the authority and responsibility of the principal for
disciplining or reprimanding an employee for inadequate professional performance. This
shall be done in a private conference.

D.

No employee will be disciplined, reprimanded or reduced in rank or compensation or
deprived of any professional advantage without just cause.
ARTICLE XII
PROMOTIONS

A.

Purpose: It is the employer's intent to comply with the provisions of this article so as to
allow teachers covered by this Agreement to apply for promotional positions.

B.

Definitions: For the purposes of this article, a "promotional position" is defined as any
position paying a salary differential and/or any position on the administrator/supervisor
level.
39

C.

D.

E.

Posting Procedure:
1.

All promotional positions that the employer intends to fill on a permanent basis
will be posted electronically on the school district’s website or intranet, with
notice of such postings sent to bargaining unit members, including those on leaves
of absence, via electronic mail.

2.

The qualifications for the position, its duties and the rate of compensation will be
clearly set forth.

3.

Notice must be given to the Association at least three (3) months in advance of
any change in qualifications for any positions, except where the change eliminates
or reduces a qualification.

Application and Selection Procedure:
1.

All teachers will be given adequate opportunity to make application for such
positions, and the principal and/or superintendent agree to give due weight to the
professional background and attainments of all applicants, the length of time each
has been in the school system and other relevant factors.

2.

Whenever an opening in a promotional position occurs, the principal and/or
superintendent shall select the person s/he considers the most qualified for the
position.

3.

When in the opinion of the principal and/or superintendent, all other factors are
substantially equal, preference will be given to qualified teachers already
employed by the school district, and each teacher applicant not selected will
receive written notification of the action taken by the principal and/or the
superintendent. The decision of the principal and superintendent will not be
subject to arbitration.

Appointments:
1.

Acting Appointments:
a.

The employer may make appointments to fill promotional positions while
the posting process is taking place. If the vacancy occurs on or after April
1 in any school year, and if the employer chooses to fill such vacancy, it
may make an acting appointment without a posting, provided, the
appointment does not extend beyond the end of that school year.
40

b.

The employer may also make an acting appointment when an incumbent is
absent and expected to return within ninety (90) calendar days. When the
incumbent is expected to be absent for sixty (60) school days or more, a
posting is required.

c.

All bargaining unit members will be given adequate opportunity to make
application for acting appointments posted under Paragraph 1(b) above,
and the principal and/or superintendent agree to give due weight to the
professional background and attainments of all applicants, the length of
time each has been in the school system and other relevant factors.

d.

Whenever an acting appointment occurs, the principal and/or
superintendent shall select the person s/he considers the most qualified for
the position.

e.

When, in the opinion of the principal and/or superintendent, all other
factors are substantially equal, preference will be given to qualified
teachers already employed by the school district, and each bargaining unit
applicant not selected will receive written notification of the action taken
by the principal and/or the superintendent. The decision of the principal
and superintendent will not be subject to arbitration.

2.

Temporary Appointments: A temporary appointment shall not extend beyond the
end of the school year without being subject to temporary election by the
principal and/or the superintendent.

3.

Payment for Temporary or Acting Appointments: Any appointment to a
promotional position extended beyond thirty (30) days shall be recompensed at
the minimum salary for the position retroactive to the date of the appointment.

4.

Permanent Appointments: Permanent appointments will be made as soon as
possible and under normal circumstances not later than ninety (90) days after an
opening is publicized by the superintendent.

5.

Non-Discrimination: Appointments will be made without regard to race, creed,
color, religion, sex or marital status.

ARTICLE XIII
POSITIONS IN EVENING SCHOOL AND UNDER FEDERAL PROGRAMS
A.

All openings for evening school positions and for positions under federal programs will
be posted electronically on the school district’s website or intranet, and bargaining unit
members will be entitled to apply for such openings. In view of the fact that these
programs are of benefit to the school system as a whole, teachers currently in the service
41

of the Somerville school system, who qualify for particular positions, shall be given first
consideration. In filling such positions, consideration will be given to a teacher's area of
competence, quality of teaching performance, teaching experience and attendance record.
B.

The evening school classroom teacher rate shall be as specified in Article IV, Salaries
and Other Compensations.
ARTICLE XIV
ACADEMIC FREEDOM

A.

The private and personal life of a teacher is not within the appropriate concern or
attention of the School Committee except as it may interfere with the teacher's
responsibilities to and relationships with students and/or the school system.

B.

Teachers will be entitled to full rights of citizenship, and no religious or political
activities of any teacher (provided such activities do not take place during his/her
working hours), or the lack thereof, will be grounds for any discipline or discrimination
with respect to the professional employment of such teacher.
ARTICLE XV
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND EDUCATIONAL IMPROVEMENT

A.

The School Committee will pay reasonable expenses (including fees, meals, lodging and
transportation) incurred by teachers who, at the request of or with the advance approval
of the superintendent, attend seminars, workshops, conferences, that are not sponsored by
the Somerville school system.

B.

All mandatory workshops, seminars and in-service courses shall be recognized for
college equivalency credit beyond the bachelor's and master's degrees. Said credits may
be acquired or refused according to the teacher's options below:
1.

Teachers requesting credit for mandatory workshops, seminars or in-service
courses, shall be granted credit upon receipt of a statement of satisfactory
completion of the mandatory activity. The number of hours in attendance will not
be deducted from the hours required by Article V, Teaching Hours and Teaching
Load, Section C, Extended Days, Paragraph 1.

2.

Teachers not requesting credit for mandatory workshops, seminars and in-service
courses, shall reduce the number of hours stated in Article V, Teaching Hours and
Teaching Load, Section C, Extended Days, Paragraph 1, by the said number of
hours required in attendance, provided that such attendance is outside of normal
work hours.

42

3.

A teacher who teaches at an in-service workshop, seminar or in-service course
and who is entitled to cash payment under this Agreement shall have the option of
being paid in cash for each hour or receiving two (2) in-service credits for each
twelve (12) hours of teaching time towards horizontal and vertical lane
advancement.

4.

Twelve (12) hours of attendance at workshops under this section shall equal one
(1) in-service credit.

5.

Twelve (12) hours of CEU instruction equals one (1) in-service credit.

6.

A teacher who achieves National Board Certification will be awarded fifteen (15)
in-service credits.

C.

All NDEA, NSF and other college courses in the teacher's subject area (excluding
University Extension courses) taken after September 1, 1967, taken with prior approval
of the superintendent or his/her designee, shall be recognized for credit beyond the
bachelor's and master's degree for salary purposes.

D.

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, credit will be given only for courses and
degrees from an accredited institution.
1.
The distribution of course vouchers shall be as follows:

E.

a.

To the cooperating teacher;

b.

To a cooperating teacher who did not use his/her own voucher, to be used
within the following two semesters;

2.

All available vouchers shall be advertised by the superintendent;

3.

The superintendent shall insure an equitable distribution of vouchers.

F.

Practice teachers shall be assigned only with the consent of the cooperating teacher.

G.

In-service Selection Process:
1.

If there is a target group for a workshop, members of the target group shall be
placed first.

2.

If there are too many applicants for a single in-service offering, the School
Department shall arrange two (2) sessions if the funds and the presenter are
available that year. If either the funds or the presenter are unavailable, the
workshop will be given priority for the following year.
43

H.

I.

3.

Persons who applied and were not accepted into a workshop during a prior
offering and who have applied again, shall be placed next.

4.

The related target group shall be placed next.

5.

Any further vacancies shall be filled by seniority.

6.

Except as provided in Article V, Teaching Hours and Teaching Load, Section C,
Extended Days, Paragraph 1, participants shall be paid at the curriculum rate as
per Article IV, Salaries and Other Compensations, Section F, Other
Compensations, Paragraph 2, Part b, when their attendance is required by the
School Committee outside of the regular work day.

1.

A teacher who serves on a school council shall be granted in-service credit
towards increments on the teachers' Salary Schedule and professional
development points at the following rate: twelve (12) hours of council work or
attendance at council meetings to equal one (1) in-service credit, not to exceed a
total of two (2) in-service credits for twenty-four (24) hours of council work per
teacher per school year. Professional development points (PDPs) are to be
accrued at the rate of one (1) PDP for every hour of council work or attendance at
council meetings. Teachers should submit school council in-service forms, signed
by their principals, to verify their school council hours.

2.

Upon request, the School Committee will provide the Association with minutes of
school council meetings in each building. Minutes from school council meetings
will be made available to teachers assigned to the building by, for example,
posting the minutes on a faculty bulletin board or providing them on request in the
office.

In-Service Offerings for Professional Development Points: By no later than January
of each year, based on information obtained through a survey of teachers conducted
earlier in the school year, the School Committee will compile a list of the areas in which
teachers require professional development opportunities to satisfy the requirements of
M.G. L. Chapter 71, Section 38G relative to maintaining their instructional certificates.
During the spring of that school year, the School Committee will notify teachers of the
courses that will be offered during the next school year to enable them to earn
professional development points. The School Committee will use its best efforts, subject
to the availability of funding and a sufficient number of applicants, to offer during the
next school year all of the courses that are identified by teachers as prerequisites to relicensure. The School Committee may offer in-service courses, may make arrangements
for teachers to take courses from institutions of higher education or other service
providers, or may provide other professional development activities; however, all such
44

offerings must be acceptable to the Massachusetts Board of Education for purposes of
relicensing teachers in the specified areas.
J.

Courses, Seminars, or Workshops for the Purpose of Lane Advancement: The
following guidelines apply to the approval of all courses, seminars and workshops for
purposes of lane advancement:
1.

All courses, seminar and workshops must be approved by the superintendent or
designee before the course begins.

2.

Credit is granted only for courses, seminars or workshops that are taken outside
the school/work day.

3.

Professional Development Points (PDPs) do not count toward the acquisition of
credit for purposes of lane advancement.

4.

Credits are earned as follows:
a.
b.

One-half credit for six (6) hours of attendance;
A maximum of four (4) credits per course, seminar or workshop.

5.
K.

All in-service courses offered in the Somerville Public Schools by bargaining unit
members must be approved in advance by the superintendent.
All teachers who may be assigned to teach English Language Learners (“ELLs”) must
complete the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education’s
RETELL training, or such other training as the Department may require for teachers of
ELLs, by August 31, 2016 or sooner if mandated by the Department. Teachers will be
entitled to receive in-service credits as provided for in Section B of this article, for
purposes of salary advancement and PDPs upon completion of this training. The School
Committee will work to ensure that teachers who are required to complete RETELL
training by August 31, 2016 are offered an opportunity to do so in a cohort trained by the
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education; however, the School Committee is
unable to guarantee that the Department will make a sufficient number of training slots
available for Somerville teachers. In the event that a teacher has not been offered an
opportunity by August 31, 2016 to complete the RETELL training in one of the cohorts
trained by the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education and is assigned to
teach ELLs after August 31, 2016, the School Committee will endeavor to provide the
teacher with such training at no cost to the teacher and at no cost to the school district. A
teacher who fails to complete this training in a timely manner may be subject to
involuntary transfer pursuant to Article X, Teacher Assignment and Transfer, Section C,
Special Involuntary Transfers, provided that there is a vacancy that the teacher is
qualified to fill.

45

L.

Pathways to increased licensure-administrative licensure: The parties agree to establish a
Joint Study Committee, consisting of four (4) representatives of the Association and four
(4) representatives of the School Committee to make a joint recommendation to the School
Committee concerning development of a pathway to administrative licensure or additional
licenses. The Committee will include in its study, an assessment of advancement
opportunities in the Somerville Public Schools as well as development of a career ladder.
The Joint Study Committee will complete its work prior to June, 2019 and will submit its
joint recommendations to the parties’ respective bargaining teams for negotiations and
ratification by January 1, 2020.

ARTICLE XVI
SPECIAL SUBJECT TEACHERS AND SPECIAL PROGRAMS
A.

The School Committee and the Association recognize the fact that an adequate number of
competent special subject teachers is essential to the operation of an effective educational
program. Accordingly, the Joint Study Committee will be continued to evaluate the
needs and the requirements of the Somerville school system.

B.

It is expressly understood that nothing contained in this article will deprive the School
Committee of the authority and right which it has under the law, expressed or implied, to
make the final decision as to the number and/or type of special subject teachers which it
will employ, and a failure to agree with the Association regarding said number and/or
type will not be subject to the grievance procedure and/or arbitration.

C.

Schedules of itinerant teachers and supervisors shall be available to teachers on or before
October 1. Teachers will be informed of changes in these schedules due to absence or
other reasons.
ARTICLE XVII
RELIEF FROM NON-TEACHING DUTIES

A.

The School Committee and Association acknowledge that the teacher's primary
responsibility is to teach and that his/her energies should, to the extent possible, be
utilized to this end. All teachers will be provided with a duty-free lunch period, in
accordance with the provisions of Article V, Teaching Hours and Teaching Load, through
the use of aides. All varieties of non-teaching duties (including, but not limited to,
coverage of assemblies, study halls, elementary school yard duties, etc.) will be shared by
all Unit members who are assigned full-time to one building. The parties further agree to
establish a Joint Study Committee to determine and evaluate the feasibility of employing
aides in other areas to relieve teachers from non-teaching duties.
ARTICLE XVIII
SUBSTITUTE TEACHERS
46

A.

Positions that will be vacant for at least one (1) semester will, to the extent possible, be
filled by personnel who have met the state licensure requirements. After sixty (60)
consecutive school days in a work year in the same position, the substitute teacher will be
paid thereafter according to the Salary Schedule.

B.

Kindergarten teachers and practice teachers shall not be used as substitute teachers unless
substitute teachers are not available or an emergency situation arises.

C.

The School Committee will provide substitute teachers, whenever possible, for
elementary school special subject teachers (K-8) in art, music, physical education,
practical arts, exploratory foreign languages and library, after regular grade classroom
teachers are covered.

ARTICLE XIX
SICK LEAVE
A.

Teachers, other than teachers new to the system, will be granted fifteen (15) days of sick
leave each school year, as of the first official day of said school year, whether or not they
report for duty on that day. Staff who are employed in a 209-day work year under the
terms of Article XXXIII (SHIP/SKIP/ASD ) shall be granted seventeen (17) days of sick
leave each school year, as of the first official day of said school year, whether or not
they report for duty on that day.
Teachers new to the system will accumulate sick leave at the rate of one and one-half
(1½) days for each month of active employment, and any such teacher who is absent
beyond his/her accumulated sick leave shall, if still employed at the end of the school
year, be reimbursed for any days of absence due to sickness, up to a yearly total of fifteen
(15) – seventeen (17) days for 209-day work year staff. Sick leave not used in the year of
service for which it was granted shall be accumulated from year to year without
limitation.
A member of the Instructional Paraprofessionals’ bargaining unit who is appointed,
without a break of service, to serve in a Unit A bargaining unit position (other than as a
substitute teacher) may carry over any unused sick leave that the individual accrued while
employed as a Paraprofessional.

B.

Subject to the provisions in Section A above, the following shall apply for the term of the
Agreement: Any bargaining unit member who is absent on account of personal illness, or
other like disability, or any quarantine regulations of the Board of Health, shall receive
full pay for the first fifteen (15) days of absence in any school year. The superintendent
47

may require a bargaining unit member to provide a statement from the employee's
physician for each period of disability of five (5) consecutive days or more or after
consultation with the Association president, when evidence of excessive sick leave is
demonstrated.
The parties agree to establish a Joint Study Committee with two (2) members appointed
by the superintendent and two (2) members appointed by the Association who will study
absence numbers and patterns in the schools. The Joint Study Committee will complete
its work by May 1, 2009. If recommendations made by the Joint Study Committee would
have an impact on existing language in this Agreement, then such recommendations will
be forwarded to the School Committee’s and the Association’s negotiating committees
for action. Any agreed upon changes in collective bargaining language will be subject to
ratification by the parties for implementation on September 1, 2009.
C.

The Association agrees that sick leave should not be abused and recognizes the right of
the administration to discipline appropriately any teacher guilty of such abuse, including
possible reimbursement to the School Committee of any such sick leave payments made
to a teacher to which s/he is not entitled under the terms and conditions of this article.

D.

A sick leave bank shall be established. All members of Unit A will be forwarded a sick
leave bank form in September which will be returned by each Unit A member indicating
whether said member wishes to join the sick leave bank. This form will be returned to
the superintendent no later than October 1.

E.

Sick Leave Bank Rules: The sick leave bank will operate for those who have an
extended illness and/or disability and have exhausted their own sick leave. Following are
the regulations governing the operation of the sick leave bank.
1.

The sick leave bank shall be administered by a sick leave committee consisting of
one (1) member representing the School Committee, one (1) member representing
the superintendent, and one (1) member representing the Association. The sick
leave bank committee shall determine the eligibility for the use of the bank and
the amount of leave to be granted, and the sick leave bank committee's decision
shall be final.

2.

Membership in the sick leave bank shall be voluntary for each and every teacher
employed by the School Committee, but a member must remain for a full year of
operation once s/he commences participation.

3.

Each participant in this program shall contribute one (1) day of his/her annual sick
leave to the sick leave bank as a premium for membership. If, during the school
year, the sick leave bank is depleted, the bank shall be replenished by the
contribution of one (1) additional day by each member.
48

4.

Any participant must have fifteen (15) days of unused sick leave before s/he is
eligible to become a member of the sick leave bank. Only those who deposit to
the bank will be eligible to withdraw from it.

5.

The balance of days remaining in the sick leave bank at the completion of each
school year will be forfeited, will not be cumulative for future use, and will not be
returned to participants.

6.

The following criteria shall be used by the sick leave bank committee in
determining eligibility and the amount of sick leave to be granted:
a.
b.
c.
d.

F.

.
G.

Application;
Sufficient medical evidence of serious illness;
Prior utilization of all eligible sick leave;
Documented sick leave abuse per Section C of this article.

7.

The initial request from the sick leave bank may be for no more than five (5)
days. Any request for an extension of days after the initial request will be
forwarded to the sick leave bank committee as necessary. The sick leave bank
committee reserves the right to vote on any requests for extension.

8.

No days may be withdrawn from the sick leave bank for any reason other than
personal illness. Days may not be withdrawn to permit a participant to remain at
home to care for other members of his/her family.

9.

No days may be withdrawn from the sick leave bank for maternity leave, except
where mandatory under state or federal laws, or valid Massachusetts Commission
Against Discrimination regulations.

10.

Any area that is not covered specifically by this Agreement will be subject to the
vote of the sick leave bank committee.

11.

A sick leave bank application shall be stapled to the first pay-check in September.

Teachers may use up to ten (10) days per year to be deducted from their sick leave days
for the purpose of arranging care for a member of the immediate family suffering from a
catastrophic illness or for family illness or newborn care with doctors’ note.
Beginning with the 2013-2014 work year, upon retirement, a bargaining unit member
may buy back up to one hundred forty (140) days of accrued sick leave at thirty ($30)
dollars per day. Notice by October 1 of impending retirement at the end of the school
year will result in payment the following July; otherwise, such bargaining unit member
will be paid during the fiscal year subsequent to that fiscal year in which the member
retires.
49

The School Committee will allow a bargaining unit member to make a one-time transfer
of sick leave buy back monies at the time of retirement to a 403B plan, if permitted by
and in accordance with applicable federal law and regulations and the School
Committee’s plan document.
H.

Consistent with the rights of an employer under the Americans with Disabilities Act and
M.G.L. c. 151B, if the superintendent has reason to question whether a bargaining unit
member is able to perform the essential functions of the member’s job, the superintendent
may require a statement from a physician or other appropriate health care provider who
has examined the member that the member is capable of performing the essential job
functions of the job, with or without reasonable accommodation.

ARTICLE XX
TEMPORARY LEAVES OF ABSENCE
A.

Teachers will be entitled to the following temporary leaves of absence with pay each
school year:
1.

Personal Leave:
a.

A bargaining unit member will be entitled to one (1) day of personal leave
per work year for personal reasons. Application for such leave must be
made in writing at least seventy-two (72) hours before taking such leave
(except in the case of an emergency). If more than five (5) percent
(rounded up) of the bargaining unit members in a building or department
(based on the fall staffing plan numbers) apply to take personal leave
under this subparagraph and subparagraph (b) below on the same date, the
leave will be subject to the advance approval of the superintendent.

b.

With the advance written approval of the superintendent, a bargaining unit
member will be entitled to one (1) additional day of personal leave per
work year to conduct personal business or to attend to family, legal or
religious matters that cannot reasonably be accomplished outside of the
work day. Such personal day, when used, shall be deducted from sick
leave. Application for such leave must be made in writing at least
seventy-two (72) hours before the day of the leave (except in the case of
an emergency), and must state the reason for the leave. The reasons for
which such leave may be used include, but are not limited to, the
following:
50

i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.
ix.

Household emergency
Moving
Attendance at a legal proceeding
Attendance at a school-related event for a member’s child
Attendance at a military event, such as a deployment, for a family
member
Attendance at the wedding of a family member
Attendance at the graduation of a family member
Attendance at the funeral of a non-family member
Travel to or from a qualifying event, which cannot reasonably be
accomplished on the day of the event

If more than five (5) percent (rounded up) of the bargaining unit members
in a building or department (based on the fall staffing plan numbers) apply
to take personal leave under this subparagraph and subparagraph (a) above
on the same date, the leave will be subject to the advance approval of the
superintendent.
c.

Personal leave shall not be available, except in the case of an emergency,
on the day immediately prior to or the day immediately following the
Thanksgiving holiday break and the December school vacation period

d.

Unused personal days may not be carried over from one work year to the
next. A bargaining unit member who has not used a personal day under
Paragraph 1(b) above will not have the unused day deducted from sick
leave. Subject to the foregoing, a member may use both personal days
together and in any order.

e.

Application for use of personal leave under this Section A, Paragraph 1
must be made on a form developed by the Association and School
Committee for this purpose.

2.

With the advance approval or at the request of the superintendent, at least one (1)
day for the purpose of visiting other schools or attending meetings or conferences
of an educational nature.

3.

Time necessary for Association representatives to attend Massachusetts Teachers
Association and/or National Education Association conferences and conventions
with the advance approval of the superintendent or his/her designee.

4.

Time necessary for appearance in any legal proceeding connected with the
teacher's employment or with the school system or in any other legal proceeding
to which the teacher is summoned.
51

5.

6.

B.

Bereavement:
a.

Up to five (5) days at any one time in the event of death of a teacher's
family member or household member.

b.

Additional bereavement leave, when necessary, may be granted by the
superintendent.

c.

If a teacher dies in service, arrangements will be made by the
superintendent for teachers in the building to attend the funeral services.

Every person who is a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces of
the United States shall be granted, in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 33, Section
59, leave of absence, without loss of pay, during the time of his/her annual tour of
duty as a member of such reserve component; provided, however, that such leave
shall not exceed seventeen (17) calendar days.

Leaves taken pursuant to the section above will be in addition to any sick leave to which
the teacher is entitled.
ARTICLE XXI
EXTENDED LEAVES OF ABSENCE

A.

A leave of absence without pay of up to two (2) years will be granted to any teacher with
professional teacher status who joins the Peace Corps, and a leave of absence of up to one
(1) year will be granted to any teacher with professional teacher status who serves as an
exchange teacher or an overseas teacher, and is a full-time participant in any such
program. Upon return from such leave, a teacher will be considered for salary purposes
as if s/he were actively employed by the School Committee during the leave and will be
placed on the Salary Schedule at the level s/he would have achieved if s/he had not been
absent.

B.

A teacher on military leave shall be reinstated if s/he applies for his/her position within
two (2) years after the date of discharge provided s/he does not serve in excess of four (4)
years on a voluntary basis and is not disabled or incapacitated for performing the duties
of his/her position. Upon reinstatement, s/he will be entitled to all increments for which
s/he would have been eligible except for service in the armed forces. (See Chapter 708 of
the Acts of 1941, as amended by Chapter 580 of the Acts of 1964). No member of the
teaching staff who entered the armed forces shall be penalized thereby, either in salary or
rank.

C.

1.

To be eligible for a leave of absence under the federal Family and Medical Leave
Act of 1993, whether paid or unpaid, on account of his/her own or a family
member's health condition, an employee must provide the superintendent with
52

certification by the employee’s health care provider on a United States
Department of Labor (DOL) form or in another format as long as the health care
provider certifies all of the information requested on the DOL form needed to
support the employee’s eligibility for leave, as to the employee's or family
member's serious health condition, provided that the employee may not be
required to disclose information that would constitute an unwarranted invasion of
privacy.
2.

D.

An employee who is absent from work on account of his/her own or a family
member's health condition, and who is eligible for leave under the federal Family
and Medical Leave Act of 1993, may exhaust any paid leave that is available for
such purpose at the commencement of such leave, and such absence shall be
considered to be leave taken under the Act.

An employee shall be entitled to an unpaid leave of absence for the purpose of caring for
a newborn or adopted child, subject to the following:
1.

Maternity leave shall be granted to a female employee in compliance with M.G.L.
Chapter 149, Section 105D. Such teacher may also be eligible for sick leave
under Article XIX, Sick Leave, of this Agreement.

2.

Newborn Care Leave shall be granted to a Unit Member as follows: A Unit
Member may take up to ten (10) days of leave within 4 months from the date of
the birth of his/her child, to be deducted from accumulated sick leave under
Article XIX, Sick Leave, of this Agreement. Notice of this leave will be provided
no later than 3 weeks prior to the leave except in extraordinary circumstances.

3.

Adoptive leave shall be granted to a teacher of either sex also in compliance with
M.G.L. Chapter 149, Section 105D and as follows: A teacher may take up to ten
(10) days of paid adoptive leave upon the adoption of his/her child, to be deducted
from accumulated sick leave under Article XIX, Sick Leave, of this Agreement.
The adoptive leave commences when the child is turned over to the adoptive
parents. In the event that the written regulations of an adoption agency require, as
a condition of adoption, a period of home care that is longer than the statutory
eight (8) week period, such longer period shall be granted, but shall be considered
as child-rearing leave under Paragraph 4, Child Care Leave, and subject to the
return dates therein specified.

4.

Child Care Leave, as distinct from maternity leave, paternity leave or adoptive
leave, shall be granted to a bargaining unit member of either sex, provided that,
absent a legitimate reason, the member will provide the superintendent with at
least thirty (30) days written notice prior to the commencement of such leave,
which shall be subject to the following terms:
53

a.

An employee whose child was newly born or adopted during a school year
prior to April 1 may return from such leave at the beginning of any
marking period during such school year.

b.

An employee whose child was newly born or adopted after April 1 may
return from such leave at the beginning of the first or second semester in
the next academic year.

5.

Extended Child Care Leave: An employee eligible for child care leave may
extend such leave for one full school year following the school year in which such
teacher would be expected to return under Paragraph 4, Part a or b.

6.

Notice:

7.

a.

Whenever possible, notice of maternity leave and expected return date
shall be given to the superintendent by an employee at least ninety (90)
days prior to its anticipated commencement.

b.

Notice of expected adoptive leave and expected length of leave shall be
given to the superintendent by an employee upon approval of the adoption.

c.

Notice of child care leave and expected return date shall be given
concurrently with notice of maternity leave or adoptive leave.

d.

Notice of extended child care leave shall be received no later than April 1
preceding the school year for which the extended leave is being sought.

e.

If a pregnancy is terminated after the notice of maternity leave and/or
child-care leave has been given to the School Committee, such leave may
be canceled or curtailed at the discretion of the employee. If, upon
delivery, medical complications to the newborn child warrant child care
leave, such leave shall be granted upon request at that time even though
child care leave was not originally requested concurrently with the request
for the maternity leave under Paragraph 6, Part c.

The parties agree to establish a Joint Study Committee, comprised of two (2)
representatives of the School Committee and two representatives of the
Association, to review this Section D and to make recommendations to the School
Committee and the Association regarding proposed changes to ensure that the
provisions comply with the new Massachusetts Parental Leave Act. The Joint
Study Committee will submit its joint recommendations to the parties’ respective
bargaining teams for negotiations and ratification by January 30, 2016.

54

E.

The School Committee accepts M.G.L. Chapter 71, Section 41A, an act authorizing the
granting of leaves of absence to public school teachers, principals, supervisors or
superintendents for certain service to professional educational organizations.

F.

The superintendent will grant a leave of absence without pay or increment to any teacher
with professional teacher status to seek election to, or serve in any elected public office,
for up to two (2) years of said office. Such leaves shall be requested prior to the
beginning of the school year. A leave may not be taken under this section more than
once every ten (10) years.

G.

Other leaves of absence without pay may be granted by the superintendent.

H.

A teacher shall be entitled to a one (1) year career exploration leave without pay.
Although a teacher will be entitled to a career exploration leave, the superintendent will
not be required to grant any more than forty (40) such leaves in any one (1) school year.
A teacher shall not be entitled to any more than one (1) career exploration leave. In order
to be granted such leave, the teacher must notify the superintendent in writing of his/her
intention to take such leave no later than April 1 of the school year preceding the year in
which the leave is to be taken.
Effective as of the 2014-2015 work year, a bargaining unit member who applies in
writing for a career exploration leave shall be granted a career exploration leave only if
s/he serves with Professional Teacher Status and has five years of experience in the
Somerville Public Schools.

I.

1.

All benefits to which a teacher was entitled at the time his/her leave of absence
commenced, including unused accumulated sick leave, will be restored to him/her
upon his/her return. No sick leave will be accumulated during the period of said
leave.

2.

a.

A teacher who returns from a leave of absence under this article after less
than two (2) years will be assigned to the same assignment held at the time
such leave commenced. If that assignment is no longer available, such
teacher will exercise seniority rights in relation to involuntary transfer. An
employee on child care leave who returns to work at the beginning of a
school year as provided in Section D, Paragraph 4, Part b of this article
shall be covered under the terms of this section. Whenever a teacher
combines multiple, consecutive one-year leaves of absence, this section
shall apply only to the first such year.

b.

A teacher who is scheduled to return from a leave of absence longer than
one (1) year or from leave provided in the case of birth or adoption which
is longer than the leave as set forth in Part a, above, shall be eligible to
participate in the bidding process in the sequence set forth in Article X,
55

Teacher Assignment and Transfer, Section B, Assignment, Reassignment
and Transfer Procedures, Paragraph 4, Part c.
3.

A bargaining unit member must confirm his/her intention to return to work
following an extended leave by notifying the superintendent/designee in writing
by no later than April 15 of the preceding work year, or the member will be
considered to have resigned as of that June 30. The member will be sent a
reminder of this obligation by the superintendent/designee shortly before March
15. Application for use of extended leave and notification of a member’s
intention regarding return from such leave must be made on a form, which shall
be developed by the Association and School Committee for this purpose and
made available to members electronically.

ARTICLE XXII
SABBATICAL LEAVE
A.

Sabbatical leave may be granted by the superintendent for the purpose of study and
research after seven (7) years of continuous satisfactory service in the public schools of
the City of Somerville, and after the completion of any subsequent seven (7) years;
provided, that the teacher shall submit in writing to the superintendent on or before
January 1 of the year in which the leave is to take place a plan of study or travel for
his/her approval.

B.

The leave shall be granted for a period not exceeding nor less than one (1) school year
and shall begin in September and, further, shall be limited to five (5) teachers, chosen in
order of seniority service, or condition of health, preference being given to those who
have not had a previous leave of the same nature. The compensation shall be one-half
(½) of the basal salary as of June preceding the sabbatical year, the teacher's retirement
allowance to be deducted from this salary.

C.

The teacher shall sign an agreement binding him/her to continue in the service of the City
of Somerville for three (3) years after the expiration of the leave, or in case of resignation
within the period of three (3) years, to refund to the City of Somerville such proportion of
the amount paid him/her during the leave as the unexpired portion of three (3) years bears
to three (3) years. The provisions of this agreement, however, shall not apply where
resignation on account of ill health is granted by the superintendent or where resignation
is requested by the superintendent.

D.

The teacher on leave shall report to the superintendent, in such form as s/he may
determine, the manner in which his/her time is being employed, such reports being due
on the first of December, March and July.
56

E.

The teacher taking advantage of this privilege shall be entitled upon return to the same
position, and the year of leave shall be included in the years to the City for all purposes
except the accrual of salary increments.
ARTICLE XXIII
PROTECTION

A.

Teachers will immediately report to their principal or immediate supervisor, in writing,
all cases of assault suffered by them in connection with their employment.

B.

This report will be forwarded to the superintendent, who will comply with any reasonable
request from the teacher for information in its possession relating to the incident or the
persons involved, and will act in appropriate ways as liaison between the teacher, the
police and the courts.

C.

So far as permitted by M.G.L. Chapter 258, the superintendent shall provide
indemnification whenever any teacher shall become eligible therefor.

D.

1.

An employee who is absent because of personal injury arising out of and in the
course of his/her employment, as a result of an assault or battery, shall be credited
with sick leave, in addition to that credited to him/her at the time of his/her injury.
The additional sick leave shall be equal in duration to the period of his/her
absence as a result of such injury. The employee may take such of this additional
sick leave allowance payment as, when added to the amount of any weekly
Workers' Compensation disability allowance actually received, will result in the
payment to him/her of compensation equivalent to his/her full salary. The
benefits provided for above shall not exceed a period equal to one (1) calendar
year.

2.

Teachers who are absent from school as a result of personal injury received in the
course of employment by the district, other than as a result of an assault or
battery, may charge the difference between their compensation payments and
their regular salaries against accumulated sick leave. If a question exists as to
whether the employee is entitled to compensation under the Workers'
Compensation Act, it is agreed that, pending resolution of said question, the
employee may draw full sick leave benefits. As a condition of receipt of said
benefits, the employee shall enter into a written agreement with the school
district, wherein s/he agrees to reimburse the district for such excess payments in
the event s/he received Workers' Compensation benefits for said period.

1.

The School Committee shall reimburse a teacher for:

E.

57

2.

a.

Any clothing, eyeglasses or similar items of personal property damaged or
destroyed as the result of an assault or battery suffered in the course of
his/her employment; and,

b.

The cost of any reasonable medical, surgical or hospital services (less the
amount of any insurance reimbursement, and/or Workers' Compensation
payment) incurred as the result of any injury arising out of and in the
course of his/her employment.

The foregoing shall not apply to situations which are the result of gross
negligence on the part of the teacher.

58

ARTICLE XXIV
INSURANCE AND ANNUITY PLAN
A.

The School Committee will provide to teachers the same health insurance plan available
to other city employees and will contribute a percentage of the cost equal to the highest
percentage contributed for any other employee groups.
1.

A five thousand dollar ($5,000) term life insurance plan of the type presently
available to teachers.

2.

Individual or family health coverage, whichever applies in the particular case, of
the type available to teachers. The School Committee will provide health
insurance benefits to eligible bargaining unit members through the Group
Insurance Commission, in accordance with the agreement negotiated by the City
and the Public Employee Committee pursuant to G.L. c. 32B, §19.

B.

Teachers will be eligible to participate in a "tax sheltered" Annuity Plan established
pursuant to United States Public Law 87-370.

C.

The parties agree that they will work jointly to obtain the City of Somerville's agreement
to institute a cafeteria plan covering members of the bargaining unit.

D.

Beginning in September 2018, The School Committee will provide an Employee
Assistance Program for unit members.
ARTICLE XXV
TEACHER FACILITIES

A.

The School Committee agrees that the following are minimum facilities for teachers:
1.

Space in each classroom to safely store instructional materials and supplies.

2.

Reasonable access to a telephone in each school building.

3.

At least one (1) appropriately furnished room in each school building to serve as a
faculty lounge and work area.

4.

A centrally located resource center for the use of all teachers in the system.

5.

Well lighted, clean, adequately equipped and conveniently located teachers' rest
rooms.

6.

Adequate eating facilities for teachers.
59

7.

B.

Adequate space for teachers not assigned a homeroom to store their personal
effects and instructional materials.

8.
Mailboxes for teachers in each school.
To the extent that the School Committee has the jurisdiction to provide the foregoing
facilities, it shall do so. To the extent that it is within the jurisdiction of the Building
Department of the City of Somerville to provide the foregoing facilities, the School
Committee will cooperate with the Association to have such facilities provided for and
maintained in all schools by the Building Department of the City.

C.

The School Committee will request in all applicable grant applications funding for the
acquisition of computer hardware and/or software to achieve a system-wide goal of
having a computer and printer in every academic classroom. This provision will expire
upon the achievement of the goal.

D.

The School Committee will make reasonable efforts to have the City of Somerville
Traffic and Parking Department issue parking stickers to teachers, upon request, for use
during the hours from 7:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and on
evenings of PTA meetings. The Association will assist the School Committee with this
endeavor. The School Committee also will send the City of Somerville Commissioner of
Public Works a letter, requesting that, after snow storms, school yards with driveways
will be cleared and reserved for staff parking during the hours from 7:00 a.m. through
5:00 p.m.
ARTICLE XXVI
SCHOOL BUILDINGS

A.

During the planning stage of a new school, the School Committee will give the
Association an opportunity to set forth its views on the proposed new building.
ARTICLE XXVII
CONSULTATION PROCEDURE

A.

The School Committee and the Association desire to encourage the active participation of
teachers in the development and implementation of the best possible working conditions
for teachers and educational programs for the school children of Somerville, including
state and federal aid programs. Therefore, they agree as follows:
1.

The School Committee and/or the superintendent or his/her designated
representative agree to meet with Association representatives periodically for
consultation on matters of educational programs, curriculum problems and need
for specialized educational programs.

60

2.

The School Committee or members thereof, will, if requested to do so, meet with
Association representatives once each semester for consultation on educational
programs, curriculum problems, and/or similar matters; provided, however, that
during said consultation neither party shall be required to discuss any matters
which are included in this Agreement.
ARTICLE XXVIII
ASSOCIATION PRIVILEGES

A.

The School Committee does not object to the Association's use of school buildings
without cost at reasonable times for meetings; provided, however, that the Association
will be required to pay for any additional custodial costs involved by reason of said
meetings. The permission of the superintendent, and, if necessary, the Commissioner of
Public Works will be received in advance of all such meetings.

B.

There will be at least one (1) bulletin board in each school building, which will be placed
in the faculty lounge or other appropriate private location, for the purpose of displaying
notices, circulars and other Association materials. Copies of all such materials will be
given to the building principal, and if the principal objects to said materials, s/he shall
have the right to discuss his/her objection with the Association's representative, prior to
the posting. The Association agrees that it will not post any material which is derogatory
to the administration, the School Committee or any member thereof, or to the Somerville
school system.

C.

The Association will have the right to place notices, circulars and other Association
materials in the teachers' mailboxes, and to distribute materials in the schools after
notifying the principal, provided said distribution does not interfere with any instructional
activity. Copies of all such materials will be given to the building principal; and if the
principal objects to said materials; s/he shall have the right to discuss his/her objections
with the Association's representative prior to the distribution or placement in the
mailboxes of said material. The Association agrees that it will not distribute any material
which is derogatory to the administration, the School Committee or any member thereof,
or the Somerville school system.

D.

The president and chairperson of the Professional Rights and Responsibilities Committee
shall have access to all buildings and all teachers. Upon entering the building, they shall
notify the principal, provided that there shall be no interference with instructional
activities.

E.

No party to this Agreement shall discriminate against any teacher by reason of his/her
membership or non-membership in the Association or his/her participation or nonparticipation in the activities of the Association or any other employee organization.

61

F.

When it is necessary, pursuant to Article III, Grievance Procedure, for a representative of
the Association to attend a jointly scheduled grievance meeting or hearing during a
school day, s/he will be released without loss of pay as necessary in order to permit
participation in the foregoing activities. Any teacher, whose appearance in such meetings
or hearings as a witness is necessary, will be accorded the same right. When it is
necessary for an Association representative to investigate a grievance during regular
school hours, s/he shall, upon notice to his/her principal or immediate superior, be
released without loss of pay for the time necessary to do so; provided said investigation
cannot be conducted during non-working hours and provided further that s/he can be
released without detriment to the educational program. The Association agrees that these
rights will not be abused.

G.

The School Committee, upon request, will make available to the Association any
available information that is neither confidential nor privileged under law which may be
necessary for the Association to administer this Agreement or to prepare for future
negotiations.

H.

A copy of the official agenda of School Committee meetings will be made available to
the Association not later than the end of the school day on the date of said meeting.

I.

Release Time for Association President: Upon request of the Association prior to April
1, its president shall be placed on a full-time leave of absence for the following school
year. The Association president shall receive his/her full salary and benefits while
serving as full-time release president. The Association shall reimburse the School
Committee for the actual salary and fringe benefits, up to Step 5 of the master's lane, of
the least senior teacher who is employed by the School Committee as a result of the
president's leave of absence. The president shall accrue seniority while serving under this
section and shall retain a right of return to his/her former position as if on leave of
absence for not more than one (1) year.
In the event that the Association president is unable to perform the duties of the position
for an extended period of time due to illness or injury, and the vice president of the
Association must assume the duties of the president, the School Committee shall relieve
the vice president of his/her teaching duties for such purpose, provided that the
Association shall reimburse the School Committee for the cost of the substitute who is
employed to cover the vice president’s regular assignment.

J.

The Association office will be a regular stop on the inter-office mail route. The School
Committee will not guarantee delivery. This is not subject to the grievance procedure.

62

ARTICLE XXIX
PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS
A.

Dues Deductions: The School Committee hereby accepts the provisions of M.G.L.
Chapter 180, Section 17C and, in accordance therewith, shall certify to the City Treasurer
all payroll deductions for the payment of dues to the Association duly authorized by
employees covered by this Agreement.
Payroll deductions will be allowed for the Somerville School Employees Federal Credit
Union and Massachusetts Teachers Association Credit Union.

B.

Agency Fee: In accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 149, Section 178L, as
amended by Chapter 463 of the Acts of 1970, and M.G.L. Chapter 180, Section 176, the
School Committee shall deduct an agency fee from each teacher who is not a member of
the Association, as a condition of said teacher's continued employment in the Somerville
Public Schools, and shall transmit the monies to the Association treasurer. Deductions
referred to above will be made in equal payments in amounts certified by the Association
treasurer as being the regular membership dues of the Association, the Massachusetts
Teachers Association and the National Education Association in the second paycheck
each month commencing in November and continuing through the second paycheck in
May.
This amount to be withheld by the School Committee as an agency fee shall be
proportionately commensurate with the costs of collective bargaining and contract
administration.
The amounts deducted will be submitted to the Association treasurer as soon as is
reasonably possible after the issuance of the paychecks from which the deductions were
taken.
The Association shall indemnify the School Committee against any damages or legal fees
expended in compliance with this section and shall comply with any rebate procedure or
any process as may be required by state, federal or constitutional law. The failure of the
School Committee to perform any responsibility under this section, including but not
limited to the failure of the School Committee to notify any teacher on or before the
teacher's initial employment date after August 31, 1987 of such teacher's obligation to
join the Association and to pay an agency service fee, shall excuse the Association from
its indemnification obligation hereunder in any legal proceeding brought by or in behalf
of such individual teacher.
Newly hired teachers shall be required to sign a form acknowledging receipt of such
notice from the School Department. A copy of such form shall be supplied to the
Association by the School Department.
63

If the Association offers counsel to represent the School Committee and the School
Committee declines, choosing instead to be represented by its own attorney, the
Association shall not be responsible for legal fees or other litigation expenses of the
School Committee but shall remain liable for damages.
C.

The School Committee shall vote to accept the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 180,
Section 17I. Employees may authorize the School Committee to deduct from their salary
a contribution to VOTE (Voice of Teachers for Education) in an amount which the
employee shall specify in writing. The School Committee shall certify on the payroll the
amount to be deducted by the treasurer. Such amounts shall be transmitted to the
VOTE/NEA-PAC account within thirty (30) days.

ARTICLE XXX
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
A.

The Association accepts the School Committee’s Equal Employment Opportunity Policy.
ARTICLE XXXI
HEALTH AND SAFETY

A.

The School Committee will try to maintain employment conditions free of known
hazards to employee health and safety, to provide and maintain a healthful and safe
workplace with adequate heating, ventilation and lighting, and otherwise to be in
compliance with applicable federal or state laws.
ARTICLE XXXII
NEXT WAVE/FULL CIRCLE

A.

The following provisions will govern NW/FC teachers who were carried over from City
service in 1986 and/or NW/FC teachers subsequently hired by the School Committee.
1.

Article IV E (1) a: Carry-over teachers will retain all benefits accorded by the
1986 Agreement. (Slotting, service credit adjustments, longevity credit, full City
teaching service credit, sick leave and sick leave bank).

2.

The regular work day for Next Wave/Full Circle teachers may exceed the regular
work day for other teachers in this bargaining unit in order to assure the proper
performance of program requirements. The schedule of work on any particular
day will be determined collegially through the majority opinion of the faculty in
each program, subject to the approval of each program director.

3.

Other Provisions:
64

a.

Article VII, Class Size, is inapplicable to NW/FC.

b.

Carry-over teachers and other teachers at NW/FC will continue to do
individualized instructional planning as part of their jobs without extra
pay, notwithstanding Article VIII, Textbooks and Curriculum, Section F.

c.

No provision of this Agreement shall be interpreted as requiring the
employment of aides or other additional staff at NW/FC.

ARTICLE XXXIV
JOB SHARING
A.

Job sharing is defined as the voluntary division of a single full-time position between two
(2) persons. It is expressly understood that job sharing shall be voluntary and shall not
occur if it results in the layoff, involuntary transfer, or attrition from a building of a fulltime teacher. Job sharing shall not be permitted if it prevents the re-call of a laid-off
teacher.

B.

A shared job is subject to the approval of the building principal and the superintendent,
based on School Committee policy in any instance. Disapproval shall not be subject to
the grievance and arbitration procedure.

C.

Job sharing must be applied for in writing by the two (2) individuals on a form to be
mutually agreed upon by the parties. Applications must be submitted to the
superintendent no later than March 15. Approvals for shared jobs normally shall be
finalized prior to the job bidding process. In the event of competing job sharing
applications for a single shared job within a seniority area, the selection will be based on
educational qualifications, quality of teaching performance and teaching experience.

D.

Job sharing shall be effective for one (1) school year. Job sharers seeking to renew for an
additional year may apply therefore under the application procedure in Section C.

E.

In the event a job-sharing is discontinued after the first year, the job sharers shall return
to their seniority areas and to their positions, if available, with the same rights as teachers
returning from a one-year leave of absence. If job sharing continues beyond one (1) year
and thereafter is discontinued, the job sharers shall remain in the seniority area of the job
being shared and may exercise their contractual rights with regard to personnel actions as
may be taken under Article IX, Teacher Employment, and Article X, Teacher
Assignment and Transfer.

F.

Teaching salaries shall be pro-rated to reflect the fraction of the position shared. The
experience and educational step for the teachers shall be the same s/he would be entitled
65

to if employed full time. This step will determine the base salary from which the salary
fraction will be computed.
G.

Seniority shall be accrued on a pro-rata basis.

H.

If one (1) of two (2) job sharers is covered under the City's health insurance plan, the City
will contribute toward the cost of health insurance as if the job had only one (1)
incumbent. If both job sharers are covered under the City's health insurance plan, the
City will contribute fifty (50) percent toward the cost of each such job sharer's health
insurance coverage.

I.

Teacher partners will undertake joint planning for the shared position, will share
responsibility for their students and will share all teaching and non-teaching duties
applicable to the shared position.

ARTICLE XXXV
CHILD CARE FACILITY AND SCHOOL ATTENDANCE
OF NON-RESDENT TEACHERS’ CHILDREN
A.

The child care facility, having received twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) from the
School Committee to fund its start-up costs, shall be self-sustaining; the costs of
providing child care services will be paid for from user fees.

B.

Two-thirds (2/3) of the available slots for the children will be made available to parents
who are employees of the School Department (both within and outside this bargaining
unit). One-third (1/3) of the available slots for children will be made available to all
other residents of the City of Somerville.

C.

Effective in the 2008-2009 school year, a teacher in the Somerville school system who is
not a resident of the City will have the option, at no cost, of having his/her child(ren)
attend a school in the Somerville Public Schools, subject to the following conditions:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Space available basis in school, as determined by the superintendent;
Limit of twenty (20) students per school year; and
If more apply than there are spaces, there will be a lottery to choose the students
who may attend.
The admission of a non-resident teacher’s child(ren) to the Somerville Public
Schools after the beginning of a school year is subject to the discretion of the
superintendent.

Once a child is accepted, so long as the teacher is employed in the Somerville school
system, the child shall be allowed to attend school through grade twelve (12), subject to
66

the rules and regulations that apply to Somerville residents. In addition, every reasonable
effort will be made to place siblings in the same school, if the parent so requests.
ARTICLE XXXVI
EMPLOYEES ON WAIVERS AND IN TEMPORARY POSITIONS
A.

A Non-Professional Status employee serving under a waiver shall not accrue
seniority under Article IX, Teacher Employment, Section B, Paragraph 4 or for
any other contractual purpose, provided that if such employee submits evidence to
the superintendent that s/he has become licensed by the Department of
Elementary and Secondary Education for the position that s/he occupies, the
employee will be granted seniority retroactive to the beginning of his/her
continuous service under a waiver.

B.

An employee filling a temporary vacancy to which a bargaining unit member on
leave is expected to return shall not accrue seniority under Article IX, Teacher
Employment, Section B, Paragraph 4, provided that if such employee thereafter is
appointed to a permanent position without a break in service, the employee will
be granted seniority retroactive to the beginning of his/her continuous service in
the temporary vacancy. An employee filling a temporary vacancy shall be
considered to be a substitute teacher whose compensation after service for sixty
(60) consecutive school days in a work year shall be governed by Article XVIII,
Substitute Teachers.

C.

A Non-Professional Status employee described in Paragraph 1 or an employee
described in Paragraph 2 above shall not be eligible to apply for a transfer under
Article X, Teacher Assignment and Transfer, but shall be eligible to apply for an
evening school or summer school position under Article XIII, Positions in
Evening School and Under Federal Programs.

D.

An employee described in Paragraph 1 or 2 above shall be eligible to attend
workshops and to acquire credits under Article XV, Professional Development
and Educational Improvement.

E.

Except as provided for in paragraphs 1 through 4 above, an employee described in
paragraph 1 above or an employee described in paragraph 2, having served for sixty (60)
consecutive school days in a work year, shall be eligible to accrue and accumulate sick
days, carry over unused sick days and participate in the sick leave bank in accordance
with its terms, and shall be covered by all other provisions of this Agreement.
ARTICLE XXXVII
GRANTS
67

A.

The School Committee will notify all Unit members of all job and professional
opportunities created by grants in such a manner as to give them an opportunity to apply
for such jobs and opportunities. The notice will include a description of the job or
opportunity, the salary or stipend, the minimum qualifications. The School Committee
will provide the Association with contemporaneous notice of all such jobs and
opportunities.
ARTICLE XXXVIII
INCLUSION SERVICES AND REGULAR EDUCATION READING SERVICES

A.

Special Education Inclusion Services
1.

The principal will notify regular education staff by June 1 of those students with
current Somerville Individualized Education Plans (IEPs) who are scheduled to be
in his/her class in September. The list of such students will be developed by the
principal and Special Education Director using information that is currently
available.

2.

The principal and Special Education Director will make every effort to provide
information to regular education staff concerning the above students via meetings
and/or written information.

3.

To the best extent possible, classes will be “weighted” by the principal, thus classsize ratios will be comparable, only if an equal number of special education
students on comparatively equal IEPs are enrolled across classes. Otherwise,
class size will be lower for classes with a predominance and/or variety of IEP
requirements.

4.

Grade level regular education teachers and associated special education staff will
compile the class lists for instructional services in June for the upcoming
September, subject to approval by the principal.

5.

Specialized training will be provided to regular education staff having students
whose needs are significantly different from most other students with special
needs.

6.

The purpose and required procedures of Child Study Teams for regular education
students shall be explained by the principal to the entire staff each September.
Teachers will not be required to give up preparation time for Child Study Team
meetings.

7.

Inclusion services shall be scheduled, whenever possible, in Grades 1-8 at the
mutual agreement of associated staff, and within the requirements of the IEP.
68

8.

B.

The district shall identify additional special education staff as a hiring priority as
needed.

Regular Education Reading Services
1.

The priority for all reading services will be in Grades 1-3.

2.

The priority for services in Grade 1 is The Reading Intervention Program (RIP).

3.

All RIP services will be scheduled in a consecutive block of time in the morning,
whenever possible. RIP services may be in the classroom or pullout according to
mutual agreement by the principal, the Grade 1 teacher and the reading teacher.
Should there be no agreement, the decision of the reading teacher shall prevail.

4.

RIP services will not be scheduled during regular reading time in Grade 1.

5.

All other reading services in Grade 2 and 3 will be scheduled after RIP services
have concluded.

6.

Reading services in Grades 2 and 3 may be inclusionary or pullout at the mutual
agreement of the two teachers.

7.

It is strongly recommended that students entering Grades 2 and 3 be scheduled in
June with teams of teachers who have made the commitment to either the
inclusion or pullout model. This will alleviate scheduling concerns and organized
services in a more productive way for teachers and students.

8.

The principal will meet with appropriate staff in May and June with regard to
scheduling needs for reading services in the upcoming school year.
ARTICLE XXXVIIII
MENTORING

A.

Joint Mentoring Review Committee: The School Committee and the Association shall
establish a Joint Mentoring Review Committee, consisting of three (3) representatives of
the School Committee and three (3) representatives of the Association. The Joint
Mentoring Review Committee shall perform a district mentoring inventory each year,
which shall include assessing the existing plan, policies and practices, surveying
participants, performing needs assessments, reviewing research and compliance, and
making recommendations to the parties.

B.

Mentors:

69

1.

The principal of the building shall appoint and assign a mentor for each nonProfessional Status teacher in his/her first year of employment in the school
district, after consultation with the Mentor Coordinators. Additionally, the
superintendent may appoint a mentor for a Professional Status Teacher who,
during the prior work year, received an evaluation rating of Unsatisfactory
Overall and has been placed on an Improvement Plan. A mentor must hold a
professional license, have prior teaching experience and have been a part of the
specific school community (building) for a minimum of one (1) year. In addition,
a mentor must have Professional Teacher Status in Somerville or must have
achieved Professional Teacher Status in another Massachusetts public school
district unless there is agreement with the Association president or designee, on a
case-by-case basis, to use a non-Professional Status teacher as a mentor. In
making mentoring appointments, the principal shall consider, among other
factors, the following qualities demonstrated by the applicants:
a.
b.
c.
d.
d.
e.
f.

Professionalism and ability to serve as a role model;
Skills and knowledge as an educator;
Effective communication and interpersonal skills;
A non-judgmental and nurturing personality;
A desire and willingness to help the mentee and share expertise;
An ability to respect the confidentiality of the mentor-mentee relationship;
An ability to guide and encourage the mentee to be a reflective
practitioner.

2.

Mentors will guide mentees in the tenets of the Massachusetts Curriculum
Frameworks/Common Core. Mentors also will consult with mentees on lesson
plans and assist mentees in learning about the work setting, key people and
places, the traditions and organizational culture, the district’s expectations of its
professional staff, developing professional relationships, and instilling confidence
by enhancing personal and professional development.

3.

Mentors ordinarily shall be assigned to mentees prior to the New Teacher
Orientation, and shall attend a designated portion of the New Teacher Orientation.
In making mentoring assignments, the principal shall consult with the mentor
coordinators and shall match mentors and mentees based on such factors as the
partners’ proximity, grade level, discipline and other relational factors.

4.

Mentor shall be appointed for a term of one (1) work year. Acceptance of a
mentoring appointment shall be voluntary.

5.

Mentors shall be trained in a mentoring course provided by the School Committee
before the start of their first mentoring assignment.

70

C.

6.

A mentor shall be accessible to his/her mentee and will have regularly scheduled
meetings with the mentee on a biweekly basis. The mentor shall provide his/her
principal by December 15 and June 15 with a written record of the times and
dates on which such meetings were held. The mentor and mentee also shall
attend district-wide meetings throughout the work year. A mentor and mentee
will be provided with a reasonable period of release time to allow for the mentee
to observe and to be observed by his/her mentor. The mentor shall not formally
evaluate the mentee. The relationship between the mentor and the mentee is
intended to be a confidential one.

7.

The principal and mentor coordinators shall maintain contact with mentors and
mentees in an effort to ascertain that their needs are being met.

8.

The mentor and mentee shall sign a mentor/mentee agreement, on a form to be
developed by the School Committee and the Association, at the start of the work
year. The mentor/mentee relationship may be terminated by mutual agreement at
any time. In the event that one party wishes to terminate the agreement, the
approval of the principal, after consultation with the mentor coordinators, will be
required.

9.

Mentors shall be paid a stipend as specified in Article IV, Salaries and Other
Compensations.

Mentor Coordinators:
1.

The superintendent or designee shall appoint and assign mentor coordinators.
Such positions shall be posted. A mentor coordinator must have prior teaching
and mentoring experience. Mentor coordinators shall not be appointed or
assigned to serve simultaneously as a mentor.

2.

Ideally, mentor coordinators will be representative of major constituencies in the
school district (e.g., elementary, secondary, special education, ELL).

3.

Mentor coordinators shall assist the district in the delivery of training for mentors;
work collaboratively with principals regarding the establishment of
mentor/mentee partnerships and help oversee those relationships; and provide
support and assistance to the mentors.

4.

Mentor coordinators shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year.

5.

Mentor coordinators shall be paid a stipend as specified in Article IV, Salaries and
Other Compensations.

71

ARTICLE XL
CRIMINAL RECORD OFFENDER INFORMATION (“CORI”) CHECKS
A.

If a bargaining unit member is suspended or reprimanded on the basis of criminal record
information, the member may grieve the suspension or reprimand under the just cause
provision in this Agreement.

B.

Any bargaining unit member who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony offense on
or after September 1, 2013 must notify the superintendent in writing, at the time of the
conviction or plea of the fact of such conviction or guilty plea, the nature of the offense,
the date of the conviction or plea, and the court in which the conviction or plea was
entered.

C.

Each bargaining unit member shall obtain a fingerprint-based criminal record check, as
required by G.L. c. 71, §38R.
ARTICLE XLI
ACCEPTABLE USE AND SOCIAL NETWORKING POLICIES

A.

The Association accepts those portions of the School Committee’s Acceptable Use Policy
that are not inconsistent with this Agreement. The parties agree that they will continue to
engage in a dialogue concerning the Acceptable Use Policy.

B.

The parties will establish a Joint Study Committee, consisting of four (4) representatives
of the Association and four (4) representatives of the School Committee to review the
Social Networking Policy and to make recommendations to the School Committee and
the Association concerning any proposed changes to the Policy, along with any
recommendations for professional development and training for bargaining unit
members. The Joint Study Committee will complete its work prior to December 1, 2013
and will submit its joint recommendations to the parties’ respective bargaining teams for
negotiations and ratification by January 30, 2014. In the event that the parties do not
reach agreement, or the agreement is not ratified, the policy will not be applied to
bargaining unit members.
ARTICLE XLII: RESIGNATION

A.

A bargaining unit member must provide the superintendent with at least sixty (60) days
written notice of his/her severance of employment. If a bargaining unit member fails to
provide such notice prior to resigning for purposes of retirement, s/he will be ineligible to
receive sick leave buyback pursuant to Article XIX, Sick Leave, Section G of this
Agreement, provided that the superintendent may waive the sixty (60) day notice
requirement in extenuating circumstances, which decision will not be arbitrary or
capricious.
72

ARTICLE XLIII: LABOR/MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
A.

To encourage a productive, collegial relationship between the Association and the School
Committee, a Labor/Management Committee shall be established. The Superintendent or
designee and any other member(s) of the administration whom the Superintendent deems
appropriate, the Association President, and two (2) additional representatives of the
Association will meet periodically, as needed, to exchange views on concerns related to,
among other things, the improvement of services and morale, contract interpretation, new
Federal, State and local initiatives and/or mandates and other various departmental issues.
Upon mutual agreement, the Labor/Management Committee may add additional
representatives.

B.

The establishment of this Labor/Management Committee shall not be construed as a
waiver of either party’s right to bargain about wages, hours, and other working
conditions, or the right to bargain about the impact of management decisions on wages,
hours or working conditions. The Labor/Management Committee shall not be construed
to restrict the rights of either party.

C.

The School Committee will prioritize the implementation of initiatives by endeavoring to
be deliberate in the pursuit of new grant based initiatives pursued for the 2018-2019 and
2019-2020 school years, and engage the Association in decision making.
ARTICLE XLIV: GENERAL

A.

If any provision of this Agreement or any application of the Agreement to any employee
or group of employees shall be found to be contrary to law, then such provision or
application shall not be deemed valid and subsisting, except to the extent permitted by
law, but all other provisions or applications will continue in full force and effect.

B.

This Agreement constitutes School Committee and Association policy for the term of
said Agreement, and the School Committee and the Association will carry out the
commitments contained herein and give them full force and effect as their policies. The
School Committee will amend its Administrative Regulations and take such other action
as may be necessary in order to give full force and effect to the provisions of the
Agreement.

C.

Any changes in hours, wages or conditions of employment required by state law or
regulations of the State Board of Education during the term of this Agreement will result
in consultation between the parties.

D.

The Association and Committee will convene a task force to study the use of licensure
and multiple certifications. This study will include a discussion with respect to
compensation for educators who hold multiple licenses and will report to their respective
constituencies the results of their study.
73

ARTICLE XLV: DURATION
A.

This Agreement will be effective as of September 1, 2018, and will continue and remain
in full force and effect until August 31, 2021. The parties agree that not later than
November 1, 2020, they will enter into negotiations for a successor Agreement to become
effective as of September 1, 2021.

SOMERVILLE SCHOOL COMMITTEE

SOMERVILLE TEACHERS
ASSOCIATION

____________________________________

____________________________________

____________________________________

____________________________________

____________________________________

____________________________________

Date:

Date:

74

APPENDIX A-1
APPENDIX A - SALARIES
STA UNIT A SALARY SCHEDULE (184 DAYS)
EFFECTIVE 9/1/2018
2.5% PLUS $750 TO STEP 11
STEP

BA

BA+15

MA

MA+15

MA+30

MA+45

M+60
CAGS

1 49,143

51,138

53,314

54,970

57,153

58,761

60,147

2 52,230

54,276

56,648

58,350

60,629

62,310

63,697

3 55,314

57,406

59,980

61,725

64,106

65,860

67,246

4 58,401

60,503

63,313

65,071

67,582

69,410

70,797

5 61,487

63,594

66,646

68,417

71,059

72,960

74,346

6 64,574

66,672

69,979

71,750

74,536

76,510

77,897

7 67,660

69,732

73,310

75,045

78,012

80,060

81,446

8 70,745

72,747

76,644

78,307

81,487

83,610

84,997

9 74,317

76,220

80,534

82,129

85,123

87,161

88,547

10 78,116

79,986

84,497

86,070

89,563

91,529

92,916

11 84,907

86,865

91,283

92,928

96,166

97,758

99,144

75

APPENDIX A-2
STA UNIT A SALARY SCHEDULE (184 DAYS)
EFFECTIVE 9/1/2019
2.5% PLUS $750 TO STEP 11
STEP

BA

BA+15

MA

MA+15

MA+30

MA+45

M+60
CAGS

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

50,371
53,535
56,697
59,861
63,024
66,188
69,352
72,513
76,175
80,069
87,779

52,417
55,633
58,841
62,015
65,184
68,338
71,476
74,566
78,125
81,986
89,787

54,647
58,064
61,479
64,896
68,312
71,728
75,143
78,560
82,547
86,610
94,315

56,344
59,809
63,268
66,698
70,127
73,544
76,921
80,265
84,183
88,222
96,001

58,581
62,145
65,709
69,272
72,835
76,400
79,963
83,525
87,251
91,802
99,320

60,230
63,868
67,506
71,146
74,784
78,423
82,061
85,700
89,340
93,817
100,952

61,651
65,289
68,927
72,567
76,205
79,844
83,482
87,122
90,761
95,238
102,373

76

77

APPENDIX A-3

STA UNIT A SALARY SCHEDULE (184 DAYS)
EFFECTIVE 9/1/2020
2.75% PLUS $750 TO STEP 11
STEP

BA

BA+15

MA

MA+15

MA+30

MA+45

M+60
CAGS

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

51,757
55,008
58,256
61,507
64,757
68,008
71,259
74,508
78,269
82,271
90,943

53,858
57,163
60,460
63,721
66,977
70,218
73,441
76,616
80,274
84,241
93,006

56,150
59,661
63,170
66,681
70,190
73,701
77,209
80,720
84,817
88,992
97,659

57,893
61,454
65,008
68,532
72,056
75,566
79,036
82,472
86,498
90,648
99,391

60,192
63,854
67,516
71,177
74,838
78,500
82,162
85,821
89,650
94,327
102,801

61,886
65,624
69,363
73,102
76,840
80,580
84,318
88,057
91,797
96,397
104,478

63,347
67,085
70,823
74,562
78,300
82,040
85,778
89,517
93,257
97,857
105,938

78

APPENDIX A-4
STA UNIT A SALARY SCHEDULE (209 DAYS)
EFFECTIVE 9/1/2019
2.5% PLUS $750 TO STEP 11
STEP

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

BA

BA+15

MA

MA+15 MA+30 MA+45

M+60
CAGS

57,215 59,539 62,072 63,999 66,541 68,413 70,028
60,809 63,192 65,953 67,935 70,588 72,546 74,160
64,400 66,836 69,833 71,864 74,637 76,678 78,292
67,994 70,441 73,714 75,761 78,684 80,812 82,426
71,587 74,041 77,593 79,655 82,731 84,944 86,559
75,181 77,623 81,474 83,536 86,780 89,078 90,693
78,775 81,187 85,352 87,372 90,827 93,211 94,825
82,366 84,697 89,233 91,171 94,873 97,344 98,959
86,524 88,740 93,763 95,620 99,106 101,478 103,093
90,948 93,126 98,378 100,209 104,275 106,564 108,178
99,706 101,986 107,130 109,045 112,815 114,668 116,282

79

80

APPENDIX A-5
STA UNIT A SALARY SCHEDULE (209 DAYS)
EFFECTIVE 9/1/2020
2.75% PLUS $750 TO STEP 11
STEP

BA

BA+15

MA

MA+15

MA+30

MA+45

M+60
CAGS

1

58,789

61,176

63,779

65,759

68,371

70,295

71,953

2

62,482

64,929

67,767

69,804

72,529

74,541

76,199

3

66,171

68,674

71,753

73,841

76,689

78,787

80,446

4

69,864

72,378

75,741

77,844

80,848

83,034

84,693

5

73,556

76,077

79,727

81,846

85,006

87,280

88,939

6

77,248

79,758

83,715

85,834

89,166

91,528

93,187

7

80,941

83,420

87,700

89,775

93,325

95,774

97,433

8

84,631

87,026

91,687

93,678

97,482

100,021

101,680

9

88,904

91,181

96,341

98,250

101,831

104,269

105,928

10

93,449

95,686

101,083

102,965

107,143

109,495

111,153

11

103,300

105,643

110,928

112,896

116,769

118,673

120,332

81

82

APPENDIX B
EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES

Advisors for extracurricular activities will be selected annually by the principal who will notify
the applicant of selection, subject to the approval of the superintendent. All such positions shall
be advertised in each school and interested persons may apply.
Unit members shall be given first consideration for all positions listed in Appendix B. In the
event that no Unit member volunteers to be an advisor for a particular club/activity, the School
Committee may fill the position from outside the Unit.
The parties agree to incorporate the final recommended changes from the Joint Study Committee
for Appendix B that will re-categorize certain stipendiary positions. Except as otherwise noted
in the following schedule, the parties agree that positions in Appendix B shall be increased by
2.5% for the 2018-19 and 2019-20 school years and 2.75% in the 2020-21 school year.

APPENDIX B
NAME OF ACTIVITY

STIPEND AMOUNTS
2018201920202019
2020
2021

MUSIC DEPARTMENT:
All City Chamber Music Director (formerly Music Director)
All City MS Band Director (formerly City Wide Band)
All City MS Chorus Director (formerly Citywide Chorus
All City MS Drama Director (New)
All City MS Maraimba Director (New)
All City MS Orchestra Director (New)
Assistant Drill Master I
Assistant Drill Master II
Band Color Guard
Band Drill Master
Band Percussion
Bandmaster
Chorus Director
Drama Director
Jazz Ensemble
83

$977
$1,528
$1,528

$397
$1,009
$1,588
$1,588
$1,282
$3,175
$1,222
$977
$794

$1,566
$1,566
$1,566
$1,566
$1,566
$1,566
$410
$1,035
$1,716
$1,716
$1,314
$3,252
$1,252
$1,566
$830

$1,609
$1,609
$1,609
$1,609
$1,609
$1,609
$421
$1,063
$1,763
$1,763
$1,351
$3,342
$1,287
$1,609
$853

Musical Director
Musical Producer
Musical Stage Director
Orchestra Director (formerly Concerts Director

$1,222
$1,222
$1,222
$1,528

$1,566
$1,566
$1,566
$1,566

$1,609
$1,609
$1,609
$1,609

$829
$2,442
$829

$850
$2,503
$850
$850
$5,008
$3,129
$850
$850
$850
$3,756
$6,260
$850
$850
$1,878
$850
$850
$850
$850
$850
$939
$850
$850
$1,878
$974
$2,183
$1,475
$283
$425
$850
$850
$850

$873
$2,572
$873
$873
$5,146
$3,215
$873
$873
$873
$3,859
$6,433
$873
$873
$1,930
$873
$873
$873
$873
$873
$965
$873
$873
$1,930
$1,001
$2,243
$1,516
$291
$437
$873
$873
$873

ALL OTHER ACTIVITIES:
Academic Assistance Club
Academic Decathlon
Art Club
Astronomy Club
Basketball/Football Cheerleaders (2 Seasons)
Best Buddies Coordinator
Bloggers Club
Book Club
Breakfast Story Club
Business Manager
Business Manager (teaching 4 classes)
Chess Club
Club Coordinator
Cluster Coordinator
Co-Cluster Club
Coding Club (formerly Computer Club)
Community Service
Craft Club
Culture Committee
DECA
Drama Club
Early Music Ensemble (formerly Recorder Concert)
Eighth Grade Exploratory - Co-Advisor
Elementary Academic Tutor (ACE-It, SES)
Elementary Academic Tutor Coordinators (Large Sites)
Elementary Academic Tutor Coordinators Medium Sites)
Elementary Activity Section 1.1
Elementary Activity Section 1.2
Elementary Activity Section 2.2
Elementary Activity Section 3.1
End of Year Club
84

$4,886
$3,053
$829
$829
$829
$3,664
$6,108

$1,832
$829
$829
$829
$829
$917
$829
$829
$1,832
$950
$2,130
$1,439
$276
$414
$829
$829
$829

Extended Learning Coordinator
French Club
Freshman Barbecue Coordinator
Friendship Club
Future Chef's Club
Future Teachers Club
Grade 7 and 8 Basketball Coach
(All Other Grades 7 and 8 Intramural Coaches)
Grade 9 Orientation
Green Club
GSA Co-Advisor
Haitian Club
Health Club
Health, Fitness, Badminton Club
Health, Fitness, Strenghth & Conditioning Club
Hockey Cheerleaders (1 Season)
Homework Club
International Club
Italian Club
Junior Statesman Club
Latin American Newcomers Club
Library Facilitator
Literary Magazine Club
Local History Club
Math Club
MCAS Tutorial Program (tutors and site-based coordinators)
Moving Forward Club
Music Club
National History Day
National Honor Society Advisor
National Honor Society Assistant Advisor
Newcomers Club
No Stress Chess Club
Outdoor Club
Photograpy Club
Poetry Club
Portuguese / Brazilian Club
Publishing Club
85

$6,663

$829
$829
$917
$829
$2,442
$829
$403
$829
$829
$2,442
$829
$829
$403
$829
$403
$829
$829
$1,075
$829
$829
$829
$829
$829
$829
$829
$829
$829
$829

$6,829
$850
$850
$850
$850
$850
$939
$850
$2,503
$850
$413
$850
$850
$850
$850
$2,503
$850
$850
$850
$413
$850
$413
$850
$850
$850
$1,101
$850
$850
$850
$850
$850
$850
$850
$850
$850
$850
$850
$850

$7,017
$873
$873
$873
$873
$873
$965
$873
$2,572
$873
$424
$873
$873
$873
$873
$2,572
$873
$873
$873
$424
$873
$424
$873
$873
$873
$1,132
$873
$873
$873
$873
$873
$873
$873
$873
$873
$873
$873
$873

Quilting Club
Reading Club
Reading Enrichment Coordinator
Safety Coordinator
Safety Net
SAT Prep
School Newspaper
Science Club
Science Fair
Science League
Service Club
SHS After School Library Advisors (formerly Breakfast Club)
SHS Before School Library Advisors (formerly Breakfast Club)
SHS Foreign Language Independent Study
SHS Freshmen, Sophomore, Junior Class Advisor
SHS Newsletter Advisor
SHS Senior (includes Prom, Class Day, Graduation) Class
Advisor
Social Interactions
South Korean Club
Space Club
Spanish Club
Sports Club
Student Council
Table Top Game Club (formerly Board Game Club)
Tada Co-Advisor
Trivia Club
Tutoring Club
Woman's Empowerment Club
Writing Club
Yearbook Advisor
Yoga Club

$829
$829
$1,465
$1,832
$829
$1,832
$829
$829
$829
$829
$4,030
$4,030
$1,382
$829
$1,832
$1,832
$829
$829
$829
$1,832
$829
$403
$829
$829
$2,137

$850
$850
$1,502
$1,878
$850
$850
$1,878
$850
$850
$850
$850
$4,131
$4,131
$1,415
$850
$1,878

$873
$873
$1,543
$1,930
$873
$873
$1,930
$873
$873
$873
$873
$4,244
$4,244
$1,455
$873
$1,930

$1,878
$850
$850
$850
$850
$850
$1,878
$850
$413
$850
$850
$850
$850
$2,191
$850

$1,930
$873
$873
$873
$873
$873
$1,930
$873
$424
$873
$873
$873
$873
$2,251
$873

All other approved intramural and extracurricular activities shall be paid the following amount
for a minimum of thirty (30) hours of work:
2018-2019:
2019-2020:
2020-2021:

$829
$850
$873
86

The parties agree to review and revise Appendix B for acceptable additions and deletions on an
annual basis.

87

APPENDIX C
COACHING POSITIONS
1.

All coaches will be recommended annually to the superintendent for appointment, by the
head master of the high school. Coaches’ appointments will expire unless renewed
within sixty (60) days of the last regular season game. The coordinator of athletics will
submit recommendations for all coaches to the head master of the high school. It is
further understood that the coordinator of athletics will seek input from head coaches for
assistant coaches before making his/her recommendation to the head master.

2.

Any interscholastic sport adopted on a varsity level will be included in this Appendix for
the purpose of negotiations.

3.

The school department will give preference for coaching appointments to Unit members
if their qualifications are equal to outside applicants.

4.

The parties agree to incorporate the final recommended changes from the Joint Study
Committee for Appendix B that will re-categorize certain stipendiary positions. Except
as otherwise noted in the following schedule, the parties agree that positions in Appendix
C shall be increased by 2.5% for the 2018-19 and 2019-20 school years and 2.75% in the
2020-21 school year.
APPENDIX C
ATHLETICS COACHES
2018-2019

2019-2020

2020-2021

$10,143

$10,506

$10,795

$5,853
$5,853
$5,853
$3,394
$5,853
$5,853
$3,750
$5,853
$4,931

$6,303
$6,303
$6,303
$6,303
$6,303
$6,303
$6,303
$6,303
$6,303

$6,476
$6,476
$6,476
$6,476
$6,476
$6,476
$6,476
$6,476
$6,476

GROUP A HEAD COACH :
Football
GROUP B HEAD COACHES:
Baseball
Basketball
Hockey
Lacrosse
Soccer
Softball
Tennis
Track (Indoor & Outdoor)
Volleyball
88

GROUP C HEAD COACHES:
Crew
Cross Country
Golf
Swimming
Volleyball
Wrestling

$3,750
$4,931
$3,750
$4,931
$4,931
$4,931

$5,370
$5,370
$5,370
$5,370

$5,518
$5,518
$5,518
$5,518

$4,931

$5,370

$5,518

Baseball
Basketball
Crew
Football
Golf
Hockey
Lacrosse
Soccer
Softball
Tennis
Track (Indoor & Outdoor)
Volleyball

$3,750
$3,750
$3,750
$3,750
$3,750
$3,750
$3,750
$3,750
$3,750
$3,750
$3,750
$3,750

$4,003
$4,003

$4,113
$4,113

$4,003

$4,113

$4,003
$4,003
$4,003
$4,003

$4,113
$4,113
$4,113
$4,113

$4,003
$4,003

$4,113
$4,113

GROUP D FRESHMEN COACH:
Football

$3,750

$4,003

$4,113

$3,394
$3,394
$3,394

$3,520
$3,520
$3,520
$3,520

$3,616
$3,616
$3,616
$3,616

GROUP C ASSISTANT HEAD COACH:
Football
GROUP D JR. VARSITY COACHES:

GROUP E FRESHMEN COACHES:
Baseball
Basketball
Hockey
La Crosse
89

Soccer
Softball
Ultimate Frisbee
Volleyball

$3,394
$3,394

$3,520
$3,520
$3,520
$3,520

$3,616
$3,616
$3,616
$3,616

MS Cross Country Coach
MS Outdoor Track and Field Coach
MS Baseball Coach
MS Softball Coach
MS Basketball Coach

$3,394
$3,394
$3,394
$3,394

$3,520
$3,520
$3,520
$3,520
$3,520

$3,616
$3,616
$3,616
$3,616
$3,616

$3,394
$3,394

$3,520
$3,520

$3,616
$3,616

$1,875

$1,922

$2,175

$1,794

$1,843

$3,394

GROUP F ASSISTANT COACHES:
Assistant Cross Country Coach
Assistant Swim Coach
GROUP G ASSISTANT COACH:
Assistant Golf Coach

GROUP H
(ALL NON-FOOTBALL VARSITY ASSISTANT COACHES)
ADDITIONAL NOTES:

All new (future) programs / sports not listed above will be paid under Group E for the first 2
years
of the program;
Effective year 3: Programs/Sports Coaches working 14 events or less will be moved to Group C;
Effective year 3: Programs/Sports Coaches working 15 or more events or more will be moved
to Group B;
All Coaches hired after 7/1/2015 must complete the NFHS Coaches course and the NFHS
sports-specific course (if offered);
All Coaches must complete NFHS concussion class and NFHS Sports First Aid (or equivalent
class) prior to the start of the sports season.

90

91

APPENDIX D
EDUCATOR EVALUATION INSTRUMENT AND PROCEDURES
1)

2)

Purpose of Educator Evaluation
A)

This contract language is locally negotiated and based on M.G.L. c. 71, §38;
M.G.L. c. 150E; the Educator Evaluation regulations, 603 CMR 35.00 et seq.; and
the Model System for Educator Evaluation developed and which may be updated
from time to time by the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education.
See 603 CMR 35.02 (definition of model system). In the event of a conflict
between this Collective Bargaining Agreement and the governing laws and
regulations, the laws and regulations will prevail.

B)

The regulatory purposes of evaluation are:
i)

To promote student learning, growth, and achievement by providing
Educators with feedback for improvement, enhanced opportunities for
professional growth, and clear structures for accountability, 603 CMR
35.01(2)(a);

ii)

To provide a record of facts and assessments for personnel decisions,
35.01(2)(b);

iii)

To ensure that every school committee has a system to enhance the
professionalism and accountability of teachers and administrators that will
enable them to assist all students to perform at high levels, 35.01(3); and

iv)

To assure effective teaching and administrative leadership, 35.01(3).

Definitions (* indicates definition is generally based on 603 CMR 35.02)
A)

*Artifacts of Professional Practice: Products of an Educator’s work and student
work samples that demonstrate the Educator’s knowledge and skills with respect
to specific performance standards.

B)

Caseload Educator: Educators who teach or counsel individual or small groups
of students through consultation with the regular classroom teacher, for example,
school nurses, guidance counselors, speech and language pathologists, reading
specialists, some special education teachers, school adjustment counselors, team
facilitators, academic coaches, counselor educators and teachers of the visually
impaired.
92

C)

Classroom Teacher: Educators who teach preK-12 whole classes, and teachers
of special subjects as such as art, music, library, and physical education. May
also include special education teachers and reading specialists who teach whole
classes.

D)

Categories of Evidence: Multiple measures of student learning, growth, and
achievement, judgments based on observations and artifacts of professional
practice, including unannounced observations of practice of any duration; and
additional evidence relevant to one or more Standards of Effective Teaching
Practice (603 CMR 35.03).

E)

*District-Determined Measures: Measures of student learning, growth and
achievement related to the Massachusetts Curriculum Frameworks, Massachusetts
Vocational Technical Education Frameworks, or other relevant frameworks, that
are comparable across grade or subject level district-wide. These measures may
include, but shall not be limited to: portfolios, approved commercial assessments
and district-developed pre- and post-unit and course assessments, and capstone
projects. District-determined measures shall be locally bargained, if legally
required.

F)

*Educator(s): Inclusive term that applies to all classroom teachers and caseload
educators, unless otherwise noted.

G)

*Educator Plan: The growth or improvement actions identified as part of each
Educator’s evaluation. The type of plan is determined by the Educator’s career
stage, overall performance rating, and the rating of impact on student learning,
growth and achievement. There shall be four types of Educator Plans:
i)

Developing Educator Plan shall mean a plan developed by the Educator
and the Evaluator for one school year or less for an Educator without
Professional Teacher Status (PTS); or, at the discretion of an Evaluator,
for an Educator with PTS in a new assignment.

ii)

Self-Directed Growth Plan shall mean a plan developed by the Educator
for one or two school years for Educators with PTS who are rated
proficient or exemplary.

iii)

Directed Growth Plan shall mean a plan developed by the Educator and
the Evaluator of one school year or less for Educators with PTS who are
rated needs improvement.

93

iv)

Improvement Plan shall mean a plan developed by the Evaluator of at
least 30 school days and no more than one school year for Educators with
PTS who are rated unsatisfactory with goals specific to improving the
Educator’s unsatisfactory performance.

H)

*ESE: The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education.

I)

*Evaluation: The ongoing process of defining goals and identifying, gathering,
and using information as part of a process to improve professional performance
(the “Formative Evaluation” and “Formative Assessment”) and to assess total job
effectiveness and make personnel decisions (the “Summative Evaluation”).

J)

*Evaluator: Any person designated by the Superintendent who has primary or
supervisory responsibility for observation and evaluation. Evaluators shall
receive training in the principles of supervision and evaluation. Each Educator
will have one Primary Evaluator at any one time responsible for determining
performance ratings.
i)

Primary Evaluator shall be the person who determines the Educator’s
performance ratings and evaluation.

ii)

Supervising Evaluator shall be the person responsible for developing the
Educator Plan, supervising the Educator’s progress through Formative
Assessments, evaluating the Educator’s progress toward attaining the
Educator Plan goals, and making recommendations about the evaluation
ratings to the primary Evaluator at the end of the Educator Plan. The
Supervising Evaluator may be the primary Evaluator or his/her designee.

iii)

Teaching Staff Assigned to More Than One Building: Each Educator
who is assigned to more than one building will be evaluated by the
appropriate administrator where the individual is assigned most of the
time. The Principal of each building in which the Educator serves must
review and sign the evaluation, and may add written comments. In cases
where there is no predominate assignment, the Superintendent will
determine who the primary evaluator will be.

iv)

Notification: The Educator shall be notified in writing of his/her primary
Evaluator and supervising Evaluator, if any, at the outset of each new
evaluation cycle. The Evaluator(s) may be changed upon notification in
writing to the Educator.

94

K)

Evaluation Cycle: A five-component process that all Educators follow
consisting of 1) Self-Assessment; 2) Goal-setting and Educator Plan development;
3) Implementation of the Plan; 4) Formative Assessment/Evaluation; and 5)
Summative Evaluation.

L)

*Experienced Educator: An Educator with Professional Teacher Status (PTS).

M)

*Family: Includes students’ parents, legal guardians, foster parents, and primary
caregivers.

N)

*Formative Assessment: The process used to assess progress towards attaining
goals set forth in Educator Plans, performance on standards, or both. This process
may take place at any time(s) during the cycle of evaluation, but typically takes
place at mid-cycle.

O)

*Formative Evaluation: An evaluation conducted at the end of Year 1 for an
Educator on a two-year Self-Directed Growth plan which is used to arrive at a
rating on progress towards attaining the goals set forth in the Educator Plan,
performance on standards and Indicators of Effective Teaching Practice, or both.

P)

*Goal: A specific, actionable, and measurable area of improvement as set forth
in an Educator’s Plan. A goal may pertain to any or all of the following: Educator
practice in relation to performance standards, Educator practice in relation to
Indicators, or specified improvement in student learning, growth and
achievement. Goals may be developed by individual Educators, by the Evaluator,
or by teams of Educators. Team goals may be developed by grade-level or
subject area teams, departments or other groups of Educators who have the same
role.

Q)

*Measurable: That which can be classified or estimated in relation to a scale,
rubric, or standards.

R)

Multiple Measures of Student Learning: Measures must include a combination
of classroom, school and district assessments, student growth percentiles on state
assessments, if state assessments are available, and student gain scores on the
MEPA, ACCESS or other comparable assessment for English Language Learners.
This definition may be revised as required by regulations or agreement of the
parties upon issuance of ESE guidance expected by July 2012.

S)

New Assignment: An assignment in which an Educator with PTS teaches under
a different license, in a new discipline, in a new school or at a level that is three or
more grades above or below the last assignment.
95

T)

*Observation: A data gathering process that includes notes and judgments made
during one or more classroom or worksite visits(s) of any duration by the
Evaluator and may include examination of artifacts of practice including student
work. A visit of at least ten minutes is recommended. Classroom or worksite
observations conducted pursuant to this Article must result in feedback to the
Educator using agreed upon written protocols.
Normal supervisory responsibilities of department, building and district
administrators will also cause administrators to drop in on classes and other
activities in the worksite at various times as deemed necessary by the
administrator. Carrying out these supervisory responsibilities, when they do not
result in targeted and constructive feedback to the Educator, are not observations
as defined in this Article.

U)

Parties: The parties to this Agreement are the Somerville Teachers Association,
Unit A (Association) and the Somerville School Committee (School Committee).

V)

*Performance Rating: Describes the Educator’s performance on each
performance standard and overall. There shall be four performance ratings:

W)

i)

Exemplary: the Educator’s performance consistently and significantly
exceeds the requirements of a standard or overall. The rating of
exemplary on a standard indicates that practice significantly exceeds
proficient and could serve as a model of practice on that standard districtwide.

ii)

Proficient: the Educator’s performance fully and consistently meets the
requirements of a standard or overall. Proficient practice is understood to
be fully satisfactory.

iii)

Needs Improvement: the Educator’s performance on a standard or overall
is below the requirements of a standard or overall, but is not considered to
be unsatisfactory at this time. Improvement is necessary and expected.

iv)

Unsatisfactory: the Educator’s performance on a standard or overall has
not significantly improved following a rating of needs improvement, or
the Educator’s performance is consistently below the requirements of a
standard or overall and is considered inadequate, or both.

*Performance Standards: Locally developed standards and indicators pursuant
to M.G.L. c. 71, §38 and consistent with, and supplemental to 603 CMR 35.00.
96

The parties may agree to limit standards and indicators to those set forth in 603
CMR 35.03.
X)

*Professional Teacher Status: PTS is the status granted to an Educator pursuant
to M.G.L. c. 71, §41.

Y)

Rating of Educator Impact on Student Learning: A rating of high, moderate
or low based on trends and patterns on state assessments and district-determined
measures. The parties will negotiate the process for using state- and districtdetermined measures to arrive at an Educator’s rating of impact on student
learning, growth and achievement, using guidance and model contract language
from ESE, expected by July 2012.

Z)

Rating of Overall Educator Performance: The Educator’s overall performance
rating is based on the Evaluator’s professional judgment and examination of
evidence of the Educator’s performance against the four performance standards
and the Educator’s attainment of goals set forth in the Educator Plan, as follows:

AA)

i)

Standard 1: Curriculum, Planning and Assessment

ii)

Standard 2: Teaching All Students

iii)

Standard 3: Family and Community Engagement

iv)

Standard 4: Professional Culture

v)

Attainment of Professional Practice Goal(s)

vi)

Attainment of Student Learning Goal(s)

*Rubric: A scoring tool that describes characteristics of practice or artifacts at
different levels of performance. The rubrics for Standards and Indicators of
Effective Teaching Practice are used to rate Educators on performance standards.
These rubrics consists of:
i)

Standards: Describe broad categories of professional practice, including
those required in 603 CMR 35.03

ii)

Indicators: Describe aspects of each standard, including those required in
603 CMR 35.03

iii)

Elements: Define the individual components under each indicator

iv)

Descriptors: Describe practice at four levels of performance for each
element
97

3)

BB)

*Summative Evaluation: An evaluation used to arrive at a rating on each
standard, an overall rating, and as a basis to make personnel decisions. The
Summative Evaluation includes the Evaluator’s judgments of the Educator’s
performance against performance standards and the Educator’s attainment of
goals set forth in the Educator’s Plan.

CC)

*Superintendent: The person employed by the School Committee pursuant to
M.G.L. c. 71, §59 and §59A. The Superintendent is responsible for the
implementation of 603 CMR 35.00.

DD)

*Teacher: An Educator employed in a position requiring a certificate or license
as described in 603 CMR 7.04(3)(a, b, and d) and in the area of vocational
education as provided in 603 CMR 4.00. Teacher may include, for example, a
classroom teacher, librarian, guidance counselor, or school nurse.

EE)

*Trends in Student Learning: At least two years of data from the districtdetermined measures and state assessments used in determining the Educator’s
rating on impact on student learning as high, moderate or low.

Evidence Used In Evaluation
The following categories of evidence shall be used in evaluating each Educator:
A)

Multiple measures of student learning, growth, and achievement, which shall
include:
i)

Measures of student progress on classroom assessments that are aligned
with the Massachusetts Curriculum Frameworks or other relevant
frameworks and are comparable within grades or subjects in a school;

ii)

At least two district-determined measures of student learning related to the
Massachusetts Curriculum Frameworks or the Massachusetts Vocational
Technical Education Frameworks or other relevant frameworks that are
comparable across grades and/or subjects district-wide. These measures
may include: portfolios, approved commercial assessments and districtdeveloped pre- and post-unit and course assessments, and capstone
projects. One such measure shall be the MCAS Student Growth Percentile
(SGP) or student gain scores on the MEPA, ACCESS or other comparable
assessment for English Language Learners, if applicable, in which case at
least two years of data is required.
98

B)

C)

iii)

Measures of student progress and/or achievement toward student learning
goals set between the Educator and Evaluator for the school year or some
other period of time established in the Educator Plan.

iv)

For Educators whose primary role is not as a classroom teacher, the
appropriate measures of the Educator’s contribution to student learning,
growth, and achievement set by the district. The district-determined
measures should be based on the Educator’s role and responsibility.

Judgments based on observations and artifacts of practice including:
i)

Unannounced observations of practice;

ii)

Announced observation(s) for non-PTS Educators in their first year of
practice in a school, Educators on Improvement Plans, and as determined
by the Evaluator;

iii)

Examination of Educator work products;

iv)

Examination of student work samples.

Evidence relevant to one or more performance standards, including but not
limited to:
i)

4)

Evidence compiled and presented by the Educator, including :
(a)

Evidence of fulfillment of professional responsibilities and growth
such as self-assessments, peer collaboration, professional
development linked to goals in the Educator Plans, contributions to
the school community and professional culture;

(b)

Evidence of active outreach to and engagement with families;

ii)

Evidence of progress towards professional practice goal(s);

iii)

Evidence of progress toward student learning outcomes goal(s).

iv)

Student Feedback – see Section 23 below; and

v)

Any other relevant evidence from any source that the Evaluator shares
with the Educator. Other relevant evidence could include information
provided by other administrators such as the Superintendent.

Rubric
99

The rubrics are a scoring tool used for the Educator’s Self-Assessment, the Formative
Assessment, the Formative Evaluation and the Summative Evaluation. The Teacher and
Caseload Educator rubrics used in the Somerville Public Schools are those provided by ESE in
January, 2012 and attached hereto.

5)

6)

Evaluation Cycle: Training
A)

Prior to the implementation of the new evaluation process contained in this
Article, districts shall arrange training for all Educators, Principals, and other
evaluators that outlines the components of the new evaluation process and
provides an explanation of the evaluation cycle. The district through the
Superintendent shall determine the type and quality of training based on guidance
provided by ESE.

B)

By November 1st of the first year of this Agreement, all Educators shall complete
a professional learning activity about self-assessment and goal-setting satisfactory
to the Superintendent or Principal. Any Educator hired after the November 1st
date, and who has not previously completed such an activity, shall complete such
a professional learning activity about self-assessment and goal-setting within
three months of the date of hire. The district through the Superintendent shall
determine the type and quality of the learning activity based on guidance provided
by ESE with input from the Association.

Evaluation Cycle: Annual Orientation
A)

At the start of each school year, the Superintendent, Principal or designee shall
conduct a meeting for Educators and Evaluators focused substantially on educator
evaluation. The Superintendent, Principal or designee shall:
i)

Provide an overview of the evaluation process, including goal setting and
the Educator Plans.

ii)

Provide all Educators with directions for obtaining a copy of the forms
used by the district. These may be electronically provided.

iii)

The faculty meeting may be digitally recorded to facilitate orientation of
Educators hired after the beginning of the school year.

100

7)

iv)

This training may be digitally recorded to facilitate orientation of
Educators hired after the beginning of the school year.

v)

The participants may submit comments on the effectiveness of the annual
orientation, as a means of providing the joint labor/management
evaluation team with actionable feedback.

Evaluation Cycle: Self-Assessment
A)

Completing the Self-Assessment
i)

The evaluation cycle begins with the Educator completing and submitting
to the Primary or Supervising Evaluator a Self-Assessment by October 1st
or within four weeks of the start of his/her employment at the school.

ii)

The Self-Assessment includes:
(a)

An analysis of evidence of student learning, growth and
achievement for students under the Educator’s responsibility.

(b)

An assessment of practice against each of the four performance
standards of effective practice using the district’s rubric.

(c)

Proposed goals to pursue:
(1st)

At least one goal directly related to improving the
Educator’s own professional practice.

(2nd) At least one goal directed related to improving student
learning.
B)

Proposing the goals
i)

Educators must consider goals for grade-level, subject-area, department
teams, or other groups of Educators who share responsibility for student
learning and results, except as provided in (ii) below. Educators may meet
with teams to consider establishing team goals. Evaluators may
participate in such meetings.

ii)

For Educators in their first year of practice, the Evaluator or his/her
designee will meet with each Educator by October 1st (or within four
weeks of the Educator’s first day of employment if the Educator begins
employment after September 15th) to assist the Educator in completing the
101

Self-Assessment and drafting the professional practice and student
learning goals which must include induction and mentoring activities and
may be part of a team goal.

8)

iii)

Unless the Evaluator indicates that an Educator in his/her second or third
years of practice should continue to address induction and mentoring goals
pursuant to 603 CMR 7.12, the Educator may address shared grade level
or subject area team goals.

iv)

For Educators with PTS and ratings of proficient or exemplary, the goals
may be team goals. In addition, these Educators may include individual
professional practice goals that address enhancing skills that enable the
Educator to share proficient practices with colleagues or develop
leadership skills.

v)

For Educators with PTS and ratings of needs improvement or
unsatisfactory, the professional practice goal(s) must address specific
standards and indicators identified for improvement. In addition, the goals
may address shared grade level or subject area team goals.

Evaluation Cycle: Goal Setting and Development of the Educator Plan
A)

Every Educator has an Educator Plan that includes, but is not limited to, one goal
related to the improvement of practice; one goal for the improvement of student
learning. The Plan also outlines actions the Educator must take to attain the goals
established in the Plan and benchmarks to assess progress. Goals may be
developed by individual Educators, by the Evaluator, or by teams, departments, or
groups of Educators who have the similar roles and/or responsibilities. See
Sections 15-19 for more on Educator Plans.

B)

To determine the goals to be included in the Educator Plan, the Evaluator reviews
the goals the Educator has proposed in the Self-Assessment, using evidence of
Educator performance and impact on student learning, growth and achievement
based on the Educator’s self-assessment and other sources that Evaluator shares
with the Educator. The process for determining the Educator’s impact on student
learning, growth and achievement will be determined after ESE issues guidance
on this matter. See Section 22 below.

C)

Educator Plan Development meetings shall be conducted as follows:
102

D)

9)

i)

Educators in the same school may meet with the Evaluator in teams and/or
individually at the end of the previous evaluation cycle or by October 15th
of the next academic year to develop their Educator Plan. Educators shall
not be expected to meet during the summer hiatus.

ii)

For those Educators new to the school, the meeting with the Evaluator to
establish the Educator Plan must occur by October 15th or within six
weeks of the start of their assignment in that school.

iii)

The Evaluator shall meet individually with Educators with PTS and
ratings of needs improvement or unsatisfactory to develop professional
practice goal(s) that must address specific standards and indicators
identified for improvement. In addition, the goals may address shared
grade level or subject matter goals.

The Evaluator completes the Educator Plan by November 1st. The Educator shall
sign and date the Educator Plan upon receipt, and within ten days of its receipt
may submit a written response. The Educator’s signature indicates that the
Educator received the Plan. The signature does not indicate agreement or
disagreement with its contents. The Evaluator retains final authority over the
content of the Educator’s Plan.

Evaluation Cycle: Observation of Practice and Examination of Artifacts –
Educators without PTS
A)

B)

In the first year of practice or first year assigned to a school:
i)

The Educator shall have at least one announced observation during the
school year using the protocol described in Section 11B below.

ii)

The Educator shall have at least four unannounced observations during the
school year.

In the second and third years of practice or second and third years as a non-PTS
Educator in the school:
i)

The Educator shall have at least three unannounced observations during
the school year.

103

10)

11)

Evaluation Cycle: Observation of Practice and Examination of Artifacts –
Educators with PTS
A)

The Educator whose overall rating is proficient or exemplary must have at least
one unannounced observation during the evaluation cycle.

B)

The Educator whose overall rating is needs improvement must be observed
according to the Directed Growth Plan during the period of the Plan which must
include at least two unannounced observations.

C)

The Educator whose overall rating is unsatisfactory must be observed according
to the Improvement Plan which must include both unannounced and announced
observation. The number and frequency of the observations shall be determined
by the Evaluator, but in no case, for Improvement Plans of one year, shall there be
fewer than one announced and four unannounced observations. For Improvement
Plans of six months or fewer, there must be no fewer than one announced and two
unannounced observations.

Observations
The Evaluator’s first observation of the Educator should take place by November 15.
Observations required by the Educator Plan should be completed by May 15th. The
Evaluator may conduct additional observations after this date.
The Evaluator is not required nor expected to review all the indicators in a rubric during
an observation.
A)

Unannounced Observations
i)

Unannounced observations may be in the form of partial or full-period
classroom visitations, Instructional Rounds, Walkthroughs, Learning
Walks, or any other means deemed useful by the Evaluator, Principal,
Superintendent or other administrator. A visit of at least ten minutes is
recommended.

ii)

The Educator will be provided with at least brief written feedback from
the Evaluator within three to five school days of the observation. The
written feedback shall be delivered to the Educator in person, placed in the
Educator’s mailbox or mailed to the Educator’s home.

iii)

Any observation or series of observations resulting in one or more
standards judged to be unsatisfactory or needs improvement for the first
104

time must be followed by at least one observation of at least 30 minutes in
duration within 30 school days.
iv)

B)

Within five school days of the observation, the Evaluator and Educator
shall meet for a post-observation conference. The timeframe may be
extended due to unavailability on the part of either the Evaluator or the
Educator, but shall be rescheduled within twenty-four hours if possible.
During the post observation conference, the parties will discuss the
observation and may, if applicable, review any of the information set forth
in Section 11 (b) (i) (b).

Announced Observations
i)

All non-PTS Educators in their first year in the school, PTS Educators on
Improvement Plans and other Educators at the discretion of the Evaluator
shall have at least one announced observation. A visit of at least a class
period is recommended.
(a)

The Evaluator shall select the date and time of the lesson or
activity to be observed and discuss with the Educator any specific
goal(s) for the observation.

(b)

Within five school days of the scheduled observation, upon request
of either the Evaluator or Educator, the Evaluator and Educator
shall meet for a pre-observation conference. In lieu of a meeting,
the Educator may inform the Evaluator in writing of the nature of
the lesson, the student population served, and any other
information that will assist the Evaluator to assess performance.
(1st)

The Educator shall provide the Evaluator a draft of the
lesson, student conference, IEP plan or activity. If the
actual plan is different, the Educator will provide the
Evaluator with a copy prior to the observation.

(2nd) The Educator will be notified as soon as possible if the
Evaluator will not be able to attend the scheduled
observation. The observation will be rescheduled with the
Educator as soon as reasonably practical.
(c)

Within five school days of the observation, the Evaluator and
Educator shall meet for a post-observation conference. This
timeframe may be extended due to unavailability on the part of
105

either the Evaluator or the Educator, but shall be rescheduled
within twenty-four hours if possible.
(d)

The Evaluator shall provide the Educator with written feedback
within five school days of the post-observation conference. For
any standard where the Educator’s practice was found to be
unsatisfactory or needs improvement, the feedback must:
(1st)

Describe the basis for the Evaluator’s judgment.

(2nd) Describe actions the Educator should take to improve
his/her performance.

12)

(3rd)

Identify support and/or resources the Educator may use in
his/her improvement.

(4th)

State that the Educator is responsible for addressing the
need for improvement.

Evaluation Cycle: Formative Assessment
A)

A specific purpose for evaluation is to promote student learning, growth and
achievement by providing Educators with feedback for improvement. Evaluators
are expected to make frequent unannounced visits to classrooms. Evaluators are
expected to give targeted constructive feedback to Educators based on their
observations of practice, examination of artifacts, and analysis of multiple
measures of student learning, growth and achievement in relation to the Standards
and Indicators of Effective Teaching Practice.

B)

Formative assessment may be ongoing throughout the evaluation cycle but
typically takes places mid-cycle when a Formative Assessment report is
completed. For an Educator on a two-year Self-Directed Growth Plan, the midcycle Formative Assessment report is replaced by the Formative Evaluation report
at the end of year one. See Section 13 below.

C)

The Formative Assessment report provides written feedback and ratings to the
Educator about his/her progress towards attaining the goals set forth in the
Educator Plan, performance on performance standards and overall, or both.

D)

No less than two weeks before the due date for the Formative Assessment report,
which due date shall be established by the Evaluator with written notice to the
106

Educator, the Educator shall provide to the Evaluator evidence of family outreach
and engagement, fulfillment of professional responsibility and growth, and
progress on attaining professional practice and student learning goals. The
Educator may provide to the Evaluator additional evidence of the Educator’s
performances against the four performance standards.

13)

E)

Upon the request of either the Evaluator or the Educator, the Evaluator and the
Educator will meet either before or after completion of the Formative Assessment
report.

F)

The Evaluator shall complete the Formative Assessment report and provide a
copy to the Educator. All Formative Assessment reports must be signed by the
Evaluator and delivered face-to-face or to the Educator’s school mailbox or home.

G)

The Educator may reply in writing to the Formative Assessment report within ten
school days of receiving the report.

H)

The Educator shall sign and date the Formative Assessment report upon receipt.
The signature indicates that the Educator received the Formative Assessment
report. The signature does not indicate agreement or disagreement with its
contents.

I)

As a result of the Formative Assessment report, the Evaluator may change the
activities in the Educator Plan.

J)

If the rating in the Formative Assessment report differs from the last Summative
rating the Educator received, the Evaluator may place the Educator on a different
Educator Plan, appropriate to the new rating.

Evaluation Cycle: Formative Evaluation for Two-Year Self-Directed Plans Only
A)

Educators on two-year Self-Directed Growth Educator Plans receive a Formative
Evaluation report near the end of the first year of the two-year cycle. The
Educator’s performance rating for that year shall be assumed to be the same as the
previous Summative rating unless evidence demonstrates a significant change in
performance in which case the rating on the performance standards may change,
and the Evaluator may place the Educator on a different Educator plan,
appropriate to the new rating.

107

14)

B)

The Formative Evaluation report provides written feedback and ratings to the
Educator about his/her progress towards attaining the goals set forth in the
Educator Plan, performance on each performance standard and overall, or both.

C)

No less than two weeks before the due date for the Formative Evaluation report,
which due date shall be established by the Evaluator with written notice provided
to the Educator, the Educator shall provide to the Evaluator evidence of family
outreach and engagement, fulfillment of professional responsibility and growth,
and progress on attaining professional practice and student learning goals. The
Educator may also provide to the Evaluator additional evidence of the Educator’s
performance against the four performance standards.

D)

The Evaluator shall complete the Formative Evaluation report and provide a copy
to the Educator. All Formative Evaluation reports must be signed by the
Evaluator and delivered face-to-face or to the Educator’s school mailbox or home.

E)

Upon the request of either the Evaluator or the Educator, the Evaluator and the
Educator will meet either before or after completion of the Formative Evaluation
report.

F)

The Educator may reply in writing to the Formative Evaluation report within ten
school days of receiving the report.

G)

The Educator shall sign and date the Formative Evaluation report upon receipt.
The signature indicates that the Educator received the Formative Evaluation
report. The signature does not indicate agreement or disagreement with its
contents.

H)

As a result of the Formative Evaluation report, the Evaluator may change the
activities in the Educator Plan.

I)

If the rating in the Formative Evaluation report differs from the last Summative
rating the Educator received, the Evaluator may place the Educator on a different
Educator Plan, appropriate to the new rating.

Evaluation Cycle: Summative Evaluation
A)

The evaluation cycle concludes with a Summative Evaluation report. For
Educators on a one- or two-year Educator Plan, the Summative Evaluation report
must be written and provided to the Educator by May 15th.
108

B)

The Evaluator determines a rating on each standard and an overall rating based on
the Evaluator’s professional judgment, an examination of evidence against the
performance standards and evidence of the attainment of the Educator Plan goals.

C)

The professional judgment of the Primary Evaluator shall determine the overall
Summative rating that the Educator receives.

D)

For an Educator whose overall performance rating is exemplary or proficient and
whose impact on student learning is low, the Evaluator’s supervisor shall discuss
and review the rating with the Evaluator and the supervisor shall confirm or revise
the Educator’s rating. In cases where the Superintendent serves as the Primary
Evaluator, the Superintendent’s decision on the rating shall not be subject to
review.

E)

The Summative Evaluation rating must be based on evidence from multiple
categories of evidence. MCAS Growth scores shall not be the sole basis for a
Summative Evaluation rating.

F)

To be rated proficient overall, the Educator shall, at a minimum, have been rated
proficient on the Curriculum, Planning and Assessment and the Teaching All
Students Standards of Effective Teaching Practice.

G)

No less than four weeks before the due date for the Summative Evaluation report,
which due date shall be established by the Evaluator with written notice provided
to the Educator, the Educator will provide to the Evaluator evidence of family
outreach and engagement, fulfillment of professional responsibility and growth,
and progress on attaining professional practice and student learning goals. The
Educator may also provide to the Evaluator additional evidence of the Educator’s
performance against the four performance standards.

H)

The Summative Evaluation report should recognize areas of strength as well as
identify recommendations for professional growth.

I)

The Evaluator shall deliver a signed copy of the Summative Evaluation report to
the Educator face-to-face or to the Educator’s school mailbox or home no later
than May 15th.

J)

The Evaluator shall meet with the Educator rated needs improvement or
unsatisfactory to discuss the Summative Evaluation. The meeting shall occur by
June 1st.

109

15)

K)

The Evaluator may meet with the Educator rated proficient or exemplary to
discuss the Summative Evaluation, if either the Educator or the Evaluator requests
such a meeting. The meeting shall occur by June 10th.

L)

Upon mutual agreement, the Educator and the Evaluator may develop the SelfDirected Growth Plan for the following two years during the meeting on the
Summative Evaluation report.

M)

The Educator shall sign and date the final Summative Evaluation report upon
receipt. The signature indicates that the Educator received the Summative
Evaluation report. The signature does not indicate agreement or disagreement
with its contents.

N)

The Educator shall have the right to respond in writing to the Summative
Evaluation report within ten school days of receiving the report or the Summative
Evaluation meeting(s), whichever is later. The Educator’s response shall become
part of the final Summative Evaluation report.

O)

A copy of the signed final Summative Evaluation report shall be filed in the
Educator’s personnel file.

Educator Plans – General
A)

Educator Plans shall be designed to provide Educators with feedback for
improvement, professional growth, and leadership; and to ensure Educator
effectiveness and overall system accountability. The Plan must be aligned to the
standards and indicators and be consistent with district and school goals.

B)

The Educator Plan shall include, but is not limited to:
i)

At least one goal related to improvement of practice tied to one or more
performance standards;

ii)

At least one goal for the improvement the learning, growth and
achievement of the students under the Educator’s responsibility;

iii)

An outline of actions the Educator must take to attain the goals and
benchmarks to assess progress. Actions must include specified
professional development and learning activities that the Educator will
participate in as a means of obtaining the goals, as well as other support
that may be suggested by the Evaluator or provided by the school or
110

district. Examples may include but are not limited to coursework, selfstudy, action research, curriculum development, study groups with peers,
and implementing new programs.
C)

16)

17)

18)

It is the Educator’s responsibility to attain the goals in the Plan and to participate
in any trainings and professional development provided through the state, district,
or other providers in accordance with the Educator Plan.

Educator Plans: Developing Educator Plan
A)

The Developing Educator Plan is for all Educators without PTS, and, at the
discretion of the Evaluator, Educators with PTS in new assignments.

B)

The Educator shall be evaluated at least annually.

Educator Plans: Self-Directed Growth Plan
A)

A two-year Self-Directed Growth Plan is for those Educators with PTS who have
an overall rating of proficient or exemplary, and after 2013-2014 whose impact on
student learning is moderate or high. A Formative Evaluation report is completed
at the end of Year 1 and a Summative Evaluation report at the end of Year 2.

B)

A one-year Self-Directed Growth Plan is for those Educators with PTS who have
an overall rating of proficient or exemplary, and after 2013-2014 whose impact on
student learning is low. In this case, the Evaluator and Educator shall analyze the
discrepancy between the Summative Evaluation rating and the rating for impact
on student learning to seek to determine the cause(s) of the discrepancy.

Educator Plans: Directed Growth Plan
A)

A Directed Growth Plan is for those Educators with PTS whose overall rating is
needs improvement.

B)

The goals in the Plan must address areas identified as needing improvement as
determined by the Evaluator.

C)

The Evaluator shall complete a Summative Evaluation for the Educator at the end
of the period determined by the Plan, but at least annually, and in no case later
than May 15th.
111

19)

D)

For an Educator on a Directed Growth Plan whose overall performance rating is
at least proficient, the Evaluator will place the Educator on a Self-Directed
Growth Plan for the next evaluation cycle.

E)

For an Educator on a Directed Growth Plan whose overall performance rating is
not at least proficient, the Evaluator will rate the Educator as unsatisfactory and
will place the Educator on an Improvement Plan for the next evaluation cycle.

Educator Plans: Improvement Plan
A)

An Improvement Plan is for those Educators with PTS whose overall rating is
unsatisfactory.

B)

The parties agree that in order to provide students with the best instruction, it may
be necessary from time to time to place an Educator whose practice has been rated
as unsatisfactory on an Improvement Plan of no fewer than 30 school days and no
more than one school year.

C)

The Evaluator must complete a Summative Evaluation for the Educator at the end
of the period determined by the Evaluator for the Plan.

D)

An Educator on an Improvement Plan shall be assigned a Supervising Evaluator
(see definitions). The Supervising Evaluator is responsible for providing the
Educator with guidance and assistance in accessing the resources and professional
development outlined in the Improvement Plan.

E)

The Primary Evaluator may be the Supervising Evaluator.

F)

The Improvement Plan shall define the problem(s) of practice identified through
the observations and evaluation and detail the improvement goals to be met, the
activities the Educator must take to improve and the assistance to be provided to
the Educator by the district.

G)

The Improvement Plan process shall include:
i)

Within ten school days of notification to the Educator that the Educator is
being placed on an Improvement Plan, the Evaluator shall schedule a
meeting with the Educator to discuss the Improvement Plan. The
Evaluator will develop the Improvement Plan, which will include the
provision of specific assistance to the Educator.

112

H)

ii)

The Educator may request that a representative of the Association attend
the meeting(s).

iii)

If the Educator consents, the Association will be informed that an
Educator has been placed on an Improvement Plan.

The Improvement Plan shall:
i)

Define the improvement goals directly related to the performance
standard(s) and/or student learning outcomes that must be improved;

ii)

Describe the activities and work products the Educator must complete as a
means of improving performance;

iii)

Describe the assistance that the district will make available to the
Educator;

iv)

Articulate the measurable outcomes that will be accepted as evidence of
improvement;

v)

Detail the timeline for completion of each component of the Plan,
including at a minimum a mid-cycle Formative Assessment report of the
relevant standard(s) and indicator(s);

vi)

Identify the individuals assigned to assist the Educator which must include
minimally the Supervising Evaluator; and,

vii)

Include the signatures of the Educator and Supervising Evaluator.

I)

A copy of the signed Plan shall be provided to the Educator. The Educator shall
sign and date the Plan upon receipt. The signature indicates that the Educator
received the Improvement Plan. The signature does not indicate agreement or
disagreement with its contents.

J)

Decision on the Educator’s status at the conclusion of the Improvement Plan.
i)

All determinations below must be made no later than June 1st. One of
three decisions must be made at the conclusion of the Improvement Plan:
(a)

If the Evaluator determines that the Educator has improved his/her
practice to the level of proficiency, the Educator will be placed on
a Self-Directed Growth Plan.

(b)

In those cases where the Educator was placed on an Improvement
Plan as a result of his/her Summative Evaluation rating at the end
113

of his/her Directed Growth Plan, if the Evaluator determines that
the Educator is making substantial progress toward proficiency, the
Evaluator shall place the Educator on a Directed Growth Plan.

20.

(c)

In those cases where the Educator was placed on an Improvement
Plan as a result of his/her Summative Evaluation rating at the end
of his/her Directed Growth Plan, if the Evaluator determines that
the Educator is not making substantial progress toward
proficiency, the Evaluator shall recommend to the Superintendent
that the Educator be dismissed.

(d)

If the Evaluator determines that the Educator’s practice remains at
the level of unsatisfactory, the Evaluator shall recommend to the
Superintendent that the Educator be dismissed.

Timelines (Dates in italics are provided as guidance)

Activity:

Completed By:

Superintendent, Principal or designee meets with Evaluators and
Educators to explain evaluation process

September 15

Evaluator meets with first-year Educators to assist in self-assessment
and goal setting process

October 1

Educator submits Self-Assessment and proposed goals
Evaluator meets with Educators in teams or individually to establish
Educator Plans (Educator Plan may be established at Summative
Evaluation report meeting in prior school year)

October 15

Evaluator completes Educator Plans

November 1

Evaluator should complete first observation of each Educator

November 15

Educator submits evidence on parent outreach, professional growth,
progress on goals (and other standards, if desired)

January 5*

* or four weeks before Formative Assessment report date established
by Evaluator
114

Evaluator should complete mid-cycle Formative Assessment reports
for Educators on one-year Educator Plans

February 1

Evaluator holds Formative Assessment meetings if requested by
either Evaluator or Educator

February 15

Educator submits evidence on parent outreach, professional growth,
progress on goals (and other standards, if desired)

April 20*

*or 4 weeks prior to Summative Evaluation report date established by
Evaluator
Evaluator delivers Summative Evaluation report

May 15

Evaluator meets with Educators whose overall Summative Evaluation
ratings are needs improvement or unsatisfactory

June 1

At request of Evaluator or Educator, Evaluator meets with Educators
whose Summative Evaluation ratings are proficient or exemplary

June 10

115

A)

Educators with PTS on Two-Year Plans

Activity:

Completed By:

Evaluator completes unannounced observation(s)

Any time during the
two-year evaluation
cycle

Evaluator completes Formative Evaluation report

June 1 of Year 1

Evaluator conducts Formative Evaluation meeting, if any

June 1 of Year 1

Evaluator delivers Summative Evaluation report

May 15 of Year 2

Evaluator conducts Summative Evaluation meeting, if any

June 10 of Year 2

B)

Educators on Plans of Less than One Year
i)

21.

The timeline for Educators on Plans of less than one year will be
established in the Educator Plan.

Career Advancement
A)

In order to attain PTS, the Educator should achieve ratings of proficient or
exemplary on each performance standard and overall. A Principal considering
making an employment decision that would lead to PTS for any Educator who has
not been rated proficient or exemplary on each performance standard and overall
on the most recent evaluation shall confer with the Superintendent by May 1st.
The Principal’s decision is subject to review and approval by the Superintendent.

B)

In order to qualify to apply for a teacher leader position, the Educator must have
had a Summative Evaluation performance rating of proficient or exemplary for at
least the previous two years.

C)

Educators with PTS whose Summative Evaluation rating is exemplary and, after
2013-14 whose impact on student learning is rated moderate or high, may be
recognized and rewarded as determined by the district through collective
bargaining where applicable.

116

22.

Rating Impact on Student Learning Growth
ESE will provide model contract language and guidance on rating Educator impact on
student learning growth based on state and district-determined measures of student
learning. Upon receiving this model contract language and guidance, the parties agree to
bargain with respect to this matter.

23.

Using Student Feedback in Educator Evaluation
ESE will provide model contract language, direction and guidance on using student
feedback in Educator Evaluation by June 30, 2013. Upon receiving this model contract
language, direction and guidance, the parties agree to bargain with respect to this matter.

24.

Using Staff feedback in Administrator Evaluation
ESE will provide model contract language, direction and guidance on using staff
feedback in Administrator Evaluation by June 30, 2013. Upon receiving this model
contract language, direction and guidance, the parties agree to bargain with respect to this
matter.

25.

Transition from Existing Evaluation System
A)

The parties may agree that fifty percent of more of Educators in the district will
be evaluated under the new procedures at the outset of this Agreement, and fifty
percent or fewer will be evaluated under the former evaluation procedures for the
first year of implementation of the new procedures in this Agreement.

B)

The parties shall agree on a process for identifying the Educator Plan that each
Educator will be placed on during the Educator’s first year being evaluated under
the new procedures, providing that Educators who have received ratings of
unsatisfactory or its equivalent in the prior year will be placed on Directed
Growth or Improvement Plans at the sole discretion of the Superintendent.

C)

The parties may agree that to address the workload issue of Evaluators, during the
first evaluation cycle under this Agreement in every school or department, the
names of the Educators who are being placed on Self-Directed Growth Plans shall
be literally or figuratively “put into a hat.” The first fifty percent drawn shall be
117

on a one-year Self-Directed Growth Plan and the second fifty percent shall be on
a two-year Plan.
D)

26.

The existing evaluation system will remain in effect until the provisions set forth
in this Article are implemented. The relevant timeframe for adopting and
implementing new systems is set forth in 603 CMR 35.11(1).

General Provisions
A)

Only Educators who are licensed may serve as Primary Evaluators of Educators.

B)

Evaluators shall not make negative comments about the Educator’s performance,
or comments of a negative evaluative nature, in the presence of students, parents
or other staff, except in the unusual circumstance where the Evaluator concludes
that s/he must immediately and directly intervene. Nothing in this paragraph is
intended to limit an administrator’s ability to investigate a complaint, or secure
assistance to support an Educator.

C)

The Superintendent shall insure that Evaluators have training in supervision and
evaluation, including the regulations and Standards and Indicators of Effective
Teaching Practice promulgated by ESE (35.03), and the evaluation standards and
procedures established in this Agreement.

D)

Should there be a serious disagreement between the Educator and the Evaluator
regarding an overall Summative Evaluation rating of unsatisfactory, the Educator
may meet with the Evaluator’s supervisor to discuss the disagreement. Should the
Educator request such a meeting, the Evaluator’s supervisor must meet with the
Educator. The Evaluator may attend any such meeting at the discretion of the
Superintendent.

E)

The parties agree to establish a joint labor-management evaluation team which
shall review the evaluation processes and procedures at least annually through the
first three years of implementation and recommend adjustments to the parties.

F)

Violations of this Article are subject to the grievance and arbitration procedures,
except as provided below. Consistent with G.L. c. 71, §42, the arbitrator shall be
required to consider the best interests of the pupils in the district and the need for
elevation of performance standards. The parties recognize that the timelines,
dates and procedures associated with the newly negotiated Educator Evaluation
System, while agreed upon in good faith are, to some extent, placeholders and
untested. Thus, for the 2012-2013, 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 school years, the
118

Association and School Committee agree that a missed timeline of less than ten
(10) school days shall not be the subject of a grievance alleging a violation of the
new Educator Evaluation System. Failure to comply with procedural provisions
of the new Educator Evaluation System that do not prejudice an Educator will be
resolved at the lowest possible level, up to Step 3 of the grievance procedure but
no further. The parties agree to monitor the implementation of the new Educator
Evaluation System during the 2012-2013, 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 school
years, including the actual implementation of the timelines, and agree to negotiate
any proposed revisions to the timelines by no later than June 2015.

119

APPENDIX E
SOMERVILLE HIGH SCHOOL SCHEDULE

BLOCK

START

END

1

7:55

9:02

2

MONDAY TUESDAY WEDNESDAY THURSDAY FRIDAY

A1

A2

A3

A4

B4

9:06 a.m. 10:01 a.m.

B1

C2

B2

B3

C4

3

10:05 a.m. 11:00 a.m.

C1

X Block

D3

C3

D4

4

11:04 a.m. 11:34 a.m.
11:34 a.m. 12:04 p.m.
12:04 p.m. 12:34 p.m.

D1

D2

E2

E3

E4

5

12:38 p.m.

1:33 p.m.

E1

F1

F2

F3

F4

6

1:37 p.m.

2:32 p.m.

G1

G2

Advisory/
Common
Planning
Time

G3

G4

The parties agree that the high school schedule will be amended to reduce the total number of
advisories by 50% and replace the advisories with X block, assemblies or release time.

120
