COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
Between
City of Yakima
And
Teamsters Local 760

Representing
Yakima Supervisors & Administrative Unit

Effective
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

0 I INAL

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREAMBLE .. ........... .... .......... ........ ... .... .......... ... .......... .............. .. .......... ... .. ........ .... ..... 3
ARTICLE 1 - RECOGNITION .......... ..... ......... ... ............ .. ......... ... ............ .... ................ 3
ARTICLE 2 - UNION SECURITY/DUES CHECK OFF & MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP
······ ·· ·· ·· ··· ··· ···· ··· ····· ···· ··· ··· ···· ···· ·········· ·· ··········· ··· ····· ·········· ······· ··· ······· ····· ···· ···.... .... .. .... 4
ARTICLE 3 - EMPLOYER RIGHTS ... .... .......... ... .......... ... ............. ...... ........... ... ..... ... ..5
ARTICLE 4 - WAGES AND BENEFITS .... .... ... ...... .. ... ..... ..... .... ...... ..................... ... ... .. 7
ARTICLE 5- HEALTH CARE ... ... ...... ........... .............. .. ... .... ............ .. .... .................... .. 10
ARTICLE 6 - HOLIDAYS .................... ... ........ .................. .......... ......... ... ....... .............. 12
ARTICLE 7- PERSONAL HOLIDAYS .... ...................... ... .. .... ........................... .......... 12
ARTICLE 8 - VACATION LEAVE ... ... ........... .... ... .... ......... ...... ........... ...... ................ .... 13
ARTICLE 9- SICK LEAVE ................. .............. ... ........... ..... ..... ............. ... .... ............. .. 14
ARTICLE 10 - TEAMSTERS LEGAL SERVICES TRUST ........... ............. ................... 17
ARTICLE 11 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE .. ...... .. ... ......... .......... ................................. 17
ARTICLE 12 - WORK WEEK, AND HOURS OF WORK .. .................. .... ..... ............ .. .. 19
ARTICLE 13- UNION LEAVE ......................... ... ........... ....... .............. ....... ..... .... ......... 19
ARTICLE 14-RETIREMENT CONTRIBUTION ...... .... ............... .................................. 20
ARTICLE 15 - SAVINGS CLAUSE .... ...... ......... .. .............. .. .... ....... .......... ..... ...... .. ....... 20
ARTICLE 16-TERM OF AGREEMENT ..... .................. .. .. ...... ................... ... .. .. ........... 20

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January I, 2024-December 31 , 2027

2

PREAMBLE
This agreement is made and entered into pursuant to the provisions of RCW Chapter 41.56 by
and between the City of Yakima hereinafter known as the "Employer" and the Yakima Supervisors
and Administrative Unit represented by Teamsters Local #760, hereinafter known as the "Union"
for the purpose of setting forth the wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment
which shall be in effect during the term of this agreement for employees included in the bargaining
unit described in Article 1 below.

ARTICLE 1 - RECOGNITION
1.1

The Employer recognizes the Union as the exclusive bargaining representative for those
purposes appropriate to the units stated in RCW 41.56 of all full-time and regular part-time
employees of the City of Yakima in the following classifications and excluding all other
employees, as recognized by amended PERC case 25271-E-12-3758 (combining cases
234 73-E-10-3591 /Public Works Supervisors, 22917-E-09-3518/Non-Commissioned
Police Supervisors, 23805-E-11-3631 /Human Resources and Finance, 25246-E-123753/Legal Assistants & 25271-E-12-3758/Administrative Group):
Accountant I
Accountant 11
Administrative Assistant for Community Development
Administrative Assistant to the Director of Finance
Administrative Assistant to the Fire Chief
Administrative Assistant for Yakima Air Terminal
Administrative Assistant for Wastewater
Administrative Assistant to the Police Chief
Building Superintendent
- Police Department
- Public Works
Cemetery Supervisor
Chief Engineer
Construction Supervisor
Crime Analytics Supervisor
Deputy City Clerk
Engineering Contract Specialist
Equipment Supervisor
Finance Department Analyst
Financial Services Officer
Financial Services Technician
Forensic Supervisor
Human Resources Assistant
Human Resources Specialist
Lead Mechanic
Legal Assistant I
Legal Assistant 11
Legal Assistant Ill

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January I, 2024 - December 31, 2027

3

Parks Operations Supervisor
Parks Superintendent
Payroll Analyst
Police Services Supervisor
Public Works Office Assistant
Purchasing Senior Buyer
Records Administrator
Recreation Program Supervisor
Recreation Supervisor
Senior Buyer
Senior Engineer
Senior Human Resources Specialist
Senior Training Program Coordinator
Solid Waste Supervisor
Street Maintenance Supervisor
Supervising Traffic Engineer
Surface Water Engineer
Traffic Operations Supervisor
Training Program Coordinator
Treasury Services Officer
Victim Advocacy Coordinator
Wastewater Lab Coordinator
Wastewater Pretreatment Supervisor
WWTP Chief Operator
WWTP Maintenance Supervisor
WWTP Process Control Supervisor

1.2

The Union recognizes the City as the representative of the people of the City of Yakima
and agrees to negotiate only with the City through the negotiating agent or agents officially
designated by the City Manager to act on the City's behalf.

ARTICLE 2 - UNION SECURITY/DUES CHECK OFF & MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP
2.1

All employees of the Employer covered by this Agreement who are members of the Union
in good standing on the effective date of this Agreement shall remain members in good
standing in the Union.

2.2

The Union agrees to represent all employees within the bargaining unit without regard to
Union membership.

2.3

When provided a "voluntary check-off' authorization form furnished by the Union and
signed by the employee, the Employer agrees to deduct from that employee's pay, the
Union's uniform applicable dues, initiation fee and/or service fees, as prescribed in the
"voluntary check-off' form. The full amount of monies so deducted from the employee
shall monthly be forwarded to the Union by check along with an alphabetized list showing
names and amounts deducted from each employee. The Union agrees to defend and
hold the Employer harmless from and against any and all claims, demands, lawsuits,
orders or judgments arising from the administration and effects of this Section.

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January I, 2024- December 31, 2027

4

2.4

An employee may revoke his or her authorization for payroll deduction of payments to the
Union by written notice to the Employer. Every effort will be made to end the deduction
effective on the first payroll, but not later than the second payroll , after the Employer's
receipt of the employee's written notice.

2.5

The Union agrees to refund to the employee any amounts paid to the Union in error on
account of the payroll deduction provision upon presentation of proper evidence thereof.
The earning of the employee must be regularly sufficient after other legal and required
deductions are made to cover the amount of the appropriate Union dues. All other legal
and required deductions have priority for payment over such dues.

2.6

The Union agrees to defend and hold the Employer harmless from and against any and
all claims, demands, lawsuits, and/or orders of judgments arising from the administration
and effect of this Article. It is also agreed that neither any employee nor the Union shall
have any claim against the Employer for any deductions made or not made unless a claim
of error is made in writing to the Employer within forty-five (45) calendar days after the
date such deductions were, or should have been made.

ARTICLE 3 - EMPLOYER RIGHTS
3.1

Employer Rights:
Any and all rights concerned with the management of the City are exclusively that of the
Employer unless otherwise provided by the terms of this agreement or the Charter Civil
Service Rules and Regulations as amended. Furthermore, the City reserves all customary
management prerogatives including, but not limited to, the right to:
A.

Adopt rules for the operation of the Department and conduct of the employees
covered by this agreement;

B.

Establish, plan for, and direct the work force toward the organizational goals of the
department;

C.

Determine the organization, and the merits, necessity and level of activity or
service provided to the public;

D.

Determine new work methods;

E.

Control the City budget;

F.

Establish, regulate and administer a personnel system, in conformity with the City
Charter and Charter Civil Service Rules and Regulations and with this agreement,
which provides for all types of personnel transactions including determining the
procedures and standards for hiring, promotion, transfer, assignment, lay off,
discipline, retention and classification of positions;

G.

Discipline, suspend, demote or discharge employees for just cause as provided by
the Charter Civil Service Commission and in conformity with this CBA;

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

5

3.2

H.

Determine the methods, means, equipment, material, numbers and kinds of
personnel and the job or position content necessary to accomplish departmental
operations and maintain the efficiency thereof;

I.

Assign work to and schedule employee's in accordance with Civil Service
classifications and position descriptions and in conformity with this agreement;

J.

Relieve any employee from duty due to a lack of work or insufficient funds as
provided by in the Charter Civil Service Commission Rules and Regulations and
in conformity with this agreement.

K.

To perform all of the functions not otherwise expressly limited by this agreement;

L.

Take all actions necessary to carry out the mission of the City in emergencies.

M.

Provided nothing in the Agreement shall be construed as a waiver of collective
bargaining rights conferred on the parties by RCW 41.56

Scope of Management Rights
The Employer's failure to exercise any right, prerogative, or function hereby reserved to it,
or the Employer's exercise of any such right, prerogative, or function in a particular way,
shall not be considered a waiver of the Employer's management right to exercise such
right, prerogative, or function in a particular way, shall not be considered a waiver of the
Employer's management right to exercise such right, prerogative, or function or preclude
it from exercising the same in some other way not in conflict with express provisions of
this Agreement, however, the Employer recognizes that RCW 41.56 may impose an
obligation for the Employer to negotiate changes in wages, hours, and working conditions
not covered by this agreement.

3.3

Where there is probable cause to believe that an employee is psychologically or medically
unfit to perform his/her duties, the employer may require the employee to undergo a
psychological or medical examination in accordance with current Charter Civil Service
Rules.

3.3.1

3.4

The Employer and the Union hereby recognize that delivery of services in the most
efficient, effective, and courteous manner is of paramount importance to the
Employer, and as such, maximized performance is recognized to be an obligation
of employees covered by this Agreement.

The Employer shall have the right to establish and maintain performance standards. Such
standards that are in effect may be used to determine acceptable performance levels,
prepare work schedules, and measure the performance of an employee. The Employer
shall have the right to implement and prepare work schedules consistent with the terms
and conditions of this Agreement.

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024-December 31, 2027

6

ARTICLE 4 - WAGES AND BENEFITS
The Union shall have the right to reopen this Agreement on matters pertaining to employee paid
VEBA contributions by giving written notice in each year prior to July 1 for the subsequent year.
Except as modified in in this collective bargaining agreement, Employees covered by this
agreement shall receive benefits as outlined in the City of Yakima Municipal Code, Chapter 2.
The Employer acknowledges that changes to the wages and benefits are subject to bargaining
as provided by law.

4.1

Wages and Benefits
Municipal Code Chapter 2.20 .100 Classification Plan. The City may update the Cities
Classification Plan as needed, which will be adopted by the City Council as part of the
Municipal Code. This agreement adopts Municipal Code 2.20.100 as approved by the City
Council and amended during the life of this agreement.
Wages for members of this bargaining unit shall continue to be adjusted based on the Pay
and Compensation Adjustment formula (PACA) as defined in Municipal Code Sections
2.20.115, 2.20.116 & 2.20.117 as adopted and implemented as of 01/01/2019. Except as
follows:
2024-PACA
2025- PACA
2026- PACA
2027 - In lieu of PACA for this year, the classification and compensation plan shall
reflect the addition of 'F' step beginning January 1, 2027.

4.2

Longevity
All employees of this bargaining group shall receive compensation called longevity pay, in
addition to their regular salary according to the following schedule, to be paid on the first
applicable day following the thirty-first day of December and the thirtieth day of June of
each year.

A

Schedule:
Percent of
Base Pay

Years of
Service

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

5

2.5

10

4.0

15

5.5

20

7.0

24

10.0

7

4.3

B.

Upon termination of employment employees shall receive a longevity payment,
according to the above schedule, for the number of months of eligibility served by
such employee from the date on which the immediately previous longevity payment
was made. Such payment shall not be made for fractions of a month, and if
termination of employment occurs on or before the fifteenth day of any month, that
month shall not be counted as one for which longevity pay is to be made. If
termination of employment occurs after the fifteenth day of any month, that month
shall be counted as one full month for which longevity pay is to be made.

C.

No longevity pay shall be paid to any employee who is discharged from employment
for discipline reasons or any employee who leaves without giving as least two weeks'
notice in writing of such termination.

D.

Leave of absence for service in the Armed Forces of the United States shall be
regarded as continuous employment in determining eligibility for such compensation,
but shall not entitle such person to receive said compensation for the leave period.

Employee Disability Insurance
There is established a voluntary, employee-paid disability insurance program utilizing the
payroll deduction process for participating management employees. The city director of
finance and budget is authorized to implement and operate this disability insurance
program using the city's payroll deduction system.

4.4

Deferred Compensation
A.

B.

4.5

Each employee of this group shall participate in a tax deferred compensation plan
adopted or approved by the city and shall be paid, in addition to that employee's
monthly salary as established by the compensation plan, deferred earned
compensation each month in an amount equal to three percent (3%) of said monthly
base salary.
This provision is subject to the City's deferred compensation rules and regulations
and IRS regulations. The computation of retirement contributions and pension
benefits shall be governed by applicable state law.

Life Insurance
The City shall provide a life insurance policy to bargaining unit member with a face value
of One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000) subject to the terms & conditions of the
policy. The life insurance premiums shall be paid in full by the City.

4.6

Bilingual/Biliterate Compensation
Bilingual/Biliterate compensation is subject to prior written approval the employees
respective Department Head and subject to achieving a passing score on the bilingual
and/or biliterate skills examination conducted under the Charter Civil Service Rules and
Regulations and administered by the Civil Service Chief Examiner or designee. Once
certified and compensated for the bilingual and/or biliterate special pay the employee can
only stop providing the service if the Department Head determines the skill is no longer
needed.

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 7 60
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

8

4.7

A.

Employees who have Spanish/English bilingual capacity shall receive three percent
(3%) of their base pay per month for their work in that capacity.

B.

Employees who have Spanish/English biliterate capacity shall receive two percent
(2%) of their base pay per month for their work in that capacity.

C.

Employees who have capacity for American Sign Language (ASL) and have
achieved a passing score on a skills examination administered by the Civil Service
Chief Examiner or designee shall receive three percent (3%) of their base pay per
month for their work in that capacity.

Professional Fees, Licensing & Membership Dues
Members of this group are eligible (to have paid or be reimbursement) not to exceed a
maximum of two hundred dollars ($200) per year for professional fees, licensing and
membership dues relevant to employment with the City of Yakima subject to approval by
management.

4.8

Standby Pay
The determination of the need for and assignment of standby time is the right and
responsibility of Management. Employees will have the opportunity to volunteer or
exchange for standby prior to being made a required assignment. The employee must
notify his/her supervisor in writing by the end of the previous shift of an exchange with
another employee for assigned standby.

4.9

A.

Compensation for assigned standby time is Two Dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per
hour.

B.

Employees, when on assigned standby time, are required to maintain the same
required physical and mental capacity that is required during regular scheduled work
hours and are to be reachable if called.

Special Assignment Pay
A.

When a salaried employee works in a higher classification for a period of one day or
longer, performs substantially all of the duties of such higher classification and is not
actually receiving supervised training for that position, the employee shall be paid at
the pay step in the higher classification which is next higher in the amount above the
employees pay in the lower classification.

B.

When a hourly employee works in a higher classification for a period of one hour or
longer, performs substantially all of the duties of such higher classification and is not
actually receiving supervised training for that position, the employee shall be paid at
the pay step in the higher classification which is next higher in the amount above the
employees pay in the lower classification .

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

9

4.10

C.

When an employee is temporarily assigned by the City Manager to a position in a
higher classification for a period of one day or longer and performs substantially all
of the duties of such higher classification, or when the city manager assigns an
employee additional responsibilities beyond the score pf his/her current
classification, the city manager or designee may authorize and direct that the
employee be paid special assignment pay, in the amount the city manager
determines reasonable, above the normal base pay of that employee during the
period of the employee's continuous service in said higher classification or
performance of additional responsibilities.

D.

Base pay as detailed in the Master Pay ordinance shall be used to determine an
employee's appropriate placement for special pay assignments.

Footwear Reimbursement - Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
Employees may be eligible for footwear reimbursement if their position requires protective
footwear and approval of the Department Director. The Department Director has complete
discretion to approve or deny such reimbursement.

ARTICLE 5 - HEALTH CARE
The Union or the City shall have the right to reopen this Agreement on matters pertaining
employee paid retiree medical by giving written notice in each year prior to July 1 for the
subsequent year.
A.

B.

Availability:
Medical, Dental, and Vision insurance is provided by the City through the Health
Care Trust.
1.

Covered bargaining unit employees, retirees and their dependents shall
participate in the "City of Yakima Employees' Health and Welfare Plans."
Eligibility rules, types and levels of benefits, payment of premiums through a
cafeteria plan, co-payment, co- insurance and deductibility requirements and
all other terms and conditions for the provision of these health benefits shall
be governed by the "City of Yakima Employees' Welfare Benefit Program."

2.

Health coverage is effective the 1st of the month following the date of hire.

Medical, Dental and Vision Premium Contributions:
1.

Medical & Vision
All insurance premium base rates shall be determined annually by the
applicable broker of record and the formulas described below shall apply. The
employee contribution will be in accordance with the "Management Tiered
Rates" as outlines in the Payroll Insurance Rate Schedule.

2.

Dental

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024-December 31, 2027

10

The City shall pay the premium for the employee and dependent family dental
insurance.
3.

Premium Contributions:
The city shall contribute toward the payment of the monthly cost of coverage
of the health care plan in the following manner, respectively:
All employees shall pay the first fifty ($50.00) dollars of the total monthly cost
of coverage under the health care plan for the employee through a monthly
payroll deduction. If an employee only is covered in the health care plan and
the employee has no spouse or dependents in the health care plan, then the
city shall pay the balance of the employee-only unit cost in excess of the first
fifty ($50.00) dollars that the employee pays. For employees with a spouse
and/or dependents in the health care plan, any cost of coverage for the
employee with a spouse and/or dependents in the plan in excess of the first
fifty dollars ($50.00) that the employee pays shall be paid by the employee
through a monthly payroll deduction based on the following percentages on
the remaining balance above the first fifty dollars ($50.00): the employee shall
pay at the rate of twenty-five percent (25%) of the balance of the remaining
total monthly cost of coverage, and the city shall contribute the remaining
seventy-five percent (75%) of the balance of the total monthly cost of
coverage.

C.

Retiree Medical, Dental, and Vision Coverage:
1.

Upon payment of the full premium as required in 5.A herein above, retirees
may elect to remain in the group medical, dental, vision plan until they reach
age 65.

2.

Spouses of retirees may remain in the group medical plan until they reach age
65 or in the case of spouses of deceased retirees, until the spouse reaches
the age of age 65, or remarries , whichever occurs first.

3.

Other dependents of retirees may remain in the group medical plan as long
as they remain eligible under the provisions of the plan or until coverage for
the retiree and spouse, or, the spouse of a deceased retiree terminates, at
which time such dependent insurance coverage ceases regardless of the age
of the dependents. Premiums shall be paid by deduction from retirement
checks paid to retired employees or their beneficiary.

4.

Retirees, or spouses of deceased retirees, shall pay the full premium
(including dependents if enrolled) which shall be the same as the normal
group rate assessed for coverage of active municipal employees and
dependents as applicable. Premiums shall be paid by deduction from
retirement checks paid to retired employees or their beneficiary.

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

11

ARTICLE 6 - HOLIDAVS
6.1

The following shall be recognized and observed as paid holidays:
New Year's Day

January 1

Martin Luther King, Jr. Day

3rd Monday in January

Presidents' Day

3rd Monday in February

Memorial Day

Last Monday in May

Juneteenth

June 19th

Independence Day

July 4

Labor Day

1st Monday in September

Veterans' Day

November 11

Thanksgiving Day

4th Thursday in November

Day after Thanksgiving Day

4th Friday in November

Christmas Day

December 25

A.

Whenever any holiday specified above falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday
shall be scheduled as the holiday. Whenever any holiday specified above falls on
a Sunday, the succeeding Monday shall be scheduled as a holiday. If a service
must be provided for the convenience or necessity of the public on an observed
holiday, the department providing such service may assign an appropriate number
of employees to work and such employees will be granted an equivalent day off
within thirty days of the holiday with such day off to be scheduled for each
employee entitled thereto at a time determined by the department head but giving
the employee the choice of the day preferred if possible.

B.

In the event that a holiday occurs during a period of annual leave of an employee,
such holiday shall not be charged as a day of annual leave.

C.

No employee shall be paid for a holiday unless such employee is in a pay status
both the workday before and the workday after such holiday except for employees
working special schedules wherein holidays are worked as a part of that schedule.

D.

In the event that a holiday falls on an employee's regular day off, the employee
shall have equal time off to be scheduled within ninety days.

ARTICLE 7 - PERSONAL HOLIDAYS

7.1

All eligible employees shall be entitled to a total of three (3) paid personal holidays to be
selected by the employee subject to the following conditions:
A.

The employee has been or is scheduled to be continuously employed for the city
for more than six months;

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

12

B.

The appointing authority has approved the day;

C.

The personal day must be taken during the calendar year or entitlement to the
day will lapse except when an employee has requested a personal holiday and
the request has been denied; and

ARTICLE 8 - VACATION LEAVE
8.1

Accruals:
All full-time employees shall accrue vacation with pay as follows. Accruals shall be
prorated for part-time employees.
Less than 2 years of service - 8.33 hours per month
After 2 full years - 9.66 hours per month
After 6 full years - 12.33 hours per month
After 10 full years - 14.33 hours per month
After 15 full years - 16.33 hours per month
After 20 full years - 17.41 hours per month
After 25 full years - 18.25 hours per month

8.2

Accumulation of Vacation:
An employee within the bargaining unity may accumulate vacation leave time in an
amount equal to the vacation time the employee earns during two (2) years of service
according to the accrual rates above. Accrual banks may exceed the maximum accrual
limit during the calendar year but shall not exceed the maximum accrual limit as of
December 31 st of each calendar year.

8.3

Permissible Use of Vacation Accruals:
A. Vacation leave accumulated at the end of six (6) months of service may be taken in
the seventh month and each month thereafter as accumulated.
B. Vacation leave must be taken at such time as employee can be spared and must be
requested and approved in advance utilizing the City's time and attendance system.
An employee may be allowed to take leave when desired if it is possible to schedule
at that time.

8.4

Vacation Accrual Payout upon Separation:
A. A permanent employee, when leaving the service of the City in good standing and
who has given at least two (2) weeks' notice of their intent to leave shall be
compensated for vacation leave earned and accumulated to the date of separation.
B. No compensation for vacation leave shall be payable to any employee who
terminates employment before completing six months of service.
C. Any eligible employee who is discharged or resigns as a result of disciplinary action
shall be entitled to be compensated for only the vacation leave which was earned in

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

13

preceding calendar years and not used at time of separation. This provision shall
also apply to employees who quit without giving a minimum of two (2) weeks written
notice.
D. Terminal leave shall be computed by multiplying the hourly rate in effect at the time
of termination by the number of hours accumulated.

8.5

Vacation Cash-Out
Employees have the option to sell back to the City portion of their vacation leave accrued
within the preceding twelve (12) month period. No more than one request may be made
per calendar year in accordance with the City of Yakima Municipal Code provision in
section 2.40.120.
A. Employees with an accrued vacation balance of less than three hundred (300) hours
have the option to sell back to the City up to one-third (1/3) of their vacation leave
accrued within the preceding twelve (12) month period.
B. Employees with an accrued vacation balance of three hundred (300) hours or more
have the option to sell back to the City up to one-half (1/2) of their vacation leave
accrued within the preceding twelve (12) month period.

ARTICLE 9 - SICK LEAVE
9.1

Accruals:
A. All full-time employees shall accrue eight (8) hours of sick leave per month. Accruals
shall be prorated for part-time employees.
B. Upon initial employment, employees shall accrue sick leave at the rate of sixteen (16)
hours of leave per month for each of the first six (6) full calendar months of the
employee's service with the City, and no sick leave shall accrue for any such employee
for the seventh through the twelfth full calendar months of service. Thereafter,
commencing with the thirteenth full calendar month of service, each employee shall
accrue sick leave at the rate of eight (8) hours for each full calendar month of service.
C. Unused sick leave may be accumulated for an unlimited maximum period.

9.2

Permissible Use of Sick Leave
Sick leave may be used in accordance with ADM 1-1250; the Family and Medical
Leave Act of 1993; ADM 1-900 and ADM 4-400.

9.3

Requirements for Paid Sick Leave
A.

Employee must request time off in the City's time and attendance program and report
to the representative designated by his or her Department Head the reason for the

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

14

absence as far in advance of the starting of their scheduled work day as possible but
in no event shall this report be made later than the first day of absence.
B.

9.4

9.5

Employees must keep their department head informed if the absence is longer than
three working days.

Enforcement of Sick Leave Provisions
A.

Any failure to comply with the Paid Sick Leave provisions shall be grounds for denial
of sick leave with pay for the period of absence.

B.

Misrepresentations of any material facts in connection with paid sick leave shall
constitute grounds for discipline up to and including termination.

Sick Leave Exchange
Employees may exchange accrued sick leave for pay or additional time as appropriate, in
accordance with the options provided the employee, subject to the following provisions:
A. Employees who have accrued up to 719 hours of sick leave may exchange sick leave
as follows:

B.

1.

Upon retirement or death, the employee's accrued sick leave up to and including
719 hours will be exchanged for pay at the rate of 50% of the employee's current
base pay up to a maximum of $38,500 and shall be deposited into the employee's
VEBA account.

2.

Upon termination under honorable conditions, as distinct from retirement or death,
the employee's accrued sick leave up to and including 719 hours or less will be
exchanged for pay at the rate of 25% of the employee's current base pay.
Honorable termination includes layoff for budget reasons, as well as resignation
with at least fourteen (14) calendar days' notice. The maximum payment shall be
$18,750.
Employees who have accrued 720 or more hours of sick leave may exchange sick
leave for additional vacation days or for pay subject to the following provisions:

1. Upon retirement or death, the employee's accrued sick leave up through a
maximum of 1000 hours will be exchanged for pay at the rate of 100% of the
employee's current base pay to a maximum of $38,500 which shall be deposited
into the employee's VEBA account.
2. Upon termination under honorable conditions, as distinct from death or retirement,
the employee's accrued sick leave up to a maximum of 1000 hours will be
exchanged for pay at the rate of 50% of the employee's current base pay.
Honorable termination includes layoff for budget reasons , as well as resignation

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 202 7

15

with at least fourteen (14) calendar days' notice. The maximum payment shall be
$18,750.
3. Employees who have accrued 720 or more hours of sick leave may exchange such
sick leave for bonus (additional) leave days, at the rate of 24 hours of sick leave
for each additional 8 hours of leave, not to exceed a total of 40 added leave hours
annually, utilization of which would be subject to the scheduling and approval by
the Department Head.
C.

Any permanent employee may exchange accrued sick leave as provided in Article 9
- Sick Leave, at the option of the employee, subject to the following conditions and
provisions:
1. A request for such an exchange shall be made to the Finance Director, or his/her
designee. All requests shall be in writing and shall be signed by the employee
making the request.
2.

The deadline for submitting requests is the 25th of each month with exchanged
leave to be available the following month of the date the request is received by the
office of the Finance Director, or his/her designee. Exceptions to the above will be
made for termination, layoff or disability retirement.

3. No request will be granted for less than eight (8) hours pay or a minimum of three
(3) days leave.
4. No exchange will be granted to an employee who has been terminated for cause,
as defined by civil service.
9.6

Bereavement Leave
Employees shall be granted up to three (3) days per incident of Bereavement Leave in the
event of a death in the immediate family of the employee. Employees shall discuss the
duration of the leave with his/her supervisor or designee at the onset of the leave.
A.

The term "immediate family" means:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

B.

Spouse, children, children of spouse, spouse of children;
Step or foster family relationship;
Mother, father, brother, sister of employee or spouse;
Grandparent or grandchild of employee or spouse;
Aunt or uncle of employee or spouse

No leave of absence in excess of three days for each family death shall be taken by
an employee unless additional leave is recommended by the employee's supervisor
and approved by the appointing authority. Approved leave in excess of three days for
the death of a family member shall be debited against the employee's accrued sick
leave, annual leave, compensatory time, paid time off and/or other accrued leave.

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

16

ARTICLE 10-TEAMSTERS LEGAL SERVICES TRUST
Effective March 1, 2011, the Employer shall make contributions up to $25.95 per month, per
bargaining unit member, to implement the Western Conference of Teamster Legal Services Trust
to SF Administrators, Inc. During the terms of this agreement future increases that exceed $25.95
per month will be paid 50% by the employer and 50% from employee wage deductions. The Union
agrees to defend and hold the Employer harmless from and against any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, orders or judgments arising from the administration and effect of this participation. The
Employer's obligation under this Agreement is limited to the payment of normal contributions
based on hours worked by unit employees.

ARTICLE 11 -GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
11.1

Grievance Definition:
A grievance is an alleged violation of this Collective Bargaining Agreement.

11.2

Filing a Grievance:
To be reviewable under this procedure, a grievance must be filed in writing within thirty
(30) calendar days after the employee knew or should have known of the action or decision
giving rise to the grievance. This thirty (30) calendar day period must be used by the
employee to attempt to informally resolve the dispute.

11.3

Computation of Time:
The time limits in this Article must be strictly adhered to unless mutually modified in writing.
Days are calendar days, and will be counted by excluding the first day and including the
last day of timelines. Transmittal of grievances, appeals and responses will be in writing.
Service on the parties is complete when delivered in person; or upon receipt by electronic
mail or by the postmarked date if sent by certified mail.

11.4

Timeliness:
Failure by the Union to comply with the timelines will result in the automatic withdrawal of
the grievance. Failure by the employer to comply with the timelines will entitle the Union
to move the grievance to the next step of the process.

11.5

Contents:
A grievance must include the following:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

A statement of the pertinent facts surrounding the grievance;
The date upon which the incident occurred;
The specific Article and section of the Agreement allegedly violated and a specific
description of how each cited alleged violation occurred;
The steps taken to informally resolve the grievance, the individuals involved in the
attempted resolution, and the results of such discussion;
The requested remedy; and
Signature of the affected employee and Union Representative.

The employer will not be required to process a grievance unless all the information listed
above is provided. Grievances that do not meet the above conditions or are otherwise

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

17

unclear may be returned by the Employer and the Union will have seven (7) calendar days
to provide the clarifying information and re-submit the grievance.
11.6

Modifications:
Alleged violations and/or the requested remedy may be modified only by written mutual
agreement of the parties.

11. 7

Resolution:
If the Employer provides the requested remedy or a mutually agreed-upon alternative, the
grievance will be considered "fully and finally" resolved and will not be moved to the next
step.

11.8

Withdrawal:
A grievance may be withdrawn at any time.

11.9

Processing the Grievance:
Step I - If the issue is not resolved informally, the Union may present the grievance, in
writing, to employee's supervisor with a copy to Human Resources within the thirty (30)
calendar day period described above. The responsible supervisor will respond in writing
to the Union within thirty (30) calendar days.
Step II - If the grievance is not resolved at Step 1, the Union may move it to the next step
by filing it with the Department Head or designee, with a copy to Human Resources, within
thirty (30) calendar days of the Union's receipt of the Step 1 decision. The Department
Head will respond in writing to the Union within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of step
II grievance.
Step Ill - If the grievance is not resolved at Step 2, the Union may move it to the next step
by filing it with the City Manager or designee, with a copy to Human Resources, within
thirty (30) calendar days of the Union's receipt of the Step 2 decision. The City Manager
will respond in writing to the union within thirty (30) calendar days of the receipt of the
appeal.
Step IV - If the dispute is not resolved under one of the above steps, then the matter may,
within thirty (30) calendar days, be referred by either party to expedited mediationarbitration. There shall be no withholding by either side of known facts or evidence, relating
to a grievance prior to arbitration.
Upon demand for arbitration the parties may mutually agree to an Arbitrator or if
agreement cannot be reached, both parties shall immediately petition the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service for the names of seven (7) arbitrators and within seven
(7) calendar days from receipt of the list, the two (2) parties shall select one (1) name from
it by alternatively crossing off a name until one (1) remains, with the grieving party striking
first. This process for selecting an arbitrator need not be followed if both parties agree on
any person as an impartial arbitrator.
The arbiter shall not have power to add to, subtract from, or modify the provisions of this
Agreement in arriving at a decision of the issue presented; and shall confine his/her
decision solely to the interpretation, application or enforcement of this Agreement. The
arbiter shall confine himself/herself to the precise issue submitted for arbitration, and shall

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

18

have no authority to determine any other issues not so submitted to him/her. The decision
of the arbiter shall be final and binding upon the aggrieved employee, Union and employer.
The arbitrator's fees and expenses, the cost of any hearing room, shall be borne equally
by the employer and the Union. All other costs and expenses shall be borne by the party
incurring them.

ARTICLE 12 - WORK WEEK, AND HOURS OF WORK
The parties recognize that the work performed by the members of this bargaining unit is
supervisory in nature. Employees covered by this agreement are accountable for their work
product, meeting the objectives of the organization, and are subject to the Employer's policies,
including ADM 1-700 and executed employee waivers, applicable to all overtime exempt
employees.
The workweek may consist of:
• five (5) consecutive eight (8) hour days with two consecutive days off (5/40 FLSA
schedule);
• four (4) consecutive ten (10) hour days with three (3) consecutive days off (4/10 FLSA
schedule;
• five (5) consecutive nine (9) hour days with two (2) consecutive days off, alternating with
three (3) consecutive nine (9) hour days and one (1) eight (8) hour day followed by three
(3) consecutive days off (9/80 FLSA schedule).
Employees shall work such days and hours as required to advance the mission of the City as
determined by the employer. All employees shall be scheduled to work on a regular work shift,
and each work shift shall have a regular starting and ending time.

ARTICLE 13 - UNION LEAVE
13.1

Two (2) bargaining unit member(s) shall be granted leave from duty without any loss of
pay during the pre-impasse and post-impasse period as provided in RCW 41.56, for all
meetings between the City and the Union for the purpose of negotiating the terms of a
contract and/or attendance at mediation, when such meetings take place at a time during
which any such members are scheduled to be on duty.

13.2

Two (2) bargaining unit member(s) may be granted release time during normal working
hours to attend meetings for collective bargaining, labor-management, grievances, predisciplinary/disciplinary, investigatory interviews and other meeting related to contract
administration.

13.2.1

The Union shall provide the City with a list of Union Stewards upon request. This
list of Stewards shall not exceed five (5) members of the bargaining unit. The
members listed as Stewards will be granted up to two (2) hours of release time to
attend a quarterly meeting between the Stewards and a representative of the
Union. The purpose of these meetings shall be to conduct Union business and
shall be scheduled at least five (5) working days in advance, is dependent on
adequate staffing and must have supervisor approval.

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2027

19

13.3

Employees, not to exceed one ( 1) in number at any one time, shall be granted leave from
duty with pay for Teamster affiliated Union business, such as attending labor conventions
and educational conferences regarding collective bargaining, provided that notice of such
conventions or conferences shall be given at least two (2) weeks prior thereto to
Department Head, and provided further that the total leave for the entire bargaining unit
for the purposes set forth in this section shall not exceed six (6) days in any fiscal year.

ARTICLE 14 -RETIREMENT CONTRIBUTION
The Employer shall pay into the Western conference of Teamsters Pension Trust on account of
each member of the bargaining unit for each hour for which compensation was paid up to a
maximum of 2080 hours per calendar year. The hourly contribution rate shall be $1.00 per hour,
which is diverted from wages by each bargaining unit member.
Each year the employees will have the option by majority vote to change pension contribution
rate.

ARTICLE 15 - SAVINGS CLAUSE
It is understood and agreed that if any court or board of competent jurisdiction finds any Article,
Section or portion of this Agreement to be unlawful or invalid, the remainder of the Agreement will
remain in full force and effect. If such a finding is made, the parties agree to make themselves
available to negotiate a substitute for the invalid Article, Section or portion.
ARTICLE 16-TERM OF AGREEMENT
Except as provided herein, this Agreement shall be in full force and effect commencing January
1, 2024 upon ratification and execution of both the Union and the Employer and continue through
December 31, 2027.

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
,.

By ~ ~. S~
Secretary Treasurer

3.(?,.2,.~

0 'G'I
u

Yakima Supervisors and Administrative Unit
Teamsters Local 760
January 1, 2024-December 31, 2027

20

CTTY CONTRACT NJ\

,W!5--Q5°~

--. :::x>
~i .-:S--*- --

R£50LUTION NO· .c!f__
