COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
between
MIAMI UNIVERSITY

and
FACULTY ALLIANCE OF MIAMI, AAUP-AFT
LIBRARIAN BARGAINING UNIT

Effective through June 30, 2026

TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS,PAGE

2

Article 1: Purpose,

Pag4e

Article 2: Recognition, Page

5

Article 3: Dues Deduction, Page

6

Article 4: Labor-Management Meetings,

Page7

Article 5: Health, Safety, And Security, Page

8

Article 6: Management Rights, Page

9

Article

7:

Article
Article
Article

8:
9:
10:

Article
Article

Association

Article
Article

Of

Promotion
Probationary

15:

Article
Article
Article
Article
Article

Librarian

Scope

13:
14:

Article

Page

Separability,
Page
Non-Discrimination
And
Anti-Harassment,
Appointment
Notices,
Page

11:
12:

Rights,

Ranks,

Librarian

&
Period,

16:

Page
Contract,

Evaluations,

Compensation,

11
12
13

Page

14

Duties
And
Working
16

Continuing
Page

Annual

10

Conditions,

Page

Page

Page

17
23
25

Page

26

17:
Benefits,
Page
28
18:
Sick
Leave,
Page
31
19:
Vacation,
Page
32
20:
Professional
Improvement
Leaves,
Page
33

Article
21:
Leaves
And
Other
35

Time

Off

Work,

Page

Article

22:

Professional

Reimbursement

for

Travel,

Page

37

Article

23:

Individual

Page

38

Article
Article

24:
25:

Development

and

And
Discipline
Grievance

Departmental

Purchasing

And
And

Discharge,
Arbitration,

Cards,

Page
Page

39
42

Article

26:

Credit-Bearing

Courses,

Page

46

Article

27:

Personnel

Committee,

Page

47

Article 28: Committee Procedures, Page

49
2

Article 29: Intellectual Property And Copyright,Page

51

Article 30: Union Access To Information And Facilities, Page

52

Article 31: No Strike / No Lockout, Page

54

Article 32: Duration, Page

55

Criteria Definitions and Examples

Link

Sample Progression Timeline for Continuing Contract and/or Promotion

Link

Article 1: Purpose

The purpose of this Agreementis to set forth the terms and conditions of employment of members
of the bargaining unit, as well as to establish a dispute resolution procedure.

Article 2: Recognition

Miami University (the “University”) recognizes the Faculty Alliance of Miami, AAUP-AFT(the
“Union”), pursuant to the Ohio State EmploymentRelations Board (“SERB”) Order of
Certification, dated July 6, 2023, in Case No. 2023-REP-03-0024, as the exclusive representative
of the employees in the bargaining unit described as follows, for the purposesof collective
bargaining with respect to wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment pursuant
to Section 4117.08 of the Ohio Revised Code:
Included: All full-time Librarians at all campuses of Miami University.
Excluded: All faculty; all managerial employees including the president, vice presidents,
provost, associate and assistant provosts, deans, associate and assistant deans, and

departmentchairs; all supervisory employees; andall other employees of Miami

University.

Article 3: Dues Deduction

. The University will deduct regular union dues, as well as any applicable union fees, fines,
and assessments, established by the Union under the terms of the FAM, AAUP-AFT
Constitution, for any bargaining unit member uponreceipt by the appropriate personnel
office of a written dues authorization signed by the bargaining unit member. The
University will begin deductions as soon as reasonably practicable but no later than the
secondpayperiod after receipt of a bargaining unit member’s signed authorization card.
.

Deductions for each month shall be transmitted to the Union nolater than the fifteenth
(15th) of the following month, together with an alphabetized electronic list of all duespaying Librarian Bargaining Unit employees and the amount deducted from each. Upon
receipt, the Union shall assumefull responsibility for the disposition of all funds

deducted. The University shall assess no charge upon the Union for the administering of
these deductions.

. The bargaining unit member’s dues deduction authorization shall remain in effect until
expressly revoked in writing by the bargaining unit memberin accordance with the terms
of the authorization. When the Union determines that a bargaining unit member’s payroll

deduction should cease, the Union will be responsible for notifying the University in
writing. The University will rely on the information provided by the Union to cancel or

changeauthorizations due to revocation. The University’s obligation to make deductions
will terminate automatically upon receipt of revocation of authorization. The University’s
obligation to make deductions will terminate automatically upon termination of
employmentor upontransferto a job classification outside of the Librarian bargaining
unit. Updates to deductions shall be put into effect by the University no later than the
second payperiod after receipt from the Union of changesto dues authorizations, fees,
fines, and/or assessments. The Unionshall be notified in writing of any updates to
deductions, including any automatic termination of deductions.
.

Questions regarding dues, fees, or other deduction shall be resolved betweenthe affected
bargaining unit memberand the Union. Where appropriate, a refund shall be made

directly to the affected bargaining unit member by the Union.
.

The Union agreesthat it will indemnify and hold the University and any ofits agents

harmless from any action, claim, demand,suit, and other form ofliability that may arise
as a result of the deductions made underanyprovisions of this Article.

Article 4: Labor-Management Meetings

.

In the interest of promoting positive employee/managementrelations, communication,
and problem resolution, the University and Union agree to hold regularly scheduled
meetings between bargaining unit members, their representatives, and managementat
mutually agreed-upon times.

.

The numberof representatives at such meetings shall not exceed four (4) per party,
except by mutual agreementof the parties.

.

Duringthe first twelve (12) months following ratification of this Agreement, the parties
agree to meetat least every ninety (90) days. Thereafter, Labor-Managementmeetings
shall occur once duringthe fall, spring, and summerterms. Additional meetings may

occur and be scheduled by mutual agreement. Meetings may be cancelled by mutual
agreement.

.

The parties may exchange agendasat least two (2) business daysprior to a regularly
scheduled meeting.

Article 5: Health, Safety, And Security

.

The Union andall bargaining unit members will comply with all University policies,

rules and regulations relating to workplace safety. The University will continue to
provide a safe working environmentin accordance with its policies and applicable law.

.

Personal protective equipment (PPE)shall be provided by the University to a bargaining
unit memberconsistent with their job duties, as determined by the Environmental Health
and Safety Office. Any bargaining unit member may request additional PPE from this
office, if necessary, to maintain a healthy, safe, and secure working environment,as

determined by the University.
.

Bargaining unit members will immediately report in writing to Campus Security, or
Environmental Health and Safety, or Library Administration, as appropriate, all
workplace-related matters regarding safety and/or hazardous conditions of which they are
aware. The University will investigate such reports as it determines is necessary to
maintain safe working conditions.

.

The University will provide timely, appropriate training to bargaining unit members who
are required to perform duties that involve potential hazards to safety and health, as
determined by the University. The parties recognize that trainings may be required for

performanceof certain job duties. As such, bargaining unit members shall completeall
assigned safety trainings.
.

The University agrees to work to ensure that lactation roomsare accessible, private, and
clean. In the eventthat a bargaining unit memberneeds access to a secure room for the
purpose of expressing milk after the birth of a child, they should inform the Director of
Employee Relations in the Office of Human Resources. The University will work with
the bargaining unit memberto designate a room for this purpose within the building

where the bargaining unit memberis located, or nearby,if there is no designated space
within the bargaining unit member’s building.
.

The University agrees to provide at least one (1) gender-inclusive restroom for every two

(2) floors in all campus buildings, when and wherepracticable, as determined by the
University. The University shall make the locations of gender-inclusive restrooms known

to the campus community.

Article 6: Management Rights

1.

Except as expressly limited by the terms of this Agreement, in accordance with Ohio
Revised Code Section 4117.08, the University shall reserve, retain, and possess, solely
and exclusively, the right and responsibility to:
a.

Determine matters of inherent managerial policy which include, but are not
limited to areas of discretion or policy such as the functions and programsof the
public employer, standards ofservices, its overall budget, utilization of

technology, and organizational structure;
b.

Direct, supervise, evaluate, or hire employees;

c.

Maintain and improvethe efficiency and effectiveness of University operations;

d.

Determine the overall methods, process, means, or personnel by which University
operationsare to be conducted;

e.

Suspend, discipline, demote, or discharge for just cause,or lay off, transfer,
assign, schedule, promote, or retain employees;

2.

f.

Determine the adequacy of the work force;

g.

Determinethe overall mission of the University;

h.

Effectively manage the work force;

i.

Take actions to carry out the mission of the University.

Managementrights are limited only as expressly limited by the languageof this
Agreement, notwithstanding (or without regard to) any practices or customs that may

now orin the future exist.
3.

The Union agreesthat all of the functions, rights, powers, responsibilities, and authority
of the University in regard to the operation of its work and business andthe direction of
its work force which the University has not specifically abridged, deleted, granted or
modified by the express and specific written provisions of this Agreementare, and shall
remain, exclusively those of the University.

4.

The parties recognize that none of the managementrights enumeratedin this Article, nor
any matters of inherent managerial policy, shall be subjects of bargaining or grievances,
unless the exercise of such rights violates an express written provision of this Agreement.

5.

Nothing in this Agreement shall be deemed as a waiver of the Union’s right to demand
and engagein bargaining in accordance with applicable law unless expressly stated in
this Agreementor by the Union,in writing.

6.

Nothingin this Article is meantto restrict the role or authority of established institutions
of shared governanceat the University, including the University Senate and Faculty
Assembly, and campus, school and department shared governance bodies, from
exercising their rights to create and/or recommendpolicies and practices regarding the
operation of the University.

Article 7: Association Rights
1.

Bargaining unitlibrarians selected as Union representatives for the purpose of processing

grievancesas defined in Article 25: Grievance and Arbitration shall be known as
“Delegates.” Delegates shall be permitted to attend to the processing of grievances or
attend to matters having a bearing on discipline, during working hours without loss of

pay, provided that a Delegate who desires to process grievances or conduct other
authorized Union activity on University time shall contact their immediate supervisor
with reasonable advance notice for the purpose of making arrangements for the conduct
of the Union activity. Upon obtaining prior approval from the immediate supervisor, the
Delegate shall be permitted to attend meetings related to grievances during working hours
withoutloss of pay. This right shall not be abused, and if abused, shall be withdrawn
from the individual abusing the privilege, at the University’s discretion.

.

Annually by July 1, the Union will provide the University with a list of Delegates. The
Unionshall notify the University of any changesto this list within five (5) business days

after such change.
.

Bargaining unit librarians maylist bargaining unit-related activities as part of their
overall service record in annualreports.

10

Article 8: Separability

.

Where this Agreement makesno specification about a matter, the University, its
employees, and the Unionshall be subject to applicable state, federal, and local laws
which pertain to wages, hours, and terms and conditions of employment and University
policies and regulations promulgated or amendedat any time in accordance with those

laws.

.

Should any specific provision of this Agreement be declared invalid by a court of
competentjurisdiction, administrative agency, or other governmental body having
jurisdiction, including the State Employment Relations Board,all other provisions ofthe
Agreementshall remain in full force and effect.

.

In the event legislation or regulation is enacted and final which makesillegal, unlawful,
or null and void any provision of this Agreement, or if any portion of this Agreementis
invalidated as provided in this Article, the applicable law or regulation shall be
controlling.

.

Upon written request by either party, the University and the Union shall meet to negotiate
lawful replacement language for any invalidated provision.

11

Article 9: Non-Discrimination And Anti-Harassment

1.

Both parties boundby this contract are fully committed to equal opportunity, diversity,
and prohibiting discrimination and harassment. Miami University, the Union, and
bargaining unit members will not harass or discriminate on the basis ofage, color,

disability, gender identity or expression, genetic information, military status, national
origin (ancestry), pregnancy,race, religion, sex/gender, status as a parent or foster parent,
sexual orientation, protected veteran status, membership or non-membership in the
Union,or activity on behalf of or in opposition to, the Union, or any other protected
characteristic under applicable federal, state, local law, or University policy. This
prohibition extends to harassmentor discrimination based on the protected statuses listed

above, including the creation of a hostile work environment, in accordance with
University Policy.
The University affirms and the Union acknowledges the University’s obligations as a
federal contractor with regard to affirmative action.
The University will offer training to all bargaining unit members regarding unlawful

discrimination and harassment. Bargaining unit membersshall complete any required
training regarding unlawful discrimination, harassment,retaliation, or diversity, equity,
and inclusion. Bargaining unit members will ordinarily be required to complete training
regarding unlawful discrimination no more frequently than every two (2) years.
The University will provide necessary reasonable accommodation, if it can do so without
undue hardship onthe operation of the University, to disabled bargaining unit members
whorequest such accommodation, in accordance with University Policy and applicable
law.

12

Article 10: Appointment Notices

1.

All bargaining unit members shall receive written notice ofinitial appointment as
promptly as possible but, absent emergency circumstances, no later than thirty (30) days
before the start date of the appointment. The University shall make a goodfaith effort to

provide reappointmentletters as early as possible, but no later than thirty (30) days after
the start date of the reappointment.

2.

The Notice of Appointmentshall include the following:
a.

Start date of appointment;

b.

Title and rank;

c.

Duration of appointmentand, if applicable, whetherit is contingent on external
funding;

d.

Continuing contract status, including an expected timeline for promotion, as
approved by the Provost;
Campus(Primary Worksite) and Department(s) within the library;

e.

f.

Base compensation;

g.

A statement that this position is one covered by FAM, AAUP-AFTand covered

h.

A link with access to the Collective Bargaining Agreementrelevant to Librarians’

i.

by this Agreement;

employment with the University and the University policy library;
Any required employmenttrainings.

3. Campus (Primary Worksite) and Department-specific information, if any, shall be
provided to bargaining unit members by the Department Head and/or appropriate Dean.
This information will be provided within thirty (30) days after the start of the bargaining

unit member’s initial appointment.
4. Appointments are subject to and contingent upon internal University approvals and any
additional requirements for employmentby the University.

13

Article 11: Librarian Ranks

1.

Ranks of Librarians.

Librarians must hold a master's degree in library and/or information science(e.g. an

M.L.S./M.L.LS.), from an accredited college or university, or the equivalent of such a master’s

degree from an accredited college or university. All appointments are subject to approval by the
Board of Trustees.

Full-time, continuing contract-eligible librarians are appointed or promoted to the following
ranks:
e

Assistant Librarian

e

Associate Librarian

e

Principal Librarian

Librarians may be appointed into the above-namedranks as a Visiting Librarian, but any such
Librarian is an annual appointmentandis not eligible for promotion or continuing contract under
Article 13: Promotion & Continuing Contract. An individual formerly employed at Miami in a
continuing contract-eligible position but not granted continuing contractis ineligible for
employmentas a Visiting Librarian.
2.

Initial Appointment.

To secure appointmentto a rank, Librarians must meet the criteria established for that rank.
Initial appointments for the Oxford campusare determinedat the time of hire by the Dean and
University Librarian and approvedby the Provost.

For regional campus appointments, initial appointments are determinedat the time of hire by the
Dean of the Regional Campuses, or designee, and approved by the Provost.
The appropriate Dean or designee may consult with the Personnel Committee in determining a

librarian’s initial rank at appointment, following the established criteria for each rank as well as
the individual’s status and achievementsprior to appointment at Miami University.
3.

Assistant Librarian.

Appointmentto the rank of Assistant Librarian demandsthat the candidate meet the

requirements of a professionallibrarian. This rank designatesthe first level of librarianship for
those who do not meetthe criteria for Associate Librarian upon initial hire.
4.

Associate Librarian.

Appointment or promotion to the rank of Associate Librarian requires a documented record of
their job assignment demonstrating the following:

14

e

First Criterion: demonstrated very strong performancein Primary Professional
Responsibilities (PPR), as further explained in this agreement;

e

e

Second Criterion: very strong performancein either:

o

Service to Miami University Libraries, the University, Profession of Academic
Librarianship, or the Community (“Service”), as determined in accordance with
this agreement, or

o

Scholarship or Creative Achievement(“Scholarship”), as determined in
accordance with this agreement; and

Third Criterion: strong performancein either Service or Scholarship, whichever wasnot

selected as the secondcriteria.
5.

Principal Librarian.

Appointmentor promotion to the rank of Principal Librarian requires a documented record of
their job assignment demonstrating the following:
e

First Criterion: demonstrated ongoing excellence in PPR,as further explained in this
agreement;

e

e

Second Criterion: demonstrated excellence in either:
o

Service, as determined in accordance with this agreement, or

o

Scholarship, as determined in accordance with this agreement; and

Third Criterion: very strong performancein either Service or Scholarship, whichever was

not selected as the secondcriteria.
A pattern of significant contributions in these areas will be judged on how consistent, recent, and
substantial the contributions and accomplishments have been.
6.

Visiting Librarians.

Visiting Appointmentsshall be full-time one-year appointments, unless otherwise indicated in
the Visiting Librarian’s appointmentnotice, whoare eligible for renewal at the sole discretion of
management. Visiting Librarians shall be notified of any subsequent appointment(s) as early as
practicable.
Visiting Librarians may engagein service and/or scholarship with advance approval of
management. Visiting Librarians are subject to an annual review, in accordance with Article 15:
Annual Evaluations, but will only be evaluated based ontheir job assignment.

Visiting Librarians may apply for continuing contract-eligible positions, if and when available.
Should a Visiting Librarian be selected as the successful candidate, they may be credited with

experience in accordance with Article 14: Probationary Period. Annual reviews from credited
years will be provided to the appropriate evaluative bodies, as part of the promotion and
continuing contract process.

15

Article 12: Scope Of Librarian Duties And Working Conditions
1.

The policy on job responsibilities for unclassified administrative staff governs the scope

of work and job expectations for bargaining unit memberlibrarians. Bargaining unit
membersare expected to give full-time service to the University. In their roles,

bargaining unit membersare expected to perform their job duties as indicated by their job
assignment. For Assistant, Associate, and Principal Librarians, the job assignment
includes performance of Primary Professional Responsibilities (PPR), Scholarship, and
Service. Visiting Librarians are generally not expected to perform Scholarship or Service
on behalf of the University.
The parties understandthat librarian bargaining unit employees may not necessarily
participate in all service and scholarship activities identified in this Article during each
academic term or year.
The PPR for each bargaining unit Librarian shall be determined by managementat the

time of hire, and assignment of the PPR shall be at the discretion of the Dean and
University Librarian or designee. The PPR documentshall include a breakdown of
expected approximate percentages of PPR time spent on each PPR area. The bargaining
unit member and their manager may review and, as necessary and appropriate in the
discretion of management, revise the bargaining unit member’s PPR onceper year to
accurately describe the job duties the bargaining unit memberis expected to perform.
Such revisions require approval of the appropriate Dean or designee.
Librarians enjoy flexible work arrangements, including but not limited to possible
flextime and compressed workweek arrangements, and may work remotely in accordance
with the University’s Flexible Work Arrangements Policy. With approval of the

Librarian’s immediate supervisor, the schedule may vary from week to weekto best
fulfill the librarian’s responsibilities.
The typical work week expectation for librarian unit employees shall be 40 hours per
week, however needs of the University Libraries may require Librarians to work
additional hours. This includes time spentonall aspects of their job assignment,
including PPRs,service, and scholarship. The amountof time spent on each of these
categories may vary from week to weekto best fulfill the librarian's responsibilities.
It is also recognized that hours beyondthe typical workweek are unavoidable. In these
situations, librarians and their supervisor may find a mutually-agreeable schedule for

whenthe unit member may take comparable timeoff at a later date or another remedy.

16

Articl•e 13: Promotion & Continuing Contract

1.

Criteria for Promotion and Continuing Contract.

To achieve continuing contract and/or promotion, Librarians mustsatisfactorily perform their job
duties, including performance of Primary Professional Responsibilities (PPR), Service, and
Scholarly/Creative Work. Librarians mustselect either Service or Scholarly/Creative Work as
their intended area of Very Strong or Excellent performance, with the other astheir intended area
of Strong or Very Strong Performance as appropriate for their rank as described in Article 11:
Librarian Ranks. Asa librarian develops throughouttheir career, they may changetheir area of
intended Very Strong or Excellent performanceat any pointprior to submitting their dossier with
no penalty. No probationary librarian shall be granted promotion and continuing contract without
Very Strong/Excellent performancein their PPR, regardless of their performancein Service or
Scholarly/Creative Work.
2.

Criterion 1: Performance of Primary Professional Responsibilities (PPR).

Quality of performance in the area of the librarian’s responsibility is the most important and
essential criterion for promotion in rank and continuing contract. Performanceis defined as the
fulfillment and growth ofthe librarian’s PPR. Theability to carry out competently and
independently the full range of library functions pertaining to the librarian’s PPR must be
demonstrated and confirmed through assessment by the Librarian’s supervisor and Personnel
Committee. In addition, certain factors are commonto the evaluation of the job performance of
every librarian regardless of rank. Factors that may be considered in evaluating the performance

of PPR include, but are not limited to, the following:
e

Consistency of performance; planning, organization and implementation, and impact of
PPR duties;

e

Ability to innovate (particularly, development of high quality innovative services);

initiative;

e

Leadership in addressing current issues and future trends in areas of expertise; effective
organizational skills; creative approaches to problem solving; sound judgment and quality
of decision making;

e

Dependability, accuracy, and the ability to relate job functions to the more general goals
of the Libraries and the University; and

e

Effective communication skills.

Evidence of growth beyond the minimum requirements of the primary assignment may be
indicated by, butis not limited to, the following:
e

Evidence of taking on new or more complex responsibilities, e.g., assuming a
responsibility at the request of one’s supervisoror offering to take on a responsibility

which wouldbenefit the departmentandlibrary.
e

Meaningful participation in departmentalor library-wide goalsetting, e.g. offering
constructive suggestions and analysis in meetings; showing willingnessto assist in
implementation of decisions; active participation in library committees, teams, or other
groups; andlibrary initiatives.

17

e

Initiating new projects, procedures, or services which contribute to departmentalor

e

Attainmentof a specific job-related goal suchas:

library goals.
o

Continuing education activities, e.g., participation in a non-degree program
through formal courses;

a
o Pursuit or
completion of an advanced degreeor certificate;
o

3.

Acquisition of job-related skills, e.g., foreign language, statistical analysis,
computer programming, or scripting.

Criteria 2 and 3: Service and Scholarly/Creative Work

Evaluations of Service and Scholarly/Creative Workat all levels are based uponcriteria
established in collaboration with management andthe bargaining unit, subject to written
approval of the Dean and University Librarian (i.e., Criteria Definitions and Examples, and
Sample Progression Timeline, hereafter referred to as the Criteria Tables; see staff portal link. A
joint committee of management and no morethan three (3) bargaining unit members whowill

be selected by the Union shall be convened by the Dean and University Librarian or designee to
review the Criteria Tables and propose any necessary revisions once every three years, unless
otherwise agreed by management and the Union.
Whenit has completedits review, the joint committee shall provide any proposed changesto the
Dean and University Librarian, and to the Union. Anyrevisions as a result of the joint
committee’s review shall be subject to the written approval of the Dean and University Librarian
prior to any changes going into effect. Any issues identified will be discussed in LaborManagement meetings. Managementshall notify bargaining unit members and FAM of any
revisions to the Criteria Tables. Whena set of criteria changes for a bargaining unit member, the

bargaining unit membershall be given the choice whether they want to be evaluated under the
then-current Criteria Tables or under the revised Criteria Tables. The bargaining unit librarian
shall be responsible for informing Management and the Personnel Committee of which criteria
they have chosen for their evaluation through their annualreport and/or dossier. The Criteria

Tables andall versionsstill in use will be posted in the Library staff portal.
1.

Service: Fulfillment of this criterion is demonstrated by the quality and extent of

contributions by making professional knowledgeand skills available through
service on committees, task forces, and other professional and governance

activities in accordance with the Criteria Tables.
2.

Scholarly/Creative Activities: Scholarship is represented by achievements that

expand the universe of knowledge within the academic library profession and
may undergoa processof selection or evaluation by an external peer group, in
accordance with the Criteria Tables.
4,

Evaluation Materials.

All probationary Librarians must submit a written Annual Report of Professional Activities that
addresses the promotion and continuing contract criteria described above based on the previous

18

calendar year. For probationary librarians and those intending to apply for promotion, the Annual
Report of Professional Activities serves as a cumulative documentthat will provide the
frameworkfor their dossier, which is part of their application for continuing contract or
promotion. This Annual Report must be submitted by the bargaining unit memberno later than
January 31 of each year, unless the memberand their supervisor agree otherwise.
Each candidate for promotion and/or continuing contract is responsible for compiling a dossier
for subsequent review by the immediate supervisor, Personnel Committee, and Dean and
University Librarian. The dossier must consist of no more than twenty (20) pagesof narrative of
accomplishments and a comprehensive CV. Managementand the Personnel Committee will

determine, create, and publish content guidelines for the dossier. Supplemental materials
assembled digitally by the candidate may be submitted in addition to the dossier. The

supplemental materials will be available to all persons and bodies making promotion and
continuing contract recommendations and decisions, including external reviewers. Any physical
supplemental materials will be returned to the candidate after completion of the promotion and
continuing contract review process. After submission ofall appropriate application materials,
Managementwill package and distribute the application materials as required.
The Personnel Committee shall draft guidelines called Miami University Libraries Annual

Report Guidelines about writing the Annual Report that shall be made availableto all bargaining
unit members. These Report Guidelines must be reviewed and approved by the Dean and
University Librarian or designee prior to publication. These Report Guidelines will be reviewed
and updated as needed every year. The Personnel Committee will also be in charge of the
Dossier Preparation Guidelines on writing the dossier and the application process that are
available to all bargaining unit members. The Personnel Committee will review and updatethis

documentevery year as needed.
5.

First and Second Year Reviews.

In the first and second years of the Librarian’s probationary period, the Librarian prepares and

submits an Annual Report of Professional Activities. The Librarian’s immediate supervisor
prepares an annual written evaluation as provided in Article 15: Annual Evaluations.
Additionally, beginning in thefirst year of the Librarian’s probationary period, the Librarian’s
Annual Report is reviewed and evaluated by the Personnel Committee. In these years the

Personnel Committee prepares a written review of the Librarian’s progress toward promotion
and continuing contract, including strengths and weaknesses, and specific recommendations for
improvement. The Personnel Committee submitsits written review to the performance
management system, which is madeavailable to the librarian and their immediate supervisor.
A librarian who disputes errors of fact and/or omissionsin an evaluation by the Personnel
Committee and/or their supervisor(s) may note them in writing to their immediate supervisor and
to the Personnel Committee within ten (10) business days of receiving their evaluation. When
possible, the parties will work to address and correct these disputations. Such written
disputations are included with the evaluation materials.

19

6.

Third, Fourth, and Fifth Year Reviews for Librarians.

The Personnel Committee and the immediate supervisor shall continue to evaluate probationary

bargaining unit membersin their third, fourth, and fifth years. In addition to these reviews,
probationary bargaining unit membersshall be evaluated by the Dean and the Provost.
Dean Review

The Dean and University Librarian writes an evaluation in the Librarian’s third, fourth, and fifth
years of the probationary period assessing the Librarian’s progress toward promotion and
continuing contract. When the evaluation of the Dean differs from the evaluationsof the
immediate supervisor and the Personnel Committee, the Dean must cite the basis for the
judgmentin the evaluation. The Dean and University Librarian submits its written review to the

performance managementsystem, which is madeavailable to the librarian.
Provost Review

The Provost reviews the Annual Report in the third, fourth, and fifth years of a Librarian’s
probationary period. This evaluation is made available to the librarian, the immediate supervisor,
and the Dean and University Librarian.

A librarian who disputes errors of fact and/or omissions in an evaluation by the Dean and/or the
Provost may note them in writing to their immediate supervisor and to the Personnel Committee
within ten (10) business days of receiving the evaluation. When possible, the parties will work to

address and correct these disputations. Such written disputations are included with the evaluation
materials.
7.

Application Review.

Librarianshired at the rank of Assistant must apply for promotion to the next rank and for
continuing contract simultaneously. Librarianshired at the rank of Associate or above must only
apply for continuing contract, and may apply for promotion, generally in the sixth year.
Consideration for promotion and continuing contract will generally occur in the sixth year of
qualifying service. Librarians may only apply for continuing contract once. If the Librarian fails
to achieve continuing contract, the Librarian will receive a terminal appointmentfor the
following year. A probationary Librarian may request to extend or waivepart oftheir
probationary periodas stated in Article 14: Probationary Period.
The promotion and continuing contract cycle begins July 1 of each Academic Year. Those hired
after September30 fall into the promotion cycle for the following year.

In the Sixth Year (unless waived or extended in accordance with Article 14: Probationary
Period), Librarians will go through the evaluation process describedin this Article upon

submission oftheir dossier. Librarians in their probationary period applying for promotion and
continuing contract, and Librarians with continuing contract applying for promotion, must have

20

the positive recommendation ofeither the immediate supervisor or the Personnel Committee to
qualify for further consideration.
If either the immediate supervisor or the Personnel Committee recommend promotion and/or
continuing contract, the dossier will be reviewed by the Dean and University Librarian. If the
Dean and University Librarian is going to recommend denying promotion to a Librarian with

continuing contract, the Librarian is first informed and may choose to withdraw the application.
Librarians must have the positive recommendation of the Dean and University and Librarian for
applications to be advanced to the Provost.
The Provost will review the dossier if recommended by the Dean and University Librarian.

Those endorsed by the Provost are forwardedto the President for review. Recommendations
endorsed by the President are given to the Board of Trusteesfor final action regarding promotion
and/or continuing contract.
8.

Promotion for Librarians with Continuing Contract.

Librarians who have continuing contract may apply for promotion in any year, but no earlier than
three (3) years after they were last promoted. Librarians should consult with their immediate
supervisor and the Dean and University Librarian before making this request. A Librarian with
continuing contract who wishesto be considered for promotion in the following Academic Year

must submita letter of intent to their immediate supervisor, Dean and University Librarian, and
Personnel Committee by February 15.
9.

Application for Promotion and Continuing Contract.

Notice to Probationary Librarians
The appointmentletter for probationary Librarians states when the probationary Librarian must
apply for promotion and continuing contract. In addition, the Chair of the Personnel Committee

shall notify probationary librarians who are due to apply for promotion and continuing contract
and their department head by February 15 that they must apply for promotion and continuing
contract by June 15, or the following Monday.
External Reviewers

Librarians applying for promotion and/or continuing contract are responsible for assembling and
submitting a list of external reviewers as established in the Dossier Preparation Guidelines prior
to their application submission. External reviewers are only to review the service and/or
scholarly/creative works of those applying for promotion and/or continuing contract.
Dossier and Deadline

Applications for promotion and continuing contract, or for promotion, must be submitted by the
Librarian nolater than June 15 or the following Mondayif June 15 falls on a weekend.

21

Applications must include the Librarian’s dossier and supplemental materials, all of which must
be submitted to the online portal.

10. Reconsideration for Promotion and Continuing Contract or Promotion.

A Librarian who receives a negative recommendation at any evaluationstepis notified in writing
with a Statement of Reasons for the negative recommendation as soonas possible but no later
than ten (10) working days from the decision date.

If a Librarian’s application for promotion and continuing contract, or for promotion, is denied or
does not proceedto the next step, the Librarian may request reconsideration in writing within ten
(10) working days of receipt of the Statement of Reasons. Applications for promotion for
Librarians with continuing contract may only be considered for reconsideration when they are

denied at the Dean and University Librarian level or above.
The decision on reconsideration will be provided to the Librarian in writing within ten (10)

working days of receipt of the request for reconsideration. A candidate who receives a negative
recommendation following reconsideration shall be notified, in writing, of the decision on
reconsideration with a second Statement of Reasonsno later than ten (10) working days from the
date the request for reconsideration was received.

Theoriginal dossier and all documents submitted as part of the negative recommendation and
request for reconsideration becomepart of the Librarian’s record.

22

Article 14: Probationary Period
1.

Probationary Period.

New appointments, regardless of initial rank, ordinarily require a probationary period ofsix (6)
years. Visiting appointments do not have a probationary period. Librarians in their probationary
period maybe subject to non-renewal, at the discretion of management and per University
policy.
Written notice of the intent to not renew a Librarian’s appointmentfor the nextfiscal year will be

provided by the Office of Human Resourcesno later than April 1 for a probationary librarian. If
a probationary librarian does not receive an April | letter, then the person is normally entitled to

at least a full fiscal year’s notice of non-reappointment. This notice will be sent by June 30
preceding the final contract year.
This provision for notice does not preclude the termination of a probationary appointmentfor

causeat any time, in accordance with Article 24: Discipline and Discharge.
2.

Credit Toward Probationary Period.

At the sole discretion of the appropriate Dean, or designee, and with approvalof the Provost, up
to two (2) years of experience at a comparable academicor research library, and experience as a
Visiting Librarian at Miami University, may be offered toward the six-year probationary period
at the time of hire. The Librarian candidate may chooseto acceptor reject this credit. This credit
mustbe noted in the Librarian’s original appointment letter. Service in a part-time position does

not qualify toward the six-year probationary period.
At the request of the Librarian, and with written approval of the appropriate Dean, or designee,
and the Provost, this grant of prior credit or a portion thereof subsequently may be rescinded
during the probationary period prior to the consideration for continuing contract.
3.

Extending the Probationary Period.

Generally, a leave of absence for six monthsor less will count toward the six-year probationary
period unless the Librarian, the appropriate Dean, or designee, and the Provost, agree in writing
to an exceptionat the time the leave is granted.

Uponthe Librarian’s request, and with the approval of the appropriate Dean, or designee, and
Provost, a one-year extension of the probationary period may be granted when a Librarian faces
extraordinary circumstances that impacts the Librarian’s ability to meet promotional

expectations. Librarians and their probationary period will not be adversely impacted by any
protected leave.
Normally, only one such one-year extension will be provided during a Librarian’s probationary
period. A Librarian may, however, request a second extension through the appropriate Dean, or
designee, Provost, which shall be granted in the Provost’s sole discretion.

23

4.

Requests to Extend the Probationary Period.

All requests to extend the probationary period must be in writing and provided to the Librarian’s
immediate supervisor. Extensions must be requested within one year of the circumstance giving
rise to the request for an extension, and submitted prior to submitting the Librarian’s application
for promotion and/or continuing contract.
Each written request to extend the probationary period may be accompanied by supporting

letters, documents, and/orcertifications. Sensitive and/or confidential records will be maintained
appropriately by the University.
The extension of the probationary period for a librarian has no bearing on the continuing contract

and/or promotion decision other than in its timing. Expectations for continuing contract and/or
promotion for a probationary librarian granted an extension remain the same as expectations for
a probationary librarian evaluated within the standard probationary period.

5.

Waiving the Probationary Period.

In extraordinary circumstances, the Provost, upon recommendation of the appropriate Dean or
designee, may recommendwaiver of the probationary period and continuing contract for a
personbeing initially appointed to the rank of Associate Librarian or Principal Librarian upon

hire.
After consultation with the Personnel Committee and their direct supervisor, and with the

approval of the Appropriate Dean,a librarian may waive part of their probationary period and
apply for promotion and/or continuing contract before their sixth year in accordance with Article

13: Promotion & Continuing Contract.

24

Article 15: Annual Evaluations

. Bargaining unit members will be reviewed by their supervisor at least once per year in

accordance with University policies governing annual evaluation of unclassifiedstaff.
Librarians will be reviewed and evaluated on their performance of their PPR, service, and

scholarship. The primary purposeof the evaluations is to guide the professional
developmentof the bargaining unit member,particularly in their progress in attaining
continuing contract when in their probationary period. As such, performance evaluations
shall include strengths and areas for improvement with specific recommendations for
improvement.

. Librarians in their probationary period shall submit an Annual Report of Professional
Activities and shall be evaluated in accordance with Article 13: Promotion & Continuing
Contract via an online performance module.

. Non-probationary bargaining unit members may submit either an annualself-evaluation
or may submit an Annual Report of Professional Activities via an online performance
module. The Annual Report may documentonly one year of professional activities, or
may be cumulative.
The self-evaluation or annual report must be submitted by the bargaining unit member no
later than January 31 of each year, unless the bargaining unit memberand their

supervisor agree otherwise. The supervisor’s evaluation form shall be submitted nolater
than March 1 of each year.

25

Article 16: Compensation
I.

Base Compensation
A. Annual Maintenance Increases

(1) Effective on the following dates, full-time bargaining unit Librarians who performed at a
satisfactory level or higher during the previous applicable fiscal year shall receive an
increase to their base salary as follows:

July 1, 2023 (if employed in a bargaining unit role during the 2023-2024

2.0%

academic year)
July 1, 2024 (if employed in a bargaining unit role during the 2024-2025

3.0%

academic year)

July 1, 2025

2.5%

The 2023 and 2024 increasesshall be effective and applied to bargaining unit members’ base
salary within a scheduled pay period no more than 90 daysafter ratification and are intended to
reflect base salary increases for the 2023-2024 and 2024-2025 academicyears.
(2) To address the difference between the increases to base salary (for July 1, 2023, and July 1,

2024 (above)) and what was paid to bargaining unit members in the 2023-2024 and 20242025 academic years, within 120 daysof ratification, the University will make lump sum
payments as follows:

(a) a lump sum equivalent to two (2.00) percent of the bargaining unit member’s base
salary in the 2023-2024 academic year; and
(b) a lump sum equalto three (3.00) percent of the bargaining unit member’s equivalent

base salary had it been calculated based on Section 2(a) above for the 2024-2025
academic year.
To qualify for either of the lump sum payments identified above, bargaining unit members must
be currently employedat the timeof ratification.
If the University’s Board of Trustees approves an annual salary increase of more than 2.5% for

full-time non-bargaining unit employees of the University effective July 1, 2025, the percentage
difference between the approved incrementand the 2.5% increase referenced abovewill be
designated as a merit pool for bargaining unit Librarians. Allocation of merit increases shall be at
the University’s sole discretion and shall not be subject to the grievance andarbitration
procedure.
B. Promotional Increases

Bargaining unit Librarians who are promotedto a higher rank on orafter the date ofratification

of the Agreementshall receive a one-timeincrease to their base salary, effective on the date of
the bargaining unit Librarian’s promotion, under the following calculations:

26

1) A Librarian promoted to Associate shall receive an increase of $6,000.00 to their base
salary;
2) A Librarian promoted to Principal shall receive an increase of $9,000.00 to their base
salary.
Promotionalincreases that becomeeffective on July 1 shall be applied after the annual increase
for the year that the promotion becomeseffective.
C. Discretionary Retention Offers
The University may, in its discretion, offer individual bargaining unit members salary
adjustments for retention purposes. These increases are not subject to the grievance procedure or
bargaining.
II.

Additional Compensation

The University may, in its sole discretion, elect to make salary or benefit adjustments which are
more favorable than those called for in this Agreement to any individual memberof the

bargaining unit so longas it provides notice to the Union in advance. The Parties agree that any
such decisions shall not be subject to the grievance or bargaining process.
II.

Pay Schedule

The University shall pay all bargaining unit Librarians in accordance with the University pay

schedule.
IV.

Savings Clause

Notwithstanding the aboveor any other Article of this Agreement, in the event of financial
exigency, the University reserves the right not to implement the AnnualIncreases, Promotional
Increases or any other discretionary pay increasesset forth above.

27

Article 17: Benefits
A. Medical, Vision, Dental and Other Insurance

The University shall continue to offer bargaining unit Librarians access to group insurance plans

(hospitalization, basic medical, major medical, healthcare savings account, vision, dental, life
and accidental death and dismemberment) as approved by the Board of Trustees on the same
terms and conditions applicable to other full-time non-bargaining unit employees, to the extent
permitted by law. The University will contribute to the monthly premium cost and healthcare

savings account, where applicable, of the bargaining unit member’s medical plan of choice on
the samebasis and in the same amountsit does for other full-time non-bargaining unit
employees, and bargaining unit member’s monthly medical insurance premium contributions
shall be made on a pre-tax basis. The terms and conditions of group insurance shall be governed
by the applicable plan documents, as they may exist from timeto time.
The University reserves the right to amendthe plans referenced aboveat its sole discretion and
without negotiation with the Union. Any changes made by the University to the group insurance
plans shall be substantially similar to the terms applicable as ofthe ratification of this
Agreement; any changesthat are not substantially similar, the University shall negotiate with the
Union. Notwithstanding the foregoing, with respect to health insurance premiums, the University
may increase premium contributionsat its discretion and without negotiation with the Union
consistent with the following:
a.

The University mayin its discretion annually increase health premiumspaid by

bargaining unit Librarians (whichare tied to a percentage of annual salary and

elected plan and coverage levels) by up to 7.5% per plan. Thus, if a bargaining
unit Librarian’s health premium contribution was 1.52% oftheir salary in 2025,
the bargaining unit Librarian’s health premium contribution for that same plan
could not increase to more than 1.634% in plan year 2026.

b.

The Parties agree that the University’s right to continue providing health care
benefits to bargaining unit members on the same terms and conditions as for nonbargaining unit employees, including the right to make substantially similar
changes andto increase health premiums by 7.5% annually shall survive the
expiration of this Agreement absent a change negotiated by the Parties.

Spouses of bargaining unit Librarians shall be eligible for University medical, vision and dental
insurance benefits pursuant to University policy. Dependent children of bargaining unit

Librariansare eligible for medical, vision or dental insurance benefits through the end of the
month whenthey turn age 26.
The University shall comply with all federal and state requirements, including the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, related to the confidentiality of bargaining unit
Librarian medical information.
B. Flexible Spending Accounts

28

The University shall continue to offer bargaining unit Librarians access to participate in
voluntary Flexible Spending Accounts (FSA) to pay for certain medical and/or dependent
daycare expenses, on the same terms and conditions applicable to other full-time non-bargaining
unit employees, to the extent permitted by law. The terms and conditions of FSA participation
shall be governed by the applicable plan documents, as they may exist from timeto time.
C. Employee Assistance Program

The University shall continue to offer bargaining unit Librarians, spouses, and dependents (and
others at the sole discretion of the University) access to confidential Employee Assistance
Program (EAP)services on the samebasis as other full-time non-bargaining unit employees.
D. Employee Health Center

The University will continue to offer bargaining unit Librarians and dependents covered by the
University’s health insurance plan access to the Employee Health Center on the samebasis as
other full-time non-bargaining unit employees. The University reserves the right to determine the
terms of Health Center services offered, including costs to bargaining unit Librarians, at its sole

discretion.
E. Retirement Benefits

Bargaining unit Librarians shall be entitled to participate in the Ohio Public Employees
Retirement System (OPERS), and the University’s Supplemental Retirement Benefit plans, to
the extent and on the same termsoffered to other full-time employees of the University, subject
to applicable law and regulation.
At the time ofhire, bargaining unit Librarians mayelect to participate in the Ohio Alternative
Retirement Plan (ARP), rather than the OPERS, to the extent and on the sameterms offered to
other full-time employees of the University, subject to applicable law and regulation. Bargaining
unit Librarians whofail to (1) submit the retirement plan election form,(2) set up an account,
and (3) choose a vendor within one hundred and twenty (120) days after their date of hire, will
automatically default into the OPERS plan.
F.

Education Benefits

The University will continue to offer eligible full-time bargaining unit Librarianstuition fee
waivers for themselves and eligible spouses and dependentchildren, on the samebasis as other
full-time non-bargaining unit employees, in accordance with applicable University policy. The
University reserves the right to modify University policy providing for education benefits, at its
sole discretion during the term of the Agreement, and will provide the Union with notice of any
such changes.
G. Miami Recreation Center

29

The University will offer bargaining unit Librarians access to all Miami Recreation Centersat all
campuses, on the samebasis as otherfull-time non-bargaining unit employees and in accordance
with University policy. The University reserves the right to determine the terms of Recreation
Center membership and programsoffered, including costs andfees, at its sole discretion.
H. Parking
Bargaining unit Librarians will have access to parking in accordance with University policy.

30

Article 18: Sick Leave

Sick leave is the authorized absenceof a Librarian from regular duties becauseof illness, injury,
pregnancy, exposure to contagiousdisease, family health situations requiring attendanceof the

Librarian, health care appointments, and death in the immediate family. Immediate family
members include the Librarian’s mother, father, brother, sister, biological or adopted child,
stepchild, spouse, grandparent, grandchild, mother-in-law, father-in-law, daughter-in-law, sonin-law, brother-in-law,sister-in-law, grandparent-in-law, anyone whostood in loco parentis to

the Librarian as a child, and other persons for whom the Librarian is legally responsible.
Each full-time bargaining unit Librarian earns fifteen (15) days of sick leave per contract year.

Unused sick leave entitlement is cumulative without limit.
1.

Reporting Absences

Librarians are expected to report an absence promptly when normalduties cannot be performed
and sick leave is being used. A consecutive period of sick leave use includesall days an
individual is normally expected to work, whetheror not the individual has scheduled

responsibilities.
Use of accrued sick leave days must be reported on a monthly basis, and the report must be
approved bythe supervisor. Sick leave is used in increments of one-half day (reported in hourly
increments) and one full day for absences of more than a half-day. A maximum offive (5) days
of sick leave may be used for the death of an immediate family member. Bargaining unit
librarians may use additional paid leave time (sick or vacation) beyondthe five (5) days granted

above, upon approvalof their supervisor, for bereavement purposes.
Should a bargaining unit librarian not have any paid leave time available for bereavement
purposes, the bargaining unit membershould notify their immediate supervisor to discuss
potential options, which mayinclude the use of appropriate paid leave in advance ofaccrual or

another form of leave as appropriate.
The University may require appropriate evidence for the use of sick leave.
2.

Extension of Sick Leave

In the event a Librarian exhausts their accumulated sick leave because of an extendedillness, the
Librarian maybe retained on the payroll for an additional period of time if recommended by the
supervisor, appropriate Dean, and approvedat the discretion of the Vice President. Consideration
of such requestsshall include yearsof service, extentof illness, and/or other extenuating
circumstances.
3.

Transfer/Cash Out of Sick Leave

Thetransfer and cash outof sick leave uponretirement or separation of employmentshall be in
accordancewith applicable Ohio law.

31

Article 19: Vacation

Full-time bargaining unit Librarians earn a maximum of22 days of vacation per fiscal year.

Unless on an otherwise approved leave, Librarians must use vacation leave to cover time away
from work.

Bargaining unit Librarians, who begin work(as reflected by the payroll) before the 16th day of
any month, will earn the full vacation accrual for that month. Bargaining unit Librarians whose

last day of work is before the 16th of any month will not earn vacation for that month. Vacation
days do not accrue during a leave of absence withoutpay.
Vacation is used in increments of one-half day (reported in hourly increments) and one full day
for absences of more than a half-day. Requests for vacation shall be made in accordance with

departmental policy. All vacation leave must be approved in advance by the Librarian’s
supervisor, when possible.
A bargaining unit Librarian may accrue a maximum vacation balanceof fifty-two (52) days.

Librarians will not accrue and will forfeit vacation in any month while the balance isat the
maximum permitted. Librarians will earn a partial accrual in any month wherethe full accrual

wouldresult in a balance greater than the maximum permitted.
Vacation day use will not be charged against days not scheduled to work or University
recognized holidays, or winter closure days (see Article 21: Leaves and Other Time Off Work).
Uponretirement, termination, or death, the Librarian or their estate shall be compensatedat the
final rate of pay for unused vacation to a maximum offorty (40) days. Days are roundedto the
nearest half or whole day. Compensation shall be paid within ninety (90) daysof retirement,

termination, or death.
Vacation time may not be used to extend University benefits coverage.

32

Article 20: Professional Improvement Leaves
1.

Professional Improvement Leave.

All bargaining unit membersare eligible for Librarian Professional Improvement Leaves

(LPILs), which provide for time away from professional responsibilities to pursue professional

growth and developmentactivities. Professional improvementactivities normally involve
research orservice activities, professional development, or formal or informaltraining.
Normally, approval will not be granted for the purpose of pursuing a degree.

LPILs maybe taken either during the Winter or Summerterm for up to the full length of either
term. With management approval and on a case-by-case basis, the University may permit a LPIL

outside of the Winter or Summer term.
2.

Eligibility.

All Librarians in a continuing contract or continuing contract-eligible position are eligible to
apply for LPILs. If approved, bargaining unit librarians in their probationary period are eligible
to take one LPIL during their probationary period. Once a bargaining unit librarian has achieved
continuing contract, if approved,the librarian is eligible to take one LPIL every seven (7) years.
3.

Compensation and Benefits.

During the LPILs, bargaining unitlibrarians will continue to receive all regular wages and

benefits to which they would have beenentitled if not on leave. Any travel-related costs will not
be paid by the University, however a Librarian may choose to cover such costs from their
available professional developmentfunding or other external funding.
Librarians receiving a LPIL are obligated to remain employed at Miamifor one full semester
after taking the LPIL. If a person chooses not to return to Miami during the ensuing academic

term, the bargaining unit member must refund to the University compensation equalto that
received during the LPIL.
4.

Application and Approval.

Bargaining unitlibrarians interested in applying for a LPIL must submit a written application to
their supervisor/department head. Each application for LPIL mustinclude:
Applicant’s name, rank, and year rank wasattained
Dates of the anticipated leave
Dates and year of previous LPIL, if applicable
Purpose for the requested leave
Activities anticipated with timeline

Value of the leave to the applicant, Libraries, and the University

33

Applications approved bythe librarian’s supervisor/department head must be submitted to the
appropriate Dean by November1 of the calendar year preceding the requested leave. The
appropriate Dean’s Office will submit applications to the appropriate Human Resourcesoffice
for recordkeeping and compliance purposes.

Approval of LPILsis at the discretion of management, but will not be unreasonably denied.
LPIL’s will not be modified after approval except due to unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances.

Prior to approval, a librarian may withdraw their application for Librarian Professional

Improvement Leaveat any time. After approval, a bargaining unit member may withdraw their
application in consultation with and with approval from management. After approval, Librarians
must notify managementas soonas possible if anything will impact the Librarian’s ability to use
the approved LPIL.

Upon return from LPIL, bargaining unit librarians must prepare a full report of the results of the
leave to the department head, Dean and University Librarian, and Dean of the Regional
Campuses, if appropriate, within ninety (90) days of the completion of the LPIL.

34

Article 21: Leaves And Other Time Off Work
1.

University Holidays

Bargaining unit Librariansare entitled to the following paid holidays: New Year’s Day, Martin
Luther King Day, Presidents’ Day, Memorial Day, Juneteenth, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Indigenous Peoples’ Day/Columbus Day, Veterans’ Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.

State statute permits the designation of certain holidays to be observed on days other than when
they are observed bythe rest of the state. The University’s annual holiday schedule reflects these

changes.

The University will accommodate religious observances of bargaining membersin accordance
with University policy and applicable law.
If a holiday (or its observance) occurs when the bargaining unit memberis on sick leave, leave

with pay, or vacation, the employee will be paid for the holiday with no loss of accrued leave.
2.

Family and Medical Leave

The University will offer unpaid leave to eligible full-time bargaining unit Librarians with

qualifying conditions in accordance with the Family and Medical Leave Act and University
policy. Bargaining unit Librarians must request family medical leave in writing and submit the
request to the Office of Human Resources. The University must provide a medicalcertification
form, when applicable, in which case the completed medicalcertification must be received in the

Office of Human Resourcesprior to approval of the leave wheneverpossible.
Bargaining unit Librarians mustutilize their leave balances while on FMLAleave. Ifa
bargaining unit Librarian does not have sufficient paid leave available for the entire period of
their approved leave, they maytake the balanceof the leave as unpaid.

In accordance with the Family and Medical Leave Act, bargaining unit Librarians who return
from a family and medical leave mustbe restored to the position held by the employee when
leave began or be restored to an equivalent position with equivalent pay and University-provided
benefits and other terms and conditions of employment.
Miami University will maintain University-provided benefits for eligible employees on family
and medical leave under the same terms and conditions coverage would be provided had the
employee continued in employmentfor the duration of the leave. Retirement contributionswill
only be madefor that portion of the family and medical leavethat is paid leave.
3.

Military and Court Leaves

Eligible bargaining unit Librarians shall be granted leave for military service, reserve duty, and
court attendance (jury duty, witness testimony) in accordance with state and federal laws and

University policy.

35

4.

Parental Leave

The University will provide benefit-eligible bargaining unit Librarians with up to twelve (12)
weeksof parental leave to be used following the birth or adoption of a child, including the
initiation of travel by the bargaining unit memberto take custody of an adopted child, in
accordance with University policy. The purpose of Parental Leaveis to provide a period of
recovery from childbirth for the birth parent; and a period oftime for parents (birth, non-birth
and parents) to care for and bond with the newborn or newly-adopted child. Bargaining unit
Librarians maytake up to three (3) months of additional parental leave on either the full or halftime basis.

All requests for leave under this policy should be madeas far in advanceas possible, but
generally not less than thirty (30) days before the leave commencesand mustbe in writing and
submitted to the Office of Human Resources.
All parental leave will run concurrently with leave granted under the FMLA (SeeSection 2,

above)to the extent the bargaining unit Librarianis eligible for FMLA.
5.

Unpaid Personal Leave

Full-time bargaining unit Librarians shall be eligible for unpaid personal leave to make a public
service contribution; to accept a fellowship, research, or visiting appointment at another
institution; to pursue a program of formal study; or for personal or health reasons in accordance
with University Policy. All requests for unpaid personal leave must be approved by management.

Except under special circumstances, it is leave without any University-provided benefits except
any applicable fee waiver benefit, which continues during the leave. Contributionsto thestate
retirement systems are madeonly as allowed by law. The University will not make contributions

to the Alternative Retirement Plan during a personal leave. The bargaining unit Librarian may
elect to continue group health insurance coverageat their own cost.
Applications for leave pursuant to this Section 5 should be madeas far in advanceas possible.
Such leavesshall be granted at the University’s sole discretion and in accordance with University
policy.
6.

Jury Duty and Witness Testimony

Bargaining unit Librarians serving jury duty are entitled to leave with pay. The bargaining unit
Librarian must submit a request for leave to their supervisor and the Office of Human Resources
for approval. A copy of the summonsfor jury duty must be attached to the request. Bargaining

unit Librarians are required to return to work any day they are excused by the court for a period
greater than four (4) hours.
Bargaining unit Librarians subpoenaedto testify as a non-expert witness in a court action to
whichthey are not a party will be granted paid leave to testify.

36

Article 22: Professional Development and Reimbursement for Travel
1.

The Dean and University Librarian will decide how much funding will be considered

along with other budgetary priorities that may arise. However, a minimum of $28,000.00
will be designated for the professional development of bargaining unit members by the
Dean and University Librarian and will be distributed to a professional development
committee each year, provided the University Libraries has funds available to designate
for professional development purposes. Any funds remainingat the endof the fiscal year
will not roll over to the nextfiscal year. This committee will determine whatprofessional

development needs exist, decide on priorities, and allocate University Libraries funds
accordingly. This committee will make every reasonable effort to approve development
opportunities for probationary Librarians.
The funds described above do not preclude the disbursementof additional funds to
benefit the Libraries and librarians through internal or external sources, including but not
limited to: dean’s discretionary funding, grants, special purpose/project funds, or donor
funding. This also does not preclude the University Libraries’ administration from using
additional professional funds/activities for Librarians as a recruiting or retention tool.
Professional Development funds maybe used for the following purposes:
Professional and skill developmentcourses, including tuition, fees, and materials.

Conference and special program attendance costs, such as admission fees.
Related travel, including transit, lodging, and per diem allotments.

opono

Membership fees for professional organizations.
Additional uses as determined by a professional development committee with
approvalof the Dean and University Librarian.

.

The University shall reimburse membersof the bargaining unit for travel expenses
incurred during approved University business, including transportation, lodging, meals,
and incidentals, consistent with University policies on travel reimbursement.

Uponratification, each bargaining unit Librarian will receive $500.00 of professional
developmentfunds that may be used in accordance with this Article. This $500.00 in
professional development fundswill be available to each bargaining unit Librarian until
the expiration of this Agreement,or until the Librarian is no longer employed as a
bargaining unit Librarian, whicheveroccurs first.

37

Article 23: Individual And Departmental Purchasing Cards

1.

The University Libraries maintains multiple Departmental P-Cards. Librarians may

requestthe ability to use a Departmental P-card for appropriate work-related business
purposes.

2.

With managementapproval, bargaining unit members whose PPR duties necessitate the
use of an individual purchasing card may apply for an Individual Business Purchasing

Card (hereafter referred to as individual p-card) in accordance with University policy.
3. After completing the training and application requirements, including obtainingall
required signatures,all bargaining unit members’ application for a p-card shall be
forwarded to Accounts Payable, regardless of type, in accordance with University policy.
Anindividual’s p-card may be revoked or not renewed based on University business
need.

38

Article 24: Discipline And Discharge
Disciplinary Standards
1.

Consistent with the terms of this Agreement, the University has andretains the right to
discipline bargaining unit members in accordance with applicable University policies,
procedures, rules, and regulations, up to and including termination of the employment
relationship.

The University shall not discipline or discharge any bargaining unit member without just
cause.

The University is committed to the use of progressive discipline. Disciplinary action shall
be proportionalto the nature and severity of the offense, noting that when the severity of
the alleged offense or bargaining unit member’s history of discipline warrants a

deviation,it is in the University’s discretion to do so. Appropriate disciplinary action may
constitute any of the following, without limitation: oral or written warning (not placed in
the personnelfile), written reprimand, suspension with or without pay, demotion,

reduction in pay, and/or termination of a bargaining unit member’s employmentprior to
the expiration date of any employmentor continuing contract. Under certain
circumstances, suspension without pay, demotion, reduction in pay, or termination may
be an appropriate initial disciplinary action.
Absent emergency circumstances, disciplinary action or proceedings shall be initiated
within thirty (30) calendar days after the University concludesits investigation of the

allegations formingthe basis of the charges, excluding days which the University is
closed.
Bargaining unit members are required to cooperate and provide truthful information in

the University’s investigation of any allegations of misconduct.
Predisciplinary Hearings
6.

Prior to implementation of any suspension without pay, demotion, reduction in pay,or
termination, bargaining unit memberswill be provided with a predisciplinary hearing
administered by the Office of Human Resources.
a.

The purposeof the predisciplinary hearing is to provide the bargaining unit
memberan opportunity to respondto the allegations against them.

b.

Prior to the implementation of discipline, bargaining unit members will be
provided with a written Notice of Proposed Discipline. The Notice of Proposed
Discipline must include information regarding the basis for discipline in sufficient
detail to disclose the reasons andbasis for the proposed discipline and a statement

that the Librarian is presumed not responsible until a final determination has been
madeat the conclusion ofthe disciplinary process. The pre-disciplinary hearing

39

will be conducted at a date and time that allow at least seven (7) calendar days
from the Librarian’s receipt of notice. The hearing date, time, and place shall be
scheduled by management. The bargaining unit memberor the Union may request
an initial postponementof the predisciplinary hearing of up to seven (7) calendar
days, which shall be granted. Further postponementsshall only be granted at the

University’s discretion. Subsequent postponementsshall be for no more than an
additional seven (7) calendar days.
c.

Bargaining unit membershavethe right, upon request, to be accompanied by a
Unionrepresentative during the predisciplinary hearing, provided that the
unavailability of a Union representative shall not delay the predisciplinary
hearing, except as set forth in Section 6.a above. The Notice of Proposed
Discipline shall inform the bargaining unit memberof this right.

d.

Hearing proceduresshall be in accordance with University policy on Interim
Disciplinary Procedures applicable to unclassified staff.

e.

The employee, théir Union representative, and necessary witnessesshall suffer no
loss of pay as a result of time spent attending predisciplinary hearings.

f.

Within fourteen (14) days following the predisciplinary hearing, the bargaining
unit member and the Union will be given written notice of any disciplinary action
to be imposed.

g.

Bargaining unit members mayagree to waivethis predisciplinary hearing and

such waiver mustbe in writing and provided to the University. The bargaining
unit membershall copy the Union onthis notice.

h.

These disciplinary procedures as described in this Section 6 do not apply to
written warnings/reprimands, performance appraisals/evaluations, merit salary

increases(or lack thereof), failure to promote or appoint to another position, or
non-renewals of annual appointments within the probationary period.
7.

A paid interim suspension may be imposedby the Office of Human Resourcesin
accordance with the University’s Interim Disciplinary Procedures. When suchaction is
taken, the University will hold the predisciplinary hearing referenced in Section 6 as
expeditiously as possible following the suspension, and in any case no morethanthirty
(30) days following the suspension unless an extension is agreed to by the parties in
writing. The University will provide notice to the Union within 48 hours of a bargaining
unit member’s suspension pursuant to this Section.

8.

Grievancesrelating to suspension, demotions, reduction in pay, or termination may be
initiated at Step Three of the grievance procedure of Article 25: Grievance and
Arbitration.

40

9.

Disciplinary records shall be maintained in a bargaining unit member’s personnelfile
unless and until such discipline is vacated through the grievance and arbitration
procedure, including any subsequent appeals therefrom.

10. This Article shall supersede any policy or procedure related to discipline and discharge

referenced in the University’s Librarian Appointment, Retention, and Promotion System
(LARPS).

4l

Article 25: Grievance And Arbitration
1.

Definition and Scope

A “grievance” is an allegation by the Union or by one or more bargaining unit membersthat

there has been a violation involving the interpretation or administration of an Article(s) and
Section(s) of the Agreement. The Union andLibrarians agree this Article is the exclusive
procedure applicable to alleged violations of this Agreement, including disciplinary action taken
against Librarians, and waive the right to any alternative procedure unless expressly provided for
herein or by applicable law. Nothing in this Article is intended to prevent a bargaining unit
memberfrom filing a claim of unlawful discrimination, harassment,or retaliation with any
administrative agency or court of competentjurisdiction.

A Librarian whofiles a grievance or otherwise participates in the grievance process shall not be

subject to discipline, reprisal, and/or retaliation because of such participation.
2.

Grievance Procedure

The following sets forth the grievance procedure under this Agreement. Nothing prohibits the
parties from discussing issues and working toward informal resolution, at any step in the
procedure, if they so desire. If an informal resolution is reached at any step of the processset
forth in this Article, the parties will documentthe resolution in a signed writing. A Union

representative may be present at any meeting at any step of the grievance procedureset forth in
this Article.

Steps of the grievance procedure may be waived or modified in writing and by mutual agreement
of both parties. The Union and/or grievant may withdraw a grievanceat any step of the
procedure. Grievances so withdrawn shall not be reinstated. Where more than one grievance

involves similar issues, the parties may agree to consolidate the grievancesprior to arbitration.
STEP ONE

Within thirty (30) calendar days of the occurrencegiving rise to the grievance, the Union or
Librarian shall present a grievance in an informal writing to an Associate Dean. The Associate
Dean or designee will investigate the grievance as they deem appropriate and respond in writing
to the Union and grievant within twenty (20) calendar days. The Librarian and/or Union andthe

Associate Dean or designee may meetto discuss if mutually agreeable at a mutually agreeable
time and place. Unless the parties agree otherwise, settlements at this step shall be made without
precedential effect.
STEP TWO

If the grievance has not been resolved at Step One, the Union or grievant shall reduce the

grievanceto a formalwriting, stating the facts and listing the Articles and Sections of the
Agreement upon which the grievanceis based, and stating the remedy sought, and submit the
written grievance to the Dean of University Libraries or their designee within twenty (20)
calendar daysof receipt of the University’s Step One response. The Dean of University Libraries
or designee will have twenty (20) calendar days following the receipt of the written grievance to

42

investigate the matter as they deem appropriate, meet with the grievant and/or Union to discuss
the matter and submit a written response to the grievant and Union. The Union may appeal the

grievanceto the next step within twenty (20) calendar days of the University’s denial.
STEP THREE

If the grievance has not been resolved at Step Two, the Office of Human Resourceswill meet

with the Grievant and/or Union representative to attempt to resolve the grievance within twenty
(20) calendar days of the appeal to this step. The Parties will meet at a mutually agreeable time
and place. The University shall, within twenty (20) calendar days of the meeting, present the
Union with a written response.
3.

Time Limits

Anyextension to the time limits set forth herein must be made by written agreementof the

parties and will not be unreasonably denied. Should the University fail to respond at any step
within the timeframescontainedin this provision, the grievance will be deemed denied and the

Union may proceedto the next step in the procedure. No timeframeshall be binding on the
Unionuntil a required responseis given.

For purposes of computing times underthis Article, dates on which the University is closed shall
be excluded.
4.

Mediation

In the event that the parties cannot resolve the grievance at Step Three, before the grievance has

been appealedto arbitration, the Union and the University may, by mutual consent, contact the
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (“FMCS”) for grievance mediation. Mediation shall
be confidential and nothing discussed or presented during mediation shall be used as evidence at
any future arbitration of the grievance. All time limits shall be suspended while mediationis

pending. The Union and the University shall share equally in any mediation costs. If the
mediation takes place during the Grievant’s work hours, and/or during the Union representative’s
work hours if the Union representative is an employee of the University, the Grievant and/or
Union Representative shall not suffer any loss of pay or benefits to attend the mediation.
5.

Arbitration
a.

Ifthe grievance has not been resolved at a previous step or through Mediation, if

selected, then within twenty (20) calendar days of the receipt of the written
response from Step Three orfailure of Mediation, the Union, but not the
Librarian, has the sole right to refer a grievanceto arbitration and to conduct the
proceedingas a party by submitting written notice to the Office of Human
Resourcesof its intent to submit the grievance to binding arbitration. The Union
must also submit notice of intent to arbitrate to the FMCS. Failure by the Union to
request arbitration within twenty (20) days of a denial will result in the grievance

being denied andthe right to arbitration is deemed waived.

43

.

The parties shall have the right to mutually agree uponthe arbitrator, but in the
event they cannot so agree within twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of the

abovenotice, the parties shall notify the FMCSof their intent to arbitrate a
grievance. FMCS shall submit a panel of seven (7) arbitrators to each Party, each
of whom shall be membersof the National Academyof Arbitrators. Within (10)

calendar days followingreceipt of a list of arbitrators from FMCS, if the arbitrator
is not selected by mutual agreement, each party shall alternately strike a name
until one remains. Whichparty strikesfirst shall be determined by a random

method suchas the flip of a coin, or may be determined in another wayif the
parties so agree. The person remaining shall be the arbitrator. If the arbitrator thus
chosen cannotserve, the parties shall request a new list and begin the selection
process anew. Theselection of the arbitrator and conductof arbitration shall be in
accordance with FMCS’s then-applicable rules of procedure. Nothing herein shall
prohibit either Party from requesting one additional panel of arbitrators if they so

desire, at the party’s own expense.
All decisions of the selected arbitrator shall be final and binding on the
University, the Union, andall relevant membersof the Librarian bargaining unit.
.

The arbitrator shall have no authority to add to, subtract from, or modify this
Agreement or modify any procedures (including any time limits) set forth herein.
The decision ofthe arbitrator shall be limited to only the question or questions

submitted to the arbitrator, and the arbitrator shall have no authority to determine
any other issues not so submitted to them.

Thearbitrator shall have no jurisdiction or authority to issue an award that
changes, modifiesor restricts any action taken by the University with respect to
the exercise of managementrights underArticle 6 of this Agreement, and shall
have no authority to substitute their judgmentfor that of the University regarding

decisions involving evaluation of service and scholarship of Librarians, other than
grievancesalleging that there was a procedural violation in making such
decision(s) or that such decision(s) otherwise violated another Article of this
Agreement.

.

Ifthere is a question as to whether the arbitrator hasjurisdiction to heara case,
this question must be heard and an immediate benchruling issued by the
arbitrator prior to their hearing and deciding the merits of the case.

.

In disciplinary cases, evidenceof all relevant prior offenses and misconductshall
be deemed admissible.

Thecost ofthe arbitration shall be borne equally by the parties, including the
arbitrator’s fees and expensesandthe cost of the hearing room. Each party shall
pay its own individual expenses, including transcripts and the fees and
reimbursementof its representatives and witnesses.

44

The arbitrator shall be requested to issue their decision within thirty (30) calendar

days after the hearing or receipt of the transcript of the hearing, unless the parties
agree otherwise.

. No recordings may be madeof the hearing, except as needed by the preparer of a
transcript.

If the arbitration takes place during the Grievant’s work hours, the Grievantshall

not suffer any loss of pay or benefits to present testimonyat the arbitration.
. Four (4) calendar daysprior to the hearing, the parties shall exchange the names
of all witnesses to be called, and all exhibits to be introduced, during their case in
chief.

45

Article 26: Credit-Bearing Courses
1.

Unless assignedas part of the Librarian’s PPR,Librarians’ job duties do not include
being the instructor of record for credit-bearing courses or holding the equivalent status
in practice. Bargaining unit members must request and obtain permission from their

immediate supervisor(s) before accepting an offer to teach a credit-bearing course. This
request must include a description of the duration of the work assignment and the hours
per week the work is expected to take (both in-class teaching and out-of-class work).
Nothing in this Agreementprohibits a Librarian from accepting work as an instructor of
record for credit-bearing courses or holding the equivalent status in practice.
Unless the Librarian’s supervisor and the Appropriate Dean otherwise agree, any work
performedas an instructor of record is conducted outside of the Librarian’s assigned job
duties and standard work day. Bargaining unit membersandtheir supervisors may
mutually agree to incorporate the work into the bargaining unit member's normal

expected working hours, or may agree to a flexible work arrangementfor the duration of
the work. Flexible work arrangements must meet the business needs of University
Libraries.

The University shall not discipline or take adverse action against any bargaining unit
memberfor their decision to accept or refuse an offer to teach a credit-bearing course,
provided that serving as instructor of record or holding the equivalent status in practice
doesnot interfere with or prevent the Librarian from satisfactorily performing their
assigned job duties.

The University will not require the inclusion of any student evaluations from work
conducted underSection 2 of this Article in a bargaining unit Librarian’s annual reports
or dossiers, including as supplemental materials.

46

Article 27: Personnel Committee
1.

Purpose of the Personnel Committee.

The Personnel Committee is a standing advisory committee that serves as the Libraries’
promotion and continuing contract committee. The Personnel Committee conducts objective and
thorough review of probationary librarians' promotion- and evaluation-related documents.
Librarians seeking promotion to Principal Librarian shall have their documents reviewed by an

Ad-Hoc Personnel Committee as described in Section 4 ofthis Article.
2.

Membership of the Personnel Committee.

Membership of the Personnel Committee consists offive (5) librarians holding continuing
contract and the rank ofassociate librarian or principallibrarian. Two membersof the Personnel
Committee are elected from the Oxford campus, oneis elected from the Regional Campus
libraries, and two membersare appointed by the Dean and University Librarian subsequent to

elections. The Dean and University Librarian or designee convenes the Personnel Committee and
serves as a non-voting ex-officio member of the Personnel Committee, who shall coordinate the
administrative functions on behalf of the committee. Members whoare active Librarians and

remain in good standing shall serve staggered three-year terms.

A quorumshall consist of the majority of the full voting membership of the committee. If at any
point the active membership drops below the quorum ofthe full committee (due to conflict of
interest or extenuating circumstances), the Dean or designee shall invite a librarian(s) to
substitute for a limited term to achieve quorum.
3.

Conflicts of Interest.

Committee members with conflicts of interest or extenuating circumstances may be recused from
participation in Committee activity(ies) at the discretion of the Dean and University Librarian or

designee.
Librarians who supervise otherlibrarians are ineligible to serve on the committee, unless an

inadequate number of non-supervisory librariansare eligible to serve. No librarian shall be
reviewed by anyonein their supervisory chain; supervisors in such instancesshall recuse
themselves. A non-supervisory librarian serving on the committee who is temporarily or
permanently promoted into a supervisory position shall immediately be removed from the
committee upon their promotion.

If a committee member becomesineligible or is otherwise unable to serve, they shall be replaced
for the remainderof their committee term by either special election or appointment, depending
on their original methodof selection.

Applications for continuing contract and/or promotion are reviewed by Librarian committee
members with continuing contract at a rank equalto or higher than the rank sought.

47

4.

Ad-Hoc Personnel Committee for the Review of Applications to the Rank of
Principal Librarian.

Should a librarian apply for the rank of Principal Librarian, the Dean and University Librarian or
designee shall convene an Ad-Hoc Personnel Committee consisting of no fewer than three (3)
Principal Librarians to review application materials; this committee may include bargaining unit

membersas well as supervisory employees. This committee shall be disbanded after completing
the evaluation of the candidate(s).

In addition to the voting members described above, the Dean and University Librarian or

designee will serve as an ex officio non-voting memberof the Ad-Hoc Personnel Committee,
whoshall coordinate the administrative functions on behalf of the committee. A quorum shall
consist of the majority of voting members serving on this committee.
Section 3 on Conflicts of Interest shall also apply to the Ad-Hoc Committee underthis Section.

48

Article 28: Committee Procedures
1.

Library Committees.

Membership on library committees may be assigned in four ways: (1) election; (2) appointment;
(3) volunteering; or (4) as assigned in a bargaining unit member’s Primary Professional
Responsibilities (PPR). Any given Library committee may have membersassigned by one or
more of the methods described above.
Information aboutall Library committees will generally be listed in the Library Staff Manual.
Information will typically include the committee’s charge or purpose, the duration of the
committee terms, memberassignment method, and the current chair(s) and memberrosters with
their current terms of service.

Library committees may be created or dissolved at the discretion of management. The Union
shall be notified as soon as possible of the creation of any committee that may include bargaining
unit membersin its roster. The Union and any bargaining unit membersserving on a dissolved

committee shall be notified as soon as practicable.
The Personnel Committee is addressed in Article 27.
2.

Membership by Election.

Where committee membership is assigned by election, a call for nominations or self-nominations
will be announced to bargaining unit membersat least two weeks in advanceof the election
being held, whenfeasible.
3.

Membership by Appointment.

Membership ona library committee by appointmentshall be at the discretion of management.
When committee membership is assigned by appointment, a call for nominationsor selfnominations may be announced to bargaining unit membersat least two weeks, whenfeasible, in
advance of the appointment being made. All nominees and self-nominees will be considered for
the appointment.
4.

Membershipas Assigned by PPR.

Membership ona library committee as assigned as PPR shall be at the discretion of management.
5.

Library Committee Appointment Terms.

A bargaining unit member’s committee service will cease at the end of their term. They may
seek re-nomination or reappointmentfor an additional term,if so desired. Bargaining unit
members for whom service on a particular committee is part of their PPR will cease service on
the committee when the assignmentis removed from their PPR.

49

6.

Non-Library Committees with Appointed Members.

Where membership to University committees and other external committees (such as
OhioLINK)is assigned by appointment, the Dean will have discretion in making appointments
for these committees, including but not limited to bargaining unit Librarians. When committee
membershipis assigned by appointment, a call for self-nominations may be announcedto
bargaining unit membersat least two weeks, when feasible, in advance of the appointment being
made. All nominees including self-nominees will be considered for the appointment.

50

Article 29: Intellectual Property And Copyright
The University’s Intellectual Property Policy, Intellectual Property, is incorporated by reference

and applicable to Librarian bargaining unit employees. The University reserves the right to
modify such policy in its discretion during the term of the Agreement, and will provide the
Union with notice of any changesto such policy.

51

Article 30: Union Access To Information And Facilities
1.

Access to Bargaining Unit Information.

The University will provide the Union,at its request, with access to the following information

regarding bargaining unit members, to the extentit is available and/or maintained by the
University, at no cost to the Union andin a mutually agreeable format:
name;

mailing address;
email address;
phone number;

library department and campus;
rank;
continuing contract status;
gender;

race and ethnicity;
hire date;
base salary; and

leave status.

The Union may request the above information no earlier than August | for the current fiscal
year.

In addition, the University will notify the Union of approvals and denials of promotion and/or
continuing contract no later than June 1.
2.

Orientation.

The Unionshall be provided an opportunity to meet with newly hired bargaining unit members

after the completion of new hire orientation, which is provided on a regular basis through the
Office of Human Resources.
3.

Use of Facilities.

The University will allow the full-time use of a designated office space of standard and/or
customary size and on the Oxford campus, to be utilized by the Union. The Unionshall have full
responsibility to furnish, equip and maintain its designated space, as wellas for all charges
related to such equipment, including telephones, printers and computer equipment. The Union
will observeall established University rules and regulations, including University Libraries
policies, related to use of facilities. Miami Police at the Police Services Center will have access
to the space for security purposes only. The Union agreesthat it will indemnify and hold the
University harmless from any action commencedagainst the University arising out of the
Union’s maintenance and/or use ofits designated space pursuant to this Section.

52

The Union mayalso request the use of University academic and/orlibrary facilities for the

purpose of conducting meetings or other Union-related business, as well as services related to
use ofthe facilities, where available. The University will permit the Union to use suchfacilities
and/or services on the sameterms, including all customary fees and charges, as other non-student
campus organizations. The University reserves the right to add or modify customary fees charged
for the use of rooms, at its discretion, in accordance with University policy and University

Libraries policies. Such facilities and/or services may be reserved in the name of the Union or by
individual bargaining unit members, stating in the reservation that the reservation is made on
behalf of the Union. The Union agrees to comply with all University policies and University
Libraries policies regarding the use of University facilities and/or services.

53

Article 31: No Strike / No Lockout

During the term of this Agreement, the Union shall not directly or indirectly sanction or
authorize any strike (including a sympathystrike), slowdown or work stoppage, boycott,
picketing, stay-home,or other similar interruption or interference of the work or normal
operations of the University. The Union, its representatives, and bargaining unit members
shall not authorize, instigate, cause, aid, encourage,ratify, threaten, condone,participate
in or assist in any way any such actions. Any violation of this provision is proper cause

for disciplinary action, including discharge in the University’s sole discretion.
The Unionshall at all times cooperate with the University in continuing operations and

shall actively discourage and endeavorto prevent or terminate any violation of this
provision. In the event any violation of this provision occurs, the Union shall
immediately notify all bargaining unit Librarian membersthat the strike, slowdown, work
stoppageor other interference with University operations is prohibited andis not in any
way sanctioned or approved by the Union. Furthermore, the Union shall immediately
advise membersof the bargaining unit to return to their dutiesat once.
The University agrees it shall not lock out any Librarian bargaining unit members
covered by this Agreement.

Other than the question of whether a bargaining unit Librarian member engaged in any
conductthat is prohibited by this Article, no discipline or discharge issued as a result of
violation of this Article shall be subject to the Grievance and Arbitration procedure.

54

Article 32: Duration

1. This Agreement shall be effective upon ratification by FAM membership and approvalof the

University’s Board of Trustees, and shall continuein full force and effect through June 30,
2026.

2.

The Agreementshall continue from year to year thereafter, unless either party notifies the other
in writing not less than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date (or subsequent annual
anniversary) of its desire to terminate or modify the Agreement. In the event either party

provides such notice, the parties will commence negotiations over proposed modifications
within a reasonable time.
3.

The University may seek to modify any provision of this Agreementprior to its expiration
where immediate action is required due to (1) exigent circumstances that arose after or were not
known atthe time of negotiations; (2) legislative or regulatory action taken by a higher-level

legislative or regulatory body after this Agreement becameeffective that requires a changeto
conform to the statute or rule. In such cases, the University may take immediate action
necessary to carry out the functions and mission of the University, in its discretion, in response
to the exigent circumstance or to comply with the change in law orregulation, but shall notify
and bargain with the Union regarding such changes, and/or any bargainable impactthereto, as
soon as reasonably possible.

IN WITNESS WHEREOPF,andintendingto be legally bound hereby, each party has
caused this Agreement to be executed by the handof its properofficer or officers.

MIAMI

UNIVERSITY

FACULTY ALLIANCE OF MIAMI

AAUP, AFT

By

By:

Theresa Kulbaga, President, FAM-

AAUP, AFT

By:

By:

FienaAlbarran,

By:

hrisMakaroff,feds 7 ;

ive Vice President

By:Cage Narada
Kazue

Harada, Secretary

By:
Coom—
By: 5
David Creamer,

Sr:

Vice President for Finance

Jerry YarnefSky,

Treasurer

And Business Services

Date: ec eM hy |, 2025

Date:éFONMMOTfp G AOR
