Holliston, Massachusetts
Annual Report
of the

FINANCE
COMMITTEE

N.R. Gustafson 2013

Fiscal Year
Beginning July 1, 2016 and ending June 30, 2017

Town Meeting

May 9, 2016

May Interrupt Debate
to make a Motion

Yes

Majority

No

No

2

Point of no quorum

No

No

No

None

No

Yes

3

Fix time and date to which to adjourn

Yes

Yes

Yes

Majority

Yes

No

4

Point of personal privilege

No

No

No

None

No

Yes

5

Reconsideration (see s. 15)

Yes

Yes

No

Majority

No

Yes

6

Lay on the table

Yes

Yes

No

Majority

Yes

No

7

Move the question (see s. 14)

Yes

No

No

Majority

No

No

8

Extend the speaker’s time (see s.11)

Yes

No

No

2/3

No

No

9

Postpone an article to a time certain

Yes

Yes

Yes

Majority

Yes

No

10

Commit or refer a matter

Yes

Yes

Yes

Majority

Yes

No

11

Amend (not amendable more than twice)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Majority

Yes

No

12

Postpone indefinitely (if not main motion)

Yes

Yes

No

Majority

Yes

No

None

Main Motion

Yes

Yes

Yes

Variable

Yes

No

None

Take from the table

Yes

No

No

Majority

No

No

None

Advance an article from order in Warrant

Yes

Yes

Yes

2/3

No

No

*

Point of order or procedural information

No

No

No

None

No

Yes

*

Appeal ruling of Moderator

Yes

Yes

No

3/4

No

Yes

*

Divide a question

Yes

Yes

Yes

Majority

Yes

No

* Same rank as motion out of which it arises.

Vote Required

Yes

Amendable

Yes

Debatable

Adjourn to a fixed time or recess

Town Meeting Motions or Points

Second Required

1

Rank of Motion in
Order of Precedence

May Reconsider

RULES FOR MOTIONS OR POINTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Town Meeting Motions and Points

Inside front cover

Extract from By-laws Regarding Town Meeting Procedure

1

Message to the Citizens of Holliston

3

Explanation of Terms

7

About Proposition 2 1/2

9

About the Finance Committee

9

Warrant for Annual Town Meeting

10

Omnibus Budget

43

Article 26 Map

50

Revenue Budget

51

Wage and Benefit Detail

52

Financial Tables

53

Citizen Volunteer Form

57

Emergency Notification

58

EXTRACT FROM BY-LAWS REGARDING TOWN MEETING PROCEDURES
QUORUMS. At all Town Meetings one hundred (l00) registered voters of the Town shall be
necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of Town business; but a lesser number may
from time to time adjourn any such Meeting. Notwithstanding the above, whenever an article at
a Special Town Meeting involves only the transfer of funds within Town accounts, forty (40)
registered voters of the Town shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of
such article or to postpone an article requiring a quorum of one hundred (100) to a time certain.
For the purposes of this Section "free cash" shall not be considered a Town account.
ORDER OF ARTICLES. All articles in the warrant shall be taken up in the order of their
arrangement unless otherwise decided by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the voters present and voting.
LENGTH OF SPEECHES. Except in the discretion of the Moderator, no person shall speak
more than two times or more than a total of fifteen (15) minutes upon any question without
obtaining leave of the Meeting unless to correct an error or answer a question.
MOTIONS. Any action taken by a Town Meeting shall be by vote upon a motion. All motions,
if required by the Moderator, shall be reduced to writing before being submitted to the Meeting.
Any motions included in the Finance Committee Report on the warrant shall be considered as
motions presented to the Meeting, but any registered voter may present a different motion on a
question and this motion shall take precedence over any prepared motion in the Finance
Committee Report.
MOVING THE QUESTION. A motion to move the question need not be recognized by the
Moderator unless the Moderator is satisfied that various views on the subject have had an
opportunity to be heard. A motion to move the question shall not be made by the last speaker on
the question under debate.
RECONSIDERATION. Any voter may make a motion to reconsider. No vote shall be
reconsidered unless the motion to reconsider is made at the same session and within one-half
hour of the original vote. No question shall be twice reconsidered except by a two-thirds (2/3)
vote of the voters present and voting. If a motion to reconsider passes, the subject question must
be voted upon at the same session as the original vote.
VOTING PROCEDURE. After the voters have had the opportunity to be heard on a motion,
the Moderator may call for a voice vote, hand vote and/or secret ballot. A hand vote shall be
used if requested by three (3) or more voters. Notwithstanding the above, a secret ballot shall be
used if so voted by a majority prior to the initial vote on the motion or if requested by three (3)
voters after a preceding hand vote on the motion is decided by five percent (5%) or less of the
total votes cast. Any vote tellers required shall first be selected from the members of the Board
of Registrars present and then from such other registered voters appointed by the Moderator who
have not previously spoken at the Meeting on the subject to be voted. The Town Clerk shall
have ready at each Town Meeting an up-to-date voter registration list and a sufficient supply of
ballots. All ballots used on any vote shall be identical. Ballots used on subsequent votes shall be
easily distinguishable from ballots used in a previous vote.
1|Page

ADJOURNMENT. No new article or line item may be considered at any Town Meeting after
1l:00 p.m. unless two-thirds (2/3) of the voters present and voting, vote to continue the session.
Any adjournment shall be to a date, time and place specified by vote of the Meeting unless the
warrant is completely acted upon or unless otherwise provided by these By-laws.

NOTES

2|Page

To the Citizens of Holliston:
The Finance Committee submits this warrant for your consideration of the FY17 Omnibus
Budget and associated articles.
Financial Overview
This report is based on current revenue and expense projections and a balanced understanding of
Holliston’s town services. As we look towards FY17, the economy remains steady but
governments at all levels (federal, state, and local) continue to face funding challenges. For
Holliston, this translates into continued low growth in general local aid and monies for statutory
mandates. Locally, better than expected growth in the town’s tax base helped improve the
overall bottom line as we developed a balanced budget for FY17. As a result, the budget
presented here results in no service reductions in FY17. In order to give the Finance
Committee maximum flexibility, for FY17 budgeting the committee utilized the latest local aid
recommendation from the Governor’s budget recommendation.
The Finance Committee continues to focus on fiscal discipline and a series of fiscal objectives:
1. Encourage cost effective management while maintaining the quality and level of services
that the town’s residents expect, with a focus on fiscal sustainability.
2. Address ongoing capital needs. A comprehensive capital plan is being developed with
the help of funds received from a recently signed community compact.
3. Build the Town’s overall reserves (the sum of the stabilization fund and free cash) to a
level of 8.1% of the annual budget appropriation. This level is considered ‘strong’
according to the credit rating agencies, provided the town is addressing its long term
liabilities.
4. Address the town’s future benefit liabilities (pensions, health care, etc).
The Finance Committee has made significant progress in each of these areas. There is now an
annual appropriation for capital expenditures ($800,000 for FY17) included in the budgeting
process to insure that capital needs can be at least partially addressed. Assuming Town Meeting
approval of the Finance Committee recommendations, reserves will stand at 8.1%, right at the
target, and we will be continuing to fund Holliston’s Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB)
liability by adding $1,500,000 to our OPEB Trust Fund per the adopted funding schedule. With
help from the community compact the town is finally beginning the detailed work needed to
create a master capital plan. Although there is still more work to do, based on these measures
Holliston’s fiscal health is improving.
At the start of the budget process, the Finance Committee, with the help of the Town
Administrator, reviewed the fiscal picture at the state level and determined that it is likely that
Holliston will be receiving the same amount in local aid for FY17 as we received in FY16. With
this backdrop, the Finance Committee set a budget guideline of 1.5% growth for each
department, with compensation adjustments of 2.5%. Over the past five months the Committee
has met with all Town departments and committees to consider how to best allocate our limited
resources. We have worked with the departments and committees to understand how to respond
to service needs. We have updated our revenue modeling based on the latest information to give
3|Page

us the most accurate fiscal picture we could have heading into Town Meeting. The omnibus
budget recommendations in Article 14 reflect implementation of the funding guideline with
limited exception.
The Finance Committee also recognizes that it is sometimes difficult to digest all the fiscal
information presented in this warrant, and that many citizens would like to understand more of
the financial details prior to Town Meeting. For this reason, the Finance Committee will hold a
“Q&A” meeting on May 3 at 7pm in Town Hall room 105 where anyone can come to ask
questions about the budget or the Finance Committee recommendations. It is our hope that this
will allow Town Meeting to proceed more efficiently than it has in the past.
As always, we welcome and encourage public attendance at our meetings. Our meetings
(weekly during the budget season) are televised on HCAT whenever possible and are available
on-demand through the HCAT web site www.hcattv.org. We also have a web page with all the
department budget request information on the town’s web site; look for “Finance” under “Boards
and Committees” on www.townofholliston.us.
Capital Reserve/Stabilization/OPEB Trust Funds
The Finance Committee, in Article 15, is recommending an appropriation of $800,000 to the
Capital Reserve to meet the town’s ongoing capital needs. This year the recommended
appropriation has been raised due to initial projections that show an increased need for capital
replacement and several capital requests that require immediate funding. The recommendation
for the Employee Benefits budget includes the annual OPEB trust contribution and continues our
commitment to reach full funding by 2040. The recommendation for article 32 uses partial
funding from the stabilization fund to perform the hazardous material abatement at the Flagg
school as a required first step for its eventual demolition. At this time no money is being added
to the stabilization fund—the Finance Committee expects any addition to reserves to take place
in October when the revenue picture is clearer.
Capital Budget Highlights
The Finance Committee is currently recommending capital expenditures only for seasonallysensitive projects that require funding ahead of our normal fall capital reviews. These
recommendations are detailed in Article 17 and include state-mandated replacement of our fuel
storage tank, replacement of a dump truck / plow, Chromebook purchases for the schools, and
construction of a new parking lot and associated safety improvements at the senior center. Any
other capital purchases will be addressed at the October Town Meeting.
The Finance Committee is indebted to the many dedicated and talented Town employees whose
efforts make this process and report possible. We would like to commend the committees and
departments for their spirit of cooperation in formulating this budget. Their continued efforts on
behalf of the town are appreciated.
Respectfully submitted,
HOLLISTON FINANCE COMMITTEE
4|Page

Kenneth S. Szajda, Chairman

Daniel Alfred

Michelle Zeamer, Vice-Chairman

Elizabeth Liberty

Timothy Maxwell

William Dowd

Suzanne Nersessian

Revenue Planning
The Finance Committee annually reviews and analyzes historical revenue and expense
information through the current fiscal year and attempts to project out over the next three to five
years. Certain basic assumptions are used in this process:
•
•
•

real estate tax revenues will increase at the rate of 2.5% per year;
revenue from new growth will further increase real estate tax revenues at the rate of
approximately 1% to 2% per year (or less, depending on ongoing monitoring of
construction activity); and
State aid revenue will remain unchanged in many categories; the total of all State aid will
be adjusted upward or downward based on economic analysis and guidance from state
leaders.

In fact, general state aid decreased by 1.5% overall from FY02 to FY14. A modest increase in
state aid in FY15 brought the total state aid back to the same level as in FY02. We built our
budget assumptions for FY17 on no change in State aid. New growth, as determined by the
Board of Assessors, has been variable over the last decade and is a strong function of
macroeconomic conditions. We have estimated new growth for FY17 at $325,000, which is
consistent with the “low water mark” we have seen in the past.
Each year, the Committee also reviews projected available revenues from restricted funds such
as water surplus and the Capital Expenditure Fund. Water surplus funds are available to cover
capital projects specific to the water distribution system. The Capital Expenditure Fund can be
used for capital projects, acquisitions and improvements in general.
The use of the projected revenues to support expenditures was then based on a few general
assumptions:
• employee benefits will increase an aggregate of 8%, primarily due to health insurance
and retirement system increases;
• at least $800,000 will be dedicated to capital projects;
• current and proposed debt is fully funded; and
• we will continue our annual $1.5 million contribution to our OPEB trust fund.
This is a basic framework within which we began the annual budget deliberation process.

5|Page

FY17 Budget Requests
We issued an initial guideline for departmental budget requests suggesting an overall 1.5%
increase in expenses from FY16 to FY17. Departments were also asked to identify any changes
for FY17 in the schedule of capital projects which was originally developed in 1994 and has
been updated annually since then (pending completion of the new capital plan).
The Finance Committee reviewed the various capital and operating requests with the individual
departments from January through April. Our specific budget recommendations appear in the
column headed Recommended Fiscal Year 2017 in the Omnibus Budget. Our recommendations
concerning special article appropriations appear after each of the articles.
The following is a summary of our omnibus budget recommendations.

General Government

Operating Budget Comparison, FY16 to FY17
FY16
FY17
2,162,277
2,229,064

% Change
3.09%

Culture & Recreation

897,517

914,657

1.91%

Pensions & Benefits

8,456,762

8,556,795

1.18%

Solid Waste

1,029,710

1,045,156

1.50%

Debt Service

5,302,498

5,533,450

4.36%

Public Safety

3,956,555

4,048973

2.34%

Local Schools

31,052,370

31,883,737

2.68%

783,665

840,586

7.26%

Public Works

1,814,413

1,815,184

0.014%

Water Department

2,072,502

2,248,350

8.48%

Keefe Technical School

General Government
General Government includes Selectmen, Finance Committee, Town Accountant, Board of
Assessors, Treasurer/Collector, Other Financial Administration, Technology, Town Clerk,
Elections, Conservation Commission, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Public
Buildings, Board of Health, Economic Development and Veterans’ Services.
Culture and Recreation
Youth and Family Services, Library and Parks and the Council on Aging budget.
Pensions and Benefits
This includes health insurance portion of The Pensions and Benefits area also includes
retirement, Medicare expenses, unemployment benefits, disability insurance, life insurance,
6|Page

workers’ compensation, unemployment benefits and sick leave reserves and the annual OPEB
contribution.
Public Safety
Public Safety includes Police, Auxiliary Police, Fire, Building Inspection, Sealer of Weights and
Measures, Emergency Management, Animal Control and Ambulance.
Debt Service
The debt service budget for FY17 reflects the new borrowing for 1750 Washington Street that
was authorized in FY16. The Town also issued refunding bonds for the Elementary schools and
the Fire Station realizing a combined savings of $140,100 for FY17. Reimbursements from the
State for more than 60% of the school building project started during FY01 for the Elementary
school portion and in FY05, for the High School and Middle School. These reimbursements for
FY 17 are estimated to be $2,159,302 against the school debt service obligation of $3,927,306.
Schools
The local school budget recommendation is the result of a collaborative process with School
Committee. The budget amount for Keefe Technical School is based on an increase in
enrollment from Holliston.
Public Works
This category includes Highway, Snow & Ice, Street Lighting, Wastewater Treatment and Motor
Vehicle Fuels.
Water Department
The entire cost of the DPW-Water Division budget is offset by contributions to the Town's
General Fund from water system revenues. The Water Department also had refunding bonds
issued for the Treatment Plant that resulted in a FY17 savings of $43,950.
EXPLANATION OF TERMS
The following terms are frequently used in Finance Committee Reports, and during Annual and
Special Town Meetings. These definitions are provided in order to give everyone a better
understanding of these terms.
Capital Expenditure Fund B an account created by a special act of the legislature allowing
Holliston to set aside funds in reserve for capital expenditures. As of March 31, 2016, the
balance was $1,192,592 (see page 56).
Community Preservation Fund B a fund generated by a 1.5% surcharge on real estate taxes,
after allowable deductions, and matching grants from the state. This fund is administered by the
Community Preservation Committee for the purpose of preserving and expanding community
assets in open space, historic resources, recreational land and community housing. As of March
31, 2016, the undesignated Community Preservation Fund balance was $1,341,597.
Conservation Fund B a fund managed by the Conservation Commission which can be used to
purchase property or interests in property for conservation purposes or to prepare plans or
studies. As of March 31, 2016, the Conservation Fund balance was $12,413.
7|Page

Free Cash B a fund certified annually by the Massachusetts Department of Revenue by
deducting from surplus revenue all uncollected taxes for prior years. As of March 31, 2016, the
Town's Free Cash was $0 (see page 54).
Golf Course Capital Account B funds realized from the operations at the golf course are placed
into this account for future improvements, after obligations for debt service and contributions to
the General Fund are met. As of March 31, 2016, the unencumbered balance in the Golf Course
Capital Account was $154,495.
OPEB Trust Fund B this fund was created through special legislation in 2013 for the purpose of
setting aside money to cover the future costs of other post-employment benefits for former Town
employees. As of March 31, 2016, the balance in the OPEB Trust Fund was $6,443,846.
Open Space Acquisition Fund B this fund was created by the Town for the purpose of funding
acquisitions of property to be preserved as open space. The balance in this fund was $143,050 as
of March 31, 2016.
Overlay B the amount annually raised by the Assessors in excess of appropriations and other
charges for the purpose of creating a fund to cover abatements granted and to avoid fractions in
the tax rate. As of March 31, 2016, the balance in the FY16 Overlay was $202,167 (see page 55).
Overlay Reserve B the accumulated amount of Overlay for various years not used or required to
be held in the specific Overlay accounts for a given year, and which may be used by a vote of the
Town for any lawful purpose. As of March 31, 2016, the Overlay Reserve balance was
$339,327.
Reserve Fund B this fund is established by the voters at the Annual Town Meeting and may be
composed of (1) an appropriation not exceeding 5% of the tax levy of the preceding year; or (2)
money transferred from the Overlay Reserve. Transfers from the Reserve Fund are within the
exclusive control of the Finance Committee. The purpose of the Reserve Fund is to fund
extraordinary and unforeseen items. It is not intended as a supplement to departmental
budgets. The Reserve Fund balance as of March 31, 2016, was $192,914.
Revolving Funds B these are raised primarily by the School and Park departments, and are kept
separate from all other funds received by the Town. Such funds are kept under exclusive control
(by state statute) of the receiving department, and are expended without further appropriation by
the Town. Please see page for a breakdown of the funds.
Stabilization Fund B a special account created originally to provide a reserve for capital
expenditures but recently changed by State law to allow its use for any purpose. As of March 31,
2016, the Stabilization Fund balance was $4,862,427 (see page 56).
Water Surplus B Water Surplus is comprised of water department revenue, realized from fees,
found to be in excess of operating costs. Use of these funds is limited to water capital projects
and water system development. Water Surplus was $2,120,131 as of March 31, 2016.
8|Page

ABOUT PROPOSITION 2 1/2
Proposition 2 1/2 contains two separate, distinct levy limits. The first limits the tax levy to 2.5%
of the full and fair valuation of the Town each year. The second levy limit confines the annual
increase in levy authority to 2.5% of the prior year's authorized levy with new growth added.
Proposition 2 1/2 allows overrides to expand the annual increase in levy authority by more than
2.5% in a given year. The law does not allow an expansion of the overall levy limit of 2.5% of
the Town's valuation except by vote of the Town Election for past or future debt and one-time
capital exclusions.
ABOUT THE FINANCE COMMITTEE
The Finance Committee is an elected body, consisting of seven members. Its responsibilities,
functions, and organization are defined in Article IV of the Town's General By-laws. The
ultimate authority governing the conduct of the Committee is derived from Chapter 39 of the
General Laws of the Commonwealth. Section 16 of Chapter 39 sets forth the role of the
Committee. According to Chapter 39, the Committee shall consider any or all municipal
questions for the purpose of making budgets, recommendations and/or reports to the Town at all
town meetings.
Each department furnishes the Finance Committee with detailed estimates of expenses for the
ensuing year. After consideration, the Finance Committee determines the amounts which, in
their opinion, should be appropriated, and submits its recommendations, with such explanations
and suggestions as they may deem desirable, to the citizens of the Town. Final appropriation is
made by an action of town meeting.
The Finance Committee controls the Reserve Fund and may, from time to time, make transfers
from this fund to other accounts by vote of the Committee.
In addition to its own meetings, the Finance Committee is present at all town meetings, and,
when requested or necessary, the Committee or individual members attend meetings of other
Town boards, committees or departments.
The following is the text of Article IV of the Holliston General By-laws describing the duties and
responsibilities of the Finance Committee:
Section 1.
The town shall have a Finance Committee, consisting of seven members, elected
for a term of three years each, and so elected that the term of no more than three nor less than
two shall expire in any one year.
Section 2.
No person holding any other elected or appointed office and no person employed
by the town shall be eligible to serve as a member of the Finance Committee, except that, any
member of the Finance Committee, who holds another appointed office on the effective date of
this amendment shall be allowed to continue in such appointed office for so long as he or she
remains a member of the Finance Committee. Any person so exempt must abstain from any
decisions or vote of said Committee and also refrain from any action which will or appear to
create a conflict of interest.
9|Page

Section 3.
The Finance Committee shall consider any and all municipal questions for the
purpose of making reports or recommendations to the town, including but not limited to matters
relating to the appropriation, the borrowing and the expenditure of money, municipal debt,
property valuations and assessments, and the administration of the town offices and departments.
Section 4.
The various town boards, officers and committees involved with the expenditure
of money shall, on or before a date specified by the Finance Committee, prepare detailed
estimates of the amounts deemed by them necessary for the administration of their respective
offices and departments for the ensuing fiscal year, with explanatory statements of the reasons
for any changes from the amounts appropriated for the same purpose in the preceding year.
Section 5.
All officers, boards, or committees of the town, elected or appointed shall on
request, furnish to the Finance Committee or to any delegated member or authorized agent
thereof, any desired information about town affairs and town funds under their control relevant
to financial matters.
Section 6.
The Finance Committee shall submit, at least seven days prior to any town
meeting, a printed report of its recommendations to the voters including a copy of the warrant
and an explanation of its recommendations. The report submitted prior to the annual town
meeting shall also contain an appropriate form which would encourage citizen participation in
town boards and committees. No appropriation shall be made until a report thereon has been
received from the Finance Committee.

WARRANT
TOWN OF HOLLISTON
ANNUAL TOWN MEETING
Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Middlesex, ss.
Town of Holliston
To any Constable of the Town of Holliston, Greetings:
In the name of the Commonwealth you are hereby required to notify and warn the inhabitants of
the Town of Holliston who are qualified to vote in Town affairs to meet in the Holliston High
School auditorium on:
Monday,
May 9, 2016
Tuesday,
May 10, 2016 (if necessary)
Wednesday,
May 11, 2016 (if necessary)
Thursday,
May 12, 2016 (if necessary)
at 7:30 p.m. to act on the following Articles, to wit:
ARTICLE 1.
HEAR REPORTS OF THE BOARD OF SELECTMEN
To hear and act on the report of the Selectmen. (Board of Selectmen)

10 | P a g e

COMMENTS: The Board of Selectmen will provide a report on activities of the Board since
the last Annual Town Meeting on May 4, 2015. This is a standard article that allows reports
commissioned by the Town to be heard.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 2.
HEAR REPORT OF THE FINANCE COMMITTEE
To hear and act on the report of the Finance Committee. (Finance Committee)
COMMENTS: The Chairman of the Finance Committee will provide a report regarding the
Town’s overall financial condition.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 3.

AUTHORIZE TREASURER TO SELL FORECLOSED TAX TITLE
PROPERTIES
To see if the Town will vote to authorize the Town Treasurer, subject to the approval of the
Selectmen, to sell property acquired through foreclosure of tax titles by the Town and other real
estate, after first giving notice of the time and place of the sale by posting such notice of sale in
some convenient place in the Town, by publishing such notice of such sale in a newspaper
having general circulation in the Town and by posting such notice on a Holliston Cable Access
Television (HCAT) bulletin board and on the Town’s website at least fourteen (14) days before
the sale. The Treasurer shall also give notice of such sale to the Executive Director of the
Holliston Housing Authority, the Chair of the Holliston Housing Trust and the Chair of the
Holliston Housing Committee or its subsequent equivalent by first class letter at least forty-five
(45) days before the sale. The Treasurer may hold a public auction and may reject any bid which
she/he deems inadequate, and any such advertisement, notice or indication that real property is to
be offered for sale by the Town of Holliston, or any department, commission, or other
subdivision of the Town shall include the following statement: “Buyers should be aware that the
Town of Holliston does not guarantee this property to be in conformity with existing zoning
bylaws.”
Whenever the proceeds of the sale or other disposal of real estate, other than that acquired
through tax title foreclosure, by the Town of Holliston exceed five hundred dollars, the same
shall be applied to the payment of indebtedness incurred in acquiring such real estate or shall be
added to the sinking fund, if any, from which said indebtedness is payable, or if no such
indebtedness is outstanding will be applied to the Town’s Capital Expenditure Fund as
established by Chapter 46 of the Acts of 1993. The proceeds of a sale in excess of five hundred
dollars of any park land by the Town shall be used only by the Town for acquisition of land for
park purposes or for capital improvements to park land; or take any action relative thereto.
(Board of Selectmen)
COMMENTS: From time to time, the Treasurer/Collector takes personal property (mostly real
estate) with the approval of the Land Court due to delinquency to make property tax payments.
This article would allow the Treasurer/Collector to dispose of those properties.
11 | P a g e

THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 4.

AMEND CONSOLIDATED PERSONNEL BY-LAW
SECTION 29, JOB CLASSIFICATION PLAN
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Consolidated Personnel By-law Section 29, Job
Classification Plan, by reflecting those revisions, deletions and/or additions to be effective as of
July 1, 2016; or take any action relative thereto. (Town Administrator)
1.) SECTION 29, JOB CLASSIFICATION PLAN (Full-time permanent positions)
POSITION
Administrative Assessor
Assistant Clerk
Assistant Director, Library
Assistant, Town Clerk
Assistant, Treasurer/Collector
Cataloger, Library
Children’s Librarian
Clerk to a Board/Committee
Crossing Guard
Custodian
Dispatcher

GRADE
400
200
400
400
400
300
400
100
100
100
200

POSITION
Head Dispatcher
Head of Circulation, Library
Library, Page
Matron, Police
Outreach Manager
Principal Clerk
Program Coordinator
Reference Librarian
Technician, Library
Van Driver

GRADE
400
400
50
100
400
300
200
400
100
100

COMMENTS: This is a standard Article in that it places full-time and part-time employees into
the Job Classification Plan based on paygrade and positon title. The Clerk of the Board or
Committee has been added to the Job Classification Plan at Grade 100. This is not an additional
new employee, it just puts the current position on the Classification Plan. These positions are
typically temporary and part-time, hourly employees. For example, the position of Clerk to the
Finance Committee and Clerk to the Community Preservation Committee are tasked to take their
minutes. The Library Page position has been added to the Plan at Grade 50. There are currently
three employees in the classification that have never been part of the Plan. The position is parttime and hourly. By adding the position to the Plan, it will allow the Pages to receive step
increases. All other library personnel are part of the Plan and receive step increases on their
anniversary date. The Program Coordinator has been added to the Plan at Grade 200. There is
currently one person in the position. This is an hourly position at the Senior Center. By adding
the above positions to the Plan, all non-union, town positions are now on the Job Classification
Plan which will allow Department Heads to know exactly what a position is to be paid and allow
for proper budgeting.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 5.
12 | P a g e

AMEND CONSOLIDATED PERSONNEL BY-LAW

SECTION 30, JOB CLASSIFICATION PLAN
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Consolidated Personnel By-law Section 30, Job
Compensation Plan, to reflect the rates listed below, and the inclusion of any new rates resulting
from reevaluation or new or revised positions to be effective as of July 1, 2016; or take any
action relative thereto. (Town Administrator)
SECTION 30, JOB COMPENSATION PLAN, PART I, SCHEDULE B, HOURLY RATES
GRADE
----------50
100
200
300
400
500

STEP 1
---------10.77
15.99
18.97
19.56
22.52
24.44

STEP 2
---------11.45
17.01
20.18
20.81
23.96
26.00

STEP 3
---------11.93
17.72
21.02
21.68
24.95
27.08

STEP 4
---------12.23
18.16
21.53
22.21
25.56
27.74

STEP 5
---------12.52
18.52
21.97
22.66
26.09
28.31

STEP 6
---------13.04
19.30
22.89
23.60
27.18
29.49

STEP 7
---------13.31
19.71
23.38
24.11
27.76
30.13

COMMENTS: This article will bring the Compensation Plan up-to-date reflecting a 2.5% cost
of living adjustment.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 6.
PAY UNPAID BILLS
To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate or transfer from available funds a sum of
money for unpaid bills from prior years; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of
Selectmen)
Vendor
Fiscal Year
Amount
Board
Kleinfelder
2015
$718.36
Selectmen
Cabot Risk Strategies
2015
$90.32
Selectmen
Total
$808.68
COMMENTS: Occasionally, bills are not paid at the end of a fiscal year for a number of
reasons. These may include late submission from a vendor or late submission for a Reserve Fund
Transfer request to the Finance Committee by a Board, Committee, Commission or Department.
Kleinfelder: $718.26 is an outstanding bill received by the Town’s contracted vendor to provide
monitoring reports at the former Marshall Street Landfill. The billing period is from 3/30/15 –
6/30/15.
Cabot Risk Strategies: $90.32 relates to a police officer injured on duty and payment of a
deductible that was not billed by the Town’s provider, Cabot Risk Strategies.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS THAT THE TOWN RAISE AND
APPROPRIATE $808.68, FIVE IN FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT, MR. DOWD
OPPOSED.
ARTICLE 7.
13 | P a g e

CURRENT FISCAL YEAR TRANSFERS

To see if the Town will vote to transfer from available funds a sum of money for the purpose of
supplementing various accounts of the Town’s Fiscal Year 2016 annual operating budget,
previously voted by the Town under Article 17, of the Warrant for the 2015 Annual Town
Meeting and under Article 1, of the Warrant for the October 26, 2015 Special Town Meeting; or
take any action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
Department
Amount
Police
$39,000
Water
$176,729
Total
$215,729
COMMENTS: Police - The Board of Selectmen recently reached agreement with the Holliston
Police Association, Local 160, MCOP. Some of the cost of this settlement has been absorbed
within the FY16 Police Department operating budget. The amount above is the outstanding
amount needed to balance the FY16 Police Department operating budget.
Water - The $176,729 is for Water Department benefit costs that were not voted at the May 4,
2015, Annual Town Meeting. The cost will be funded by Water Surplus.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS TRANSFERING $39,000 FROM THE
FY16 SNOW AND ICE BUDGET TO THE FY16 POLICE BUDGET AND $176,729
FROM THE WATER SURPLUS ACCOUNT, FIVE IN FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN
ABSENT, MR. DOWD OPPOSED.
ARTICLE 8.

AUTHORIZE BOARD OF SELECTMEN TO SELL SURPLUS
EQUIPMENT
To see if the Town will vote to authorize the Board of Selectmen to hold a public auction for the
purpose of disposing of surplus departmental equipment; or take any action relative thereto.
(Board of Selectmen)
COMMENTS: This standard article allows the Town to sell used vehicles, equipment or other
personal property.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 9.

AUTHORIZATION TO EXPEND CHAPTER 90 (STATE AID FOR
HIGHWAYS PROGRAM)
To see if the Town will vote to authorize the Department of Public Works, with the approval of
the Board of Selectmen, to use and expend sums received from the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts as reimbursements under the Chapter 90 State Aid to Highways program for
further construction, reconstruction and improvements, including surface treatments of approved
public ways within the Town; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)

14 | P a g e

COMMENTS: Annually, the Commonwealth provides state assistance to cities and towns in
support of road reconstruction and maintenance projects. Holliston is projected to receive
$508,485 in FY17. This article would allow the Selectmen to receive and expend these funds.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.

ARTICLE 10.

REAUTHORIZE REVOLVING ACCOUNTS FOR FISCAL YEAR
2017
To see if the Town will vote, under the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 44,
section 53E1/2, as amended, to reauthorize the following revolving accounts for fiscal year 2017:
1.
a Wetlands Filing Fee revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received
as payment of filing fees for wetlands determinations and from which account expenditures for
the costs of wetland determinations may be made from said account not to exceed $30,000;
2.
a Council on Aging fee revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received
as payment of fees for the use of the Senior Center and from which account expenditures for
Senior Center expenses may be made in an amount not to exceed $5,000;
3.
a Composting Kit revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received from
the sale of composting kits and from which account expenditures for purchasing composting kits
may be made in an amount not to exceed $3,000;
4.
a Response and Recovery fee revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts
received as payment of fees and reimbursements for response to natural and man-made
emergencies and from which account expenditures for planning, response, recovery and
mitigation efforts by Town departments may be made in an amount not to exceed $100,000;
5.
an Abutter’s List fee revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received as
payment of fees for abutter’s lists and from which fund expenditures for preparing and issuing
abutter’s lists, including technologies, may be made in an amount not to exceed $5,000;
6.
a Building Inspection revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received
as payment of all fees received by the Building Inspection department for plumbing, gas and
wiring permits and from which account expenditures reasonably related to inspectional services
for plumbing, gas and wiring may be made in an amount not to exceed $100,000;
7.
a Town Hall revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received as
payment of all fees for rental of the Town Hall facility and from which account expenditures
reasonably related to maintaining the Town Hall for purposes of rental may be made in an
amount not to exceed $25,000;

15 | P a g e

8.
a Senior Center Van Services revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts
received as payment of all fees, reimbursements and contracted receipts for use of the Senior
Center van and transportation program and from which account expenditures reasonably related
to maintaining the Senior Center van service and transportation program may be made in an
amount not to exceed $10,000;
9.
an Agricultural Commission programs revolving account into which shall be deposited
receipts received as payment for all programs and activities of the Agricultural Commission and
from which account expenditures reasonably related to the programs and activities of the
Agricultural Commission may be made in an amount not to exceed $10,000;
10.
a Sealer of Weights and Measures revolving account into which shall be deposited
receipts received for Sealer of Weights and Measures services and from which account
expenditures related to the services of the Sealer of Weights and Measures may be made in an
amount not to exceed $5,000;
11.
a Fluorescent Bulb recycling revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts
received from recycling fluorescent bulbs and from which account expenditures for recycling
fluorescent bulbs may be made in an amount not to exceed $3,000;
12.
a Banner Revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received as payment
of fees for banners over Washington Street and from which account expenditures for placing the
banners may be made in an amount not to exceed $5,000;
13.
an Accident Fee revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received as
payment of fees for motor vehicle accident investigations and from which account expenditures
for investigating motor vehicle accidents may be made in an amount not to exceed $5,000;
14.
an Inoculation revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received for
reimbursement for inoculations and from which account expenditures for inoculations may be
made in an amount not to exceed $20,000;
15.
a Cost of Prosecution account into which shall be deposited receipts received as payment
of fees for court imposed penalties and from which account expenditures for the costs of
prosecution may be made in an amount not to exceed $30,000; and
16.
a Nutrition revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received for nutrition
programs at the Senior Center and from which account expenditures for nutrition programs at the
Senior Center may be made in an amount not to exceed $10,000;
17.
a Pinecrest Golf Course revolving account into which shall be deposited receipts received
for golf course and restaurant fees and from which account expenditures for debt payments and
lease payments of the Pinecrest Golf Course may be made in an amount not to exceed $200,000;
18.
a Technology Repair and Replenishment account into which shall be deposited receipts
received for an optional insurance policy for families who have borrowed student technology
16 | P a g e

under the care and custody of the School Committee and from which account expenditures for
the costs of repair, replacement, and future replenishment may be made with the approval of the
School Committee in an amount not to exceed $75,000;
provided that expenditures from said accounts shall require the approval of the Board of
Selectmen (except for the School Committee) and expenditures in excess of the amounts stated
shall require the approval of the Board of Selectmen and the Finance Committee; or take any
action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
COMMENTS: Over the years, several revolving accounts have been established, adopted and
re-authorized by Town Meeting. This article authorizes continued use through the end of FY17.
These accounts are funded through user fees and permits to provide services at no budgetary
costs to the Town.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVOARBLE ACTION, WITH A
DECREASE IN THE SPENDING LIMIT TO $10,000 FOR THE RESPONSE AND
RECOVERY ACCOUNT, SIX IN FAVOR MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.

ARTICLE 11.
PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
To see if the Town will vote to accept the provisions of Chapter 73 of the Acts of 1986, as
amended by Chapter 126 of the Acts of 1988, authorizing the Board of Assessors to grant an
increase of twenty percent (20%) to all exemptions from property taxes excluding those granted
under clause 18 of section 5 of Chapter 59 of the Massachusetts General Laws for the fiscal year
commencing July 1, 2016; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of Assessors)
COMMENTS: This is an annual article that provides for tax exemptions to assist elderly and
other fixed income residents. With approval of this article at each Annual Town Meeting, certain
residents may avail themselves of abatements, if the resident meets certain pre-determined
qualifications.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 12.
AMEND INTEREST RATE PER ANNUM
To see if the Town will vote to amend the interest rate per annum from 8% to 6% under the
provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 59, Section 5, clause 41A, which regulates
tax deferral for homeowners 65 years or older, pursuant to the authority contained in Chapter 136
of the Acts of 2005, thereby amending said clause 41A; or take any action relative thereto.
(Board of Assessors)
COMMENTS: Residents who are 65 and older may take advantage of this option at an annual
rate of 6%.
17 | P a g e

THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 13.
AMEND INCOME REQUIREMENTS
To see if the Town will vote to accept the provisions of section 51 of Chapter 184 of the Acts of
2002, amending the income requirements under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 59, section
5, clause 41C; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of Assessors)
COMMENTS: This would allow the Town to increase the statutory income requirements to
$20,000 for single and $30,000 for married couples from $10,000-$12,000. The Article was
originally adopted by the Town in 2006. This Article requires annual approval at Town Meeting.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 14.
FISCAL YEAR 2017 BUDGET
To see what money the Town will vote to raise and appropriate or transfer
from available funds to meet expenses and outlays to Town departments, salaries of Town
Officers, sundry and miscellaneous but regular expenditures, for a Reserve Fund, Conservation
Fund, Stabilization Fund, and to appoint trustees or caretakers or authorize the Selectmen to
appoint caretakers of the cemeteries of the Town not otherwise provided for, for the ensuing
year; or take any action relative thereto. (Finance Committee) (Omnibus Budget)
COMMENTS: The Omnibus Budget begins on page 43 of this report.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION
(UNANIMOUS). The Finance Committee voted unanimously on the following budgets:
Conservation Commission, Fire, Motor Vehicle Fuels, Board of Health, Youth and Family
Services, DPW - Water, Keefe Tech and Treasurer/Collector. The Finance Committee
voted six in favor with Ms. Liberty absent on the following budgets: Planning Board, Solid
Waste, Town Buildings, Board of Selectmen, and Council on Aging. The Finance
Committee voted six in favor with Mr. Dowd absent on the following budgets: Finance
Committee, Town Accountant, Board of Assessors, Reserve Fund, Technology, Town
Clerk, Elections, Zoning Board of Appeals, Building Inspector, Sealer of Weights and
Measures, Emergency Management, Animal Control, DPW – Highway, Street Lighting,
Waste Water Treatment, Veterans’ Services, Library, Parks and Recreation, Snow and Ice
and Debt. The Finance Committee voted six in favor with Ms. Nersessian absent on the
following budget: Economic Development. The Finance Committee voted five in favor with
Ms. Nersessian absent and Ms. Liberty abstaining on the following budget: Schools. The
Finance Committee voted four in favor with Ms. Liberty absent, Mr. Dowd opposing and
Ms. Nersessian abstaining on the following budget: Insurance and Benefits.
ARTICLE 15.

18 | P a g e

TRANSFER FROM AVAILABLE FUNDS A SUM OF MONEY
FOR THE CAPITAL EXPENDITURE FUND

To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate or transfer from available funds a sum of
money for the Capital Expenditure Fund; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of
Selectmen)
COMMENTS: It has been the custom of the Town to annually transfer from reserves a sum of
money to the Capital Expenditure Fund to be used at the October Special Town Meeting to fund
capital expenditure requests.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS THAT THE TOWN RAISE AND
APPROPRIATE $800,000, SIX IN FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 16.
REPORT OF THE COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
To see if the Town will vote to act on the report of the Community Preservation Committee on
the fiscal year 2017 community preservation budget and to appropriate or reserve for later
appropriation monies from Community Preservation Fund annual revenues or available funds for
the administrative expenses of the Community Preservation Committee, the payment of debt
service, the undertaking of community preservation projects and all other necessary and proper
expenses for the year:
Reserves
Community Housing Reserve
Open Space Reserve
Historic Resources Reserve
Community Preservation Fund Budget Reserve
Appropriations
Park & Recreation for rehabilitation of courts at Stoddard Park
Administrative Functions to support the Committee
or take any action relative thereto. (Community Preservation Committee)

$ 60,450
$ 60,450
$ 60,450
$423,150
$168,500
$5,000;

THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 17.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate, transfer from available funds, or borrow a
sum of money for the purpose of capital expenditures, including replacement and new vehicles
and equipment, for the Schools, Police, Fire and Public Works departments, and authorize the
Board of Selectmen to trade or sell used equipment toward part of the purchase price; or take any
action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
Department
Item/Activity
Estimated Cost
DPW
1 Utility Rack Body Truck
$48,807
DPW
Purchase and Install Gasoline Tank
$245,000
Schools
Chromebooks
$125,000
Conservation Commission Dam Inspections & Improvements
$28,000
Selectmen
Senior Center Parking Lot
$185,000
Selectmen
Cart Path Improvements
$30,000
19 | P a g e

Total

$661,807

COMMENTS: The Town normally purchases capital items at the October Special Town
Meeting. However, from time to time, departments need to purchase capital items in advance of
that date, usually due to seasonal issues.
1 Utility Rack Body Truck: If approved, this Article would fund the replacement of an old
utility truck which has exceeded its life expectancy.
Purchase and Install Gasoline Tank: The existing underground gasoline storage tank is a
steel, single walled tank and it must be removed. This is pursuant by a directive from the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
Chromebooks: Teachers are delivering a modern, digitally-rich curriculum that fosters critical
thinking, creativity, collaboration, and communication. Chromebooks are currently provided for
each middle school student to use as a learning tool. This proposal would furnish two grades of
students at Holliston High School with Chromebooks, as the first step in a two-year process to
move the High School toward a similar 1:1 environment.
Dam Inspections & Improvements: The Office of Dam Safety has placed the Town on notice
regarding needed repairs to several dams in Town. This article would start to address those
concerns and help to bring the Town back into compliance.
Senior Center Parking Lot: The Senior Center Parking Lot project has been under
consideration and discussion for several years. A bid was issued, the low bidder came in at
$125,000. There are several related items and possible change orders that need to be funded
including payment to the consulting engineer. For example, drainage and placing the above
ground utility wires underground and installing more lighting in the parking lot.
Cart Path Improvements: The Golf Course Advisory Committee is looking for funds to
improve the cart paths at the Golf Course.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS THAT THE TOWN APPROPRIATE
$661,807 FROM THE CAPITAL EXPENDITURE FUND FOR THE PURCHASE OF
THE ITEMS STATED IN THE ARTICLE (FIVE IN FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN
ABSENT, MR. DOWD OPPOSED)

ARTICLE 18.

TRANSFER FROM AVAILABLE FUNDS A SUM OF MONEY
FOR THE STABILIZATION FUND
To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate or transfer from available funds a sum of
money for the Stabilization Fund; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)

20 | P a g e

COMMENTS: The Stabilization Fund is a long range financial planning tool in that the Town
can lawfully set aside revenues and fund large unforeseen expenses. It is similar to a savings
account.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS INDEFINITE POSTPONMENT, SIX
IN FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 19.

WATER MAIN DESIGN AND REPLACEMENT FOR MUDVILLE
AREA
To see if the Town will vote to appropriate from Water Surplus, Water Infrastructure Account,
$43,000 for engineering design and tasks related to replacement of approximately 6,100 linear
feet of water mains in the Mudville Area. The scope of this project includes new water mains,
valves, hydrants, service connections and related work in Pleasant, Spring, School, Exchange,
Mechanic and Union Streets; or take any action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
COMMENTS: This project is part of the Town’s comprehensive water main replacement and
upgrade program.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 20.

WATER MAIN DESIGN AND REPLACEMENT FOR SHAW
FARM ROAD AREA
To see if the town will vote to appropriate from Water Surplus, Water Infrastructure Account
$39,000 for engineering design and tasks related to replacement of approximately 5,000 linear
feet of water mains in the Shaw Farm Road area. The scope of this project includes new water
mains, valves, hydrants, service connections and related work in Clark, Cold Spring and Shaw
Farm Roads, Cynthia Circle, Appleyard Lane, Roberta Circle and Heritage Way; or to take any
other action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
COMMENTS: This project is part of the Town’s comprehensive water main replacement and
upgrade program.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 21.
AMEND ZONING BY-LAW, SECTION I-C
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning By-Law by making the following
changes: Delete Section I-C in its entirety and substitute the following therefor:
I-C PRE-EXISTING NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
1. Applicability.
This By-law shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully in existence or lawfully
begun, or to a building or special permit issued before the first publication of notice of
the public hearing required by G.L. c. 40A, s. 5 at which this By-law, or any relevant
part thereof, was adopted.
21 | P a g e

Construction or operations under a building permit or special permit shall conform to any
subsequent amendments to this By-law, unless the use or construction is commenced within a
period of not more than six months after the issuance of the permit and in any case involving
construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously and
expeditiously as is reasonable.
2. Nonconforming Uses.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may award a special permit to change a nonconforming
use in accordance with this Section only if it determines that such change shall not be
substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming use to the
neighborhood.
2.1 Permissible Changes. The following types of changes to nonconforming uses may
be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals:
1. Change or substantial extension of the use.
2. Change from one nonconforming use to another, less detrimental,
nonconforming use.
2.2 Reversion to Nonconformity. No nonconforming use shall, if changed to a
conforming use, revert to a nonconforming use.
3. Nonconforming Structures.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may award a special permit to change a nonconforming
structure in accordance with this Section only if it determines that such change shall not
be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure to the
neighborhood.
3.1 Permissible Changes. The following types of changes to nonconforming structures
may be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals:
1. Reconstruction, extension or structural change.
2. Alteration to provide for a substantially different purpose or for the same
purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent.
3.2 Changes Resulting in Increased or New Nonconformity. Except as provided below,
the change of a nonconforming structure in such a manner as to increase an existing
nonconformity, or create a new nonconformity, shall require the issuance of a
dimensional variance; the extension of an exterior wall at or along the same
nonconforming distance within a required yard shall also require the issuance of a
dimensional variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
3.3 Nonconforming Single and Two Family Residential Structures. Nonconforming
single and two family residential structures may be changed upon a determination by
the Building Inspector that such proposed change does not increase the nonconforming
nature of said structure by more than 50% of the existing gross floor area.
3.3.1 Permissible Changes. The following circumstances shall not be deemed to
increase the nonconforming nature of said structure and a building permit may be
issued:
22 | P a g e

1. Alteration to a structure located on a lot with non-conforming area, provided
that the structure and any alterations thereto comply with all current setbacks,
building height, and percent building coverage requirements. See Section IVB.
2. Alteration of a structure on a lot with non-conforming frontage, provided that
the structure and any alterations thereto comply with all current setbacks,
building height, and percent building coverage requirements. See Section IVB.
3. Alteration to a structure which encroaches upon one or more required yard or
setback areas, where the alteration will comply with all current setback,
building coverage and building height requirements. See Section IV-B.
4. When an existing residence does not meet the minimum required side yard
setback, an addition may be constructed on the same line as the existing
residence.
If the Building Inspector determines that proposed change exceeds the one or more of
the criteria set forth above (including the 50% cap), the Zoning Board of Appeals may,
by Special Permit, allow such change where it determines that the proposed
modification will not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming
structure to the neighborhood. For the purposes of this subsection only, the term
“reconstruction” shall not include the voluntary demolition of such structure and its
rebuilding. See Section 3.5 below.
3.4 Abandonment or Non-Use. A nonconforming use or structure which has been
abandoned, or not used for a period of two years, shall lose its protected status and be
subject to all of the provisions of this zoning by-law; provided, however, that by special
permit the Zoning Board of Appeals may reestablish a nonconforming use or structure
otherwise abandoned or not used.
3.5 Reconstruction After Catastrophe or Demolition. Any nonconforming structure
may be reconstructed after a catastrophe or after demolition in accordance with the
following provisions:
3.5.1 Procedures.
1. Reconstruction of said premises shall commence within two years after such
catastrophe or demolition.
2. Building(s) reconstructed as of right shall be located on the same footprint as
the original nonconforming structure and shall be only as great in volume or area
as the original nonconforming structure.
3. In the event that the proposed reconstruction would (a) cause the structure to
exceed the volume or area of the original nonconforming structure or (b) cause
the structure to be located other than on the original footprint, a Special Permit
shall be required. In the case of voluntary demolition, the Special Permit shall
be obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to such demolition.
4. Non-Conforming Lots
4.1 Changes to Nonconforming Lots. A lot that does not currently comply with the dimensional
requirements set forth in Section IV-B may be changed provided that such change reduces or
does not increase the extent of the existing nonconformity and does not create a new
23 | P a g e

nonconformity. Such change shall not cause the protected status of the lot to be forfeited and the
lot shall be considered a nonconforming lot.
4.2 Government Acquisition. If government acquisition of land causes a lot to be rendered
nonconforming, or more nonconforming, it shall not cause the protected status of the lot to be
forfeited and the lot shall be considered a nonconforming lot; or take any action relative thereto.
(Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning Board)
COMMENTS: This article is submitted in accordance with a vote of the Zoning Board of
Appeals taken at a meeting on March 16, 2016 and Planning Board on March 17, 2016.
ARTICLE 22. REVISIONS TO ZONING BY-LAWS SECTION I-E
To see if the town will vote to make the following changes to Section
I-E of the Zoning By-Laws:
Item 1. Add the following new definitions, placed in proper alphabetical order:
Apartment - A multi-family dwelling authorized under Section V-G and V-K, herein.
Business or Professional Office – A building or part thereof, for the transaction of business or
provision of services exclusive of the receipt, sale, storage, or processing of merchandise. Shall
include but not be limited to other uses such as an office of a manufacturer’s representative or
salesperson, bank or financial institution, lawyer, real estate office, and outpatient medical or
dental uses.
Child Care Center - A child care center as defined in G.L. c. 15D, s. 1A.
Electric Charging Station, Level Two - A facility equipped with a compatible cable
such as J-1772, for the recharging of the batteries of motor vehicles.
Family day care home, large and small - An accessory use as defined in G.L. c. 15D,
s. 1A.
General Service Establishment – Establishments engaged primarily in providing
services and assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals or businesses including
but not limited to repair, trades, dry cleaning, personal fitness center, and the like.
Qualified Acres - Parcels two (2) acres or more if the sale of products produced from the
agriculture, aquaculture, silviculture, horticulture, floriculture or viticulture use on the parcel
annually generates at least $1,000 per acre based on gross sales dollars per G.L. c. 40A, s. 3.
School Aged Child Care Program - A school aged child care program as that term is
defined in G.L. c. 15D, s. 1A.
Warehouse - A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials, for distribution,
but not for sale on the premises.
24 | P a g e

Item 2. Delete the following existing definitions:
Child Care Facility – Day care center and School-age child care program as defined in MGL, c.
28A, s. 9. (Added May 2001 – ATM, Art. 40)
Family Day Care Home – Any private residence utilized for day care of children as defined in
MGL, c. 28A, s.9. (Added May 2001 – ATM, Art. 40);
or take any action relative thereto. what it will do in relation thereto. (Planning Board)
COMMENTS: This article is submitted in accordance with a vote of the Planning Board on
March 17, 2016.
ARTICLE 23. DELETE EXISITING SCHEDULE OF USE REGULATIONS IN
SECTION III-A OF THE ZONING BY-LAWS AND SUBSTITUTE WITH THE
FOLLOWING LANGUAGE
To see if the Town will vote to delete the existing Schedule of Use Regulations in Section III-A
of the Zoning By-Law, and substitute the following therefor:
SECTION III - USE REGULATIONS
In any district, no building or structure shall be erected or used for any purpose other than those set
forth in the Schedule of Use Regulations and in accordance with the following notations:
Y -

Permitted Use

SP -

Use allowed under Special Permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority as
provided in Section VI-D and VI-E hereinafter.

N -

Prohibited Use

Permitted Uses and uses allowed by the Special Permit Granting Authority
shall be in conformity with the provisions of Section IV and V of this
Zoning By-Law. Where a use, structure, or activity may be classified under
more than one use in the table below, the more specific classification
applies. If equally specific, the more restrictive classification is used.

# A single-family dwelling in an Apartment District shall be governed by the requirements for the Residential
or Agricultural-Residential District on which the Apartment District is superimposed.

25 | P a g e

26 | Page
N

2. Two-family dwelling (See Section IV-C)

N

Y

AR-2

SP

Y

R-1

SP

Y

VR

N

N

C-1

SP

N

VC

N

N

I

Y

Y#

APT

AR-1

Y
N
N
SP

USE

3. Alteration & conversion of single-family
dwelling existing prior to the effective date of this
by-law, to accommodate two or more families,
provided that all intensity, off-street parking and
additional residential floor area requirements are
met, and exterior design of this structure is not
changed from the character of a single-family
dwelling excepting that the exterior of the building
may be reconstructed to accommodate an exit
from the second floor or other units.

4. Multi-family dwellings

5. Apartments

6. Nursing, rest or convalescent home

SP

N

N

Y

AR-2

SP

N

N

Y

R-1

N

N

N

SP

VR

N

N

N

SP

C-1

N

SP

SP

Y

VC

N

N

N

N

I

N

SP

SP

N

APT

# A single-family dwelling in an Apartment District shall be governed by the requirements for the Residential or Agricultural-Residential District on which the Apartment District
is superimposed.

Y

AR-1

1. Single-family detached dwelling

A. RESIDENTIAL USES

USE

27 | Page
Y

Y
Y
SP

AR-1

2. Use of land or structures for educational purposes on
land owned or leased by the commonwealth or any of its
agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic or by a religious
sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit educational
corporation

3. Public buildings, structures and premises
owned or leased by, or from the municipality for
their use or other uses expressly allowed elsewhere
within this By-Law, or M.G.L. Chapter 40A,
and which may also include uses such as
passive and active recreational areas, and be
inclusive of structures which may exceed the height
limitations to which they would otherwise be subject
under Section IV-B of the Town of
Holliston Zoning By-Law

4. Public Utilities

5. Public Service Corporation

USE

6. Use of Municipal property by a Public Service
Corporation or a provider of telecommunication
Services or a provider of a solar energy system,
under lease by the Board of Selectmen after first

Y

AR-1

1. Use of land or structures for religious
purposes

B. INSTITUTIONAL AND EXEMPT USES

USE

AR-2

SP

Y

Y

Y

Y

AR-2

R-1

SP

Y

Y

Y

Y

R-1

VR

SP

Y

Y

Y

Y

VR

C-1

SP

Y

Y

Y

Y

C-1

VC

SP

Y

Y

Y

Y

VC

I

SP

Y

Y

Y

Y

I

APT

SP

Y

Y

Y

Y

APT

28 | Page
SP

SP
Y

SP

AR-1

7. Library, Museum or Civic Center

8. Civic, fraternal, historical, religious, social,
educational, or other non-profit organizations
whose primary function is non-commercial, with
ancillary uses permitted to the extent appropriate
for their support

9. Child care center or school aged child care program

10. Hospital, charitable institution, or other
non-correctional institutional use

USE

Y

Y

Y

Y

1. Horticulture, floriculture or agriculture except the
raising of livestock for commercial use on parcels of
less than five acres or to two qualified acres

2. Raising of poultry or livestock for commercial use
on parcels of less than five acres or two qualified acres

3. Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture on parcels of
five acres or more or two qualified acres

4. Salesroom or stand for the display of agricultural or
horticultural products, the major portion of which is grown
or produced on the premises by a resident proprietor

C. AGRICULTURAL USES

Y

holding a public hearing including giving notice
to all abutters within 300 feet or as further
governed by M.G. L. Chapter 40.

Y

Y

Y

Y

AR-2

SP

Y

SP

SP

Y

Y

Y

SP

Y

R-1

SP

Y

SP

SP

Y

Y

Y

SP

SP

VR

N

Y

SP

SP

Y

Y

Y

SP

SP

C-1

N

Y

SP

SP

Y

Y

Y

SP

SP

VC

N

Y

SP

SP

Y

Y

Y

SP

SP

I

N

Y

SP

SP

Y

N

Y

SP

SP

APT

N

Y

SP

SP

Y

29 | Page
AR-1

USE

SP
SP

SP
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

1. Educational uses or structures which are not public,
Religious, or run by a non-profit educational corporation
Duly licensed in Massachusetts

2. Privately organized camp

3. Bed and breakfast, but not including an overnight cabin,
motel or hotel

4. Hotel, motel, or overnight cabin

5. Retail sales, not including drive-in or outdoor retail sales

6. Personal service establishment

7. General service establishment

8. Drive-in uses and appurtenant buildings or structures

9. Outdoor retail sales

10. Business or professional office

D. COMMERCIAL USES

SP

5. Commercial greenhouse, nonexempt

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

SP

SP

SP

AR-2

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

SP

SP

SP

R-1

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

SP

SP

SP

VR

N

Y

SP

SP

Y

Y

Y

SP

SP

SP

SP

C-1

Y

Y**

SP

N

Y**

Y**

Y

SP

SP

SP

Y

VC

Y

Y

SP

SP

N

N

SP

SP

N

SP

Y

I

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

SP

Y

APT

N

30 | Page
N

N

N

N
N

N
N

12. Undertaking establishment or funeral home

13. Commercial parking lot and/or parking charging a fee

14. Restaurant or other place serving food or beverages only
to persons inside a building

15. Restaurant with drive-in window

16. Restaurant or other place serving food or beverages with either live or
entertainment or which provides outdoor seating
N

N

N

N

N

SP

N

R-1

N

N

N

N

N

N

VR

SP

SP

Y

SP

SP

SP

C-1

** Except ‘SP’ for a new building over 5,000 s.f. gross floor area or an addition resulting in a building over 5,000 s.f. gross floor area.

N

N

N

AR-2

11. Mixed office and warehouse use where not more than 20% of the
gross floor area not to exceed 15,000 square feet is devoted to warehouse
facilities, packaging, or fabrication
and is otherwise in compliance with local, state and federal
laws, rules and regulations, but not including any use which
involves the manufacture, storage, transportation, discharge
or disposal of hazardous, toxic or radioactive materials or
which generates perceptible vibration or noise levels greater
than 65 dbA at the property line
N

USE

AR-1

SP

N

Y**

SP

SP

SP

VC

SP

SP

SP

SP

N

Y

I

N

N

N

N

N

N

APT

31 | Page
N

N
SP
N

19. Outdoor movie theater

20. Drive-in or open-air business and appurtenant buildings
or structures

21. Animal or veterinary hospital or kennel

22. Adult Entertainment Uses

N

SP

N

N

SP

N

AR-2

N

SP

N

N

SP

N

R-1

N

N

N

N

SP

N

VR

N

SP

SP

N

SP

SP

C-1

N

SP

SP

N

SP

SP

VC

SP***

SP

N

SP

SP

SP

I

N

N

N

N

SP

N

APT

1. Salesroom for motor vehicle, trailers, boats, farm implements or
machinery with repair services
and storage permitted

E. MOTOR VEHICLE USES

USE

N

AR-1

N

AR-2

N

R-1

N

VR

SP

C-1

SP

VC

Y

I

N

APT

*** No adult use Special Permit shall be issued to any person convicted of violating the provisions of MGL, c. 119, Section 60 or MGL, c. 272, s. 28. All building entries and windows
shall be screened in such a manner as to prevent visual access to the interior of the establishment by the public. No sign or other like materials shall display any sexually explicit figures
or words as defined in MGL, c. 272, s. 31.

SP

N

AR-1

18. Country, tennis, golf or similar clubs whether or not for
Profit

17. Commercial indoor or outdoor amusement or recreation place or
place of assembly, not including outdoor movie theater, provided that the
building is so insulated and maintained as to confine the noise to the
premises and is located not less than one hundred feet from a residential
District.

USE

32 | Page
N
N

N

AR-1

3. Self-service gasoline station

4. Repair garage, auto body, soldering or welding shop

5. Electric charging station, Level Two, as principal or
accessory use

USE

N

3. Alternative Energy and Renewable Energy Manufacturing Facilities
and Alternative Energy and Renewable Energy Research and
Development Facilities

2. General industrial uses including manufacturing, storage,
processing, fabrication, packaging and assembly comprised
of not more than 15,000 square feet of floor area devoted
to such use and otherwise in compliance with local, state
and federal laws, rules and regulations, but not including
any use which involves the manufacture, storage,
transportation, discharge or disposal of hazardous, toxic

1. Wholesale office or showroom, including warehouse
facilities

N

N

2. Large-scale solar power generation system

G. INDUSTRIAL AND OUTDOOR USES

Y

1. Small-scale solar power generation system

F. ENERGY RELATED USES

N

2. Gasoline station with service by attendant only

N

N

N

SP

AR-2

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

SP

R-1

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

SP

VR

Y

N

N

N

SP

N

SP

SP

C-1

Y

SP

SP

SP

SP

N

N

SP

VC

Y

SP

SP

SP

Y

Y

SP

Y

I

Y

SP

SP

SP

N

N

N

SP

APT

Y

N

N

N

33 | Page
N

N
AR-1

Y

Y

SP

or radioactive materials or which generates perceptible
vibration or noise levels greater than 65 dbA at the property
line

3. General Industrial uses including manufacturing, storage,
processing, fabrication, packaging, and assembly that
occupy more than 15,000 square feet of floor area, or
those that have no more than 15,000 square feet of floor
area and which involve the manufacture, storage,
transportation, discharge or disposal of hazardous, toxic,
or radioactive materials

USE

4. Building materials and equipment exposed to view the
extent actually necessary during active continuous
construction work on the same lot

5. Outdoor storage of building materials and equipment,
excluding scrap and junk, which is not provided for
elsewhere in this by-law, if the same is subjected to
screening and does not occupy an area exceeding 25%
of the ground floor area of the main building on the lot

6. Outdoor storage of building or other materials or
equipment not covered elsewhere in this by-law

SP

Y

Y

AR-2

N

N

SP

Y

Y

R-1

N

N

SP

Y

Y

VR

N

N

SP

Y

Y

C-1

N

N

SP

Y

Y

VC

N

N

SP

Y

Y

I

SP

Y

SP

SP

N

APT

N

SP

34 | Page
Y

Y

Y

AR-1

2. Renting of 1 or 2 rooms and the furnishing of board by
a resident family to no more than 3 non-transient persons

3. Professional office or studio of a resident physician,
dentist, attorney, architect, artist, musician, engineer or other
member of a recognized profession provided that not more
than 2 other persons are regularly employed therein in
connection with such use, and provided that not more
than 25% of the total floor area not to exceed 400 square
feet, is regularly devoted to such use

4. Customary use and keeping of outdoor furniture,
structures, firewood logs, recreational and other equipment
appropriate to the normal occupancy of a dwelling on the
lot provided that the same complies with other provisions
of this By-law

Use

5. Customary home occupation conducted by a resident of the premises
provided that not more than one other person
is regularly employed therein in connection with such use, and that not
more than 25% of the total floor area, not to exceed 400 square feet, is
regularly devoted to such use,
and that there is no exterior storage of material or equipment, and that no
exterior display of products is
visible from the street
Y

Y

AR-1

1. Accessory Family Dwelling Unit

H. ACCESSORY USES

USE

Y

AR-2

Y

Y

Y

Y

AR-2

Y

R-1

Y

Y

Y

Y

R-1

Y

VR

Y

Y

SP

Y

VR

Y

C-1

Y

Y

N

SP

C-1

Y

VC

Y

Y

SP

Y

VC

N

I

Y

N

N

N

I

SP

APT

SP

SP

N

N

APT

35 | Page
SP
Y

N

N

6. Family day care home, large

7. Family day care home, small

8. Accessory uses to activities permitted as a matter of right,
whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as
a matter of right, which activities are necessary in
connection with scientific development, scientific research
or related production, provided that the Special Permit
Granting Authority finds that the proposed accessory uses
do not substantially derogate from the public good

9. Helioports, landing areas or platforms for
helicopters or other hovering-type aircraft subject
to an evaluation of noise and nuisance effects on
business or residential occupants of the area and
subject also to all national, state laws, regulations
and codes pertaining hereto
N

N

Y

SP

N

N

Y

SP

N

N

SP

SP

N

SP

SP

SP

N

SP

N

N

SP

SP

N

N

N

N

N

N

COMMENTS: This article is submitted in accordance with a vote of the Zoning Board of
Appeals taken at a meeting on March 16, 2016 and the Planning Board on March 17, 2016.

ARTICLE 24. AMEND ZONING BY-LAWS SECTION V-J FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Holliston Zoning By-Laws at Section V-J Flood Plain
District Regulations to correct references to a FEMA flood study and insurance rate maps for
Middlesex County (effective date July 7, 2014) as well as other language to comply with
National Flood Insurance Program regulations as follows (strikethrough text is to be deleted and
italicized text is new):
2. Flood Plain District
The map panels of the Middlesex County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of
Holliston are panel numbers 25017C0610E, 25017C627E, 25017C628E, and 25017C0631E
dated June 4, 2010 and 25017C0610F, 25017C27F, 25017C0628F and 25017C0631F dated July
7, 2014.
3. Use and Development Regulations.
In Zones A1-30 and AE, along watercourses that have a regulatory floodway designated on the
Middlesex County FIRM encroachments are prohibited in the regulatory floodway which would
result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that:
a) such proposals minimize flood damage;
b) all public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage; and
c) adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
or take any action relative thereto. (Planning Board)
COMMENTS: This article is submitted in accordance with a vote of the Planning Board on
March 17, 2016.

ARTICLE 25.

AMEND ZONING BY-LAWS, SECTION V-P SENIOR
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING DEVELOPMENT
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning By-Laws at Section V-P Senior Residential
Dwelling Development Requirements, sub-section 5. Special Definitions to allow for
developments on one parcel or contiguous parcels totaling at least 10 acres in size under a. AgeRestricted Development or Senior Residential Dwelling Development and to clarify that a
qualified non-profit entity may hold a conservation restriction on the designated open space if it
to be held by a condominium association as follows:
Item 1.

36 | P a g e

Amend sub-section 5. Special Definitions to allow for developments on one parcel or contiguous
parcels totaling at least 10 acres in size under a. Age-Restricted Development or Senior
Residential Dwelling Development and 6. Special Requirements (f)
Item 2.
Amend sub-section 4. Common Land and/or Open Space (a) Ownership of Common Land or
Open Space at (1)…and shall grant a separate conservation restriction to the Town of Holliston
or by a non-profit organization, satisfactory to the Planning Board, the principal business of
which is the use and protection of common open space in perpetuity …satisfactory to the
Holliston Conservation Commission and the Planning Board, over such land pursuant to Chapter
184, Sections 31-33, General Laws, to insure its perpetual use….
or take any action relative thereto. (Planning Board)
COMMENTS: This article is submitted in accordance with a vote of the Planning Board on
March 17, 2016.
ARTICLE 26. AMEND ZONING BY-LAWS SECTION V-P (3) ESTABLISHMENT AND
DELINEATION OF SENIOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning By-Laws at Section V-P(3) Establishment and
Delineation of Senior Residential District by adding Assessors Map 14, Block 3, Lot 1 to the
map entitled “Senior Residential District” dated April 2005 (revised May 2006). The parcel is
12.67 acres and is located off Indian Ridge Road and Indian Ridge Road South; or take any
action relative thereto. (Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning Board)
COMMENTS: This article is submitted in accordance with a vote of the Planning Board on
March 17, 2016.
ARTICLE 27. AMEND ZONING BY-LAWS, ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENTS
To see if the town will vote to amend the Zoning By-Laws by making the following changes
with regard to Adult Entertainment Establishments:
Item 1. Add the following new Section V-I:
V-I ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS.
1. Purposes. It is the purpose of this Section governing Adult Entertainment
Establishments to address and mitigate the secondary effects of Adult Entertainment
Establishments and sexually oriented businesses that are referenced and defined herein.
Secondary effects have been shown to include increased crime, adverse impacts on
public health, adverse impacts on the business climate of the Town, adverse impacts on
the property values of residential and commercial properties, and adverse impacts on
the quality of life in the Town. All of said secondary impacts are adverse to the health,
safety and general welfare of the Town and its inhabitants.
The provisions of this By-Law have neither the purpose nor intent of imposing a
limitation on the content of any communicative matter or materials, including sexually
oriented matter or materials. Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this By-Law to
37 | P a g e

restrict or deny access by adults to Adult Entertainment Establishments or to sexually
oriented matter or materials that are protected by the Constitution of the United States
of America or of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, nor to restrict or deny rights that
distributors or exhibitors of such matter or materials may have to sell, rent, distribute or
exhibit such matter or materials. Neither is it the purpose or intent of this By-Law to
legalize the sale, rental, distribution or exhibition of obscene or other illegal matter or
materials.
2. Authority. This By-Law is enacted pursuant to G.L. Chapter 40A and pursuant to
the Massachusetts Constitution to serve the compelling Town interests of limiting the
location of and preventing the clustering and concentration of certain Adult
Entertainment Establishments for the reasons set forth, above.
3. Applicability. An Adult Entertainment Establishment may be permitted by special
permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority provided a written determination is
issued by said Board that the special permit decision criteria of Section V-E have been
met.
4. Location. Adult Entertainment Establishments may be located only in an Industrial
District.
5. Conditions.
a. In no instance shall the Special Permit Granting Authority issue a special
permit to any person convicted or violating G.L. c. 119, s. 63 or G.L. c. 272,
s. 28.
b. No pictures, publications, electronic media, or other implements, items, or
advertising that fall within the definition of adult merchandise shall be
displayed in store windows or be visible from areas used by the general
public.
c. No sign or other like materials shall display any sexually explicit figures or
words as defined in G.L. c. 272, s. 31.
Item 2. Add the following definitions, alphabetically placed, to Section I-E:
Adult Entertainment Establishments: Shall include and be defined as follows:
Adult bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its
stock in trade, books, magazines, and other matter which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as
defined in section thirty-one of chapter two hundred and seventy-two of the General Laws..
Adult motion picture theatre: an enclosed building used for presenting material
distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or
sexual excitement as defined in section thirty-one of chapter two hundred and seventy-two of the
General Laws.
Adult paraphernalia store: an establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock devices, objects, tools, or toys which are distinguished or characterized by
38 | P a g e

their association with sexual activity, including sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in
section thirty-one of chapter two hundred and seventy-two of the General Laws.
Adult video store: an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its
stock in trade, videos, movies, or other film material which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as
defined in said section thirty-one of said chapter two hundred and seventy-two of the General
Laws.
Establishment which displays live nudity for its patrons: any establishment which
provides live entertainment for its patrons, which includes the display of nudity, as that term is
defined in section thirty-one of chapter two hundred and seventy-two of the General Laws; or
take any action relative thereto. (Planning Board)
COMMENTS: The article is submitted in accordance with a vote of the Planning Board on
April 7, 2016.

ARTICLE 28. AMEND ZONING BY-LAW SECTIONS I-E DEFINITIONS, III-A
SCHEDULE OF USES, AND VII SITE PLAN REVIEW TO ADD REGULATION OF
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTERS
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning By-Laws at Sections I-E Definitions, III-A
Schedule of Uses, and VII Site Plan Review to add regulation of Medical Marijuana Treatment
Centers as follows:
Item 1. Add the following at Section I-E Definitions:
Medical Marijuana Treatment Center/Registered Marijuana Dispensary – As defined in the
Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana Act, GL c. 94C, means a not-for-profit entity registered
under 105 CMR725.100, that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes, transfers, transports,
sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related
supplies or educational materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.
Unless otherwise specified, this is a site for dispensing, cultivation and preparation of medical
marijuana.
Item 2. Add the following at Section III-A Schedule of Use Regulations:
52. Medical Marijuana Treatment Center/Registered Marijuana Dispensary
Industrial District – Y (Permitted Use)
Item 3. Amend Section VII Site Plan Review, sub-section 2. Applicability of Site Plan Review as
follows:
(b)(v.) No new Medical Marijuana Treatment Center/Registered Marijuana Dispensary…..shall
be allowed except in conformity with a site plan bearing an endorsement of approval from the
Planning Board; or take any action relative thereto. ( Planning Board)
COMMENTS: This article is submitted in accordance with a vote of the Planning Board on
March 17, 2016.
ARTICLE 29.

39 | P a g e

SALE OF ANDREWS SCHOOL

To see if the Town will vote to authorize the Board of Selectmen to sell the former Andrews
School located at 17 School Street for the purposes of demolition, redevelopment, and or housing
consistent with the Town’s General By-laws and Zoning By-laws; or to take any action relative
thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
COMMENTS: This Article would authorize the Board of Selectmen to sell the former
Andrews School including the land.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 30.
DOWNTOWN SIGNALIZATION ESTIMATED COST $1,500,000
To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate, transfer from available funds or borrow a
sum of money for the purpose of roadway and streetscape improvements, including traffic
signals and engineering costs, in the downtown area; or take any action relative thereto. (Board
of Selectmen)
COMMENTS: If approved, this project would require a debt exclusion and approval as a ballot
question for the voters of the Town to consider at the May 24th Annual Town Election.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, FIVE IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT, MR. ALFRED OPPOSED.
ARTICLE 31.

TRANSFER OF CHAMBERLAIN STREET LAND FROM THE
BOARD OF SELECTMEN
To see if the Town will vote to transfer title to the property shown as Lot 366.2 of Block 7 on
Assessors’ Map 7 located on Chamberlain Street, Holliston, Massachusetts which property is
also shown as Lots 2A and 2B on a plan entitled, “Plan of Land in Holliston, Massachusetts,”
dated September 30, 2014 prepared by Colonial Engineering, Inc. filed as Plan Number 1023 of
2014 in the Middlesex Registry of Deeds (the “Property”) in connection with constructing
affordable, low/moderate income housing, the care, custody and control of which property was
transferred from the Board of Selectmen to the Holliston Housing Trust by Town vote dated May
5, 2014, for the purpose of constructing low and moderate income housing; or take any action
relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
COMMENTS: The title insurance company requested the Town Meeting take a confirmatory
vote of what was already approved and authorized at a previous Town Meeting. This action
would allow for the transfer of the land and for the title insurance company to issue insurance to
the new owner.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 32.

40 | P a g e

ASBESTOS REMEDIATION AND DEMOLITION OF THE
FLAGG SCHOOL
ESTIMATED COST: $620,000

To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate, transfer from available funds or to borrow
a sum of money for the purpose of paying all costs associated with the environmental
remediation and/or demolition of the Flagg School building and to convey to the Board of
Selectmen from the School Committee the parcel and building until the demolition has been
completed at which time the parcel will be returned to the School Committee; or to take any
action relative thereto. (Board of Selectmen)
COMMENTS: The building is no longer in use and needs to be demolished. A hazardous
materials inventory is currently underway to better understand the dimensions of the needed
remediation. This Article if approved, would allow the Town to fund the actual implementation
of the remediation. The cost of the demolition is unknown at this time and it is anticipated
further Town Meeting action will be needed to address that step in the project. Once the building
is demolished by the Town, the land will be returned to the School Committee for future reuse.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS THAT THE TOWN APPROPRIATE
$200,000 FROM THE STABLIZTION FUND AND RAISE AND APPROPRIATE
$225,000, FOUR IN FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT, MS. LIBERTY AND
MR.DOWD OPPOSED.
ARTICLE 33.
PILOT AGREEMENT 128 FISHER STREET
To see if the Town will vote to authorize the Board of Selectmen to enter into a Payment in Lieu
of Taxes (PILOT) agreement for the solar power project at 128 Fischer Street; or take any action
relative thereto. (Board of Assessors)
COMMENTS: A solar PILOT Agreement allows the Town to know exactly what will be
collected annually over the term of that Agreement.
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS FAVORABLE ACTION, SIX IN
FAVOR, MS. NERSESSIAN ABSENT.
ARTICLE 34.
CHANGE ANNUAL SPECIAL TOWN MEETING DATE
To see if the Town will amend section 1 of Article 1 of the General By-Laws of the Town of
Holliston and provide that Fall Town Meeting will be held on the 4th Monday in October, or take
any action relative thereto. (Town Clerk)
COMMENTS: This Article will prevent Fall Special Town Meeting from occurring on
Halloween, which can happen periodically.
And you are directed to notify and warn the inhabitants of said Town who are qualified to vote in
Town elections to vote at:
Voters in Precinct 1 vote at the High School gymnasium
Voters in Precinct 2 vote at the High School gymnasium
Voters in Precinct 3 vote at the High School gymnasium
Voters in Precinct 4 vote at the High School gymnasium
on TUESDAY, MAY 24, 2016
41 | P a g e

from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. for the following purpose:
To cast their votes in the Town Election for the election of candidates for the following offices:
SELECTMAN & HIGHWAY SURVEYOR (three year term)

Vote for ONE

ASSESSOR OF TAXES (three year term)
HOUSING AUTHORITY (five year term)

Vote for ONE
Vote for ONE

TOWN CLERK (three year term)

Vote for ONE

MODERATOR (three year term)

Vote for ONE

SCHOOL COMMITTEE (three year term)

Vote for NOT MORE THAN TWO

BOARD OF HEALTH (three year term)

Vote for ONE

TRUSTEES OF PUBLIC LIBRARY (three year term)

Vote for NOT MORE THAN TWO

FINANCE COMMITTEE (three year term)

Vote for NOT MORE THAN
THREE

PARK COMMISSIONER (three year term)

Vote for NOT MORE THAN TWO

PLANNING BOARD (five year term)

Vote for ONE

Question 1: Shall the Town of Holliston be allowed to exempt from the provisions of
Proposition two and one-half, so-called, the amounts required to pay for the bond to be issued in
order to make roadway and streetscape improvements, including traffic signals and engineering
costs, in the downtown area? YES
NO
And you are directed to serve this Warrant by posting true copies thereof, attested, on and within
the Town Hall seven days at least before the date of said meeting. Hereof fail not and make
return of this Warrant with your doings thereon at the time and place of said meeting.
Given under our hands this 20st day of April A.D. 2016.
Joseph P. Marsden, Chairman
John D. Leary Jr., Vice-Chairman
Kevin P. Conley, Clerk

42 | P a g e

BOARD OF
SELECTMEN

43 | Page

01131
---------

01134
---------

01137
---------

01138
---------

TOWN
ACCOUNTANT

BOARD OF
ASSESSORS

TREASURER/
COLLECTOR

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------58000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------58000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------58000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------TOTAL

DEPT. ACCT.
NO.
NO.
01122
51000
--------- ----------52000
----------54000
----------57000
----------58000
----------TOTAL

FINANCE
COMMITTEE

DEPARTMENT
BOARD OF
SELECTMEN

Page 1

PERSONAL SERVICES
244,603
257,307
249,219
260,359
268,439
268,439
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
43,300
41,609
45,160
47,592
45,120
45,120
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
5,100
5,075
6,111
7,178
6,644
6,644
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------CAPITAL OUTLAY
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------TREASURER/COLLECTOR
293,003
303,991
300,490
315,129
320,203
320,203

PERSONAL SERVICES
170,880
172,957
170,869
172,347
178,978
178,978
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
9,290
6,371
9,024
25,668
25,668
25,668
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
700
800
1,004
1,000
1,000
1,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------CAPITAL OUTLAY
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------BOARD OF ASSESSORS
180,870
180,128
180,897
199,015
205,646
205,646

PERSONAL SERVICES
74,254
76,330
67,703
103,701
107,254
107,254
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
3,250
1,014
20,096
28,725
29,725
29,725
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
296
402
527
550
550
550
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------CAPITAL OUTLAY
0
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------TOWN ACCOUNTANT
77,800
77,746
88,326
132,976
137,529
137,529

PERSONAL SERVICES
1,717
206
50
1,475
1,475
1,475
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
50
35
0
50
50
50
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------FINANCE COMMITTEE
1,767
241
50
1,525
1,525
1,525

1.61%

3.33%

3.42%

0.00%

TOWN OF HOLLISTON - OMNIBUS BUDGET
EXPENDED
EXPENDED
EXPENDED APPROPRIATED REQUESTED RECOMMENDED 16 TO 17
FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR
PERCENT
ACCOUNT NAME
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2017
CHANGE
PERSONAL SERVICES
177,335
179,180
191,142
214,926
217,940
217,940
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
55,100
58,992
80,225
35,600
35,600
35,600
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
1,642
1,584
2,184
1,300
2,300
2,300
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------OTHER EXPENSES
177,431
178,000
171,985
200,000
210,000
210,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------CAPITAL OUTLAY
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------BOARD OF SELECTMEN
411,508
417,756
445,536
451,826
465,840
465,840
3.10%
NOTES

44 | Page

DEPT.
NO.
01149
---------

01154
---------

01161
---------

01162
---------

01171
---------

01172
---------

01173
---------

DEPARTMENT
OTHER FINANCIAL
ADMINISTRATION

TECHNOLOGY

TOWN CLERK

ELECTIONS

CONSERVATION
COMMISSION

PLANNING BOARD

ZONING BOARD
OF APPEALS

Page 2

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------58000
----------TOTAL

ACCT.
NO.
53202
----------57810
----------TOTAL

PERSONAL SERVICES
3,841
5,460
4,619
6,340
6,499
6,499
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
138
258
212
4,200
4,200
4,200
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
14
113
128
150
151
151
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------3,993
5,831
4,959
10,690
10,850
10,850
ZONING BOARD OF APPEA

PERSONAL SERVICES
65,395
66,818
70,926
73,081
75,613
75,613
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
8,570
4,167
4,358
6,400
11,400
6,400
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
508
482
434
500
500
500
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PLANNING BOARD
74,473
71,467
75,718
79,981
87,513
82,513

PERSONAL SERVICES
39,208
40,220
37,825
45,837
46,795
46,795
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
1,972
2,128
1,557
2,400
2,500
2,500
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
516
459
437
650
600
600
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------CONSERVATION COMM.
41,696
42,807
39,819
48,887
49,895
49,895

PERSONAL SERVICES
13,444
5,444
10,149
10,829
18,837
18,837
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
6,464
2,296
3,305
4,075
3,242
3,242
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
2,966
2,255
4,837
3,980
3,582
3,582
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------ELECTIONS
22,874
9,995
18,291
18,884
25,661
25,661

PERSONAL SERVICES
118,351
120,419
129,261
133,258
136,251
136,251
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
6,003
6,158
6,576
6,971
6,148
6,148
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
1,903
1,512
1,685
1,938
1,900
1,900
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------TOWN CLERK
126,257
128,089
137,522
142,167
144,299
144,299

PERSONAL SERVICES
78,709
79,495
78,545
84,853
86,872
86,872
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
5,042
4,797
4,779
4,652
4,700
4,700
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
218
215
356
400
300
300
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------CAPITAL OUTLAY
7,064
7,992
8,141
7,906
7,406
7,406
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------TECHNOLOGY
91,033
92,499
91,821
97,811
99,278
99,278

1.50%

3.17%

2.06%

35.89%

1.50%

1.50%

EXPENDED
EXPENDED
EXPENDED APPROPRIATED REQUESTED RECOMMENDED 16 TO 17
FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR
PERCENT
ACCOUNT NAME
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2017
CHANGE
0
0
0
0
0
BANK/BONDING EXPENSES
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------RESERVE FOR TRANSFERS
0
0
0
212,675
215,000
215,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------OTHER FINANCIAL ADMIN
0
0
0
212,675
215,000
215,000
1.09%
NOTES

45 | Page

01192
---------

01194
---------

01210
---------

01211
---------

EMPLOYEE
BENEFITS

POLICE

AUXILIARY POLICE

DEPT.
NO.
01182

PUBLIC
BUILDINGS

DEPARTMENT
ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT

Page 3

52000
----------53000
----------54000
----------57000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------53000
----------54000
----------58000
----------TOTAL

51750
----------51780
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------53000
----------54000
----------TOTAL

EXPENDED
FISCAL YEAR
2014

PURCHASED SERVICES
5,203
5,290
2,342
5,580
1,749
1,749
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
190
185
190
190
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
7,071
7,029
4,023
7,264
11,480
11,480
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------OTHER EXPENSES
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------AUXILIARY POLICE
12,464
12,504
6,555
13,034
13,229
13,229

PERSONAL SERVICES
2,160,839
2,250,831
2,212,681
2,331,291
2,524,107
2,526,607
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
97,337
94,056
106,567
112,855
104,312
104,312
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
20,242
25,469
26,153
26,994
25,206
25,206
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
10,635
10,816
17,758
15,250
15,650
15,650
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------CAPITAL OUTLAY
4,247
0
0
3,461
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------POLICE
2,293,300
2,381,172
2,363,159
2,489,851
2,669,275
2,671,775

INSURANCE
4,253,146
4,122,004
4,273,221
4,913,895
5,184,893
5,184,893
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------BENEFITS
1,542,912
1,698,016
1,816,919
3,542,867
3,381,902
3,381,902
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
5,796,058
5,820,020
6,090,140
8,456,762
8,566,795
8,566,795

PERSONAL SERVICES
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
169,907
173,543
200,019
205,292
217,472
217,472
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
36,979
36,879
38,250
60,000
50,814
50,814
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
944
903
925
1,000
2,000
2,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PUBLIC BUILDINGS
207,830
211,325
239,194
266,292
270,286
270,286

EXPENDED
FISCAL YEAR
2013

1.50%

7.31%

1.30%

1.50%

EXPENDED APPROPRIATED REQUESTED RECOMMENDED 16 TO 17
FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR
PERCENT
ACCOUNT NAME
2015
2016
2017
2017
CHANGE
PERSONAL SERVICES
10,455
10455
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------ --------------PURCHASED SERVICES
1,950
1950
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------ --------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
100
100
----------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------ --------------TOTAL ECONOMIC DEV
12,505
12,505

ACCT.
NO.
51000
----------52000
----------NOTES

46 | Page

01231

01251
---------

01254
---------

01291
---------

BUILDING
INSPECTION

SEALER OF
WEIGHTS AND
MEASURES

EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT

DEPARTMENT

DEPT.
NO.
01220
---------

AMBULANCE

FIRE

Page 4

52000
----------54000
----------57000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------53000
----------54000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------53000
----------54000
----------58000
----------TOTAL

ACCT.
NO.
51000
----------52000
----------53000
----------54000
----------58000
----------TOTAL

PURCHASED SERVICES
9,798
7,002
8,043
10,305
10,500
10,500
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
0
0
31
72
62
62
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------OTHER EXPENSES
0
0
300
300
275
275
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------EMERGENCY MANAGEME
9,798
7,002
8,374
10,677
10,837
10,837

PERSONAL SERVICES
1,000
1,000
993
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
0
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
0
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SEALER OF WEIGHTS
1,000
1,000
993
0
0
0

PERSONAL SERVICES
117,679
119,110
122,278
124,245
127,831
127,831
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
1,736
6,870
4,443
2,600
3,250
3,250
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
0
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
702
464
548
700
700
700
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------BUILDING INSPECTION
120,117
126,444
127,269
127,545
131,781
131,781

PERSONAL SERVICES
248,974
201,044
332,462
335,603
228,690
228,690
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
54,754
67,563
77,067
88,275
88,275
88,275
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
10,712
16,472
6,407
13,750
13,750
13,750
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
22,487
26,183
22,993
21,300
21,300
21,300
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------CAPITAL OUTLAY
2,165
586
2,589
2,100
2,100
2,100
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------AMBULANCE
339,092
311,848
441,518
461,028
354,115
354,115

1.50%

0.00%

3.32%

-23.19%

EXPENDED
EXPENDED
EXPENDED APPRORIATED
REQUEST
RECOMMENDED 16 TO 17
FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR
PERCENT
ACCOUNT NAME
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2017
CHANGE
PERSONAL SERVICES
638,810
644,444
632,730
723,720
735,950
735,950
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
45,359
47,341
47,010
47,150
47,166
471,666
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
30,269
22,418
43,786
20,800
20,800
20,800
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
5,567
12,083
12,225
12,250
12,250
12,250
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------CAPITAL OUTLAY
2,661
11,975
5,585
12,500
12,500
12,500
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------FIRE
722,666
738,261
741,336
816,420
828,666
828,666
1.50%
Benefits are now in the Benefit
Budget and funded from the
General Fund

NOTES

47 | Page

DEPT.
NO.
01292
---------

01300
---------

01371
---------

01420
---------

01423
---------

01424
---------

01433
---------

DEPARTMENT
ANIMAL CONTROL
OFFICER

SCHOOL

KEEFE TECHNICAL
SCHOOL

DEPARTMENT OF
PUBLIC WORKS HIGHWAY

DEPARTMENT OF
PUBLIC WORKS SNOW AND ICE
REMOVAL

STREET LIGHTING

SOLID WASTE

Page 5

PERSONAL SERVICES
22,630,800
24,088,933
23,884,277
24,281,105
25,698,174
24,851,023
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
2,267,109
2,218,058
2,383,578
2,435,703
2,666,113
2,666,113
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- --------------------REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
947,347
950,050
1,021,378
832,717
809,275
809,275
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- --------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
576,327
507,095
406,785
465,585
565,585
565,585
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- --------------------FUELS
136,009
104,000
99,392
104,000
104,000
104,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- --------------------INTERGOVERNMENTAL
1,666,501
1,181,088
1,734,426
2,464,472
2,278,098
2,278,098
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- --------------------OTHER EXPENSES
365,009
354,999
323,331
326,815
456,241
456,241
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- --------------------CAPITAL OUTLAY
144,363
152,173
91,886
141,973
153,402
153,402
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SCHOOL
28,733,465
29,556,396
29,945,053
31,052,370
32,730,888
31,883,737

PERSONAL SERVICES
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
250,000
250,000
373,015
250,000
250,000
250,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------DPW - SNOW AND ICE
250,000
250,000
373,015
250,000
250,000
250,000

PERSONAL SERVICES
683,699
665,923
680,498
757,395
775,498
775,498
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
72,112
77,242
77,089
82,896
84,096
84,096
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
17,906
27,664
27,664
27,664
27,664
27,664
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
56,371
61,994
60,995
65,953
65,953
65,953
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------CAPITAL OUTLAY
356,575
352,973
162,983
352,973
352,973
352,973
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------DPW - HIGHWAY
1,186,663
1,185,796
1,009,229
1,286,881
1,306,184
1,306,184

52120 SOLID WASTE
1,051,672
1,054,260
1,048,269
1,029,710
1,045,156
1,045,156
----------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------

52120 STREET LIGHTING
52,961
60,057
61,182
60,000
60,000
60,000
----------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- -----------------------

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------53000
----------54000
----------58000
----------TOTAL

1.50%

-1.93%

0.00%

1.50%

7.26%

2.68%

EXPENDED
EXPENDED
EXPENDED APPROPRIATED REQUESTED RECOMMENDED 16 TO 17
FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR
PERCENT
ACCOUNT NAME
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2017
CHANGE
PERSONAL SERVICES
0
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
38,000
38,000
38,000
38,000
38,570
38,570
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
0
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- ----------------------ANIMAL CONTROL OFFIC
38,000
38,000
38,000
38,000
38,570
38,570
1.50%

57000 INTERGOVERNMENTAL
549,683
617,396
773,766
783,665
840,586
840,586
----------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- --------------------- -----------------------

51000
----------52000
----------53000
----------54000
----------55000
----------56000
----------57000
----------58000
----------TOTAL

ACCT.
NO.
51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------TOTAL
NOTES

48 | Page

DEPT.
NO.
01440
---------

01499
---------

01512
---------

01541
---------

01542
---------

01543
---------

DEPARTMENT
WASTEWATER
TREATMENT

OTHER PUBLIC
WORKS

BOARD OF
HEALTH

COUNCIL ON
AGING

YOUTH SERVICES

VETERANS'
SERVICES

Page 6

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------56000
----------57000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------57000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------53000
----------54000
----------TOTAL

51000
----------52000
----------54000
----------TOTAL

PERSONAL SERVICES
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------INTERGOVERNMENTAL
19,988
19,916
19,916
21,087
21,319
21,319
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------BENEFITS
6,511
20,542
46,559
31,350
31,250
31,250
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------VETERANS' SERVICES
26,499
40,458
66,475
52,437
52,569
52,569

PERSONAL SERVICES
107,855
109,483
114,186
116,385
118,760
118,760
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
0
17
1,202
3,841
3,276
3,276
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
118
118
285
500
500
500
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------OTHER EXPENSES
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------YOUTH SERVICES
107,973
109,618
115,673
120,726
122,536
122,536

PERSONAL SERVICES
117,074
118,463
139,872
153,190
159,051
159,051
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
36,315
37,923
40,975
39,550
40,165
40,165
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
6,245
3,948
5,907
4,000
4,060
4,060
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
8,067
9,791
9,880
11,500
11,650
11,650
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------COUNCIL ON AGING
167,701
170,125
196,634
208,240
214,926
214,926

PERSONAL SERVICES
109,304
124,929
104,386
121,934
124,765
124,365
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
12,232
18,122
10,050
9,300
9,400
9,400
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
60
452
647
700
700
700
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------BOARD OF HEALTH
121,596
143,503
115,083
131,934
134,865
135,465

0.25%

1.50%

3.21%

2.68%

-13.33%

EXPENDED
EXPENDED
EXPENDED APPROPRIATED REQUESTED RECOMMENDED 16 TO 17
FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR
PERCENT
ACCOUNT NAME
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2017
CHANGE
PERSONAL SERVICES
0
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
66,235
64,881
68,271
71,800
73,000
73,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
1,496
1,009
1,207
1,500
1,000
1,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------INTERGOVERNMENTAL
0
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------WASTEWATER
67,731
65,890
69,478
73,300
74,000
74,000
0.95%

54000 MOTOR VEHICLE FUELS
142,009
127,483
124,119
144,232
125,000
125,000
----------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------

ACCT.
NO.
51000
----------52000
----------53000
----------57000
----------TOTAL
NOTES

49 | Page

DEPT.
NO.
01610
---------

01650
---------

01710
---------

60150
---------

DEPARTMENT
LIBRARY

PARKS

DEBT SERVICE

DEPARTMENT OF
PUBLIC WORKS WATER

Page 7

PERSONAL SERVICES
702,266
637,650
679,499
525,380
766,968
751,771
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
357,329
396,104
390,756
381,000
395,478
395,478
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
64,308
7,030
61,170
73,000
83,000
83,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
211,201
226,731
224,684
225,000
225,000
225,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------INTERGOVERNMENTAL
2,904
2,997
2,769
3,600
3,600
3,600
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------DEBT SERVICE
1,094,880
863,143
966,864
854,522
774,501
774,501
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------CAPITAL OUTLAY
2,002
0
5,355
10,000
15,000
15,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------DPW - WATER
2,434,890
2,133,655
2,331,097
2,072,502
2,263,547
2,248,350

PURCHASED SERVICES
3,169
5,646
1,624
3,123
5,579
5,579
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------DEBT SERVICE
5,700,669
5,611,917
5,778,220
5,299,375
5,527,871
5,527,871
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------DEBT SERVICE
5,703,838
5,617,563
5,779,844
5,302,498
5,533,450
5,533,450

8.48%
---------------

4.36%

TOTAL OMNIBUS BUDGET
51,987,540
52,637,704
54,015,104
57,528,221
59,990,200
59,125,952
2.78%
----------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------ ---------------

51000
----------52000
----------53000
----------54000
----------56000
----------57000
----------58000
----------TOTAL

52000
----------57600
----------TOTAL

1.62%

EXPENDED
EXPENDED
EXPENDED APPROPRIATED REQUESTED RECOMMENDED 16 TO 17
FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR FISCAL YEAR
PERCENT
ACCOUNT NAME
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2017
CHANGE
PERSONAL SERVICES
281,478
283,156
301,227
309,310
316,024
316,024
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------PURCHASED SERVICES
71,995
71,390
72,145
70,631
69,814
69,814
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
8,741
8,474
16,485
9,581
9,581
9,581
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------SUPPLIES & MATERIALS
73,201
72,656
77,303
78,481
79,604
79,604
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------CAPITAL OUTLAY
0
560
0
0
0
0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------LIBRARY
435,415
436,236
467,160
468,003
475,023
475,023
1.50%

51000 PERSONAL SERVICES
89,845
91,142
99,060
100,548
102,172
102,172
----------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------

ACCT.
NO.
51000
----------52000
----------53000
----------54000
----------58000
----------TOTAL
NOTES

50 | Page

TOWN OF HOLLISTON
BUDGETED/PROJECTED REVENUES, FISCAL YEARS 2013 - 2018
:
FY13
: BUDGETED
PROPERTY TAX
:
Base levy
6.8 :
34,955,864
New growth
44.3 :
409,318
Excluded debt
-1.0 :
2,733,369
Override
N/A :
N/A
------------------------ ------------ : -----------------TOTAL LEVY
3.6 :
38,098,551
:
STATE AID
:
General
-1.2 :
8,403,315
Offsets
4.6 :
718,762
-3.0 :
2,263,760
School Building Asst
------------------------ ------------ : ------------------1.3 :
11,385,837
TOTAL STATE AI
:
LOCAL RECEIPTS
:
MV excise
-3.5 :
1,660,529
Interest
-50.0 :
25,000
Water
6.9 :
2,536,390
Ambulance Fees
6.4 :
383,223
Other
-10.3 :
1,172,000
------------------------ ------------ : -----------------TOTAL
-1.0 :
5,777,142

:
FY14
%chg : BUDGETED
:
3.9 :
36,257,858
-13.8 :
464,129
-1.2 :
2,697,180
N/A :
N/A
----------- : -----------------3.3 :
39,419,167
:
:
7.1 :
8,487,275
0.3 :
710,306
0.0 :
2,260,046
----------- : -----------------5.2 :
11,457,627
:
:
6.4 :
1,700,000
0.0 :
25,000
6.5 :
2,556,914
1,759.5 :
558,702
-8.4 :
1,188,268
----------- : -----------------9.7 :
6,028,884

:
FY15
%chg : BUDGETED
:
3.7 :
37,640,037
13.4 :
650,163
-1.3 :
2,672,130
N/A :
N/A
-------- : -----------------3.5 :
40,962,330
:
:
1.0 :
8,612,086
-1.2 :
780,208
-0.2 :
2,260,046
-------- : -----------------0.6 :
11,652,340
:
:
2.4 :
1,850,000
0.0 :
22,000
0.8 :
2,426,301
45.8 :
465,254
1.4 :
924,220
-------- : -----------------4.4 :
5,687,775

:
FY16
%chg : BUDGETED
:
3.8 :
39,258,578
40.1 :
850,223
-0.9 :
2,652,489
N/A :
N/A
-------- : -----------------3.9 :
42,761,290
:
:
1.5 :
8,723,984
9.8 :
1,054,688
0.0 :
2,260,046
-------- : -----------------1.7 :
12,038,718
:
:
8.8 :
2,000,048
-12.0 :
20,000
-5.1 :
2,979,293
-16.7 :
484,028
-22.2 :
981,220
-------- : ------------------5.7 :
6,464,589

:
FY17
%chg : PROJECTED
:
4.3 :
41,111,521
30.8 :
325,000
-0.7 :
2,649,917
N/A :
N/A
-------- : -----------------4.4 :
44,086,438
:
:
1.3 :
8,713,671
35.2 :
936,589
0.0 :
2,260,046
-------- : -----------------3.3 :
11,910,306
:
:
8.1 :
1,850,000
-9.1 :
22,000
22.8 :
2,119,025
4.0 :
450,988
6.2 :
981,220
-------- : -----------------13.7 :
5,423,233

:
AVAILABLE FUNDS
:
Free Cash
79.2 :
1,819,966
-21.2 :
670,246
Capital Expenditure F
-100.0
564,584
Community Preserva
Other
-6.8 :
417,076
------------------------ ------------ : -----------------TOTAL
-0.3 :
3,471,872
:
TOTAL REVENUES
:
------------------------ ------------ : -----------------Tax Levy
3.6 :
38,098,551
State Aid
-1.3 :
11,385,837
Local Receipts
-1.0 :
5,777,142
Available Funds
-0.3 :
3,471,872
------------------------ ------------ : -----------------TOTAL
2.0 :
58,733,402

:
:
67.9 :
1,358,776
0.0 :
1,007,093
0.0
495,260
0.0 :
776,415
----------- : -----------------41.1 :
3,637,544
:
:
----------- : -----------------3.3 :
39,419,167
5.2 :
11,457,627
9.7 :
6,028,884
41.1 :
3,637,544
----------- : -----------------6.0 :
60,543,222

:
:
-25.3 :
0
0.0 :
987,464
0.0
1,395,500
0.0 :
3,802,515
-------- : -----------------4.8 :
6,185,479
:
:
-------- : -----------------3.5 :
40,962,330
0.6 :
11,652,340
4.4 :
5,687,775
4.8 :
6,185,479
-------- : -----------------3.1 :
64,487,924

:
:
-100.0 :
2,773,684
0.0 :
1,502,037
0.0
484,500
0.0 :
360,200
-------- : -----------------70.0 :
5,120,421
:
:
-------- : -----------------3.9 :
42,761,290
1.7 :
12,038,718
-5.7 :
6,464,589
70.0 :
5,120,421
-------- : -----------------6.5 :
66,385,018

:
:
:
125,000
0.0 :
0
0.0
0
0.0 :
39,028
-------- : ------------------17.2 :
164,028
:
:
-------- : -----------------4.4 :
44,086,438
3.3 :
11,910,306
13.7 :
5,423,233
-17.2 :
164,028
-------- : -----------------2.9 :
61,584,005

%chg

%chg

FY18
PROJECTED

%chg

4.7
-61.8
-0.1
N/A
-------3.1

42,472,434
325,000
2,607,115
N/A
-----------------45,404,549

3.3
0.0
-1.6
N/A
--------3.0

-0.1
-11.2
0.0
--------1.1

8,713,671
936,589
2,260,046
-----------------11,910,306

0.0
0.0
0.0
--------0.0

-7.5
10.0
-28.9
-6.8
0.0
--------16.1

1,850,000
22,000
2,150,578
457,753
981,220
-----------------5,461,551

0.0
0.0
1.5
1.5
0.0
--------0.7

-95.5
0
0.0
0
0.0
0
0.0
35,642
----------- ------------------96.8
35,642

-100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
---------78.3

-------3.1
-1.1
-16.1
-96.8
--------7.2

--------3.0
0.0
0.7
-78.3
--------2.0

-----------------45,404,549
11,910,306
5,461,551
35,642
-----------------62,812,048

PROPERTY TAX LEVY BY CLASS OF PROPERTY
Residential (87.55%)
Commercial (3.18%)
Industrial (6.76%)
Personal (2.51%)

33,356,881
1,209,858
2,573,900
957,912

34,513,136
1,251,795
2,663,120
991,116

35,864,240
1,300,800
2,767,374
1,029,916

37,439,305
1,357,928
2,888,910
1,075,147

38,599,528
1,400,009
2,978,436
1,108,465

39,753,590
1,441,867
3,067,486
1,141,607

TOTAL

38,098,551

39,419,167

40,962,330

42,761,290

44,086,438

45,404,549

NOTES: Local Receipts Other includes revenues from permits, licenses, fines and solid waste and other fees. Available Funds Other includes Water Surplus, Stabilization Fund, Overlay Reserve,
Revolving Accounts, Golf Course Capital, Open Space and other special purpose funds.

51 | Page

FY15 WAGES AND BENEFITS

DEPARTMENT
SELECTMEN
TOWN ACCOUNTANT
ASSESSORS
TREASURER/COLLECTOR
TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT
TOWN CLERK
ELECTION DEPARTMENT
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
PLANNING BOARD
POLICE DEPARTMENT
FIRE DEPARTMENT
BUILDING DEPARTMENT
COMMUNITY PRESERVATION
TAX CREDIT PROGRAM
HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT
DPW
WATER DEPARTMENT
BOARD OF HEALTH
COUNCIL ON AGING
YOUTH & FAMILY SERVICES
METROWEST VETERANS DISTRICT
LIBRARY
PARK DEPARTMENT
TOTAL TOWN

WAGES
$203,390
$70,221
$166,824
$245,251
$176,563
$128,422
$7,064
$50,360
$73,474
$2,461,537
$792,997
$164,958
$1,000
$1,847
$763,997
$76,934
$438,289
$112,982
$167,685
$111,499
$54,679
$311,287
$175,048
$6,756,306

MILLER ELEMENTARY
PLACENTINO SCHOOL
SUBSTITUTES/TUTORS
HIGH SCHOOL
MIDDLE SCHOOL
SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION
SCHOOL CAFETERIA
TEACHERS AIDES
SCHOOL CLERICAL
CUSTODIANS/MAINTENANCE
BUS DRIVERS
EXTENDED DAY
NURSES/MISC
COACHES
SUMMER LEARNERS PROGRAM

$4,752,014
$4,262,411
$703,947
$6,451,864
$5,179,638
$557,082
$280,318
$1,920,292
$307,886
$389,379
$105,414
$747,446
$312,323
$110,055
$93,258

TOTAL SCHOOL

$26,173,326

DISABILITY
$813
$251
$613
$986
$317
$451

HEALTH
INSURANCE
$16,181
$8,972
$13,650
$30,948
$9,284
$15,914

$128
$284
$7,997
$924
$490

$3,654
$124,069
$318,048
$271,412

$2,667
$312
$1,453
$350
$534
$457
$209
$770
$341
$20,345

$107,278
$8,996
$41,733
$4,699
$9,881
$7,170
$23,999
$4,602
$1,020,489
$304,242
$330,937
$29,172
$406,489
$319,177
$16,253
$41,052
$308,207
$54,535
$49,021
$8,648
$85,250
$12,535

$116
$32
$39
$116
$74
$77
$0
$0
$0
$714
$1,431
$346
$0
$0
$305
$39
$284
$77
$67
$77
$39
$39
$88
$3,954

MEDICARE
$1,318
$909
$2,265
$3,107
$2,470
$1,699
$95
$730
$1,030
$27,069
$9,943
$2,205
$15
$27
$9,096
$1,005
$5,875
$1,569
$2,318
$1,492
$793
$4,188
$2,453
$81,672

$1,477
$1,359
$109
$1,541
$1,019
$116
$35
$1,026
$154
$231
$74
$224
$123
$0
$0

$65,303
$53,877
$9,887
$86,269
$68,028
$7,896
$3,659
$24,368
$3,760
$5,130
$1,436
$9,951
$4,372
$1,528
$1,352
$346,816

CTY RETIREMENT
ASSESSMENT
$39,729
$12,990
$30,377
$49,521
$32,609
$22,338
$6,339
$14,040
$395,378
$45,870
$24,233

$132,672
$15,434
$72,370
$17,307
$22,340
$22,621
$10,330
$43,187
$19,020
$1,028,704
$30,969
$41,378
$39,955
$64,585
$49,102

WORKERS'
COMP
$163
$56
$133
$196
$141
$103
$6
$40
$59
$223
$4,784
$3,721
$1
$0
$22,230
$2,454
$12,116
$5,190
$1,787
$178
$44
$249
$25,949
$79,824

$265

$31,838
$28,558
$4,705
$43,227
$34,704
$3,732
$9,363
$12,857
$2,063
$13,005
$4,297
$5,008
$2,093
$737
$625

$918,226

$196,812

$47,026
$349,712
$62,424
$74,114
$20,086
$138,611

OPEB
ALLOCATION
$6,194
$3,422
$5,203
$11,807
$3,557
$6,078
$0
$0
$1,389
$47,429
$121,431
$103,293
$0
$0
$40,891
$3,434
$15,970
$1,815
$3,781
$2,755
$15
$9,137
$1,782
$389,382

BENEFITS
TOTAL
$64,514
$26,631
$52,279
$96,679
$48,451
$46,660
$100
$7,237
$20,455
$602,879
$502,432
$405,700
$15
$27
$315,139
$31,674
$149,800
$31,007
$40,707
$34,751
$11,429
$81,568
$54,236
$2,624,370

$116,201
$126,303
$11,129
$155,089
$121,704
$6,221
$15,617
$117,537
$20,787
$18,720
$3,315
$32,488
$4,811
$0
$0
$0
$749,922

$550,031
$582,412
$94,956
$757,200
$593,732
$34,218
$116,752
$813,706
$143,722
$160,221
$37,855
$271,532
$23,934
$2,266
$2,242
$0
$4,184,778

$1,965,517

$7,485

RETIREES-DIRECT BILL
RETIREES-MIDDLESEX RETIREMENT
RETIREES-TEACHERS RETIREMENT

$141,020
$208,891
$596,283

$218
$757
$1,801

$53,684
$79,685
$227,327

$194,923
$289,332
$825,411

TOTAL RETIREES

$946,194

$2,776

$360,696

$1,309,666

$3,932,200

$14,214

$1,500,000

$8,118,813

TOTAL TOWN, SCHOOL, AND RETIREES

$32,929,632

$0

LIFE
INSURANCE

$20,345

$428,487

NOTES:
1. Employee wages and benefits are charged to the employee "home" department if they work in more than one location.
2. The Metrowest Veterans Districts wages and benefits are included in the above number as they are part of our payroll/accounting system.
3. The total Middlesex Retirement Assessment for FY15 is broken down as follows:
NORMAL COST
$492,979.00
PAYMENT OF MIDDLESEX RETIREMENT ON JULY 1: $1,909,829
UNFUNDED ACCRUED LIABILITY
$1,376,225.00
PAYMENT ON 2002 ERI
$56,695.00
The amount of $37,101 was applied to our unfunded accrued liability
PAYMENT ON 2013 ERI
$21,031.00
TOTAL RETIREMENT ASSESSMENT
$1,946,930.00
4. The total cost of workers comp for FY15 was $170,103.90 after departmental charge backs and credits from various vendors.
5. $3,798,531 was contributed by the Commonwealth of Mass on behalf of the Town for employees enrolled in the Mass. Teachers Retirement System
6. The OPEB allocation is based upon the total health and life insurance for active employees and retirees.
Revised: 2/2/2016

52 | Page

$1,946,930

$276,636

HOLLISTON LONG TERM DEBT SCHEDULE
4/22/2016
FISCAL
YEAR
-----------2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
TOTAL

:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:

FIRE
LAND
------------ -----------37,606
0

TOWN
GOLF
WATER
HALL
COURSE
------------ -------------- --------------117,856
0
0

161,584

0

113,795

0

0

159,931

0

0

0

0

179,788

0

0

0

0

174,931

103,240

0

270,535

170,148

170,244

98,088

0

265,173

168,638

164,411

0

0

259,810

180,063

155,960

0

714,247

254,448

176,000

148,520

0

615,800

249,085

171,938

143,376

0

602,675

248,723

162,875

138,164

0

590,425

238,198

128,975

118,123

0

608,702

232,835

126,050

114,145

0

771,400

226,648

122,675

100,645

0

751,800

215,460

119,300

87,645

0

730,450

198,812

111,268

84,845

0

704,100

195,007

109,219

75,591

0

820,886

188,257

104,629

74,247

0

774,501

181,557

98,279

65,100

0

746,400

178,257

96,479

62,150

0

723,424

169,957

94,679

29,950

0

705,325

161,757

92,879

0

0

682,101

173,757

51,279

0

0

663,752

0

0

0

0

480,604

0

0

0

0

469,582

0

0

0

0

453,710

0

0

0

0

442,988

0

0

0

0

155,167

0

0

0

0

155,198

0

0

0

0

155,228

0

0

0

0

155,259

0

0

0

0

155,291

0

0

0

0

155,324

0

0

0

0

155,358

0

0

0

0

155,391

0

0

0

0

155,426

0

0

2,446,957

201,328

14,682,166

3,908,275

2,285,373

:
OUTSIDE THE LEVY LIMIT
:
GRAND TOTALS
: ELEMENT. HIGH&MIDDLE
1750
:
TOTAL : SCHOOL
SCHOOL
SEWERS POLICE WASHINGTON TOTAL
: ALL ITEMS CHANGE
------------ : --------------- ------------------- -------------- ---------------------------------- : ------------------ -------------155,462 :
761,271
0
0
0
761,271 :
916,733
:
:
275,379 :
2,324,427
0
0
0
2,324,427 :
2,599,806
1,683,073
:
:
159,931 :
2,342,738
0
0
0
2,342,738 :
2,502,669
(97,138)
:
:
179,788 :
2,355,616
1,588,613
332,603
0
4,276,832 :
4,456,619
1,953,950
:
:
718,854 :
2,364,794
2,029,116
338,270
0
4,732,180 :
5,451,033
994,414
:
:
702,141 :
2,373,231
2,028,241
340,658
0
4,742,129 :
5,444,271
(6,763)
:
:
604,284 :
2,376,190
2,031,316
349,054
0
4,756,559 :
5,360,842
(83,428)
:
:
1,300,655 :
2,397,543
2,028,166
354,005
0
4,779,714 :
6,080,369
719,527
:
:
1,185,343 :
2,276,568
2,032,103
353,400
0
4,662,070 :
5,847,412
(232,957)
:
:
1,157,649 :
2,274,880
2,027,578
351,998
0
4,654,456 :
5,812,105
(35,308)
:
:
1,095,761 :
2,279,224
2,019,603
355,211
599,525
5,253,563 :
6,349,324
537,219
:
:
1,085,710 :
2,282,455
1,933,284
338,815
589,025
5,143,578 :
6,229,288
(120,035)
:
:
1,234,868 :
2,280,255
1,890,503
322,066
578,525
5,071,348 :
6,306,216
76,927
:
:
1,187,205 :
2,280,555
1,869,065
317,306
568,025
5,034,951 :
6,222,156
(84,060)
:
:
1,128,175 :
2,282,405
1,833,721
319,208
557,525
4,992,859 :
6,121,034
(101,122)
:
:
1,093,171 :
2,281,455
1,821,266
315,465
547,025
4,965,211 :
6,058,382
(62,652)
:
:
1,189,364 :
2,218,684
1,795,706
316,657
531,525
33,925
4,896,497 :
6,085,861
27,479
:
:
1,128,584 :
2,142,250
1,785,056
317,453
517,725
408,825
5,171,309 :
6,299,893
214,032
:
:
1,086,237 :
2,135,125
1,764,106
311,502
503,925
395,025
5,109,683 :
6,195,920
(103,973)
:
:
1,050,211 :
2,133,500
1,746,006
309,326
490,125
377,775
5,056,732 :
6,106,943
(88,977)
:
:
989,912 :
2,132,000
1,730,506
311,864
472,875
360,525
5,007,770 :
5,997,682
(109,261)
:
:
907,137 :
0
1,722,056
297,500
459,075
348,450
2,827,081 :
3,734,218
(2,263,464)
:
:
663,752 :
0
1,700,988
294,000
445,275
2,440,263 :
3,104,014
(630,204)
:
:
480,604 :
0
235,980
0
431,475
667,455 :
1,148,059
(1,955,955)
:
:
469,582 :
0
0
0
412,675
412,675 :
882,257
(265,802)
:
:
453,710 :
0
0
0
399,075
399,075 :
852,785
(29,472)
:
:
442,988 :
0
0
0
385,475
385,475 :
828,463
(24,321)
:
:
155,167 :
0
0
0
371,450
371,450 :
526,617
(301,846)
:
:
155,198 :
0
0
0
222,425
222,425 :
377,623
(148,994)
:
:
155,228 :
0
0
0
213,713
213,713 :
368,940
(8,683)
:
:
155,259 :
0
0
0
0
0:
155,259
(213,681)
:
:
155,291 :
0
0
0
0
0:
155,291
32
:
:
155,324 :
0
0
0
0
0:
155,324
32
:
:
155,358 :
0
0
0
0
0:
155,358
34
:
:
155,391 :
0
0
0
0
0:
155,391
33
:
:
155,426 :
0
0
0
0
0:
155,426
35
:
:
23,524,098 :
46,295,164
37,612,975 6,546,361 9,296,463
1,924,525 101,675,487 :
125,199,585

The above debt schedules include those projects which have been permanently financed and reflects refinancing of school, fire and sewer debt in 2016. The school figures do not include SBAB
reimbursements. Short term borrowing is not included above but is included in the Debt Service budget in the Omnibus Budget.
Notes: The 1996 Annual Town Meeting approved a borrowing of up to $45 million for a sewer project. Town Meetings in 1996 and 1997 authorized borrowings of up to $28,962,000 for the
elementary school project and the 1998 Annual Town Meeting authorized a borrowing of $50,408,132 for the high and middle school building projects. Various Town Meetings
between 1997 and 2000 authorized a total borrowing of $1,800,000 for the golf course clubhouse. Town Meetings in 1997 and 2000 authorized a total borrowing of $1,750,000 for
the Central Fire Station. The 2001 Annual Town Meeting authorized a borrowing of $2,950,000 for the Town Hall project. A Town Meeting in 2002 authorized a borrowing of up to
$649,000 for land acquisition. Town Meetings in 2003 authorized a borrowing of $6,900,000 for water projects. A Town Meeting in 2006 authorized $6,630,000 for a new police
station. A Town Meeting in 2010 authorized a borrowing of $1,500,000 for water projects. A Town Meeting in 2015 authorized borrowing of $1,725,000 for the purchase of 1750 Washington Street.
The above debt schedules include those projects which have been permanently financed and reflects refinancing of school, fire and sewer debt in 2016.
The school figures do not include SBAB reimbursements.

53 | Page

FREE CASH ANALYSIS

TRANSFERS
-------------------------1,962,411

2003

574,474

574,474

1.43%

2.39%

2004

631,408

631,408

1.57%

2.46%

2005

258,447

258,447

0.61%

0.97%

2006

758,141

758,141

1.74%

2.72%

2007

1,094,926

1,094,926

2.36%

3.73%

2008

882,642

882,642

1.84%

2.87%

2009

582,828

582,828

1.20%

1.82%

2010

206,643

206,643

0.42%

0.61%

2011

604,887

604,887

1.20%

1.70%

2012

1,084,078

1,084,078

2.12%

2.96%

2013

1,819,966

1,819,966

3.45%

4.81%

2014

1,358,776

1,358,776

2.54%

3.46%

2015

690,000

690,000

1.26%

1.70%

2016

2,083,684

2,083,684

3.44%

4.87%

AVERAGE

972,887

972,887

0

0

AVERAGE 11-15

1,111,541

1,111,541

2.11%

2.93%

FISCAL YEAR
---------------------------------2002

54 | Page

7/1 BALANCE AS % OF
OMNIBUS
BUDGET
TAX LEVY
-------------------- -------------------5.14%
8.29%

CERTIFIED
JULY 1
-------------------------1,962,411

OVERLAY ANALYSIS

Total
Overlay
----------------157,821

Overlay
% of Levy
--------------0.67%

Total
Expended
----------------175,280

Expended
% of Levy
--------------0.74%

Transfers
To Reserve
----------------0

2003

139,199

0.58%

99,554

0.41%

39,645

2004

144,316

0.56%

155,433

0.60%

0

2005

317,982

1.19%

117,300

0.44%

200,682

0

2006

130,289

0.47%

107,091

0.38%

23,198

0

2007

157,975

0.54%

168,741

0.57%

0

2008

133,953

0.44%

156,396

0.51%

2009

374,616

1.17%

338,063

1.06%

36,553

2010

132,477

0.39%

217,865

0.65%

0

2011

274,999

0.77%

169,880

0.48%

0

105,119

2012

294,249

0.80%

148,892

0.41%

145,357

0

2013

269,083

0.71%

172,263

0.46%

96,820

0

2014

282,584

0.72%

168,424

0.43%

0

114,160

2015

285,468

0.70%

165,420

0.41%

120,048

2016

393,125

0.92%

190,958

0.45%

202,167

Totals:

3,095,011

2,360,602

N/A

542,255

339,327

Averages:

221,072

168,614

0.54%

38,733

24,238

FY
------------2002

N/A
0.69%

Transfers
To Overlay
----------------17,459

Balance
--------------0
0

11,117

0

10,766

0

22,443

0
0

85,388

0

WATER SURPLUS
Balance
July 1
----------------24,964

Revenue
--------------1,194,086

Expenses
----------------628,848

Transfers
---------------33,264

Balance
June 30
----------------556,938

% Omnibus
Budget
----------------1.45%

% Tax
Levy
--------------2.35%

2003

556,938

997,893

627,214

-106,614

821,003

2.05%

3.42%

2004

821,003

1,247,481

1,652,873

57,981

473,592

1.18%

1.84%

2005

473,592

1,489,623

867,066

1,008,009

2,104,158

5.02%

7.90%

2006

2,104,158

1,667,378

1,114,257

-870,040

1,787,239

4.10%

6.40%

2007

1,787,239

1,898,432

2,774,627

521,935

1,432,979

3.09%

4.88%

2008

1,432,979

2,771,513

2,660,444

-296,092

1,247,956

2.60%

4.05%

2009

1,247,956

2,692,550

2,065,893

-638,792

1,235,821

2.54%

3.86%

2010

1,235,821

2,038,715

2,197,318

-89,439

987,779

2.00%

2.94%

2011

987,779

2,216,497

2,125,333

-247,085

831,858

1.65%

2.34%

2012

831,858

2,306,699

2,328,482

-724,119

85,956

0.17%

0.23%

2013

85,956

2,470,414

2,460,905

101,666

197,131

0.37%

0.52%

2014

197,131

2,672,306

2,170,957

-52,319

646,161

1.21%

1.65%

2015

646,161

3,098,464

2,911,482

-23,574

809,569

1.48%

2.00%

2016

809,569

3,256,456

1,945,894

2,120,131

3.68%

4.96%

Averages:

882,873

2,134,567

1,902,106

FY
------------2002

55 | Page

-92,783

1,022,551

CAPITAL EXPENDITURE FUND
JULY 1 BALANCE
AS % OF
OMNIBUS
BUDGET
TAX LEVY
------------------ -----------------5.58%
8.83%

JUNE 30 BALANCE
AS % OF
OMNIBUS
BUDGET
TAX LEVY
------------------ ----------------5.67%
8.96%

FISCAL YEAR
----------------------2002

BALANCE
JULY 1
----------------2,089,675

TRANSFERS
IN
----------------------0

CELL TOWERS
AND
INTEREST
-----------------------165,555

2003

2,120,230

0

64,458

239,788

1,944,900

5.28%

8.82%

4.85%

8.09%

2004

1,944,900

0

46,644

195,000

1,796,544

4.84%

7.57%

4.47%

6.99%

2005

1,796,544

0

61,459

1,144,447

713,556

4.29%

6.75%

1.70%

2.68%

2006

713,556

0

55,903

293,000

476,459

1.64%

2.56%

1.13%

1.79%

2007

476,459

280,000

66,478

50,000

772,937

1.03%

1.62%

1.67%

2.63%

2008

772,937

0

63,403

0

836,340

1.61%

2.51%

1.74%

2.72%

2009

836,340

350,000

47,549

0

1,233,889

1.72%

2.61%

0.25%

3.85%

2010

1,233,889

0

47,736

350,059

931,566

2.49%

3.67%

1.88%

2.77%

2011

931,566

686,000

57,666

444,179

1,231,053

1.85%

2.62%

2.44%

3.46%

2012

1,231,053

350,000

71,537

350,000

1,302,590

2.41%

3.36%

2.55%

3.56%

2013

1,302,590

920,246

76,557

670,246

1,629,147

2.47%

3.44%

3.09%

4.30%

2014

1,629,147

1,017,193

98,163

1,158,293

1,586,210

3.04%

4.15%

2.96%

4.04%

2015

1,586,210

625,000

88,430

1,801,464

498,176

2.89%

3.91%

0.91%

1.23%

2016

498,176

1,187,878

43,575

537,037

1,192,592

0.87%

1.17%

2.07%

2.79%

AVERAGE

1,368,805

361,088

70,341

491,234

1,217,746

2.94%

4.50%

2.65%

4.30%

TRANSFERS
OUT
----------------------135,000

BALANCE
JUNE 30
----------------2,120,230

STABILIZATION FUND
JULY 1 BALANCE
AS % OF
OMNIBUS
BUDGET
TAX LEVY
------------------ -----------------2.81%
4.57%

JUNE 30 BALANCE
AS % OF
OMNIBUS
BUDGET
TAX LEVY
------------------ ----------------5.90%
9.57%

FISCAL YEAR
----------------------2002

BALANCE
JULY 1
----------------1,080,158

TRANSFERS
IN
----------------------1,154,050

INTEREST
-----------------------30,706

TRANSFERS
OUT
----------------------0

BALANCE
JUNE 30
----------------2,264,914

2003

2,264,914

67,760

31,112

954,288

1,409,498

5.65%

9.43%

3.51%

5.87%

2004

1,409,498

0

5,717

290,000

1,125,215

3.51%

5.49%

2.80%

4.38%

2005

1,125,215

0

14,032

800,000

339,247

2.69%

4.38%

0.81%

1.32%

2006

339,247

0

10,355

35,795

313,807

0.78%

1.22%

0.72%

1.12%

2007

313,807

100,531

10,143

4,190

420,291

0.68%

1.07%

0.91%

1.43%

2008

420,291

0

17,725

52,735

385,281

0.87%

1.37%

0.80%

1.25%

2009

385,281

467,860

4,593

0

857,734

0.79%

1.20%

1.76%

2.68%

2010

857,734

0

4,436

73,988

788,182

1.73%

2.55%

1.59%

2.34%

2011

788,182

258,887

1,976

0

1,049,045

1.56%

2.21%

2.08%

2.95%

2012

1,049,045

1,111,687

7,796

0

2,168,528

2.05%

2.87%

4.24%

5.92%

2013

2,168,528

1,795,479

5,214

0

3,969,222

4.11%

5.73%

7.53%

10.48%

2014

3,969,222

1,891,974

23,291

3,295,479

2,589,007

7.41%

10.10%

4.84%

6.59%

2015

2,589,007

900,000

7,684

474,000

3,022,691

4.72%

6.38%

5.51%

7.45%

2016

3,022,691

1,833,684

6,052

4,862,427

5.25%

7.07%

8.45%

11.37%

AVERAGE

1,452,188

553,445

12,484

1,478,762

2.67%

4.01%

2.88%

4.30%

427,177

The Finance Committee has a goal of getting the Stabilization Fund balance to 8.1% of General Fund Expenditures (GFE).

56 | Page

TOWN OF HOLLISTON
CITIZEN VOLUNTEER FORM
If you are interested in serving the Town in any capacity, please complete this form and return it
either by mail or in person, to the Town Clerk's Office, Room 102, Town Hall, 703 Washington
Street, Holliston, MA 01746. Information received will be made available to all boards,
committees and departments for their reference in filling vacancies.
Name: ___________________________________

Telephone: _________________________

Address: _________________________________

Email: ____________________________

Area(s) of Interest: _____________________________________________________________
Availability (e.g. nights, weekends, hours per month): _________________________________
Comments: ___________________________________________________________________

57 | P a g e

HAVE YOU READ ME CAREFULLY?
Here are a few suggestions until we meet at town meeting:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

look to where the majority of the money will go;
look at material and significant changes from year to year;
reread prior year's reports if you see something unusual which is not clear in this year's
report;
write down exactly what your questions will be; be clear and precise;
bring a pencil to make notes at town meeting;
be alert to what is said so the same questions are not repeated;
discuss issues with friends and neighbors; come prepared to talk about facts.

GOOD GOVERNMENT STARTS WITH YOU

EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION INFORMATION
Please be sure to update your emergency contact information by going to
www.townofholliston.us and selecting the link to Blackboard Connect (shown below) on the
right hand side of the home page. Thank you.

58 | P a g e
