COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
AGREEMENT
BETWEEN

INGLEWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT

AND

TEAMSTERS LOCAL 911

July 1, 2022 – June 30, 2025
0

2022-2025 SCHOOL YEARS

INGLEWOOD BOARD OF EDUCATION
Brandon G. Myers, President
Carliss McGhee. Ph.D., Vice President
Joyce L. Randall, Member
Ernesto Castillo, Member
Margaret Evans, M.A., Member
James Morris, Ed.D., County Administrator
IUSD NEGOTIATING TEAM
Nick Stephany, Ed.D, Chief Human Resources Officer
Shelly Ebinar, Executive Director of HR and Risk Management
Megan Atkins, Director III
TEAMSTERS LOCAL 911 NEGOTIATING TEAM
Crystal Turner, Chief Shop Steward
Frank Weaver, Chief Shop Steward
Kendrea Goodwin-Miller, Shop Steward
Antonio Duncan, Shop Steward
Rosa Cruz, Shop Steward
Angie Gomez, Shop Steward
Juanita Brown, Shop Steward
Michael J. Leon, Business Representative

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE I
ARTICLE II
ARTICLE III
ARTICLE IV
ARTICLE V
ARTICLE VI
ARTICLE VII
ARTICLE VIII
ARTICLE IX
ARTICLE X
ARTICLE XI
ARTICLE XII
ARTICLE XIII
ARTICLE XIV
ARTICLE XV
ARTICLE XVI
ARTICLE XVII
ARTICLE XVIII
ARTICLE XIX
ARTICLE XX
ARTICLE XXI
ARTICLE XXII
ARTICLE XXIII
ARTICLE XXIV
ARTICLE XXV
ARTICLE XXVI
ARTICLE XXVII
ARTICLE XXVIII
ARTICLE XXIX
APPENDIX A
APPENDIX B

RECOGNITION
1
NO DISCRIMINATION
2
DEFINITION
3
AGENCY SHOP
4
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS
7
ORGANIZATIONAL RIGHTS
9
SHOP STEWARDS
11
HOURS AND OVERTIME
12
HOLIDAYS
19
VACATION PLAN
21
LEAVE OF ABSENCE
25
COMPENSATION
36
HEALTH AND WELFARE BENEFITS
41
PROCEDURES FOR EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE
45
TRANSFER AND PROMOTIONAL PROCEDURES
49
LAYOFF AND REEMPLOYMENT
51
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
55
DISMISSAL/SUSPENSION/DISCIPLINARY ACTION OF
CLASSIFIED EMPLOYEES
60
SAFETY
68
CONTRACTING AND BARGAINING UNIT WORK
69
SEVERABILITY AND SAVINGS
72
NEGOTIATIONS
73
PROFESSIONAL GROWTH PROGRAM
74
NO STRIKE – NO LOCKOUT
76
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
77
CLASSIFICATION, RECLASSIFICATION AND ABOLITION OF
POSITION
78
TRANSPORTATION
80
RETIREMENT OPTION
86
TERM OF AGREEMENT
87
CLASSIFIED SALARY SCHEDULE
89
GRIEVANCE FORMS
117

2

ARTICLE I – RECOGNITION
1.1

The District hereby acknowledges The International Brotherhood of Teamsters Local 911
1.2 is the exclusive bargaining representative for all classified employees holding those
positions described in Appendix A, attached hereto, and incorporated by reference as a part
of this Agreement. All newly-created positions, except those that lawfully are certificated,
management, confidential, or supervisory, shall be assigned to the bargaining unit.
Disputed cases shall be submitted to the PERB for resolution. The bargaining unit may be
expanded to other classes by mutual agreement of the International Brotherhood of
Teamsters Local 911 on any matter outside the scope of representation.

1.2

Scope of Representation. The scope of representation shall be limited to matters relating
to wages, hours of employment, and other terms and conditions of employment, as
enumerated in Government Code Section 3543.2. Nothing herein may be construed to limit
the right of The International Brotherhood of Teamsters Local 911 on any matter outside
the scope of representation.

1

ARTICLE II – NO DISCRIMINATION
2.1

Discrimination Prohibited. No employee in the bargaining unit shall in any way be favored
or discriminated against in wages, hours or other terms and conditions of employment
because of their political opinions or affiliations, or because of race national origin or
marital status, and to the extent prohibited by law, no person shall be discriminated against
because of age, sex, or physical handicap or union affiliations. This section shall not be
subject to the grievance procedure but resolved through the appropriate statutory
procedures.

2

ARTICLE III – DEFINITION
3.1

Bargaining Unit Seniority is secured by hours in paid status in a class or classes included
in the bargaining unit.

3.2

Job Description is the description of the duties, responsibilities, minimum qualifications,
and authority of positions in a class and is a regular minimum number of assigned hours
per day.

3.3

Classification is the act of placing a position in a class and shall be construed to mean that
each position in the classified service shall have a designated title, days per week, and
months per year, and the regular monthly salary range for each such position.

3.4

Fiscal Year is July 1 through June 30.

3.5

Safety Conditions of Employment means any work-related condition affecting the health,
safety, or welfare of the employee. Any dispute between the employee and the District
shall be resolved by OSHA.

3.6

Working Hours. All hours in paid status shall be considered working hours.

3.7

Uniforms. Any clothing of a particular color, design, pattern, or style required to be worn
by the District shall be paid for considered a uniform.

3.8

Substitute. Is any person employed to replace any classified employee who is temporarily
absent from duty. In addition, if the District is then engaged in a procedure to hire a
permanent employee to fill a vacancy in any classified position, the governing board may
fill the vacancy through the employment, for not more than 60 calendar days of one or
more substitute employees.

3.9

Lateral Transfer. For purpose of this Agreement, a “lateral transfer” shall consist of a
change in work location of a bargaining unit member within the same classification, same
hours, and same pay within the District. Such transfer must involve a change of worksite
as well and does encompass the change in assignment within a department or work
locations. A lateral transfer may be initiated by a bargaining unit member (voluntary) or
by the District (involuntary).

3.10

Day. A day is considered to be a day the District Office is open.

3

ARTICLE IV – AGENCY SHOP
4.1

Except as expressly exempted herein, all employees in the bargaining unit shall be required
to pay monthly dues to Teamsters within thirty (30) days of the ratification of this
agreement by both parties.
4.1.1

Monthly dues are the amount paid to Teamsters on a monthly basis as a condition
of maintaining full membership in the Union. These amounts are set forth in and
controlled in accordance with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters Local
911 Constitution.

4.2

Any unit member who is not a member of Teamsters or does not make application for
membership within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this application, or within thirty
(30) days from the date of commencement of assigned duties within the bargaining unit,
shall, as a condition of continued employment, become a member of the Union or pay to
the Union a fee in an amount equal to Teamsters membership dues, payable to the Union
in one lump sum cash payment in same manner as required for the payment of membership
dues, provided, however, that the unit member may authorize payroll deduction for such
fee in the same manner as provided in Section 4.7 of this Article. In the event that a unit
member shall not pay such a fee directly to the Union or authorize payment through payroll
deduction as provided in Section 4.7, the Union shall so inform the District, and the District
shall immediately begin automatic payroll deduction as provided in Education Code 45168
and in the same manner as set forth in Section 4.7 of this Article. There shall be no charge
to the Union for such mandatory agency fee deductions.

4.3

Teamsters has the sole and exclusive right to have employee organization membership dues
deducted by the employer for employees in the bargaining unit.

4.4

The District shall deduct, in accordance with the Teamsters dues from the wages of all
employees who are members of the bargaining unit and who have submitted payroll
deduction authorization forms to the District. Such authorization shall remain in effect until
expressly revoked in writing by the employee. Such revocation shall remain in effect until
expressly revoked in writing by the employee. Such revocation shall only be effective if
the employee completes the form authorizing such action. The employee must obtain the
acknowledgement of receipt of the form by the Teamsters prior to filing the form with the
District.

4.5

The District shall, without charge, pay to Teamsters within fifteen (15) days of the
deduction all sums so deducted.

4.6

Along with each monthly payment to Teamsters, the District shall, without charge, furnish
Teamsters every 120 days with an alphabetical list of all employees in the bargaining unit,
identifying them by name, first, last and middle initial, job title, department, work location,
work, home, and personal cellular telephone numbers, personal and work email addresses
and hire date on file with the employer, and home address and indicating the amount
deducted. Within 30 days of hire or by the first pay period of the month following hire, the
4

employer must provide the exclusive representative with the first, last and middle initial,
job title, department, work location, work, home, and personal cellular telephone numbers,
personal and work email addresses and hire date on file with the employer, and home of
all newly hired employees.
This information shall be provided to Teamsters regardless of whether the newly hired
employee was previously employed by the District. In the event no one is hired in any
particular month, the District shall send an e-mail to Teamsters confirming they did not
hire any new staff that month.
4.7

NEW EMPLOYEE ORIENTATION.
“New employee orientation” means the onboarding process of a newly hired classified
employee, whether in person, online, or through other means or mediums, in which
employees are advised of their employment status, rights, benefits, duties and
responsibilities, or any other employment-related matters.
The District shall provide Teamsters mandatory access to its new employee orientations.
Teamsters shall receive not less than ten (10) days’ notice in advance of an orientation,
except that a shorter notice may be provided in a specific instance where there is an urgent
need critical to the District’s operations that was not reasonably foreseeable. The parties
agree that on a recurring basis, notice regarding one-on-one onboarding procedures are
likely to be shorter than ten (10) days. Teamsters access shall not be impeded due to any
shorter notice of a one-on-one orientation.
In the event the District conducts a group orientation, Teamsters shall have thirty (30)
minutes of paid release time for one (1) Teamster Shop Steward, to conduct the orientation
session. Said release time shall not be counted against the total release time contained
elsewhere in the collective bargaining agreement. The Teamster Business Representative
may also attend the orientation session.
The District shall include the Teamsters new membership packets. Teamsters shall provide
the copies of the Teamsters’ membership applications to the District for distribution.
The orientation session shall be held on District property during the workday of the
employee(s), who shall be on paid time. This section shall not apply to time prior to an
employee’s first day of work.
During Teamsters’ orientation session, no District manager or supervisor or non-unit
employee shall be present.

4.8

Nothing contained herein shall prohibit an employee from paying dues or service fees
direct to Teamsters.

4.9

The Union shall indemnify and hold the District harmless from any and all claims, demands
or suits, or any other action arising from the organizational security provisions contained
herein.
5

4.10

The parties agree to furnish any information needed by the other party to fulfill the
provisions of this Article.

6

ARTICLE V – EMPLOYEE RIGHTS
5.1

Personnel Files.
5.1.1

The personnel file of each employee shall be maintained at the District’s Central
Administrative Office. An employee’s original personnel file shall not be removed
from the central office by any District administrator or employee except in
exceptional circumstances as approved by the County Administrator or his or her
designee, and such files shall remain in the custody of the District’s custodian of
records. No adverse action of any kind shall be taken against an employee based
upon material which is not in the personnel file.

5.1.2

An employee shall be provided with copies of any derogatory written material ten
(10) calendar days before it is placed in the employee’s personnel file. The
employee shall be given an opportunity during normal working hours to initial and
date the material without a loss of pay. The employee may prepare a written
response on off-duty time and the written response shall be attached to the material.

5.1.3

Within twenty-one (21) days of the receipt of the employee’s written response to
the derogatory material, the employee and his/her immediate supervisor or site
administrator shall, upon timely request by the employee discuss the subject matter
of the derogatory material. The employee shall have the right to representation by
Teamsters Local 911 Business Representative or job steward at any such
discussion. Unless the immediate supervisor or site administrator and the employee
mutually agree that the derogatory material and the employee’s response should be
destroyed, that information shall be permanently place in the employee’s personnel
file. The decision of the immediate supervisor or site administrator to place the
derogatory material and employee response in the employee’s personnel file shall
not be subject to the grievance procedure.

5.1.4

Employees shall have the right to examine material in his or her personnel file,
except ratings, reports, or records which were obtained prior to his or her
employment. Background files are a part of the employee’s personnel files.

5.1.5

Every employee may inspect and/or review his/her personnel file between 2:30 p.m.
and 5:00 p.m. on Tuesdays and Thursdays. An employee’s personnel file may be
reviewed at times other than the above in connection with a grievance or litigation
as approved by the Chief Human Resources Officer. Any person who requests to
inspect a personnel file must present appropriate identification and complete the
District’s “Request to Inspect Confidential Personnel Records” form.

5.1.6

All personnel files shall be kept in confidence. The District shall keep a log
indicating the persons who have examined a personnel file as well as the date such
examinations were made. Such log shall be maintained in the employee’s personnel
file and shall be available for examination by the employee or by his/her Teamsters
Local 911 Business Representative if authorized in writing by the employee. No
7

employee shall divulge any confidential information kept in employee personnel
files to any other employees without the express permission of the Chief Human
Resources Officer or his/her designee.
5.1.7

Any written material placed in an employee’s personnel file shall be signed and
dated by the person requesting that the material be placed in the personnel file.

5.1.8

Official District letters of recommendation and other favorable reports may be
placed by the employee in his/her personnel file upon the request of the employee.

8

ARTICLE VI – ORGANIZATIONAL RIGHTS
6.1

Union Rights. Teamsters Local 911 shall have the following rights in addition to the rights
contained in any other portion of this Agreement.
6.1.1

The right of access at reasonable times (which shall be defined as break and lunch
periods) to areas in which employees work, for the purpose of representing
bargaining unit members.

6.1.2

The right to use without charge designated bulletin boards, mailboxes and the use
of the school mail or e-mail system for the posting or transmission of written
information or notices concerning Union matters. Such written information or
notices shall be signed and dated by authorized Teamsters Local 911 Business
Representatives. A copy of such postings or distributions must be delivered to the
Office of the County Administrator or his/her designee and the principals’ and/or
department heads’ offices at the same time as posting or distribution. The Union
will not post or distribute information which is derogatory or defamatory of the
District or District personnel. The District agrees that it will not post nor distribute
information which is derogatory or defamatory of the Union.

6.1.3

The limited right to use institutional facilities at reasonable times for the purpose
of meetings concerned with the exercise of rights guaranteed by the Education
Employment Relations Act. Such use shall not interfere with normal District
operations. Use of specific facilities at specific times will be determined by mutual
agreement. The Union shall pay in advance a reasonable fee for expenses related to
utilities, security, clean-up, and any unusual wear or damage in accordance with the
District’s Civic Center Permit regulations. Any unusual wear and tear may result in
additional charges being assessed by the District.

6.1.4

The Union reserves the right to review employee’s personnel files between the
hours of 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Tuesdays and Thursdays when accompanied
by the employee or upon written authorization signed by the employee.

6.1.5

The right to be supplied with a complete seniority roster of all bargaining unit
employees as soon as feasible after the effective date of this Agreement and upon
request which shall be no less than six months from previous requests. The roster
shall indicate the employee’s present classification and primary job site. Within
five (5) days of the District issuing classified layoff notices, the District shall
provide Teamsters Local 911 a seniority list of the employees affected by the layoff.

6.1.6

The right to be supplied with complete “seniority and/or reemployment” list for all
bargaining unit classifications as soon as feasible after the ratification of this
Agreement and annually thereafter.

6.1.7

The District will provide Teamsters Local 911 with a bi-annual list of all vacant
classified bargaining unit positions, with unfilled or currently filled by provisional
9

or unit members working out of class. The list will identify, by name the person
currently filling the position, if applicable, how long the person has filled position,
how long the vacancy has existed, and whether it has been advertised.
6.1.8

The District will provide Teamsters Local 911 with a bi-annual list of all vacant
classified bargaining unit positions, either unfilled or currently filled by substitutes
or unit members working out of class. The list will identify, by name, the person
currently filling the position, if applicable, how long the person has filled the
position, how long the vacancy has existed, and whether it has been advertised.

6.2

Distribution of Contract. Within thirty (30) days after the execution of this contract, the
District shall provide the number of copies to be determined by Teamsters Local 911, with
the cost to be divided equally.

6.3

New Employee Orientation. New employees shall have the opportunity to attend on
release time, a one (1) hour orientation upon the contract. Such orientation shall be
conducted at the District Administration Building by the Teamsters Local 911 Business
Representative and/or his/her designee after the regular school hours on a quarterly basis.
The Assistant County Administrator/Personnel Services or his/her designee shall have the
option to attend.

6.4

Shop Steward Release Time.
6.4.1

6.5

Shop Steward Release Time. Shop Steward’s shall be granted ninety (90) hours of
leave to conduct business pertinent to the Union upon expressed approval of
Teamsters Local 911 with notification to the immediate supervisor.

All Union business, discussions, and activities, will be conducted by members of the
bargaining unit or Union officials outside established work hours and will be conducted in
places other than District property, except when expressly authorized by the County
Administrator pursuant to the terms of this agreement.

10

ARTICLE VII – SHOP STEWARDS
7.1

Assignment of Shop Stewards.
7.1.1

7.2

7.3

Teamsters Local 911 shall designate Chief Shop Stewards and Shop Stewards.
Teamsters Local 911 shall notify the District in writing of their name and the site
and/or classification they represent. If a change is made, the District shall be
advised in writing of said change.

Duties and Responsibilities of the Shop Steward(s).
7.2.1

After receiving written permission from the immediate supervisor, or designee, a
Shop Steward will be granted a reasonable amount of time to participate in the
investigation, preparation, writing, and presentation of grievances. The Shop
Steward shall arrange with the grievant’s supervisor for a mutually suitable time to
conduct such business.

7.2.2

A Shop Steward shall be granted release time with pay to accompany an OSHA
representative conducting an on-site, walk-around safety inspection of any area,
department, division, or other subdivision for which the job steward has
responsibilities of representation.

7.2.3

Shop Steward shall have the authority to file notice and take action on behalf of
unit members who give them written consent relative to rights afforded them under
this Agreement.

7.2.4

A Shop Steward may act on items 7.2.1. and 7.2.2 only upon expressed approval of
Teamsters Local 911.

Teamsters Local 911 Business Representative. Shop Stewards shall be entitled to seek and
obtain assistance from Teamsters Local 911 Business Representative(s) for the purpose of
processing grievances and matters related thereto and other reasons relating to wages,
hours, and terms and conditions of employment covered by this Agreement.

11

ARTICLE VIII – HOURS AND OVERTIME
8.1

8.2

The work week for current and permanent full-time employees shall consist of five (5)
consecutive days or forty (40) hours per week, Monday through Friday, excluding lunch
period. This Article shall not restrict the extension of the regular workday or workweek on
an overtime basis when such is necessary to carry on the business of the District.
8.1.1

Part-time employees have a regular workweek of less than forty (40) hours.

8.1.2

The work year, workweek and workday for new employees shall be determined by
the District at the time of employment. Any reduction there from shall be
considered a layoff. Permanent employees shall be notified by June 1st of any
change in the employee’s assignment for the following year. Any change of
schedule after the beginning of the school year, must be approved by the classified
Personnel Director and/or the County Administrator and a thirty-day written notice
to the employee, with explanation.

8.1.3

Spilt Shift Assignment. Spilt Shift shall be defined as nonconsecutive hours of
employment during any one workday. Bargaining unit members hired on or after
July 1, 2009 may be assigned a spilt shift. Bargaining unit members hired on or
after July 1, 2009 not initially hired on a spilt shift are subject to the thirty (30)
days’ notice pursuant to 8.1.2 of Article 8.

Workday.
8.2.1

The length of the workday shall be designated by the District for each classified
assignment in accordance with the provision set forth in this Agreement. Each
bargaining unit employee shall be assigned a fixed, regular, and ascertainable
minimum number of hours at the time of employment.

8.2.2

The District may require all members of the bargaining unit to record the time they
report to and from duty each day and take lunch and other breaks, by means of log
sheets, time clocks, or other systems as necessary and designated by the District.
The District shall notify the Union of any groups of employees who will be required
to use time clocks.

8.3

Adjustment of Assigned Time. Any employee in the bargaining unit who works a
minimum of thirty (30) minutes or more per day in excess of his/her regular part-time
assignment for a period of twenty (20) consecutive working days or more shall have his/her
regular assignment adjusted upward to reflect the longer hours, effective with the next pay
period.

8.4

Lunch Period. A thirty (30) minute non-compensated, duty-free lunch period shall be
provided to all employees who render service of at least six (6) consecutive hours per day.
The lunch period shall be assigned by the immediate supervisor to be taken as soon after
the conclusion of four (4) hours of service as administratively practicable. The length of
the lunch period in excess of thirty (30) minutes shall be determined by the employee and
12

the immediate supervisor so long as the employee works the required number of hours per
day. This designated lunch period shall be uninterrupted. In the event an employee is
required by a District administrator or the employee’s supervisor to work during the
designated lunch period, the entire lunch period shall be considered hours worked for
purpose of compensation in Section 8.6 below. Implementation of this section shall not
allow the reduction of the assigned workday unless mutually agreed by the employee and
his/her supervisor.
8.5

Rest Period. A fifteen (15) minute compensated duty-free rest period shall be provided all
employees for each four (4) hour period of service. The rest period herein described shall
be taken at a time assigned by the immediate supervisor as close to the mid-point of each
four (4) hour period of service as administratively practicable. An employee must remain
at the worksite during his/her break period, except as authorized by the immediate
supervisor.
8.5.1

8.6

Rest periods are a part of the regular workday and shall be compensated at the
regular rate of pay of the employee.

Overtime.
8.6.1

Overtime compensation shall be provided to employees who are directed and
authorized by their immediate supervisor to work in excess of eight (8) hours in
any day, or in excess of forty (40) hours in any calendar week. The employee shall
be compensated equal to time and one-half of the regular rate of pay or the
employee shall receive compensatory time off at time and on-half; however, the
employee may accrue not more than 160 overtime hours or 240 compensatory
hours. Any such employee who has accrued in excess of 240 hours of compensatory
time off shall, for additional hours of work, be paid overtime compensation.
Unauthorized overtime work will not be paid.

8.6.2

Employees excused from work because of holidays, sick leave, vacation,
compensatory time, or other fully paid leave of absence shall be allowed to utilize
the time off as time worked for the purpose of computing the number of hours
worked for overtime service credit.

8.6.3

Employees directed and authorized by the immediate supervisor and who provide
service to the District for five (5) consecutive workdays averaging four (4) hours
or more per day shall be compensated on the sixth (6th) and seventh (7th) day
following the commencement of the workweek at the rate of time and one-half of
the employee’s regular rate of pay.

8.6.4

Employees directed and authorized by the immediate supervisor and who provide
service five (5) consecutive workdays averaging less than four (4) hours per day
shall be compensated on the seventh (7th) day at time and one-half of the
employee’s regular rate of pay.

8.6.5

The pay received for any work performed on a holiday shall be paid at one and one13

half times the employee’s regular rate of pay plus the regular pay received for all
hours worked if the employee is required to work by his/her immediate supervisor.
8.6.6

Employees authorized to take compensatory time off in lieu of cash compensation
for authorized overtime shall take the compensatory time off within six (6) calendar
months following the month the overtime service was rendered at a time mutually
acceptable to the employee and the District.

8.6.7

If the compensatory time has not been taken within six (6) months of the date on
which it was earned, due to the District’s priorities, the District shall either assign
the employee time off or pay the employee in cash for all such time at the
appropriate overtime rate based on the employee’s current rate of pay.

8.6.8 Distribution of Overtime.
8.6.8.1 Within thirty (30) days of this Agreement the District shall circulate within
each department or worksite a form upon which bargaining unit employees
may affix their names indicating they are and will be available to work
overtime assignments and hours. Bargaining unit employees who do not
complete the overtime form will not be eligible to work overtime for a threemonth period. The District shall circulate the same form on a quarterly basis
thereafter.
8.6.8.1.1 Every department and/or worksite shall establish a seniority list
per classification for the purposes of overtime and have it posted
where it will be visible for all employees to see. Copies of these
seniority lists shall be provided to the Teamsters.
8.6.8.2 Each employee who indicates that he/she is available for overtime
assignments shall be placed on an overtime assignment list for that
department or worksite and listed in seniority order and by classification.
8.6.8.3 Overtime shall be distributed and rotated as equally as is possible among
bargaining unit employees within each department or worksite as provided
for in this Article. Unit members who have been given written notice of
repeated absences and or repeatedly tardies without authority and sufficient
reason may be excluded from overtime assignments until this problem is
corrected.
8.6.8.4 For the purpose of offering overtime hours to bargaining unit members, the
supervisor responsible for such assignments in each department or worksite
shall first offer the overtime to the person who normally performs the work.
If that person refuses the assignment, the overtime shall be offered to the
most senior person within the same classification in the department or
worksite. After overtime has been accepted or rejected, the employee shall
be put on the bottom of the seniority list for overtime assignments. If there
are no bargaining unit employees available to work the overtime at that
14

worksite, then the overtime shall be offered to other bargaining unit
employees holding the same classification in the department or who have
indicated their availability to work overtime. This section shall not apply to
the maintenance department.
8.6.8.5 Any bargaining unit employee who is offered an overtime assignment and
who accepts or rejects the assignment or is unavailable to work on that day
shall be put on the bottom of the seniority list for overtime assignments.
8.6.8.6 If there are no bargaining unit employees willing and available to work
overtime assignment in a department or worksite and all other lists have
been exhausted, the District may offer said overtime to a qualified
permanent employee in another classification.
8.6.8.7 Employees assigned to an overtime assignment shall have the right to
complete the assignment without regard to any other provision of this
Agreement.
8.6.8.8 Overtime assignments in the maintenance department shall be offered as
follows: Offers to work an overtime assignment shall be made first to the
employee(s) who has signed the overtime form and who normally performs
such work. If that employee rejects the assignment or is unavailable to work
the assignment shall be put on the bottom of the seniority list for overtime
assignments. The overtime shall then be offered to the most senior skilledmaintenance specialist able to perform the assignment safely and
competently and who is eligible to work in descending order of seniority,
on the approved overtime form list. If none of the above are available or
willing to work an overtime assignment, the overtime shall be offered to
any other maintenance employee eligible to work overtime, who has signed
the overtime form. For purposes of the subsection, competence shall be
determined by the minimum qualifications to perform the overtime. If the
employee accepts and reports to an assignment and abandons the
assignment, the employee will be denied overtime for a period of one (1)
month.
8.6.8.9 If there are no regular maintenance employees available or willing to work
overtime, the District may offer such overtime in accordance with Section
8.6.8.6 of this Agreement.
8.7

Procedure for School Safety Assistant (SSA) Additional Assignments. This agreement
shall be used for the filling of SSA assignment outside of the normal working day.
The Parties agree for the purpose of this article only, seniority will be determined by the
date of hire.
Whenever possible, the assignment of SSA overtime will not be delayed until the day of
the overtime but shall be done prior to the day of the overtime assignment.
15

8.7.1

When offered, overtime shall initially be offered to the SSAs at his/her site in
descending order of District seniority. After overtime has been accepted or rejected,
the SSA shall revert to the bottom of the SSA seniority list at that site for SSA
overtime assignments. The Chief of School Police or designee shall be responsible
for keeping the SSA seniority list current, and for tracking the order of SSA’s as
they rotate through the list. If all SSAs at the site reject the SSA overtime
assignment, then the Chief of School Police or designee shall fill the SSA
assignment. School Police shall refer to the District-wide SSA seniority list, and
follow the following procedure:
Human Resources shall maintain a master District seniority list that will be revised
whenever a new SSA is hired, or a SSA leaves employment. That list will be
provided to School Police and the Teamsters as soon as it is completed.
Each school shall designate a school office employee who shall be responsible for
relaying immediate messages about overtime assignments to their SSAs on campus.
The relay shall occur via radio or the most expedient method available to the
designee.
On duty SSAs shall remain accessible to the designee so as to be available for
contact about overtime assignments.
SSAs who do not wish to be offered overtime can call School Police and advise
them that the SSA does not wish to be called for overtime. The words “DO NOT
CALL” will be placed next to that SSAs name until the SSA calls School Police
again to state that he/she wishes to be included in the SSA overtime rotation. All
SSAs will be considered interested in overtime for the purposes of beginning this
new procedure.
School Police shall initially call and offer the overtime assignment to the senior
most SSA on their District seniority list through that SSA’s school contact designee.
After the first assignment, the list shall rotate in seniority order.
When the SSA assignment requires a specific gender, then School Police will
follow the same procedures, except that the overtime will be offered only to the
SSAs of the needed gender.
When contacted, the SSA must make an immediate decision about the overtime. If
the designee cannot immediately reach the SSA, then the designee is to log the
receipt of the overtime call from School Police, along with their attempt to contact
the SSA, and then tell School Police that the SSA is not available. The overtime is
to be considered rejected.
After a SSA has accepted or rejected an overtime assignment at another site that
SSA shall revert to the bottom of the District-wide SSA seniority list for SSA
16

overtime assignments. For example: if a SSA at Morningside High School was
called for an overtime assignment at Inglewood High School. After that call, the
SSA at Morningside High School will revert to the bottom of the District SSA
seniority list.
School Police shall log their attempts to fill all assignments via seniority rotation
list. For each assignment this shall include where the rotation started on the list, and
the date, time of each attempt made to contact the SSA. For on-duty SSAs, School
Police shall log their contact with the school site designee. For off duty SSA’s,
School Police shall log the phone number called, with a comment (reached
answering machine, no answer, wife advised SSA was not available, etc.).
If Police Services has contacted (or attempted to contact) every SSA in the District
and has not found a volunteer for the overtime assignment, School Police will fill
the assignment with a substitute SSA.
8.7.2

The parties agree to meet and negotiate upon request of either party with respect to
the provisions of Article 8, Section 8.6.8 at any time after one year from the
effective date of this contract.

8.8

Call Back Time. Employees who are called back to work outside their regular work hours
shall be guaranteed a minimum of two (2) hours pay or compensatory time off at the
appropriate rate.

8.9

Substituting. All nine, ten, and eleven-months permanent employees, who request
substitute duty during their off month(s), shall be placed on the top of the substitute list and
be given preference over regular substitutes, for substitute assignments.
8.9.1

Any regular employee performing substitute work in the same position as their
regular Board of Education approved assignment for the District shall be paid their
regular rate of pay.

8.10

Extra Duty. For the purpose of offering extra duty hours to bargaining unit members, the
supervisor responsible for such assignments in each department or worksite shall first offer
the extra duty to the person who normally performs the work. If that person refuses the
assignment or is not available, the extra duty shall be offered to the most senior person
within the classification who has the ability and training to perform the task. If there are no
bargaining unit employees at the worksite capable and willing to perform the extra duty
task, the extra duty shall be offered to other bargaining unit employees within the
classification who has the ability, training and have indicated their availability to work
extra duty.

8.11

The District and the Union agree to establish a joint committee with equal representation
to review and make recommendations relative to the wearing of uniforms by unit members.

8.12

Maintenance and Operations bargaining unit members are required to wear safety shoes.
17

The District will reimburse full-time bargaining unit members up to two hundred dollars
($200) for the purchase of safety shoes (includes steel toe or composite toe) subject to the
approval of the Maintenance and Operations Director. The District shall also provide
gloves, goggles and face mask upon request of bargaining unit members.
8.13 School Safety Assistants (SSAs) shall be required to wear a safety boot. SSAs shall receive
up to one hundred and fifty dollars ($150) for the purchase of footwear as approved by the
School Chief of Police. The District shall also provide head cover and eye protection for
each bargaining unit member.
8.14

Food Services personnel shall wear protective footwear. Food Services personnel shall
receive up to one hundred and fifty dollars ($150) for the purchase of protective, slip
resistant with good tread footwear as approved by the Food Service Director.
All receipts are to be submitted prior to May 1st of each school year in order to be eligible
for reimbursement.

18

ARTICLE IX – HOLIDAYS
The District shall convene a calendar committee on a regular basis to review the actual dates of
observed holidays prior to the beginning of each academic/fiscal year.
9.1

Scheduled Holidays. The District agrees to provide all employees in the bargaining unit
with the following paid holidays:
9.1.1

New Year’s Day – January 1

9.1.2

Martin Luther King Day – Third Monday in January

9.1.3

Lincoln Day

9.1.4

Presidents Day – Third Monday in February

9.1.5

Cesar Chavez Day – March 31 (date to be determined)

9.1.6

Spring Vacation Day – To be determined

9.1.7

Memorial Day – Last Monday in May

9.1.8

Juneteenth (June 19th)

9.1.9

Independence Day – July 4

9.1.10 Labor Day – first Monday in September
9.1.11 Admission Day Fiscal year 2022-2023
Fiscal year 2023-2024
Fiscal year 2024-2025
9.1.12 Veteran’s Day – November 11
9.1.13 Thanksgiving Day – Thursday proclaimed by the President and the following
Friday.
9.1.14 Christmas Eve – December 24
9.1.15 Christmas Day – December 25
9.1.16 New Year’s Eve – December 31
9.2

Additional Holidays. Every day declared by the President or Governor of this state as a
public fast, mourning, thanksgiving, or holiday, and any day declared a holiday by the
Governing Board under Education Code Section 37220, 37221, 37222 or their successors
19

shall be subject to negotiations as to whether it is a paid holiday in the bargaining unit.
9.3

Holidays on Saturday or Sunday.
9.3.1

When a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding workday not a holiday shall be
deemed to be that holiday. When a holiday falls on Sunday, the following workday
not a holiday shall be deemed to be that holiday.

9.3.2

The operation of this section shall not cause any employee to lose any of the
holidays clearly indicated in this Article.

9.4

Student Release Days. On any school day during which pupils would otherwise be in
attendance but are not and for which certificated personnel receive regular pay, food
service workers and/or instructional aides who desire to work on those days shall receive
pay for either work time or for attending in-service training provided by the Business
Services Division. Food service workers and/or instructional aides desiring such days off
may take such days off as vacation days or days off without pay.

9.5

Holiday Eligibility. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, an employee must be in
paid status on the working day immediately preceding or succeeding the holiday to be paid
for the holiday.
9.5.1

9.6

Employees in the bargaining unit who are not normally assigned to duty during the
school holidays of December 24, December 25, December 31, and January 1, or
Spring vacation day, shall be paid for those holidays provided that they were in paid
status during any portion of the working day of their normal assignment
immediately preceding or succeeding the holiday period.

The parties understand and agree that the above definitions of legal holidays are intended
to conform to the definitions of legal holidays provided in the applicable law. In the event
an amendment or repeal of applicable law renders the above definition inconsistent with
the law, the District shall, after negotiations with Teamsters Local 911, adjust the date of
the holiday to conform to the law.

20

ARTICLE X – VACATION PLAN
10.1

Eligibility. All employees in the bargaining unit shall earn paid vacation time in accordance
with this Article. Vacation benefits are earned on a fiscal year basis, July 1 – June 30.
Vacation shall be earned and accumulated prior to its use.

10.2

Paid Vacation. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, paid vacation shall be granted
no later than the fiscal year immediately following the fiscal year in which it is earned.
Where desired by the employee, the paid vacation shall be granted in the fiscal year in
which it is earned. Vacations must be approved by the immediate supervisor. Except for
twelve-month employees, employees assigned to school sites may not take vacation when
school is in session.

10.3

Accumulation.
10.3.1 Increase Vacation Time.
Vacation time shall be earned and accumulated on a monthly basis in accordance
with the following:
Twelve-Month Employees
Years of Service
0-5
6-10
11-14
15 or more

Maximum
Number of Days
14
17
20
22

Eleven-Month Employee
Years of Service
0-5
6-10
11-14
15 or more

Maximum
Number of Days
12
16
18
20

Ten-Month Employees
Years of Service
0-5
6-10
11-14
15 or more

Maximum
Number of Days
11
13
16
17

Nine-Month Employees
Years of Service
0-5
6-10
11-14
15 or more

Maximum
Number of Days
10
12
14
16
21

10.3.2 Nine, ten, and eleven-month employees may choose to use non-paid or take their
vacations when school is not in session or when student are not required to be
present.
10.3.3 All remaining vacation time off must be approved in advance by the immediate
supervisor so as to not adversely affect the operations of the employee’s
department.
10.4

An employee granted vacation leave, as described, shall be compensated at their regular
rate of pay at the commencement of vacation leave.

10.5

If a paid holiday falls at a time employees are on paid vacation status, the employee shall
be compensated for that day as a holiday, rather than a day of vacation. The utilization of
any other leaves of absence specified in Article 10 shall not be permissible while on
vacation leave except as provided in Section 10.5.1 and 10.5.2.
10.5.1 An employee on vacation leave may interrupt such leave and may utilize available
personal illness and injury leave while on vacation leave, if hospitalized. The
employee shall immediately notify the District of such interruption of leave, and
upon return to service, provide verification of hospitalization. The interruption of
the leave shall not result in an extension in the total number of days of vacation
leave.
10.5.2 An employee on vacation leave may interrupt such leave and may utilize
bereavement leave in the event of the death of a member of the employee’s
immediate family (as defined in Article XI). The employee shall immediately notify
the District of such interruption of leave, and upon return to service the employee
shall provide the District a copy of the death certificate as verification. The
interruption of the leave shall not result in an extension of the total number of days
of vacation leave.

10.6

Earned vacation shall not become a vested right until completion of the initial six (6)
months of employment.

10.7

Upon separation from service, an employee shall be entitled to lump-sum compensation
for all earned and unused vacation, except that employees who have not completed six (6)
months of employment in regular status shall not be entitled to such compensation. Upon
separation from service, an employee who has utilized more vacation leave than has been
earned and accrued, that deficit, in a dollar amount calculated for the equivalent daily rate
for that employee at the time of termination, shall be deducted from the final salary warrant
due.

10.8

Upon authorization described herein, an employee shall utilize annual vacation leave
within twelve (12) months of the end of the fiscal year in which the vacation was earned.
If the annual earned vacation leave is not utilized during the twelve (12) months after the
22

end of the July 1st – June 30th fiscal year, in which the vacation is earned, the employee
may carry over a maximum of ten (10) days of vacation leave for use during the next twelve
(12) month period, with knowledge of the immediate supervisor. All employees must be
granted approval of vacation during each fiscal year to ensure that no employee will be
denied annual vacation due to District priorities. All employees shall be notified by the
District payroll department of the number of vacation days earned by the employee by
December 1st of each calendar year.
10.9

The supervisor shall schedule vacation times at the employee’s request if the request is
made at least thirty (30) days before commencing of vacation time and if the request does
not seriously impede District operations.

10.10 The supervisor shall inform the employee as to whether the time requested seriously
impedes District operations with an explanation, in writing, as to the seriousness, within
ten (10) days after receiving the request.
10.11 All requests made less than thirty (30) days before vacation time is requested to
commence, shall be scheduled at the supervisor’s discretion. The supervisor shall notify
the employee, in writing, within ten (10) days as to whether the request is approved or
denied.
10.12 Request for vacation time shall not be denied arbitrarily or capriciously.
10.13 The employee may appeal the decision to rescind a vacation, a vacation denial, or a
refusal to provide a response to a vacation request to the County Administrator or
designee. The appeal shall be heard within five (5) days or a mutually agreed upon day.
10.14 Employees will receive their regular pay for designated school recess days and will have
these days off.
10.15 The District may elect to implement a period of District closure during the Thanksgiving
Break, Winter break, and Spring break in accordance with the Board approved District school
calendar. Employees may elect to utilize available vacation during periods of mandatory District
closure or elect to be placed in unpaid status during the period of mandatory closure.


Use of non-paid time shall not be counted toward a member’s absences.



Any employees required to work during the period of mandatory closure shall be
compensated at their regular rate of pay.



Employees will be notified if they are required to work during any of the mandatory
closures by October 1st of each year.



If employees are required to work during school recess days, they may shift that day off
to another regularly scheduled work day by mutual agreement with their direct
supervisor.
23



Employees may choose to work during mandatory closures with the prior approval of
their direct supervisor.



Vacation days may not be taken the week before or the week after the first or last day of
the school year.

24

ARTICLE XI – LEAVE OF ABSENCE
The following leave provisions are in lieu of and not in addition to leave provisions under any
applicable law.
11.1

Personal Illness and Injury Leave.
11.1.1 An employee, covered by this Agreement, working five (5) days per week for a full
contract year (12 months), shall annually be entitled to twelve (12) days of leave of
absence with full pay for the purpose of personal illness or injury.
An employee, covered by this Agreement, working less than full-time, shall be
entitled to such leave in the same ratio that his/her employment bears to full-time
employment. Credit for personal illness and injury leave need not be accrued prior
to utilizing such leave and such leave may be utilized at any time during the
employee’s assigned work year. Sick leave used but not earned, upon termination,
shall be reimbursed to the District. Nine (9) month employees shall receive ten (10)
sick days.
11.1.1.1 Establish Committee to Review Cost of Absences. The Union and the
District agree to establish a joint committee with equal representation by
Teamsters Local 911 and the District to review and recommend a plan for
reduction of the cost of absences. The areas shall not be limited to
incentives similar to those presented to the certificated bargaining unit or
other forms of compensation or incentives.
11.1.2 Employees, upon initial employment, shall be eligible to take not more than six (6)
days, or the proportionate amount of sick leave to which they are entitled, until the
first day of the calendar month following six months of service. Sick leave used but
not earned upon termination shall be reimbursed to the District.
11.1.3 Pay for any day of such absence shall be the same as the pay which would have
been received had the employee served during the day of illness.
11.1.4 Each bargaining unit employee shall once a year be credited with a total of 100
working days of paid sick leave including days to which he or she is entitled under
Section 11.1.1. Such days of paid sick leave in excess of those provided under
Section 11.1.1 shall be compensated at fifty percent (50%) of the employee’s salary.
Use of sick leave hereunder shall be subject to the provisions of Section 11.1.6.
11.1.5 If an employee does not utilize the full amount of leave as authorized in Section
11.1.1 in any school year, the amount not utilized shall be accumulated from year
to year.
11.1.6 If an employee fails to submit a verification required under this section within five
(5) workdays of his return to work, the employee’s paycheck may be adjusted to
25

reflect the non-payment for days of leave claimed, in addition to any other measures
which the District may take including but not limited to disciplinary action. If an
employee is absent due to personal illness or injury on the day before or the day
after a legal or local holiday, the employee shall provide a doctor’s statement
verifying such absence, or other verification acceptable to the District. An
employee who has experienced a disability absence requiring surgery,
hospitalization, or extended medical treatment, shall be required to submit, prior to
return to active duty, a medical statement indicating an ability to return to his/her
position classification.
11.1.7 Whenever possible, an employee must contact the District Office as soon as the
need to be absent is known, but in no event less than two (2) hours prior to the start
of his/her workday, unless later notification is authorized in advance by the
immediate supervisor. The notification described herein shall also include an
estimate of the expected duration of the absence.
11.1.8 An employee becoming aware of the need for absence of more than five (5)
consecutive work days, due to surgery or other predictable causes, shall submit a
statement from his/her attending physician at least five (5) days prior to the date of
absence, if applicable, and a request for leave of absence to the Personnel Division,
using the approved District form, prior to taking the leave. The physician’s
statement shall include the beginning date of disability, that the employee is
medically able to work, and the anticipated date of return to active service.
11.1.9 When a unit member is absent due to illness for more than five (5) consecutive
days, a leave form shall be required. On or before the sixth (6th) day of absence, the
unit member shall notify the Personnel Division of his/her anticipated length of
absence. The District shall provide the employee with a leave of absence form. The
leave of absence form shall be submitted to the District within five (5) days after
receipt of same by the unit member.
11.1.10 For employees compensated on the basis of a monthly salary, personal illness and
accident leave may be utilized in increments of no less than one-quarter day. For
employees compensated on the basis of an hourly rate, personal illness and accident
leave may be utilized in increments of no less than two (2) hours.
11.1.11 An employee shall notify the District Office of the employee’s intent to return to
work at least two (2) hours prior to the close of the preceding workday. If the
employee fails to notify the District Office as specified herein, the employee shall
not be allowed to return to work on said day and said day shall be unpaid. If an
employee is absent for twenty (20) consecutive workdays or more, the employee
shall advise the District Office of his/her intent to return to work at least twentyfour (24) hours prior to the date of the return. If the employee fails to notify the
District Office as specified herein and returns to work, the employee shall not be
allowed to work on said day and said day shall be unpaid.

26

11.1.12 Immediately upon return to active service, the employee shall complete the
District absence form and submit it to the immediate supervisor.
11.1.13 If, upon termination, an employee has used more sick leave than has been earned
and accrued, that deficit, in a dollar amount calculated for the equivalent daily rate
for that employee at the time of termination, shall be deducted from the final salary
warrant due.
11.1.14 Employees on paid illness leave shall be returned to their previous position unless
circumstances warranting a transfer or reassignment under Article 15 apply, the
employee has been subject to or affected by a layoff, or the employee is no longer
able to perform the essential functions of his or her former position in a manner
that does not pose a direct health or safety, with or without reasonable
accommodation.
11.1.15 Pursuant to Education Code Section 45195, when all available leaves of absence,
paid or unpaid, have been exhausted and if the employee is not medically able to
assume the duties of his or her position, the employee may request additional
leave, paid or unpaid. If the request is denied or the employee does not request
additional leave, the District shall place the employee on a reemployment list for
a period of thirty-nine (39) months. If at any time during the 39 months the
employee is able to assume the duties of his or her position, the employee shall be
reemployed in the first vacancy in the classification of his or her previous
assignment. The employee’s reemployment will take preference over all other
applicants except for those laid off for lack of work or funds.
11.1.16 Any classified employee of any public school district or County Administrator of
schools who has been employed for a period of one calendar year or more whose
employment is terminated for reasons other than action initiated by the employer
for cause and who subsequently accepts employment with the District within one
year of such termination of his former employment, shall have transferred with
him to the District the total amount of earned leave of absence for illness or injury
to which he/she is entitled under Section 45191 of the Education Code.
11.2

Personal Necessity Leave.
11.2.1 Days of absence for illness or injury earned and available pursuant to Section
11.1.1, may be used by an employee in cases of personal necessity, without prior
approval, provided that use of such personal necessity leave does not exceed seven
(7) days in any school year. Personal necessity leave is defined to include only the
following:
11.2.1.1 Death or serious illness of a member of the employee’s immediate family
when additional leave is required beyond the provisions of Section 11.3.1
for Bereavement Leave. Members of the immediate family shall mean the
same as defined in Section 11.3.2 of this Agreement.
27

11.2.1.2 Accident involving the employee or his/her property, or the person or
property of a member of the employee’s immediate family.
11.2.2 An employee shall obtain prior approval from the Personnel Division for use of
personal necessity leave in these circumstances:
11.2.2.1 Appearance in any court or before an administrative tribunal as a litigant,
party or witness under subpoena or any order made with jurisdiction,
provided the subpoena or summons is submitted to the Personnel Division
three (3) days prior to the required appearance, when possible, subject to
appropriate verification.
The term “litigant” in this provision does not mean plaintiff, complainant
or charging party in an action against the District.
In any case where a witness fee is payable, such fee may be collected by
the unit member and remitted to the District. A unit member who chooses
to retain any witness fee shall be paid the difference between the unit
member’s regular rate of pay and the witness fees received.
11.2.2.2 Attendance at a funeral of a close friend or a member of the employee’s
family, other than the immediate family. The duration of such leave shall
not exceed one (1) workday.
11.2.3 If an employee is absent due to personal necessity as defined herein on the day
before and/or day after a legal or local holiday, the employee shall provide
verification of his personal necessity acceptable to the District. If the employee fails
to submit the verification immediately upon return to work, the employee’s
paycheck may be adjusted to reflect the non-payment for days of personal necessity
leave claimed.
11.2.4 For employees compensated on the basis of a monthly salary, personal necessity
leave may be utilized in increments of no less than one-quarter day. For employees
compensated on the basis of an hourly rate, personal necessity leave may be utilized
in increments of no less than two (2) hours.
11.2.5 An employee shall submit a request for approval of personal necessity leave on the
District developed form to the immediate supervisor not less than 48 hours prior to
the proposed beginning of the requested leave, except when there is an emergency.
The employee shall provide upon District request additional verification of the basis
for the leave request. Requests for such leave shall be accepted for review less than
forty-eight (48) hours in advance if there is an emergency. The employee shall in
any event make every effort to comply with District procedures designed to secure
substitutes and shall notify the immediate supervisor on the request form of the
requested duration of the leave. The immediate supervisor shall review the request,
28

grant, or deny it in his or her discretion, and advise the employee accordingly.
11.2.6 Immediately upon return to active service, the employee shall complete the District
absence form and submit it to the immediate supervisor.
11.2.7 Of the seven (7) days of personal necessity leave, employees may take, once a year,
up to two (2) days for personal business without prior authorization. Said days are
not cumulative. Employees are expected to notify their immediate supervisors in
sufficient time so that substitute may be employed.
11.2.8 An employee shall notify the District Office of employee’s intent to return to work
at least two (2) hours prior to close of the preceding workday unless the return day
is definite and certain.
11.3

Bereavement Leave.
11.3.1 An employee shall be granted necessary leave of absence, not to exceed five (5)
consecutive workdays without loss of salary on account of the death of any member
of his/her immediate family. The necessary leave of absence shall be granted for
the number of days specified herein immediately following the bereavement.
11.3.2 For the purpose of this provision, the immediate family is defined as spouse or
domestic partner, mother, father, sister, brother, son, daughter, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, grandchild, foster-parent, step-parent,
stepson, stepdaughter, grandparents, brother-in-law, sister-in-law or any relative of
either spouse or registered domestic partner living in the immediate household of
the employee. Bereavement leaves not exceeding three (3) days may also be granted
in case of death of:
11.3.2.1 An aunt or uncle defined as a brother or sister of a parent.
11.3.2.2 A close friend for whose funeral arrangements an employee has
responsibility.
11.3.3 An employee exercising the leave of absence provisions shall notify the District as
soon as possible and indicate the expected duration of the absence.
11.3.4 Immediately upon return to active service, the employee shall complete the District
absence form and submit it to the immediate supervisor.
11.3.5 The employee shall provide upon District request additional verification for the use
of these leave provisions.

11.4

Leave For Pregnancy Disability.
11.4.1 An employee is entitled to utilize sick leave as set forth in 11.1.1 and 11.1.3 for
29

disabilities caused or contributed to by pregnancy, miscarriage, childbirth, and
related medical conditions on the same terms and conditions governing leaves of
absence for other temporary illness or injury disability. Such leave shall not be used
for child care, child rearing, or preparation for child bearing, but shall be limited to
those disabilities as set forth above. The length of such disability leave, including
the date on which the leave shall commence and the date on which the duties are to
be resumed, normally shall be determined by the employee and employee’s
physician. If absence after normal delivery exceeds six (6) weeks, the District may
require a verification from the employee’s physical stating that the employee
remains medically unable to work, the absence is related to the pregnancy, and
identifying an approximate date of return to work.
11.4.2 The employee shall submit a request for pregnancy disability leave not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the requested commencement date of the leave. The request
shall be accompanied by the attending physician’s statement stating that the
employee is medically unable to perform her duties and the anticipated beginning
and ending dates of the leave.
11.4.3 Immediately upon conclusion of the pregnancy disability described herein, the
employee shall return to service and shall complete the required District absence
form and submit it to her immediate supervisor. The employee shall provide
advance notice of return as provided by section 11.1.11. The employee shall
provide verification of ability to return to work as provided by section 11.1.6.
11.5

Parental (Child Bonding) Leave.
11.5.1 Effective January 1, 2017, as provided by education Code section 45196.1, unit
members shall be entitled to parental leave as set forth in this section.
11.5.2 For purposes of this section, “parent leave” shall be defined as leave for reason of
birth of the unit member’s child, or the placement of a child with a unit member for
adoptions or foster care.
11.5.3 Unit members shall be entitled to use all current and accumulated sick leave for
parental leave, for a period of up to twelve (12) workweeks.
11.5.4 When a unit member has exhausted all current and accumulated sick leave and
continues to be absent on account of parental (child bonding) leave under the
California Family Rights Act (CFRA, Government section 12945.2), he or she shall
be entitled to 50% pay for any of the remaining twelve (12) workweek period. Such
50% pay shall be paid as set form in section 11.1.4 of this agreement but shall not
count against the leave entitlement set forth in that Section. In order to use 50%
pay, the unit member must be eligible for leave under the California Family Rights
Act as set form in Section 11.9 of this Agreement, except that he or she is not
required to have worked 1,250 hours in the (12) months immediately preceding the
leave.
30

11.5.5 Any leave taken under this section shall count against any entitlement to child
bonding leave under the California Family Rights Act and the aggregate amount of
leave taken under this section and CFRA shall not exceed twelve (12) workweeks
in any twelve (12) month period.
11.5.6 Unit members shall not be entitled to more than one (1) twelve (12) week period
for parental leave in any twelve (12) month period.
11.5.7 If an employee is on leave for child bearing or child rearing and in the event of a
miscarriage or death of a child subsequent to childbirth, the employee may request
an immediate assignment to their previous position subject to the employee
providing to their immediate supervisor advance notice of return to work as
provided by section 11.1.11 and verification of ability to return to work as provided
by section 11.1.6.
11.5.8 The determination as to the date on which the leave shall end shall be made at the
discretion of the County Administrator or his/her designee when considering the
scheduling and replacement problems of the District. The leave shall not be
extended more than forty-five (45) days.
11.5.9 Unit members shall provide thirty (30) calendar days-notice of parent leave. Parent
leave under this section shall be taken in increments of at least two (2) weeks
duration, except on two (2) occasions leave may be of shorter duration.
11.6

Industrial Accident and Illness Leave.
11.6.1 Pursuant to the requirements specified below, industrial accident and illness leave
shall be granted for illness or injury incurred within the course and scope of an
employee’s assigned duties with the District.
11.6.2 Allowable leave shall not exceed sixty (60) working days during which the schools
of the District are required to be in session or when the employee would otherwise
have been performing work for the District in any one fiscal year for the same
industrial accident or illness. If the cause of injury is a battery, the employee shall
be entitled to no more than seventy-five (75) days with full pay.
11.6.3 In conformance with the State Labor Code, the employee shall have the right to
designate the physician of their choice prior to the illness or injury on a form
provided by Teamsters Local 911. The District has the right to have the employee
examined, at District expense, by a physician designated by the District. Disputes
under this Section shall be resolved in accordance with the rules and regulations
provided by the State Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board.
11.6.4 An employee who has sustained a job-related injury shall report the injury on a
District approved accident report form within twenty-four (24) hours to the
31

immediate supervisor.
11.6.5 Allowable leave shall not be accumulated from year to year.
11.6.6 Industrial accident or illness leave shall commence on the first day of absence upon
determination of the job relatedness of the disability.
11.6.7 Industrial accident or illness leave shall be reduced by one day for each day
authorized absence regardless of a temporary disability indemnity award.
11.6.8 During any industrial paid leave of absence, the employee shall endorse to the
District the temporary disability indemnity check received on account of his/her
industrial accident or illness. The District, in turn, shall issue the employee
appropriate salary warrants for payment of the employee’s salary and shall deduct
normal retirement, other authorized contributions, and the temporary disability
indemnity, if any, actually paid to and retained by the employee for periods covered
by such salary warrants. Upon conclusion of this industrial paid leave, an employee
may utilize any available sick leave utilization when combined with any temporary
disability indemnity shall not exceed 100 percent of the employee’s normal
compensation.
11.6.9 An employee shall be permitted to return to service after an industrial accident or
illness only upon the presentation of a release to the risk manager or designee from
a physician stating that the employee is able to return to work and perform the
essential functions of his or her position with or without reasonable
accommodation.
11.6.10 For a leave of absence of twenty (20) consecutive workdays or more, the employee
shall notify the District Office by 3:00 p.m. the day before the employee intends
to return to service; otherwise, the employee shall notify the District Office at least
one-and-one-half (1.5) hours prior to the start of his/her workday, unless later
notification is authorized in advance by the immediate supervisor.
11.6.11 Pursuant to Education Code section 45192, when all available leaves of absence,
paid and unpaid, have been exhausted and, if the employee is not medically able
to assume the duties of his or her position, the employee may request additional
leave, paid or unpaid. If the request is denied or the employee does not request
additional leave, the employee shall, if not placed in another position, be placed
on a reemployment list for a period of 39 months. If at any time during the 39
months the employee is able to assume the duties of his or her position, the
employee shall be reemployed in the first vacancy in the classification of his or
her previous assignment. The employee’s reemployment will take preference over
all other applicants except for those laid off for lack of work or funds.
11.6.12 An employee who has been medically released for return to duty from an industrial
accident or illness leave shall be returned to their previous Board approved
32

classification.
11.6.13 An employee shall be permitted to return to their previous Board approved
classification after an industrial accident or illness only upon presentation of a
release from the authorized work’s compensation physician certifying the
employee can perform the essential function of the job with/without reasonable
accommodation.
11.6.14 An employee who does not receive a full medical release to return to his/her
previous position, and has successfully completed a vocational rehabilitation
program and is medically able to perform the essential functions in a new position,
the employee shall be offered the employment in the new position, as vacancies
occur for which they are qualified for a period not to exceed thirty-nine (39)
months.
11.6.15 An employee who is medically released for return to duty and who fails to accept
a position in a comparable classification may be deemed to have resigned.
11.7

Judicial Leave of Absence.
11.7.1 The District shall grant to employees regularly called for jury duty in the manner
provided by law, including leave of absence without loss of pay for time the
employee is required to perform jury duty during the employee’s regularly assigned
working hours.
11.7.2 Employees, so called for jury duty, must immediately notify the District office of
service date(s) upon receiving said notice from officers of the Court and forward
said notice and request for judicial leave form to the Personnel Office.
11.7.3 The employee and/or the District may seek a postponement of duty to times when
the employee’s services are not required by the District or to times more consistent
with the operational needs of the District.
11.7.4 The District shall pay the employee the difference, if any, between the employee’s
regular rate of pay and the amount received for jury duty, less meals, travel, and
parking allowance provided the unit member submits timely written verification of
the required jury duty.
11.7.5 Employees are required to return to work during any day or any portion of a day
equal to or greater than one-half of the work shift in which jury duty services are
not required.
11.7.6 The District may require verification of jury duty time prior to or subsequent to
providing jury duty compensation.
11.7.7 Immediately upon return to service, the employee shall complete the District
33

absence form and submit it to his/her immediate supervisor.
11.7.8 An employee in a paid status shall be granted leave of absence without loss of pay
or benefits to:
Appear in court as a witness other than a litigant.
Respond to an official order from another governmental jurisdiction for reasons
brought about through no fault of the employee. Employees requesting leave under
this policy shall submit to the Personnel Office a copy of the subpoena or summons
requiring their appearance.
11.8

Personal Leaves of Absence Without Pay.
11.8.1 An employee may be granted a personal leave of absence without compensation for
reasons not enumerated elsewhere in Article XI: Leave of Absence.
11.8.2 The employee seeking an approved personal leave of absence shall submit a
request, including the reasons and any supporting information related thereto, and
duration of the length of the requested leave.
11.8.3 For personal leaves of five (5) working days or less, the employee shall submit the
request described herein to the immediate supervisor, designated by the District to
approve such leaves, not less than five (5) working days prior to the beginning date
of the leave.
11.8.4 For personal absences in excess of five (5) working days including the balance of
the school semester/year, or a fully school semester/year, the employee shall submit
the request described herein to the County Administrator, or his/her designee, for a
recommendation and presentation to the Board of Education for approval or denial.
An employee requesting such an extended personal leave of absence shall submit
the request no less than ten (10) days prior to the next Board of Education meeting.
11.8.5 The employee shall be reinstated to a position in the classification held prior to the
leave of absence.
11.8.6 If the personal leave of absence was granted for personal health reasons, the
employee shall be required to submit, prior to return to active duty, a medical
statement from a licensed physician indicating an ability to assume assigned duties
without restrictions or detriment to the employee’s physical or emotional wellbeing.
11.8.7 If the personal leave of absence extends beyond twenty (20) workdays, any portion
beyond that period shall not count as service determining eligibility for other types
of leave, salary advancement, seniority, retirement, or other benefits. The District
contributions toward premiums for health and welfare insurance shall cease during
34

the leave.
11.8.8 For personal leave of absence extending beyond twenty (20) workdays, the
employee shall be permitted to participate in the District health and welfare
insurance at his/her own expense pursuant to Article XIII of the Agreement.
11.8.9 An employee shall not accept gainful employment while on personal leave of
absence without prior written approval of the County Administrator or designee.
11.9

Family Leave Act. All classified employees are eligible for leave under the Federal Family
Leave Act provided the employee meets all guidelines and requirements as set forth under
the Federal and State guidelines.

35

ARTICLE XII – COMPENSATION
12.1

The classified salary schedule shall be increased by 6% retro to July 1, 2021, with an
additional 4% increase effective July 1, 2022. This shall be a full 10% increase between
the two years above the current salary schedule.
Over the past two academic years, the District has struggled to fill open positions and retain
employees. This has affected classified, certificated and management employees.
The District will pay all unit members in paid status a one-time, off-schedule retention
bonus in the amount of 3% of the unit member’s annual base salary, not including
longevity, doctoral or any other stipend, overtime, or extra duty assignments, provided that
the unit member meets the following criteria:
The unit member is employed by the District as of March 1, 2023.
The unit member has been employed by the District for six (6) months prior to March 1,
2023.
The retention bonus will be issued to unit members in one lump sum as reasonably close
to March 1, 2023 as possible.

12.2

Salary Placement. New employees shall be placed on the first step (column) in the
appropriate range for the position classification.
12.2.1 Initial Step Placement. A new employee may be provided with advanced step
placement based upon such factors as:
Additional qualifying experience (limited to no more than one step for each year of
qualifying experience beyond that required for entry into the class);
Additional education at the college level (limited to no more than one step for each
two years of education related to the position, but beyond the educational
requirements established for entry into the class).

12.3

Salary Computation.
12.3.1 Full-time employees shall be compensated on the basis of a monthly salary in the
appropriate range for the position classification.
12.3.2 Part-time employees working less than eight (8) hours per day shall be compensated
for each hour of service rendered at the hourly equivalent of the monthly salary
range for the appropriate separate salary schedule in Appendix A. In determining
the hourly equivalent from the monthly equivalent salary range, the divisor of
173.33 hours per month shall be utilized.

36

12.4

Anniversary Increment.
12.4.1 Employee shall be granted by the District an anniversary increment to the next
higher step, if any, one year from the date of hire.
12.4.2 Anniversary increment advancement to the third, fourth, and fifth steps (columns)
as provided in Appendix A shall be granted after completion of each year of service
in paid status in the prior step (year of service is defined by employment status 10,
11, or 12 months). The employee shall have been in a paid status for one-half (1/2)
or more of the working days in a month to be credited with the entire month. This
includes time while on paid leave, vacation, compensatory time, and holidays, as
well as time providing service.
12.4.3 Reclassification Anniversary Date. The employee’s anniversary date shall not be
changed as a result of a reclassification.

12.5

Longevity Increment.
12.5.1 After eight (8) consecutive years of credited service in the District, the employee’s
regular salary, as provided in Appendix A, shall be increased by an increment of
four (4) percent.
12.5.2 After twelve (12) consecutive years of credited service in the District, the
employee’s regular salary, as provided in Appendix A, shall be increased by an
increment of four (4) percent applied to the salary reflecting the eight (8) year
longevity increment.
12.5.3 After fifteen (15) consecutive years of credited service in the District, the
employee’s regular salary, as provided in Appendix A, shall be increased by an
increment of four (4) percent applied to the salary reflecting the twelve (12) year
longevity increment.
12.5.4 After twenty (20) consecutive years of credited service in the District, the
employee’s regular salary, as provided in Appendix A, shall be increased by an
increment of four (4) percent applied to the salary reflecting the fifteen (15) year
longevity increment.
12.5.5 The employee shall have rendered services for at least seventy-five (75) percent of
the working days in a year to be credited with the entire year.

12.6

Night Increment.
12.6.1 For an employee whose assignment requires working fifty (50) percent or more of
his/her regular assignment after 5:00 p.m., the employee’s regular salary shall be
37

increased by an increment of five (5) percent.
12.7

Compensation During Required Training Periods. An employee who is required to attend
training sessions or otherwise engage in training of any kind in order to continue
employment in a position shall receive compensation as follows:
12.7.1 When training occurs during the employee’s regularly assigned working hours, the
employee shall receive all benefits to which said employee is entitled.
12.7.2 All costs incurred under a mandated training program shall be reimbursed to the
employee, including transportation, registration, or tuition fees, if not paid in
advance by the District.

12.8

Compensation For Working Out of Classification. An employee shall not be required to
perform duties not a part of the employee’s classification except as provided in this Section.
12.8.1 No employee shall be assigned duties of a position other than his regularly assigned
position for any period of time which exceeds five (5) working days within a fifteen
(15) day calendar period. In such event an employee shall receive the pay for the
range of the duties performed at the lowest step on the range which will give the
employee a salary increase above their salary for the entire period the employee is
working out of classification.

12.9

Payroll Errors. Any payroll error resulting in insufficient payment to an employee in the
bargaining unit shall be corrected, and a supplemental check requested not later than three
(3) working days after the employee provides notice to the payroll department. In the event
a unit member’s regular monthly paycheck is not available on the scheduled payday, the
District shall issue a supplemental check advancing payment of 70% of the unit member’s
monthly gross salary. The balance of the unit member’s salary shall be paid by the District
within five (5) working days from the regularly scheduled payday for that month.
12.9.1 Special Payments. Any payroll adjustment due an employee in the bargaining unit
as a result of working out of class, re-computation of hours, or reasons other than
procedural errors shall be made and a supplemental check requested from the
County not later than five (5) working days following notice to the payroll
department.
12.9.2 Lost Checks. Any paycheck for an employee in the bargaining unit which is lost
shall be immediately reported to the payroll department. The payroll department
shall initiate a request for replacement in accordance with the County of Los
Angeles regulations.
12.9.3 Pay Increases. The District shall make a lump sum payment of an agreed-upon
retroactive wage increase resulting from this Agreement or any amendments thereto
as soon as feasible.

38

12.9.4 Mileage. Any employee in the bargaining unit required and authorized to use
his/her vehicle on District business shall be reimbursed at the rate per mile
authorized by the Board of Education for all miles driven on behalf of the District.
The mileage computation shall include mileage necessary to return to the
employee’s normal job site after the completion of District business. This amount
shall be payable in a separate warrant drawn against District funds within thirty
(30) working days of submission of the claim by the employee in the bargaining
unit.
12.9.5 Overpayments. Any payroll overpayment as a result of misplacement on the salary
schedule or other error shall be corrected by automatic salary deduction in equal
installments over twelve (12) working months. Any balance due upon separation
from service shall be deducted from the employee’s final paycheck.
12.10 Court Appearances. Court appearances required by the District in its discretion in
connection with the employee’s duties which occur on any day the employee is not
scheduled to work shall be deemed to be two hours or the actual number of hours in court.
12.11 Stand-by Time. An employee is on “stand-by” whenever his/her immediate supervisor
assigns him/her to be available for a work assignment or court appearance on an on-call
basis during a specified period of time. Prior to authorizing a stand-by assignment, the
employee’s immediate supervisor shall make a written request to the Director of Business
Services or his/her designee, indicating (1) the employee or employees required for the
stand-by assignment and (2) the necessity for the assignment. The assignment becomes
effective only upon approval of the Assistant County Administrator or his/her designee.
Employees placed on stand-by shall be paid two (2) hours at his/her overtime rate for each
eight (8) hours of stand-by time if not required for duty.
12.12 Salary Differential for Bilingual Skills.
12.12.1 Positions in the collective bargaining unit which are designated to require verbal
bilingual translation skills shall receive a 3% differential above base pay. Positions
in the collective bargaining unit which are designated to require reading, writing,
and verbal translation skills shall receive a 5% differential above base pay.
12.12.2 The administrator of the position requiring bilingual skills shall certify this
requirement to the Human Resources Administrator in writing on the District
Bilingual Skills Questionnaire.
12.12.3 Upon approval by the Human Resources Administrator that the need for bilingual
skill is required by the incumbent or candidate on a skilled, frequent, and
continuous basis as certified by the administrator, the Human Resources
Administrator shall cause a test to be administered to the incumbent (or require
such skill in a note of examination, 4.200.4). Upon verification that the incumbent
or candidate for the position meets the required verbal skill level, a 3% differential
shall be assigned, and issued to the incumbent above base pay. Upon verification
39

that the incumbent or candidate for the position meets the required reading,
writing, and verbal skill levels, a 5% differential shall be assigned, and issued to
the incumbent above base pay.
12.13 Summer School.
12.13.1 Selection Process. In order to be considered for summer schoolwork, unit members
must complete and submit the Summer School application form to Human
Resources by the published deadline. Unit members will be selected for the
summer school session based on their seniority within the job classification to be
filled. If the District determines there are no qualified candidates from within the
District, applicants from outside the District may be selected. Substitutes shall be
considered an outside of the District applicant for the purpose of this section.
12.13.2 Pay. Unit members shall be paid the appropriate rate for the work performed within
the assigned classification during Summer School.
12.13.3 Sick Days, Holidays. Unit members shall be paid for any holidays that occur during
summer school as required by law. Unit members shall accrue sick leave for
service performed during summer school, to the extent required by law.

40

ARTICLE XIII – HEALTH AND WELFARE BENEFITS
13.1

District Contribution – Medical and Vision.
For fiscal years beginning July 1, 2022 and July 1, 2023, the District and Teamsters agree
to reopen negotiations on Article 13. The parties agree to commence negotiations on this
article no later than April 1 of each year of this agreement.
Effective October 1, 2022, the District will provide comprehensive major medical, vision
and prescription coverage in accordance with the Teamsters Miscellaneous Security Trust
Fund’s Plan SD $15 Tier. The District shall provide said program to the employee, the
employees’ dependents, and employees’ domestic partner (coverage effective October 1,
2022). Domestic partners must be registered with the State of California and coverage is
subject to the rules and regulations of the Teamsters Miscellaneous Security Trust Fund
and/or insurance carriers. The medical enrollment options under Plan SD $15 Tier are as
follows:
Anthem Blue Cross (HMO)
Kaiser Permanente (HMO)
For the period of October 1, 2022-September 30 2023, the District shall contribute toward
the actual cost of health and welfare benefits (Medical, Vision and Prescription) up to a
maximum of $699.00 for Single, $1,464.00 for 2 Party and $2,090.00 tenthly for Family
per eligible full-time employee. The vision enrollment options under Plan SD $15 Tier are
as follows:
VSP
The rate sheets effective October 1, 2022 is attached to this MOU.
Waiver of Medical Coverage.
Any eligible employee who certifies that: (i) the employee is enrolled in other employerprovided medical coverage through the employee's own employer or through a parent,
spouse or domestic partner; or (ii) that the employee is enrolled in government-provided
medical coverage (such as CHAMPUS or Tricare and subject to the eligibility requirements
of the Teamsters Miscellaneous Security Trust Fund) may elect to waive the employee's
right to medical coverage paid by the District. Government-provided coverage does not
include health insurance purchased on the health insurance marketplace pursuant to the
Affordable Care Act.
Employees must meet the following criteria to qualify for coverage in the Teamsters
Miscellaneous Security Trust Fund’s plan:
New Employees.
Employees on the payroll on the effective date of coverage are eligible with the first
41

contribution paid.
All subsequent new hires must qualify and will be eligible with the third contribution paid.
New Hires.
Initial contribution is determined by this collective bargaining agreement.
The first two contributions are placed in the reserves of the Fund.
Employee becomes eligible on the first day of the month for which the third contribution
is made during a six-month consecutive period.
Opt-Outs.
Employees may be eligible to opt out of coverage if other group health coverage is
maintained.
The first contribution due for new employees shall be the 1st of the month following the
date of hire.
Dental coverage and life insurance will be available to Unit Members through the District’s
other Dental and Life Insurance coverage options. This coverage will be available on the
first day of the month following the date of hire.
Effective October 1, 2022, the maximum District annual contribution for District medical
insurance for each eligible full-time unit member (regularly assigned 7 to 8 hours per day)
shall be equivalent to 100% of each tier (Single, 2 Party, Family) of the District’s lowest
cost HMO medical health benefit plan. For the period of October 1, 2022-September 30,
2023, the maximum contribution by the District is provided in Section 13.1 of this
agreement.
Part-time unit members regularly assigned less than full-time, but more than four (4) hours
or more per day, five (5) days per week, shall receive a percentage of the District’s
maximum annual contribution towards health benefits as described below:
At least 6 hours, less than 7 hours:
Single
100%
2 Party
75%
Family
75%
Any employee who works in more than one bargaining unit position with the District and
the total hours equal six (6) or more, excluding any extra duty assignment shall also be
eligible for benefits in accordance with the above schedule.
The District’s annual medical contribution may not be combined with or applied to any
other employee’s selection of medical benefits. A current District employee cannot be
added as a dependent on a parent’s selected District medical plan.

42

Employees who fail to enroll in a District offered medical insurance plan shall be
automatically enrolled in the lowest cost insurance plan for single coverage.
13.1.1 The selection of the plans and benefits offered shall be within the sole
discretion of the District. The name of the plan, the name and style of any cards
carried by or in the possession of the employee, and the relative fame and goodwill
of any insurance or other company providing coverage or service in connection
with any of the plans shall not be considered “employee benefits” within the
meaning of this section.
Health Benefits for Retirees: Unit members who retired prior to January 1, 2016,
shall be eligible for a District annual contribution toward District medical insurance
equal to active employees in accordance with Section 13.1.1 above, subject to all
of the following conditions:
The retiree is enrolled in a District approved medical plan at the time the retiree’s
retirement becomes effective.
The retiree has retired from District service in accordance with the regulations then
in effect with the applicable retirement system (either STRS or PERS of which the
retiree is a member).
The retiree has completed twenty (20) years of credited service with the District
immediately prior to retirement.
The retiree is at least fifty-five (55) years of age and is receiving retirement
allowance from either STRS or PERS.
Any out-of-paycheck costs will be reimbursed to the District by the retiree as a
condition of continued eligibility.
Eligible retirees shall be covered for twelve (12) months annually.
Medical coverage for retirees shall terminate when the retiree reaches age 65 or
becomes Medicare eligible, whichever comes later.
Eligible full-time unit members who retire from the District after January 1, 2016,
shall be eligible for a District contribution for employee only medical coverage
equal to active employees in accordance with Section 13.1.1.
Health Insurance: The District shall form a Benefit Committee consisting of three
(3) representatives chosen from the District, three (3) representatives chosen by
Teamsters Local 911 and three (3) representatives chosen by ITA and chaired by
the risk manager. The purpose of this committee shall be to identify options for
reducing health benefit cost increases. The Health Insurance Committee shall serve
in an advisory capacity to the represented parties. The Committee will meet on
43

dates mutually determined by the committee.
In addition to the Benefit Committee meetings, the District will meet monthly with
Teamsters representatives on dates mutually determined by the parties to discuss
matters related to health and welfare benefits.

44

ARTICLE XIV - PROCEDURES FOR EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE
14.1

Definition and Purpose.
14.1.1 Performance Evaluation.
A performance evaluation is a document that reflects, on a regular or special basis,
whether the unit member has met or not met specified competencies and goals.
The performance evaluation process deals with the appraisal and development of a
unit member on a continuous basis. It involves ongoing dialogue between
supervisors and unit members in communicating work goals, giving, and receiving
work instructions, assigning work, as well as observing and evaluating work
progress within the job classification. It is a management tool for understanding
individual strengths and weaknesses of performance and behavior, a means of
determining training and development needs, and may be used as a basis of
personnel action to promote and improve performance.
The purpose of a performance evaluation, whether it is a regular (annual) or special
evaluation, is to encourage open and honest supervisor-unit member relationships
through appraisal, and maintain ongoing dialogue that contributes to coaching,
through training, and counseling of unit members while improving the quality,
productivity, and responsiveness of the workforce.
14.1.2 Performance Improvement Plan.
Unit members determined to be in need of improving any areas of performance will
be provided with a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP), or documentation
following the progressive discipline model. If the PIP does not improve
performance, or a PIP is determined to be inappropriate based upon the
performance issue identified, the District may refer to Article XVIII
Dismissal/Suspension/Disciplinary Action of Classified Employees Section 2.1.
The purpose of a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP) is to serve as a means of
improving a unit member’s performance and/or behavior to achieve acceptable
standards of competence or higher. The evaluator, with input from the affected unit
member, shall develop an improvement plan that is fair, measurable, and which
outlines work efforts through established timeline, which evaluate progress. A PIP
is a model designed to facilitate constructive discussion between supervisors and
unit members.
14.1.3 Performance evaluations and PIPs are a fundamental component of each unit
member’s documented employment history and are not, in and of themselves,
disciplinary in nature.
14.1.3.1 Process.
45

14.1.3.2 Performance Evaluation.
14.1.4 Every permanent unit member shall receive a formal, final written evaluation on
the District evaluation tool completed between March 1st and May 15th of each year.
14.1.4.1 Every probationary unit member shall be evaluated twice during the
probationary period. The first (1st) evaluation shall be completed on or
before the end of the third (3rd) month of service. The second (2nd)
evaluation shall be completed on or before the end of the fifth (5th) month
of service. Form A shall be utilized for probationary evaluations.
14.1.4.2 Evaluations for permanent and probationary members shall be completed
utilizing the District evaluation tool. The Union shall have the right to
consult with the District concerning any revisions the District intends to
make to the evaluation tool.
14.1.4.3 Permanent employee review procedures shall consist of a series of two (2)
meetings between the unit member and the evaluator. Each meeting will
allow both the unit member and evaluator to discuss performance and
progress towards goals to date, and to make formal comments recorded.
The timing and purpose of these two meetings is as follows:
The initial meeting between the unit member and evaluator shall be held
between September 1 and October 15 each year. During this meeting,
relevant competencies and goals are established for evaluation purposes
and recorded.
The second review meeting shall be held between January 1 and February
15 each year. During this meeting, unit member progress towards
competencies and goals will be discussed and recorded on the evaluation
tool. This second review meeting may be waived by mutual agreement.
14.1.4.4 If a unit member is in a limited term, or out of class during the evaluative
period, it shall be noted on the final evaluation. If a unit member transfers
into a new assignment, or passes probation between August 16 and
December 31, the evaluator shall hold an initial meeting with the unit
member prior to December 31, and a final evaluation meeting between
March 1 and May 15. Following each meeting, the unit member and
evaluator will acknowledge the meeting was held by signing in the
evaluation tool. The unit member will then have ten (10) working days to
respond to the evaluator’s assessment by recording comments in the
evaluation tool. Once the response is entered, the unit member will sign
the evaluation. If the evaluation is not signed within ten (10) days, that
portion of the evaluation is considered finalized.

46

14.2

Performance Improvement Plan.
14.2.1 Notice must be presented to the unit member before a PIP may be issued. Such
notice shall be within thirty (30) calendar days of the issuance of a PIP. Form B
shall be utilized for probationary evaluations.
14.2.2 A PIP may be issued any time during the annual evaluation period and may be no
less than thirty (30) calendar days but not more than ninety (90) calendar days in
duration. All PIPs shall be subject to prior authorization by the division director or
designee, shall be clearly noted as a PIP, and shall be subject to all other provisions
of this Article.
14.2.3 A PIP must include measurable and attainable goals. A PIP may include but is not
limited to the following:
A description of the areas for which improvement is needed;
An improvement plan for the unit member to achieve satisfactory performance;
Resources to support and assist in achieving satisfactory performance;
The criteria, standards, or objectives necessary to be met by the unit member to
achieve satisfactory performance.
14.2.4 Reasonable release time for duty hours shall be provided to the unit member to
review a PIP. The content of individual unit members’ PIPs shall not be subject to
the grievance procedure.

14.3

Evaluation Appeal.
Upon submission of a written rebuttal the unit member may request an appeal to the
division director or designee for an objective review. Both the manager or designee and
unit member shall have the right to one (1) representative at the appeal conference. Upon
completion of the review, the division director or designee shall make a final written
determination in the matter within ten (10) working days. If the unit member is not satisfied
with this final determination, they may submit written comments within ten (10) working
days. Such comments shall be attached to the performance evaluation and included in the
unit member’s office personnel file. The final content of individual unit members’
performance evaluations shall not be subject to the grievance procedure.
14.3.1 Notice.
Unit members shall be assigned one evaluator and be informed in writing of the
name of his/her evaluator within thirty (30) working days at the beginning of the
fiscal/school year. Unit members shall be notified in writing within thirty (30)
working days if their evaluator changes.
14.3.2 Methods of Assessment.

47

Evaluations shall be based on standards and criteria appropriate for the
classification and assignment of the unit member, along with standards established
by the division and the Office.
The evaluator shall utilize, but is not limited to, the following methods of assessing
performance:
Personal observations and knowledge, and/or

Review of work product, and/or

Appropriate, documented and/or pertinent input from the unit member’s
supervisor(s) and/or individuals who receive services form the unit member,
where applicable, and/or

Other documented input related to the unit member’s job performance.
14.4

Inclusion of Derogatory Materials in Personnel File.
Information of a derogatory nature shall not be placed in the unit member’s personnel file
or utilized in disciplinary proceedings unless the following procedures have been followed:
14.4.1 Reasonable released time from duty hours shall be provided to the unit member to
review the derogatory material;
14.4.2 The unit member has the right to attach a written rebuttal within ten (10) working
days of the time the unit member has received the derogatory material. If the
material is identified as a reprimand, the unit member shall have five (5) additional
days to attach a rebuttal. The actual preparation of the written rebuttal shall be
accomplished outside of duty hours;
14.4.3 If the derogatory information is received by the immediate administrator from a
non-IUSD external third party, the unit member shall first be provided written or
oral notice of the same. However, the information shall be determined as factual in
nature before it can be utilized for any disciplinary purposes.
If any derogatory information is going to be utilized there must be prior
documentation. The documentation shall include the time and date the issue was
discussed and what measures were taken to address the issue.

48

ARTICLE XV – TRANSFER AND PROMOTIONAL PROCEDURES
15.1

Definitions.
15.1.1 A transfer is defined as a change of job location, but within the same position
classification, or a change of classification to a position with an identical salary
range.
15.1.2 A promotion is defined as a change of classification to a position with a higher
salary range.
15.1.3 A demotion is defined as a change of classification to a position with a lower salary
range.

15.2

Procedures for Filling Job Vacancies by Voluntary Transfer or Promotion: All vacancies
shall be posted by the District for not less than six (6) working days at all work locations
prior to being filled. Any employee who has attained permanent status may apply for
transfer or promotion to that position by filing a written notice with the Personnel
Department of the District prior to the closing date of the position. When a vacancy occurs,
the District shall consider any written transfer request filed within the previous three (3)
months or within the six (6) day posting period by those of the bargaining unit employee
serving in the same class in the District. In the case of a transfer, the employee shall be
interviewed by the Site Administrator, prior to the job being flown. If the employee is
rejected, the Personnel Administrator will furnish an explanation to the employee.
Bargaining unit employees, who meet the minimum qualifications for the vacancy,
including employees who are requesting a transfer, shall receive an interview for the
position. At such interview, bargaining unit members with one (1) or more years of service
with the District shall receive one (1) additional point per year of service with the District
to a maximum of six (6) on a scale of 100 for purposes of selection provided that such
employee has not utilized an excess of the maximum number of days provided by Section
11.1.1 of this Agreement for personal illness or injury leave during the preceding twelve
(12) calendar months. Provided further, that absences resulting from industrial accident or
illness shall not be considered in determining whether an employee has exceeded such
maximum allowance.
15.2.1 Any employee on leave during the period of the posting shall be mailed a copy of
the notice by First Class Mail on the date the position is posted if previously
requested in writing. Such employees may authorize a Teamsters Shop Steward to
file any application or written materials required by this Article on his/her behalf.
15.2.2 When there is a vacancy in a bargaining unit position and there are five (5) or more
unit employees who both meet minimum qualifications and apply for the vacancy,
the District shall complete the transfer and promotion procedures for bargaining
unit employees prior to considering any other applicants outside of the bargaining
unit. This provision shall not be construed to require the District to promote or
transfer any bargaining unit applicant.
49

15.2.3 Transfers shall be given priority over promotion where possible.
15.3

Involuntary Transfer.
15.3.1 Employees may be transferred to another job location if the District determines that
such change of assignment would be for the good of the District. The immediate
supervisor of the employee to be involuntarily transferred will provide in writing
upon employee’s request the reasons for the involuntary transfer. A copy of the
response shall become part of the employee’s personnel file. An employee
transferred involuntarily shall receive notification of the transfer seven (7) days
prior to the actual date of transfer, except in an emergency. The employee will
receive a written notice of involuntary transfer, which shall specify the needs of the
District which require the transfer.
15.3.2 Employees may be involuntarily transferred to a position within an identical salary
range with training for the newly assigned position.
15.3.3 No employee shall be involuntarily transferred for arbitrary or capricious reasons.
15.3.4 No employee shall be transferred without authorization of the County
Administrator or his/her designee subject to the approval of the Board of Education,
except in an emergency as referenced in Article 15.3.1.

50

ARTICLE XVI – LAYOFF AND REEMPLOYMENT
16.1

Reason for Layoff: Layoff shall occur only for lack of work or lack of funds.

16.2

The Layoff Procedure shall be in accordance with the California Code, Education Code EDC § 45117.

16.3

Reduction: Any reduction in regularly assigned hours or work year shall be considered a
layoff under the provision of this Article.

16.4

Bumping Rights: An employee laid off from his/her present classification may bump into
the next lowest classification in which the employee has greatest seniority considering
his/her seniority in the lowest classification and any higher classifications. The employee
may continue to bump into lower classifications in which he/she has seniority to avoid
layoff.
16.4.1 Bumping rights shall include the following:
16.4.1.1 Select a vacant position in the same classification which is equal in pay
and in number of hours of employment;
16.4.1.2 Displace a less senior employee from a remaining position in the same
classification which is equal in pay and in number of hours of
employment;
16.4.1.3 Select, in another classification, a vacant position in which the employee
has previously served satisfactorily, which has an equal amount of
required qualification licenses or certificates;
16.4.1.4 Displace a less senior employee in another classification from a remaining
position in which the employee has previously served satisfactorily,
which has an equal number of hours of employment, and for which the
employee possesses the required licenses or certificates;

16.5

Select options a through d, which have a greater number of hours of employment;
16.5.1 Select options a through b, which have a lower rate of pay;
16.5.1.1 Select options a through d, which have fewer number of hours of
employment;
16.5.1.2 Elect to be laid off; or
16.5.1.3 Elect a service retirement as provided in Section 16.10.
16.5.2 Options of Employees Notified of Layoff: The District shall notify an employee
51

whose position has been eliminated that he/she must elect one of the follow options
within five (5) working days of receipt of notice:
16.5.2.1 The employee shall exercise bumping rights;
16.5.2.2 The employee shall not exercise bumping rights; or
16.5.2.3 The employee reserves his/her right to exercise bumping rights. If an
employee who is notified of his/her bumping rights, if any, fails to indicate
which of the three available options he/she desires within the time
specified, the District shall consider such failure as an election to not
exercise bumping rights.
16.5.3 Tucker Rights. Unit members shall be given preferential reemployment rights over
any new outside applicant to available positions to which they are qualified as
determined by the District based on its existing hiring criteria. Notice of this right
shall be included in the employee layoff notice.
16.6

Layoff in Lieu of Bumping. An employee who elects a layoff in lieu of bumping maintains
his/her reemployment rights under this Agreement.

16.7

Equal Seniority. If two (2) or more employees subject to layoff have equal class seniority,
the determination as to who shall be laid off will be made on the basis of the skill and
performance of the employee as determined by past performance evaluations.

16.8

Reemployment Rights. Laid off employees are eligible for reemployment in the class from
which laid off for a thirty-nine (39) month period and shall be reemployed in the reverse
order of layoff. Their reemployment shall take precedence over other employment in the
classifications affected by said layoffs. An employee on a reemployment list shall be
notified of promotional opportunities and other vacancies for which they have previously
requested notification. An employee who is laid off and subsequently rehired from a
reemployment list within a thirty-nine (39) month period shall have the accrued sick leave
balance as of the date of layoff reinstated.

16.9

Voluntary Demotion or Voluntary Reduction in Hours. Employees who take voluntary
demotions or voluntary reductions in assigned time in lieu of layoff shall be, at the
employee’s option, returned to a position in their former class or to positions with increased
assigned time as vacancies become available within a period of thirty-nine (39) months
except that they shall be ranked in accordance with their seniority on any valid
reemployment list. Employees who take voluntary demotions or voluntary reduction in
assigned time in lieu of layoff shall retain eligibility to be considered for reemployment for
an additional period of twenty-four (24) months provided the same tests of fitness under
which they qualified for appointment to the class shall still apply.

16.10 Retirement in Lieu of Layoff.

52

16.10.1 Any employee in the bargaining unit may elect to accept a service retirement in
lieu of layoff, voluntary demotion, or reduction in assigned time. Such employee
shall within ten (10) workdays prior to the effective date of the proposed layoff
complete and submit a form provided by the District for this purpose.
16.10.2 Any election to retire after being placed on a reemployment list shall be retired in
lieu of layoff within the meaning of this section.
16.10.3 If the employee is subsequently subject to reemployment and accepts in writing
the appropriate vacant position, the District shall maintain the vacancy until the
Board of Administration of the Public Employees Retirement System has properly
processed the request for reinstatement from retirement but in no event longer than
sixty (60) days.
16.11 Notification of Reemployment Opening. Any employee who is laid off and is subsequently
eligible for reemployment shall be notified in writing by the District of any opening.
Employees who have been laid off and who request shall be put on the appropriate
substitute list. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the last address given the
District by the employee, and a copy of the letter or a list of affected employees shall be
sent to the Teamsters Local 911 Business Representative, by the District, which shall acquit
the District of its notification responsibility.
16.12 Employee’s Notification to District. An employee shall notify the District of his/her intent
to accept or refuse reemployment within five (5) working days following receipt of the
reemployment notice. If the employee accepts reemployment, the employee must report to
work within fifteen (15) days following receipt of the reemployment notice. An employee
given notice of reemployment need not accept the reemployment to maintain the
employee’s eligibility on the reemployment list, provided the employee notifies District of
refusal or reemployment notice. If an employee rejects three (3) job offers for which he
requested to be notified, the employee shall then be removed from the reemployment list.
16.13 Reemployment in Highest Class. Employees shall be reemployed in the highest rated job
classification available in accordance with their class seniority. Employees who accept a
position lower than their highest former class shall retain their original thirty-nine (39)
month rights to the higher paid position.
16.14 Improper Layoff. Any employee who is improperly laid off shall be reemployed
immediately upon discovery of the error and shall be reimbursed for all loss of salary minus
any earnings during the period he/she was laid off and be credited for sick leave and
vacation days that such employee would have earned had the employee not been laid off.
This contract section shall be null and void thirty (30) days after layoff notices have been
received.
16.15 Working Out of Classification. If an employee’s position is eliminated and the employee
bumps into a lower class, such employee who is assigned duties not a part of their
classification for more than five (5) working days within a fifteen (15) day calendar period
53

shall receive the pay for the range of those duties performed at the lowest step on the range
which will give the employee a salary increase over their salary for the entire period the
employee is working out of classification.
16.16 Fringe Benefits for Laid Off Employees. Any employee laid off shall continue to receive
the prevailing health and welfare benefits through the end of the calendar month in which
the layoff takes effect.
16.17 Settlement of Layoff and Reemployment. This provision shall be the complete settlement
of all issues related to layoffs, and the impacts and effects of all these matters.
16.18 The use of substitute, provisional, temporary, volunteer, management, confidential,
supervisory, certificated, or student personnel or other non-unit persons where there has
been a layoff in that classification shall be governed by applicable law, Disputes arising
under this provision are not subject to the grievance procedure.

54

ARTICLE XVII – GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
17.1

Definitions.
17.1.1 A grievance is defined as any complaint of an employee, employees, or Teamsters
Local 911 involving the interpretation, application, or alleged violation of this
Agreement. It is the intent of the parties to equitably resolve grievances at the
lowest possible administrative level. It is the intention of the parties to encourage
as informal and confidential an atmosphere as is possible in the resolution of
grievances.
17.1.2 Alleged violations of Board Policy and/or Administrative Rules shall be
adjudicated in accordance with Board Policy. Issues arising out of the management
rights and no-strike clauses of this Agreement shall not be subject to this grievance
procedure.
17.1.3 The grievance procedure shall not be utilized to contest the dismissal of an
employee and the application of the requirements of EEOC, Title VI, Title VII and
Title XI, unemployment insurance and any other federal or state statute for which
a specific method of review is provided by law, except as provided in Government
Code section 3541.5(a).
17.1.4 A day is a day on which the District office is open for business. Any time limit
affected by the Christmas holidays or spring recess shall be extended by ten (10)
and five (5) days, respectively.
17.1.5 A grievant or an aggrieved person is any person(s) in the bargaining unit as defined
in this Agreement. The Union may be the grievant on Union rights, payroll
deductions, negotiation procedures and the zipper clause.
17.1.6 Immediate supervisor is the lowest level administrator having immediate
jurisdiction over the grievant.
17.1.7 A party in interest is any person who might be required to take action or against
whom action might be taken in order to resolve a claim.
17.1.8 The grievant shall have the right to be represented by the Union at all steps of the
grievance procedure.

17.2

Procedure.
17.2.1 Informal Level.
17.2.1.1 Before filing a formal written grievance, the grievant shall attempt to
resolve a grievance by an informal conference with the grievant’s
immediate supervisor. Said conference shall be requested within thirty
55

(30) days of the occurrence of the act or omission giving rise to the
grievance or of the date the grievant could be reasonably expected to know
of the event which gives rise to the grievance or employees and the Union
lose the right to grieve.
17.2.1.2 The immediate supervisor shall hold an informal conference with the
grievant within five (5) days of receipt of a request and attempt to resolve
the matter and respond in writing upon request, within five (5) days of
conference.
17.2.1.3 If the immediate supervisor does not hold an informal conference within
the time limits stated above, then the grievant may proceed to Level I with
the grievance.
17.2.2 Level I.
17.2.2.1 If a grievant is not satisfied with the results of the informal conference, the
grievant must, within ten (10) days of the request for the informal
conference present the grievance in writing on the approved form to the
immediate supervisor. The grievant shall supply a clear, concise statement
of the grievance including identification of the provision or provisions of
this Agreement alleged to have been violated, misinterpreted, or
misapplied, the circumstances involved, the decision rendered at the
informal level, and the specific remedy sought.
17.2.2.2 The immediate supervisor shall hold a conference with the grievant and
shall communicate a decision in writing within seven (7) days of receipt
of the written grievance.
17.2.2.3 In the event the immediate supervisor fails to render a decision within
seven (7) days, the grievant may appeal the grievance to Level II.
17.2.3 Level II.
17.2.3.1 In the event the grievant is not satisfied with the decision at Level I, the
grievant may appeal the decision through certified mail to the County
Administrator or his/her designee on the appropriate form within seven
(7) days of the receipt of the Level I decision or of the expiration of the
time in which the Level I decision or of the expiration of the time in which
the Level I decision is to be rendered.
17.2.3.2 The form shall include a copy of the original grievance form filed for
decision at Level I and a clear, concise statement of the reason(s) for the
appeal.
17.2.3.3 The County Administrator or his/her designee shall hold a conference with
56

the parties and render a decision in writing within twenty (20) days of the
receipt of the written grievance.
17.2.3.4 In the event the County Administrator or his/her designee fails to render
a decision within twenty (20) days, the grievance shall be deemed settled
in accordance with the reasonable remedy mutually agreed to by the
Union and the District.
17.2.3.5 In the event the grievance is not settled, the grievant may proceed to Level
III.
17.2.4 Level III.
17.2.4.1 The grievant may request, in writing, that the Union submit the grievance
to arbitration. The grievant shall make such request within five (5) days
after receiving the Level II decision or of the expiration of the time in
which the Level II decision is to be rendered. The Union shall notify that
County Administrator or his/her designee within five (5) days after receipt
of the request by the grievant if the grievance is to be submitted for
arbitration by the Union.
17.2.4.2 The parties shall attempt to agree within seven (7) days on an acceptable
arbitrator. In the event the parties cannot agree on an arbitrator, the parties
shall request a list of five (5) arbitrators from the California State
Conciliation Service from which the parties shall alternately strike names.
The remaining name shall become the arbitrator. The list of potential
arbitrators shall contain only names of neutrals who are members of the
National Academy of Arbitrators and who have issued at least ten
arbitration decisions since 1976 involving public school districts in
California.
17.2.4.3 If any question arises as to the arbitrability of the grievance, such
question(s) will be ruled upon by the arbitrator prior to taking evidence
on the grievance itself.
17.2.4.4 The arbitrator shall limit his decision strictly to the application and
interpretation of the provisions of the Agreement.
17.2.4.5 The arbitrator shall be without power to make decisions contrary to or
modifying or varying in any way the terms of the Agreement.
17.2.4.6 The arbitrator shall be without power to make decisions limiting or
interfering with the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Board
under its bylaws, applicable law, and rules and regulations having the
force and effect of law giving full legal effect to the management’s rights
clause and Board Policies and written regulations.
57

17.2.4.7 The arbitrator shall consider only those issues, facts, opinions and
information which have been properly carried through all prior steps of
the grievance procedure and are known to the District through earlier
levels of the grievance procedure.
17.2.4.8 All costs for the service of an arbitrator including, but not limited to, per
diem expenses, travel expenses and subsistence expenses, shall be borne
equally by the Union and the District.
17.2.4.9 All other costs will be borne by the part incurring them.
17.2.4.10 The arbitrator shall render the decision no later than thirty (30) days after
the close of the record by the arbitrator unless otherwise agreed upon by
the District, the Union and the arbitrator. Such decision shall be final
and binding on the parties.
17.2.4.11 Copies of the award shall be in writing and shall set forth the arbitrator’s
opinion and conclusions on the issue, and copies shall be furnished to
both parties.
17.2.4.12 No public comments shall be made by any party involved in the
grievance procedure until both parties have received a decision by the
arbitrator.
17.2.4.13 The arbitrator will be without power or authority to make any decisions
which require the commission of an act prohibited by law or which is in
violation of the terms of this Agreement.
17.2.4.14 The arbitrator shall have no power to establish salary schedules or
structure.
17.2.4.15 In case of a grievance involving any contingency or other money claim
against the District, no award shall be made by the arbitrator which shall
allow any alleged accruals when such grievance has not been presented
to the District in writing within fifteen (15) days of the occurrence of
the act or omission giving rise to the grievance or when the grievant
could be reasonably expected to know the event which gives rise to the
grievance.
17.2.4.16 The arbitrator shall not hear a grievance previously barred by the parties
or on an issue previously denied by an arbitrator.
17.3

Miscellaneous.
17.3.1 Nothing contained herein will be construed as limiting the right of any employee
58

alleging a grievance to discuss the matter informally with any appropriate member
of the administration and to have the grievance adjusted without intervention of the
Union provided the adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of the Agreement
and that the Union has been given a copy of the grievance and the proposed
resolution and has been given the opportunity to file a response.
17.3.2 Since it is important that grievances be processed as rapidly as possible, the time
limits specified at each level should be considered maximums and every effort
should be made to expedite the process. The time limits, however, may be extended
by mutual agreement.
17.3.3 Failure of the grievant or Union to abide by the time limit specified shall result in
the grievant or the Union being deemed to have accepted the decision. The Union
shall be given an opportunity to file a written response to any proposed settlement
prior to the final resolution of the grievance.
17.3.4 No reprisals of any kind shall be taken by the District or its agents against anyone
by reason or participation in the grievance procedure.
17.3.5 All documents, communications, and records dealing with the processing of a
grievance will be filed in a separate file and will not be kept in the personnel file of
any of the participants.
17.3.6 The processing of a grievance beyond Level II shall constitute an express election
on the part of the grievant that the grievance arbitration procedure is the chosen
forum for resolving the issues contained in the grievance and that the grievant will
not resort to any other forum for resolution or revise of the issues.
17.3.7 Grievant Release Time. The grievant, in the absence of a job steward, shall be
entitled to process his/her grievances during his/her regular scheduled hours of
work without loss of pay consistent with Article 6.1.1.
17.3.8 Grievance Processing During Regular Working Hours. The grievant and/or the
Union job steward shall be entitled to process a grievance during normal working
hours with no loss of pay or benefits.

59

ARTICLE XVIII – DISMISSAL/SUSPENSION/DISCIPLINARY ACTION OF
CLASSIFIED EMPLOYEES
If the Personnel Commission is removed, the District and the Union agree to remove any reference
to the Personnel Commission.
18.1

Termination of Probationary Employment.
At any time prior to the expiration of the probationary period, the County Administrator or
designee may, at his/her discretion, dismiss a probationary classified employee from
District employment.

18.2

Involuntary Suspension Without Pay, Demotion, Reduction of Pay Step in Class, or
Dismissal.
Permanent classified employees shall be subject to adverse personnel action (suspension
without pay, demotion, reduction of pay step in class, dismissal) only for cause. The
Board’s determination of the sufficiency of the cause for disciplinary action shall be
conclusive.
18.2.1 Progressive Discipline.
As a general concept, the District utilizes progressive discipline consisting of: oral
warnings, written warnings, written reprimands, unscheduled evaluations (when
appropriate), suspension, and termination.

18.3

Causes for Disciplinary Action.
In addition to any disqualifying or actionable causes otherwise provided for by statute or
by policy or regulation of this District, each of the following constitutes cause for adverse
personnel action against a permanent classified employee:
18.3.1 Falsifying any information supplied to the School District, including, but not
limited to, information supplied on application forms, employment records, or any
other School District records.
18.3.2 Incompetency, inefficiency or unsatisfactory performance of the duties of his/her
position.
18.3.3 Insubordination.
18.3.4 Dishonesty.
18.3.5 Drinking alcoholic beverages while on duty or in such close time proximity thereto
as to cause any detrimental effect upon the employee or upon employees associated
with him/her.
18.3.6 Possessing or being under the influence of a controlled substance at work or away
from work or furnishing a controlled substance to a minor. (Ed. Code § 44011.)

60

18.3.7 Conviction of a felony, conviction of any sex offense made relevant by provisions
of law, or conviction of a misdemeanor which is of such a nature as to adversely
affect the employee’s ability to perform the duties and responsibilities of his/her
position. A plea or verdict of guilty, or a conviction following a plea of nolo
contendere, is deemed to be a conviction for this purpose.
18.3.8 Absence without leave or repeated unexcused tardiness.
18.3.9 Immoral conduct.
18.3.10 Discourteous treatment of the public, students, or other employees.
18.3.11 Improper political activity.
18.3.12 Willful disobedience.
18.3.13 Misuse of District property.
18.3.14 Abandonment of position or excessive absenteeism.
18.3.15 Violation of District, Board of departmental rule, policy or procedure including
safety rules.
18.3.16 Failure to possess or keep in effect any license, certificate, or other similar
requirements specified in the employee’s class specification or otherwise
necessary for the employee to perform the duties of the position.
18.3.17 Refusal to take and subscribe any oath or affirmation which is required by law in
connection with his/her employment.
18.3.18 A physical or mental disability which precludes the employee from the proper
performance of his/her duties and responsibilities as determined by competent
medical authority, except as otherwise provided by a contract or by law regulating
the retirement of employees.
18.3.19 Unlawful discrimination, including harassment, on the basis of race, religious
creed, color, national origin, ancestry, physical handicap, marital status, sex, or
age against the public or other employees while acting in the capacity of a District
employee.
18.3.20 Unlawful retaliation against any other District officer or employee or member of
the public, who in good faith, reports, discloses, divulges, or otherwise brings to
the attention of any appropriate authority any information relative to an actual or
suspected violation of state or federal law occurring on the job or directly related
thereto.

61

18.3.21 Any other failure of good behavior either during or outside of duty hours which
is of such nature that it causes discredit to the District or his/her employment.
18.4

Time Limitation.
Except as defined in item 18.3.18 above, no adverse personnel action shall be taken for any
cause which arose before the employee became permanent, no for any cause which arose
more than two years before the date of the filing of the notice of cause unless this cause was
concealed or not disclosed by the employee when it could be reasonably assumed that the
employee would have disclosed the facts to the District.

18.5

Initiation and Notification of Charges.
18.5.1 When disciplinary action is commenced against a permanent employee, the District
shall provide the employee with written notice from the County Administrator or
designee either in person or by certified mail, including the proposed action, the
reasons for such action, and the charges and materials upon which the action is
based.
18.5.2 The notice shall contain a statement of the employee’s right to respond orally or in
writing to the charges within ten (10) business days of the date the notice is given
to him or her personally or sent by registered or certified mail to his/her last known
address. The notice shall also contain a statement of the employee’s right to a
preliminary or “Skelly” hearing with the County Administrator or designee on such
charges, and the time within which such hearing may be requested, which shall be
within ten (10) business days after service of the notice.
18.5.3 Notice of the commencement of disciplinary action shall be accompanied by a card
or paper, the signing and filing of which with the County Administrator, or designee
within 10 business days of the date of the notice, shall constitute a demand for
hearing and a denial of all charges. Failure of the employee to file a request for the
hearing within the time specified shall constitute a waiver of the employee’s right
to a hearing.
18.5.4 Dismissal of an employee of the District shall cause removal of the employee’s
name from all employment lists.
18.5.5 The employee’s failure to appeal as provided in these regulations, shall make the
recommendation and action of the County Administrator final without the need for
additional action by the Governing Board.

18.6

Employment Status Pending Appeal or Waive.
18.6.1 Except as provided herein, any employee against whom a recommendation of
adverse personnel action has been issued shall remain on active-duty status and
responsible for fulfilling the duties of the position pending his/her appeal or waiver
62

thereof.
18.6.2 If the County Administrator or designee determines that a permanent classified
employee should be suspended or dismissed and that his/her continuing in active
duty status would present an unreasonable risk of harm to students, staff, or
property while proceedings are pending, the County Administrator or designee may
order the employee immediately suspended from duty without pay in conjunction
with the recommendation of adverse personnel action. This suspension order shall
be in writing and shall state the reasons that the suspension without pay is deemed
necessary. The suspension order shall be served upon the employee wither
personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, immediately
after issuance.
18.6.3 Except in cases of emergency when the employee must be removed from the
premises immediately, the County Administrator or designee shall give the
employee written notice of the proposed recommendation of dismissal at least five
(5) calendar days before the effective date of any order of suspension issued in
conjunction with a recommendation involving dismissal. This notice shall state that
immediate suspension without pay is being considered, the reasons for the proposed
dismissal and proposed immediate suspension without pay, materials upon which
the proposed action is based, and the employee’s right to respond to the County
Administrator orally or in writing before the final recommendation and order are
issued.
18.7

Amended/Supplemental Charges.
18.7.1 At any time before an employee’s appeal is finally submitted to the Board or to a
hearing officer selected by the District for decision, the complainant may, with the
consent of the Board or hearing officer, serve on the employee and file with the
Board an amended supplemental of adverse personnel action.
18.7.2 If the amended or supplemental recommendation presents new cause or allegations,
the employee shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to prepare his/her defense.
Any new causes or allegations shall be deemed controverted and any objections to
the amended or supplemental causes or allegations may be made orally at the
hearing and shall be noted on the record.

18.8

Hearing Procedures.
18.8.1 All hearings shall be heard by a hearing officer selected by the Board except in
those cases where the Board determines to hear the appeal itself. In any case in
which the Board hears the appeal, the Board may use the services of its counsel or
a hearing officer in ruling upon procedural questions, objections, and issues of law.
If the appeal is heard by the Board, the Board shall affirm, modify or revoke the
recommended personnel action. The Board may conduct hearings of appeals or may
appoint a hearing officer to conduct the hearing and report findings and
63

recommendations to the Board. The Board will make every effort to rotate hearing
officers for disciplinary hearings and to ensure that the same hearing officer is not
used two (2) consecutive times. The decision of the Board as to the sufficiency of
the cause for disciplinary action shall be conclusive without prejudice to any
subsequent court action.
18.8.1.1 List of Witnesses.
A.

A list of witnesses to be called by each party and a list of persons
authorized to attend the hearing shall be submitted to the Human
Resources Office and the representative for the District or the Union
at least five (5) working days prior to the date of the hearing.

18.8.1.2 Subpoena of Witnesses.
The Board or its hearing officer may, and shall if requested by either party,
subpoena witnesses and/or require the production of records, documents,
or other material evidence. The Chief Human Resources Officer shall
issue the subpoenas on behalf of the Board or its hearing officer,
subpoenas shall be delivered to the requesting party for service.
Request for subpoenas shall be filed with the Human Resources Office at
least five (5) working days prior to the date of the hearing.
18.8.2 The hearing officer shall fix the time and place of the hearing, which will be within
reasonable length of time from the receipt of the request for a hearing. The hearing
can be continued for good cause. The investigation and hearing shall be confined
to the reasons for action as charged by the Principal or Department Head or County
Administrator and the defenses set forth in the request and answer.
18.8.3 The representatives of the School District shall first present evidence in support of
the charges. The employee shall then have the right to present evidence. Witnesses
desired by either side shall be subpoenaed by the District.
18.8.4 At the hearing, both the employee and the Principal, Department Head, or County
Administrator shall have the right to be heard and present evidentiary facts. The
employee shall have the right to be represented by a person(s) of his choice at the
employee’s expense. The following rules shall apply:
18.8.4.1 Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
18.8.4.2 Each party shall have these rights: To call and examine witnesses, to
introduce exhibits, to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter
relevant to the issues even though that matter was not covered in the direct
examination, to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called
him/her to testify, and to rebut any evidence. If respondent employee does
64

not testify in his/her own behalf, he/she may be called and examined as if
under cross-examination.
18.8.4.3 The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating
to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is
the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to
relying in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any
common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission
of such evidence over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be
used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence,
but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be
admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be
effective to the same extent that they are not or hereafter may be
recognized in civil actions, and irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence
shall be excluded.
18.8.5 If the appeal is heard by a hearing officer, he/she shall prepare a proposed decision
in a form that may be adopted by the Board as the decision in the case. A copy of
the proposed decision shall be received and filed by the Board and furnished to each
party within 10 days after the proposed decision is filed by the Chief Human
Resources Officer. The Board may:
18.8.5.1

Adopt the proposed decision in its entirety.

18.8.5.2 Reduce the personnel action set forth in the proposed decision and adopt
the balance of the proposed decision.
18.8.5.3

Reject a proposed reduction in personnel action, approve the personnel
action sought by complainant or any lesser penalty, and adopt the
balance of the proposed decision.

18.8.5.4

Reject the proposed decision in its entirety.

18.8.5.5 The Board may sustain or reject any or all of the charges filed against the
employee. It may sustain, reject, or modify the disciplinary action
invoked against the employee. It may not provide for discipline more
stringent than that invoked by the County Administrator or his/her
designee.
18.8.6 If the Board 1) rejects any or all of the charges filed against the employee; 2) rejects
or modifies the disciplinary action or (3) rejects the proposed decision in its
entirety, each party shall be notified of such action and the Board may decide the
case upon the record including the transcript, with or without the taking of
additional evidence, or may refer the case to the same or another hearing officer
to take additional evidence. If the case is so assigned to a hearing officer, he/she
shall prepare a proposed decision, as provided above, upon the additional evidence
65

and the transcript and other papers which are part of the record of the prior hearing.
A copy of this proposed decision shall be furnished to each party within 10 days
after the proposed decision is received by the Chief Human Resources Officer.
18.8.7 In arriving at a decision or a proposed decision on the propriety of the proposed
personnel action, the hearing officer may consider the records of any prior personnel
action proceedings against the employee in which an adverse personnel action was
ultimately sustained and any records that were contained in the employee’s
personnel files and introduced into evidence at the hearing.
18.9

Hearing Decision.
18.9.1 The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall contain findings of
fact and the adverse personnel action approved, if any. The findings may reiterate
the language of the pleadings or simply refer to them.
18.9.2 The decision of the hearing officer shall be certified to the County Administrator
or designee who recommended the personnel action, and he/she shall enforce and
follow this decision. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant or
his/her designated representative personally or by registered mail. The decision of
the hearing officer shall be final.

18.10 Compulsory Dismissal.
18.10.1 The District shall not employ or retain in employment any person who has been
convicted of any sex offense as defined in Ed. Code § 44010 or any controlled
substance offense as defined in Ed. Code § 44011. However, the District may
employ a person convicted of a controlled substance offense if the Board
determines from the evidence it requires that the person has been rehabilitated for
at least five years. If any such conviction is reversed and the person is acquitted or
charges dismissed except as otherwise provided below, the employee may be reemployed by the District, although reemployment is not a guarantee. (Ed. Code §
45123.)
18.10.2 The District reserves the right to dismiss an employee for any acts upon which the
original criminal charges were based, despite the disposition by the courts. If
dismissal is recommended and upheld, an employee will not be reemployed or
compensated for the time he/she was suspended unless otherwise required by law.
An employee shall be given notice of the possibility of not being reimbursed
during mandatory suspension if he/she is ultimately dismissed for the acts upon
which the original charges were based.
18.11 Administrative Leave with Pay.
18.11.1 The County Administrator may place any classified bargaining unit member on
administrative leave with pay. Written notice to the employee is required by
66

personal delivery, registered or certified mail to the employee’s last known
address. However, the County Administrator must notify the Board within 21 days
of notification to the employee for the administrative leave with pay to continue.
18.11.2 Sections 18.4 – 18.10 of these procedures are inapplicable to any administrative
leave with pay.

67

ARTICLE XIX – SAFETY
19.1

Safety Policy. It is the desire of both parties to this Agreement to maintain high standards
of safety in order to eliminate, as far as possible, industrial injuries and occupational
diseases.

19.2

Safety Devices. Where safety devices are determined to be necessary by the safety
committee and are provided by the District, it shall be mandatory for employees to use
them.

19.3

Employee’s Refusal to Work on Account of Alleged Unsafe Conditions. No employee
may be discharged for refusing to work on a job or machine the safety of which has been
questioned by the employee if the employee follows the subsequent procedure. Before
refusing to perform an assigned job because of an alleged safety hazard, the employee shall
attempt to prove to the immediate supervisor the existence of the unsafe condition. If
unsuccessful, the employee shall be accorded a conference with the appropriate department
head. If still unsuccessful in convincing the District of the unsafe conditions, the employee
shall meet with the County Administrator his/her designee. The employee shall do as
directed and, if the employee does not agree with the County Administrator or his/her
designee, the employee may appeal to the District Safety committee which shall hear the
matter as soon as feasible.

19.4

Safety Committee. A Safety Committee shall be formed which shall be composed of three
(3) members appointed by the District and three (3) members appointed by Teamsters
Local 911 and chaired by the County Administrator’s designee, which committee shall
review health, safety, sanitation and working conditions to ensure compliance with Section
19.1.

19.5

No Reprisal. No employee shall suffer reprisal as a result of reporting any conditions
believed to be in violation of any section of this Article.

19.6

Release Time. The bargaining unit members of the Committee shall be allowed reasonable
release time to carry out their obligations.

19.7

The District shall reimburse employees one-half the deductible amount, up to five hundred
(500) dollars, for loss or damage to their automobiles that occurs while the employees are
providing authorized service to the District. The parties agree that the total District liability
for the purpose of this section shall not exceed five hundred (500) dollars. Authorized
service means service to the District during normal business hours or work at District sites
during non-formal business hours after notification to an appropriate District official.

68

ARTICLE XX – CONTRACTING AND BARGAINING UNIT WORK
20.1

Restrictions on Contracting Out.
20.1.1 The District will not initiate the contracting out of work normally performed by
employees with the bargaining unit unless one or more of the following conditions
is demonstrated: The bargaining unit employees who would normally perform the
work are unavailable;
20.1.1.1 The bargaining unit employees do not possess the required qualifications
and skills to do the work in a quality manner;
The District will act in accordance with California Education Code §
45103.1, which reads:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, personal services
contracting for all services currently or customarily performed by
classified school employees to achieve cost savings is permissible, unless
otherwise prohibited, when all the following conditions are met:
The governing board clearly demonstrates that the proposed contract will
result in actual overall cost savings to the school district, provided that:
In comparing costs, there shall be included the school district's additional
cost of providing the same service as proposed by a contractor. These
additional costs shall include the salaries and benefits of additional staff
that would be needed and the cost of additional space, equipment, and
materials needed to perform the function.
In comparing costs, there shall not be included the school district's indirect
overhead costs unless these costs can be attributed solely to the function
in question and would not exist if that function was not performed by the
school district. Indirect overhead costs shall mean the pro rata share of
existing administrative salaries and benefits, rent, equipment costs,
utilities, and materials.
In comparing costs, there shall be included in the cost of a contractor
providing a service any continuing school district costs that would be
directly associated with the contracted function. These continuing school
district costs shall include, but not be limited to, those for inspection,
supervision, and monitoring.
Proposals to contract out work shall not be approved solely on the basis
that savings will result from lower contractor pay rates or benefits.
Proposals to contract out work shall be eligible for approval if the

69

contractor's wages are at the industry's level and do not undercut school
district pay rates.
The contract does not cause the displacement of school district employees.
The term “displacement” includes layoff, demotion, involuntary transfer
to a new classification, involuntary transfer to a new location requiring a
change of residence, and time base reductions. Displacement does not
include changes in shifts or days off, nor does it include reassignment to
other positions within the same classification and general location or
employment with the contractor, so long as wages and benefits are
comparable to those paid by the school district.
The savings shall be large enough to ensure that they will not be
eliminated by private sector and district cost fluctuations that could
normally be expected during the contracting period.
The amount of savings clearly justify the size and duration of the
contracting agreement.
The contract is awarded through a publicized, competitive bidding
process.
The contract includes specific provisions pertaining to the qualifications
of the staff that will perform the work under the contract, as well as
assurance that the contractor's hiring practices meet applicable
nondiscrimination standards.
The potential for future economic risk to the school district from potential
contractor rate increases is minimal.
The contract is with a firm. A “firm” means a corporation, limited
liability company, partnership, nonprofit organization, or sole
proprietorship.
The potential economic advantage of contracting is not outweighed by the
public's interest in having a particular function performed directly by the
school district.
If California Education Code § 45103.1 changes in any way, the parties
agree that the new Education Code language will be automatically
updated and followed in this agreement to reflect the current law.
20.1.2

In any grievance arising under Article 20.1, if the District is found by an arbitrator
not to be in compliance, after a contract has been signed, the arbitrator’s remedial
authority shall be limited to a cease-and-desist order applicable to any similar
future contracting;
70

20.2

Bargaining Unit Work. No supervisory or management employee may perform any work
within the job description of a bargaining unit employee which will result in the layoff of
employees or reducing the number of assigned hours of employment in the bargaining unit.

71

ARTICLE XXI – SEVERABILITY AND SAVINGS
21.1

Savings Clause. If, during the life of this Agreement, there exists any applicable law or
any applicable rule, regulation or order issued by governmental authority other than the
District, which shall render invalid or restrain compliance with or enforcement of any
provision of this Agreement, such provision shall be immediately suspended and be of no
effect hereunder so long as such law, rule, regulation or order shall remain effect. Such
invalidation of a part or portion of this Agreement shall not invalidate any remaining
portions which shall continue in full force and effect.

21.2

Replacement for Severed Provision. In the event of suspension or invalidation of any
article or section of this Agreement by statute or by the courts, the parties agree to meet,
upon written request, within thirty (30) days after such determination for the purpose of
arriving at a satisfactory replacement for such article or section.

72

ARTICLE XXII – NEGOTIATIONS
22.1

Release Time for Negotiations. Teamsters Local 911 shall have the right to designate
employees who shall be given reasonable time for negotiations and to prepare for
negotiations.

22.2

Ratification of Additions or Changes. Any additions or changes in this Agreement shall
not be effective unless reduced to writing and signed by both parties.

22.3

Teamsters Local 911 acknowledges that, during the negotiations which preceded this
Agreement, Teamsters Local 911 has had the unlimited right and opportunity to make
demands and proposals with respect to any subject or matter not removed by law from the
area of collective negotiations and that the understandings and agreements arrived at by the
parties after the exercise of that right and opportunity are set forth in this Agreement. This
Agreement shall constitute the full and complete commitments of both parties.

22.4

Impasse. If notice has been given in accordance with the preceding sections and the parties
have not been able to agree upon terms of a new Agreement, either party may institute
impasse procedures in accordance with the rules of the Public Employment Relations
Board.

73

ARTICLE XXIII – PROFESSIONAL GROWTH PROGRAM
23.1

Purpose.
This program is intended to provide an incentive to employees to improve the quality of
his/her job performance and for unit members to pursue professional growth and
development.

23.2

Professional Growth Committee.
23.2.1 A Professional Growth Committee shall be established comprised of four (4)
members, two (2) to be selected by Teamsters Local 911 and two (2) by the District.
23.2.2 Committee members shall be given release time to participate on the Professional
Growth Committee.
23.2.3 The Committee shall verify and approve that proposed courses are aligned with
professional growth and development. Accepted applications for reimbursement
shall state and show progress towards an educational goal such as a degree,
certification, or credential.

23.3

Procedure.
23.3.1 The employee shall obtain the committee’s approval and the course will meet the
goals of the program within six (6) months of starting the course(s) to submission
to the Committee.
23.3.2 An employee shall submit a request to the Professional Growth Committee for
approval of courses or activities that qualify for this program within six (6) months
of starting the course(s) of participating in the activities.
23.3.3 The employee shall provide the Committee with proof of completion and payment
of each approved course or other activity in order to be reimbursed.

The District will reimburse the cost of tuition that a unit member incurs for courses taken at a
regionally accredited university or college. Only the cost of tuition will be reimbursed. Unit
members will be eligible for reimbursement of tuition costs in the following manner.
The District will budget and reimburse up to $150,000 total for this program on an annual basis.
Once this amount is reached, the committee will no longer approve reimbursements.
Units completed per Semester/Quarter
1-6 Units
7-15 Units

Maximum Reimbursable Tuition
$1,800.00
$3,800.00

One (1) semester unit is the equivalent of one and a half (1.5) quarter units.
74

There is no limit as to how many instances a unit member can be reimbursed for tuition expenses
as long as the request is reviewed and approved by the Committee and the applicant is making
progress towards their stated educational goal.
The Committee will approve up to an additional $1,000 reimbursement annually for textbooks,
computer, software or other approved required related materials. In-lieu of tuition reimbursement.
Proof of payment and application must be submitted prior to reimbursement.

75

ARTICLE XXIV – NO STRIKE – NO LOCKOUT
24.1

Neither the Union nor its agents or members will assist in or participate in strike sanctions,
slowdown or any concentrated effort designed to improve its bargaining position which
interferes with, impedes, or impairs the normal operation of the schools.

24.2

It is not the intent of the above to abrogate the Agreement due to an unsanctioned or wildcat
strike by a small number of members, providing the Union exerts concerted effort to
prevent said wildcat strike or other concentrated efforts.

24.3

The District agrees that it shall not engage in a lockout of bargaining unit employees during
the term of this Agreement. The term lockout is intended to cover a situation where the
employer refuses to permit employees to work in an effort to obtain bargaining concessions
from Teamsters Local 911. Disputes arising under this Article are to be handled according
to appropriate legal proceedings rather than the grievance and/or arbitration procedures of
Article XVIII.

24.4

It is agreed and understood that in the event this Article is violated, the District shall be
entitled to withdraw any rights, privileges or services provided for in this Agreement from
those individuals involved in the action(s).

76

ARTICLE XXV – MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
25.1

The Union agrees that the Board’s authority is limited only by that which is consistent with
law or violation of specific provisions of this Agreement. Further, the Board and its duly
selected administrators have the responsibility and authority to manage and to direct on
behalf of the public all operations and activities of the school district, both to the fullest
extent authorized by law and in any manner which the Board deems appropriate.

25.2

The Board retains its right to amend, modify or rescind provisions in this Agreement in
cases of emergency, such as an Act of God. The determination of whether or not an
emergency exists is within the reasonable discretion of the Board, the County
Administrator, or his or her designee.

25.3

All other rights and responsibilities of the Board not limited by the clear and explicit
language of the contract are reserved to the Board.

77

ARTICLE XXVI – CLASSIFICATION, RECLASSIFICATION AND ABOLITION OF
POSITION
26.1

Placement in Class. Every bargaining unit position shall be placed in a class.

26.2

Classification and Reclassification Position. Position classification and reclassification
shall be subject to involvement between the District and Teamsters Local 911. Either party,
or an individual employee, may propose a reclassification at any time during the life of this
Agreement of any position.

26.3

New Positions or Classes of Positions. All newly created positions or classes of positions,
unless specifically exempted by law, shall be assigned to the bargaining unit if the job
descriptions describe duties performed by employees in the bargaining unit or which by
the nature of the duties should reasonably be assigned to the bargaining unit.

26.4

Salary Placement of Reclassified Positions. When a position or class of positions is
reclassified, the position or positions shall be placed on the salary schedule in a range which
will result in at least a one (1) range increase above the salary of the existing position or
positions where there will be an increase in salary.

26.5

RECLASSIFICATION PROCEDURE.
26.5.1 Individual requests for classification review may be submitted to the Human
Resources Office for study and implementation or rejection. Reclassification
requests for all individuals in a class or classes shall be sent to the reclassification
committee. Either type of request would be processed as follows:
26.5.1.1 Requests will be accepted between July 1st and December 31st of each
year, with any approved reclassifications to be effective the subsequent
July 1st.
26.5.1.2 No requests will be accepted between January 1st and June 30th.
26.5.1.3 Bargaining unit members submitting reclassification requests within the
proper time frames shall be notified of the progress of the request no later
than June 1st. Unless an employee obtains permanency in a second
classification, he/she may submit a request only once every three (3)
years.
26.5.2 Requests may be submitted only by an employee who has had permanency in the
position for a minimum of one (1) year.
26.5.3 This article is specifically excluded from the grievance/arbitration section of the
Agreement except for the limited issue of whether or not the District has complied
with the contractual time limits.
26.5.4 The reclassification request form shall be in two (2) copies and shall provide a
78

statement indicating that the unit member may forward a copy to the Teamsters if
desired.
26.5.5 Reclassification Committee.
A District/Teamster Reclassification Committee shall be comprised of the
following:
26.5.5.1 Two (2) Teamster members and one (1) alternate shall be appointed by
the Chief Shop Steward. These members shall serve two (2) year terms
and may be reappointed.
26.5.5.2 Two (2) Administrators and one (1) alternate shall be appointed by the
Chief Human Resources Officer. These administrators shall serve two
(2) year terms and may be reappointed.
26.5.5.3 The committee will make a recommendation to the County Administrator
or designee for a final decision.
26.6

Reclassification.
Reclassification review may be sought only for the accretion of higher-level duties and not
for workload increases.

26.7

The findings and recommendations of the Reclassification Committee shall be submitted
to the District and Teamsters no later than May 1st.

26.8

All District recommendations for new and abolished classifications shall be forwarded to
Teamsters.

26.9

At the end of the reclassification process, the employee shall have the right to present an
appeal to the Reclassification Committee if their reclassification is denied. The appeal will
be heard by the committee and a recommendation will be made to the County
Administrator for a final decision. Any lack of consensus of the committee during the
appeal process will be referred to negotiations regarding matters within the scope of
negotiations.

79

ARTICLE XXVII –TRANSPORTATION
27.1

Transportation.
27.1.1 The summer bid list for driving assignments shall be prepared in accordance with
the Annual Bid Procedures (reference 27.1.2).
27.1.2 Annual Bid Procedures. Driver’s assignments for the school year shall be made
annually based on the results of the annual bid meeting. The meeting times and
dates shall be announced two weeks prior to the annual bid meeting. Copies of the
bid lists shall be made available three days prior to the meeting. A driver may
request clarification of the bid list prior to the bid meeting. All clarification requests
are to be submitted in writing to the Coordinator of Transportation or designee.
27.1.3 A driver who is absent from the bid meeting may submit to the bid Coordinator a
written “Authorization to Bid” form, designating another employee to bid on
his/her behalf. Drivers will first bid a route and then bid a bus from the available
buses for the designated route. Drivers that have knowledge that they will not be
able to attend the bid meeting will be able to submit a “proxy bid sheet” in advance
of the bid meeting to the Transportation Supervisor.
The bid meeting shall be held one calendar week prior to the start of the student school
year.
27.1.4 Filling Vacancies that Occur During the Year. When there is a vacancy in a bus
driver position, notice of that vacancy shall be posted for a minimum of five (5)
days. The vacancy shall be made available for bidding as above (27.1.2, Annual
Bid Procedure), as assigned in order of seniority. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the District may assign a portion of the run to an existing assignment for reasons of
economy or efficiency. When no driver bids for the vacant position, it may then be
filled from an eligibility list.
27.1.5 The Union shall be allowed observers at each bid meeting.

27.2

Working Rules.
Base Hours - each driver shall begin with a base of six (6) hours or eight (8) hours per day.
In the event a driver selects a special trip which is scheduled to run so late as to prevent
him/her from legally driving his/her regularly assigned time the following day, he/she
shall be paid only for service provided after eight (8) hours rest within the legal restriction.
In the event the trip is delayed for mechanical reasons, acts of God, a student emergency,
a civil emergency, or an approved field trip extension, the driver shall be paid these hours.
Drivers will not exceed the legally mandated working and driving hours. W hen the
possibility of this becomes apparent, drivers will contact their immediate supervisor of the
possibility of exceeding maximum driving or maximum working hours.
80

Selection of routes and schedules shall be determined on the basis of seniority through the
bidding process. Compensation for minimum show-up time for any assigned route shall
be two (2) hours.
Extra work. Drivers will express interest for extra work by 8:30 a.m. of the day of the extra
work assignment.
Management has the right to assign additional work in the transportation department (e.g.,
such as bus washing, refueling, dispatching, and the like) to meet the 8-hour minimum base
hours.
Extra work will be assigned based on seniority. Such work can only be accepted if it
does not conflict with the regularly scheduled route.
Extra work will be assigned by 9:30 a.m. by radio and/or cell phone by the
Transportation or designee.
Any assignment that becomes available for any reason with less than one (1) hour notice to
the transportation department will be offered to drivers who are located within the
transportation building complex in seniority order. Drivers have 15 minutes to respond to
the offer of extra work. If no drivers respond, the assignment will be offered over the radio
and given to the bus driver in closest proximity.
27.3

Bid Procedures.
Routes shall be posted in Transportation and emailed to each driver’s district email no later
than five working days before the first day of bidding. The initial bidding will be
conducted after the drivers have had one week before the first day of the start of school
to review the scheduled routes and hours.
Regular home to school a.m. and p.m. routes will be posted separately from all mid-day
and activity runs.
Each driver will be given a pre-scheduled fifteen (15) minute period for any bidding process,
including a rebidding process, during which the driver must make his/her choice. The
next scheduled person will not be able to bid until his/her scheduled time slot.
If for any reason a driver cannot make his/her scheduled bid time, the driver may submit
a proxy bid sheet (as mentioned earlier – duplicative language).
After a route is chosen, it will be removed from the group. There will be a signature sheet
to sign verifying the driver’s choice.
Each driver will be paid one (1) hour for the bidding process.

81

Standby time - Each driver shall be allowed standby time of thirty (30) minutes between
the regularly scheduled run if it is thirty (30) minutes or less.
Split-time – in building routes, every effort shall be made to provide a driver with his/her
base or adjusted base hours in the least number of total hours.
Each driver shall be allowed thirty (30) minutes per day to perform required inspections,
warm up and cleaning of the bus fifteen (15) minutes pre-trip and fifteen (15) minutes
bus cleaning. The Transportation Supervisor, or in the Director’s absence a management
designee, may approve an additional forty-five (45) minutes. All required cleaning shall be
done in the yard at the end of each day’s use unless it is included in the route at a different
time. All cleaning and check out time are part of the accepted bid package.
27.4

Bus Drivers.
Licenses. All bus drivers must have proper certification and must always carry his/her
Class A or B driver’s license and his/her special driver certificate while on duty. Training
priority shall be given to drivers whose certificate expires within the next six (6) months.
It is the responsibility of all bus drivers to maintain current certifications required for the
position. Any lapse in certification may result in termination after due process.
In the first instance in a five-year period that a driver allows their certifications to lapse,
the District shall allow the driver to work in an alternative assignment, at the sole discretion
of the Deputy Chief of Maintenance, Operations and Transportation, for a maximum of ten
days or until the certifications are obtained.
Change of Address and Telephone. All school bus drivers must notify the Transportation
Office and the Human Resources Department of any change of address and/or telephone
within three (3) working days of the change. Drivers without a valid telephone number
on file in the Transportation Office will not be called.

27.5

Substitute Bus Driver.
Substitute bus drivers will be used to cover home-to-school routes only on an “as needed”
basis. Substitute bus drivers will be assigned to cover a. m . and p.m. runs ONLY. Midday, after school, and extra assignments that are attached to a route the substitute bus
driver has accepted will be covered by bargaining unit drivers and will be assigned using
the existing procedures for assigning daily work.
Substitute bus drivers will not be allowed to work any assignment other than a.m./p.m.
runs and/or other driving assignment that may result in overtime unless said work has
been offered to all bargaining unit members.

27.6

Assignments.

82

As vacancies occur through separation of employment, additional runs, or for other
reasons, the routes shall be assigned by the Transportation Supervisor.
Modification of an existing route shall not be considered a new route.
All drivers shall be “locked in” to their routes for the remainder of the school year.
27.7

Bus Drivers Summer School Procedures.
Annually, no later than one (1) week before the first day of summer school, routes/hours
will be posted and will be available for bidding by seniority following the regular bidding
procedure described in ARTICLE VIII, Section 6, sub section 8, Distribution of Overtime.
Summer school dates, routes and students are subject to many changes and the
Transportation Supervisor will modify assignments based on the needs of the summer
school program and students.
If drivers miss more than one day, for any reason, during their summer school assignment,
the Transportation Supervisor may reassign the route to another driver.

27.8

Field Trips.
The Transportation Supervisor shall establish and keep a field trip sign up book. The book
shall be accessible to all drivers in the Transportation Yard.
The field trip sign up book shall be updated every Friday and drivers will have the
opportunity to sign up for a desired field trip.
The field trips will be awarded to drivers through the seniority-based and rotation bidding
process.
Rotation is defined as going to the bottom of the list once the driver has been assigned a
field trip.
In the event that a more senior driver is skipped in the bidding process, that driver will be
placed on a “skip list” which gives them priority for the next field trip.
Once a driver has accepted a field trip, if the driver “returns” the trip with less than 24
hours’ notice shall automatically go to the bottom of the seniority rotation and shall also
forgo the next field trip assignment on the respective list in the seniority rotation.
If a field trip requires stop time, it must be stated on the request form; if not, and there is
a stop time, the driver will be paid straight through. A driver in paid status shall be
responsible for the vehicle and remain available to the field trip group for the duration of
the trip, except during meal, rest, and unpaid periods. The driver will also provide the
chaperone a means to contact them in the event the driver is needed.
83

Field trip assignments to the bus driver will include the route to be used to and from
the destination, with the driver to have the authority to depart from the assigned route
only in the case of inclement weather, authorized roadblocks, and detours.
Except when scheduled for training, if a driver does not accept a trip, regardless for the
reason, his/her name will go to the bottom of the respective list.
If a field trip becomes available on a weekend that was not posted during the regular
workweek, each driver is given one phone call or text message only, the driver has 15
minutes to respond. (Phone number of his/her choice).
Compensation for minimum show-up time for any trip shall not be less than:
Two (2) hours. If not provided a 24-hour cancellation notice.
Four (4) hours. Weekend field trips that are not cancelled prior to 4:30 p.m. on any Friday
prior to the weekend of the field trip.
27.9

Bus Monitors.
Like Drivers, routes shall be posted in Transportation and emailed to each monitor’s district
email no later than five working days before the first day of bidding. All Bus Monitor
positions shall be no less than four hours per day, five days per week, with the basic
assignment of hours contingent upon the route selected and the normal operation. Bus
monitor assignments can be changed based on the needs of special education students.

27.10 Use of Charter Buses. The District shall prioritize the use of District drivers and District
vehicles in preference to charter buses.
Charter buses may not be used when District funds (including site-based and grant funds)
are utilized to pay for field trips, or other types of student transportation. This policy does
not apply to the following situations:
Trips funded by parent donations, student fundraising, non-profit 501(c)(3) organizations
and/or charitable donations from corporations or other community organizations, where
there is no contribution from the District towards a charter bus.
Grad Nite or middle school promotion trips.
Out-of-Town for CIF Championship sports events outside a 35-mile radius of the
Transportation bus yard.
Out-of-state Trips.
Overnight trips.

84

Trips during non-school days including holidays, weekends and Thanksgiving, Winter, and
Spring Breaks.
In the event that the District has offered the trip to District drivers, but the trip has not been
bid on.
27.11 Bus Driver and Bus Monitor Uniforms and Dress Code.
Drivers shall be afforded uniforms as per the following:
Each Bus Driver and Bus Monitor shall be afforded five (5) t-shirts or buttoned shirts with
the District’s logos, long and/or short sleeved, the full value of which shall be reported
to CalPERS (as applicable) for the purposes of final retirement benefits.

85

ARTICLE XXVIII – RETIREMENT OPTION
28.1

The District, in order to realize savings, will promote early retirement, by purchasing two
(2) years of additional service credit for qualified retiring Public Employee Retirement
System (PERS) members who request it, provided the District qualifies to do so under
Section 20904 Government Code and Los Angeles County Office of Education approved
it.

86

ARTICLE XXIX - TERM OF AGREEMENT
29.1

The term of this Agreement shall be effective July 1, 2022, through June 30, 2025. IUSD
and Teamsters Local 911 agree to reopen two Articles of the CBA as well as Salary and
Benefits for 2023-2024. The parties may choose to modify this Agreement at any time only
by mutual agreement, or as may be necessary based upon applicable changes in the law.
All other provisions of this contract remain the same except that the parties agree to modify
the existing contract language to effectuate this agreement. Acceptance of this tentative
agreement and agreement to its terms is subject to ratification by Teamsters Local 911,
ratification and approval by the Board of Education, and approval of AB 1200 as submitted
or amended to reflect the impact of this agreement. Board approval of this agreement is
contingent upon satisfaction of the requirements of Government Code section 3547.5. If,
on review of the costs specified in Government Code section 3547.5(a), the Superintendent
and chief Business Official cannot both make the certification required by Government
Code section 3547.5(b), or if the County Superintendent issues a qualified or negative
certification pursuant to Government Code section 3547.5(c), the parties shall return to the
bargaining table in an effort to reach an agreement that meets these requirements.

29.2

Reopener Negotiations.
The parties agree to re-open negotiations on Article 12, Compensation, Article 13 Health
and Welfare Benefits, and two additional articles per party upon written notice of the other
party no later than April 1st of each year. Upon receipt of this written notice, arrangements
shall be made pursuant to provisions of the EERA, including the Public Notice provision,
for meeting and negotiating to commence with respect to said specific provisions.
In the event that neither party gives appropriate written notice to the other of its desire to
terminate or modify any of the aforementioned specific provisions by April 1, these
provisions shall be extended for at least another year.
The parties agree to meet and negotiate after appropriate written notice has been received,
pursuant to the above paragraphs. Pending a conclusion of the meeting and negotiating to
terminate or modify any of the specific provisions, these provisions shall remain in full
force and effect.

29.3

Teamsters Local 911 agrees to present to the District its initial proposal with respect to any
such provision which has been reopened pursuant to this Article no later than thirty (30)
days following submission of the written notice.

87

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement effective July
1, 2022 through June 30, 2025.

88

APPENDIX A – CLASSIFIED SALARY SCHEDULE
INGLEWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
Classified Monthly Bargaining Unit Salary Schedule
Fiscal Year 2022-2023 – 10%
(Effective 07-01-2022 as Part of 2022-2023 Negotiations)
CLASSIFIED UNION
SCHEDULE 3-MONTHLY
Effective July 1, 2022
RANGE STEP 1 STEP 2
024
2,866.23 2,866.23
025
2,866.23 2,866.23
026
2,866.23 2,866.23
027
2,866.23 2,866.23
028
2,866.23 2,866.23
029
2,866.23 2,866.23
030
2,866.23 2,866.23
031
2,866.23 2,866.23
032
2,866.23 2,866.23
033
2,866.23 2,875.52
034
2,866.23 2,926.64
035
2,875.60 2,994.13
036
2,926.64 3,065.22
037
2,994.13 3,134.51
038
3,065.22 3,205.64
039
3,134.51 3,276.75
040
3,205.64 3,349.70
041
3,276.75 3,422.67
042
3,349.70 3,510.16
043
3,422.67 3,584.93
044
3,510.16 3,674.26
045
3,584.93 3,747.22
046
3,674.26 3,838.37
047
3,747.22 3,929.55
048
3,840.21 4,017.09
049
3,929.55 4,115.56
050
4,020.71 4,208.57
051
4,115.56 4,307.01
052
4,208.57 4,405.48
053
4,307.01 4,513.06
054
4,414.68 4,625.88
055
4,524.36 4,741.52
056
4,602.12 4,832.23

STEP 3 STEP 5 STEP 5
2,866.23 2,866.23 2,866.23
2,866.23 2,866.23 2,866.23
2,866.23 2,866.23 2,866.23
2,866.23 2,866.23 2,875.79
2,866.23 2,866.23 2,927.38
2,949.35 3,096.82 3,251.66
2,866.23 2,926.64 3,061.59
2,875.60 2,994.13 3,134.51
2,926.64 3,065.22 3,205.64
2,994.12 3,134.51 3,276.75
3,065.22 3,205.64 3,347.89
3,134.51 3,276.75 3,422.67
3,205.64 3,347.89 3,510.16
3,276.75 3,422.67 3,581.28
3,347.89 3,510.16 3,674.26
3,422.67 3,584.93 3,747.22
3,510.16 3,674.26 3,838.37
3,584.93 3,747.22 3,927.71
3,674.26 3,838.37 4,017.09
3,747.22 3,929.55 4,115.56
3,838.37 4,017.09 4,208.57
3,929.55 4,115.04 4,307.01
4,017.09 4,208.57 4,405.48
4,115.56 4,307.01 4,513.06
4,208.57 4,405.48 4,618.81
4,307.01 4,513.06 4,719.14
4,405.48 4,618.81 4,839.47
4,513.06 4,719.14 4,947.01
4,618.81 4,839.47 5,074.69
4,719.14 4,947.01 5,184.11
4,837.11 5,070.68 5,313.71
4,958.03 5,197.44 5,446.55
5,073.83 5,327.51 5,593.89

89

CLASSIFIED UNION
SCHEDULE 3-HOURLY
Effective July 1, 2022
RANGE STEP 1
STEP 2 STEP 3 STEP 4 STEP 8
024
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
025
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
026
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
027
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.59
028
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.89
029
16.54
16.54
17.02
17.87
18.76
030
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.88
17.66
031
16.54
16.54
16.59
17.27
18.08
032
16.54
16.54
16.88
17.68
18.49
033
16.54
16.59
17.27
18.08
18.90
034
16.54
16.88
17.68
18.49
19.32
035
16.59
17.27
18.08
18.90
19.75
036
16.88
17.68
18.49
19.32
20.25
037
17.27
18.08
18.90
19.75
20.66
038
17.68
18.49
19.32
20.25
21.20
039
18.08
18.90
19.75
20.68
21.62
040
18.49
19.33
20.25
21.20
22.14
041
18.90
19.75
20.68
21.62
22.66
042
19.33
20.25
21.20
22.14
23.18
043
19.75
20.68
21.62
22.67
23.74
044
20.25
21.20
22.14
23.18
24.28
045
20.68
21.62
22.67
23.74
24.85
046
21.20
22.14
23.18
24.28
25.42
047
21.62
22.67
23.74
24.85
26.04
048
22.16
23.18
24.28
25.42
26.65
049
22.67
23.74
24.85
26.04
27.23
050
23.20
24.28
25.42
26.65
27.92
051
23.74
24.85
26.04
27.23
28.54
052
24.28
25.42
26.65
27.92
29.28
053
24.85
26.04
27.23
28.54
29.91
054
25.47
26.69
27.91
29.25
30.66
055
26.10
27.36
28.60
29.99
31.42
056
26.55
27.88
29.27
30.74
32.27

90

CLASSIFIED UNION
SCHEDULE 4-HOURLY
Effective July 1, 2022
RANGE STEP 1
019
021
023
027
030

16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54

STEP 2
STEP 3
STEP 4
STEP 5
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.91

16.54
16.54
16.54
16.58
17.66

CLASSIFIED UNION
SCHEDULE 5-HOURLY
Effective July 1, 2022
RANGE
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
20

STEP 1
STEP 2
STEP 3
STEP 4
STEP 5
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16 .54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
16.54
17.05
17.05
17.05
17.05
17.05
17.05
17.05
17.05
17.05
17.05
17.73
17.73
17.73
17.73
17.73
16.54
18.23
16.54
16.54
17.27
16.95
17.80
18.71
18.71
18.71
19.64
19.64
19.64
19.64
19.64
20.64
20.64
20.64
20.64
20.64
16.54
16.54
17.09
17.09
17.09
18.06
18.06
18.06
18.06
18.06
16.80
17.46
18.16
18.90
19.64
16.54
17.64
18.74
19.84
20.95

CLASSIFIED UNION
SCHEDULE 6-HOURLY
Effective July 1, 2022
RANGE

01

STEP 1
16.54

STEP 2

STEP 3

16.54

16.54

91

6

22.05

CLASSIFIED UNION
SCHEDULE 6-HOURLY
Effective July 1, 2022
RANGE

01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11

12
13

14
15
16
17
21
22
23
24

STEP 1
STEP 2
16.54
22.15
21.20
16.59
16.54
16.54
16.54
17.69
16.54
16.59
18.08
16.54
16.54
19.73
16.54
16.54
16.54
17.27
23.19
14.33
20.69

STEP 3

92

STEP 4

STEP 5

CLASSIFIED SALARY SCHEDULE
Job Classifications/Salary Schedule Placement
By Alpha

TITLE

RANGE

ACCOUNTANT / BUDGET TECHNICIAN
ACCOUNT CLERK IV
ACCOUNTANT TECHNICIAN
ACCOUNTING SPECIALIST
ADMIN. SECRETARY – ED. SERVICES
ADMIN. SECRETARY – MAINT. DEPARTMENT
ADMIN. ASSISTANT – PUBLIC INFORMATION
ADMIN. SECRETARY - PUBLIC INFORMATION
ADMIN. SECRETARY - PUPIL PERSONNEL
ADMIN. SECRETARY - SCHOOL POLICE
ADMIN. SECRETARY - SPECIAL PROJECTS
ASSIST. STOREKEEPER/TRUCK DRIVER II
ASSIST. STOREKEEPER/TRUCK DRIVER I

52
37
42
47
46
45
52
46
45
46
45
38
32

BIL. PARENT INVOLVEMENT COMMU. AIDE
BUDGET TECHNICIAN
BUS ATTENDANT
BUS DRIVER/UTILITY

10
43
21
41

C.A.I. TECHNICIAN
CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL TECHNICIAN
CHILD DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANT
CLERK TYPIST II
CLERK TYPIST III
COOK I
COOK II
COMMUNICATION IDENTIFICATION SPECIALIST
COMMUNITY LIAISON SPECIALIST
COMPUTER OPERATIONS OPERATOR
CUSTODIAN
CUSTODIAN/HOUSEKEEPER
COMPUTER TECHNICIAN
CUSTODIAN/MAINTENANCE UTILITY
CWA TECHNICIAN

40
42
01
33
35
27
30
38
38
48
29
35
40
33
36

DATA PROCESSING/BILINGUAL REGISTRAR CLERK
DIETETIC TECHNICIAN
DISPATCHER
DISS COMPUTER TECHNICIAN
DUPLICATING/MAIL CENTER SPECIALIST

33
37
35
40
47

93

ELECTRONIC DATA PROCESSING CLERK
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS SPECIALIST

37
37

FACILITIES SERVICES TECHNICIAN
FAMILY SERVICE WORKER
FOOD SERVICES ASSISTANT I

37
02
19

FOOD SERVICES ASSISTANT II
FOOD SERVICES ASSISTANT III

21
23

FOOD SERVICES BOOKKEEPING TECHNICIAN
FOOD SERVICES COORDINATOR TECHNICIAN
FOOD SERVICES OPERATIONAL DRIVER/MAIN.
FOOD SERVICES PROCESSING TECHNICIAN
FOOD SERVICES UTILITY WORKER II
FOOD PRODUCTION MANAGER I
FOOD PRODUCTION MANAGER II

37
40
38
36
30
37
40

GARDENER

35

HUMAN RESOURCES TECHNICIAN

37

INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE I *
INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE II *
INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE III *
INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE I - ASES *
INSTRUCTIONAL ASSISTANT-SPECIAL NEEDS *
JUNIOR HIGH NIGHT CUSTODIAN LEAD

01
02
03
01
10
35

LEAD DATA PROCESSING TECH/CLASSIFIED
LEAD DISTRICT NIGHT CUSTODIAN
LIFEGUARD

50
35
02

MAINTENANCE AUTO MECHANIC
MAINTENEANCE PROC/STOREKEEPER
MAINTENANCE STAGE ATTENDANT
MOWER/GARDENER

47
40
42
36

NURSE TECHNICIAN
NUTRITION ASSISTANT

45
37

OFFICE MANAGER I
OFFICE MANAGER/DATA PROCESSING
OFFICE MANAGER BUSINESS SERVICES
OFFICE MANAGER HUMAN RESOURCES

42
44
42
42

PARENT INVOLVEMENT COMMU. LIAISON
PAYROLL TECHNICIAN

35
41

94

PERSONNEL TECHNICIAN
PROGRAM AIDE I *
PROGRAM AIDE II *
PROGRAM AIDE III *
PURCHASING ASSISTANT, I
PURCHASING ASSISTANT II
PURCHASING CLERK

43
01
02
03
38
41
34

RECEPTIONIST CLERK
RECORDS CLERK I
RECORDS CLERK II

32
34
37

SCHOOL POLICE OFFICER
SCHOOL OFFICE MANAGER
SCHOOL OFFICE MANAGER I
SCHOOL OFFICE MANAGER II
SCHOOL OFFICE MANAGER III
SCHOOL SAFETY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY
SECRETARY II – CWA
SECRETARY II – SPECIAL EDUCATION
SECRETARY II – SPECIAL SERVICES
SECURITY DISPATCHER
SEVERELY HANDICAPPED BEHAVIORAL ASST.
SEVERELY HANDICAPPED TEACHER ASST.
SEVERELY HANDICAPPED TECHNICIAN
SENIOR ACCOUNT PAYABLE CLERK
SENIOR CLERK
SENIOR CLERK II
SENIOR DATA TECHNICIAN – TECHNOLOGY
SENIOR HIGH NIGHT LEAD CUSTODIAN
SENIOR STOREKEEPER
SKILLED MAINT. CARPENTER
SKILLED MAINT. ELECTRICIAN
SKILLED MAINT. HEAT/AIR CONDITIONING
SKILLED MAINT. LOCKSMITH
SKILLED MAINT. PAINTER
SKILLED MAINT. PLUMBER
SKILLED MAINT. WELDER
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC CARPENTER
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. ELECTRICIAN
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. GENERAL
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. GLAZER
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. HEAVY MECHANIC
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. LOCKSMITH
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. PAINTER
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. PLUMBER
SPECIAL EDUCATION-TRANSITION SPECIALIST

52
38
42
43
44
38
39
40
40
40
38
10
10
40
40
36
38
42
37
42
47
47
52
47
47
47
47
48
52
48
48
52
48
48
48
11

95

SPECIAL EDUCATION AIDE
STAFF DEVELOPMENT TECHNICIAN
STORE KEEPER
STUDENT BODY ACOUNT CLERK
SWIMMING POOL TECHNICIAN

01
44
40
34
42

TEACHER ASSISTANT/CDC
TRUCK DRIVER

11
34

VAN DRIVER
VOCATIONAL/CAREER YET TECHNICIAN

27
40

WAREHOUSE CLERK
WEB MASTER

32
50

*After completion of thirty (30) college semester units.

96

CLASSIFIED SALARY SCHEDULE
Job Classifications/Salary Schedule Placement
By Salary Range

TITLE

RANGE

ACCOUNTANT / BUDGET TECHNICIAN
ADMIN. ASSISTANT/PUBLIC INFORMATION
MENTAL HEALTH DISABILITY SERV. COORD.
SCHOOL POLICE OFFICE
SKILLED MAINT. HEAT/AIR CONDITIONING
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. ELECTRICIAN
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. HEAVY MECHANIC

52
52
52
52
52
52
52

LEAD DATA PROCESSING TECH/CLASSIFIED
WEB MASTER

50
50

COMPUTER OPERATIONS OPERATOR
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. CARPENTER
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. GENERAL
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. GLAZER
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. LOCKSMITH
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. PAINTER
SKILLED MAINT. SPEC. PLUMBER

48
48
48
48
48
48
48

DUPLICATING/MAIL CENTER SPECIALIST
MAINTENANCE AUTO MECHANIC
SKILLED MAINT. CARPENTER
SKILLED MAINT. ELECTRICIAN
SKILLED MAINT. PAINTER
SKILLED MAINT. PLUMBER
SKILLED MAINT. WELDER

47
47
47
47
47
47
47

ADMIN. SECRETARY ED. SERVICES
ADMIN. SECRETARY PUBLIC INFORMATION

46
46

ADMIN. SECRETARY – PUPIL PERSONNEL
ADMIN. SECRETARY – SPECIAL PROJECTS
NURSE TECHNICIAN

45
45
45

OFFICE MANAGER/DATA PROCESSING
SCHOOL OFFICE MANAGER III

44
44

BUDGET TECHNICIAN
SCHOOL OFFICE MANAGER
SCHOOL OFFICE MANAGER II
PERSONNEL TECHNICIAN

43
43
43
43
97

ACCOUNTANT TECHNICIAN
CERTIFICATED PERSONNEL TECHNICIAN
MAINTENANCE STAGE ATTENDANT
OFFICE MANAGER I

42
42
42
42

OFFICE MANAGER BUSINESS SERVICES
OFFICE MANAGER HUMAN RESOURCES

42
42

SCHOOL OFFICE MANAGER I
SENIOR DATA TECHNICIAN – TECHNOLOGY
SENIOR STOREKEEPER

42
42
42

SWIMMING POOL TECHNICIAN

42

BUS DRIVER/UTILITY
PAYROLL TECHNICIAN
PLANT MANAGER II - SENIOR HIGH
PURCHASING ASSISTANT II

41
41
41
41

C.A.I. TECHNICIAN
COMPUTER TECHNICIAN
DISS COMPUTER TECHNICIAN
FOOD PRODUCTION MANAGER II
FOOD SERVICES COORDINATOR TECHNICIAN
MAINTENEANCE PROC/STOREKEEPER
SECRETARY II – CWA
SECRETARY II – SPECIAL EDUCATION
SECRETARY II - SPECIAL SERVICES
SEVERELY HANDICAPPED TECHNICIAN
SENIOR ACCOUNT PAYABLE CLERK
STORE KEEPER

40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40

SECRETARY
PLANT MANAGER I-JUNIOR HIGH

39
39

ASSIST. STOREKEEPER/TRUCK DRIVER II
COMMUNICATION IDENTIFICATION SPECIALIST
COMMUNITY LIAISON SPECIALIST
FOOD SERVICES OPERATIONAL DRIVER/MAIN.
PURCHASING ASSISTANT, I
SCHOOL OFFICE MANAGER
SECURITY DISPATCHER
SENIOR CLERK II

38
38
38
38
38
38
38
38

ACCOUNT CLERK IV
DIETETIC TECHNICIAN
ELECTRONIC DATA PROCESSING CLERK

37
37
37
98

EMPLOYEE BENEFITS SPECIALIST
FACILITIES SERVICES TECHNICIAN
FOOD PRODUCTION MANAGER I
FOOD SERVICES BOOKKEEPING TECHNICIAN
HUMAN RESOURCES TECHNICIAN
NUTRITION ASSISTANT
SENIOR HIGH LEAD CUSTODIAN

37
37
37
37
37
37
37

RECORDS CLERK II

37

CWA TECHNICIAN
FOOD SERVICES PROCESSING TECHNICIAN
MOWER/GARDENER
SENIOR CLERK

36
36
36
36

CAMPUS SUPERVISOR
CLERK TYPIST III
CUSTODIAN/HOUSEKEEPER
DISPATCHER

35
35
35
35

GARDENER
JUNIOR HIGH LEAD CUSTODIAN
LEAD DISTRICT NIGHT CUSTODIAN
PARENT INVOLVEMENT COMMU. LIAISON

35
35
35
35

PURCHASING CLERK
RECORDS CLERK I
STUDENT BODY ACOUNT CLERK
TRUCK DRIVER

34
34
34
34

ELEMENTARY LEAD CUSTODIAN
CLERK TYPIST II
CUSTODIAN/MAINTENANCE UTILITY
DATA PROCESSING/BILINGUAL REGISTRAR CLERK

33
33
33
33

ASST. STOREKEEPER/TRUCK DRIVER I
RECEPTIONIST CLERK
WAREHOUSE CLERK

32
32
32

COOK II
FOOD SERVICES UTILITY WORKER II
CUSTODIAN

30
30
29

SPECIAL EDUCATION-TRANSITION SPECIALIST
TEACHER ASSISTANT/CDC

11
11

PROGRAM AIDE III *
INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE III *

03
03
99

SEVERELY HANDICAPPED BEHAVIORAL ASST.
SEVERELY HANDICAPPED TEACHER ASST.

10
10

INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE II *
FAMILY SERVICE WORKER
PROGRAM AIDE II *
LIFEGUARD

02
02
02
02

BIL. PARENT INVOLVEMENT COMMU. AIDE

10

INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE I *
PROGRAM AIDE I *

01
01

VAN DRIVER
COOK I

27
27

FOOD SERVICES ASSISTANT III
FOOD SERVICES ASSISTANT II
FOOD SERVICES ASSISTANT I

23
21
19

BUS ATTENDANT
CHILD DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANT

21
01

*After completion of thirty (30) college semester units

100

INGLEWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
Classified Bargaining Unit Salary Schedule
Effective 07/01/2023 as Part of 2022-2023 Negotiations

RANGE
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

I

II

III

IV

V

Hourly

17.00

17.85

Daily

136.00

142.80

Annual

35,496.00

37,270.80

Hourly

16.60

17.43

18.30

19.22

20.18

Monthly

2,888.40

3,032.82

3,184.46

3,343.68

3,510.87

Annual

34,660.80

36,393.84

38,213.53

40,124.21

42,130.42

Hourly

16.93

17.78

18.67

19.60

20.58

Monthly

2,946.17

3,093.48

3,248.15

3,410.56

3,581.09

Annual
Hourly

35,354.02
17.27

37,121.72
18.13

38,977.80
19.04

40,926.69
19.99

42,973.03
20.99

Monthly

3,005.09

3,155.35

3,313.11

3,478.77

3,652.71

Annual

36,061.10

37,864.15

39,757.36

41,745.23

43,832.49

Hourly

17.62

18.50

19.42

20.39

21.41

Monthly
Annual

3,065.19
36,782.32

3,218.45
38,621.43

3,379.38
40,552.51

3,548.34
42,580.13

3,725.76
44,709.14

Hourly

17.97

18.87

19.81

20.80

21.84

Monthly

3,126.50

3,282.82

3,446.96

3,619.31

3,800.28

Annual

37,517.96

39,393.86

41,363.56

43,431.73

45,603.32

Hourly
Monthly

18.33
3,189.03

19.24
3,348.48

20.21
3,515.90

21.22
3,691.70

22.28
3,876.28

Annual

38,268.32

40,181.74

42,190.83

44,300.37

46,515.39

Hourly

18.69

19.63

20.61

21.64

22.72

Monthly

3,252.81

3,415.45

3,586.22

3,765.53

3,953.81

Annual

39,033.69

40,985.37

43,034.64

45,186.38

47,445.69

Hourly

19.07

20.02

21.02

22.07

23.18

Monthly

3,317.86

3,483.76

3,657.94

3,840.84

4,032.88

Annual

39,814.36

41,805.08

43,895.34

46,090.10

48,394.61

Hourly

19.45

20.42

21.44

22.52

23.64

101

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

Monthly

3,384.22

3,553.43

3,731.10

3,917.66

4,113.54

Annual

40,610.65

42,641.18

44,773.24

47,011.91

49,362.50

Hourly

19.84

20.83

21.87

22.97

24.11

Monthly

3,451.91

3,624.50

3,805.73

3,996.01

4,195.81

Annual
Hourly

41,422.86
20.24

43,494.01
21.25

45,668.71
22.31

47,952.14
23.42

50,349.75
24.60

Monthly

3,520.94

3,696.99

3,881.84

4,075.93

4,279.73

Annual

42,251.32

44,363.89

46,582.08

48,911.19

51,356.75

Hourly

20.64

21.67

22.76

23.89

25.09

Monthly
Annual

3,591.36
43,096.35

3,770.93
45,251.17

3,959.48
47,513.72

4,157.45
49,889.41

4,365.32
52,383.88

Hourly

21.05

22.11

23.21

24.37

25.59

Monthly

3,663.19

3,846.35

4,038.67

4,240.60

4,452.63

Annual

43,958.28

46,156.19

48,464.00

50,887.20

53,431.56

Hourly
Monthly

21.47
3,736.45

22.55
3,923.28

23.67
4,119.44

24.86
4,325.41

26.10
4,541.68

Annual

44,837.44

47,079.31

49,433.28

51,904.94

54,500.19

Hourly

21.90

23.00

24.15

25.36

26.62

Monthly

3,811.18

4,001.74

4,201.83

4,411.92

4,632.52

Annual

45,734.19

48,020.90

50,421.94

52,943.04

55,590.19

Hourly

22.34

23.46

24.63

25.86

27.16

Monthly

3,887.41

4,081.78

4,285.87

4,500.16

4,725.17

Annual

46,648.87

48,981.32

51,430.38

54,001.90

56,702.00

Hourly

22.79

23.93

25.12

26.38

27.70

Monthly

3,965.15

4,163.41

4,371.58

4,590.16

4,819.67

Annual

47,581.85

49,960.94

52,458.99

55,081.94

57,836.04

Hourly

23.24

24.41

25.63

26.91

28.25

Monthly

4,044.46

4,246.68

4,459.01

4,681.96

4,916.06

Annual

48,533.49

50,960.16

53,508.17

56,183.58

58,992.76

Hourly

23.71

24.89

26.14

27.45

28.82

Monthly

4,125.35

4,331.61

4,548.19

4,775.60

5,014.38

Annual

49,504.16

51,979.37

54,578.33

57,307.25

60,172.61

Hourly

24.18

25.39

26.66

27.99

29.39

102

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

Monthly

4,207.85

4,418.25

4,639.16

4,871.12

5,114.67

Annual

50,494.24

53,018.95

55,669.90

58,453.40

61,376.07

Hourly

24.67

25.90

27.20

28.55

29.98

Monthly

4,292.01

4,506.61

4,731.94

4,968.54

5,216.97

Annual
Hourly

51,504.13
25.16

54,079.33
26.42

56,783.30
27.74

59,622.46
29.13

62,603.59
30.58

Monthly

4,377.85

4,596.74

4,826.58

5,067.91

5,321.30

Annual

52,534.21

55,160.92

57,918.96

60,814.91

63,855.66

Hourly

25.66

26.95

28.29

29.71

31.19

Monthly
Annual

4,465.41
53,584.89

4,688.68
56,264.14

4,923.11
59,077.34

5,169.27
62,031.21

5,427.73
65,132.77

Hourly

26.18

27.49

28.86

30.30

31.82

Monthly

4,554.72

4,782.45

5,021.57

5,272.65

5,536.29

Annual

54,656.59

57,389.42

60,258.89

63,271.84

66,435.43

Hourly
Monthly

26.70
4,645.81

28.04
4,878.10

29.44
5,122.01

30.91
5,378.11

32.45
5,647.01

Annual

55,749.72

58,537.21

61,464.07

64,537.27

67,764.14

Hourly

27.23

28.60

30.03

31.53

33.10

Monthly

4,738.73

4,975.66

5,224.45

5,485.67

5,759.95

Annual

56,864.72

59,707.95

62,693.35

65,828.02

69,119.42

Hourly

27.78

29.17

30.63

32.16

33.77

Monthly

4,833.50

5,075.18

5,328.93

5,595.38

5,875.15

Annual

58,002.01

60,902.11

63,947.22

67,144.58

70,501.81

Hourly

28.33

29.75

31.24

32.80

34.44

Monthly

4,930.17

5,176.68

5,435.51

5,707.29

5,992.65

Annual

59,162.05

62,120.15

65,226.16

68,487.47

71,911.84

Hourly

28.90

30.35

31.86

33.46

35.13

Monthly

5,028.77

5,280.21

5,544.22

5,821.43

6,112.51

Annual

60,345.29

63,362.56

66,530.68

69,857.22

73,350.08

Hourly

29.48

30.95

32.50

34.13

35.83

Monthly

5,129.35

5,385.82

5,655.11

5,937.86

6,234.76

Annual

61,552.20

64,629.81

67,861.30

71,254.36

74,817.08

Hourly

30.07

31.57

33.15

34.81

36.55

103

33

Monthly

5,231.94

5,493.53

5,768.21

6,056.62

6,359.45

Annual

62,783.24

65,922.40

69,218.52

72,679.45

76,313.42

Hourly

30.67

32.20

33.81

35.50

37.28

Monthly

5,336.58

5,603.40

5,883.57

6,177.75

6,486.64

Annual

64,038.91

67,240.85

70,602.89

74,133.04

77,839.69

104

CLASSIFIED SALARY SCHEDULE
Job Classifications/Salary Schedule Placement By Alpha
TITLE
ACCOUNTING SPECIALIST

RANGE
17

ADA ATTENDANCE CLERK

8

ADMINISTRATIVE ANALYST

27

ADMINISTRATIVE SECRETARY

14

APP SUPPORT TECHNICIAN

24

BEHAVIOR INTERVENTION ASSISTANT
BENEFITS ANALYST

12
27

BUS ATTENDANT

1

BUS DRIVER I

10

BUS DRIVER/MAINTENANCE UTILITY

10

CHILD DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANT
CLERK II - SENIOR

1
2

CLERK TYPIST II

2

CLERK TYPIST II - BILINGUAL

2

CLERK TYPIST II - ELEMENTARY

3

COLLEGE AND CAREER SPECIALIST

27

COMMUNICATION IDENTIFICATION SPECIALIST

6

COMMUNITY LIAISON SPECIALIST

6

COMMUNITY LIAISON SPECIALIST - LEAD

17

COMPUTER TECHNICIAN

8

COOK I

1

CUSTODIAN

2

CUSTODIAN - ELEMENTARY LEAD

2

CUSTODIAN - JUNIOR HIGH LEAD

3

CUSTODIAN - SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL LEAD

5

CWA TECHNICIAN

4

DATA ANALYST CLERK - BILINGUAL

3

DATA PROCESSING CLERK/SECRETARY
DATA TECHNICIAN

105

8
8

FACILITIES ACCOUNTANT
FAMILY SERVICE WORKER

27
1

FILE CLERK

2

FOOD SERVICES OPERATIONAL DRIVER/MAINTENANCE

6

HEALTH/NUTRITION ASSISTANT - CDC
HUMAN RESOURCES ASSISTANT

2
14

HUMAN RESOURCES SPECIALIST II

24

INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE - SIGN LANGUAGE
INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE I

17
1

INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE II

1

INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE III

2

INSTRUCTIONAL ASSISTANT - SPECIAL NEEDS

2

INSTRUCTIONAL SUPPORT - ASES

1

INVENTORY AND DISTRIBUTION COORDINATOR

17

MAINTENANCE TECHNICIAN - IRRIGATION AND GROUNDS 25
MOWER/GARDNER
4
NURSE TECHNICIAN
NUTRITION SERVICE WORKER

14
2

NUTRITION SERVICE WORKER - INTERMEDIATE

2

NUTRITION SERVICE WORKER - SENIOR

2

NUTRITION SERVICE WORKER - SENIOR/HIGH SCHOOL

5

OFFICE MANAGER - ASES
OFFICE MANAGER I - SCHOOL

6
8

OFFICE MANAGER II - SCHOOL
OFFICE MANAGER III - SCHOOL

12
13

PAYROLL TECHNICIAN - LEAD
PRODUCTION CENTER MANAGER

20
13

PROGRAM AIDE I - CLERICAL

1

PROGRAM AIDE I - CLR/COMM

1

PROGRAM AIDE I - COMMUNITY

1

PROGRAM AIDE II - BILINGUAL CLERICAL

1

PROGRAM AIDE II - BILINGUAL COMM

1

106

PROGRAM AIDE II - COMPUTER AIDE

2

PROGRAM AIDE II - LIBRARY

1

PROGRAM AIDE II - RESOURCE AIDE

1

PROGRAM AIDE II - SPECIAL EDUCATION

1

PROGRAM AIDE III - BILINGUAL CLERK

1

PROGRAM SPECIALIST - ASES

7

PURCHASING ASSISTANT

6

RECEPTIONIST/CLERK
RECEPTIONIST/CLERK - BILINGUAL

2
2

RECORDS CLERK II

2

SCHOOL POLICE - SECRETARY
SCHOOL SAFETY ASSISTANT

7
6

SENIOR ACCOUNTS PAYABLE CLERK

8

SENIOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SUPPORT TECHNICIAN 27
SENIOR STOREKEEPER

11

SH/TEACHER ASSISTANT

2

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - GENERAL

18

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - HEAVY MECHANIC I 18
SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - HEAVY MECHANIC II 23
SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - LOCKSMITH I

18

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - LOCKSMITH II

23

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - PLUMBER I

18

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - PLUMBER II

23

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - SSR ELECTRICIAN I 18
SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - SSR ELECTRICIAN II 23
SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - WELDER II
SPANISH TRANSLATOR

23
3

SPECIAL EDUCATION AIDE

1

STUDENT BODY ACCOUNTING CLERK

2

STUDENT SUPERVISION ASSISTANT
TRUCK DRIVER
UTILITY HELPER II
VAN DRIVER

1
2
2
1

107

CLASSIFIED SALARY SCHEDULE
Job Classifications/Salary Schedule Placement By Salary Range

TITLE

RANGE

BUS ATTENDANT

1

CHILD DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANT

1

COOK I

1

FAMILY SERVICE WORKER

1

INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE I

1

INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE II

1

INSTRUCTIONAL SUPPORT - ASES

1

PROGRAM AIDE I - CLERICAL

1

PROGRAM AIDE I - CLR/COMM

1

PROGRAM AIDE I - COMMUNITY

1

PROGRAM AIDE II - BILINGUAL CLERICAL

1

PROGRAM AIDE II - BILINGUAL COMM

1

PROGRAM AIDE II - LIBRARY

1

PROGRAM AIDE II - RESOURCE AIDE

1

PROGRAM AIDE II - SPECIAL EDUCATION

1

PROGRAM AIDE III - BILINGUAL CLERK

1

SPECIAL EDUCATION AIDE

1

STUDENT SUPERVISION ASSISTANT

1

VAN DRIVER

1

CLERK II - SENIOR

2

CLERK TYPIST II

2

CLERK TYPIST II - BILINGUAL

2

CUSTODIAN

2

CUSTODIAN - ELEMENTARY LEAD

2

FILE CLERK

2

HEALTH/NUTRITION ASSISTANT - CDC

2

INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE III

2

108

INSTRUCTIONAL ASSISTANT - SPECIAL NEEDS

2

NUTRITION SERVICE WORKER

2

NUTRITION SERVICE WORKER - INTERMEDIATE

2

NUTRITION SERVICE WORKER - SENIOR

2

PROGRAM AIDE II - COMPUTER AIDE

2

RECEPTIONIST/CLERK

2

RECEPTIONIST/CLERK - BILINGUAL

2

SH/TEACHER ASSISTANT

2

UTILITY HELPER II

2

RECORDS CLERK II

3

STUDENT BODY ACCOUNTING CLERK

3

TRUCK DRIVER

3

CLERK TYPIST II - ELEMENTARY

4

CUSTODIAN - JUNIOR HIGH LEAD

4

DATA ANALYST CLERK - BILINGUAL

4

SPANISH TRANSLATOR

4

CWA TECHNICIAN

5

MOWER/GARDNER

5

CUSTODIAN - SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL LEAD

6

NUTRITION SERVICE WORKER - SENIOR/HIGH SCHOOL

6

COMMUNICATION IDENTIFICATION SPECIALIST

7

COMMUNITY LIAISON SPECIALIST

7

FOOD SERVICES OPERATIONAL DRIVER/MAINTENANCE

7

OFFICE MANAGER - ASES

7

PURCHASING ASSISTANT

7

SCHOOL SAFETY ASSISTANT

7

PROGRAM SPECIALIST - ASES

8

SCHOOL POLICE - SECRETARY

8

ADA ATTENDANCE CLERK

9

COMPUTER TECHNICIAN

9

DATA PROCESSING CLERK/SECRETARY

9

DATA TECHNICIAN

9

OFFICE MANAGER I - SCHOOL

9

109

SENIOR ACCOUNTS PAYABLE CLERK

9

BUS DRIVER I

11

BUS DRIVER/MAINTENANCE UTILITY

11

SENIOR STOREKEEPER

12

BEHAVIOR INTERVENTION ASSISTANT

13

OFFICE MANAGER II - SCHOOL

13

PRODUCTION CENTER MANAGER

14

OFFICE MANAGER III - SCHOOL

14

ADMINISTRATIVE SECRETARY

15

HUMAN RESOURCES ASSISTANT

15

NURSE TECHNICIAN

15

ACCOUNTING SPECIALIST

18

COMMUNITY LIAISON SPECIALIST - LEAD

18

INSTRUCTIONAL AIDE - SIGN LANGUAGE

18

INVENTORY AND DISTRIBUTION COORDINATOR

18

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - GENERAL

19

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - HEAVY MECHANIC I

19

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - LOCKSMITH I

19

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - PLUMBER I

19

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - SSR ELECTRICIAN I

19

PAYROLL TECHNICIAN - LEAD
SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - HEAVY MECHANIC II

21
24

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - LOCKSMITH II

24

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - PLUMBER II

24

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - SSR ELECTRICIAN II

24

SKILLED MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST - WELDER II

24

APP SUPPORT TECHNICIAN

25

HUMAN RESOURCES SPECIALIST II

25

MAINTENANCE TECHNICIAN - IRRIGATION AND GROUNDS

26

ADMINISTRATIVE ANALYST

28

BENEFITS ANALYST

28

COLLEGE AND CAREER SPECIALIST

28

FACILITIES ACCOUNTANT

28

110

CLASSIFIED SALARY SCHEDULE
Job Classifications/Salary Schedule Placement
By Alpha

Title

Range

ACCOUNTING SPECIALIST
ADA ATTENDANCE CLERK
ADM SECRETARY
ADMINISTRATIVE ANALYST
APP SUPPORT TECHNICIAN
ASES OFFICE MANAGER
BEHAVIOR INTERV ASSISTANT
BENEFITS/RISK MGMT ANLST
BIL RECEPTIONIST/CLERK
BILINGUAL CLERK TYPIST II
BUS ATTENDANT
BUS DR/MAINT UTILITY
BUS DRIVER I
CHILD DEVELOPMENT ASSIST
CLERK TYPIST II
COLLEGE & CAREER SPEC
COMMUNICATION INDENT SPEC
COMMUNITY LIAISON SPEC.
COMPUTER TECHNICIAN
COOK I
CUSTODIAN
CWA TECHNICIAN
DATA ANALYST CLERK-BIL
DATA PROC CLK/SEC
DATA TECHNICIAN
ELEM LEAD CUSTODIAN
ELEM-CLERK TYPIST II
FACILITIES ACCOUNTANT
FAMILY SERVICE WORKER
FOOD SVS OPER DR/MAINT
HUMAN RESOURCES ASSISTANT
HUMAN RESOURCES SP II
INST ASSIST-SPECIAL NEEDS
INSTR AIDE-SIGN LANGUAGE
INSTR SUPPORT-ASES
INSTRUCT AIDE I
INSTRUCT AIDE II
INSTRUCT AIDE III
INTMD NUTRITION SER WKR

17
8
14
27
24
6
12
27
1
2
1
10
10
1
1
27
6
6
8
1
1
4
3
8
8
1
3
27
1
6
14
24
1
17
1
1
1
1
1
111

INVENTORY & DISTR COORD
IRR AND GROUNDS MAINT TEC
JR HIGH LEAD CUSTODIAN
LEAD COMMUNITY LIAISON SP
LEAD PAYROLL TECHNICIAN
MOWER/GARDNER
NURSE TECH
NUTRITION SERVICE WORKER
PRODUCTION CENTER MANAGER
PROG AIDE I CLR/COMM
PROG AIDE I COMM
PROG AIDE II LIBRARY
PROG AIDE II BIL COMM
PROG AIDE II COMPT
PROG AIDE II RES
PROG AIDE II SPEC ED
PROG. AIDE III/CLERK/BIL
PROG.AIDE II/BIL. CLER.
PROGRAM AIDE I CLR
PURCHASING ASST
RECEPTIONIST CLK
RECORDS CLERK II
SCH ED SAF-ASES PROG SPC
SCHOOL OFF MGR II
SCHOOL OFF MGR III
SCHOOL OFFICE MGR I
SCHOOL POLICE- SECRETARY
SCHOOL SAFETY ASSISTANT
SENIOR STOREKEEPER
SH/TEACHER ASSISTANT
SK MAINT SPEC GENERAL
SK MAINT SPEC LOCKSMITH I
SK MAINT SPEC LOCKSMITH II
SK MAINT SPEC PLUMBER I
SK MAINT SPEC PLUMBER II
SK MAINT SPEC/HEAVY MECH I
SK MAINT SPEC/HEAVY MECH II
SK MAINT WELDER II
SK MAINT/SSR ELECT I
SK MAINT/SSR ELECT II
SPANISH TRANSLATOR
SPEC ED AIDE
SR HIGH LEAD CUSTODIAN
SR INFO TECH SUPP TECH
SR NUTR SER WKR-HIGH SCH
SR NUTRITION SER WKR

17
25
3
17
20
4
14
1
13
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
6
1
2
7
12
13
8
7
6
11
1
18
18
23
18
23
18
23
23
18
23
3
1
5
27
5
1
112

SR. ACCT PAYABLE CLK
STUDENT BODY ACCT CLK
TRUCK DRIVER
UTILITY HELPER II
VAN DRIVER

8
2
2
1
1

113

CLASSIFIED SALARY SCHEDULE
Job Classifications/Salary Schedule Placement
By Salary Range

Title

Range

BIL RECEPTIONIST/CLERK
BUS ATTENDANT
CHILD DEVELOPMENT ASSIST
CLERK TYPIST II
COOK I
CUSTODIAN
ELEM LEAD CUSTODIAN
FAMILY SERVICE WORKER
INST ASSIST-SPECIAL NEEDS
INSTR SUPPORT-ASES
INSTRUCT AIDE I
INSTRUCT AIDE II
INSTRUCT AIDE III
INTMD NUTRITION SER WKR
NUTRITION SERVICE WORKER
PROG AIDE I CLR/COMM
PROG AIDE I COMM
PROG AIDE II LIBRARY
PROG AIDE II BIL COMM
PROG AIDE II COMPT
PROG AIDE II RES
PROG AIDE II SPEC ED
PROG. AIDE III/CLERK/BIL
PROG.AIDE II/BIL. CLER.
PROGRAM AIDE I CLR
RECEPTIONIST CLK
SH/TEACHER ASSISTANT
SPEC ED AIDE
SR NUTRITION SER WKR
UTILITY HELPER II
VAN DRIVER
BILINGUAL CLERK TYPIST II
RECORDS CLERK II
STUDENT BODY ACCT CLK
TRUCK DRIVER
DATA ANALYST CLERK-BIL
ELEM-CLERK TYPIST II
JR HIGH LEAD CUSTODIAN
SPANISH TRANSLATOR

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
114

CWA TECHNICIAN
MOWER/GARDNER
SR HIGH LEAD CUSTODIAN
SR NUTR SER WKR-HIGH SCH
ASES OFFICE MANAGER
COMMUNICATION INDENT SPEC
COMMUNITY LIAISON SPEC.
FOOD SVS OPER DR/MAINT
PURCHASING ASST
SCHOOL SAFETY ASSISTANT
SCH ED SAF-ASES PROG SPC
SCHOOL POLICE- SECRETARY
ADA ATTENDANCE CLERK
COMPUTER TECHNICIAN
DATA PROC CLK/SEC
DATA TECHNICIAN
SCHOOL OFFICE MGR I
SR. ACCT PAYABLE CLK
BUS DR/MAINT UTILITY
BUS DRIVER I
SENIOR STOREKEEPER
BEHAVIOR INTERV ASSISTANT
SCHOOL OFF MGR II
PRODUCTION CENTER MANAGER
SCHOOL OFF MGR III
ADM SECRETARY
HUMAN RESOURCES ASSISTANT
NURSE TECH
ACCOUNTING SPECIALIST
INSTR AIDE-SIGN LANGUAGE
INVENTORY & DISTR COORD
LEAD COMMUNITY LIAISON SP
SK MAINT SPEC GENERAL
SK MAINT SPEC LOCKSMITH I
SK MAINT SPEC PLUMBER I
SK MAINT SPEC/HEAVY MECH I
SK MAINT/SSR ELECT I
LEAD PAYROLL TECHNICIAN
SK MAINT SPEC LOCKSMITH II
SK MAINT SPEC PLUMBER II
SK MAINT SPEC/HEAVY MECH II
SK MAINT WELDER II
SK MAINT/SSR ELECT II
APP SUPPORT TECHNICIAN
HUMAN RESOURCES SP II
IRR AND GROUNDS MAINT TEC

4
4
5
5
6
6
6
6
6
6
7
7
8
8
8
8
8
8
10
10
11
12
12
13
13
14
14
14
17
17
17
17
18
18
18
18
18
20
23
23
23
23
23
24
24
25
115

ADMINISTRATIVE ANALYST
BENEFITS/RISK MGMT ANLST
COLLEGE & CAREER SPEC
FACILITIES ACCOUNTANT
SR INFO TECH SUPP TECH

27
27
27
27
27

116

APPENDIX B – GRIEVANCE FORMS
Grievance Forms
Level One, Two and Three
INGLEWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
Inglewood, California
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE FORM STEP/LEVEL I
Grievant's Initial Submission of Grievance to Immediate Supervisor)
______________________________________________________________________________
Name of Grievant (Last, First, Middle)
Date
______________________________________________________________________________
Name of Representative, if any
Signature of Grievant
______________________________________________________________________________
School/Work Location
Assignment
Status
Grievant has conformed to the original direction of the immediate supervisor? N/A
______________________________________________________________________________
Name of Immediate Supervisor
Provision(s) of the Agreement alleged to have been violated: (State the Article Number(s),
Section number(s), Page number(s), Line number(s) of the Agreement which is alleged to have
been violated.
______________________________________________________________________________
Specific Grounds of the Grievance: (Describe the specific grounds of the grievance, including
provision(s) of the Agreement alleged to have been violated, how the grievant is adversely
affected by the alleged violation, and names, dates, and places necessary for a complete
understanding of the grievance. Additional pages may be attached to each copy of this form if
more space is required.
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
Reason(s) Proposed Resolution is Unacceptable: (State the specific reasons why the immediate
supervisor's proposed resolution of the grievance at the Informal Level is unacceptable.)
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
Action(s) Requested to resolve the Grievance: (State the specific action(s) requested of the
District which is expressly provided for in the Agreement and which will resolve the grievance.)
_____________________________________________________________________________
117

INGLEWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
Inglewood, California
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE FORM STEP/LEVEL II
(Grievant's Appeal to County Administrator or Designee)

______________________________________________________________________________
Name of Grievant (Last, First, Middle)
Date
______________________________________________________________________________
Name of Representative, if any
Signature of Grievant
______________________________________________________________________________
School/Work Location (Assignment)
(Status)
Reason(s) Proposed Resolution is Unacceptable: (State the specific reasons why the Immediate
Supervisor's proposed resolution of the grievance at Step/Level I is unacceptable.)
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
Action(s) Requested to resolve the Grievance: (State the specific action(s) requested of the
District which is expressly provided for in the Agreement and which will resolve the grievance.)
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________

118

INGLEWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
Inglewood, California
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE FORM STEP/LEVEL III
(Grievant's Appeal to Binding Arbitration)
______________________________________________________________________________
Name of Grievant (Last, First, Middle)
Date
______________________________________________________________________________
Name of Representative if any
Signature of Grievant
______________________________________________________________________________
School/Work Location
Assignment
Status
In accordance with the Agreement, the Grievant acknowledges the obligation to pay one-half of
the fees and expenses of the arbitrator.
__ Yes

No (If No, the request for binding arbitration shall be denied)

Reason(s) Proposed Resolution is Unacceptable: (State the specific reasons why the County
Administrator's or Designee's proposed resolution of the grievance at Step/Level II is
unacceptable.)
____________________________________________________
Action(s) Requested to resolve the Grievance: (State the specific action(s) requested of the
District which is expressly provided for in the Agreement and which will resolve the grievance.)

119
