COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
Between

Birmingham Country Club

and

Local 24
UNITE HERE AFL-CIO
EFFECTIVE APRIL 1, 2024 - MARCH 31, 2026

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Article 1 - Recognition - Union Membership - Employee Hiring ...................................................................................... 1
Article 2 -Check-off of Union Dues ................................................................................................................................. 2
Article 3 - Work Week - Hours of Work - Reporting for Work - Definition of Full-time, Part-time,
Seasonal Employees - Less Than Eight Hour Schedules ............................................................................ 2
Article 4 - Merit Increases - Schedule of Wage Rates - Specific Working Conditions .................................................... 4
Article 5 - Overtime Provisions ....................................................................................................................................... 5
Article 6 - New Year's Eve Overtime Provisions - All Employees ................................................................................... 5
Article 7 - Vacations - Full-time Employees .................................................................................................................... 6
Article 8 -Holidays ........................................................................................................................................................... 6
Article 9 - Paid Personal Absence Days - Full-time Employees ..................................................................................... 7
Article 10 - Leaves of Absence ....................................................................................................................................... 8
Article 11 - Seniority - Full-time/Part-Time Employees ................................................................................................. 11
Article 12 - Health - Welfare – Pension......................................................................................................................... 12
Article 13 - Grievance Procedure - No Strike - No Lockout .......................................................................................... 15
Article 14 - Management's Rights ................................................................................................................................. 16
Article 15 - Meals - Shift Differential - Locker Room ..................................................................................................... 17
Article 16 - Employee/Union Rights .............................................................................................................................. 18
Article 17 - Saving Provision ......................................................................................................................................... 19
Article 18 - Jury Duty - Full-time Employees ................................................................................................................. 19
Article 19 - Bereavement Leave - Full-time Employees ................................................................................................ 19
Article 20 - Other Specific Working Conditions ............................................................................................................. 20
Article 21 – Positive Labor Relations ............................................................................................................................ 21
Article 22 - Fair Treatment ............................................................................................................................................ 21
Article 23 - Term of Agreement..................................................................................................................................... 22
Wage Schedules

AGREEMENT
THIS Collective Bargaining Agreement ("the Agreement"), made as of the 1st day of April, 2024 between Birmingham
Country Club, the "Club", and UNITE HERE, Local 24, AFL-CIO, the "Union"; collectively the “Parties.”
ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
UNION MEMBERSHIP
EMPLOYEE HIRING
Section 1 • Recognition
The Club recognizes the Union as the exclusive bargaining representative for the purpose of collective
bargaining with respect to rates of pay, hours of work and other conditions of employment for employees in
classifications set forth in the Schedules contained in this Agreement, excluding managerial, confidential,
administrative, office clerical, seasonal and supervisory employees and guards as defined in the National Labor
Relations Act. If the Union at any time during the term of this Agreement can prove by authorization in writing that
it represents a majority of employees in a job classification listed in the attached Schedule "C" but not previously
represented, the Union shall be recognized as the bargaining agent for such employees and thereupon such
employees shall be automatically covered by this Agreement. Should the Club create a new position that is
covered under the terms of this Agreement, the Club and the Union shall negotiate the applicable rate of pay for
the position.
Section 2 • Union Membership
(a)
The Club agrees that as a condition of employment, all employees covered by this Agreement
shall remain members in good standing of the Union or tender to the Union the initiation fees and periodic
dues that are the obligation of members, or shall become and remain members in good standing of the Union
or tender to the Union the initiation fees and periodic dues that are the obligations of members on the thirtyfirst (31st) calendar day following the date of employment, the effective date of this Agreement, or the date
of execution of this Agreement whichever is later.
(b)
Newly hired employees shall become and remain members in good standing of the Union or
tender to the Union the initiation fees and periodic dues that are the obligations of members on the thirty-first
(31st) calendar day following the date of employment, the effective date of this Agreement or the execution of
this Agreement, whichever is later.
(c)
No provisions of this Article shall prohibit employees from electing to become members of the Union
prior to the thirty-first (31st) calendar day of employment.
(d)
Any employee who fails to tender dues, including initiation or reinstatement fees, in accordance with
the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section shall be subject to discharge, upon written notice to the Club.

1

ARTICLE 2
CHECK-OFF OF UNION DUES
Section 3 — Dues Check-Off
(a)
The Club shall honor and effectuate the payroll deduction authorization card attached to this
Agreement, and incorporated herein by reference, for each employee who signs said card, for such period as
each authorization is in effect. The Club shall deduct for each payroll or at such intervals/times otherwise
designated by the Union the amount authorized by the employee and promptly transmits such amount to the
Union. The Parties acknowledge that the cost of establishing and administering payroll deduction has been
taken into account by the Parties in the negotiation of their overall economic terms of this Agreement. The Club
will send to the Union electronically on a monthly basis, a list of bargaining unit employees that includes the
following information: names, addresses, job classifications, starting date, social security numbers (sent
encrypted) or employee identification numbers.
(b)
The Union shall indemnify and hold the Club harmless against any and all liability which may arise
by reason of the Club's compliance with the terms of Sections 2 and 3.
ARTICLE 3
WORK WEEK - HOURS OF WORK - REPORTING FOR WORK
DEFINITION OF FULL-TIME, PART-TIME AND SEASONAL EMPLOYEES
LESS THAN EIGHT HOUR SCHEDULES
Section 4 - Work Week; Schedules; Hours
(a)
The normal work week shall be Sunday through Saturday and shall consist of seven (7) days.
Eight (8) hours of work shall be considered the normal workday and forty (40) hours of work the normal work
week. This shall not be construed as the minimum or maximum number of hours of work for full-time employees
as defined. The Club shall schedule eight (8) hours of work, except as provided further in this Section, when eight
(8) hours is available.
(b)
Employees may be scheduled to work any days of the week, with the Club making every
effort to accommodate employees’ personal requests for time off each week. Scheduled days off can be
changed by mutual agreement between the employee and the Club and may not be made to circumvent
overtime or to deny full-time employees the opportunity to work golf outings and other functions on days
the Club is ordinarily closed. Choice of available schedules, including regular days off, shall be done by
seniority for full-time employees. The Club shall not penalize an employee for declining to agree to change
regular days off. The Club shall have the right to change one or more days off for full-time employees and
designate other days as the scheduled days off for full-time employees once every forty-five (45) days and
upon seven (7) days’ notice to the employee, provided that schedule changes shall not be made to
circumvent overtime or to deny full-time employees the opportunity to work golf outings and other functions
on days the Club is ordinarily closed.
(c)
The Club will maximize work assignments for full-time employees up to six (6) days and shall
give full-time employees priority for additional available work (golf outings, special functions, etc.) by seniority.
The Club may schedule full-time employees for shifts of less than eight (8) hours but not less than four (4) hours
prior to Memorial Day and after Labor Day. The Club will maximize work for full-time employees, by seniority in
compliance with Article 3, Section 4. The Club will not assign work to part-time employees or seasonal
employees unless full-time employees in the same classification, or who have worked in the same classification,

2

have been given the opportunity to work the available hours as scheduled. Seasonal employees will be used to
supplement, not to displace, full-time employees. Seasonal employees will not be scheduled when full-time
employees are on layoff unless full-time employees have been given the opportunity to work and declined such
opportunity. No two (2) eight (8) hour employees will be scheduled on shifts of less than eight (8) hours to cover
eight (8) hours of available work on one (1) day.
(d)
Employees shall be paid for all hours worked. If the Club sends an employee, who was
scheduled to work eight (8) hours, home early due to a shortage of work, the Club shall pay the employee for
six (6) hours of work or the actual hours worked, whichever is greater, with a minimum of $60.00 upon
ratification; effective April 1, 2025 $75.00 minimum; effective April 1, 2026 $80.00 minimum. This provision
shall not apply in case of an emergency caused by power failure, fire, flood, riot, civil commotion, or acts of
God affecting any part of the Club’s property. An employee reporting for work during an emergency shall be
paid for all hours actually worked and not less than one-half the employee’s regular rate of pay for the day.
The Club shall make the effort to have a bargaining unit employee present when the manager or his designee
attempts to call off employees due to an emergency. However, in the event no bargaining unit employee is
available to witness the call, the manager or his designee shall make the calls to inform employees.
(e)
Work schedules for full-time employees shall be posted weekly in advance of the work week.
Schedules shall not be altered to circumvent the payment of overtime.
(f)
No part-time employees shall be used where full-time employees are on layoff; (i) unless the full-time
employee selected a layoff instead of being converted to part-time status; (ii) except in cases of emergency; or
(iii) where the Club cannot contact laid-off employees in the same classification.
Section 5 – Seventh Day
The Club shall designate one (1) day in its payroll week as the seventh (7 th ) day for each fulltime employee. The Club shall not be required to designate the same days off for each full-time employee.
Section 6 – Pay Day
Full-time and part-time employees shall be paid weekly. All gratuities due full-time and part-time employees
shall be paid in the next regular weekly payroll.
Section 7 - Bargaining Unit Work
Only bargaining unit employees shall perform the work covered by this Agreement except during relief
periods, absenteeism, sickness, rush periods, and in cases of emergency.
Section 8 - Full-time, Part-time, Seasonal – Defined
(a)
A part-time employee is defined as any regular employee who does not meet the full-time definition.
To be reclassified as full-time, a part-time employee must pass the below-described quarterly full-time test for one (1)
calendar quarter and request a change of status. In addition, a part-time employee is one who is scheduled to work
less than four (4) days per week or who is paid at the part-time rate for the number of days, or hours, actually worked
and does not qualify as a seasonal employee as defined in paragraph (c) below.
(b)
A seasonal employee is an employee hired to work from May 1st through September 15th. Seasonal
employees are not covered by the terms of this Agreement.

3

Section 9 - Full-time Status
(a)
A full-time employee is defined as an employee who works and/or is paid an average of at least thirty
(30) hours per week. The average number of weekly hours shall be measured each calendar quarter. An employee
shall not lose full-time status unless the employee fails to meet this thirty (30) hour definition for one (1) calendar quarter
which begins in April.
(b)
A full-time employee shall not be evaluated for the purpose of the employee’s status during the slow
period or “off season” when the Club is frequently closed.
(c)
The status of all full-time employees of Birmingham Country Club, who are in good standing,
maintaining full time status, and are working as needed, is protected and cannot be changed in the event of
circumstances that may arise and are in the control of the Club. This may include, but is not limited to, temporary
operational shutdowns due to extended discretionary construction projects (unrelated to casualty), ongoing extended
maintenance (unrelated to casualty), or other such actions that the Club is voluntarily taking for the betterment of BCC
and its future. In the event of circumstances that are not within the control of the Club, e.g. natural disasters, casualties,
floods, health crises (including pandemics, quarantines or other public health events), governmental lockdowns or
shutdowns, martial law or other situations that are not caused by BCC or within the Club’s control, it is understood that
BCC will make decisions that are in the best interests of the Club.
(d)
An employee, who is converted to part-time status instead of being laid off at their discretion, will
receive priority over other part-time employees for work in that classification and for future conversion to full-time status
for one (1) year from the date of conversion.
ARTICLE 4
MERIT INCREASES - SCHEDULES OF WAGE RATES
SPECIFIC WORKING CONDITIONS
Section 10 - Merit Increases
Wages and fringe benefits can be raised by the Club for individuals for superior knowledge and ability.
Section 11 - Job Classifications
(a)

The list of job classifications does not require that the Club hire employees in each classification.

(b)
An employee who works more than one (1) hour during a shift in a higher rated job classification
shall be paid at the higher rate for all hours worked in that classification.
(c)
An employee can work in a lower rated job classification, provided the employee is paid the higher
rate, full staffing is not required, and the work is within the same department.
(d)
An employee receiving a higher wage rate within the same job classification than the rate in this
Agreement, shall have that differential maintained as long as the employee occupies the same job classification at that
Club. New over scale wages are enforceable only if authorized by the Club in writing. The employing Club will notify
the Union in writing of such over scale wages within a reasonable time.
(e)
Non-tipped employees on the midnight shift shall be paid a shift differential of ten cents ($.10) per
hour. The midnight shift is that shift commencing at 11:00 pm and ending at 7:00 am.

4

Section 12 • Non-contractual Benefits
Except as provided in Section 11, no extra-contractual benefit, condition, or practice of employment,
past or future, is enforceable under this Agreement by the Club or the Union unless committed to writing and
signed by the employing Club and the Union; provided, that any such writing shall not be effective beyond
the term of this Agreement.
Section 13 - New Hire Rate
New employees will be paid ninety percent (90%) of the scheduled rate for that employee's classification until
such time as completing one (1) year of employment, at which time that employee shall be paid one hundred percent
(100%) of the scheduled rate for that employee's classification.
Section 14 - Wage Assignments
Employees may make wage assignments to any credit union designated by the Union, for purposes such
as Roth IRA accounts or other purposes as arranged with the credit union by the employee.
ARTICLE 5
OVERTIME PROVISIONS
Section 15 - Overtime Premium
(a)
For full-time employees, time and one half (1-1/2) shall be paid for all hours worked in excess of
eight (8) hours in any one day or for work performed on the seventh (7th) day between May 1st and December 31st.
Part-time employees (and full-time employees during the period of January 1st — April 30th) shall be paid time and
one half (1-1/2) for all hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours in any work week.
(b)
A full-time employee who has worked or been paid for or excused from such employee's regular
schedule and who works one (1) of such employee's days off will be paid time and one-half (1-1/2) for all hours worked
on those days. Daily and weekly overtime shall not be pyramided.
(c)
A full-time employee absent from work during a work week except for proven illness or an approved
vacation or with permission of the Club must make up lost straight time before receiving premium pay.
Section 16 - Assignment of Overtime
Full-time employees may be requested, but not required, to work a designated seventh (7th) day and shall
rotate the overtime equally in any job classification where scheduling is practical. The Club shall make this request by
seniority, and if no full-time employees volunteer, the Club shall have the right to require the least senior full-time
employee to perform the work.
ARTICLE 6
NEW YEAR’S EVE OVERTIME PROVISIONS
ALL EMPLOYEES
Section 17 • Premium Pay
(a)
Employees will be paid time and one-half (1-1/2) for hours worked on New Year's Eve between
6:00 p.m. and midnight, and double (2) time for hours worked after midnight.

5

(b)
Employees working New Year's Eve as a seventh (7th) day will be paid double (2) time for hours
worked between 6:00p.m. and midnight, and double time and one-half (2-1/2) for hours worked after midnight.
ARTICLE 7
VACATIONS – FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES
Section 18 – Vacation Provisions
(a)

The Club will grant vacations with pay as follows:
Current Employees
1 Year - 1 Week
2-7 Years - 2 Weeks
8-15 Years - 3 Weeks
16-22 Years - 4 Weeks
23 or more Years – 5 Weeks

New Hires (on or after May 1, 2007)
1 Year – 1 Week
2-9 Years – 2 Weeks
10-15 Years – 3 Weeks
16 or More Years – 4 Weeks

(b)
A full-time employee must have been employed for one (1) year and have worked at least two
hundred (200) days before becoming eligible for vacation pay. A day paid is considered a day worked.
(c)
Vacation pay is computed on forty (40) hours at current straight time hourly rate for each week of
vacation to which the employee is entitled. For tipped or fixed gratuity employees, (not Bartenders) vacation rate is two
(2) times their hourly contract rate.
(d)
An employee discharged, except for proven dishonesty, who has earned, but not been paid for
vacation, shall be paid one (1) day’s vacation pay for each forty (40) days worked or paid times the number of weeks
the employee would otherwise be entitled pursuant to subsection (a). An employee discharged for proven dishonesty
shall not be entitled to this benefit.
(e)
An employee who quits, or is laid off, who has earned but not been paid for vacation, shall be paid
one (1) days’ vacation pay for each forty (40) days worked or paid times the number of weeks the employee would
otherwise be entitled pursuant to subsection (a) provided an employee who quits must give one (1) week’s written
notice of intention to quit to be eligible for this benefit.
Section 19 – Vacation Requests
Employees granted permission to take vacations during operational periods shall receive vacation pay
at the time vacation is taken. All unused vacation shall be taken with pay when the Club closes. The Club shall
not unreasonably deny permission to take a vacation, provided that the Club may restrict vacations during peak
operational periods. Peak operational periods are defined as: Memorial Day weekend through Labor Day
weekend and Halloween Weekend through Christmas Day. Employees permitted to take vacations during
operational periods shall take vacations in accordance with seniority.
ARTICLE 8
HOLIDAYS
Section 20 - Holiday Provisions
Full-time employees shall be paid straight time for the following holidays if not worked and double (2) time
for all hour worked.

6

Mother’s Day
Labor Day
New Year's Day

Memorial Day
Thanksgiving Day
Employee's Birthday

Independence Day
Christmas Day
Easter

Section 21 – Eligibility
(a)
To be eligible for holiday pay, a full-time employee must work the last scheduled work day in full
preceding and the first scheduled work day in full following the holiday unless excused by the Club.
(b)
(c)
A full-time employee shall not be eligible for holiday pay until employed more than one hundred
twenty (120) calendar days.
(d)
A full-time employee laid off shall be paid for a holiday if it occurs within fifteen (15) calendar days of
layoff, provided that an eligible full-time employee whose birthday falls at anytime during a layoff related to the Club's
annual closed period shall receive payment for the birthday holiday at the time of layoff.
(e)

If a holiday falls during a period of vacation, the employee shall receive an extra days pay.

(f)
If a full-time employee fails to work a scheduled holiday, pay for that day is forfeited, unless the
employee is excused by the Club.
(g)
After three (3) years of employment, full-time employees hired on or after May 1, 2007 shall receive
the employee's birthday as a paid holiday, subject to the provisions herein.
Section 22 - Part-time Benefits
Part-time employees will be paid time and one-half (1-1/2) for working on a holiday.
ARTICLE 9
PAID PERSONAL ABSENCE DAYS
FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES
Section 23 - Paid Personal Absence Provisions
(a)
The Club will grant paid personal absence days according to the following schedule: (i) 1-2 Years of
service - 3 Days annually; (ii) 3 or more Years of service - 6 Days annually; (iii) 8 or more years of service – 8 Days
annually.
(b)
A full-time employee must have been employed for one (1) year and have worked at least two
hundred (200) days before becoming eligible for paid personal absence days. A day paid is considered a day worked.
(c)
Michigan Paid Sick Leave. If there is a change in the Michigan Sick Leave Act, and it is providing a
greater benefit to the bargaining unit than the current paid personal day provision in this Agreement, it shall be
implemented. However, it shall supersede the current policy and the current personal absence language shall no
longer apply.

7

Section 24 - Written Notice Requirement
Employees shall give one (1) week's written notice of taking a paid personal absence day, unless prevented
by sickness, disability, or emergency. Paid personal absence days shall not be taken consecutively without the
permission of the Club.
Section 25 - Unused Days
If a full-time employee does not use the personal absence days, the Club shall pay the employee for any
unused days when the Club closes or add the unused days to the vacation period, at the employee's option. A paid
personal absence day taken shall be paid in the work week taken.
Section 26 - Earning Schedule
(a)
An employee who quits or is laid off, and who has earned but not been paid for paid personal
absence days under Section 24(a)(1) above, will receive payment for one (1) paid personal absence day for every
sixty-six (66) days worked or paid.
(b)
An employee who quits or is laid off, and who has earned but not been paid for paid personal absence
days under Section 24(a)(2), will receive payment for one day for every thirty-three (33) days worked or paid.
Section 27 – Forfeiture
An employee who quits without giving two (2) week's written notice, or who is discharged for proven
dishonestly, shall not be entitled to any unused paid personal absence.
ARTICLE 10
LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Section 28 - Leave of Absence Provisions
Leaves of Absence without pay for reasons including bona fide illnesses or injuries or personal reasons shall
be granted to employees in accordance with the provisions of this Article after successful completion of their
introductory period. The term of any leave covered by this Article may be extended by the written mutual agreement of
the parties. The circumstances and conditions of a leave request will be provided on the appropriate leave of absence
request form. A leave of absence is not automatic, and must be requested, reviewed, and approved by the Club in
writing. All leaves of absence will be in accordance with the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA) where
applicable.
Section 29 - Medical Leave
A medical leave of absence will be granted to an employee due to illness or injury according to the
following guidelines:
(a)
Employees shall be granted a medical leave of absence provided an employee has completed
at least one (1) full year of service with the Club and have worked a minimum of 1,250 hours in the twelve (12)
month period preceding the leave to be eligible for such leaves. Employees who do not meet this requirement
may apply for a personal leave of absence.
(b)
Medical leaves shall be granted for a period of up to twelve (12) weeks in any twelve month period.
An employee who exhausts the maximum leave of absence available pursuant to this Section shall be provided the

8

opportunity to be placed on inactive status according to Section 48 of this Article. Upon presentation of appropriate
medical documentation, and after one (1) year of service, the Employer may provide up to twelve (12) months of unpaid
medical leave within a twenty-four (24) month period.
(c)
The Club shall continue to provide medical insurance coverage for eligible employees for up to twelve
(12) weeks while on an approved medical leave of absence in accordance with the requirements of the FMLA.
Employees not eligible for FMLA leave shall receive medical benefits until the end of the month following the month
the leave began.
(d)
Employees shall be required to use all accrued/unused personal days during the leave
period. Employees may request, but shall not be required to use accrued/unused vacation days during
the leave period.
(e)

The Club may require medical evidence prior to approving a medical leave.

Section 30- Illness in the Immediate Family Leave
A leave of absence shall be granted to an employee due to illness in an employee's immediate family as
defined by the FMLA according to the following guidelines:
(a)
An employee shall be granted a leave of absence for an illness in the immediate family provided an
employee has completed at least one (1) full year of service with the Club and has worked a minimum of 1,250 hours
in the twelve (12) month period preceding the leave to be eligible for such leave. Employees who do not meet this
requirement may apply for a personal leave of absence.
(b)

Leaves shall be granted for a period of up to twelve (12) weeks in any twelve month period.

(c)
The Club shall continue to provide medical insurance coverage for eligible employees for up to twelve
(12) weeks while on an approved leave of absence due to illness in the employee's immediate family in accordance
with the requirements of the FMLA. Employees not eligible for FMLA leave shall receive medical benefits until the end
of the month following the month the leave began.
(d)
Employees shall be required to use all accrued/unused personal days during the leave period.
Employees may request, but shall not be required to use accrued/unused vacation days during the leave period.
Section 31 - Child Rearing Leave
A child-rearing leave of absence will be granted for the birth and caring of an employee's
child or for the placement of a child with an employee for adoption or foster care according to the
following guidelines:
(a)
An employee shall be granted a child rearing leave of absence provided an employee has
completed at least one (1) full year of service with the Club and has worked a minimum of 1,250 hours in the twelve
(12) month period preceding the leave to be eligible for such leaves. Employees who do not meet this requirement
may apply for a personal leave of absence.
(b)
Leaves shall be granted for a period of up to twelve (12) weeks and eligibility ends one (1) year after
the date of birth or placement of the child.
(c)

Proof of the birth or adoption may be required.

9

(d)
The Club shall continue to provide medical insurance coverage for eligible employees for up to twelve
(12) weeks while on an approved child rearing leave in accordance with the requirements of the FMLA. Employees not
eligible for FMLA leave shall receive medical benefits until the end of the month following the month the leave began.
(e)
Employees shall be required to use all accrued/unused personal days during the leave period.
Employees may request, but shall not be required to use accrued/unused vacation days during the leave period.
Section 32 - Military Service Leave
A military service leave of absence shall be granted to an employee serving in branch of the U.S.
Military, according to the following guidelines:
(a)

The military leave shall be in accordance with applicable laws.

(b)

Proof of military duty shall be required prior to the approval of such leave being granted.

Section 33 - Personal Leaves of Absence
Personal leaves of absence without pay may be granted to employees according to the following guidelines:
(a)

Employees may be granted a personal leave after successful completion of their introductory

(b)

Leaves shall be limited to eight (8) weeks.

period.

(c)
The circumstances and conditions of a personal leave request must be stated on the appropriate
leave of absence request form and the form must be submitted to the Club.
(d)

Employees shall be required to use all accrued/unused vacation and personal days during the leave

(e)
expense.

Employees granted a personal leave may retain their insurance coverage at the employee's

period.

Section - 34 General Guidelines for Leaves of Absences
(a)

Leaves of absences will not be granted to employees being laid off because of lack of work.

(b)
An employee who enters into gainful employment at another Employer while on a leave of absence,
unless specifically approved by the Club in writing, will be terminated.
(c)
An employee may request an extension to a leave of absence by providing written justification for
the leave extension. An extension to a leave is not automatic and must be requested and granted in writing.
(d)
Any combination of leaves of absence shall not exceed twelve (12) weeks within a one (1) year
period unless approved by the Club.
(e)

All leaves of absence require review and approval by the Club.

(f)
All leaves of absence shall be in writing and submitted by the employee to the Club with thirty (30)
days advance notice of the proposed leave commencement, or as much advance notice as possible.

10

Section 35 - Returning from Leave of Absence
(a)
Any employee returning from a leave of absence due to a medical condition or a leave of absence
due to injury is required to obtain a written release from a licensed physician stating that the employee is able to return
to work.
(b)
An employee returning from a leave of absence from work in excess of the time periods as stated in
this Article, shall receive prior service credit for seniority for time employed up to a maximum of three (3) years. The
returning employee will be returned to a job in his/her former classification, which may result in the displacement of the
least senior employee in the job classification.
(c)
In order for a former employee to be eligible to return to his/her former job classification the employee
must return to work within the lesser of time worked or thirty-six (36) months of being placed on inactive status. The
employee must also provide the Club with written intent to return to work within fifteen (15) days from the date on which
the employee is placed on inactive status.
ARTICLE 11
SENIORITY
FULL-TIME/PART-TIME EMPLOYEES
Section 36 - Seniority Provisions
(a)
The Club recognizes seniority in specific job classifications and employees shall, whenever
reasonably possible, be promoted, demoted, laid off and recalled to work according to length of service, provided the
employee qualifies for the job classification.
(b)
The Union recognizes the right of the Club to arrange its work schedules, to designate days off
and to fix hours worked by employees. The Club will, whenever reasonably possible, follow seniority rights in
arranging its schedules, in designating days off and hours to be worked by employees, but the Club shall not be
restricted in carrying on its operations in an efficient manner or in complying with specific requests of members
or guests for special assignments.
(c)
An employee transferred or promoted to a new job classification shall retain and accumulate seniority
in the old classification as of the date of the transfer. The employee shall earn seniority in the new classification from
the date of transfer. For purposes of determining the employee's rights in the event of layoff, seniority in the new
classification shall be calculated from the date of transfer to the date of layoff. Seniority in the old classification shall
be from the date of entry into the old classification to the date of layoff. Employees transferred to a non-bargaining unit
position lose all seniority rights after one (1) year.
(d)
Seniority for purposes of vacations leaves of absence and paid personal absence days shall be from
the employees last date of hire.
(e)
Part-time employees shall have seniority amongst themselves. Their seniority shall be
established by their date of hire in their job classification. The Club shall maintain a list in seniority order for
scheduling. The Club shall schedule part-time employees by seniority, based on availability.
(f)
When an employee is involuntarily transferred from full-time to part-time, the employee shall
be placed at the top of the part-time seniority list for purposes of scheduling. When an employee voluntarily
transfers from full-time to part-time, the employee shall be placed at the bottom of the part-time seniority list for

11

purposes of scheduling. When an employee transfers from part-time to full-time, the employee shall be placed
at the bottom of the full-time seniority list for purposes of scheduling.
Section 37 - Probationary Period
New employees are probationary employees and shall not acquire seniority until employed for more than
ninety (90) calendar days. Upon completion of this probationary period, seniority shall be date of hire as a full-time
employee. Part-time employee’s seniority shall be the date they become a part-time employee except as otherwise
provided in this Agreement.
Section 38 - Termination of Seniority Rights
(a)
Seniority rights terminate when an employee:(i) quits or retires; (ii) Is discharged for cause;
(iii) Fails to return to work from an approved leave of absence;(iv)Is absent for three (3) consecutive
scheduled days without notice except when the employee is unable to give notice due to circumstances beyond
control, in which case the employee shall give notice as soon as possible, but in any event within eight (8) days; or (v)
is laid off for a period equal to seniority or one (1) year from the date of layoff, whichever is the lesser period of time.
(b)
Employees in a department of the Club working less than the full operating year shall maintain
seniority from year to year equal to the number of consecutive years employed, provided they work at least ninety (90)
days in each year unless laid off.
(c)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the Club closes in whole or part for remodeling,
renovation, repairs or similar purposes, seniority shall continue during the closed period, and the closed period shall
not be considered as part of any layoff period for purposes of seniority expiration.
ARTICLE 12
HEALTH - WELFARE – PENSION
Section 39 -Culinary Plan 345, Full-time Employees During Their First 90 Days Of Employment
(a)
The Club shall make a contribution for each day, or part thereof, worked or paid, in accordance with
the schedule in paragraph (d) of this Section, for each full-time employee, until such full-time employee completes
ninety (90) calendar days of employment, at which time the full-time employee becomes eligible for contributions listed
in Section 40 from and after such employee's first date of employment. Contributions will be made to UNITE HERE
HEALTH.
(b)
The Parties agree and understand that if appropriate welfare contribution rates are not paid, the
Trustees of the Fund may eliminate benefits to otherwise eligible Participants and terminate the employers participation
pursuant to Paragraph 1.1 of the Fund's Minimum Standards.
(c)
The Club will not submit welfare contributions for employees classified as part-time or seasonal
employees (extra or steady extra employees).
(d)

Contribution rates for each day worked or paid, for each eligible employee shall be:

(i)

$2.01 per day, effective January 1, 2024 through _________

12

Section 40 - Culinary Plan 345, Full-time Employees
(a)
On the first day of the first full month, and beginning with that full month, following ninety (90) calendar
days of employment as a full-time employee, the Club shall make a contribution per month, or part thereof worked or
paid, for each full-time employee in accordance with the schedule in paragraph (c) of this Section.
(b)
The Parties agree and understand that if the appropriate welfare contribution rates are not paid, the
Trustees of the Fund may eliminate benefits to otherwise eligible Participants and terminate the employer's participation
pursuant to paragraph 1.1 of the Fund's Minimum Standards.
(c)

Contribution rates for each month, worked or paid, for each eligible employee shall be:
(i) $40.25 per month, effective January 1, 2024 through __________

(d)
Whether insured under health maintenance organization, or covered as an individual or a dependent
upon a comparable plan, the Club will continue the monthly culinary contribution in the amounts referred to in
Section 40(c) above.
Section 41 - Health Maintenance Organizations; Premium Increases
(a)
In addition to the contributions set forth in Section 40 above, on the first day of the first full month
following sixty (60) calendar days of employment as a full-time employee and beginning with that full month; provided
such full-time employee is not covered as an individual or a dependent on a comparable plan; the Club will pay to the
insurance carrier of record eighty percent (80%) of the monthly premium per month, or part thereof, worked or paid.
Employees shall be responsible for the remaining twenty percent (20%) through payroll withholding. One hundred
percent (100%) of the deductible will be paid by the Club.
Upon written request, qualified employees may receive a stipend in the gross amount of One Hundred and
00/100 Dollars ($100.00) per month in lieu of Employer provided medical coverage. Employee must otherwise qualify
for Employer health coverage and provide continued proof of health care coverage. Ability to transfer into the Employer
provided coverage is subject to the open enrollment terms of the Employer provided healthcare plan.
(b)
The Club may change carriers or plans or self-insure health insurance coverage provided
comparable benefits are maintained.
Section 42 - Dependent Care
(a)
Should any full-time employee desire to cover as a dependent any person other than such employee,
such full-time employee must do so at such full-time employee's individual expense.
(b)
Full-time employees who are not eligible for Club-paid HMO coverage in conformity with Section 41
may enroll, if eligible, at the employee's expense, paid through payroll deduction.
Section 43 - Section 125, Self-Payment Plan
The Club will establish and maintain a "Section 125" plan to permit those employees who self-pay
some or all insurance premiums (e.g., for spousal or family coverage, etc.) to do so with pre-tax funds rather
than after-tax funds.

13

Section 44 - Brand-Name Prescription Reimbursement
(a)
The Club shall reimburse the employee $10 of the $40 prescription co-pay paid by the employee for
a brand-name medication prescribed by a medical provider for the employee. In order to claim reimbursement, the
employee must ask the medical care provider to prescribe a generic medication. This reimbursement shall be based
upon the medical care provider having made a determination that a generic medication is not appropriate or suitable
for the employee and that the brand-name medication must be prescribed, which determination shall be indicated on
the prescription form either as "DAW" or "Dispense as Written."
(b)
The employee shall be able to file a claim for reimbursement, on a form to be provided by the Club,
on a quarterly basis. Each quarter consists of the following months:
First Quarter: January, February and March; Second Quarter: April, May and June;
Third Quarter: July, August and September; and Fourth Quarter: October, November and December.
(c)
In submitting a claim, the employee must provide billing documentation that shows that the
$40 brand-name prescription co-pay has been paid by the employee. The Club shall have the right to request
that the employee provide other substantiating documentation regarding the need for the prescribing of a
brand-name medication.
Section 45 Layoff Leave Quit or Discharge
(a)
Upon completion of one (1) year of employment as a full-time employee, and upon work or
payment for two hundred (200) or more days from date of hire as a full-time employee, the Club will pay for
one (1) month following layoff, the monthly contribution due for health maintenance organization coverage for
such full-time employee as provided for in Sections 41 of this Article, and the one (1) month contribution to the
Culinary Plan as provided in Section 40 of this Article. However, the Club may provide contributions, in a nondiscriminatory manner, in excess of those required by this part of this Section. Provided further, the Club shall
continue coverage year round, including during the Club's annual closed period, for any full-time employees
who work as full-time employees for ten (10)months or more in a calendar year, so that there will be no gap in
the Club-paid coverage provided under this Agreement.
(b)
If a full-time employee is granted a leave of absence pursuant to Section 30 of this Agreement, the
Club will contribute the monthly health maintenance organization contribution for such full-time employee as provided
in Section 41 of this Article, and the monthly culinary contribution as provided in Section 40 of this Article, for not less
than three (3) calendar months following the granting of such leave of absence.
(c)
An eligible employee who quits or is discharged will not be entitled to any additional contributions as
may be provided in this Section.
Section 46 - Pension Program, Fund 545
(a)
Effective with the execution of this Agreement by both parties, the Club will contribute, in
addition to the health and welfare contributions provided in this Article, a contribution in dollars per day, or part
thereof, worked or paid for each bargaining unit employee classified as full-time to the UNITE HERE National
Retirement Pension Fund, pursuant to an indenture of trust establishing such fund.
$27.11 per day or $3.39 per hour;
(b)
The Club will not submit pension contributions for employees classified as part-time or
seasonal employees (extra or steady extra employees) except those employees classified as Worker II.

14

Section 47 - Funds and Trustees
The Club and the Union agree to be bound by the Agreement and Declaration of Trust ("Trust Agreement")
of the said UNITE HERE HEALTH ("Fund") as may, from time to time, be amended, and they do hereby irrevocably
designate as their respective representative on the Board of Trustees, together with their successors selected as
provided therein, and agree to abide and be bound by all procedures established and actions by the Trustees pursuant
to said Trust Agreement. Any provision in this Agreement that is inconsistent with the Trust Agreement, or the Plan of
Benefits, rules, or procedures established by the Trustees, shall be null and void.
The Club agrees to contribute for each employee covered by this Agreement the sums listed above to the
Fund for the purpose of providing health and welfare benefits under the UNITE HERE HEALTH Plan, or such new,
merged, or consolidated plan as may be adopted by the Trustees. Said contribution shall be submitted monthly,
together with a report of the employee data required by the Fund, on the format prescribed by the Fund, no later than
the fifteenth (151h) day of the month following the month for which contributions are to be made.
Section 48 - Employee Data
The contributions provided in Sections 39, 40, 41, 42 and 46 shall be paid monthly, together with a report
of employee data prescribed by the Trust Funds no later than the fifteenth (15th) day of the month following the
month for which they are to be made. Said employee data shall include name, address, social security number,
sex, date of birth, date of hire, days or weeks of employment, length of employment and such other information as
the Trustees may determine necessary in order to comply with the record keeping requirements of ERISA and/or
to properly provide welfare and pension benefits to participants.
Section 49 - National Health Insurance
In the event National Health Insurance Program becomes law, it is not the intent of this Agreement to
duplicate coverage, but to maintain at least the same level of benefits. Any cost of National Health Insurance to
the employee up to the amount of the cost of this contractual benefit shall be assumed by the Club. It is understood
that the Club shall not be obligated to contribute a total contribution toward the employees' designated obligation
for the National Health Insurance which is greater than the health and welfare contributions required under the
terms of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 13
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE - NO STRIKE - NO LOCKOUT
Section 50 - Grievance Procedure
Any dispute arising out of any of the provisions of this collective bargaining agreement, which an employee
has not been able to adjust informally with supervision shall be heard in the following steps:
Step One - Between the aggrieved employee, the steward, and the Club's designated representative.
Step Two - Between the aggrieved employee, the steward, a Union representative, and the Club's
designated representative.
Step Three - If the grievance has not been satisfactorily settled during Step 1 or Step 2, within fifteen
(15) working days following the alleged occurrence being grieved, the grieving party must reduce the grievance to
writing specifying the provisions of the Agreement involved. Step 3 must be initiated by delivering the written grievance
to the Club, not more than fifteen (15) working days after the employee becomes aware of the occurrence or such

15

grievance shall be deemed to be without merit and barred from further consideration. Within fifteen (15) working days
following the delivery of the written grievance, the Club shall deliver a written response to the Union and the employee.
These time limits are material and may be waived only by written agreement in each individual grievance.
Step Four – If no agreement is reached at Step Three, both Parties shall agree to non-binding
mediation of the grievance case in an effort to resolve the dispute before going to arbitration. The Club and Local 24
shall give good faith consideration to the finding of the Mediator. The Mediator shall be requested from the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service at no cost to each party.
Step Five - If the grievance has not been settled in Step 4, the grievance may be referred to
arbitration by the Union. Arbitration must be initiated by delivery of a written demand for arbitration to the Club
within sixty (60) days of the Club's Step 4 written response. Following the written demand, a single arbitrator,
whose decision shall be final and binding, shall be selected by mutual consent or in accordance with the policies,
functions and procedures of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service or the Michigan Employment Relations
Commission. The parties shall share the costs and fees of the arbitrator equally, and shall pay their own respective
costs.
Section 51 - No Amendments to Agreement
The arbitrator shall have no power to alter, amend, change, add or subtract from any of the terms
of this Agreement, but shall determine only whether or not there has been a violation of this Agreement.
Section 52 - No Strike Provision
The Union and the Club recognize the service nature of the Club business, and the benefit to both
the employees and the Club in rendering continuous and hospitable service to its members and their guests.
Therefore, the Union agrees that it will not call, engage in, participate in, or sanction any strike, slow downs,
stoppage of work, or picketing or any other interference with the conduct of the Club's business, for any
reason whatsoever.
Section 53 - No Lockout Provision
The Club agrees that it shall not lockout any employees for any reason whatsoever and agrees that
discipline of any employee shall be for just cause.
ARTICLE 14
MANAGEMENT'S RIGHTS
Section 54 - Rules and Regulations
(a)
The Union recognizes the undisputed right of the Club to operate and manage its business in
all respects in accordance with its commitments and responsibilities to its members and their guests and to
make and alter from time to time written rules and regulations to be observed by employees, which written
rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with this Agreement. The Club shall provide each employee with
a copy of its rules and with alterations when made.
(b)
Drug/alcohol testing. The Club shall have the right to direct an employee to be tested for unlawful
drugs and/or alcohol based upon reasonable suspicion that the employee is using or under the influence of such
substances on the job or in the workplace, subject to the following conditions:

16

(i) All testing shall be non-invasive and conducted by qualified professionals under conditions
that ensure the employee's health, safety, privacy and dignity;
(ii) All testing shall be done on paid time and, whenever possible, during the employee's normal
work schedule;
(iii) All testing shall be at the Club's expense;
(iv) The employee is entitled to the presence of a union steward, during work time, on request;
(v) The results shall be provided to the employee by the tester at the same time they are
provided to the employer;
(vi) The testing process and resulting discipline shall be subject to the just cause standard and
the grievance procedure, as is application of this section;
(vii) The Club shall state the basis for its reasonable suspicion in writing, signed by two (2)
managers, in advance of directing testing, and shall supply the writing to a union steward at the time the
employee is directed for testing.
(c)
Disciplinary Notices. A copy of the disciplinary write-up (or discharge notice), reflecting both
the level of discipline and policy/rule violated by the employee, shall be issued to the employee at the time of
the disciplinary meeting. Disciplinary write-ups shall be considered voided for progressive discipline purposes
after twelve (12) months of the infraction. Shop Steward(s) shall be present during the disciplinary meeting. In
the event a Shop Steward is not available, another bargaining unit employee, available at the time of the
meeting, can substitute for a Shop Steward. That employee shall be (reasonably) acceptable to the employee
who is the subject of the disciplinary meeting.
ARTICLE 15
MEALS - LOCKER ROOM – UNIFORMS
Section 55 – Meals
The Club shall furnish one (1) fresh meal that has been prepared within the last 24 hours for each shift
worked. Meals should consist of at least one (1) protein option, one (1) vegetable option, one (1) starch option
and one (1) salad option. Meals are to be eaten on Club time when employees are not busy and at such time as
not to interfere with the efficient operation of the Club. Time for meals shall not exceed one-half (1/2) hour for
each meal. The station of an employee during their meal period shall be covered by another employee whenever
necessary. If no other employee is available to cover the station of an employee while eating, such employee
shall return to the station to take care of any service that is necessary. If no other employee is available to cover
the workstation while eating, the employee will return to their original workstation and take a break when time
permits. There shall be a weekly menu posted on the board for employees to review.
Section 56 - Locker Rooms
The Club shall provide sanitary dressing rooms for all employees and shall provide lockers with locks, the first
key to be furnished free of charge for full-time employees. The Club shall be responsible for any losses sustained by
full-time employees because of the Club's failure to comply with this provision. No locker inspection shall be held
without the employee or the shop steward or designee accompanied by the manager or designee. All other employees
shall have a designated area for their personal belongings.

17

Section 57 – Uniforms
(a)

The Club shall from time to time determine the regulation waiter and waitress uniforms.

(b)
The Club shall furnish and launder kitchen uniforms or may elect to pay three dollars and fifty
cents ($3.50) per week in lieu of furnishing kitchen uniforms. But in all cases, kitchen uniforms shall be laundered
at the Club's expense.
(c)

The Club shall provide the following for part-time non-kitchen employees:
•
•
•
•
•

2 golf style shirts
2 formal style shirts
1 pair of pants
1 tie
1 vest

The Club shall provide the following for full-time non-kitchen employees:
•
•
•
•
•

3 golf style shirts
3 formal style shirts
3 pants
2 vests
1 tie
ARTICLE 16
EMPLOYEE/UNION RIGHTS

Section 58 – Discrimination
(a)
No employee shall be discriminated against, disciplined or discharged for efforts to enforce this
Agreement or for Union activity.
(b)
The Club agrees that there will be no discrimination against an employee carrying out the
duties of shop steward. The Union agrees that a shop steward's duties are the presentation of grievances
for members working at the Club. Such activity may be conducted during working hours if necessary, but
shop stewards will not interfere with the operation of the Club's business. Work time spent in such activities
by stewards will be held to the absolute minimum.
Section 59 – Injuries
The Club shall post a list of doctors and hospitals in the area for employees who may sustain injury while on
the job. Any employee injured on the job sent from the Club for medical attention shall be paid for the balance of the
scheduled shift on that day.
Section 60 • Union Activities
(a)
No Union meeting shall take place on the Club premises or on Club time without the consent of the
Club. This shall not preclude the visitation by a Union representative with individual Union employees, provided the
representative announces his or her presence to management at the time of arrival.

18

(b)
Union officers and stewards shall be allowed to attend Union meetings, without pay, upon written
notification to the Club not less than one (1) week in advance of the meeting date.
(c)
Duly elected delegates to Union conventions or assemblies shall be excused from work, without pay,
for the purpose of attending such convention or assembly without any loss of rights or privileges, upon not less than
thirty (30) days' advance notification for such convention. Time off for local conventions shall not exceed seven (7)
calendar days and time off for International conventions shall not exceed fifteen (15) calendar days.
(d)
The Club shall provide a designated area for Union information to employees in an area
accessible to them.
ARTICLE 17
SAVING PROVISION
Section 61 - Saving Provision
If any provision of this Agreement shall be deemed invalid by reason of any applicable law or be held invalid
by any court or agency, the remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.
ARTICLE 18
JURY DUTY • FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES
Section 62 - Jury Duty
(a)
A full-time employee must have been employed for one (1) year and have worked at least two
hundred (200) days before becoming eligible for jury duty pay. A day paid is considered a day worked.
(b)
An eligible full-time employee summoned and reporting for jury duty shall be paid an amount
equal to the difference between the amount of straight-time wages the employee otherwise would have earned
by working on that day and the daily jury duty fee paid by the court, excluding travel allowances or
reimbursement of expenses. The Club's obligation to pay an employee for jury duty is limited to a maximum
of thirty (30) days in any year. In order to receive payment, the employee must give the Club prior notice and
must furnish evidence that jury duty was performed.
ARTICLE 19
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE - FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES
Section 63 – Bereavement
(a)
A full-time employee must have been employed for one (1) year and have worked at least two
hundred (200) days before becoming eligible for bereavement leave. A day paid is considered a day worked.
(b)
If a full-time employee's father, mother, sister, brother, son daughter, current spouse,
grandparent, legal guardian, or child or parent of current spouse dies, a bereavement leave of not more than
three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled work days with pay shall be granted for purposes of attending the
funeral. In the event the funeral is two hundred (200) miles or more from the Club, a full-time employee
attending the funeral shall be granted five (5) consecutive regularly scheduled work days with pay for purposes
of attending the funeral. For tipped or fixed gratuity employees, bereavement pay shall be base daily pay plus
one hundred percent (100%) of base daily pay per day of leave.

19

ARTICLE 20
OTHER SPECIFIC WORKING CONDITIONS
Section 64 - Additional Pay Provisions
(a)
In the event tips or gratuity are added to bar checks by members or their guests at the time of service
and are billed to the member or guest when only bartenders are involved in service, said tip or gratuity shall be given
to the bartender, but this shall not apply to service charges subsequently added by the Club, which charges shall not
be construed as a tip or gratuity in accordance with the terms of this provision.
(b)
Part-time employees shall be paid the hourly rate set forth on the applicable Wage Schedules
accompanying this Agreement for his or her classification(s), and the employees shall be scheduled for a minimum of
four (4) hours. Full-time employees may be scheduled for less than eight (8) hours pursuant to Section 5(c) and 5(d)
only.
(c)
The Union has the right to examine documentation and to determine if distribution of any fixed
gratuity is made in accordance with the established Schedules to this Agreement included herein by reference.
(d)
All non-vacation Paid Time Off. All non-vacation paid time off (this includes bereavement days,
personal days, jury duty, and mandatory employee meetings divided by hours mandated), shall be paid at the
following rates for tipped employees or hourly wage rate, whichever is greater:
Upon ratification
4/1/24
4/1/25

$120.00 daily
$120.00 daily
$130.00 daily

Section 65—Scheduling and Staffing
(a)
Full-time, eight (8) hour employees may be scheduled for shifts of less than eight (8) hours only in
conformity with Section 5(c) and 5 (d).
(b)
Management shall make every reasonable effort to staff banquets (i) 1 Server per 20 guests for
breakfast and Lunch; and (ii)1 Server per 16 guests for Dinner and Supper functions.
(c)
If banquet servers serve more than 20 guests for breakfast or lunch, or more than 16 guests at dinner
or supper parties, they shall be paid premium pay (i) for each additional guest for breakfast or lunch, thirty-five (.35)
cents per person; and (ii) for each additional guest at dinner or supper parties, forty (.40) cents per person.
(d)
If servers serve banquet buffets exclusive of Club functions, they will receive thirty-five (.35) cents;
for each additional guest in excess of 35 for a luncheon banquet buffet, and forty (.40) cents; for each additional guest
in excess of 35 for every dinner banquet buffet.
(e)

The Club shall prepare and post a list of all special functions and the prices to be charged.

(f)
A newly hired server assigned to "shadow" an experienced server for training purposes will not
participate in the gratuity pool and will be paid the prevailing minimum wage per hour. A newly hired server may be in
this "shadow" training status for up to two weeks.
(g)
Management shall make every reasonable effort to staff banquets, generally one (1) server
per 20 guests for Breakfast, Lunch, Dinner and Supper functions.

20

(h)
Assuming hours are otherwise approximately equal within the required classification, when
staffing levels exceed the number needed to service the Club members during a banquet event, volunteers
(high seniority) shall be asked if they wish to leave first. If not enough employees volunteer from (high
seniority); the Club shall mandate from reverse seniority. This language shall govern with the assurance that
volunteers shall decide in a timely manner about the option to stay or leave early. Those employees who have
been sent home shall receive reporting pay as outlined in the CBA.
(i)
Notwithstanding any provision in the CBA to the contrary, non-bartender employees tending
the bar at a banquet function shall be paid at the same rate as a Banquet Server and shall receive one share
of the service fee pool.
(j)
A report including a total of the sales and gratuity and the accounting or “breakdown” of the
function prices and gratuity amounts per employee shall be available in a written document on each Thursday.
The following functions shall be pooled functions only:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Fourth of July Festivities
Halloween Carnival
Farm-to-table dinners
Specialty Wine dinners
Holiday Ball
Banquet and a la carte events of 20 or more

(k)
Lunch Tip Pool. For twenty (20) billed guests or more, each shift shall be pooled (consisting
of banquet and A la Carte business).
(l)
Dinner Tip Pool. For banquet events only, combined billed guests totaling twenty (20) people
or more and/or total banquet billing of $3,500 before gratuity and tax.
(m)
“Tipped Credit”. If there is a change in the current State of Federal law regarding “tip credit”
that results in a higher tipped employee base hourly rate, the parties shall meet and discuss the amount of
service charge paid to employees for a la carte and banquets.
ARTICLE 21
POSITIVE LABOR RELATIONS
A joint labor-management committee shall meet for the purpose of discussing matters that would
positively improve the workforce, labor-management relations, and the Club’s operations and business. Such
meetings shall include representatives from the Union and Management. Local 24 shall designate the
representatives to participate in these meetings, and likewise, the Club shall designate participants from
management. A written agenda shall be given to management/union in advance of the meeting. The committee
shall meet not more often than once per month, unless otherwise mutually agreed. Both the Club and the Union
shall give good faith consideration to the views expressed in the meetings. Both parties (GM/Union
Representative on record) shall respond to the other’s agenda items in writing within fourteen (14) days after
the meeting.

21

ARTICLE 22
FAIR TREATMENT
Section 66 - More Favorable Agreement
If the Club believes that Local 24 has negotiated, with a similarly-situated club, an agreement more favorable
to that employer than this Agreement, the Club may so notify Local 24 within a reasonable time and the Parties will,
upon the Club's request, meet to discuss the Club's interest in conforming this Agreement to the other similarly-situated
club's agreement, provided that this Agreement shall remain in full force unless and until the parties agree otherwise.
ARTICLE 23
TERM OF AGREEMENT
Section 67 – Term
This Agreement is effective, April 1, 2024 and continues through March 31, 2026 and from year to year
thereafter, unless either party serves notice in writing by certified mail on the other party not more than ninety (90)
calendar days, nor less than sixty (60) calendar days prior to or any subsequent anniversary date. Upon giving notice,
this Agreement shall terminate or subsequent anniversary.

UNITE HERE LOCAL 24

BIRMINGHAM COUNTRY CLUB

By: ____________________________

By: ____________________________

Director
Its: __________________________

Interim General Manager
Its: ____________________________
12/20/2024

12/3/2024

551133

22

SCHEDULE A
NON TIPPED
3/1/2024
DAILY

4/1/2024
DAILY
HOURLY

HOURLY

4/1/2025
DAILY
HOURLY

Sous Chef

$141.76

$17.72

$147.20

$18.40

$152.56

$19.07

Cook

$141.20

$17.65

$146.64

$18.33

$152.00

$19.00

Pastry Chef

$141.20

$17.65

$146.64

$18.33

$152.00

$19.00

Utility Worker

$130.56

$16.32

$136.00

$17.00

$141.36

$17.67

Utility Workers include polishers, Potwashers, Dishwashers, Runners, Garbage Men, Glasswashers,
Kitchen persons, Ice persons, Coffee Makers, Vegetable Prepares, and General Kitchen Cleaning and
Busser
In addition to the above 4/1/24 Schedule A rates, employees shall receive a one time longevity
wage rate adjustment of ten ($.10) cents an hour for each year of completed service as of 4/1/24
(up to five (5) years (.50)) and a one time longevity wage rate adjustment of twenty five ($.25)
cents an hour for each ten (10) years of completed service as of 4/1/24.

SCHEDULE B
–STAFF PERSONNEL
These classifications do not necessarily apply to people working in the classifications. It is necessary in
accordance with the recognition provisions of this contract that an employee indicate a desire to be
represented by the Local by execution of an authorization card.
3/1/2024
DAILY

HOURLY

4/1/2024 i
DAILY
HOURLY

4/1/2025
DAILY
HOURLY

Housekeeper

$133.72

$16.59

$138.16

$17.27

$143.52

$17.94

House-Person

$131.76

$16.47

$137.20

$17.15

$142.56

$17.82

In addition to the above 4/1/24 Schedule B rates, employees shall receive a one time longevity wage rate
adjustment of ten ($.10) cents an hour for each year of completed service as of 4/1/24 (up to five (5) years
(.50)) and a one time longevity wage rate adjustment of twenty five ($.25) cents an hour for each ten (10)
years of completed service as of 4/1/24.

23

SCHEDULE C

Servers, Full-Time;
8 hours

4/1/2024
DAILY
HOURLY
$40.96
$5.12
$5.65

Servers, Part-Time;
4 Hours
Bus Person Runner

4/1/2025
DAILY
HOURLY
$42.96
$5.37

$51.52

$6.44

$5.90
$53.32

$6.44

Bus Person Runner
(4 hours)

$6.69
$6.69

Captain

$56.24

$7.03

$58.24

$7.28

Bartender

$128.32

$16.04

$130.32

$16.29

Part-time server working time in addition working time in addition to his/her scheduled 4 hour
shift shall be entitled to the wage rates in the table above. Bartenders shall be considered
Tipped Employees and receive tipped employee wage increases. A la Carte Bartenders shall
continue to receive gratuities on all “chits” at the bar area.
Gratuity/Service Fees to be distributed as follows:
•

A la Carte Servers shall receive 18%

•

Servers and Captains shall receive 18% pooled, divided and distributed as follows:
Each Server working the banquet shall receive 1 equal share of the 18% service
charge pool. Each Captain working the banquet event shall receive 1.5 share of
the 18% service charge pool.

•

Bartenders do not participate in the 18% service charge pool. Instead, Bartenders
shall receive $125.00 from the Club when a Bartender fee is charged.

•

Any service charge in excess of 18% is the property of the Club.

•

Busser/Runner duties may be performed by Utility classification (Employer
discretion). Non-tipped position

The Union has the right to examine documentation and to determine if distribution of the
service fee is made in accordance with this Schedule.

24
