2019-MED-05-0551

06-18-19
0715-05
19-MED-05-0551
38119
AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE CITY OF WASHINGTON COURT HOUSE
AND

INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
FIRE FIGHTERS LOCAL 699
SERB CASE NUMBER
2019-MED-05-0551

Effective
July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2022

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE

NUMBER

TITLE

1

Recognition ................................................................................................. 5

2

City Right to Manage .................................................................................. 6

3

Union Dues .................................................................................................. 7

4

Grievance Procedure ................................................................................... 8

5

No Strik:e ................................................................................................... 11

6

Union Business ...................................... ~············
....................................... 12

7

Layoff and Recall ...................................................................................... 13

8

Appointments and Promotions .................................................................. 14

9

Discipline .................................................................................................. 15

10

Compensation ............................................................................................ 17

11

Hours ofDuty ............................................................................................ 20

12

Duties ........................................................................................................22

13

Working out of Classification ...................................................................23
2

14

Vacation Leave .......................................................................................... 24

15

Holidays ..................................................................................................... 26

16

Siclc Leave with Pay ..................................................................................27

17

Injury Leave/Light Duty and Transitional Work Program ........................ 31

18

Funeral Leave .............................................................. -..............................35

19

Military Leave ...........................................................................................36

20

Personal Leave ..........................................................................................37

21

Health Insurance ........................................................................................ 38

22

Lump Sum Death Benefits ........................................................................ 39

23

Pension and Retirement Plan.................................................................... .40

24

Safety and Health. ......................................................................................41

25

Residence ..................................................................... ,............................ 42

26

Definition of Seniority ..............................................................................43

27

Non-Discrimination ................................................................................... 44

28

Appendices and Amendments .................................................................. .45
3

29

Savings Clause ..........................................................................................46

30

Labor-Management Committee ............................................................... .47

31

Drug/Alcohol Testing ................................................................................ 48

32

Family and Medical Leave ........................................................................51

33

Abandonment of Position .......................................................................... 52

34

Duration ofthe Agreement.. ...................................................................... 53

35

Physical Fitness .........................................................................................54

36

Compensable Time .................................................................................... 55
Signature Page ..................................... .-.....................................................56
Appendix A- Wages ..............................................................................58
Appendix A- Wages ..............................................................................59

4

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION

Section 1.0 I. The City hereby recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive bargaining
agent for a bargaining unit of career Fire Fighters, career Lieutenants, and career Captains
employed by the City of Washington Court House, Ohio.

5

ARTICLE2
CITY RIGHT TO MANAGE

Section 2.01. The City shall have the exclusive right to manage the operations, control the
premises, direct the working force and maintain efficiency of operations. Among the City's
management rights, but not by way of limitation, are the foilowing:
1.

Determine matters of inherent managerial policy which include, but are not
limited to, areas ofdiscretion or policy, such as the functions and programs of
the public employer, standards of services, its over-all budget, utilization of
technology, and organizational structure;

2.

Direct, supervise, evaluate, or hire employees;

3.

Maintain and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of governmental
operations;

4.

Determine the overall methods, process, means, or personnel by which
governmental operations are to be conducted;

5.

Suspend, discipline, demote, or discharge for just cause; or layoff, transfer,
assign, schedule, promote, or retain employees;

6.

Determine the adequacy of the work force;

7.

Determine the overall mission ofthe employer as a unit of government;

8.

Effectively manage the work force;

9.

Take actions to carry out the mission ofthe public employer as a governmental
unit.

The exercise of the foregoing powers, rights, authority, duties and responsibilities, the
adoption of reasonable policies, rules and regulations and practices in furtherance thereof,
and the use ofjudgment and discretion in connection therewith, shall be limited only by the
specific and express terms ofthis agreement.

6

ARTICLE3
UNION DUES
Section 3 .0 I. The City agrees to deduct, once each month, monthly dues in the amount
certified to be current by the Treasurer of the Union from the pay of those employees who
individually request in writing that such deductions be made. The total amount ofdeductions
and service fees shall be remitted, within five (5) working days after the deduction is made
from the employees check, each month by the City to the Treasurer of the Union.
Section 3.02. The Union agrees to hold the City harmless in any suit, claim, or
administrative proceeding arising out ofor connected with the imposition, determination, or
collection of dues; to indemnify the City for any liability imposed upon it as a result of any
such suit, claim, or administrative proceeding; and to reimburse the City for any and all
expenses incurred by the City in defending any such suit, claim, or administrative proceeding,
including attorney fees and court costs. For purposes ofthis Section, the term "City" includes
the City ofWashington Court House and its various officers and officials, whether elected or
appointed.
Section 3.03. Payroll Deduction of Fair Share Fee -The Employer shall deduct from the
pay of members of the bargaining unit who elect not to become or remain members of the
Union a fair share fee for the Union's representation ofsuch non-members during the term of
this Agreement. No non-member filing a timely demand shall be required to subsidize
partisan political or ideological causes, or any other endeavors not germane to the union's
work in the realm of collective bargaining and contract administration. The amount of the
fair share fee shall be determined by the Union, and shall be in compliance with all
applicable state and federal laws and the constitutions ofthe United States and the State of
Ohio. The Union shall publish a Rebate Procedure in accordance with Ohio Administrative
Code Section 4117-11-01.
Section 3.04. Any individual employee objection, based upon bona fide religious tenets or
teachings of a church or religious body of which such employee is a member, will require
such employee to inform the City and the Union and establish a satisfactory arrangement for
distribution of a monetary contribution equivalent to the Union fair share fee to a nonreligious charity. The employee shall furnish written proof to the City and the Union that this
has been done. For any period oftime that Fair Share fees are unlawful, the provisions ofthis
section shall have no force and effect. The parties acknowledge that at this time ofexecution
ofthis agreement, Fair Share fees are currently invalid per Janus v. AFSCME, Council 31, et
al (U.S. Supreme Court, June 27, 2018).

7

ARTICLE4
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Section 4.01. Definition: A grievance is a dispute or difference of opinion involving the
meaning, interpretation, or application of the terms ofthis agreement.
Section 4.02. Discipline of counseling, informal, and formal reprimands shall be grievable
only through step two ofthe grievance procedure and shall not be arbitrable.
Section 4.03. The following procedure shall be used for processing bargaining unit
member(s) grievance(s). Identical grievances may be consolidated for steps 2, 3, and
Arbitration under 4.03 with the consent ofthe individual and grievant and upon agreement of
the Union and the City.
Step 1. A written grievance must be presented to the Fire Chief or designee within five (5)
days of the date on which the grievant knew or reasonably should have lrnown of its
occurrence. The written grievance shall be signed by the grievant and shall set forth the
relevant facts, the provision(s) of the Agreement allegedly violated, and the requested
remedy. The Fire Chief or his designee may hold a meeting to discuss such grievance with
the Grievant and a Union representative. The Fire Chief or his designee shall provide a
written answer to the grievant and Union representative within seven (7) days of receipt of
the written grievance.
Step 2. If the grievance is not settled in Step 1 and the employee or the union wishes to
appeal the grievance to Step 2 ofthe grievance procedure, it shall be referred in writing to the
City Manager within five (5) days after receipt ofthe Fire Chiefs or his designee 's answer in
Step 1. The written grievance appeal shall be signed by the employee and the authorized
Union representative and shall set forth relevant facts, the provision(s) of the Agreement
allegedly violated, and requested remedy. If the grievB;nt is also a Union Representative,
another Union Representative must sign the grievance appeal for Step 2. The City Manager
or his designated representative may meet and discuss the grievance within ten (10) days of
the receipt ofthe notice of appeal with the grievant and the authorized Union representative
at a mutually agreeable time. The City Manager or his designated representative shall give a
written answer to the grievant and the Union representative within fifteen (15) days ofreceipt
ofthe appealed grievance.
Step 3. If the grievance remains unresolved within ten (10) days after the reply of the City
Manger or his designee has been received or is due, whichever comes first, the Union may by
written notice to the City Manager, invoke arbitration by providing such written notice to the
City Manager within ten (10) days after the reply of the City Manager or his designee has
been received or is due, whichever comes first. Request for arbitration must be signed by the
grievant and a Union Representative. If grievant is also a Union Representative, another
Union Representative must sign request for arbitration.
8

Section 4.04 Arbitration -The parties, by mutual agreement in writing, may submit more
than one grievance to the same arbitrator. Within ten (10) days following the notice to
arbitrate, the parties shall either agree upon an arbitrator, or shall request in writing that the
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS) submit a panel ofseven (7) arbitrators.
Both the Employer and the Union shall have the right to strike, alternately, one (1) name
from the panel until only one (I) name remains. To determine who will strike first will be
determined by the toss of a coin. The remaining person shall be the arbitrator. Each party
shall be notified ofthe selection by a joint letter from the Employer and the Union requesting
that he set a date and time for the hearing, subject to the availability ofthe Employer and the
Union representative. Either party may once reject the list, prior to the striking ofnames, and
request another list of seven (7) arbitrators from FMCS. The party requesting the new list
shall pay for the cost of said list.
Section 4.05. Authority of the Arbitrator -The arbitrator shall have no right to amend,
modify, nullify, ignore, add to, or subtract from the provisions of this Agreement. Tue
arbitrator shall only consider and make a decision with respect to the specific issue or issues
of contract interpretation or application appealed to arbitration and shall have no authority to
make a decision on any other issues not so submitted. The arbitrator shall submit in writing
his decision to the Employer and to the Union within thirty (30) days following the close of
hearing unless the parties agree to an extension thereof. The decision shall be based solely
upon the arbitrator's interpretation of the meaning or application of the terms of this
Agreement and the facts ofthe grievance presented, provided that the arbitrator shall issue no
decision which would add to, subtract from, or modify any provision of this Agreement.
Subject to the arbitrator's compliance with provisions of this Section, the decision of the
arbitrator shall be final and binding.
Section 4.06. Expenses of Arbitration - The fees and expenses of FMCS and of the
arbitrator shall be borne entirely by the unsuccessful party. Tue prevailing party shall not be
responsible for any fees or expenses ofthe FMCS or of the arbitrator. Each party shall be
responsible for compensating its own representative and witnesses. The cost of a transcript
shall be shared if the necessity of a transcript is mutually agreed upon between the parties.
Section 4.07. Processing and Time Limits-A grievance not filed or appealed within the
established time limits shall be deemed waived. If the Employer fails to reply within the
established time limits then, at the Union's option, it may automatically advance to the next
step.
The time limits set forth in this Agreement may be extended by mutual written consent ofthe
parties.
The term "days" means the days ofthe week, Monday through Friday, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays.

9

Section 4.08. Processing Grievances - The preparation of initial grievance forms and
grievance meetings shall be scheduled in a manner which does not interfere with City
operations. During any grievance meeting scheduled by the City during the grievant' s work
day, grievant, and ifnecessary an on duty Union representative, shall remain on duty without
loss of pay, but the grievant, and the Union representative if on duty, shall respond to a call
immediately, and the grievant's hearing shall be reconvened as soon as possible thereafter.
When a grievance meeting is scheduled on grievant's and/or Union representative's offduty
day, the grievant, and/or the Union representative, shall not be entitled to be paid.
Section 4.09. Municipal Civil Service - The parties agree that matters which are
exclusively required by State statute to be mandatorily appealed to the Municipal Civil
Service Board are excluded from the provisions ofthis grievance procedure. Promotions as
provided for in Article 8 and those matters referred to in Section 4117 .08(B), Revised Code,
shall be within the exclusive jurisdiction ofthe Municipal Civil Service Board and shall not
be subject to the grievance procedure.

10

ARTICLES
NO STRIKE
Section 5.01. Neither the Union nor any member of the bargaining unit shall directly or
indirectly call, sanction, encourage, finance, participate in, or assist in any way in any strike,
slowdown, walkout, concerted "sick leave" or mass resignation, work stoppage or slowdown,
or other unlawful interference with the normal operations ofthe City during the term ofthis
Agreement. A breach of this Section shall be grounds for discipline up to and including
discharge.
Section 5 .02. The Union shall at times cooperate with the City in continuing operations in a
normal manner and shall actively discourage and attempt to prevent any violation ofthe 11nostrike 11 clause.
In the event of a violation of the "no-strike" clause, the Union shall promptly notify all
employees in a reasonable manner that the strike, work stoppage or slowdown, or other
unlawful interference with normal operations ofthe City, is in violation ofthis Agreement, is
unlawful, and is not sanctioned or approved of by the Union. The Union shall advise the
employees to return to work immediately.

11

ARTICLE6
UNION BUSINESS
Section 6.01. The City will provide approximately one (I) square yard of space on a bulletin
board for the use ofthe Union in the Fire House to be located either in the kitchen or in the
dormitory at the option ofthe Union. No material of an unlawful, indecent, defamatory, or
insubordinate nature shall be posted on the board.
Section 6.02. Up to two members of the Union's negotiating team shall be allowed to
participate in negotiating meetings with the City without loss ofpay, but such members shall
remain on duty and subject to call immediately. Ifmeetings are scheduled on such member's
off duty days, members are not entitled to be paid therefore.
Section 6.03. Meetings of members of the Union may be permitted when and where
departmental functions are not interrupted by such meetings. Formal meetings may be
pe1mitted at the Fire Station after 1700 hours on City business days, and after 1200 noon on
weekends and observed City holidays. Members on duty may be allowed to attend said
meetings. At no time will Union meetings ofany kind interrupt departmental functions ofthe
City. Formal union meetings are defined as a quomm ofthe local union, meeting to discuss
business in which the Union would have a part. Meetings requested at other times must be
requested in writing and upon the approval of management.

12

ARTICLE7
LAYOFF AND RECALL
Section 7.01. When the Employer determines that a long term layoff or job abolishment is
necessary, he shall notify the affected employee(s) as soon as possible but not less than ten
(10) calendar days in advance of the effective date of the layoff or job abolishment.
Employees will be notified ofthe Employer's decision to implement any short-term layoff,
lasting seventy-two (72) hours or less, as soon as possible. The layoff procedure shall not be
used for disciplinary purposes.
Section 7 .02. Layoff order shall be in the inverse order ofseniority. Employees who are laid
off shall be placed on a recall list for a period ofthree hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days.
If there is a recall, employees who are still on the recall list shall be recalled, in the inverse
order of their layoff, provided they are presently qualified to perform the work in the work
section to which they are recalled.
Section 7.03. Notice ofrecall shall be sent to the employees by certified mail with a copy to
the International Association of Fire Fighters Local 699. The employer shall be deemed to
have fulfilled its obligations by mailing the recall notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last mailing address provided by the employee. It is the responsibility ofthe
employee to provide the Employer with a written notice of any change of address and/or
telephone number during his period of layoff.
Section 7 .04. The recalled employee shall have five ( 5) calendar days following the date of
receipt or attempted delivery of the recall notice to notify the Employer of his intention to
return to work and shall annually return to work as soon as possible, but not more than seven
(7) days following the receipt or attempted delivery ofthe recall notice in which to report for
duty, unless a later date for returning to work is otherwise specified in the notice.

13

ARTICLES
APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS
Section 8.01. All promotions within the bargaining unit only shall be in accordance with the
State of Ohio Civil Service laws as last amended except with the following revisions: The
criteria for promotions shall include written testing which shall be equivalent to fifty-five
percent (55%) of the total promotion score. An assessment center process (of a panel of
outside testing consultants) shall be utilized and shall be equivalent to thirty percent (30%) of
the total score. An interview with the City Manager and the Fire Chiefshall be equivalent to
fifteen percent (15%) of the total score. Seniority credits will be applied at the end of the
testing process to the final score. Any claim ofnoncompliance for the written testing shall be
made by appeal through the Municipal Civil Service Board. Any claim ofnoncompliance for
the remaining segments of the promotion process shall be made through the grievance
procedure.
Section 8.02. No person shall be permitted to compete for any promotion within the
bargaining unit to Lieutenant or higher rank without attaining at least a minimum offour (4)
years career service with the City of Washington Court House Fire Division.
Section 8.03. If a Fire Fighter or Lieutenant is promoted to the rank of Captain, then the
starting salary shall start at Step D.
Section 8.04. Every newly hired employee shall be required to successfully complete a one
(1) calendar year probationary period. An employee serving an initial probationary period
may be terminated at any time and shall have no right to appeal the termination.
Section 8.05. An employee promoted into a higher level position within the bargaining unit
shall be required to successfully complete a promotional probationary period of six (6)
months. If the employee's performance in the new position is unsatisfactory, the employee
shall be returned to his or her former position during this period.

14

ARTICLE9
DISCIPLINE
Section 9.01.
No employee shall be disciplined except for just cause. Any claim ofnoncompliance may be
appealed through the grievance procedure provided for in this agreement.
No suspension will be imposed until the bargaining unit wither waves his right or the
discipline is up held in step 2 in the grievance procedure.
A. Just cause, for purposes of this article, includes incompetency, inefficiency,
dishonesty, drunkenness, immoral conduct, insubordination, neglect of duty,
conviction of criminal charges, misfeasance, malfeasance, nonfeasance, discourteous
treatment of the public, failure to pay just debts, violation of the Administrative
Regulations ofthe City, violation ofthe Division of Fire Rules, Regulations, general
or special orders, and any other failure ofgood behavior, or an accumulation ofminor
infractions.
B. Possible disciplinary actions are as follows:
Informal (verbal) reprimand, Formal (written) reprimand, suspension with or without
pay, reduction of pay, demotion to lower classification, dismissal.
C. (1) An employee may request to meet with the Chief prior to or after receiving
discipline. In special cases, the employee may be suspended pending a meeting, but
such meeting must be held promptly. Upon suspension, the suspended employee may
request a hearing to be held by the close ofthe next succeeding workday. The Union
President or Steward shall have the right to attend such meeting subject to the
disciplined employee's desires. Such meeting shall, at the request ofthe employee, be
once continued to permit his Steward or Union President's attendance.
(2) A suspension without pay, demotion, reduction in pay, or dismissal requires that:
a.

Written notice be given to the employee ofthe charges against him and
the evidence upon which they are based.

b.

A Pre-disciplinary conference before a hearing officer designated by
the City Manager or his or her representati':'e shall be held within ten
(10) working days of the notice provided in paragraph one of this
subsection. The employee shall be afforded, at the conference, a fair
opportunity to be heard in opposition to the charges against him,
including the right to question witnesses, if presented.

c.

The employee has a right to have with him two (2) representatives ofhis
choosing.
15

d.

The employee shall be informed of the hearing officer's decision and
the reasons for it in writing within ten (10) working days of the
conference. Such decision by the hearing officer shall only be a
determination as to whether or not there was evidence to substantiate
the charges against the accused. There shall be no detennination by the
hearing officer as to the appropriateness of, or level of, discipline.

e.

The employee may waive the Pre-disciplinary conference. If the
employee grieves the suspension without pay, demotion, reduction in
pay, or dismissal, such grievance will proceed directly to Step 2 ofthe
grievance procedure in Article 4 of this agreement.

D. In cases of dismissal, the employee may request all monies due him within two (2)
working days after his supervisor and department head certify in writing that all City
property has been properly returned and just debts paid to the City.
Section 9 .02. During the probationary period of one (1) year, for new hires, employees may
be terminated without showing of cause and shall have no right to appeal the termination.
Section 9 .03 Informal reprimand and fo1mal reprimand shall be grievable only through step
two of the grievance procedure and shall not be arbitrable.

16

ARTICLE10
COMPENSATION
Section 10.01. The compensation schedule set out and attached as Appendix A shall form a
part of this Agreement.
The pay schedule shall be on a biweekly basis.
The employee's contribution to the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund, which has been
established by and is governed by the laws ofthe State ofOhio, shall be annuitized according
to the laws of the United States and the State of Ohio.
New employees shall be employed at the minimum rate established for the range assigned,
except those employees with exceptional qualifications beyond the minimum normally
required for the position may be employed at the second step of the range, provided that a
Personnel Status Sheet with written explanation is on file in the Office ofthe City Manager
of all such advance step employments.
An employee may be advanced to succeeding steps in the range assigned for his classification
according to the schedule established in Appendix A. Upon the completion of each year of
service, and with the Fire Chief's recommendation, an employee may be advanced one step
within his classification range or grade by the City Manager. The failure to advance an
employee to a succeeding step in an assigned classification range based upon the
recommendation or non-recommendation ofthe Fire Chief, or upon action or inaction by the
City Manager, may be appealed to the grievance article of this Agreement.
Section 10.2. Longevity Pay: Beginning on the first day of the pay period following
completion of the consecutive years of total service with the City, illustrated below,
each appointed full-time employee shall receive an automatic salary adjustment to
base pay equivalent to the designated percentage of the classification base salary, to
the nearest whole cent. The required consecutive years of total service and salary
adjustments are as follows:
5 years
6 years
7 years
8 years
9 years
10 years
15 years
20 years

2½%
3%
3½%
4%
4½%
5%
71/2%
10%

Longevity pay adjustments referenced above shall become effective at the beginning ofthe
pay period within which the employee completes the necessary length ofservice. Time spent
17

on an authorized leave of absence shall be counted for this purpose. Overtime shall be paid
in accordance with FLSA requirements. Longevity pay shall be reflected and paid out on a
bi-weekly basis.
Section 10.03. For pay purposes, any promotions following the initial appointment ofa Fire
Fighter shall change the anniversary date of the employee promoted for step advancement
purposes. Each promotion thereafter, the anniversary date shall change to the effective date
of that promotion within the Fire Department. Subsequent step increases may be given on
the anniversary date of the latest promotion in the current position held.
Section 10.04. Uniform Allowance: The City ofWashington CourtHousewillpurchasefor
each regular uniformed member of the Fire Department his or her first issue of clothing as
prescribed by the official clothing regulation as posted in said department. The clothing shall
be the property of the City of Washington Court House. After the first year from date of
issue of the original issue, each member of the Fire Department shall be granted a clothing
allowance of six hundred dollars ($600 .00) annually for the purchase ofuniform items from
an approved uniform list prepared and maintained by the Fire Chief. The City reserves the
right to inspect all purchases. Failure to produce items will result in non-payment. The
payment of said allowances shall be administered by the City Manager or his authorized
agent. Statements approved by the City Manager or his authorized agent shall be transmitted
to the Director ofFinance for lawful payment. Whenever assigned duties require the wearing
of civilian clothes and said clothes are damaged while performing those duties, the employee
shall be reimbursed from the six hundred dollars ($600.00) uniform allowance for the loss
suffered, provided that the damaged article is given to the Fire Chief, and he is satisfied that
the damage occurred in the course of employment.
Section 10.041. In the event of a uniform change at a cost of$250.00 or more to the City,
either by law or by the City's choosing, the City shall provide a complete issue of the items
being changed, as prescribed by the official clothing regulation as posted in said department.
In such event the clothing allowance will be reduced to $250.00 to cover the cost ofitems not
being replaced for a period of one year.
Section 10.042. The City shall furnish a washing machine and clothes dryer for the washing
of uniforms. The City shall also furnish laundry detergent/fabric softener. These machines
shall not be used for the cleaning of tum out gear.
Section 10.05. Mileage Allowance: Employees assigned to use their private automobiles for
Fire Department business will be compensated at the IRS rate.
Section 10.06. Jury Duty: Any bargaining unit member who is required to serve on a jury
shall continue to receive his regular salary during such period, provided that the employee
submits his compensation for jury duty service to the City.
18

Section 10.07. Other Required Business: Any employee required to appear on behalfofthe
City before a court, judge, or coroner shall not lose any pay as a result of such appearance.
An employee required to appear as a witness concerning a matter arising out of his
employment other than on behalf ofthe City before a court, judge, or coroner shall not lose
any pay as a result ofsuch appearance, provided he has obtained the permission ofthe City
Manager to so appear; such permission shall not be withheld unless said employee is required
to be a witness against the City. Any witness fees received must be turned over to the City.
Any bargaining unit employee required to appear before a court, judge, or administrative
body (as a party to a case or when subpoenaed as a witness) concerning a matter that did not
arise out of his employment with the City shall be permitted time offto appear before such
entity. The employee shall trade his or her shift or shall use available, eligible paid leave to
attend such matter; if he or she cannot find a trade and has no available, eligible paid leave
time, he or she shall be permitted time off without pay. Offenses classified as "traffic
offenses" or "moving violations" shall not be subject to Section 10.07 of this agreement;
bargaining unit employees shall schedule such matters subject to the other leave restrictions
applicable to this unit.
Section 10.08. Education: Education reimbursement will be coordinated as spelled out by
City policy, as long as it remains within the City's budget.
Section 10.081. Voluntary Training A maximum of two voluntary trainings per year for
bargaining unit members will be reimbursed at a rate of one hour of compensatory time for
every one hour of training to include travel time. Training compensatory time will be
approved by the fire chief prior to the start date oftrainings. Training request forms must be
filled out and approved by the shift commander, the training officer and the fire chief.
Mandatory trainings will be paid out at the overtime rate per contract.
Section 10.09. Meal reimbursement will be coordinated and spelled out by City policy.
Section IO .10. Overnight lodging reservations, when required, shall be made and paid for by
the Employer at a motel, hotel, or other reasonable lodging facilities.
Section 10 .11. Before an employee can be reimbursed for any expense provided for in this
article, he must provide receipts of all such expenditures to the Employer or his designee.
Section 10 .12. Direct Deposit - All members ofthe bargaining unit shall be required to have
direct payroll deposit. A variance from this section may be granted at the discretion of the
City Manager.

19

ARTICLE 11
HOURS OF DUTY

Section 11.01. Fifty-three (53) Hour Work Week: Aplatoonsystemoffifty-three(53)hours
shall constitute a full, regular, average but not guaranteed work week computed on the basis
ofthe average over the declared nineteen (19) day work cycle. Employees will be assigned
to regular platoon duty shifts. The normal on-duty tours of duty will be twenty-four (24)
consecutive hours on duty. The on-duty tour normally will be followed by forty-eight (48)
consecutive hours off duty.
Section 11.011. The total hours of work for the platoon system employees shall total
approximately fifty-six (56) hours average per week which includes the straight time payment
for the fifty-three (53) hour workweek and the three (3) hours of overtime each week to
compensate for loss ofEDO's.
Section 11.02. With the approval of the Fire Chief, or his designee, employees may
exchange shifts when the change does not interfere with the operation of the Fire
Department. Such an exchange shall not result in an overtime or other premium pay
obligation on the part of the City.
Section 11.03. Call Back: An off-duty employee called back to duty which does not abut his
scheduled working shift, or an off-duty employee called back to duty two (2) or more hours
before the shift starts, will be compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1 ½) times his or
her hourly rate ofpay for a minimum oftwo (2) hours ifhe or she responds within thirty (30)
minutes ofa toned fire call. Bargaining unit members responding after thirty (3 0) minutes of
a toned fire call or within one and a half (1 ½) hours of their assigned shift shall be
compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1 ½) times their hourly rate for the actual time
worked calculated in thirty (30) minute increments. Call Back pay will not be paid to
bargaining unit members who initially responded to the call where the call runs past their
scheduled shift. Those hours will be calculated as overtime hours; however, those hours will
not be marked on the overtime list. Hourly rate shall be the rate shown in Appendix A.
Section 11.031. Call Back Definition: Call back is defined as when a general call is put out
for available off duty personnel for help (i.e., radios are toned for an emergency situation or
station coverage or general assistance at the Fire Department). The purpose ofcall back is to
afford assistance to the fire fighter responding to a call and to adequately man the Fire
Station. A call back request ends when the supervisor deems that additional personnel are no
longer necessary. (Example: Trucks are back in the station.) Any time additional manpower
is needed, it will be offered to members ofthe bargaining unit first.
Section 11.04. Overtime: Employees required to work until there is sufficient manpower to
fulfill the departmental function or employees authorized to work any time on duty in
addition to the normal shifts as defined in Section 11.01 shall be considered as working
overtime hours, subject to the overtime rate provisions ofthis Agreement.
20

Section 11.042. Overtime Distribution: When the need for overtime exists, such overtime
may be distributed as equally as possible with the Fire Fighter with the least hours being
given first opportunity for overtime, unless a bargaining unit member who has special
training is needed. Overtime created as the result of staying over due to a fire run will not be
subject to the necessity of calling the low person on the overtime list. The employer shall
establish and periodically update a Fire Department overtime list which shall be posted in
each work place. Said list shall show the amount of accumulated ·overtime hours and shall
identify the employees' classification (officer or fire fighter) using a color designation.
Overtime shall be offered on a rotation basis to those employees within the bargaining unit
and classification needed. Employees currently on duty are required to work overtime if
overtime abuts their shift, and it is deemed necessary by the Fire Chief or Supervisor in order
to fulfill the mission ofthe Fire Department. Overtime shall be marked on the overtime list.
An employee who is not required and refuses the offered overtime shall be marked with the
appropriate number ofhours he would have worked on the overtime list. All overtime hours
worked other than call back shall be counted as accumulated overtime hours and shall be
offered to members of the bargaining unit first. All new employees shall start at the bottom
of the overtime list when they become eligible to work overtime.
All leave designated as Sick Leave and Funeral Leave (but excluding leave qualifying as
FMLA or Injury Leave) shall be covered with overtime by full-time, bargaining unit
employees. Such overtime will be offered ·on a rotating basis, but will be mandatory if no
bargaining unit employee voluntarily accepts the overtime after going through the overtime
list. The Overtime Dispersal Policy will be used to distribute overtime.
Section 11.043. Overtime Rate: Employees that work overtime will be compens·ated at the
rate ofone and one-half ( 1½) times their hourly rate ofpay for all hours worked. Hourly rate
shall be the rate shown in Appendix A.
Section 11.05. Payment of overtime and/or premium rates shall not be duplicated or
pyramided for the same hours worked, and under no circumstances shall more than one basis
of calculating overtime and/or premium pay be used for the same hours.

21

ARTICLE 12
DUTIES

Section 12.01. All members shall be prompt in reporting to their assigned duties, and shall
faithfully perform their duties in a way that renders quality service to the Citizens of
Washington Court House and to whom they serve.
Section 12.02. The assignment of duties related to fire suppression, prevention,
extinguishment and emergency rescue services, and weather related emergencies, general
maintenance of equipment, customary fire house details and other emergency duties deemed
necessa1y to preserve the health and welfare ofthe Citizens ofWashington Court House and
to whom they serve shall not be grounds for a grievance under Article 4. Nothing in the
above duties descriptions shall limit assignments during emergency conditions and/or
circumstances which threaten citizens' lives and/or property.
Section 12.03. When requested, the City ofWashington Court House Fire Department will
assist emergency medical services.
Section 12.04. All new employees and those hired on or after July 1, 1992, will be certified
as Emergency Medical Technicians (EMTs) and will maintain certification. Employees hired
prior to July 1, 1992, at their own choosing, may elect to become an EMT but do not have to
maintain certification. The City will pay for the cost of initial training and re-certification.
Employees who are in training or recertification shall be allowed to attend all classes and
training without loss of pay.

22

ARTICLE13
WORKING OUT OF CLASSIFICATION

Section 13.01. An employee who is required to accept responsibilities and carry out the
duties of a position or rank above that which he normally holds shall receive whatever the
pay differential is between the top step Fire Fighter/EMT (or Fire Fighter, whichever is
applicable) and the lowest step ofLieutenant/EMT (or Lieutenant, whichever is applicable),
regardless of what the amount is, while so acting. A minimum of two (2) hours must be
served before such pay will start and then only for the position of Lieutenant/EMT (or
Lieutenant, whichever is applicable). Further, ifaLieutenant,Lieutenant/EMT, Captain, or
Captain/EMT is working, no out-of-classification assignment will be made. Ifno officer is
available for a shift, the Employer will only assign a Fire Fighter or Fire Fighter/EMT to the
appropriate acting Lieutenant classification.

23

ARTICLE14
VACATION LEAVE
Section 14.01. Full-time employees on a fifty-three (53) hour per week schedule shall have
earned and will be due upon the attainment ofthe first year of employment, and through the
fifth year of service with the City, one hundred twenty (120) hours of vacation leave with
pay.
Section 14.02. Full-time employees on a fifty-three (53) hour per week schedule with six (6)
years ofservice but less than ten ( 10) years ofservice with the City shall have earned and are
entitled to one hundred forty-four (144) hours of vacation leave with pay.
Section 14.03. Full-time employees on a fifty-three (53) hour per week schedule with ten
(10) years ofservice but less than fifteen (15)years ofservice with the City shall have earned
and are entitled to one hundred ninety-two (192) hours of vacation leave with pay.
Section 14.04. Full-time employees on a fifty-three (53) hourperweekschedulewith fifteen
(15) years ofservice but less than twenty (20) years ofservice with the City shall have earned
and are entitled to two hundred forty (240) hours of vacation leave with pay.
Section 14.041. Fuil-time employees on a fifty-three (53) hour per week schedule with
twenty (20) or more years of service with the City shall have earned and are entitled to three
hundred twelve (312) hours of vacation leave with pay.
Section 14.042. Full-time employees on a fifty-three (53) hour per week schedule with
twenty-six (26) or more years of service with the City shall have earned and are entitled to
three hundred sixty (360) hours of vacation leave with pay.
Section 14.05. Such vacation leave shall accrue to the employee on a fifty-three (53) hour
work week at the rate of4 .615 hours each biweekly period for those entitled to one hundred
twenty (120) hours per year; 5.538 hours each biweekly period for those entitled to one
hundred forty-four ( 144) hours per year; 7.3 85 hours each biweekly period for those entitled
to one hundred ninety-two (192) hours per year; 9.23 hours each biweekly period for those
entitled to two hundred forty (240) hours per year; 12.0 hours each biweekly period for those
entitled to three hundred twelve (312) hours per year; and, 13.846 hours each biweekly
period for those entitled to three hundred sixty (360) hours per year.
Section 14.06. An employee may accrue annual leave without penalty. An employee shall
be entitled to compensation, at his current rate of pay, for only two (2) years of unused
vacation leave to their credit at the time of separation. Refer to Sections 14.04 thru 14.042
for years of service and amount of hours of vacation accrued each year at separation.
Section 14.07. In the case of the death of an employee, the unused vacation leave of any
such employee, shall be paid in accordance with Ohio Revised Code 2113 .04 or to his estate.
24

Section 14.08. An employee who is discharged for cause, or is separated from the service
due to fault on his part, shall not be granted any unused vacation leave to his credit or pay in
lieu thereof on the date of such discharge, resignation or separation.
Section 14.09. Any employee in good standing, who gives fourteen (14) calendar days notice
before resigning, may be paid a lump sum amount for any unused vacation leave to his credit
based on earned credits to date of resignation. If the employee has received advanced
vacation pay, such time shall be deducted before computing the lump sum payment.
Section 14.10. Vacation time is subject to the approval of the Fire Chief in advance.
Selections of vacations shall be on a shift seniority basis. In December of each year,
vacations may be scheduled for the following year for up to one-half(½) ofthe yearly accrual
of each employee. This scheduling shall be approved by the end of the first full week in
January. Other vacation time can be requested no more than sixty (60) days in advance,
subject to availability ofthe dates requested (e.g., Training, etc.). There is no restriction on
prior notice, providing advance approval is obtained from the Chief or his designate. After
an employee's vacation has been approved, it shall not be changed, subject to the City's right
to alter the vacation time in the event of an emergency or if the public welfare would be
otherwise adversely affected. Vacation leave shall be approved or disapproved as soon as
possible after submission of a vacation leave form.
Section 14.11. During the prime months ofJune through September 2016, two (2) members
of the same platoon shall be allowed annual leave at the same time. Beginning January 1,
2017, two members of the same platoon shall be allowed to take annual leave at the same
time at any point during the year, subject to conditions agreed to in Memorandum of
Understanding.
Section 14.12. All full-time bargaining unit employees, excluding initial hire probationary
Fire Fighters and Fire Fighter/EMTs, may receive payment in a lump sum of one ( 1) hour of
pay for one (1) hour of accumulated unused vacation leave to his or her credit (one hundred
percent [100%] conversion rate) for a maximum cash out of one-half(½) of his or her
accrued amount of vacation to a maximum cash out per year of one hundred twenty (120)
hours. Such cash out is a one time per year offer, and requests for such cash out must be
made between October 1 and October 15 of such calendar year. Payment shall be made by
November 30 of the calendar year and shall be made by separate check.

25

ARTICLE 15
HOLIDAYS

Section 15.01. The City shall observe the following eleven (11) holidays:
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.

New Year's Day
President's Day
Independence Day
Columbus Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day

2.
4.
6.
8.
10.

Martin Luther King
Memorial Day
Labor Day
Veteran's Day
Christmas Eve

Section 15.02. Fire Department personnel working a fifty-three (53) hour per week schedule
shall be entitled to twenty-four (24) hours of holiday pay for each holiday observed,
regardless of whether they work on the holiday. Pay will be at the base rate as outlined in
Appendix A. Bargaining unit members scheduled to work the holiday starting at 0800 hours,
shall receive their holiday pay plus time and a half for all hours worked. The City and the
bargaining unit agree that payment of eight (8) hours of overtime pay satisfies the definition
of holiday pay plus time and a half for all hours worked.
For payroll purposes when bargaining unit members take leave on a holiday shift
following agreement will apply:
1. A bargaining unit member who works 1-12 hours shall receive 4 hours of
overtime pay.
2. A bargaining unit member who works 121/2 hours or more shall receive 8
hours of overtime.
Section 15.03. Any employee who is absent without approved leave for any workday for
which he/she was scheduled to work shall be placed on no-pay status for the period oftime
from the end of the last workday on which the employee was present, until the employee
returns to work.

26

ARTICLE 16
SICK LEAVE WITH PAY
Section 16.01. All employees working a regular fifty-three (53) hour work week schedule
shall accrue sick leave with pay of 6.462 work hours for each completed pay period.
Section 16.02. Employees may use sick leave, upon approval of the department head, for
absence due to personal illness, pregnancy, injury, exposure to contagious disease which
could be communicated to other employees, and to illness, injury, or death in the employee's
immediate family. Sick leave shall not be used for injuries that occur on the job, unless
specifically authorized by section 16.08. Employees must return to work as soon as possible
following a doctor's visit.
Section 16.03. Unused sick leave shall be cumulative without limit. When sick leave is
used, it shall be deducted from the employee's credit on the basis of one (1) hour for every
hour of absence from previously scheduled work. Compensation for such credit shall be at
the rate of one hundred percent ( 100%) ofthe employee's hourly base rate ofpay as outlined
in Appendix A.
Section 16.04. Previously accumulated sick leave of an employee who has been separated
from the public service shall be placed to his credit upon his re-employment in the public
service, provided that such re-employment takes place within ten (10) years of the date on
which the employee was last terminated from public service. An employee who is hired into
the Fire Department from another public agency shall be credited with the unused balance of
his accumulated sick leave up to the maximum ofthe sick leave accumulation permitted for
employees in the Fire Department.
Section 16.05. The City Manager of the City of Washington Court House shall require an
employee to furnish a satisfactory, written, signed statement to justify the use ofsuch leave.
If medical attention is required a certificate from a licensed physician stating the general
nature of the illness shall be required to justify the use ofsick leave. Falsification ofeither a
written signed statement or a physician's certificate shall be grounds for disciplinary action
including dismissal. No employee shall be compensated for sick leave unless or until such
written statement or physician's certificate ifapplicable has been filed by the employee upon
return to duty. The City may question any such signed statement or physician's certificate in
connection with sick leave benefits, and the City may require such employee who has either
requested sick leave or who has notified the City Manager of the use of sick leave to be
examined by a licensed physician designated by and paid for by the City. The report ofsuch
examination shall be made available to the City Manager and such employee. This section
shall be uniformly administered to all employees ofthe City regardless ofdepartment and not
withstanding any other personnel or departmental rule or regulation to the contrary.
Section 16.06. Sickness in the immediate family requiring the presence at home of the
employee for more than one (1) duty day will require a certificate ofthe attending physician
27

before any employee will receive pay under the above situation. Sick leave with pay thus
chargeable shall not exceed three (3) work days in any calendar year. In special cases where
more than three (3) work days are necessary, the department head shall approve or submit the
employee's request in writing to the City Manager and the City Manager's approval shall be
obtained in advance ofgranting such leave. (Example: Pneumonia, broken leg, heart attack,
etc.)
It is recognized by the parties in the implementation of this section that the spouses have a
duty to share in the responsibility of attending to the care of a family member under this
section.
Section 16.07. If an employee uses forty-eight (48) or more hours off because of illness or
injury, or two (2) consecutive days off because of illness or injury within the preceding six
(6) months without submitting doctor's excuses for such incidents, the employee may be
required to furnish a doctor's certificate certifying the cause for such employee's absence
from duty. Said certificate shall be filed on return to duty. Management reserves the right to
request a doctor's certificate before forty-eighty (48) hours if employee has shown abuse of
sick leave at the City's expense. If an employee is ill and will not be able to return to work,
he or she shall call and report his or her absence to the department head no later than the
starting time each and every day of the absence unless a pre-determined length of time of
absence by a qualified physician is on file.
Section 16.08. In the event an employee who is entitled to injury leave uses up all his injury
leave time, and is still unable to return to active duty, due to temporary disability, he may,
with the approval ofhis department head and the City Manager, use any unused sick leave to
which he is otherwise entitled until such time as he is able to retmn to active duty. (Example:
Broken leg, hip, ribs, skull :fracture, or occupational injuries or diseases, etc.)
Section 16.09. Bargaining unit employees shall be eligible to participate in the City's
Catastrophic Sick Leave Donation Program, subject to the following restrictions:
A.

A catastrophic sick leave donation program is established to assist employees who are
placed on a leave of absence due to an accident or long-term illness which is not job
related, and who will exhaust all other available paid leave. This program neither
supersedes nor replaces other disability programs.

B

The catastrophic sick leave donation program can only be utilized if all of the
following conditions are met:
1.

The City Manager shall determine and confirm that the injury or illness exists.

2.

A doctor certifies that a long-term medical injury or illness exists.
28

3.

The injury or long-term illness must require the employee to take at least thirty
(30) consecutive days off.

4.

The employee must have worked for the City at least one (1) year.

5.

The employee shall not have been disciplined for sick leave abuse.

6.

Prior to receiving a sick leave donation, the employee must have exhausted all
paid time off, including, but not limited to, sick leave, compensatory time,
personal leave, and vacation time.

7.

All sick leave donations must be voluntary. They must be received by posting
a request on the bulletin boards oftl;ie City and asking employees to consider
signing over some of their sick leave to the disadvantaged employee. The
opportunity for donations shall be posted for a period of seven (7) days. After
this time, no further donations may be made.

8.

No employee shall give more than sixteen (I 6) hours to the donation program
for any one (1) employee in a calendar year.

9.

No more than four (4) weeks may be contributed to the benefit of any one (1)
bargaining unit employee for any single catastrophic leave (maximum
contributions to employees outside this bargaining unit shall be set by City
policy or applicable labor agreement).

Section 16.10. All full-time employees, whose first date ofemployment is prior to or on July
1, 1992 shall, at the time oftheir retirement ("retirement" for purposes ofthis Article being
defined as [1] immediate ability to qualify for age and service retirement under PFPF, OR [2]
where the employee has ten { 10} years ofservice with the City of Washington Comt House,
OR [3] where an employee is eligible to receive disability benefits {sometimes referred to as
a "disability retirement"} from the state retirement plan {i.e., PFPF} and the employee is
approved for such benefits), receive payment in a lump sum of one (1) hour ofpay for each
hour of accumulated unused sick leave to his credit for accruals up to and including nine
hundred sixty (960) hours. All full-time employees whose first day of employment is after
July 1, 1992, shall at the time of their retirement, receive payment in a lump sum of one (1)
hour for each two (2) hours ofaccumulated unused sick leave to his credit for accruals up to
and including four hundred eighty (480) hours. A bargaining unit employee may only
convert sick leave to severance payment one (1) time with the City under this section,
regardless ofwhether the employee is rehired or otherwise returns to active City employment.
Section 16.11. Payment shall be based upon the employee's rate ofpay in Appendix A at the
time of retirement as determined by the Finance Director ofthe City of Washington Court
House.
29

Section 16.12. Payment for unused sick leave under this article shall eliminate the City's
responsibility for all accrued sick leave credited to the employee.

30

ARTICLE 17
INJURY LEAVE/LIGHT DUTY AND TRANSITIONAL WORK PROGRAM

The goal of management is for the employee to re-enter the work force. Work schedule
and /or work assignments may be modified to address physical needs. Preference will be
made to accommodate work related injuries over non-work injuries.
Section 17.01. In addition to sick leave as provided by this agreement an employee shall
receive job incurred injury leave as follows:
A. In the event an employee is injured on the job and within the scope of his or her
employment, and is unable to perform his_ or her regularly assigned duties, or a job
reassignment duty, such employee may receive as injury leave compensation his or her
regular base pay for four hundred eighty (480) hours oftime offbecause of an on-the-job
injury. Provided,however, at the time ofthe injury andinnoeventlaterthantwenty-four
(24) hours following the occmTence that gave rise to the injury, the employee notifies
(with a signed and approved City Injury Report Form) an appropriate supervisor, ofthe
injury and, unless hospitalized, within seventy-two (72) hours ofthe occurrence, provides
the employer a physician's statement stating the nature of the injury, limitations on the
employee's ability to work, and an expected date of return to work.
B. If an employee is hospitalized immediately following the injury, he shall submit the
physician's statement within seventy-two (72) hours after his dismissal from the hospital
to the employer.
C. If an employee does not notify the employer, as provided above, the first five (5) tours
of duty off of work because of the on-the-job injury shall be charged as sick leave.
D. Ifwhile on-duty, an employee sustains a re-injury or aggravation ofa prior on-the-job
injury, the first five (5) tours of duty off work because of the re-injury or aggravation
shall be charged as sick leave, unless the employee is hospitalized as a result of the reinjury or aggravation.
Section 17.02. All ofthe following standards must be met for an employee to qualify for and
use injury leave:
A.

The employee must have suffered a bona fide on-duty, work-related injury.

B.

The injury must prevent the employee from performing his normal job duties or a job
reassignment duty which can be perfmmed even with the job injury.

C.

The employee must report such injury to his immediate supervisor within the notice
requirements set forth herein.
31

D.

The employee must report his current medical status to his department head each pay
period unless waived by the Department Head.

E.

The employee must release and deliver to the City and the City doctor all medical
records pertaining to the injury, diagnosis, treatment, therapy or other medical
information pertaining to the injury upon request.

Section 17.03. No injury leave will be granted to any employee who is offofwork because of
any of the following:
A.

Any medical condition that existed prior to the employee's original hire date,
including an aggravation or re-injury, on or off the job, of any such pre-existing
condition.

B.

Any medical condition that results from an off-the-job injury, including an
aggravation or re-injury of any such condition.

C.

Any psychological disorder or stress, unless such condition is connected with an onthe-job physical injury or significant on-duty catastrophic event.

Section 17.04.
A.

If an employee is injured while on duty, he or she may be given a job reassignment
duty, referred to as light duty, which can be performed even with the job injury, and
which is in lieu of receiving injury leave/sick leave compensation, with the approval
ofthe employee's physician or the employer's physician as set forth in Section 17.05
below, and in conjunction with Section 17.04 (B) and (C).
If an employee is injured while off duty, he or she may request a job reassignment
duty, referred to as light duty, which can be performed even with the injury, and
which is in lieu of sick leave compensation, with the approval of the employee's
physician or the employer's physician as set forth in Section 17.05 below, and in
conjunction with Section 17.04(B) and (C).

B.

If the light duty is part of the operations of another department within the City, the
employee shall have the option of taking the out-of-department reassignment or
remaining on appropriate leave, whether or not the injury was on-duty or off-duty.

C.

If the injury is an on-duty injury, and if the light duty is part of the operations ofthe
Fire Department, the employee must accept the light duty, provided that there is
physician's approval to do so. Ifthe injury is an off-duty injury, and ifthe light duty is
part ofthe operations ofthe Fire Department, the employee may voluntarily accept the
light duty, provided that there is physician's approval to do so.
32

D.

If an employee aggravates the injury that prompted the taking oflnjury Leave or sick
leave during a light duty assignment, he or she may return to the appropriate leave
status. If any such aggravation continues for more than three (3) consecutive work
days (or 72 work hours), the Employer may require that the employee submit himself
or herself to a medical examination by a licensed physician selected by the employer
in order to determine whether the employee can perform the light duty. Refusal to
submit to such examination may lead to suspension or denial of Injury Leave or sick
leave compensation.

E.

Any employee who is found to have been dishonest in claiming an aggravation of an
injury may be disciplined under the contract.

F.

An employee on injury leave or light duty shall be enrolled into the Transitional Work
Program (TWP) as per City policy.

G.

An employee on light duty shall be placed in the TWP within ten (IO) worldng shifts
or two hundred forty (240) working hours, from time placed on injury report.

H.

An employee on light duty is allowed to take call back assignments to assist with non
emergency duties, but is not eligible for shift overtime.

I.

An employee on light duty shall remain on full paid status at the current hourly pay
rate found in Appendix A while performing actual work for the Employer. An
employee shall not be on full pay status due to light duty and also be receiving lost
time workers' compensation for his injury. If an employee files a workers'
compensation claim for his injury after being placed on light duty, the employee shall
execute a wage agreement letter with the City acknowledging the pay the employee
has received from the City (in the light duty status) so that the City may be reimbursed
by the Workers I Compensation Bureau.

Section 17.05.
A.

An employee claiming the right to receive, or who is receiving, injury leave
compensation may be required by the employer at any time to submit himself or
herself for a medical examination by a licensed physician selected by the employer.
The employer will pay any legitimate cost for examination that the employee's
medical insurance or Workers' Compensation does not cover, including travel
expenses. HSA shall not be used to fund these expenses. An employee with a PPO
Medical Plan may be reimbursed any out of pocket medical charges not covered by
the Health Insurance Plan. If the employee refuses to submit to a medical
examination, injury leave compensation may be suspended or denied.

B.

If the report from the physician selected by the City is in conflict with the report
submitted by the employee's physician regarding the nature ofthe injury, limitations
33

on the employee's ability to work or the expected date ofreturn to work, the employee
shall be examined by a third physician selected from a list of physicians to be
mutually agreed to by the parties. The opinion of said third physician shall be
determinative.
Section 17.06. If an employee returns to work following an on-the-job injury for which he
received less than the full injury leave benefit provided herein, and within five (5) tours from
the date of his return, the employee's physician or the employer's physician as set forth in
17.05, above, determines that the employee, because ofthe injury, is unable to perform those
duties the employee has been assigned following the injury, the employee will be entitled to
the balance of the injury leave, subject to the conditions set forth herein.
Section 17.07. An employee shall not receive both job injury leave and lost time workers'
compensation for his injury. If an employee files a workers' compensation claim for his
injury after having received injury leave, the employee shall execute a wage agreement letter
with the City acknowledging the job injury leave time offthe employee has received from the
City so that the City may be reimbursed by the Ohio Bureau of Workers' Compensation.
Section 17.08. In the event that an employee has been injured by, or exposed to, a toxic or
infectious substance and/or disease, which occurs in the course or scope of his or her
employment with the City ofWashington Court House Fire Department, and such employee
is sent to the hospital for testing, treatment, and/or preventative measures, the City shall
assume all costs for such testing, treatment, and/or preventative measures (thereby resulting
in no payment by either billing or co-payment by the employee for such testing) if the Ohio
Bureau ofWorkers' Compensation subsequently determines that it will deny such claim as a
non-mJury.

34

ARTICLE18
FUNERAL LEAVE

Section 18.01. Fifty-three {53) hour eligible employees will be granted paid leave, for a
maximum of forty-eight (48) hours, in the event of a death of an immediate family member
defined as, mother, father, brother, sister, spouse, child, step-child, grandparents, grandchild,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, step mother, or step father. In order to receive Funeral Leave,
the employee must attend the funeral of the deceased.
Any eligible employee will be granted paid leave, for a maximum oftwenty-four (24) hours,
in the event of a death of a family member defined as step-brother, step-sister, daughter-inlaw, son-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, aunt, uncle, legal guardian or other person who
stands in place of the employee's parent, or any other related person having established
pe1manent residence in the employee's household. In order to receive Funeral Leave, the
employee must attend the funeral of the deceased.
Section 18.02. The City may, in its discretion, permit a bargaining unit employee to use
accrued but unused sick leave to attend the funeral ofany person not specified in this Article,
or to extend the funeral leave period following the death of any relative provided for in this
Article. Such leave may only be approved upon written demand from the employee and after
review and approval by the Fire Chief and the City Manager.

35

ARTICLE 19
MILITARY LEAVE
Section 19.01. Employees shall be granted military leave in accordance with applicable state
and/or federal law.

36

ARTICLE20
PERSONAL LEAVE

Section 20.01. An employee shall be allowed two (2) twenty-four (24) hour shifts of
personal leave each calendar year, commencing after one ( 1) year ofservice. This leave shall
not be accumulated, and must be taken as whole days.
Section 20.01 L Employee's personal leave request shall be submitted not more than sixty
(60) days in advance. Personal leave shall be at the discretionary approval ofthe Fire Chief
or designee in advance. There is no restriction on prior notice, providing advance approval is
obtained from the Chief or his designee.

37

ARTICLE21
HEALTH INSURANCE
Section 21.01. All full-time bargaining unit employees shall be entitled to participate in the
City's Group Hospitalization (Health) Insurance Program. All full-time bargaining unit
employees have the option to participate in any insurance plan offered by the City ofwhich
they are eligible to participate.
An eligible employee may waive his rights to participate in either single or family coverage.
If an employee waives this benefit, such employee may not revoke the waiver until the next
open enrollment period and may be accepted only after medical review, if required by the
insurance provider.
The City may take action to comply with applicable laws ofthe State of Ohio or the Federal
Government of the United States. Further, the City may take action to avoid any tax on High
Cost Health Insurance Plans. The City's decision on insurance carrier, administrators or plan
design shall be final.
Section 21.02. The participating employee shall pay twelve percent (12%) ofthe applicable
premium for the duration ofthis agreement. Such payment shall be by payroll deduction and
shall be divided into two (2) equal deductions per month. The City will fund the bargaining
unit employee at a level equal to any other employee who participates in the HSA plan. The
City will deposit to the HSA, in four (4) equal payments, the full annual amount by April 30th
of each calendar year ofthe contract, unless Federal and/or State law specifies otherwise. In
any succeeding year, bargaining unit employees will be responsible for a deductible amount
equal to the least amount payable by any City employee who participates in the HSA plan.
Section 21.03. Ifthe City at anytime during the duration ofthis agreement adds other types
of insurance for other City employees, such elective insurance will be made available to
employees of this bargaining unit.

38

ARTICLE22
LUMP SUM DEATH BENEFITS
Section 22.01. The City shall provide a te1m life policy for each employee with a value of
$50,000.00 payable to either the spouse, beneficiary, or estate of any employee who dies
while employed by the City.
Section 22.02. In the event that a bargaining unit employee's death is attributable to an onduty event (as identified by the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund ["PFPF"] as "covered
causes of death"), the City shall pay a lump sum death benefit to designated beneficiaries (or
PFPF eligible survivors, if no designations are made).
The total amount ofdeath benefit shall be calculated by using the hourly rate ofthe employee
at the time of death multiplied by the hours in five (5) pay periods. The death benefit is a
lump sum payment and is not increased or decreased by the number of beneficiaries. Such
lump sum death benefit payment shall be made at the next payroll distribution day following
receipt by the Employer of the employee's death certificate.

39

ARTICLE23
PENSION AND RETIREMENT PLAN

Section 23.01. The City will continue to provide the pension and retirement plan for
members ofthe Fire Department required by applicable provisions ofthe Ohio Revised Code.

40

ARTICLE24
SAFETY AND HEALTH
Section 24.01. The City will continue to observe occupational safety and health laws and
regulations applicable to its Fire Department operations and personnel.
Section 24.02. The City shall provide and maintain all required safety equipment and
clothing (excluding uniforms covered elsewhere in this agreement).
Section 24.03. The Safety Manning level shall be a minimum of three (3) people per shift.
Section 24.04 It is a long-term goal ofthe Employer and the Union to eventually elevate the
Manning level so that the department can accomplish a "2 in/2 out" with shift personnel.
Section 24.05. A safety committee shall be established between the Union and the City for
reviewing and providing meaningful input on safety equipment purchases. The City shall
have final say on all safety equipment purchases.

41

ARTICLE25
RESIDENCE
Section 25.01. All employees must reside within Fayette County, Ohio, or a contiguous
county, within six (6) months after their permanent appointment to the Fire Department and,
as a condition of continued employment, must continue to reside within such area. IfO.R.C.
Section 9 .481 is found to be unconstitutional by a court ofcompetent jurisdiction, residency,
as established in the previous sentence, shall be set at Fayette County, Ohio, only. Any
bargaining unit employee who has moved to a contiguous county properly under such former
rule, shall be permitted to retain such residence in the contiguous county; however if such
employee changes residence again after living in the contiguous county, he or she must
establish residence in Fayette County, Ohio.
Section 25 .02. In the event required residency is outlawed or found unconstitutional by
either state or Federal Government, then employees shall have the right to live anywhere they
choose.

42

ARTICLE26
DEFINITION OF SENIORITY
Section 26.01. Seniority in the bargaining unit shall be determined by continuous service in
the Fire Department calculated from the most recent date of employment. Continuous
service shall be broken only by resignation, discharge, retirement, failure to return from
layoff when recalled, or failure to return from authorized leave of absence upon completion
of same. Employees with the same employment date shall be assigned to the seniority list in
order of their ranking on the Civil Service Eligibility List.

43

ARTICLE27
NON-DISCRIMINATION
Section 27.01. Neither the Employer nor the IAFF, Local 699 shall discriminate unlawfully
against any bargaining unit employee on the basis ofage, sex, race, color, religion, disability,
national origin, on the basis ofmembership or non-membership in the Union, or on the basis
oflawful activity on behalf ofthe Union performed in accordance with applicable provisions
of this Agreement. The employer, however, reserves the right to establish bona fide
occupational qualifications, which employees and prospective employees must satisfy as a
term or condition of employment.
Section 27.02. All references to employees in this Agreement designate both sexes, and
wherever the male gender is used, it shall be construed to include male and female
employees.
Section 27 .03. No employee shall be discriminated against, harassed or reassigned due to the
employee exercising his or her grievance rights granted under this agreement.

44

ARTICLE28
APPENDICES AND AMENDMENTS
Section 28.01. All appendices and amendments of this Agreement shall be numbered (or
lettered), dated, and signed by the responsible parties and shall be subject to all provisions of
this Agreement.

45

ARTICLE29
SAVINGS CLAUSE

Section 29.01. If any provision of this Agreement, or the application of such provision,
should be rendered or declared invalid by any court action or by reason of any existing or
subsequently enacted legislation, the remaining parts ofthis Agreement shall remain in full
force and effect.

46

ARTICLE30
LABOR-MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
Section 30.01. Labor Management meetings shall be held by mutual agreement.

47

ARTICLE31
DRUG/ALCOHOL TESTING

Section 31.01. Drug/alcohol testing may be conducted on employees post-incident or with
reasonable suspicion.
Section 31.02. Reasonable suspicion that an employee used, or is using, a controlled
substance or alcohol may be based upon, but not limited to:
A.

Observable phenomena, such as direct observation of drug and alcohol use or
possession and/or the physical symptoms of being under the influence of a drug or
alcohol;

B.

A pattern of abnormal conduct or erratic behavior;

C.

Arrest or conviction for a drug or alcohol-related offense, or the identification of an
employee as the focus of a criminal investigation into illegal drug or alcohol
possession, use, or trafficking;

D.

Information provided either by reliable or credible sources and independently
corroborated;

E.

Evidence that an employee had tampered with a previous drug test; and,

F.

Facts or circumstances developed in the course of an authorized investigation of an
accident or unsafe working practice.

A bargaining unit employee may ofhis own volition, even ifnot ordered to do so, undergo a
drug and/or alcohol screening test if he is involved in an on-duty incident or accident
involving bodily injury, extensive property damage or death. Testing done under these
circumstances will be treated in the same manner as if the employee had been ordered to
undergo screening.
Section 31.03. All drug-screening tests shall be conducted by medical laboratories meeting
the standards ofthe Department ofHealth and Human Services. No test shall be considered
positive until it has been confirmed by a Gas Chromatography/Mass-Spectrometry full scan
test or its equivalent. The procedures utilized by the Employer and testing laboratmy shall
include an evidentiary chain of custody control. All samples collected shall be contained in
two (2) separate containers for use in the prescribed testing procedures. All procedures shall
be outlined in writing and this outline shall be followed in all situations arising under this
Article.

48

Section 31.04. Alcohol testing shall be done the same as to detect drivers operating a motor
vehicle under the influence. A positive result of a blood alcohol concentration of .02% or
above shall entitle the Employer to proceed with sanctions as set forth in this Article.
A.

The results ofthe testing shall be delivered to the Employer and the employee tested.
An employee whose confirm~tory test result is positive shall have the right to request
a certified copy of the testing results in which the vendor shall affirm that the test
results were obtained using the approved protocol methods. The employee shall
provide a signed release for disclosure ofthe testing results. Refusal to submit to the
testing provided for under this Agreement may be grounds for discipline.

B.

The Employer may suspend the employee without loss of pay before the time the
confirmatory test results are complete. Ifthe screening test and confirmatory test are
positive, the Employer may discipline the employee. The use ofillicit substances, on
or off duty, will ordinarily result in termination. The improper use of prescription
drugs and/or alcohol may result in a lesser discipline, depending upon the relevant
circumstances. Such discipline must be unifo1m in its application.

Section 31. 05. If a drug test is confirmed positive, the employee is entitled to have the
sample in the second container tested in the manner prescribed above at the employee's
expense. The results of this test, whether positive or negative, shall be determinative.
Section 31.06. A list of two (2) collection sites shall be majntained by the Employer. The
DHHS ce1tified laboratories selected by these collection sites shall conduct any testing
directed by the Employer.
Section 31.07. Ifthe testing required above has produced a positive result, the Employer may
take disciplinary action and/or require the employee to participate in any rehabilitation or
detoxification program that is covered by the employee's health insurance. An employee who
participates in a rehabilitation or detoxification program shall be allowed to use sick time,
compensatory days, vacation leave, and personal leave days for a period ofthe rehabilitation
or detoxification program. If no such leave credits are available, the employee shall be
placed on medical leave of absence without pay for the period of the rehabilitation or
detoxification program. Upon completion ofsuch program, and upon receiving results from
a retest demonstrating that the employee is no longer abusing a substance, the employee may
be returned to his former position. Such employee may be subject to periodic re-testing upon
his return to his position for a period ofone (1) year from the date ofhis return to work. Any
employee in a rehabilitation or detoxification program in accordance with this Article will
not lose any seniority or benefits, should it be necessary for the employee to be placed on
medical leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days.
Section 31.08. If the employee refuses to undergo rehabilitation or detoxification, or ifhe
tests positive during a re-testing within one (I) year after his return to work from such a
49

program, the employee shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination
of his employment.
Section 31.09. Costs ofall drug screening tests and confirmatory tests shall be borne by the
Employer except that any test initiated by the employee shall be at the employee's expense.
Section 31. 10. All test results and actions taken under or pursuant to this Article shall be
kept confidential in accordance with and subject to state and federal law.
Section 31.11. In the event that an employee is required to submit to a drug test, the
following guidelines should be observed.
A.

The employee shall be granted enough time to change from uniform to civilian
clothing.

B.

The employee will be transported to the designated testing center by a supervisor.

C.

The employee may request that a Fire Department employee ofhis or her choice be
present for the transportation and test, provided said individual is on duty and
reasonably available.

50

ARTICLE32
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE, AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
Section 32.01. Family and Medical Leave will be granted pursuant to Section 4.08 of the
City's Personnel Policy Manual. Such policy is attached as an Appendix to this agreement.
The parties to this agreement aclmowledge that the City may implement changes to its Family
and Medical Leave policy, Affordable Care Act consistent with federal law.

51

ARTICLE33
ABANDONMENT OF POSITION

Section 33.01. Absence without leave from work for a period oftwo (2) entire, consecutive
working days will be considered by the City Manager as a resignation, excluding FMLA
qualifying events as described in Article 32 (Family and Medical Leave) ofthis Agreement.
Unless otherwise determined by the City Manager upon presentation of supporting
documentation of extraordinary circumstances, the employee's resignation in this situation is
not considered to be in good standing and the employee is not eligible for rehire.

52

ARTICLE34
DURATION OF THE AGREEMENT

Section 34.01. The agreement shall be effective from the 1st day of July, 2019 and shall
remain in full force and effect until the 30th day of June, 2022. It shall automatically be
renewed from year to year thereafter, unless either party notifies the other in writing on or
before ninety (90) days prior to the anniversary date that it desires to modify or terminate the
Agreement. In such an event, the meeting will be held at least forty-five (45) days prior to
the expiration date for the purpose ofdiscussing considered changes and/or modifications. If
the parties do not arrive at a mutually satisfactory agreement by the termination or
anniversary date, this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect until such time that
either party gives a five (5) day written notice to terminate this Agreement.

53

ARTICLE35
PHYSICAL FITNESS

Section 35.01. The Employer and the Union (IAFF, Local 699) have recognized the need
and benefit of creating a formal physical fitness program for the mutual benefit of the
members, the department, and the citizens of the community, and both parties are in
agreement regarding the establishment of such a program.
Section 35.02. The Physical Fitness Program has been established, and all full-time
bargaining unit employees must participate in the program, so long as they have received
prior approval for participation by the Medical Director who oversees the program. All fulltime bargaining unit employees, who are approved to participate, are required to exert a good
faith effort toward the goals ofthe Physical Fitness Program, as illustrated by the guidelines
constructed by the established consultant. It is the goal of the Employer and the Union to
maintain an outside consulting firm for coordination ofthe Physical Fitness Program, unless
it is not feasible or beneficial to do so.
Section 35.03. The Employer and the Union shall establish a Wellness and Fitness
Committee, consisting oftwo (2) management and two (2) union members that shall meet at
least semi-annually to evaluate the progress of the Physical Fitness Program and to make
recommendations on the program. Ifthe Wellness and Fitness Committee determines that it
must mandate a change to the program guidelines established by the consultant, it must do so
by a majority vote ofthe Committee.

54

ARTICLE36
COMPENSABLE TIME
Section 36.01 Compensable Time: Employees may elect to take overtime or Holiday pay as
compensable time. Accumulated unused compensable time can only be used when it does
not create overtime. This does not apply to crews with three (3) or less members. The City
and Union shall strive to use unused compensable time by not creating overtime.
One (1) hour of overtime equals one and one half (11/2) hours of compensable time. One
hour (1) of holiday time equals one hour (1) of compensable time.

55

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

\3

This contract is entered this
\b
day or::s= ,s: , e. , 2019 between the City
of Washington Court House and the International Association of Fire Fighters, Local 699.
The party hereinafter subscribed approves the forgoing contact for a period being
~...., \, ri,O\<\ and ending Zfuae'1D 1a,t>-ad-- . By signing this acknowledgement the
partiks il.nderstands and so covenant that this is the complete agreement ofthe parties and no
terms or conditions exist outside this contract.
FOR THE CITY OF WASHINGTON
COURTHOUSE

FOR THE IAFF.

Josephenen
City Manager

IAFF Pri sident, Local 699

~(};(!~

~Awk bd__

\AiF Negotiation Team Member

] Chrisman
Chairman of Council

IAFF~~on Team Member

~

IAFF Negotiation Team Member
ATTEST:

k Q Q 0 __,__,

(2_~cl

Clerk to City Coun~il

'

56

APPENDIX A (07.01.2019 through 06.30.2020)

Section 4. Members ofthe bargaining unit shall be compensated according to the following rate of
compensation starting July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020. 3 1/2% increase
FIRE FIGHTER

Step A

StepB
$15.38

$14.90

StepC

*****

StepD

*****

StepE

*****

StepF

*****

StepG

*****

FIRE FIGHTER/EMT

Step A

StepB

$15.17

$15.59

Step C
$16.10

StepD
$17.79

StepE
$18.40

StepF
$18.98

Step G
$19.55

LIEUTENANT/EMT

$20.14

CAPTAIN

Step A

StepB

****

****

Step C

****

StepD
$18.61

StepE
$19.21

StepF
$19.86

StepG
$21.97

CAPTAIN/EMT

Step A

****

StepB

****

Step C

****

StepD
$20.32

StepE
$20.97

StepF
$21.62

StepG
$22.27

57

APPENDIX A (07.01.2020 - 6.30.2021)

Section 4. Members ofthe bargaining unit shall be compensated according to the following rate of
compensation starting July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2021. 3.5% increase.
FIRE FIGHTER

Step A

StepB

$15.42

$15.92

Step C

****

StepD

****

StepE

****

StepF

****

StepG

****

FIRE FIGHTER/EMT

Step A

StepB

$15.70

$16.14

Step C
$16.66

StepD
$18.41

StepE
$19.04

StepF
$19.64

StepG
$20.23

LIEUTENANT/EMT

$20.84

CAPTAIN

Step A

StepB

****

****

StepC

****

StepD
$19.26

StepE
$19.88

StepF
$20.56

StepG
$22.74

CAPTAIN/EMT

Step A

****

StepB

****

StepC

****

StepD
$21.03

StepE
$21.70

StepF
$22.38

StepG
$23.05

58

APPENDIX A (07.01.2021 - 6.30.2022)

Section 4. Members ofthe bargaining unit shall be compensated according to the following rate of
compensation starting July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022. 3.5% increase.
FIRE FIGHTER

Step A

StepB

$15.96

$16.48

StepC

****

StepD

****

StepE

****

StepF

****

StepG

****

FIRE FIGHTER/EMT

Step A

StepB

$16.25

$16.70

StepC
$17.24

StepD
$19.05

StepE
$19.71

StepF
$20.33

StepG
$20.94

LIEUTENANT/EMT

$21.57

CAPTAIN

Step A

StepB

****

****

StepC

****

StepD
$19.93

StepE
$20.58

StepF
$21.28

StepG
$23.54

CAPTAIN/EMT

Step A

****

StepB

****

StepC

****

StepD
$21.77

StepE
$22.46

StepF
$23.16

StepG
$23.86

59
