IN THE MATTER OF THE
ARBITRATION BETWEEN:
PLAINFIELD CHARTER TOWNSHIP
AND

MERC Case No. L04 B-7005

PLAINFIELD TOWNSHIP FIRE FIGHTERS
IAFF LOCAL 3890
/
COMPULSORY ARBITRATION
Pursuant to Act 312,
Michigan Public Act of 1969, as amended
FINAL OPINION AND AWARD

Arbitration Panel
William E. Long
Arbitrator/Chair
Steve Girard, Attorney
Employer Delegate
Alison Paton, Attorney
Union Delegate
Date: August 8, 2007

INTRODUCTION
These proceedings were initiated by petition for arbitration dated March 28, 2005
pursuant to Act 312 of the Public Acts of 1979, as amended. The arbitration panel is
comprised of Independent Arbitrator William E. Long, Township Delegate Steven
Girard and Union Delegate Alison Paton.
A pre-hearing telephone conference was held July 26, 2005. It was agreed by the
parties that if they were unable to reach agreement on external comparable
communities the parties would identify proposed comparables and submit briefs and
supporting documentation to the independent arbitrator and the independent arbitrator
would issue a separate decision on comparability prior to beginning the hearing on
other issues. The parties were unable to agree on all comparable communities. The
parties submitted briefs and evidence in support of their respective proposed
comparables November 1, 2005. A partial opinion on comparability was issued by the
Independent Arbitrator November 14, 2005. The parties agreed that the partial opinion
and order on comparable communities will be considered incorporated in and part of
this final order and opinion. Communities found to be comparable to Plainfield
Township in this proceeding are: the City of Norton Shores, Grand Haven Township,
Muskegon Township, the City of Grandville, the City of Holland, and the city of
Jackson.
Five days of hearings on the issues in dispute were held March 13, March 15, July
12, July 13, and October 24, 2006 at the Plainfield Township Fire Hall, Grand Rapids,
Michigan. Plainfield Township was represented by Attorney Steve Girard. The Union
was represented by Attorney Alison Paton. The record consists of 958 pages of record
testimony in five volumes six Joint Exhibits (J-1 through J-6); 85 (E-1 through E-85)
Township Exhibits; and 62 (U-1 through U-62) Union exhibits. References to record
testimony will be identified as T- page number and references to exhibits will be: (J-1, E10, U-40), etc.
Last offers of settlement were submitted by the parties on February 22 and 26,
2007. Post-hearing briefs were submitted by the parties on June 18, 2007. The parties
agreed there would be no reply briefs.
By written stipulation, which is contained in the case file, the parties waived all
time limits applicable to this proceeding, both statutory and administrative.
2

At the beginning of the hearing stage of this proceeding, March 13, 2006, the
parties identified 39 separate issues for the panel’s consideration (J-1). During the
course of the proceeding the following issues were withdrawn:
-

Issue # 3 – proposed by the Employer to add a new paragraph to Article 8,
section 2

-

Issue # 18 – proposed by the Union to delete Article 21, section 2(1)

-

Issue# 22- proposed by the Employer to modify Article 31, section 3

-

Issue# 37 – proposed by the Union to add a new article addressing
emergency medical certification

In addition, during the course of the proceeding the parties addressed the
following issues by way of stipulation:
1) “The parties agree to delete Article 9, Section 9 which states: “The President
of the Union shall be retained in the Township service in the event of layoff,
regardless of their position on the seniority list, so long as there is work that
they have the ability to do.” (J-3)
2) The parties agree to modify Article 21, Holidays, Section 4 as follows:
“Section 4. Holiday Pay. Eligible regular full-time employees shall receive ten
(10) hours pay for each recognized full day holiday. Five (5) hours pay for
each half-day holiday. Holiday pay shall be at the employee’s straight time
rate. The person who actually works the holiday gets paid at time and a half
for holiday hours worked. An employee who works holiday hours that are
not his regularly scheduled shift shall receive double time for such holiday
hours worked.
(a) Non-24-hour shift employees receive the day or half-day (1/2) off
with pay.
(b) All 24-hour shift employees work regularly scheduled days (including
holidays) and receive holiday pay. (J-3)
In exchange for Employer’s Agreement to # 2 above, the Union withdraws its
uniform cleaning allowance proposal.
3) The Parties agree to add a new section to Article 31 regarding payment in lieu
of insurance:
“Employees furnishing proof of insurance coverage under the policy of a
spouse shall receive an annual cash benefit of $2500 in lieu of coverage
offered under this contract. This amount will in future years be increased as
the Board determines to increase the amount applicable to other Township
employees.” (J-4)
4) Stipulation of the Parties re: MERC Case No. L04 B-7005:
3

1) The Union and the Township hereby agree that, effective January 1,
2007 or as soon thereafter as administratively possible, the Priority
Health plan will be replaced by the BCN Plan E health plan (including
BCBS $10/$40 prescription coverage with 1xMOPD) as is set forth in
Township Exhibit 83, except that the Durable Medical Equipment
coverage will be 80% (not 50%) and the plan will include students
under family coverage. This change is without prejudice to any
proposals or last best offers that either party may make in thi8s Act 312
proceeding.
2) The Union and the Township further agree to supplement the record
with the following:
a) The Union’s primary reason for agreeing to this change is to
lessen the premium costs for the PPO and POS plans by way of
eliminating the ‘participation factor’ since, as of January 2007,
all Township employees including the bargaining unit will be
covered only by plans offered by BCBSM.
b) The Municipal Worker (Water) bargaining unit employees in
the Township will have the BCN plan E in place of the Priority
Health Plan effective January 1, 2007. The Township’s nonunion employees will have the BCN Health Living Plan in place
of the Priority Health Plan effective January 1, 2007. Regarding
the non-union out-of-state retirees who have in the past been
covered under the PPO Plan 1 (which plan is also currently
available to the IAFF bargaining unit), they will continue to
have the PPO Plan I available to them after January 2007 (as
testified by Township Supervisor Homan) the Township
reserves the right to change their plan.
c) Township Exhibit 85 (currently a two-page exhibit) shall be
replaced with the attached one-page document.
d) The attached document entitled “January 2007 PPO Plan I and
POS Plan 4 Premium Rates” shall be added as Joint Exhibit 6.
e) This stipulation shall be added as Joint Exhibit 5. (J-5)
The Panel discussed and determined that of the thirty-four (34) issues remaining
to be addressed by the Panel, thirty-one (31) are economic issues and three (3) are noneconomic issues. The non-economic issues are issues: #1, #6, and #38. The issues will be
addressed in this Final Opinion and Award in the order in which they were addressed
by the Parties in their post-hearing briefs which generally follows the numerical order
of the Articles in the Contract. Issues will be identified as economic or non-economic as
each is addressed.
The Employer took the position on several issues that the issue was a permissive
subject of bargaining and therefore not within the jurisdiction of the Panel to address.
The Union took the position that these issues are a mandatory subject of bargaining.

4

During pre-hearing conferences it was agreed that the parties would submit
arguments on the issue of mandatory v permissive subject of bargaining on each issue
in which that position was raised and the Arbitrator would issue a ruling on the
question of permissive v mandatory subject of bargaining on an issue-by-issue basis.
There are five issues in which the Employer argues the proposed change is a permissive
subject of bargaining. Those issues are issues 4, 5, 11, 33 and 34. The Arbitrator will
address the question of permissive v mandatory subject of bargaining in the discussion
and findings on each issue but in so doing may refer to a previous issue discussion
when the basis for the findings of whether the proposed change is a permissive or
mandatory subject of bargaining is basically the same.
Contract provisions not before the panel for determination that are in the current
collective bargaining agreement will be advanced into the new agreement the same as
under the old agreement.
When considering the economic issues in this proceeding, the panel was guided
by Section 8 of Act 312. Section 8 provides that “as to each economic issue, the
arbitration panel shall adopt the last offer of settlement, which in the opinion of the
arbitration panel, more nearly complies with the applicable factors prescribed in Section
9.”
The applicable factors to be considered as set forth in Section 9 are as follows:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)
(f)

(g)
(h)

The lawful authority of the employer.
Stipulations of the parties.
The interests and welfare of the public and the financial ability of the unit of government to meet
those costs.
Comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of employment of the employees involved in the
arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours and conditions of employment of other employees
performing similar services and with other employees generally:
(i) In public employment in comparable communities.
(ii) In private employment in comparable communities.
The average consumer prices for goods and services, commonly known as the cost of living.
The overall compensation presently received by the employees, including direct wage
compensation, vacations, holidays and other excused time, insurance and pensions, medical and
hospitalization benefits, the continuity and stability of employment, and all other benefits
received.
Changes in any of the foregoing circumstances during the pendency of the arbitration
proceedings.
Such other factors, not confined to the foregoing, which are normally or traditionally taken into
consideration in the determination of wages, hours and conditions of employment through
voluntary collective bargaining, mediation, fact-finding, arbitration or otherwise between the
parties, in the public service or in private employment.

Where not specifically referenced, the above factors were considered but not
discussed in the interest of brevity.
5

COMPARABLE COMMUNITIES
As noted above, a partial opinion on comparability was issued by the
Independent Arbitrator on November 14, 2005. The findings and support for that
opinion and partial order, which is part of this file, are incorporated by reference into
this opinion and award. The Independent Arbitrator found the following communities
comparable to Plainfield Township: the City of Norton Shores, Grand Haven Township,
Muskegon Township, the City of Grandville, the City of Holland, and the city of
Jackson. Therefore the panel chooses the following communities as comparable to
Plainfield Township:
The City of Norton Shores
Employer: Agree

Disagree

Union:

Disagree

Agree

The Cities of Holland and Jackson
Employer: Agree____________________

Disagree______________________

Union:

Disagree______________________

Agree____________________

The City of Grandville and the Townships of Grand Haven and Muskegon
Employer: Agree____________________

Disagree_______________________

Union:

Disagree_______________________

Agree____________________

The Independent Arbitrator acknowledges the arguments advanced by the
Union in its post-hearing brief. The Union argues that of the six comparable
communities, greater weight should be given to the four comparables which, like
Plainfield Township, have an established union/employer labor relationship. The
Union points out that Grandville’s fire employees are non-union employees and
therefore not in a position to collectively bargain and that Grand Haven Township’s fire
employees just recently organized and its current contract is the first that was
collectively bargained and not necessarily reflective of “everything that fairness and
comparatives support.”
The Union also argues that no reliance should be made in this proceeding upon
the wages or other employment conditions of other Plainfield Township employees.
The Union points to County of Wexford v POAM, Mich App No.108033 (7/19/89,
unpub), lv den Sup Ct No. 86823 (2/26/90) in support of its argument. That decision
stated: “We agree with the circuit court that Sec 9 does not require wage comparison
with other Wexdford County employees.” The Union argues that in this case even the
6

Plainfield Township’s current contract with the Municipal Employees Association, the
only other group of Township Employees who bargain collectively with the Employer,
was imposed unilaterally by the Employer and therefore not reflective of a true
collectively bargained for agreement. (U-51) The Union says that in light of the County
of Wexford decision and the lack of any other Act 312-covered units within the
Township, the appropriate analysis of all issues mandates that where Section 9(d)
evidence is deemed relevant, exclusive reliance be placed on the fire department
comparables.
On the issue of the weight given to the external comparables, the Arbitrator will
give such weight as he deems appropriate to each of the Comparable Communities
based on the evidence in the record on an issue-by-issue basis. Section 9(d) directs the
arbitration panel to base its findings, opinions and order upon a comparison of the
wages, hours and conditions of employment of the employees involved in the
arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours and conditions of employment of other
employees performing similar services and with other employees generally: (i) In public
employment in comparable communities, (ii) In private employment in comparable communities.
The Arbitrator does not interpret Section 9(d) as limiting consideration of comparables
to only those employee groups who have entered in to collective bargaining agreements
or whose collective bargaining agreements are a result of Act 312 proceedings. Such a
limitation would prohibit consideration of employees in private employment in
comparable communities pursuant to Section 9(c)(ii). Also, Section 9(c)(i) permits a
comparison with other employees generally in public employment in comparable
communities. It does not limit the comparison to only those public employees who
perform similar services. And certainly one would conclude that public employees
employed by Plainfield Township would be employed in a community comparable to
that of the employees involved in this arbitration proceeding.
Additionally, Section 9(h) directs the arbitration panel to consider “Such other
factors, not confined to the foregoing, which are normally or traditionally taken into
consideration in the determination of wages, hours and conditions of employment
through voluntary collective bargaining, mediation, fact-finding, arbitration or otherwise
between the parties, in the public service or in private employment.” The Independent
Arbitrator finds nothing in Act 312 that mandates that only those wages, hours, and
conditions of employment of employees performing similar services and/or whose
wages, hours, and conditions of employment are a result of collectively bargained for
7

agreements can be among the factors considered by the panel when determining its
findings, opinions and order. Act 312 does not set out a strict formula for what weight
should be given to each factor identified in Section 9 and indeed subsection (h) allows
the panel to consider other factors, not specified. The Independent Arbitrator will
consider and give such weight to these factors as deemed appropriate on an issue-byissue basis.

8

Sec. 9(c) Interests and Welfare of the public and the financial ability
of the unit of government to meet those costs
Section 9(c) of Act 312 requires the panel to consider the interests and welfare of
the public and the financial ability of the unit of government to meet those costs when
reaching its conclusions. The Employer acknowledges in its post-hearing brief that the
Township is not in imminent financial crisis but it does point out that its budget
projections for 2005 and 2006 would require drawing funds from its general fund
reserve account in order to balance its budget. (E-71) It notes that its second largest
source of income, state revenue sharing, has declined each of the past five years. (T-793)
The Employer says now is not the time for the panel to impose an expensive contract.
The Union, in its post-hearing brief, argues that the Employer is able to pay for
all of the improvements proposed by the Union in this proceeding. The Union points to
evidence it presented at the proceeding that shows the Township growth in housing
units of 28% from 1990 to 2000. (U-1) The Employer testified however that in 2006 the
Township had 70 % fewer housing starts than in the previous year. The Union
presented evidence that Plainfield Township’s total taxable value per capita, based on
the 2000 census, was 9% above the average of the comparable communities in 2005. (U3) and that its total general fund revenues increased by 16.2% from FY 2003 to FY 2005
while its expenditures for the Fire Department during that time increased only 3.8%. (U4) The Union also points out that the total millage assessed by the Township is the
lowest of all the comparables (U-5, U-6) and noted the Township had a General Fund
balance at the end of FY 2005 exceeding $2 million (E- 71) which the Union says is large
compared to the approximately $7 million General Fund expenditures for FY 2005.
The community has been and continues to be supportive of its fire services and
fire department as evidenced by a recent special millage to support a bond for
construction of a new fire station. (U-6) It is also noted that the Fire Department is the
largest department and largest single expenditure in the Township’s annual budget. (E71) The Township also has experienced steady growth during the past few years and
has vacant land upon which additional growth can occur. On the other hand,
Michigan’s overall economy, which is experiencing high unemployment and a slow
down in construction and capital investment, will likely have some dampening impact
on the rate of growth in the Township during the period of this contract. The panel has
taken all of these facts into consideration when considering the interests and welfare of
9

the public and the financial ability of the Employer to pay for the costs to provide fire
protection and prevention services to its residents.

ISSUES
Issue #1 Article 6—Discipline and Discharge (Non-Economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
Article 6 of the current contract consists of one paragraph addressing Discipline
and Discharge. The Union proposes deleting the current language and replacing it with
new language consisting of three sections. The Union says its proposed changes rest
upon consideration of fairness and due process. The proposed language is more
detailed and specific regarding the policies and procedures applicable to employee
discipline.
The Union’s proposed language specifies that “no employee shall be
reprimanded, transferred, discharged, reduced in rank or pay, suspended, or otherwise
disciplined, without just cause.” This would replace current language which states:
“Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, discipline or discharge shall be for
just cause.” The Union also proposes new language which would 1) require that “All
disciplinary charges shall be brought within ten (10) business days of the Employer’s
knowledge of the alleged occurrence, unless there are extenuating circumstances
necessitating a longer period for the Employer to complete its investigation.” 2) Require
that the employee and the union representative be provided with a written statement of
charges and reason for the charges prior to a disciplinary hearing or investigatory
interview, 3) render the discipline or discharge null and void if the Employer fails to
comply with the requirements of this Article, 4) require the employees personnel
records be purged of all references to prior disciplinary action after twenty-four (24)
months following any disciplinary action and that disciplinary action occurring 24
months prior to a new discipline action not be considered in connection with the new
discipline action, 5) employee evaluations/appraisals not be used in the disciplinary
process unless the parties have bargained and reached agreement on its use.
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposes no change to the current contract language.
10

Union Position
The Union says there is no written disciplinary procedure beyond what is set
forth in Article 6 and as a result there is a lack of consistency in how discipline is
handled. (T-347) The Union says its proposed language will more clearly describe the
Employer’s obligations in the disciplinary process and reduce the possibility of
litigation between the parties by providing clearer contract language.
Employer Position
The Employer says the current language has served the parties well over the
years and the Union has failed to demonstrate a need for change. The Employer argues
that the proposed language is not supported by the comparables and, in its post-hearing
brief, points to several specific words or phrases in the proposed language that may
confuse, rather than clarify the application of the language to disciplinary proceedings,
particularly when considered in the context of other provisions in the contract, which
could lead to more, not less litigation between the parties. The Employer points to
several proposed language changes that it says is in conflict with provisions in Article 4
of the current contract dealing with Management Rights. The Employer’s position is
that language in Article 4 gives it the right to unilaterally establish rules and policies,
including policies and procedures relating to discipline and discharge. The Employer,
in its post-hearing brief, says it believes the language in Article 4 constitutes a waiver of
the normal duty to bargain over such rules and policies. The Employer urges the panel
to refrain from crafting language for the parties saying the current language has served
the parties; administration of discipline has not been a problem, and the proposed
language is not supported by the comparables.
Discussion and Findings
The independent arbitrator finds that some modification of the current language
of Article 6 addressing discipline and discharge is merited but not to the extent
proposed by the Union. Testimony during the proceeding and arguments in posthearing briefs leads the arbitrator to conclude: 1) this issue is before the panel primarily
because the parties differ upon whether the current contract requires the parties to
bargain on discipline policies and procedures (T-339), 2) because of those differing
views the parties have not cooperated in discussing and developing mutually
acceptable policies and procedures addressing disciplinary matters, 3) the Union’s
attempt to fashion language addressing these issues, while successful in bringing it to
the attention of the panel, does contain language that could be interpreted as in conflict
11

with other provisions of the contract and therefore could result in more, not less, clarity
and more, not less, litigation, 4) there are several provisions in the proposed language
that are mutually recognized by the parties as current procedure or legally required and
inclusion of these provisions would aid in clarifying the policy and procedure.
One of the difficulties presented in this issue is distinguishing: (a)the Employer’s
authority to establish “reasonable rules, regulations, policies and procedures not
inconsistent with the provisions of this agreement” and making them “available for
inspection and review by employees if such rules, regulations, policies and procedures
concern working conditions” as provided in Article 4, Section 2 of the contract dealing
with Management Rights from: (b)the question of the panel’s role in addressing the
Employer’s responsibility to collectively bargain in the development of rules,
regulations, policies and procedures involving discipline and discharge because those
particular rules and policies fall within the scope of “conditions of employment” in dispute
under Act 312, Section 9. (T-341)
The record reflects there was discussion between the parties about adopting fire
department rules and regulations but it is unclear to what extent those proposed rules
and regulations addressed discipline and discharge policies and procedures. (T-338, U46) What was clear was the Union’s interest in bargaining over rules pertaining to
employee conduct and discipline. (T-344) In any event, there was no evidence presented
demonstrating that the parties negotiated on the issue of policies and procedures
involving discipline and discharge. (T-338, 339)
The Union, by putting forth its proposed substitute language, has attempted to
address specific policies and procedures impacting disciplinary actions that would
better be addressed in mutually agreed upon rules and regulations. The Employer, in its
post-hearing brief, has pointed to several potential conflicts in language proposed by
the Union with other sections of the contract such as restrictions on “transfers” or
“reductions in pay” without just cause. Given the complexity of the issues involved in
development of policies and procedures addressing discipline, particularly as it relates
to other contract provisions, the panel is reluctant to undertake the task of developing
language that is better left to the parties to develop. The panel does not want to develop
language that would potentially result in more grievances or litigation.
On the other hand, there was record testimony revealing certain recognized
standards or acceptance on behalf of the Employer on this issue. Employer witness, Fire
Chief Peterson, testified that he would not object to a provision requiring automatic
12

removal of references to prior disciplinary actions after a period of time. (T-387). Fire
Chief Peterson also testified that the Employer strives to put in writing a statement of
the charges and reason for the charges regarding a proposed disciplinary action and
present that statement to the employee prior to a disciplinary hearing but
acknowledged that there may have been an occasion when that procedure wasn’t
followed the way it should have been. (T-389) With respect to the opportunity for
employees to have union representation during meetings with the Employer involving
disciplinary proceedings, the Employer, in its post-hearing brief, says language
addressing this is unnecessary in the contract because the Michigan Employment
Relations Commission (MERC) has already provided due process rights for employees
in investigatory interviews. The Employer says failure to provide such rights would be
an unfair labor practice and MERC has full authority to fashion a remedy. The panel
finds that incorporating language addressing these rights as currently interpreted by
MERC and the courts would help clarify to the parties what those rights are and
perhaps avoid unnecessary grievances or litigation.
Taking all of these factors into consideration the panel finds it appropriate
to modify current contract language in Article 6 addressing Discipline and
Discharge by clarifying some policies and procedures and to direct the parties
to engage in discussions involving development of rules, regulations and
procedures relating to Employee evaluation, appraisal, discipline and discharge
as those rules, regulations and procedures impact conditions of employment.
Therefore, Article 6 will be modified as follows to be effective on the date
this arbitration award is issued:
“Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, discipline or discharge
shall be for just cause. The Employer and the Union subscribe to basic
principles of progressive discipline; however the Employer may summarily
impose discipline up to and including discharge in appropriate cases. Incidents,
which occur beyond three (3) years previously, will not be considered in
evaluating discipline or discharge of an employee. The Employee’s personnel
record shall be purged of all references in connection with any prior disciplinary
action which occurred beyond three (3) years previously.
Any disciplinary hearing, or any investigatory interview conducted by the
employer with the employee which could result in discipline of the employee,
shall be conducted in conformance with the legal and procedural requirements
required by the Public Employment Relations Act, (PA 336 of 1947) and the
Compulsory Arbitration Of Labor Disputes in Police and Fire Departments Act,
(PA 312 of 1969).
13

Within three (3) months of the issuance of the Act 312 Award in MERC
Case No. L04 B-7005 the Employer shall appoint three persons and the Union
shall appoint three persons to participate in one or more special conferences as
provided in Article 33, Section 4 of this contract and shall convene the initial
special conference. The purpose of and agenda for the special conference(s)
will be to discuss and determine whether the Union and Employer can develop
mutually agreed upon rules, regulations and procedures relating to employee
evaluation, appraisal, discipline and discharge as those rules, regulations and
procedures impact conditions of employment and to develop and agree upon
such rules, regulations and procedures if possible.” [Effective upon issuance of
the Award.]
Employer:

Agree__________________ Disagree_______________________

Union:

Agree__________________ Disagree_______________________

The Employer delegate disagrees with the Panels’ Award in Issue No. 1 and specifically reserves
all its contractual and statutory rights with respect to its right to promulgate and revise policies
and procedures including, but not limited to, those involving disciplinary matters.
The Union delegate agrees with the Award, but specifically reserves all of its contractual and
statutory rights, including but not limited to its rights under the Article 32 Maintenance of
Standards provision, as well as its bargaining rights under PERA and interest arbitration rights
under Act 312. In addition, the Union further reserves all constitutional due process rights on
behalf of its individual members.
Issue #2 Article 8—Seniority, Section 2 loss of seniority (Economic)
The Parties Proposals
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposes to amend language in the second sentence of Article 8,
Section 2 which refers to a series of reasons seniority shall be terminated. Currently the
language reads: “Seniority shall terminate for the following reasons:” The Employer
proposes the language be amended to read: “Seniority and employment shall terminate
for the following reasons:.”
Union Proposal
The Union proposes no change to the current language.
Employer Position
Employer witness Homan testified that the Employer advanced this proposal to
clarify what he believed to be the obvious intent, that it’s not just seniority that is lost
for the listed reasons, but employment is also lost for those listed reasons. (T-616) In its
post-hearing brief the Employer argues that it is commonly held that termination of
14

employees is concomitant with the loss of seniority even in the absence of an express
provision. The Employer also points to the language in the contracts of the internal and
external comparables in support of its position.
Union Position
The Union argues that adoption of the Employer’s proposed change would result
in a significant reduction in employee rights and is not just a simple clarification of
intent. The Union acknowledges that the first two reasons listed for loss of seniority: A.
by voluntary termination or retirement, and B. if the employee is discharged for cause,
will effectively mean both loss of seniority and employment. However the Union points
out that the other reasons listed in sub-paragraphs C through H resulting in loss of
seniority are not intended to automatically result in termination of employment. The
Union says under the current language the employee may lose seniority associated with
the stated reasons but termination of employment would require the Employer to
demonstrate the employee was discharged for just cause. If the panel were to adopt the
Employer’s language the Union member would lose his/her ability to challenge the
“just cause” basis for the termination in a grievance proceeding.
The Union also points out in particular sub-paragraph G of Article 8, Section 2
which the Union says would conflict with language in Article 12, Section 6(B) dealing
with leaves of absence for injury or illness. The Union also argues that relying on other
internal or external comparables for this particular issue is inappropriate because even
though some of those contracts may include the phrase “loss of seniority and
employment” that phrase must be considered in the context of other provisions in the
contract on an individual contract by contract basis just as in this contract.
Discussion and Findings
The Panel finds the Union’s position on this issue convincing. The Employer may
view this as a simple clarification of language but upon further review it does appear to
have much broader implications and could result in confusion and conflict with other
provisions in the Contract. It should also be noted that upon questioning, Employer
witness Homan acknowledged that the Employer had not experienced any
administrative difficulties as a result of the absence of the words “and employment” in
this section of the Contract. (T-617)
Additionally, the Union’s argument about viewing this language in the
comparable contracts in the context of other language in those contracts is supported by
a brief review of just two of those comparable contracts. The City of Holland contract
15

language at Article VII, section 5 e) addresses the subject of loss of seniority and the
employment relationship involving an employee on sick leave different from the way it
is addressed in Article 8, section 2G of this contract. (E-67) The City of Jackson contract
addresses the issue of loss of seniority and employment in Section 24.4 but its list of
reasons for such loss differ greatly from those in Article 8, section 2G of this contract. (E68) The comparables reveal there is much difference as to how each comparable has
addressed this issue as it relates to loss of seniority and termination and the simple
insertion of the words “and employment” would not lead to more clarity and could
lead to much more litigation.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore on the issue of revising the language in Article 8,
section 2 there will be no change from the current contract.
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #3 — This issue was withdrawn
Issue # 4 – Article 9, LAYOFF AND RECALL, Section 8 – Work by non-bargaining
unit employees (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposes to modify Article 9, Section 8 by deleting the second
sentence of the section, highlighted, below. The current language reads:
“Non-bargaining unit employees may continue to perform such work, as was the
normal custom prior to the time this agreement was executed, and in the future, in the
manner and to the extent as may be determined by the employer. The Employer agrees,
however, that it will not assign bargaining unit work of more than five (5) workdays duration to
any non-bargaining unit employees while a qualified bargaining unit member is on layoff. Nonbargaining unit employees will in no way be used to delay the recall of a bargaining
unit employee. Recall pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with this
agreement, except in extraordinary situations where the Employer shall be permitted to
16

contact laid off employees by telephone or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the employee’s last known address.”
Union Proposal
The Union proposes the ‘status quo’, no change from the current contract.
Employer Position
The Employer, in addition to arguing the merits of its proposal, takes the
position that its proposed deletion of this sentence is a permissive subject of bargaining
and therefore outside the jurisdiction of this Act 312 panel to address. The Arbitrator
will address the question of permissive v mandatory subject of bargaining in the
discussion and findings.
The Employer presented the testimony of Fire Chief Peterson in support of this
proposal. Chief Peterson stated that the purpose of this proposal was to permit the
Department to continue to operate close to the way it currently operates in the event it
had to lay off a full time firefighter. (T-853) The Employer says that with the current
full time bargaining unit staff of 10, if it had to lay off a full time fire-fighter it would
have to reduce the staff from the current five people on 24/7 to three people 24/7
because it wouldn’t be able to offer that work to non-bargaining unit part time people
while the bargaining unit employee was on layoff. The Chief testified that by using part
time staff under the current arrangement it has been able to increase the number of staff
on 24/7 from 2 staff in 1999 to 5 staff currently and that has allowed lieutenants to be on
24/7, increased efficiency and permitted the Employer to more easily comply with two
in, two out and several other things. (T-855)
The Employer provided its arguments, in its post-hearing brief, in support of its
position that its proposal is a permissive subject of bargaining. The Employer argued
that the following MERC and/or Court decisions supported its position: 1) Oak Park
Public Safety Officers Association and City of Oak Park, No. CU03 A-005, 19 MPER, pg
50 (June 27, 2006); Southfield Police Officer’s Association v City of Southfield, 445
NW2d 98 (1989) and Local 1227 AFSCME v City of Center Line, 414 Mich 642; 327
NW2d 822 (1982). In the Oak Park Public Safety Officers Association case the MERC
upheld the Administrative Law Judge decision, which stated in part:
“While Respondent has the right to demand bargaining over the impact of a
decision to lay off bargaining unit members, including the safety and workload
of the remaining Public Safety Officers, seniority, and bumping rights, the Union
may not demand to bargain over and take to impasse a proposal conditioning
the layoff of its members on the layoff of non-union employees.”
17

The Employer points out the ALJ, in the Oak Park decision relied on the
AFSCME v City of Centerline Michigan Supreme Court case. The Court in the AFSCME
v City of Centerline case found that an Act 312 Panel did not have the authority to
compel inclusion of a no-layoff provision in a collective bargaining agreement. In the
AFSCME case the word ‘layoff’ meant a reduction in the working force of the
bargaining unit due to a decrease of work or general lack of funds and provided that
bargaining unit members could only be laid off in conjunction with layoffs or cutbacks
in other departments. The State Supreme Court held that such a provision restricted the
city’s ability to make decisions regarding the size and scope of municipal services and
to base its decisions on factors such as need, available revenues, or public interest. The
Court said this clause is a mild restriction but it speaks to the very essence of the city’s
decision making process.
The ALJ in the Oak Park decision found the Centerline case to be controlling on
the layoff and recall language in the Oak Park case. The Contract language in the Oak
Park case prohibited the department from laying off any bargaining unit member until
all non-members who performed police and fire duties – defined as work presently or
previously performed by public safety officers - were laid off first and required that all
laid off public safety officers be rehired before non public safety officers who perform
such duties be recalled from lay off.
The Employer argues that the language it proposes to eliminate has a similar
impact as the language in the Oak Park case in that it would require the Employer to lay
off all part time employees if even a single bargaining unit employee is laid off for a
period of more than five days. The Employer says the language it proposes to eliminate
deprives the employer of the ability to make policy decisions regarding the number of
firefighters needed to operate the Department. The Employer says this language is a
permissive subject of bargaining and not within the jurisdiction of this Act 312 panel.
Union Position
The Union says the language the Employer proposes to delete is a result of an
agreement reached by the parties in the prior contract negotiations. Prior to those
negotiations there were no part time personnel, only paid on call personnel who
responded to fire calls to supplement the full-time firefighters at the scene of the fire.
During negotiations, the Union says it proposed the Employer increase the number of
full-time personnel from the then eight (8) to twelve (12) to allow a minimum of two
18

full-time employees on duty at each of the two fire stations. The Employer proposed
that instead of staffing these positions with full-time personnel they be permitted to
staff them with part-time personnel. The parties agreed to a letter of understanding (E64, pg 49-50) which was part of the current contract. The letter of understanding stated
in part “it is the Township’s intention for the term of this Agreement to continue the
process of increasing staffing at the fire stations so that by the end of the term of this
agreement, a minimum of two employees are scheduled at each station on a 24-hour,
seven day per week, basis. The type of staffing utilized shall be at the discretion of the
Fire Chief.” The Union points out that the letter of understanding also contains a
provision which states: “The Union’s desire to increase staffing at the Fire stations can
be accomplished on and interim basis without the full complement of additional fulltime staffing by more extensive utilization by the Department of non-bargaining unit
employees.” The Union, through the testimony of Union President Duvall, stated its
understanding was that it would allow the Employer to use part-time personnel on an
interim basis only until the Employer could move to hiring an additional four full-time
personnel for a total of twelve full-time personnel. Union President Duvall testified, “it
was never the Union’s intent to permanently fill the firefighter positions with part-time
firefighters. We never would have agreed to that.” (T-876-877) The Union argues that
the parties agreement to permit use of non-bargaining unit employees on an interim
basis as provided in the letter of understanding No 1 would be completely undermined
were the Employer to be allowed to continue to use part-time employees to work shifts
while a full-time firefighter was on layoff, which would be permitted if the panel were
to accept the Employer’s proposal to delete the language contained in the second
sentence of Article 9, Section 8. The Union says the Employer has failed to demonstrate
a need for change and points to the Fire Chief’s testimony that the current language has
not impaired the Employer’s ability to manage. (T-858) The Union also argues that
bargaining history and factors “traditionally taken into consideration” under Section
9(h) of Act 312 support its position that the Employer’s proposal should be rejected.
The Union, in its post-hearing brief, also puts forth its arguments on whether the
Employer’s proposal is a permissive or mandatory subject of bargaining. The Union, in
addition to referring to some of the cases relied on by the Employer, cites several cases
in support of its position that the Employer’s proposed deletion of this sentence is a
mandatory subject of bargaining. Those cases include: City of Manistee v Manistee Fire
Fighters Ass’n, 174 Mich App 118 (1989) lv den, 434 Mich 864 (1990); Southfield Police
19

Officers Ass’n v Southfield, 433 Mich 168 (1989); and InterUrban Transit Partnership v
ATU, MERC Case No. C01 K-220 (issued 6/30/04).
The Union argues that the Employer’s reliance on the City of Centerline case is
misplaced. The Union distinguishes that case from the facts in this case saying that in
Centerline the Court held the language the Union argued was the subject of mandatory
bargaining deprived the city of its ability to make a policy decision of whether to layoff
police officers because it could only be done in conjunction with reductions in other
departments, whereas in this case, inclusion of the language that the Employer wants to
delete does not interfere with the Employer’s decision to layoff members of the
bargaining unit. Instead, it only limits the Employer from using non-bargaining unit
members to perform bargaining unit work while a bargaining unit member is laid off.
The Union says the language is not a limitation on the right to layoff personnel but
rather a limit on the Employer’s use of non-bargaining unit persons to perform
bargaining unit work, which, the Union says, Michigan courts have continually
recognized as a mandatory subject of bargaining. The Union points to the City of
Manistee v Manistee Fire Fighters Ass’n case in support of this position. In that case the
Michigan Court of Appeals upheld a MERC decision saying “There is a duty to bargain
over management’s decision to subcontract bargaining unit work to nonunion
members. --- Because petitioner sought to bring in volunteers to perform bargaining
unit work, it, in effect attempted to subcontract the unit’s work by using nonunion
members to perform the same job as respondent’s members. --- Therefore, this was a
mandatory subject for bargaining.” The Union also cites the Michigan Supreme Court
decision in Southfield Police Officers Ass’n which states: “The Michigan Courts have
held, in varying contexts, that the duty to bargain extends to a public employer’s
diversion of unit work to non-unit employees or to the subcontracting of the unit work
to independent contractors.”
The Union says that any reliance by the Employer related to the ‘exclusivity rule’
as adopted by the Michigan Supreme Court in the Southfield Police Officers Ass’n,
supra, must be limited to situations where the work is performed by members of the
bargaining unit as well as by another set of unionized employees of the same employer.
The Union says the exclusivity rule does not apply in situations, as in this case, where
the work is performed by members of the bargaining unit and other non-organized
employees of the employer. The Union points to the Commission decision in Oak Park
20

Public Safety Officers Ass’n v City of Oak Park, supra, in support of its position on the
exclusivity rule. In that case the Commission said:
“A union has a legitimate interest in whether and when the work of its members
may be assigned outside of the bargaining unit, and employers generally have
the duty to bargain the diversion of work to non-unit employees and the
subcontracting of work to others. [citation omitted] However, when the work at
issue historically has been performed by members of more that one bargaining
unit, assignment of that work to other bargaining units whose members already
perform that work is not a mandatory subject of bargaining. [citations omitted]
Because the work sought to be preserved has also historically been performed by
City employees belonging to another bargaining unit, we hold that the Union
violated PERA by submitting its proposal to compulsory arbitration under Act
312.”
The Union also cites a Michigan Court of Appeals case issued March 9, 2006
(Docket No. 256796, unpub upholding a MERC decision in InterUrban Transit
Partnership v ATU, MERC Case No. C01 K-220 (issued 6/30/04). The Michigan Court
of Appeals stated:
“We have found no authority to extend the exclusivity rule beyond disputes over
work claimed to be exclusive to one of at least two bargaining units. In addition,
the recognized rational underlying MERC’s exclusivity rule does not support its
application beyond disputes involving at least two bargaining units.”
The Union says these cases support the Union’s position that the exclusivity rule,
i.e. “Where particular job functions have been assigned interchangeably to both
represented and non-represented employees, or to members of different bargaining
units, and the unions involved have had an opportunity to demand bargaining over
these assignments in the past, the mere fact that an employer assigns more of the work
to one of these groups should not give rise to a bargaining obligation.” Southfield Police
Officer’s Ass’n, supra, does not apply in this case because neither the Employer’s paidon-call or part-time employees are organized in a bargaining unit. The Union says the
panel should determine this issue to be a mandatory subject of bargaining within the
panel’s jurisdiction and the panel should maintain the status quo.
Discussion and Findings
The Independent Arbitrator will first address the subject of whether the
Employer’s proposal is a permissive or mandatory subject of bargaining. The Arbitrator
finds the arguments put forth by the Union more consistent with current case law and
MERC decisions. The relatively recent MERC decision in Oak Park Public Safety
Officers Ass’n and the City of Oak Park, supra, stated: “Here, the work sought to be
21

preserved has been performed by members of the Union’s bargaining unit, by members
of a command officers bargaining unit, and by personnel furnished through mutual aid
from other communities with whose employees the City has no collective bargaining
relationship. Because the work sought to be preserved has also historically been
performed by City employees belonging to another bargaining unit, we hold that the
Union violated PERA by submitting its proposal to compulsory arbitration under Act
312.” Similarly, the Michigan Supreme Court in the Southfield Police Officers Ass’n,
supra, spoke to the exclusivity rule. It stated:
“Under the exclusivity rule, if particular work has been performed
interchangeably by employees in several bargaining units, and the public employer has not
been limited by the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, the public employer is
able to assign according to the expertise required by the work.... The MERC standard,
unlike the federal “adverse impact” rule, takes into account the significant differences in
the statutory schemes regarding the resolution of disputes and provides for the efficient
allocation of scarce public resources by minimizing the time-consuming and expensive
challenges to the transfer of work where there has been an overlap in the performance
of job duties by a multiplicity of bargaining units.” (emphasis added). These cases support
the Union’s position that the exclusivity rule removing this issue from a mandatory
subject of bargaining does not apply in this case because the work involved in this case
has not been performed interchangeably by employees in several bargaining units nor is
there an overlap of job duties by a multiplicity of bargaining units.
The Arbitrator also finds the facts in this case differ from the facts in the Oak
Park and AFSCME v City of Centerline cases cited by the Employer in support of its
position. In the Oak Park case the ALJ relied on the Michigan Supreme Court decision
in the City of Centerline Case but the result of the provisions sought by the Union in the
Centerline case would have conditioned lay offs of bargaining unit members on similar
lay offs or cut backs in other city departments. That is not the case here since the
language the Employer proposes to delete would not require the Employer to make any
change in any other department. Neither would it require the Employer to lay off any
non-union employees as in the Oak Park case. The Employer argues that by retaining
the language it proposes to delete the Employer could not schedule part time personnel
to work more than five workdays and it would have to lay off part time employees if it
had a full-time employee on lay off. (T-858) But Chief Peterson also had difficulty
explaining the meaning and application of the third sentence in Article 9, Section 8
22

which states, “Non-bargaining unit employees will in no way be used to delay the recall
of a bargaining unit employee.” (T-859) Retaining that sentence appears to require the
Employer to do the same thing the Employer argues it wants to avoid doing and as its
reason for urging the deletion of the language it proposes be deleted.
The ALJ decision, supported by the Commission, in the Oak Park case refers to
the Centerline Case with respect to Layoff and Recall. In that decision the ALJ referred
to the Employer’s position that Sections 33.4 and 33.5 of the parties’ contract which had
been previously negotiated should be eliminated because they were permissive subjects
of bargaining. Section 33.4 stated, “No layoffs of Public Safety Officers shall occur until
all non-public Safety Officers or civilians who perform police and fire duties are laid off
first. Said duties are to be defined as work presently or previously performed by Public
Safety Officers.” Section 33.5 stated, “ Public Safety Officers who have been laid off
shall be rehired before non-Public Safety Officers or civilians who perform police and
fire duties.” The ALJ said: “ I find Center Line to be controlling with respect to this
issue. Because PSOs have performed and continue to perform dispatch work for the
department, the layoff and recall provision at issue in this case would clearly prohibit
the City from laying off a single PSO until each and every civilian dispatcher is laid-off
first. I conclude that the layoff and recall language which Respondent submitted to the
Act 312 panel in the instant case, like the clause at issue in Center Line, deprives
Charging Party of its ability to make policy decisions regarding the number of PSOs
needed to operate the department and the level of fire and law enforcement services to
offer its citizens. While Respondent has the right to demand bargaining over the impact
of a decision to layoff bargaining unit members, including the safety and workload of
the remaining PSOs, seniority, and “bumping” rights, the Union may not demand to
bargain over and take to impasse a proposal conditioning the layoff of its members on
the layoff of non-unit employees.”
The Employer’s argument that the language it proposes to eliminate deprives the
Employer of the ability to make policy decisions regarding the number of firefighters
needed to operate the department is not completely true. The language still permits the
Employer to determine the number of firefighters it needs to provide public safety, it
just limits the Employer to employing all of its full-time firefighters before it employs a
part time firefighter to perform the duties of a full-time firefighter. It should be noted
that the letter of understanding No. 1, which was made part of the agreement and upon
which there was extensive testimony of its relationship to the crafting of language in
23

Article 9, Section 8, states “it is the intention for the term of this Agreement to continue
the process of increasing staffing at the fire stations so that by the end of the term of this
agreement, a minimum of two employees are scheduled at each station on a 24-hour,
seven day per week, basis. The type of staffing utilized shall be at the discretion of the Fire
Chief.” (emphasis added) This language authorizes the Employer to determine the
number of full-time and the number of part time employees that would be utilized to
staff the fire stations. The Arbitrator finds that as long as this language remains as part
of this agreement the Employer is not deprived of its ability to make policy decisions
regarding the number and type of staff needed to operate the department and the level
of services to offer its citizens, unlike the findings of MERC and the Court in the Center
Line and Oak Park cases. The language in Article 9, Section 8 proposed to be deleted by
the Employer, when viewed in the context of the authority given the Employer in the
letter of understanding #1, does not significantly impact the Employer’s ability to make
policy decisions regarding staffing.
Additionally, the evidence and testimony in this case reveals that the language
proposed by the Employer to be deleted in Article 9, Section 8 is one of a series of interrelated provisions in the contract, some of which were negotiated by the parties leading
to the current agreement. Those inter-related provisions include the language in Article
9, Section 8, (issues 4 and 5), language in Article 18, Section 1 (D) and (E), (issue 11),
Article 18, Section 1 (F), (issue 12), Article 33, Section 7, (issue 33), Article 33, proposed
new section, (issue 34) and the content of a grievance settlement agreement (U-18); the
letter of understanding No. 1 made part of the current agreement (E-64) and appendix
A of a document authored by Chief Peterson prior to and discussed during the
negotiations between the parties leading to the current contract. (U-62)(T-923) Also,
testimony by Employer witness, Chief Peterson and Union Witness, Union President
Pat Duvall (T- 852-953) supports the inter-relatedness of these issues and their relevance
to the Employer’s general duty to bargain the diversion of work to non-unit employees
and the subcontracting of work to others. [citations omitted] There was also testimony
by Chief Peterson on staffing which supports the relationship of these issues to safety
and compliance with MIOSHA standards: “Back in 1999 during contract negotiations
we were in the awkward position of wanting to increase staffing and agreeing to do
that. The Township actually acknowledged that we needed to increase staffing.
Actually, there were two people on 24/7. We came to the bargaining table saying that if
we could put on part-time people, we would do so. And if we were able to operate
24

under the part-time – with those part time people, we would add full-time positions ‘til
we got to the point where we had increased the staffing level. The part-time staffing has
been – we’ve been able to maintain that. And we actually put on – put lieutenants on
24/7 as a result of that as well. So it’s increased our efficiency, makes us more easily able to
comply with two in, two out and several other things. It was perceived as a safety issue.”
[emphasis added] (T– 854-855)
Excerpts from the ALJ decision and recommended order and the MERC order
upholding the ALJ recommended order in Oak Park Public Safety Officers case is
instructive here. The ALJ referred to the “two-in/two-out” rule as required by
MIOSHA. “This rule states that when officers enter a burning structure, they do so in
teams of at least two and remain in constant visual or voice contact with one another. In
addition, a team of at least two officers must remain outside the structure ready to
initiate an immediate rescue should one be necessary. General Order No. 104 states that
one of the two individuals located outside the structure may be assigned an additional
role during that time, such as incident commander, so long as this individual is able to
perform assistance or rescue activities without jeopardizing the safety or health of any
firefighter working at the incident.” The Commission, in its Order, stated: “The
utilization of personnel at the fire scene has an impact upon the risk of injury or harm to
members of the bargaining unit, and we find this type of manning proposal would
ordinarily constitute a mandatory subject of bargaining. However, in this case, because
the Union’s proposal additionally seeks to limit the personnel at the scene to PSOs, we
reach a different conclusion.” Of course in this proceeding the Union does not seek to
limit the personnel to be assigned at a scene of a fire or limit the Employer’s authority to
determine the type of staffing.
The facts and evidence in this case, including but not limited to the above stated
findings, support the Union’s position that the language addressing layoff and recall
and work by non-bargaining unit employees (issues 4 and 5); allocation of overtime for
bargaining unit employees and use of non-bargaining unit employees to fill any fulltime vacancies (Issue 11); procedures involving assignment of mandatory overtime
(Issue 12) [the question of mandatory or permissive subject of bargaining is not
presented in issue 12]; the use of part-time employees to fill in for absences of full-time
employees (issue 33); and the training required of non-bargaining unit employees (issue
34) do involve the assignment of work outside the bargaining unit and/or matters that
involve safety and potential impact upon the risk of injury or harm to members of the
25

bargaining unit and as such are mandatory subjects of bargaining. Therefore the panel
finds issue No. 4 is within the jurisdiction of this Arbitration Panel.
On the merits of the Employers proposal, the panel finds insufficient support for
the need to delete the language it proposes be deleted. The Employer says its purpose in
seeking the deletion of the language is so it can continue to operate close to the way it
currently operates in the event it had to lay off a full-time firefighter. Yet, testimony
revealed that the Employer has never had to lay off a full-time firefighter and no factual
evidence was presented that would lead one to conclude that lay offs of full-time
firefighters are likely to occur during the period of this agreement. Speculation on
reduced state revenue sharing or reduction in local revenues resulting from an
economic slow down was just that, speculation. Fire Chief Peterson acknowledged that
the current language had not impaired the Employers ability to manage in any way. (T858) Also, the Employer and the Union entered into an agreement which was made
part of the current contract that the Township’s intention for the term of the agreement
was to increase staffing at the two fire stations so that a minimum of two employees are
scheduled at each station on a 24-hour, seven day per week basis. That is the current
staffing pattern. The agreement also stated “The type of staffing utilized shall be at the
discretion of the Fire Chief.” The Fire Chief also testified that that staffing level has
helped the Employer meet the two in/two out standards required by MIOSHA. It is
highly unlikely the Employer would be able to maintain that standard without
retaining full-time firefighters at the current level.
On the other hand, there was testimony that financial reasons were a factor in
why the Employer sought the ability to use part-time employees during the
negotiations leading to the current contract. The Fire Chief testified, “ during the
contract negotiations we were able to sell the board on adding extra positions, based on
the cost of the amount of money that part-time was going to cost us. We pay them less
hourly, and they’re part-time employees so they don’t receive the same benefits.” (T865) Certainly the Employer’s desire to keep costs down while meeting its obligation
to provide safe, adequate fire protection services to its citizens is understandable, but it
must attempt to meet that obligation in the context of its duty to negotiate an agreement
with the Union on wages and other conditions of employment. That balance appears to
be what the parties attempted to address during the most recent negotiations leading to
the current agreement. The language the Employer seeks to delete was part of the
negotiations to achieve that balance. The Arbitrator finds it is a better course to try to
26

retain or make any clarifying modifications to current language that leaves, as much as
possible, that current balance in place, and let the parties continue to work within the
parameters of that balance, gain experience with it, and determine what changes, if any,
may be mutually agreed upon.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore on the issue of revising the language in Article 9,
section 1 as proposed by the Employer there will be no change from the current
contract.
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

The Employer delegate disagrees with both the Panels’ Award in Issue No. 4, as well as the
Panels’ determination that Issue No. 4 involves a mandatory subject of bargaining.
Issue #5 – Article 9, LAYOFF AND RECALL, Section 8 – Work by non-bargaining
unit employees (economic)
The Parties Proposal
Union Proposal
The Union proposes to modify the first sentence of Article 9, Section 8. Currently
that sentence states:
“Non-bargaining unit employees may continue to perform such work, as was the
normal custom prior to the time this agreement was executed, and in the future, in the
manner and to the extent as may be determined by the employer.”
The Union proposes to modify that sentence to read:
“Non-bargaining unit employees may continue to perform such work, as was the
normal custom prior to the time this agreement was executed, except as may be specifically
provided otherwise in this agreement.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposes to maintain the current contract language.

27

Union Position
The Union, in its post hearing brief, addresses both the merits and the issue of
the panel’s jurisdiction in this matter. Like issue #4, the Employer takes the position
that the proposed change sought by the Union is a permissive, not mandatory, subject
of bargaining and, therefore, outside the jurisdiction of this panel to address. The Union
restates much of its same arguments used in addressing Issue 4 to support its position
that this matter is within the jurisdiction of the Act 312 panel. The Union’s arguments
will not be restated here. The Union argues that work by non-bargaining unit
employees in the current contract language is improper because it contains language
that purports to waive the Union’s statutory right to bargain under PERA. Therefore,
the Union argues in order to prevent the parties from having to engage in future
litigation over the Union’s right to bargain on these issues the language should simply
be deleted.
The Union further argues on the merits of this proposed language that it makes it
clear that other provisions of the contract that specifically address use of nonbargaining versus bargaining unit members, such as Article 18 Section 1 (D) and (E)
must be abided by, not withstanding the language of Article 9 Section 8. The Union says
its language makes that clear.
Employer Position
The Employer, as with Issue 4, takes the position that the Union’s proposed
change in language is a permissive subject of bargaining and, therefore, not in the
jurisdiction of the Act 312 panel to address. In the event the panel determines it is a
mandatory subject of bargaining the Employer’s position is that the current contract
language be maintained.
On the question of the panel’s jurisdiction to address this issue the Employer
advances arguments similar to the arguments presented by the Employer in addressing
Issue 4. The Employer argues that the Union’s proposal seems to restrict the Employer’s
use of non-bargaining unit employees who have been historically and traditionally
performing bargaining unit work and, based on the cases cited in arguing Issue 4, the
Employer says courts and MERC cases have held that this is a permissive, nonmandatory bargaining issue.
On the merits, the Employer says the phrase “and in the future, in the manner
and to the extent as may be determined by the Employer” has been in every collective
28

bargaining agreement with unit employees and its elimination would restrict the chief’s
management rights in the future. The Employer says that one of the arguments
advanced by the Union in support of the proposed change is that it is more consistent
with language already contained in Article 33 Section 7 which states “non-bargaining
unit employees will not be used to permanently replace full-time bargaining unit
employees.” The Employer disagrees with that rational and says that the language in
Article 33, Section 7 is not as expansive with respect to the language sought to be
removed by the Union. The Employer says Article 9, Section 8 effects more than just
part time employees because it includes all “non-bargaining unit employees” which
encompasses the fire chief, deputy chief and other administrative officers not in the
bargaining unit.
Discussion and Findings
The arbitrator finds that this is a mandatory subject of bargaining and, therefore,
within the panel’s jurisdiction to address. The basis for this finding is previously stated
in the discussion and finding section addressing Issue 4. Citation of case law and MERC
decisions are contained in Issue 4 and constitute the same basis for a similar finding on
this issue. On the merits of the proposed language change the independent arbitrator
finds the Union’s proposed language does assist in clarifying the provisions of the
contract and, therefore, should be adopted. Given the choice between the current
language and adopting the Union’s proposed language, it is the independent
arbitrator’s view that the Union’s proposed language is more consistent with other
provisions in the contract and hopefully could reduce the potential for further litigation.
The current language, without reference to any other portions of the contract, states that
the non-bargaining unit employees may continue to perform such work as was the
normal custom prior to the time of this agreement “in the manner and to the extent as
may be determined by the Employer.” However, Article 33, Section 7 specifically states,
“Non-bargaining unit employees will not be used to permanently replace full-time
bargaining unit employees.” The grievance settlement agreement entered into by the
parties on 12/22/04 (U-18) states “the township agrees it will not use part time
employees to fill in for absences of full-time employees, and will instead use only offduty full-time employees and paid on call employees to fill in for absences for full-time
employees in accordance with the prior practice of the parties.” Both of these examples
point out that the parties have agreed to limit the manner and the extent of use of nonbargaining unit employees to perform work as was the normal custom prior to the time
29

the current agreement was executed and to limit the Employer’s determination of what
that work may be in the future. The Union’s proposed language, on the other hand,
does not totally prohibit non-bargaining unit employees from continuing to perform
such work as was the normal custom prior to the time of this agreement, but merely
indicates that will be allowed, except as may be specifically provided otherwise in this
agreement. Both parties, in their post-hearing briefs take the position that evidence
involving comparability is either not relevant or not useful in addressing this issue. The
Union points out that given the parties’ bargaining history and unique way of
addressing the use of non-bargaining unit personnel, language involving this issue is
unique to these particular parties in this particular contract. Review of the comparable
community contracts reveals that it is not unusual to have contracts address and, in
some instances, restrict work by non-bargaining unit employees, but the manner in
which that is dealt with is unique to each contract. The arbitrator finds that the Union’s
proposed clarifying language does assist in promoting the current balance and leaving
that in place may result in less conflict of interpretation between separate sections of the
contract.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, the language in the first sentence of Article 9,
section 8 will be modified as proposed by the Union. [Effective upon issuance of
the award.]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

The Employer delegate disagrees with both the Panels’ Award in Issue No. 5, as well as the
Panels’ determination that Issue No. 5 involves a mandatory subject of bargaining.
Issue #6 – Article 11, Work Assignment, Section 1 A and B Station Bids (noneconomic)
The Parties Proposals
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to delete Section 1 A and B of Article 11 –station bids
30

Union Proposal
The Union proposed the ‘status quo’, no change.
Employer Position
The Employer proposes to delete Section 1, paragraphs A and B of Article 11,
which currently specifies that employees in the bargaining unit will be offered the
opportunity to bid for station assignments based on seniority each year. The current
language states, “The Employer reserves the right to assign the employee to another
station for training purposes or when the needs of the department, as determined by the
chief, exist. Under normal circumstances, assignments to another station for training
purposes will not exceed a 28 day duty cycle.” Employer witness Chief Peterson
testified that the principle reason the Employer proposed deletion of Section 1 was to
ensure firefighters are familiar with the service areas and for efficiency purposes. With
respect to the familiarity with the service areas, the Employer points out that there are
currently two fire stations. One serves the area north of Grand River, which bisects the
township, and the other serves the geographic area south of the river. Both Union and
Employer witnesses testified that there was value in firefighters being as familiar as
possible with the geographic area to be served, such as knowing where fire hydrants
are located, driveway and road clearances.
On the issue of efficiency, Chief Peterson testified that there are times when a
particular employee, for example the current employee doing mechanical work on an
apparatus, would be better utilized in a particular location and if in fact that employee,
by seniority, chose to work in a different location that would not be the most efficient
way to manage employee capabilities with duties. The Employer acknowledges that the
majority of external comparables do contain some language either specifically
authorizing employees to bid on stations by seniority or at least acknowledging some
consideration of seniority when making station assignments. The Employer does point
out that at least the City of Jackson language authorizes the management to temporarily
assign employees to various shifts, stations and equipment as determined by the fire
chief. In summary, the Employer states that the purpose of the proposal is to give the
chief the flexibility to make station assignments based on the skill and ability of the
employees and the needs of the department and the ability to potentially rotate
employees so that they can become familiar and proficient with both station’s
geographic areas.
31

Union Position
The Union points out that the current provision was a result of a volunteer
agreement by the parties in the most recent negotiations leading to the current contract.
The Union says the Employer has not met the burden of proof necessary to demonstrate
a legitimate and substantial need for this change. The Union says the Employer’s
testimony did not reveal that any significant problems have arisen as a result of this
language and the Employer could not identify any specific inefficiency that has resulted
from inclusion of this language. The Union says the comparability data also supports its
position in that the majority of the comparable communities do contain language
authorizing station bids based on seniority.
Discussion and Findings
The arbitrator finds that total elimination of this language, as proposed by the
Employer, is not justified by evidence in the record. On the other hand, since this is a
non-economic issue, some slight modification of the current language can assist the
Employer and the bargaining unit members in fulfilling their responsibility to the
citizens and ensure safety of firefighters. During testimony, the chief did acknowledge
that total deletion of the language would permit the Employer to make assignments any
time and for any duration that the Employer chose. Such assignments could be made
for purely legitimate management reasons but on the other hand such flexibility could
be abused as well.
Testimony at the hearing by the Employer did not reveal a strong and substantial
basis for making this change for efficiency purposes. On the other hand, the arbitrator
does find some justification for ensuring that most of the firefighters, particularly in
such a small unit as this, have some exposure from time-to-time to the different
locations within the township that they may have to serve. Chief Peterson, during cross
examination testified “One of the other advantages to occasionally moving people and
assigning them to another station is that if they did an overtime shift as that station and
worked there, and they haven’t worked there in two, three years, there is a little bit of
loss of familiarity. And they are the lead person on the apparatus, they have to get us
there and we need to make sure they are familiar with the districts. It would allow that
to occur.” (T-621) The arbitrator does see value in attempting to allow enough flexibility
for assignments for this purpose.
Additionally, the Union position is supported to a larger degree than the Employer’s
position upon review of the language in the comparable community contracts.
32

Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue, with modifications to the language in
paragraph A of Article 11, Section 1, as specified below, to more nearly comply
with the applicable factors in Section 9. Therefore the language in Article 11,
Section 1 A will be revised as specified below and the language in Article 11,
Section 1 B will remain unchanged. [Effective upon issuance of the Award.]
A. “Employees that bid a respective station will be assigned to that station
for a period of one (1) year. The employer reserves the right to assign the
employee to another station temporarily for training purposes or for the purpose
of becoming familiar and proficient with the geographic area served by the
station, or when the needs of the Department, as determined by the Fire Chief,
exist. Under normal circumstances, assignments to another station for training
purposes will not exceed a 28 day duty cycle.”
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #7 – Article 12, Types of Leave, Section 1 D, payment for unused sick leave
benefits (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to modify Article 12, Section 1 D. The proposed revised
language would read:
“Upon separation from employment (payable to beneficiary in event of death),
employees shall be paid one-half of their accrued but unused sick benefits, provided the
employee has at least eight (8) years seniority with the Township. Upon separation
from employment (payable to beneficiary in event of death), employees shall be paid
for all (100%) of their unused sick benefits, provided the employee has at least fifteen
(15) years seniority with the Township. At the end of each calendar year, each employee
shall be paid for one-half (1/2) accrued but unused sick leave in excess of the ninety (90)
day/forty-five ((45) day maximums defined above.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposes to maintain the ‘status quo”, continue the current
language.

33

Union Position
Article 12, Section 1 deals with sick leave. The current contract language
provides that all regular full-time employees will be eligible for sick leave and accrue
sick leave at a rate of twelve (12) hours per month for 24-hour employees. Employees
can have a maximum accumulation determined by multiplying the employee’s sick
leave rate by 90 for employees hired before September 1, 1999. For those employees
hired after September 1, 1999 the maximum accumulation rate is 45 days times the
employee’s sick leave rate provided the Employer institutes that policy for all Township
employees. Subsection D authorizes payment, upon separation from employment of
one-half of the employee’s accrued but unused sick benefits, provided that the
employee has at least eight years seniority with the township. Therefore, currently an
employee with eight years seniority can receive a maximum payout for unused sick
leave upon separation of 50% times 1,080 hours for a maximum payout of 540 hours.
Subsection D also currently provides that at the end of each calendar year, each
employee shall be paid one-half of the accrued but unused sick leave in excess of the 90
day maximum defined above.
The Union’s proposed change would do two things. First, it would clarify that in
the event of the death of the employee, payment for unused sick leave would be made
to the employee’s beneficiary. Second, it would add language that would provide a new
category for payment upon separation. That payment would be 100% of all accrued but
unused sick time up to the maximum for those employees with at least 15 years
seniority. That would result in the potential for maximum payout of 1,080 hours.
The Union states that it seeks its first change merely to make it clear that a
beneficiary would be eligible for this accrued payment on behalf of the employee upon
an employee’s death. The Union believes this is already required, but this would clarify
any question should a dispute arise in the future. As for the second proposed change,
the Union says that employees who use less sick time than others, therefore providing
more productive work hours for the township, should be rewarded at separation for
sick time they did not use and this proposal does that.
The Union argues that a review of comparable community contracts, while
revealing, on average, fewer hours of maximum payout as proposed by the Union,
differs from the other comparables in that it would only apply to those employees who

34

have at least 15 years of seniority; whereas employees in the other comparable
communities receive the maximum payout regardless of years of seniority.
Employer Position
The Employer argues that the purpose of sick leave benefits is not to add to the
income of the employee. The Employer acknowledges that most contracts do have some
provisions for rewarding employees who do not overuse sick leave benefits. The
Employer notes that the current benefit of payment of one-half of accrued but unused
sick leave up to a maximum for those employees who have at least eight years seniority
is exactly the same as provided to the township’s non-union employees and the other
unionized group in the township. The township states that the Union’s proposal would
be too costly and is unwarranted and far exceeds the payouts of most of the comparable
communities. The Employer points out that of the comparable communities, only the
City of Grandville has the benefits similar to this, and even that benefit would pay the
maximum of 1,080 hours only after 20 years of service. The Employer points out that the
remainder of the comparables all pay out less than the Union’s proposal.
Discussion and Findings
The arbitrator finds the evidence presented does not support the Union’s
proposal. Both parties post-hearing briefs provided a summary of the comparable
communities’ treatment of this matter in their contracts. Both acknowledged that the
City of Holland provides no payout of sick leave upon separation from employment.
The arbitrator has calculated the average payout for sick leave accrual upon separation
of employment of the remaining five comparable communities taking the most liberal
approach, including calculating in the 1,080 hours for the City of Grandville, and finds
that the average maximum hours paid would be 805 hours. None of the comparable
community provisions provide for 100% of unused sick benefits up to a maximum as
this proposal does. Additionally, if this proposal were adopted it would immediately
apply to three of the four current employees who have 15 years plus seniority and who
currently qualify for the 90 day maximum accrual. In two years, the fourth employee
who qualifies for the 90 day maximum accrual would also have 15 years seniority.
These employees would benefit greatly from this proposal in that they would qualify
for a maximum of 2,160 hours (90 days times 24-hours). This is far in excess of what the
average comparable communities provide.

35

Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the
Employer’s last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the
applicable factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of revising the language
in Article 12, section 1 D as proposed by the Union there will be no change from
the current contract.
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #8 – Article 17, Hours of Work, Section 1 C, alternate schedules
(economic)
The Parties Proposals
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to revise the language in Article 17, Section 1 C to read
as follows: (proposed new language is italicized, proposed deleted language is
bracketed[ ])
C. Alternate schedules, such as ten (10) hours, may be used by the Fire Chief [for
training purposes]. When assigned to a ten (10) hour shift for training purposes, the
employee will continue to be paid his or her 24-hour salary for the duration of the
training period.
All of the provisions of this Section are subject to management rights retained by the
Township, including but not limited to, the right to determine the hours of work, work week,
work period, pay period, tours of duty and work schedules. The exercise of such management
rights shall not be deemed a violation of the Maintenance of Standards clause of this Agreement.
The Fire Chief shall provide affected employees 30 days notice prior to any planned change in
shift schedules. As much notification as possible will be given when unplanned changes occur
due to absences or other emergencies.”
Union Proposal
The Union proposed the ‘status quo’, no change in the current language
Employer Position
The language proposed by the Employer would, in essence, negate all of the
provisions specified in Section 1 and give to management, the right to determine the
hours of work, work week, work period, pay period, tours of duty and work schedules.
36

The Employer presented its support for this proposal through Chief Peterson’s
testimony. Chief Peterson testified the township sought this language to permit
flexibility in assigning work schedules and hours in the event of changing
circumstances and budgets. He indicated that with this flexibility the township might
be able to avoid scheduling layoffs or could hire more people to fill in for 12-hour shift
periods to cover for vacations and other time off. (T-656)
The Employer points out that the internal comparables that involve the nonunion township employees and the employees of the other bargaining unit within the
township allow management to determine the number of hours in each employee work
schedule and to establish and change employee work schedules. (E-65) The Employer
acknowledges that the external comparables vary. The City of Jackson and Township of
Muskegon both require any change from the traditionally 24-hour shift schedule to be
negotiated between the Employer and the Union. The Employer said that its proposal is
based largely on the language of the recently finished collective bargaining agreement
of Grand Haven Township. (E-81) The language the Employer advances in this
proposal is quite similar to the language contained in the Grand Haven Township
collective bargaining agreement.
Union Position
The Union’s view is that the language put forth by the Township is basically
seeking agreement by the Union to give up its statutory right to bargain over all matters
pertaining to work hours and work schedules. The Union says bargaining over these
issues are clearly authorized as mandatory subjects of bargaining under PERA and that
it is unreasonable to believe the Union would voluntarily give these rights up. The
Union also says the Township has failed to meet its burden of proof in providing
evidence of any real need for change. The Union points out that under the current
language in Subsection D of Section 1 of Article 17 the Employer has the authority to
establish additional schedules and starting times for bargaining unit employees hired
after April 26, 2000. (U-49) Therefore, the Union says the Employer already has quite a
bit of flexibility. The Union says that the external comparables demonstrate that the 24hour schedule is by far the most common work schedule in fire departments and it is
not uncommon to establish that schedule within the collective bargaining agreement.
Discussion and Findings
This issue and Issue 9 are interrelated. Both address the subject of establishing
work schedules and the authority of the Employer to establish schedules other than the
37

24-hour shift schedule for certain purposes. The arbitrator finds that the proposal put
forth by the Employer for change in language on Issue 8 and the proposal put forth by
the Union for change in language in Issue 9 are not supported by substantial evidence
sufficient enough to merit a change. The arbitrator’s general view of the role and
responsibility of an Act 312 panel is to attempt to fashion an agreement that the parties
would most likely fashion in the normal give and take of bargaining. It is highly
unlikely the Union would agree to give up its traditional right to bargain on such
matters as the determination of the hours of work, work week, work period, pay period,
tours of duty and work schedules as proposed by the Employer in this proposal.
Additionally, the arbitrator agrees with the Union’s views that, in this instance, the
Employer has not demonstrated a strong need to have the wide discretion it seeks in
this proposal in order to obtain flexibility or address emerging budget needs. Union
Exhibit 49 reveals that five of the 10 current employees in the bargaining unit have been
hired after April 26, 2000. That means, with retention of the current language in
Subsection D of Section 1 of Article 17, the Employer already has the authority to
establish schedules and starting times other than the 24-hour shift schedules and
starting times for 5 out of the 10 bargaining unit employees. Also, language in Section D
currently allows for bargaining unit employees hired on April 26, 2000 to be scheduled
other than a 24-hour tour if agreed to by the employee and the Union. There was no
evidence that the chief has ever approached the employees and the Union seeking to
alter that schedule for employees hired on April 26, 2000.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of adding the language in Article 17,
section 1, paragraphs B and C as proposed by the Employer there will be no
change from the current contract.
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

38

Issue #9 – Article 17, Hours of Work, Section 1 D, work schedules (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to revise Article 17, Section 1 D to read as follows:
“Except as provided in Paragraph C of this Section, no bargaining unit employee
shall be placed on a work schedule other than the 24-hour normal work schedule set
forth in Paragraph B of this Section, unless mutually agreed otherwise by the Township
and the Union.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to maintain the ‘status quo’, no change in the current
language.
Union Position
The Union, in its post-hearing brief, acknowledges that the purpose of this
proposal is to do away with provisions in the current contract that were agreed to in the
last negotiations between the parties, which permitted those employees hired after
April 26, 2000 to be scheduled other than a 24-hour tour of duty without having to
negotiating it with the Union. Union President Duvall testified that the Union didn’t
like the provision then, but found it necessary to agree to it in order to resolve the last
contract. (T-677) President Duvall stated that at least that agreement secured the 24hour shift for those members that were currently in the bargaining unit at that time.
Testimony at the hearing also revealed that currently there is only one bargaining unit
employee, John Denemy, (T-671) who is scheduled on shifts other than the 24-hour
work schedule. The Union argues that since the Employer used only one employee for a
schedule other than 24-hour schedule, it would not be that difficult to mandate that all
employees be scheduled the 24-hour tour of duty unless mutually agreed to by the
parties. Much of the testimony offered by the Union and the argument advanced in its
post-hearing brief revolved around the manner in which the Employer has scheduled
the employee that is not scheduled the 24 tour of duty. The Union says the manner in
which the Employer has implemented this provision has resulted in uncertainty;
absence of advance notice of schedule, and this has resulted in an inability to plan
vacations, among other things. Basically, the Union seeks a return to requiring all
bargaining unit employees to be scheduled on the 24-hour tour of duty unless agreed to
by the Union so that, if the Employer does seek to schedule someone other than 24-hour
tour of duty the Union will have some leverage to establish within the agreement the
39

necessity of the different schedule, protective features for the employees on that
schedule, such as adequate advanced notice, and some degree of time frame of the
permanency of that schedule. The Union, referring to the external comparables, uses
basically the same arguments it did in Issue 8, pointing out that the majority of the
external comparables use 24-hours schedules and schedules other than that are the
exceptions.
Employer Position
The Employer, in its post-hearing brief, says that if the panel awards the
Employer’s last best offer on Issue 8 it would provide the Employer the flexibility it
chooses on this issue. If the panel grants the Union’s last best offer on Issue 8, then the
Employer would have less flexibility but would at least retain some flexibility under the
current paragraph D. Therefore, the Employer urges the current language in paragraph
D be retained.
The Employer presented testimony of Deputy Chief Bigger to rebut some of the
testimony of Union witness Duvall relative to the manner in which the Employer has
implemented this provision in the current contract. The Employer says the Township’s
flexibility in scheduling Officer Denemy has been an advantage to the employee
permitting him to work around a college schedule of classes. The Employer uses
basically the same arguments relative to the external and internal comparables on this
issue as it advanced for Issue 8. It acknowledges that the external comparable
communities vary in how they permit or do not permit other than 24-hour shifts and
whether or not establishing other than 24-hour shifts must be agreed to by the Union or
not. The Employer seeks to retain as least the flexibility granted to it currently in
Subsection D of Section 1 of Article 17.
Discussion and Findings
As indicated in the discussion and findings on Issue 8, the arbitrator views the
Act 312 procedure and panel as a vehicle to attempt to promote the parties to negotiate
and reach voluntary agreement on as many issues as possible involving wages and
conditions of employment. The process should not be viewed as one that allows either
party to attempt to achieve through the Act 312 procedure what they were unable to
achieve or conceded to in a previously voluntary negotiated agreement. On this issue,
the arbitrator finds the better course is to maintain the status quo.
There is sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the employer has not overly used
the current provision in the contract to alter the traditional 24 hour tour of duty
40

schedule. The arbitrator can understand the Union’s position that the current language
provides the Employer great latitude in determining how to implement the authority
given it to establish schedules other than the 24 tour of duty for employees hired after
April 26, 2000, but believes there are other ways to approach that issue such as
proposing in future negotiations provisions that would require adequate advance notice
to employees of what their schedules would be and how long they would remain on
that schedule. These are matters than can be brought up in future negotiations. In the
meantime, the Arbitrator finds the current language in Article 17, Section 1, as
negotiated by the parties in there most recent negotiated agreement, serves to balance
the interest of both the Union and the Employer better than attempting to adopt either
the Employer’s proposed language in Issue 8 or the Union’s proposed language in this
issue.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the
Employer’s last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the
applicable factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of revising the language
in Article 17, section 1 D as proposed by the Union there will be no change from
the current contract.
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #10 – Article 17, Hours of Work, Section 2, work hours (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to modify Article 17, Section 2 to read as follows:
“The shift starting time for personnel assigned to 24-hour shifts shall be 0700
hours to 0700 hours the next day, unless mutually agreed otherwise by the Township
and the Union.”

41

Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to modify Article Section 2 to read as follows:
“The shift starting time shall be determined by the Fire Chief. However the shift
starting time for employees assigned to 24-hour shifts shall not begin before 0600 hours
or after 0800 hours without the agreement of the Union.”
Union Position
As can be seen above, each of the parties have proposed language change to the
current language of Article 17, Section 2 which states, “the shift starting time for
personnel assigned to 24-hours shifts shall be 0700 hours to 0700 hours the next day.”
The Union in its post-hearing brief, argues its proposal represents a reasonable attempt
at compromise to permit the shift starting for the 24-hour personnel to be modified if
mutually agreed to by the Township and the Union. Through the testimony of Union
President Duvall, the Union’s position is that absent a mutually agreed upon change in
the shift starting times, employees would be uncertain as to what their start or quit
hours would be on a long term basis and it would be difficult to manage their time for
non-employee related functions, such as childcare and other family obligations. (T-651)
The Union says the Township’s language would give the Township the right to make
changes unilaterally for shift starts between 0600 and 0800 hours and even single out
certain employees for different starting times if it so chose. The Union argues its
proposed language allows for flexibility but only in the context of retention of the
Union’s right to bargain over such changes in work hours and conditions of
employment.
Employer Position
The Employer advanced its purpose of its change through the testimony of Chief
Peterson. The chief testified that its proposed language would give flexibility of the start
and end time of the 24-hour shifts, which the chief said could allow the stations to have
staggered time that would allow the lieutenant to be at both of the stations at the start
time of their respective shifts. (T-647) The chief also testified that an analysis may show
that the department is having a larger number of alarms at a certain time of the day and
a small change in times could result in ensuring a sufficient number of staff during shift
changes. The Employer says its proposal, limiting the flexibility for shift starts, only
between 0600 and 0800 hours provides some flexibility but certainly is not so open
ended that it would have a significant impact on employees. Both the Union and the
42

Employer point to the external comparables and advance their arguments relative to the
external comparables similar to their arguments on Issues 8 and 9.
Discussion and Findings
The arbitrator finds the Union’s last offer of settlement on this issue to more
adequately address the parties’ needs than the Employer’s last offer of settlement. Both
parties proposals provide some degree of additional flexibility in the language but the
Union’s proposal retains the current language that the shift starting times for personnel
assigned to 24-hour shifts shall be 0700 to 0700 the next day and then provides for an
alternative schedule if agreed to by the Township and the Union. The Employer’s
proposed language provides a little more flexibility, but also provides the fire chief the
authority to make those changes unilaterally relative to frequency and selectivity
without agreement of the Union. Chief Peterson’s testimony as to the purpose of
needing the flexibility to change the starting times of the 24 shifts was not strongly
supported by the additional evidence and under the Union’s proposed language, if
there is such evidence, it can be presented to the Union in a negotiation on the question
of changing shift starting times. Nothing precludes the parties from agreeing to that
change if it can be demonstrated that it is beneficial to both the employees and the
Employer and necessary to providing better services to the citizens.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, the language in Article 17, section 2 will be
revised as proposed by the Union in its last offer of settlement. [Effective upon
issuance of the Award.]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

43

Issue #11 – Article 18, Overtime and Callback, Section 1 D and E, overtime
(economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to modify Article 18, Section 1 (D) and (E):
“D. In the event there is a need to fill an absence or vacancy of a full-time
bargaining unit employee, it shall be filled first by offering it as overtime to bargaining
unit members. The overtime shall first be offered to those employees in the job
classification in which the overtime has arisen who are off on their four-day leave
period, then to other off-duty employees in the job classification, and then to other offduty employees in other job classifications. Reasonable efforts shall be made to contact
off-duty bargaining unit members for purposes of offering overtime. The existing
overtime equalization procedure shall continue to be utilized; each time a bargaining
unit member either accepts or rejects offered overtime, it shall be counted for overtime
equalization purposes. Employees can voluntarily work overtime not to exceed fortyeight (48) consecutive hours on-duty.”
E. Provided that bargaining unit employees are first afforded the opportunity to
work overtime as set forth in (D) above, the Township may utilize non-bargaining unit
employees to work the hours in lieu of mandating bargaining unit employees to work
the overtime.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed the ‘status quo’, to maintain the current language and
challenged the jurisdiction of the panel to address this issue.
Union Position
The parties advanced arguments on this issue in support of their positions of
permissive or mandatory subject of bargaining similar to the arguments advanced
previously on Issues 4 and 5.
The Union points out in its post-hearing brief that it advances this proposal to
rectify an injustice that the Union members continue to suffer as a result of the
Township’s continuing failure to hire a sufficient number of full-time employees so that
the “interim” use of part-time employees under the letter of understanding can be
terminated. The Union points out that, until the most recent negotiation between the
parties leading to the current contract, there were no part-time employees and there
were only paid on call used only to respond to emergency scenes. Union President
Duvall testified that it was only because of the Union’s desire to make it financially
easier for the Township to hire additional full-time employees, to bring the number of
44

full-time employees up to 12, that the Union agreed to allow the Township to create the
part-time employee program and to the current language in Article 18, Section 1 (D)
and (E) that allows the Township to use paid on call employees to fill in for absences of
full-time employees after a certain number of hours of overtime opportunities are
provided to full-time employees. The Union’s position is that is it only fair that full-time
employees be provided the opportunity to fill the bargaining unit position when
overtime opportunities arise and earn additional overtime pay for doing so.
The Union points to the external comparables and notes that three of the five
comparable community contracts offer overtime to bargaining unit members first.
Employer Position
The Employer argues that this is a permissive subject of bargaining and not
within the panel’s jurisdiction. The Employer advances the same basic arguments
advanced in Issues 4 and 5 in support of its position that this is a permissive subject of
bargaining. The Employer’s position is that if the arbitrator determines that this issue is
a mandatory subject of bargaining, the Employer reserves the right to challenge the
determination in appropriate forums. The Employer proposed that the current contract
language be maintained.
On the specifics of the proposed language the Employer points out that this was
carefully crafted compromise language agreed to by the parties during the last
negotiations and should not be altered by the panel. The Employer also points out that,
in practice, bargaining unit employees have been offered overtime opportunities in
excess of the minimum number of hours guaranteed by this section of the contract. (E73-74) The Employer says adopting the Union’s proposed language in this contract
would require the Employer to always fill the vacancies with overtime first before they
could seek any non-bargaining unit employees to fill in for absences and this would be
totally contrary to good management and efficiency with tax dollars.
The Employer also points to comparable community contracts and notes that
only the Muskegon Township contract specifically requires that overtime be offered
first to bargaining unit employees. The Employer does acknowledge, however, the
absence of this language in some of the contracts may also be due in part because no
part-time or paid on call staff are employed.
Discussion and Findings
The arbitrator will first address the issue of whether the Union’s proposed
language is a permissive or mandatory subject of bargaining. The arbitrator finds the
45

Union’s proposed language is an appropriate subject for panel consideration and is a
mandatory subject of bargaining. The arbitrator’s basis for this finding is described in
detail in the discussion and findings section addressing Issue 4. The arbitrator finds the
proposed language on this issue a mandatory subject of bargaining on the same basis of
the findings on Issue 4.
On the specifies of the proposed language, the arbitrator finds that the better
course is to retain the current contract language rather than adopt the language
proposed by the Union. There is clear evidence that this language was arrived at
through compromise by the parties during the last negotiating session leading to the
current contract. The basis for this compromise was to balance the interests of safety
and staffing levels necessary to provide adequate service to the community with the
financial considerations faced by the Employer. Union witness Duvall testified “we felt
it was very important to increase our staffing levels, because we felt that firefighter’s
safety was – or should be our most important goal. And we wanted to do that with fulltime personnel. And in order to get there, we were willing to lessen the burden on the
Township to pay overtime. So we allowed them to use the paid on call in this expanded
role.” (T-881) There is no record evidence that the financial situation of the Employer
has changed significantly from the time this negotiated language was agreed to. In fact,
if anything, the financial situation of the Employer may be less certain currently than at
the time this language was agreed to.
The arbitrator believes that maintaining the current language will better provide
the opportunities for the parties to continue to discuss and decide the appropriate use
of full-time versus part-time or on call employees along with the financial
considerations. The arbitrator notes, for example, that Article 33, Section 7 states “nonbargaining unit employees will not be used to permanently replace full-time bargaining
unit employees. In the event a non-bargaining unit employee averages more than 48hours per week, over a six month period, the Union and Township will meet and confer
on the bargaining unit status of that individual.” The arbitrator reads this to provide an
opportunity for a monitoring of the number of overtime hours necessitated and filled
by non-bargaining unit employees and have the parties analyze whether, in fact, it
improves both safety and is financially more feasible to hire an additional full-time
employee than to continue to use overtime or full-time or part-time employees.
There was also testimony by both representatives for the Employer and the
Union that the language in the Union’s proposal relative to procedure in offering
46

overtime among the bargaining unit employees was being followed currently. There
was no evidence that this procedure would substantially change.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the
Employer’s last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the
applicable factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of revising the language
in Article 18, section 1 (D) and (E) as proposed by the Union there will be no
change from the current contract.
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

The Employer delegate agrees with the Panels’ Award in Issue No. 11, but disagrees with the
Panels’ determination that Issue No. 11 involves a mandatory subject of bargaining.
The Union delegate agrees with the Panel's determination that the issue is a mandatory subject
of bargaining, but disagrees with the Award on the merits.
Issue #12 – Article 18, Overtime and Callback, Section 1 F (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to modify Article 18, Section 1(F).
“F. If there are insufficient bargaining unit employees who volunteer for the
overtime opportunity, the Employer may, in lieu of utilizing a non-bargaining unit
employee to work the hours, assign mandatory overtime to the bargaining unit
employee with the least seniority in the job classification in which the overtime has
arisen who is off on his four-day leave period, provided, however that no employee
who has previously been approved vacation will be mandated to work overtime during
the vacation period, inclusive of those off-duty days immediately prior to and following
the vacation days. Employees who are on-duty are also subject to mandatory holdover
until a replacement can be found in accordance with this Article.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed the ‘status quo’, maintain the current language
Union Position
The Union states that its purpose in advancing this proposed language change is
to primarily codify current procedure. The current language states “if there are
47

insufficient full-time employees who volunteer to perform the work, the Employer shall
assign the least senior employee in the bargaining unit in which case the assignment
shall be mandatory.”
The Union says its proposed language would clarify that if there is not a
sufficient number of bargaining unit employees who volunteer for the overtime, then
the Employer can either mandate overtime within the bargaining unit or utilize a nonbargaining unit employee to work the needed hours. The Union says its proposed
language describes what the actual practice is in describing the order in which the
Employer will consider whom, within the bargaining unit, to mandate overtime. The
Union says the actual practice is to mandate overtime in the “pecking order” of first
choosing the bargaining unit employee with the least seniority in the job classification
in which the overtime has arisen who is off on a four-day leave period. The Union also
says that exempting those who are on an approved vacation from mandatory overtime
has been the way the policy has been implemented and the proposed language
referring to the practice of mandating on duty employees to work hold over overtime
until a replacement can be found does reflect current practice.
Both the Union and the Employer acknowledge, in their post-hearing briefs, that
this particular provision in the contract does not lend itself to comparability with other
external bargaining units and fashioning the language is unique to the parties in this
contract.
The Union says the language it proposes is intended to fully and correctly state
the actual practice of the parties and as such will serve to facilitate labor peace and
enhance employee moral.
Employer Position
The Employer urges that the current language be retained. The Employer says
the proposed language is complicated and unclear and could lead to more, not less,
confusion and potential grievances. For example, the Employer questions the first
sentence of the Union’s proposal and inquires whether the reference to “in lieu of
utilizing a non-bargaining employee to work the hours,” could be interpreted that it
would prohibit the Employer from using non-bargaining unit employees to avoid
overtime all together. The Employer says it should not be interpreted to mean that it
could not use the floating full-time employee or lieutenants or others to fill vacancies on
occasion and avoid overtime altogether. The Employer notes that it was these and other
ambiguities and issues that led the parties to be unable to come to an agreement on a
48

memorandum of understanding addressing this issue previously. (T-948) The Employer
says that there was testimony by both Union and Employer representatives that their
interest was to maintain the status quo on this issue. The Employer says there is no
better way to maintain the status quo than to maintain the current language.
Discussion and Findings
The arbitrator found it difficult to reach a conclusion on this issue. On the one
hand, there was substantial testimony that the intent behind the Union’s proposal was
to merely clarify what the existing practice has been. The Employer did not dispute, in
many instances, what the Union proposed in this language has been the current
practice. There is no question that the current language leaves more to interpretation
than the language proposed by the Union. One might also argue that the current
language could be interpreted to be in direct conflict with the language in Subsection E
of Section 1 in that Subsection E allows the Employer to use non-bargaining unit
employees to fill vacancies provided the bargaining unit employees are afforded the
guaranteed overtime opportunities of Subsection D, but language in Subsection F says
the Employer “shall” assign the least senior employee in the bargaining unit to
mandatory overtime if there are insufficient full-time employees who volunteer to
perform the work. Obviously this has not been the past practice.
The Union’s attempt to clarify what is current practice, however, may also result
in further ambiguities. For example, the Union’s proposed language in its first sentence
says “the Employer may, in lieu of utilizing a non-bargaining unit employee to work
the hours, assign mandatory overtime to the bargaining unit employee. The Union’s use
of the word “may” instead of “shall” that appears in the current language, is apparently
intended to recognize that the Employer can use non-bargaining unit employees to
work these hours or may mandate bargaining unit employees to work these hours
provided the Employer follows the procedure in selecting the employee for that
mandated overtime as described in the Union’s proposed language. However, one
might conclude that the “may” also applies to the reference to assigning mandatory
overtime to the bargaining unit employee with the least seniority in the job
classification and, therefore, be interpreted to mean that the Employer has discretion as
to whether to use this particular process in assigning mandatory overtime. The
arbitrator believes that the inclusion of the last sentence in the Union’s proposed
language is of little value in that it recognizes that employees who are on duty can be
held over to provide service until a replacement can be found. There was testimony
49

indicating that both the Employer and the Union recognized that an employee could be
held over but not be held over to a point that would result in working in excess of the
48 consecutive hours on duty limitation.
To summarize, the independent arbitrator saw positives and negatives in
choosing the proposed language the Union puts forth, rather than the current language.
On the whole, however, particularly in light of testimony by both the Union and
Employer that there has evolved a general procedure and practice both Union and
Employer have recognized as satisfactory in fulfilling the requirements of the current
language, that it is the better course of action to retain the current language than to
insert this new language, which could lead to potential further confusion. There was
testimony that the parties were close to agreement on a memorandum of understanding
describing the practices to be carried out under the current language. Perhaps, with
further discussion around the ambiguities within both the current language and the
proposed language, the parties can come to agree on a memorandum of understanding
or at least reaffirm use of the current practices.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the
Employer’s last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the
applicable factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of revising the language
in Article 18, section 1 (F) as proposed by the Union there will be no change from
the current contract.
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

50

Issue #13, #14, #15, #16, #17 – Article 20, Wages, Appendices A-1 through A-3
(economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed across-the-board wage increases beginning as follows:
April 1, 2004 = 4%
April 1, 2005 = 4%
April 1, 2006 = 4%
April 1, 2007 = 4%
April 1, 2008 = 4% extending through March 31, 2009
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed across-the-board wage increases as follows:
April 1, 2004 = 2.75%
April 1, 2005 = 3.0 %
April 1, 2006 = 3.25%
April 1, 2007 = 3.0 %
April 1, 2008 = contract not to be extended beyond March 31, 2008 but if it is then
3.0% through March 31, 2009.
Union Position
The Union, in its post-hearing brief, takes the position that the best way to
analyze wage rates is to compare hourly wage rates of firefighter wages among the
external comparable communities. The Union says it is a more accurate comparison
than using the annual pay amount because hours of work differ among the
comparables. The Union also says it is best to use the firefighter wage for comparison
because it is the most similar position to compare. Several of the other positions differ in
description and duties.
The Union urges the panel to give greater weight to the four external comparable
communities that have established wage rates through the collective bargaining process
as Plainfield has done and give lesser emphasis on Grandville because wages for
Grandville firefighters are not established through a collective bargaining process and
on Grand Haven which has just negotiated its first contract under a collective
bargaining process. The Union also says consideration should be given to the fact that 9
out of 10 of the bargaining unit employees obtain the basic EMT license and even
though the Department is not licensed at the Basic EMT level, the Township residents
benefit from the EMT skills of the firefighters.
51

The Union says little weight should be given to the wages or pattern of wage
increases of other Township employees because the wages of those employees has been
established unilaterally by the Employer. The Union suggests the panel use the CPI-U
(All Urban Consumers) data for the Detroit/Ann Arbor/Flint SMSA when considering
the cost of living factor (Sec. 9(e)) as exhibited in Union exhibit (U-13C) because that
data reflects the area nearest to Plainfield Township and points out that Employer
exhibit (E-9) only provided data for Midwest. Additionally, the Union provided an
analysis in its post-hearing brief on cost of living which described the CPI-U increases
for the period April 2004 to April 2007, using the 2006-2007 data from the BLS website.
The Union says the external comparable data and the CPI-U data support its position on
wages.
Employer Position
The Employer says one of the most critical factors the panel should consider
when addressing wages is the internal consistency of wage increases for other
employees of the Employer. The Employer urges the panel to consider the wages given
to non-union elected and administrative employees and the non-supervisory employees
represented by the Plainfield Township Municipal Employees Association. The
Employer notes these groups received wage increases ranging from 2.0% to 3.5% for the
years 2004-2006. (E-10, E-11, U-60) With respect to CPI-U consideration, the Employer
says the panel should look more to Midwest data as more reflective of the State of
Michigan during the relevant time periods.
The Employer, in its post-hearing brief, uses the same base wage data as used by
the Union in its analysis of external comparables. Both parties have used the Firefighter
with five years seniority as the base data for wage comparisons. The Employer says,
however, that Plainfield Township firefighters may be getting more overtime than
firefighters in some of the other comparable communities because some communities
don’t include the “Kelly” day in the work schedule as does Plainfield Township. The
Employer says this should be taken into consideration when assessing overall wage
comparisons.
Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator has analyzed the very helpful data submitted by the parties
during the hearing and in their post-hearing briefs and carefully considered the
arguments to reach a decision on the issue of wages. Outlined below is a summary of
that data which is intended to describe the relationship between the Arbitrator’s
52

findings and the data that those findings are based on. The summary data is based on
the following findings. First, the external comparables primarily used in comparing
wages are Holland, Jackson, Muskegon Township and Norton Shores. The Arbitrator
generally agrees with the Union’s view that Grandville is not as comparable on this
issue because wages are not set through a collective bargaining process and Grand
Haven Township has just recently engaged in that process. Additionally, the Employer,
in its post-hearing brief analysis has excluded Grand Haven Township in some of its
analysis recognizing that its “market adjustment” rate does not compare with the
others. The Employer has also excluded Grandville in some of its analysis.
Second, internal comparables have been considered. The Arbitrator does view
internal comparables as relevant to the overall picture of wages in public employment
in the community, including the wages of other employees of the Employer. In the data
below the Arbitrator has used exhibits (U-13B, (E-11) to calculate average percentage
increases for some of the groupings of these employees over the period 2004-2006. It is
recognized that the wages of individual employees may vary greatly but this data gives
some indication of internal wage decisions made by the Employer.
Third, with respect to the cost of living/CPI-U data, both parties used the same
information but each argued for emphasis on a different set of that information. The
summary reflects a average percentage increase for the years noted by calculating the
average of the combined data for the Detroit/Ann Arbor/Flint SMSA, as urged by the
Union, and the Midwest SMSA, as urged by the Employer.
The remaining information in the summary merely uses the data contained in the
exhibits and presented by the parties in their post-hearing briefs to compare the hourly
wage, annual wage and average annual increase in firefighters base wages in
comparable communities with those that will be received by the bargaining unit
members in this proceeding as a result of the panel’s decision. The summary reveals for
example that with the increases ordered by the panel the Plainfield firefighters hourly
wage will increase over the period 2004-2007 to slightly close the gap between Plainfield
firefighters and the average of the comparables but will still be slightly less than the
average of the comparables in 2007. The summary shows the Plainfield Township
firefighters annual wage as slightly more in 2007 than the average of the comparables
but this may be due to having fewer number of comparables data to compare for 2007.
The CPI/cost of living comparison shows the CPI/cost of living increase over the
period 05-07 was 10.81%; the percentage increase in wages among the comparables over
53

that same time period was 10.22%, and the percentage increase in wages for the
Plainfield Township firefighters over that same time period as a result of this panel’s
decision will be 10%.
The Arbitrator has also concluded that it more consistent with the intent of PERA
that the contract period be extended to end March 31, 2009. As a result, the Arbitrator
finds the wage rates should encompass that period between April 1, 2008 and March 31,
2009 and finds the Employer’s last offer of settlement the more reasonable given the
pattern of wage increases of comparable communities and the CPI/cost of living
pattern.
External comparables used for wage comparison: Jackson, Muskegon
Township, Holland, Norton Shores
• Internal comparables using (U-13 B) (E-11)
Plainfield Township non-bargaining unit:
General employees average percent increase
Non-bargaining fire average percent increase
Non-bargaining water average percent increase
AVERAGE

2004
4.84
3.67
3.05
3.85

2005
5.1
4.3
2.76
4.05

2006
3.5
3.5
3.5

Cost of living/CPI average of Detroit/Ann Arbor/Flint SMSA and Mid-West area
(U-13 C)
2004/05
2005/06
2006/07
Average percent increase 3.08
3.35
4.38
=10.81% over 3 years
•

•

Average hourly wage among comparables for full paid firefighter (E-6) (U-10)
2004
2005
2006
2007
15.99
16.53
17.20
17.54

•

Average annual wage among comparables for full paid firefighter
2004
2005
2006
2007
45,337
47,117
48,814
49,323

•

Average annual percentage increase in base wage among comparables
2004
2005
2006
2007
2.96
3.41
3.56
3.25
=13.18% over 4 years

•

Plainfield Township Firefighters base hourly and annual wage; percentage of
increase over 4 years as result of panel award
Hourly
Annual
% increase

2004
15.53
45,215
4%

2005
16.00
46,571
3%

2006
16.64
48,434
4%

2007
17.13
49,887
3%

=14% over 4 years

54

Based on the entirety of the evidence and analysis the Arbitrator finds that
modifications to the wage appendixes in Article 20, Section 1 should be revised to
reflect the following percentage increases for all classifications: beginning April 1, 2004
= 4%; beginning April 1, 2005 = 3%; beginning April 1, 2006 = 4%; beginning April 1,
2007 = 3%; beginning April 1, 2008 = 3%.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds:
The Union’s last offer of settlement on Issue 13; the Employer last offer of
settlement on Issue 14; the Union’s last offer of settlement on Issue 15; the
Employer’s last offer of settlement on Issue 16; the Employer’s last offer of
settlement on Issue 17 to more nearly comply with the applicable factors in
Section 9; Therefore, Appendix A will be modified to reflect the wage
percentage increases for all classifications as follows:
For the period April 1, 2004 – March 31, 2005 = 4% [retroactive to April 1, 2004]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree______________________

For the period April 1, 2005 – March 31, 2006 = 3 % [retroactive to April 1, 2005]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree______________________

For the period April 1, 2006 – March 31, 2007 = 4% [retroactive to April 1, 2006]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree______________________

For the period April 1, 2007 – March 31, 2008 = 3% [retroactive to April 1, 2007]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree______________________

55

For the period April 1, 2008 – March 31, 2009 = 3%[effective date: April 1, 2008]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree______________________

Issue #18 – Withdrawn
Issue #19 – Article 23, Uniforms, Section 3, Boot/Shoe Allowance (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to modify Article 23, Section 3 by adding the following
language (noted in italic) to the current language so the Section would read: “ A one
hundred fifty ($150) dollar per year allowance for shoes and boots and essential items
will be paid by the second Monday in April of each year. Effective April 1, 2004, the
allowance shall be increased to two hundred fifty ($250.00) per year.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed the ‘status quo’, no change in current contract
Union Position
Union Witness Duvall testified that the current shoe/boot allowance has not
been increased since 1996. (T-407) He also testified, in response to how the figure of
$250.00 was arrived at, that it was approximately the cost of a pair of boots today ($220)
equivalent to what the same pair would have been able to be purchased for in 1996
($80.00). (T407-408) The Union provided exhibit (U-25) which identified four of the
comparable community contracts reference to the manner in which those Employers
provide clothing or boot/shoe allowances. The Union says this evidence, along with the
fact that cost of living has increased since 1996 supports its position that the allowance
amount should be raised as proposed by the Union.
Employer Position
The Employer says the Employer does not require specific boots or shoes as part
of the uniform and does provide “turnout” boots for use at emergency and fire scenes.
The Employer recognizes that adequate boots and shoes are a necessity and therefore
56

has provided this allowance. The Employer points to its contract with the employees
represented by the Municipal Employees Association as an example of what it provides
to those employees which includes replacement of footwear every 12 to 18 months. The
Employer says only one of the comparable external community contracts specifically
provides a clothing allowance similar to this which may include boots and shoes.
(Muskegon Township with a $350 annual clothing allowance. (E-69) The Employer says
it opposes this change because of the increased cost and its unfairness with respect to
other Township groups.
Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator has reviewed the language in several of the external contracts and
in the contract between to Employer and the PTMEA in an attempt to get a better sense
of how other groups treat this issue. It is noted that while the Employer argues that
granting this proposal would be unfair to other Township groups, the only other group
who would need such clothing items, the employees of the PTMEA, are provided with
uniforms, including industrial footwear every 12 to 18 months. The external community
contracts reviewed by the Arbitrator revealed that Holland merely states “All uniforms,
protective clothing, or protective devices required of regular, full-time employees in the
performance of their duties, shall be furnished without cost to the employee.” (E-67,
Art. 23) It is not clear whether this includes boots and shoes. Jackson has similar
language (E-68, Art. 12) and it too is unclear whether it includes boots and shoes.
Muskegon Township specifies a $350 annual clothing allowance (E-69) and Norton
Shores specifies that “Employees shall wear a work uniform provided by the
Employer” and specifies the work items to include dress shoes, work boots and over
boots. (E-70, Art. 25) Grand Haven provides “uniforms and equipment as the Township
shall determine is necessary – the items provided by the Township will include: leather
structure fire boots, approved station boots.” (E-81, Art 22) Grandville’s policy does not
reference this. So the external comparisons are mixed. The trend however appears to be
that the Employer will either provide shoes and boots as part of the clothing provided
or will provide some compensation for purchase of clothing, including the purchase of
shoes and boots.
The Employer’s stated second objection to the Union’s proposal was that it
would increase costs but it did not address the question of whether the costs to the
Employee would have risen since the $150 amount was established in 1996. A review of
the Bureau of Labor Statistics data (E-9) reveals that cost of living increased
57

approximately 41% from May 1996 to May 2006. That would mean boots costing $80 in
1996 may cost at least $113 in May of 2006. Of course using just the inflation as a
consideration for some increase would result in an increase of about $61 to a $211
amount rather than to $250. This being an economic issue the panel is forced to choose
between one of the parties last offers of settlement. One of the dilemmas is that the
Union’s last offer of settlement would make this provision effective April 1, 2004.
Exhibit (E-9) indicates the percentage increase in inflation between April 1996 and April
2004 was approximately 30% which would perhaps justify a $45 increase at that time.
On the other hand, this contract will cover a period extending to March of 2009 so it is
expected inflation will continue to impact buying power through that period.
Considering all of the evidence the Arbitrator finds the Union’s last offer of
settlement is the more acceptable. A primary consideration in reaching that finding is
the fact that the Employer currently provides industrial footwear to the employees
represented by the PTMEA. While the increase of $100 may be higher than needed on a
retroactive basis it will bring the allowance “for shoes and boots and other essential
items” more in line with inflationary costs over the life of the contract period than
would the Employer’s proposal of no change. It also may prompt the parties to
consider, in their next round of negotiations, whether adopting a policy similar to that
used in the contract with PTMEA is a more reasonable approach.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, the language in Article 23, section 3 will be
revised to add the language proposed by the Union in its last offer of settlement
[effective upon issuance of this opinion and award]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

58

Issue #20 – Article 31, Group Benefits, Section 1(a) Group Insurance (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to modify Article 31, Section 1(a) as follows:
“(a) Employees shall be eligible to participate in the existing Blue Cross/Blue
Shield Point of Service Plan 4, the existing Blue Cross/Blue Shield PPO Plan 1, or the
existing Blue Cross/Blue Shield BCN Plan E. The Township reserves the right to change
insurance carriers or plans, provided benefit coverage is substantially similar.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to modify Article 31, Section 1(a) as follows:
“(a) Employees shall, upon proper written application, be eligible to participate
in one (1) of the following health care plans offered for employees and their
dependents, subject to the availability of said plans: Blue Cross/Blue Shield Point of Service
Plan 4, The Blue Cross/Blue Shield PPO Plan 1, or the Blue Care Network Plan E. The
Township reserves the right to change insurance carriers or plans, provided benefit
coverage is substantially similar.”
Union Position
Both the Union and the Employer acknowledge in their post-hearing briefs that
the parties have agreed that the Employer will offer the three health care plans
referenced in their respective proposals. This is further reinforced by the stipulation
entered into by the parties replacing the Priority Health plan referred to in the current
contract with the Blue Care Network Plan E referred to in the proposed language. (Joint
exhibit 5) The key point of difference for the Union in the proposed languages is the
Union’s urging the inclusion of the phrase “the existing” modifying the reference to the
three specified plans and its opposition to the Employer’s proposed inclusion of
“subject to the availability of said plans.”
The Union says including the term “the existing” is important because within
each type of plan offered there can be different optional features including riders to
each plan and the Union wants the language to be interpreted that the coverage remains
the same, or at least substantially similar, to the coverage covered by these plans as it
exists when the agreement is entered into through the issuance of this order. The Union
says its language provides greater clarity on that point.
As for the Employer’s proposed language, the Union says it questions the
meaning of the proposal. The question the Union poses is if one or more of the three
59

plans was no longer offered what would the Employer be required to do? The Union
says the answer under the current language – without the phrase proposed by the
Employer – is found in the last sentence whereby the Employer would be allowed to
change insurance carriers or plans provided benefit coverage is substantially similar.
The Union says if the Employers language is adopted it may be interpreted that the
Employer would not be required to replace the no longer available plan given that it
was offered “subject to its availability” and of course it now is no longer available. The
Union says the Employers retention of language “upon written application” is not
necessary and was not something the parties discussed when coming to agreement on
the plans that would be offered.
Employer Position
The Employer says it proposes this language because the Township has had a
recent experience during the term of the expired contract when one of the companies
sponsoring one of the plans specified in the contract went out of business. The
Employer says it doesn’t want to be contractually bound to offer a plan that is no longer
available. The Employer, in its post hearing brief stated that “The Township is willing
to continue to offer the existing three plans for the duration of this agreement.
However, it would be unreasonable to expect the Employer to continue to offer a plan
that is no longer made available by the carrier.”
Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator believes the parties may be seeing some ghosts that don’t exist.
The objective of the language is to give some clarity and assurance that the parties know
what health care coverage (the general scope and extent of that coverage) the Employer
will be expected to provide and the Employees can be expected to be provided during
the period of the agreement. The last sentence of the section obligates the Employer to
do that. The Union raises a good question, i.e. what would occur if all three of the
existing plans offered were no longer offered? Would the Employer not be obligated to
provide any coverage? The Arbitrator is of the opinion that the Employer’s proposed
language does not add to the clarity of the language and in fact may add confusion. On
the other hand, the Union’s proposed language merely clarifies and modifies what the
Employer is obligated to do through the last sentence of the section, which is to ensure
that it seeks and obtains coverage “substantially similar” to the coverage provided by
the “existing” plans specified in the language in the event one or more of those plans
are no longer available.
60

Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of revising the language in Article
31, section 1(a), the language proposed by the Union in its last offer of
settlement will become the language of Article 31, section 1(a). [Effective upon
issuance of this Opinion and Award]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #21 – Article 31, Group Benefits, Section 2,employee contributions
(economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to modify Article 31, Section 2 as follows:
“Effective retroactive to April 1, 2004, employees having family coverage under
any plan shall contribute $60 per month to the premium by way of an appropriate
payroll deduction; the Township shall pay the remainder of the premium for family
coverage. The retroactive adjustment due to employees for the difference between what
the employee paid for the family premium on and after April 1, 2004, and the new
contribution rate of $60 per month, shall be paid by the Township to such employees by
no later than 30 days after issuance of the Act 312 Award in MERC Case No. L04 B7005.”
Effective immediately upon the issuance of the Act 312 Award in MERC Case
No. L04 B-7005, employees having single (1-person) or double (2-person) coverage
under any plan shall contribute to the premium by way of an appropriate payroll
deduction as follows: $50 per month for double (2-person); $25.00 per month for single
(1-person).”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to modify Article 31, Section 2 as follows:
“(a) The township will pay ninety-seven percent (97%) of the premium for regular
full-time individual employee, spousal coverage, and dependant coverage under the
hospitalization and medical insurance programs set forth in Section 1. Employees shall,
during the term of this Agreement, contribute three percent (3%) of the premium
applicable to the coverage selected by the employee (single, two person or family), by payroll
deduction of equal installments from each biweekly payroll for a total of twenty-six (26)
times in each calendar year. If the premium increases during the term of this Agreement, the
61

Township and the employees shall continue to pay the same proportions of the increased
premium (97%/3%).
(b) In addition to the 3% contribution in (a) above, employees choosing an available
health care insurance plan whose premiums are higher than a lower cost plan offered shall pay
the dollar amount difference between the chosen plan and the lowest cost plan offered through
payroll deductions.”
Union Position
Both the Union and the Employer seek to modify the provisions in the current
contract involving Employee contributions to payment of health insurance premiums.
They disagree on what that contribution should be and how it should be distributed
among the Employees. The current contract provides that employees with individual or
spousal coverage pay no share of the premium cost and those employees with family
coverage pay 100% of the difference between the two person and the family plan,
currently ranging from approximately $185 to $188 per month. The Union, in its post
hearing brief states eight of the ten current bargaining unit employees has family plan
coverage.
The parties have agreed upon the health plans that will be offered. (Jt. Ex. 5,6)
Under the Union’s proposed language Employees would pay a set amount toward the
premium payment for the period of the agreement regardless of the plan chosen by the
Employee. That monthly contribution would be $25 for single, $50 for double and $60
for family coverage. Based on the current cost of the three plans offered the employee
payment amount would range between approximately 5.3% to 7.5% of the total
premium costs, depending upon the plan chosen and whether it was for single, two
party or family coverage. Of course if premium costs rose, the employee contribution
amount would not change. The other feature of the Union’ proposal is to require the
Employer to reimburse employees who have had family coverage and been paying the
difference between the two person and family plan the amount of that difference (less
the $60 amount per month the Employee would pay for the family plan) paid since
April 1, 2004 – the expiration date of the current contract. The Union says this would
provide relief to those employees who have been paying these excessive amounts while
this contract has been pending.
The Union says its proposal is supported by a review of the external comparables
and the Employers proposal is not. The Union says its proposal, as opposed to the
Employers, would require an employee monthly contribution equivalent to the highest
of the comparables, pointing out that only two of the comparable communities
62

(Muskegon Township and Norton Shores) require any employee contribution at all at
$35 and $22 per month for family coverage respectively. The Union says only one of the
comparable communities – Grand Haven Township – offers a HMO plan similar to the
BCN-E plan offered by the Employer. Five comparables offer plans similar to the PPO-1
plan and POS-4 plan offered by the Employer but only two of those five require
employees to share in the premium cost of those plans. The Union says none of the
comparables require anything near the employee share of premium cost that the
Employers proposal would require. The Union also says if the Employers proposal is
adopted, which requires 3% of the cost of any increase in the premium to be paid by the
Union members, it will put the members at risk of paying a much higher amount if the
Employer unilaterally chooses to offer non-BCBS plans to its other employees in the
future. The Union notes, in its post hearing brief, that the Employers costs for health
care have already been reduced as a result of the parties agreement involving the
specific plans that will be offered (Jt. Ex. 5-6) (E-85) and the Employer can afford to bear
the cost of the Union’s proposal.
Employer Position
The Employer, in its post hearing brief, notes that both proposals require all unit
member employees to share in the cost of health care premiums, unlike the current
contract which only requires cost sharing of those choosing the family coverage. The
Employer objects to the Unions proposal that would permit the Employee to select the
highest cost plan and pay nothing more for it than for the lowest cost BCN-E plan. The
result of offering this choice would likely be that most employees would select the
higher cost, i.e. better coverage, plan which would result in the Employer having to pay
100% of the balance of the higher cost.
The Employer notes that under its proposal if the Employees choose the BCN-E
plan the employee’s total premium contribution will be 3% of the premium. Based on
current costs, that would be approximately $10.25 for single, $22.56 for two person
coverage and $28.20 for family coverage per month. For those currently under the
family plan, if they chose to retain or to switch to the BCN-E coverage, they would pay
substantially less per month, i.e. a reduction from $188.00 to $28.20. The Employer says
the BCN-E plan is one of the better HMO plans in that there is no annual deductible; no
annual co-insurance and a reasonable co- pay for office visits and ER use.
Where the Employer and the Union proposals differ most is how the cost would
be shared if the Employee chooses coverage under one of the other two plans offered.
63

Under the Union’s proposal the Employer would pay the additional premium cost of
the difference between the cost of the BCN-E plan and the other two plans. Under the
Employer’s proposal the Employee would pay that additional premium cost. The
Employer says it is willing to pay the majority of the cost for coverage of a reasonable
health care plan but it does not believe it should be obligated to pay for the additional
costs of the highest plans available when a negotiated lower cost plan, which it believes
provides quality coverage, is available. The Employer says it would be unreasonable to
place this cost on the Employer, particularly since all other Township employees are
either covered by the BCN-E plan or the Healthy Blue Living plan. The Employer also
notes that its plan, based on a shared percentage, would maintain the ratio of cost
sharing, at least for those on the BCN-E plan in the event of premium increases whereas
the Union’s set amount proposal would not. The Employer says its proposal would
result in the Employee having an interest in keeping costs down whereas the Union’s
proposal would not.
The Employer notes that the other major difference in the proposals is that the
Union is seeking to have its proposal for the cost of family coverage to be retroactive to
April 1, 2004 and for reimbursement of the difference in premium cost sharing by
employees to be refunded to employees who have paid those costs since that time. The
Employer says this would cost the Employer approximately $20,000.00. With respect to
the external comparables, the Employer says they lag somewhat in the national trend
towards employees paying a higher portion of health care premiums. The Employer
also notes that some of the plans offered by the comparable community Employers do
not provide the same level of coverage, meaning not as good a coverage, or coverage
requiring more employee co-pay or deductibles. (U-29)(E-26) The Employer says the
comparables demonstrate a trend where employers who pay 100% of the premium have
either a less expensive HMO plan or reduced benefits by adding deductibles and copays and where optional plans are offered, employees must pay the difference to
receive the higher benefit plans.
Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator finds the Employers last offer of settlement to be the more
appropriate for inclusion in this contract at this time. The Arbitrator finds the Union’s
proposal is perhaps more supported by the current contract provisions in the majority
of external comparable contracts than is the Employers proposal, but comparison of
what health care benefits are offered and how employers and employees share those
64

costs for employees performing similar services in other comparable communities (Sec.
9(d) of Act 312) is only one of several factors to be considered by the panel when
reaching decisions. For example, in this case, the parties negotiated a stipulation and
agreed on contract language that specified the health plans that will be made available.
(Jt. Ex. 5,6) [Sec. 9(c) of Act 312] One of those plans was BCN-E which, if chosen by the
Employees, will substantially reduce the costs of health care for eight out of the 10
current members of the bargaining unit.
On the other hand, if the Union’s proposal were to be adopted, one would
presume that those employees who would have considered choosing the BCN-E plan
under the Employers proposal would see no advantage in doing so because they would
pay the same amount whether they chose that plan or one of the two more expensive
plans since it would only be more expensive to the Employer. Another factor to
consider is the internal comparables and those support the Employers proposal because
the rest of the Township employees are provided a plan the same as or similar to the
BCN-E plan provided here. One of the Union’s concerns expressed in the post hearing
brief was that if the Employer chooses to offer other than non-BCBS plans to other
Township employees it would result in dramatic increase in costs to its members
because of the percentage cost sharing approach of the Employers proposal. That is
highly unlikely to occur given the fact that the Employer and the Union just agreed to
offer only BCBS plans (Jt. Ex. 5,6) and if that were to occur the Employer’s costs would
increase dramatically also.
It may be somewhat unfortunate that the parties were not able to devise a
method of premium cost sharing for the two plans offered in addition to the HMO plan
BCN-E that could have shared the cost a little more proportionately. Under the Unions
proposal the Employer shares the majority of the additional costs for those two plans.
Under the Employers proposal the employee shares the additional costs for those two
plans. The record reflects, however, that compared to what the majority of the current
unit members (8 out of 10) were paying for the family member coverage, if they choose
to continue that coverage under a plan other than the BCN-E plan, they will not be
paying significantly more than they have been paying and of course if they choose the
BCN-E plan they will be paying substantially less. (Sec. 9 (d) of Act 312)
Another major difference in the proposals is the inclusion of the language in the
Union’s proposal that would require the Employer to reimburse those employees who
were paying a share of the cost under the family plan retroactive to April 1, 2004. The
65

average monthly payment from April 1, 2004 ranged from $41 per month to nearly
$188.00 per month. Even if the $60 per month contribution were deducted from this
reimbursement the Employer estimates the cost of that reimbursement would be
$20,000. Even though the Employer might technically have the financial ability to pay
this lump sum amount, along with its payment of retroactive wages granted in this
Award, it would not be in the interests of the welfare and the public that it be ordered
to do so. An additional fact to consider relevant to this aspect of the Union’s proposal is
that the parties negotiated and voluntarily agreed to these payments in this manner as
part of the current contract, and that the parties have had the opportunity to negotiate
and agree to a successor contract long before this point in time. Had they done so the
impact on the Employer of the retroactivity aspect of this proposal would not have been
as great.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the
Employers last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the
applicable factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of revising the language
in Article 31, section 2, the language proposed by the Employer in its last offer of
settlement will be incorporated into the contract. In addition, so that employees
may make decisions on health care given the requirements of this Award, the
Township and Blue Cross/Blue Shield are directed to offer an appropriate open
enrollment period to bargaining unit employees after issuance of this Award.
[Effective upon the issuance of this Award]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #22—Withdrawn

66

Issue #23—Article 31, Group Benefits, Section 4, Continuation of Insurance
Coverage (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed modifications to Article 31, Section 4. The proposed
modifications are in the first and third sentences of Section 4 as follows:
(First Sentence) “Group health care insurance benefits shall be paid by the
Employer, less the employee premium contribution amount as provided for in this agreement,
for a period of three (3) months following the date on which an employee is laid off or is
placed on an unpaid medical leave of absence. The Township will continue coverage
during the period an employee is on approved workers’ compensation leave. In all
other cases where an employee begins an unpaid leave of absence, group health care
insurance benefits shall be paid by the Employer, less the employee premium contribution
amount as provided for in this agreement, to the end of the month in which the leave
begins.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed modifications to Article 31, Section 4. The proposed
modification are in the first and third sentences of Section 4 as follows:
“Group health care insurance benefits shall be paid by the Employer and employee
in the agreed upon proportions for a period of three (3) months following the date on
which an employee is laid off or is placed on an unpaid medical leave of absence. The
Township will continue coverage during the period an employee is on approved
workers’ compensation leave. In all other cases where an employee begins an unpaid
leave of absence, group health care insurance benefits shall be paid by the Employer and
employee in the agreed upon proportions to the end of the month in which the leave
begins.”
Union Position
The Union acknowledges that both parties language attempts to accomplish the
same thing but believes its language is more specific and clear and therefore urges its
adoption.
Employer Position
The Employer also acknowledges that both parties language attempts to clarify
that when an employee is laid off or on a leave of absence, both employee and
Employer will continue to pay their agreed upon contributions to continue health care.
The Employer prefers its language because is says it more clearly specifies that both will
continue to contribute whereas the Unions proposal does not mention the employee’s
obligation to continue.
67

Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator finds the Union’s proposed language is preferable. The Union’s
proposed language makes it clear, by referring to “the employee premium contribution
amount” that the employee does have an obligation to pay some amount. In addition,
the Union’s language states the amount as “as provided for in this agreement” which is
specific. The Employers language statement “in the agreed upon proportions” may
leave the impression that the parties could agree to some other proportion outside of
this agreement. If it is the desire of the parties, at some future time, to agree to some
proportion of shared payment other than what is in this agreement, the Union’s
language makes clear that they must agree to do so as a modification to this agreement.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of revising the language in Article
31, section 4, the language proposed by the Union in its last offer of settlement
will be incorporated into the contract. [Effective upon issuance of this Award.]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #24 – Article 31, Group Benefits, Section 5, Retiree Hospitalization
Insurance (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed modifications to Article 31, Section 5. The Employer’s
proposed modifications are to sub-sections 2 and 3 of Section 5. The Employer proposes
to modify the language in sub-section 2 from: “Employees who have reached age 50
(age 55 if date of hire is after 4/27/00) with 15-19 years of regular full-time
employment...” to “Employees who have reached age 55 with 15-19 years of full-time
employment...” The Employer proposes to modify the language in sub-section 3 from:
“Employees (who have reached age 55 if date of hire is after 4/27/00) with 20 years or
more of regular full-time employment....” to “Employees who have reached age 55 with
20 years or more of regular full-time employment...”
68

Union Proposal
The Union proposed maintaining the ‘status quo”, no change
Employer Position
The Employer says that during the negotiations leading to the current contract
the Employer proposed this change in coverage for retiree hospitalization insurance.
Record testimony and evidence revealed that under the 1996-1999 contract there was no
age requirement related to receipt of retired employees eligibility for Employer paid
hospitalization benefits. (U-45)

The parties reached a compromise during the

negotiations leading to the current contract language. That compromise was that the
age 55 requirement would apply to those with 10 – 14 years seniority; those with 15 to
19 years seniority (if hired after 4/27/00); and to those with 20 or more years seniority
(if hired after 4/27/00). Employees hired before 4/27/00 with 15 to 19 years of seniority
can retire at age 50 and those with 20 or more years of seniority can retire regardless of
age. Currently there are five employees that were hired before 4/27/00.
The Employer points to internal comparables to support its proposal. Evidence
was presented that the 55 minimum age requirement is the requirement for all nonunion Township employees (E-63) and for the PTMEA bargaining unit (E-65). The
Employer says the age 55 requirement it proposes here is now applicable to all
Township employees except the five firefighter employees exempt as a result of the
previous negotiated contract and that it should apply to them also.
The Employer says the external comparables support its position noting that two
have a minimum age of 60 to qualify for retiree health benefits and two others with a
minimum age of 50. One has a minimum age of 55 and one has no minimum age. (E-43)
Union Position
The Union, in its post hearing brief, provides the same general background as the
Employer relating how the current language came to be and says the Employer has
failed to provide sufficient evidence justifying a change. The Union also points to the
external comparables in support of the status quo and notes that four of the six
comparables provide retiree health insurance at ages lower than 55. (U-43, E-43) The
Union says since the language that was agreed to in the last negotiations applied the
age 55 requirement to all but five of the current employees, over time, the age 55
requirement will apply to everyone.
69

Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator finds the evidence does not justify making this change at this
time. There was undisputed evidence that the parties reached a compromise on the
existing language during negotiations leading to the current contract. The external
comparables do not strongly favor the Employers proposal. A review of the language in
those contracts on this issue reveals that they vary to some degree in the level of
benefits offered at different age levels or different seniority levels. What that review
does reveal is that these provisions are somewhat individually crafted to meet the
particular parties needs, just as the current provisions were crafted in the current
contract between these parties.
The Employer, in its post hearing brief, and by presentation of evidence and
testimony at hearing, noted that new governmental accounting standards require public
employers to secure an annual actuarial statement of its unfunded liability for retiree
health care and that the report the Employer received for fiscal year ending 2005
showed an unfunded accrued liability of over $5 million. (E-77) But as the Union points
out in its post hearing brief, there is no requirement that the Employer pre- fund its
health liability. Based on the review of other external comparable community contracts
it appears the parties have a number of options for modification of the current language
if the Employer continues to feel strongly that some modification is necessary for
economic reasons. That is the better course for the parties than for this panel to make
the modification the Employer seeks without more justification.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of revising the language in Article
31, section 5 as proposed by the Employer there will be no change from the
current contract.
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

70

Issue #25 – Article 31, Group Benefits, Section 5, Retiree Hospitalization
Insurance (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to modify Article 31, Section 5 by adding the following
new language:
“Retirees receiving health care insurance benefits under the terms of this
agreement will be covered by the lowest cost plan available to and offered by the
Township to current bargaining unit members. The level of benefits to be received by
retirees under that plan is subject to the terms of that plan. If a retiree resides outside
the area covered by that plan and therefore cannot take advantage of all of the benefits
available to current bargaining unit members, s/he may elect to receive cash in lieu of
coverage in the amount of the monthly premium or portion thereof paid by the
Township under the terms of this agreement. Such election shall be made in writing and
may be made at any time during the period of eligibility to receive this benefit. If the
retiree receiving the benefit is deceased, the spouse, if eligible, may also make an
election if it had not been exercised.
In the alternative, if allowed by the carrier, a retiree may continue in a higher cost
plan by paying the dollar amount difference in premiums between the chosen plan and
the lowest cost plan offered.”
Union Proposal
The Union proposed maintaining the ‘status quo’, no change
Employer Position
The language the Employer proposes to add to this section addressing retiree
health care coverage would specify that the Employer would be responsible for
providing the retiree with the lowest cost plan available to and offered by the Township
to current bargaining unit members. The retiree would be allowed to receive cash in
lieu of coverage if the retiree lived outside the area covered by the plan or continue to
be covered by a higher cost plan offered by the carrier provided the employee paid the
difference in cost between the lowest cost plan and the plan chosen. This language
would be added to the current language in Article 31, Section 5. The current language
specifies various criteria for eligibility for coverage based on age, years of service and
specifies how much would be paid by the Employer and the employee dependent upon
age and years of service at retirement.
71

The Employer says the current language is, or has the potential to be, costly to
the Employer because of the eligibility criteria that requires payment by the Employer
or at least some shared payment by the Employer of plans offered and perhaps chosen
by the retiree that may cost more than the lowest cost plan. The Employer basically puts
forth the same argument here as it did in support of its modification to Section 2 of this
Article that the current lowest cost plan offered, BCN-E, has excellent benefits and the
retiree should be adequately covered by it.
The Employer also says the external comparables support its proposal and points
to the various methods the comparable community contracts address this issue. Those
contracts, like the current contract between the parties in this proceeding, provide a
variety of methods of determining eligibility for retirees and sharing costs between the
Employer and retiree for health care coverage.

The Employer says its proposal

represents reasonable steps to reduce increasing costs of retiree health insurance
without imposing an undue burden on the retiree. It says its proposal to allow retirees
who move out of state to either take the cash amount the Employer pays for the least
cost plan and buy their own insurance or take pay the difference in cost for a higher cost
plan, if available, is a reasonable compromise.
Union Position
The Union points out that of the current plans offered, only the BCBS PPO 1 plan
can cover a retiree who moves out of Michigan. (U-26K) Additionally, the Union says
the premium difference between the lowest cost plan and the other plans currently
offered is tremendously costly for a retiree – nearly $175 per month for two person
coverage. The Union says a review of the comparable community contracts does not
reveal any language comparable to the Employers proposed language requiring retirees
to take the least cost health plan offered and be reimbursed only at the level of the
Employers cost of the least cost plan. The Union notes that only one of the five contracts
in which there is a collective bargaining agreement contains language that links the
retiree health plan to a plan “available to and offered by the Township to current
bargaining unit members.” The Union says under this language the Employer could
offer a terribly inadequate plan to its employees along with better plans and even
though none of the employees chose to be covered by the inadequate plan it still would
be the applicable plan for coverage for the retiree health benefit. The Union expresses
concern that application of this language could be abused by the Employer.
72

Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator views the proposal put forth by the Employer on this issue similar
to the proposal put forth on issue 24. As discussed in issue 24, there was undisputed
evidence that the parties reached a compromise on the existing language in Section 5
during negotiations leading to the current contract. Also, there is evidence in this record
that the parties agreed to certain changes in health care coverage for employees (Jt. Ex,
5, 6) and agreed upon plans in Section 1(a) of this Article. If the parties had wanted to
address the issue of retiree health care coverage differently they had ample opportunity
to do so. As with issue 24, the Arbitrator does not view the external comparables as
strongly favoring the Employers proposal. A review of the language in those contracts
reveals, just as in issue 24, provisions addressing retiree health benefits are individually
crafted to meet the particular parties needs, just as the current provisions were crafted
in the current contract between these parties.
Not unlike the discussion and findings in issue 24, it appears the parties have a
number of options for modification of the current language addressing retiree health
care if the Employer continues to feel strongly that some modification is necessary for
economic reasons. The Arbitrator finds the evidence does not support an immediate
need for this change at this time for economic reasons.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of revising the language in Article
31, section 5 as proposed by the Employer there will be no change from the
current contract.
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #26—Article 31, Group Benefits, new section re: office visit employee copayments (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to modify Article 31 by adding a new Section as follows:
73

“The employee co-pay for office visits under all plans shall continue to be twenty
dollars ($20.00); the Township will reimburse the employee for ten dollars ($10.00), and
the employee may opt to be reimbursed for the remaining ten dollars ($10.00) from his
flexible benefit account provided funds are available.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to modify Article 31 by adding a new Section as follows:
“Employees shall be responsible to pay $20 for doctor’s office visits (as required
by the carrier’s plan). This $20 co-pay shall be paid by the employee or from his/her
flexible spending account.”
Union Position
Both parties, during the hearing and in post hearing briefs, acknowledged that
prior to January 2005 the Employer had a $20 office visit co-pay requirement for its
employees and the Employer reimbursed the employee $10 or allowed the employee to
be reimbursed the $10 from his/her flexible benefit account. In January 2005 the
Employer ceased reimbursing the $10 for all employees, including those in this
bargaining unit, although the employees could continue to be reimbursed by drawing
funds from their flexible benefit plan. The Union says the Employer acted contrary to
the Maintenance of Standards clause of the contract by unilaterally changing this benefit
and the Unions proposal is to return to what had been the practice prior to the
expiration of this contract.
The Union says the external comparables support its proposal pointing out that
four of the six comparables have office co-pays of $10 and none have co-pay of $20 as
proposed by the Employer. (E-37) The Union also argues that establishing the co-pay at
$10 is justified when the panel takes into consideration that the bargaining unit
members receive no dental or optical benefits provided by the Employer and uses its
flexible benefit account to pay for those services. The Union says this is unlike four of
the six comparable community employers who provide some form of dental and optical
coverage. (U-33)
Employer Position
The Employer says its proposal maintains the status quo because at least since
January of 2005 all Township employees have been paying $20 co-pay for office visits.
The Employer says the Unions proposal to return to the $10 co-pay is unreasonable
given the Employers proposal to increase the Employers contribution to the employees
flexible benefit account from the current $900 to $1300 per year. The Employer says that
74

even though the majority of the external comparable communities may have co-pay for
office visits below $20, (E – 37) only two of them have flexible benefit accounts the
employees can draw from and those two have employer account contributions below
the Employers current $900 annual amount. The Employer says if the Employees were
required to pay only $10 co-pay per office visit this would differ from all other
Township employees’ required payment of $20 co-pay per office visit.
Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator finds the Union’s position on this issue is supported by the
evidence more so than the Employers. It is recognized that all other Township
employees currently pay the $20 per office visit co-pay but that is in large part because
they had no choice when the Employer unilaterally changed to require that amount in
January 2005. Also, the external comparables do reveal that no other employer in
comparable communities requires employees performing similar services to pay a $20
office visit co-pay. (E-37) The Union’s position is also favored when considering that
the Employer does not offer Dental or Optical health care coverage as does a majority of
the other employers in comparable communities as part of the overall compensation
received by employees. (Sec. 9(f) of Act 312) Lastly, the Arbitrator does not believe this
will impose a significant cost on the Employer because it is unlikely the Employees
would purposely initiate more office visits, with the accompanying additional time and
travel expense, just because they only had to pay $10 rather than $20.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of inserting the language in Article
31 as proposed by the parties, the new language proposed by the Union will be
inserted in Article 31. [Effective upon issuance of the Award]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

75

Issue #27 – Article 31, Group Benefits, new section re: employee prescription
co-payments (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to add a new section to Article 31 as follows:
“For brand name prescription drugs under all plans, the employee co-pay shall
continue to be forty dollars ($40.00); the Township will reimburse the employee for
twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and the employee may opt to be reimbursed for the
remaining fifteen dollars ($15.00) from his flexible benefit account provided funds are
available.
For generic prescription drugs under all plans, the employee co-pay shall
continue to be ten dollars ($10.00); the employee may opt to be reimbursed for the ten
($10.00) from his flexible benefit account provided funds are available.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to add a new section to Article 31 as follows:
“Employees shall be responsible to pay $10 for generic drug prescriptions (as
defined and required by the carrier’s plan) and shall be responsible for the first $20 for
non-generic drug prescriptions, with the Township reimbursing the employee for the
balance of the co-payment if the co-payment is greater than $20.”
Union Position
Similar to the office visit co-pay issue, there currently is no contract provision
that specifies what the employee prescription co-pay will be. Both parties proposed
language to address this. Both proposals provide language that would result in the
Employee paying $10 for generic prescription drugs. The Union’s proposed language
would result in the Employee paying $15 for brand name prescription drugs. The
Employers proposal would result in the Employee paying $20 for brand name
prescription drugs.
The Union says its proposal would maintain the status quo in that $15 dollars of
the $40 dollars for brand name drugs that is not paid by the insurer is paid by the
Employee out of the Employee’s flexible benefit account (or in cash if the Employee
doesn’t have sufficient funds in the flexible benefit account) and the other $25 is paid by
the Employer. The Union says the Employer has failed to provide sufficient justification
for its proposed reduction in this benefit and notes that due to the changes in health
providers the Employers costs for prescription coverage has actually decreased from
2006 to 2007. (Jt. Ex. 6, U-26I) The Union also says a review of the external comparables
76

reveals that the Unions proposed co-payment of $15 for brand name prescription drugs
is in the mid- range of the comparables. (U-26, E-38) As it pointed out in addressing the
office visit co-pay issue, the Union says the panel should take into consideration the fact
that the Employer does not provide Dental and Optical coverage as several of the other
comparable communities do.
Lastly, the Union says it questions why the Employers proposed language does
not specifically state that the employee can receive reimbursement from the employees
flexible benefit account in this proposal as it did in the office co-pay proposal. The
Union says its inclusion in the office benefit provision and not in this provision could
create ambiguity and it might be construed that reimbursement from the employees
flexible benefit account for prescription drugs is not permitted.
Employer Position
The Employer says it makes this proposal because of its proposal to increase its
annual contribution to the employees’ flexible benefit account from $900 to $1300. The
Employer says as a result it believes the $20/$20 split between the Employer and the
employee is more equitable. The Employer says the external comparables support its
position and points to (E-38) which indicates that four out of the six comparable
community employers require employee brand name prescription drug co-pays of $20
or more.
Discussion and Findings
The external comparables support the Employers position slightly more that the
Unions position. On the other hand, the Union does point out that its members are
much more likely to have to draw a larger amount of funds from their flexible benefit
accounts to pay for dental and optical care than employees performing similar services
in the majority of the other comparable communities because employers in those
communities provide some form of optical and dental coverage. Additionally, there is
the question of why the Employer omitted the language in this proposal allowing the
employee payment to be made from the flexible benefit account. That omission, coupled
with the inclusion of such language in the Section addressing office co-pay, could lead
to some confusion. It should also be remembered that the Employee already has some
incentive to secure generic prescription drugs at $10 cost to the employee rather than at
$15 or $20 for brand name drugs. It is questionable how much a $5 or $10 difference in
cost to the employee will make in the employees’ decision whether to purchase a brand
name or a generic drug if given the choice. The Employer presented no evidence to
77

demonstrate what it estimated its cost savings would be as a result of this change which
would occur prospectively during the remaining term of this contract. Considering the
evidence as a whole the Arbitrator finds the insufficient evidence to justify a change
from the current practice.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of the parties proposed new
language in Article 31, the language proposed by the Union in its last offer of
settlement shall be incorporated into Article 31. [Effective upon issuance of the
Award]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #28 – Article 31, Group Benefits, new section re: mail order prescriptions
and employee co-pay
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to add a new Section to Article 31 as follows:
“Employees shall have the option of obtaining eligible maintenance prescription
drugs by mail order; a single co-payment shall apply to a 90-day supply.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to add a new Section to Article 31 as follows:
“As long as allowed by the carrier, employees shall have the option of obtaining
maintenance prescription drugs by mail order; at least a single co-payment shall apply
to a three-month supply, or the lowest co-payment that is offered by the carrier for a
three-month supply.”
Union Position
The current contract contains no language that specifically addresses the mail
order prescription benefit. The Union says its proposed language is consistent with the
current plans offered by BCBS because they offer a mail order benefit that provides a 90
78

day supply with just one co-payment. The Union says the Employers proposed
language goes beyond just addressing the current benefit by including language “as
long as allowed by the carrier” and “at least a single co-payment shall apply to a threemonth supply, or the lowest co-payment that is offered by the carrier for a three-month
supply.” The Union says the inclusion of the “as long as allowed by the carrier”
language would permit the Employer to change carriers and if the new carrier didn’t
offer a mail order benefit the Employee would lose the benefit entirely. As for the
second phrase the Union says it could permit the Employer to choose a carrier that
requires three co-pays for a 90-day supply. The Union says its proposed language
provides certainty to its members of what the benefit will be at least for the duration of
this contract.
Employer Position
The Employer, in its post hearing brief, acknowledged that the language the
Union proposes is what the current carrier provides and poses no problem so long as
the current carrier continues to provide that option. But the Employer says what if the
carrier no longer provided that option or revised it to require two co-pays for a 90 day
supply? The Employer says it has crafted its language to avoid a potential union
grievance in the event the carrier changed this provision and the Union demanded the
Employer pay any additional cost as a result of that change.
Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator believes again, both parties may be seeing potential problems that
are unlikely to occur during the remaining term of this agreement. The record reflects
that the parties participated in fashioning an agreement on health care coverage that
resulted in a recent contract with one carrier, BCBS. That carrier has every incentive to
retain the Employer as a customer and is unlikely to change the one co-payment per 90
day supply during the course of the remainder of this agreement. The Employer is
unlikely to seek another carrier during the course of this agreement.
Both parties, in their post hearing briefs pointed to external comparable
community contracts to note which ones currently provide one or two co-pays for a 90
day supply. Neither party, however, addressed whether the contracts of those
comparable communities had specific language addressing the number of co-pays
required for a 90 day supply, as proposed by the Union, or more general language, as
proposed by the Employer. A cursory review by the Arbitrator of the contracts revealed
nothing specific either way.
79

Based on the fact that the Employer has just recently entered into the current
agreement with the carrier and that this agreement will be effective for only about 20
months from the issuance of this order, the Arbitrator finds the more specific language
proposed by the Union is clearer and not likely to result in the problems envisioned by
the Employer. If a situation arises that results in a change in carrier coverage involving
the co-payment necessary for a 90 day supply the parties can meet and discuss how best
to address it.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of the new language proposed by
the parties for inclusion in Article 31, the language proposed by the Union in its
last offer of settlement will be incorporated into Article 31. [Effective upon
issuance of the Award]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #29 – Article 31, Group Benefits, Section 7, flexible benefit program
(economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to modify Article 31, Section 7 as follows:
“All bargaining unit employees shall continue to be covered by the existing
Flexible Benefit Program, with the Township contributing thirteen hundred dollars
($1,300.00) annually into each employee’s flexible benefit account.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to modify Article 31, Section 7 as follows:
“Bargaining Unit employees will be covered under the Township’s Flexible
Benefit Program, and the Employer will contribute $1,300.00 annually to the account of
each employee.”

80

Union Position
The Union’s proposed language differs from the Employers proposed language
in that it includes the term “the existing” Flexible Benefit Program and the Employers
language does not. The Union says while the Employers proposed language would lock
in the amount contributed, there are other important aspects of the Program, such as the
purposes for which it can be used and other procedural aspects, that the Unions
proposed language would assure would remain the same. The Union says it fears the
Employer, under the Employers proposed language, might change the program and
then the Union would have to challenge the unilateral change.
Employer Position
The Employer says it prefers its proposed language over the Unions because the
phrase “existing” implies inflexibility in the program that may not be warranted. The
Employer says Flexible Benefit Programs are impacted by IRS code and plans
frequently change. The Employer says it has no desire to get into a dispute with the
Union just because the program changes. The Employer also notes that the language in
the current contract merely states, “employees will be covered under the Flexible
Benefit Program.”
Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator finds the Employers proposed language to be the more practical
in this situation. The Employer makes a valid point in noting that programs of this
nature could change as a result of policy set by the IRS. Surely, the Union would not
want to miss out on an opportunity for even more uses of the flexible benefit funds in
their account if the IRS expanded the purposes for which the funds could be used
during the term of this contract. Also, the parties have worked with the current
language which merely refers to the Flexible Benefit Program and not the “existing”
program for some time with no apparent problems. There was no evidence presented
that indicated a greater possibility of problems than in the past.

81

Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the
Employers last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the
applicable factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of revising the language
in Article 31, section 7, the language proposed by the Employer in its last offer of
settlement will replace the current language in Article 31, section 7. [Effective
upon issuance of the Award]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #30 – Article 31, Group Benefits, new section re: Short and Long term
disability program
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to add a new Section to Article 31 as follows:
“All bargaining unit members shall continue to be covered by the existing Long
Term Disability Insurance program, providing benefits of 50% of the employee’s
monthly earnings (overtime excluded) up to $1,000/month commencing after 90 days
of disability. All bargaining unit members shall also continue to be covered by the
existing Short Term Disability Insurance program, providing benefits of 66% of the
employee’s weekly earning (overtime excluded) during the first 90 days of disability
(must use sick days first).”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to add a new Section to Article 31 as follows:
“For the duration of this Agreement, bargaining unit employees shall continue to
be covered by the same Short Term and Long Term Disability insurance programs as
existed at the execution of this Agreement.”
Union Position
The Union says its proposed language is superior because it specifies the basic
features of the long and short term disability benefits, allowing members to be better
informed about the benefits. The Union also says the Employers proposed language
could lead to litigation because of the Employers use of the phrase “for the duration of
the agreement.” The Union questions whether that means only until the last day of the
82

contract term and questions how that term would be interpreted in contrast with the
section 13 status quo provision of Act 312. The Union also questions what the phrase
the programs will be maintained as they existed “at the execution of this agreement”
means. The Union says the time at which this agreement is executed is uncertain and
this language would allow the Employer to make a unilateral change in the program
any time up to the time the agreement was executed.
Employer Position
The Employer says it attempted to respond to the Unions concern expressed in
the hearing over whether it could unilaterally change the short or long term benefit if it
did so for other Township employees by inserting the language that the bargaining unit
employees would “continue to be covered by the same Short Term and Long Term
Disability insurance programs as existed at the execution of this Agreement.”
Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator views the proposals as equal in practical effect. If the Employer
tried to change the program or benefits the Union would likely turn to the Article 32
Maintenance of Standards clause in the agreement to challenge the change or to Act 312
Section 13 status quo provision if applicable. On the other hand the Employer has
demonstrated through its last offer of settlement language that its intent is to continue
to provide the current long and short term benefit program during the period of this
contract. As a result of the Employers apparent agreement to continue the existing
program the Arbitrator finds no harm, and perhaps more, clarity, in incorporating the
Union’s proposed language into the agreement.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of adding language to Article 31
addressing the long and short term disability program, the language proposed
by the Union in its last best offer of settlement will be added to Article 31.
[Effective upon issuance of the Award]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

83

Issue #31 – Article 31, Group Benefits, Section 8, Health Insurance for Surviving
Spouse (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to add the following to Article 31, Section 8:
“Effective immediately upon issuance of the Act 312 Award in MERC Case No.
L04 B-7005, the twenty-four (24) month period shall be increased to a forty-eight (48)
month period.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed the ‘status quo’, no change.
Union Position
Language in Article 31, Section 8 currently reads: “ The Township shall provide
health insurance coverage for the surviving spouse in the event of the employee death
or retiree death for a period of twenty-four (24) months or remarriage whichever occurs
first.” The Union’s proposal would increase the period from 24 to 48 months. The
Union points to external comparable community contracts in support of its position.
Four of the comparables with collective bargaining relationships have a defined
contribution pension plan. The Union says under these plans the surviving spouse of a
deceased employee or retiree will receive a defined retirement benefit and that in turn
means that the employer paid retirement health insurance benefit will also apply to the
spouse. (U-21)

The Union says unlike these comparables, Plainfield Township has a

defined contribution plan and therefore there is no link between the defined benefit and
continuation of health care coverage for the spouse of a deceased employee or retiree.
The Union says there is a substantial likelihood a surviving spouse will live beyond two
years of their spouse’s death and even more than four years, which makes the Union’s
proposed change not nearly as generous as those of the comparable communities.
Employer Position
The Employer says the Employer is trying to restrain cost increases in its health
care costs and this extension of coverage for spouses of deceased employees or retirees
would add to the Employer’s health care costs. The Employer also says, in its post
hearing brief, that the Union reliance on (U-21) linking health benefits with survivor
pension benefits is flawed. The Employer says MERS does not include a spousal health
84

insurance component upon the employee’s death. The Employer says if the contractual
agreement between the Employer and the Union in the comparable communities does
not contain the spousal benefit it does not exist and the Employer points to (E-41) which
reveals that none of the comparable contracts provide such a benefit. The Employer also
says the internal comparables are consistent with retaining the status quo.
Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator finds there is insufficient and conflicting evidence in this record to
support the Union’s proposed change. The parties, in their post hearing briefs, have
presented directly opposite positions on the relationship of the MERS pension benefit to
the continuation of health care coverage for a surviving spouse. The Union has
presented exhibit U-21 in support of its position but little more than the statement in U21 to support that link. Additionally, the Union refers to (U-43) which refers to external
comparable contract provisions for retiree health benefits but this evidence merely
reveals that the extent of employer paid health care coverage varies among the
comparables and does not reveal whether the spouse of a deceased employee or retiree
receives health care coverage and if so, for how long. The Union attorney, during the
hearing testified, “The difference is that the organized external comparables, all four of
them, have a defined benefit plan and has, you know, a duty death, a non-duty death,
retirement benefit. And then from that flows the retiree health which, you, know, may
or may not include spouse.”
Additionally, neither the Union nor the Employer presented reliable evidence of
what the actual anticipated cost of this change would be and the Union did not address
the significance of this proposed change to its members or how the proposed extension
from two to four years was determined. The Arbitrator finds insufficient evidence to
support the Union’s proposal at this time.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the
Employer’s last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the
applicable factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of adding the language to
Article 31, Section 8 as proposed by the Union in its last offer of settlement,
there will be no change from the current contract.
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________
85

Issue #32 – Settled by stipulation – Joint Exhibit #4
Issue #33 – Article 33, Miscellaneous, Section 7, Work by Non-Bargaining Unit
Employees (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed, in its last offer of settlement, the following:
“If the Union’s last best offer on Issue #11 is awarded, the Union agrees that the
Grievance Settlement Agreement dated 12/22/04 is null and void effective immediately
upon issuance of the Award.
If the Union’s last best offer on Issue #11 is not awarded, the following language
shall be added at the end of Article 33, Section 7 effective immediately upon issuance of
the Award:
The Township agrees that it will not use Part-Time employees to fill-in for
absences of Full-Time employees, and will instead use only off-duty Full-Time
employees and/or Paid-On-Call Employees to fill in for absences of Full-Time
employees in accordance with the prior practice of the parties.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to delete the Grievance Settlement Agreement dated 1222-04.
Union Position
The Union says this issue involves and is related to the issues involving use of
part time v. fulltime personnel, allocation of overtime, layoff and recall, etc. embodied
in issues 4, 5, 11 and 12 addressed previously in this opinion and award. This issue, like
issues 4, 5, and 11 involves the question of whether the subject is a mandatory or
permissive subject of bargaining. The Union argues that it is a mandatory subject of
bargaining and puts forth substantially the same arguments in support of that position
as put forth in its position and addressed in the related issues.
On the merits of the Union’s proposal the Union provides the background that
led to the Letter of Understanding No. 1, made part of this agreement and the
Grievance settlement agreement entered into by the parties on 12/22/04. (U-18) The
Union says that if the Union’s last best offer on issue #11 is not awarded then the
substance of the Grievance settlement agreement should be added to the end of Article
33 for clarity and to maintain the status quo. The Union says if the panel awards the
Employer’s status quo proposal on issue 11, then equity demands that the status quo be
86

maintained with respect to the Grievance settlement agreement. That’s what its
proposal does.
Employer Position
The Employer takes the position that this issue is a permissive subject of
bargaining and reserves the right to challenge a panel determination that it is a
mandatory subject of bargaining in appropriate forums. The Employer refers to its
arguments on this issue made on the other issues in which it challenges the jurisdiction
of the panel in support of its position on the permissive or mandatory subject of
bargaining.
On the merits of the Employer’s proposal to delete the Grievance settlement
agreement dated 12/22/04 the Employer basically describes the same background as
the Union leading to the development of the Memorandum of Understanding No. 1 and
the Grievance settlement agreement entered into by the parties on 12/22/04. The
Employer says the question of maintaining or not maintaining the language of the
Grievance settlement agreement has both economic and practical considerations. The
Employer says it is less expensive to use paid-on-call and part-time employees to fill
vacancies than fill in with a bargaining unit employee on overtime. (T-913) The
Employer also says there is the practical consideration with the current limitation
imposed by the Grievance Settlement agreement which limits the Employer to use only
paid-on-call employees to fill in for absences of full-time employees. The Employer says
many paid-on-call employees work other jobs that would eliminate them from working
twelve or twenty-four hour shifts during the weekdays. (T-915) The Employer would
like to be able to use either paid-on-call or part-time employees to fill in for full-time
staff as long as the full-time staff are allowed their contractually guaranteed amount of
overtime. The Employer says the Union’s desire to retain the language restricting the
Employer’s use of employees to fill in for full-time staff absences with only paid-on-call
employees is merely intended to make the Employer’s use of part-time employees as
difficult as possible consistent with the Union’s intent that part-time firefighters not be
used to fill the positions of full-time firefighters. (T-877)
Discussion and Findings
On the question of whether this issue is a mandatory of permissive subject of
bargaining the Arbitrator finds this issue is a mandatory subject of bargaining. The
basis for that finding is the same basis and based on the same evidence cited in the
discussion and findings sections of this Opinion and Award on issues 4, 5 and 11.
87

On the merits of the parties’ proposals on this particular issue, the Arbitrator
finds the Union’s last offer of settlement the better course to follow for these parties at
this time. The Employer says that it seeks to delete the Grievance settlement agreement
for economic and practical reasons. But on the economic matter the Employer
acknowledged that it is not more costly to use paid-on-call employees to fill in for fulltime employees than it is to use part-time employees. (T-915) On the practical matter
the Employer says it thinks the Grievance settlement agreement limits its ability to be as
efficient as it thinks it can be by cutting out potential people who are qualified and
capable of filling the position. (T-913) Yet no testimony or evidence was provided by
the Employer to indicate that the Employer was ever unable to fill full-time employee
absences with paid-on-call employees and testimony was provided that indicated that
use of paid-on-call employees in this capacity was not extensive. Chief of Paterson
testified that “However, we have used paid on-call people in the recent past to fill shifts.
---the deputy chief told me of two occasions that he can recall in the last six weeks
where we had done that.”
Also, as noted in the discussion and findings on issue #4, the Employer’s desire
to keep costs down while meeting its obligation to provide safe, adequate fire
protection services to its citizens is understandable, but it must attempt to meet that
obligation in the context of its duty to negotiate an agreement with the Union on wages
and other conditions of employment. That balance appears to be what the parties
attempted to address during the most recent negotiations leading to the current
agreement and including the Letter of Understanding #1 and the Grievance settlement
agreement entered into on 12/2/04. The language of the Grievance settlement
agreement the Employer seeks to delete was part of the negotiations to achieve that
balance. The Arbitrator finds it is a better course to try to retain or make any clarifying
modifications to current language that leaves, as much as possible, that current balance
in place, and let the parties continue to work within the parameters of that balance, gain
experience with it, and determine what changes, if any, may be mutually agreed upon.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue of deleting the Grievance Settlement
Agreement dated 12/22/04 or adding language to Article 33, Section 7 to more
nearly comply with the applicable factors in Section 9. Therefore, the additional
language in Article 33, Section 7 as proposed by the Union in its last offer of
88

settlement will be incorporated into the agreement. [Effective upon the issuance
of the Award]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

The Employer delegate disagrees with both the Panels’ Award in Issue No. 33, as well as the
Panels’ determination that Issue No. 33 involves a mandatory subject of bargaining.
Issue #34 – Article 33, Miscellaneous, new section re: training for nonbargaining unit employees (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to add a new Section to Article 33 as follows:
“Non-bargaining unit employees must participate in the same fire department
trainings that are scheduled in the Training Schedule calendars for bargaining unit
employees.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed maintaining the ‘status quo’, no change
Union Position
This issue, like issues 4, 5, 11 and 33, involves the question of whether the
subject is a mandatory or permissive subject of bargaining. The Union argues that it is a
mandatory subject of bargaining and puts forth substantially the same arguments in
support of that position as put forth in its position and addressed in the related issues.
The Union, on this issue in particular, stresses the safety aspect of this proposal and
says safety of employees under PERA has been recognized as a “condition of
employment.”
On the merits of the proposal, the Union says its member’s safety is impacted by
the Employer not requiring the part-time employees to participate in the same fire
department trainings that are scheduled for the bargaining unit members. The Union
says the Employer relies on part-time employees to staff its fire stations and go on fire
runs and it should require the part-time employees to participate in the same trainings
that it requires of the full-time and paid on-call employees. The Union says the
89

Employers position that part-time employees are getting training at other fire
departments is not sufficient to guarantee adequate training, noting that currently only
one of the part-time employees is a full-time employee of another fire department. The
Union also questioned the method and quality and procedure undertaken by the
Employer to assure that part time employees were getting adequate training from other
Employers.
Employer Position
The Employer takes the position that this issue is a permissive subject of
bargaining and reserves the right to challenge a panel determination that it is a
mandatory subject of bargaining in appropriate forums. The Employer refers to its
arguments on this issue made on the other issues in which it challenges the jurisdiction
of the panel in support of its position on the permissive or mandatory subject of
bargaining. The Employer, in its post hearing brief, specifically focuses in on the issue
of safety as it relates to the question of whether this proposal should be considered a
mandatory or permissive subject of bargaining. The Employer cited several MERC and
Court decisions noting the decisions seeming to depend upon the extent of impact the
proposed action would have on firefighter safety and argues that the proposal put forth
by the Union here does not have a substantial impact on bargaining unit members
safety. The Employer notes that the Union’s proposal would not result in identical
training and/or familiarity with those that might respond to a fire from another
department through a mutual aid pact.
On the merits of the proposal the Employer says this issue isn’t about safety, it’s
about the Union’s desire to eliminate the Department’s use of part time employees. The
Employer says it has approximately 24 employees who are paid on call and 12 part-time
employees. Record evidence indicated that nearly all of these part time and paid on call
employees are employees of other Fire Departments. The Employer acknowledges it
already provides the same training to paid on call employees as it does for the
bargaining unit employees. But it points out that the part time employees, as a
condition of employment, must maintain certification by the State of Michigan as a
firefighter I and II and licenses and certifications as First Responder, CPR, Drivers
license, AED and HAZMAT operations. (T-442)

These are the same licenses and

certifications required of full-time firefighters and part time employees must attend all
trainings necessary to maintain these certifications. (T-470) The Employer testified that
90

there are certain other training sessions that it requires part time employees to attend.
(T-475)
The Employer says that in addition to the added cost that would be required by
mandating that every part time employee participate in the same training as bargaining
unit employees, the Employer is concerned that requiring this training may be
duplicative of training they are already getting from their home department (T-507) and
that some of these employees other job commitments would conflict with the training
schedule and may cause some of them to quit employment with the Township. (T-446)
The Employer says the Union failed to present evidence showing that requiring parttime employees to attend the same training as full-time employees would significantly
impact safety. The Employer notes that the Union never presented testimony or
evidence that the part time employees were untrained, and that its primary concern was
that they be trained together with bargaining unit and paid on call employees “so we
have that sense of teamwork.” (T-422)
Discussion and Findings
On the question of whether this issue is a mandatory of permissive subject of
bargaining the Arbitrator finds this issue is a mandatory subject of bargaining. The
basis for that finding is the same basis and based on the same evidence, MERC
decisions, and court cases cited in the discussion and findings sections of this Opinion
and Award on issues 4, 5, 11 and 33. Additionally, the Arbitrator finds that the subject
of this proposal is related to and can have an impact on the safety of the bargaining unit
members. The Employer argues that other firefighters from other departments may
respond to scenes as part of a mutual aid pact and the unit members have no way of
knowing what training they have had nor are they familiar with the particular
equipment used by this Department. But evidence was presented that all firefighters in
Michigan must meet certain qualifications and each Department must be responsible for
and expect its mutual aid partners to be responsible for the training of their respective
personnel and that those personnel meet the State required qualifications. The unit
members have a right to expect that the extent of training provided to or required by
the Employer for non-bargaining unit personnel will be such that it will ensure the
safety of the bargaining unit members on the job. That is the subject of the Union’s
proposal and as such, this is a mandatory subject of bargaining.
On the merits, the Arbitrator finds the evidence does not support the Union’s
proposed change. The evidence revealed that part time employees are required to meet
91

and maintain the same basic licensing requirements as all other firefighters employed
by the Department. Evidence also indicated that they are required to take certain
additional training mandated by the Employer. Additionally, it must be recognized that
these 12 part time employees join

approximately 24 paid on call and 10 full-time

employees to constitute the number of firefighters within the department. Skill
development, teamwork and familiarity with the department equipment can be
obtained on the job as well as in specific training.
The Arbitrator does believe the Employer has a responsibility to demonstrate to
the bargaining unit members that it is adequately monitoring the training and skills of
the part time employee just as it needs to for the paid on call and full-time employees.
But that does not necessarily mean that it must require the participation of part time
employees in the same training as bargaining unit employees. The Employer’s concern
that such a mandate would be duplicative and could result in loss of some employees is
legitimate. The Union notes, in its post hearing brief, that the Union’s proposal does not
dictate the number of training sessions the Employer must have. It would be counter
productive to the Union’s concern for adequate training if, because of the cost to the
Employer of having to pay the part time staff to attend training sessions, the Employer
reduced the number of training sessions for all of its employees.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the
Employer’s last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the
applicable factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of adding a new section
to Article 33 as proposed by the Union in its last offer of settlement, there will be
no change from the current contract.
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

The Employer delegate agrees with the Panels’ Award in Issue No. 34, but disagrees with the
Panels’ determination that Issue No. 34 involves a mandatory subject of bargaining.
The Union delegate agrees with the Panel's determination that the issue is a mandatory subject
of bargaining, but disagrees with the Award on the merits.

92

Issue #35 – Article 35, Duration
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to modify Article 35 to replace “March 31, 2004” with
“March 31, 2009.”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed to modify Article 35 to replace “March 31, 2004” with
“March 31, 2008.”
Union Position
The Union points out that if the Employer’s proposal is awarded on this issue the
contract will be expiring less than a year from the time this Award is issued. The Union
says its proposal will provide the parties a period of “labor peace” and allow the parties
to implement and gain experience with the new contract provisions before embarking
on new contract negotiations. The Union says the comparables should not be a major
consideration in reaching a finding on this issue because none of the comparables were
engaged in an Act 312 proceeding leading to the adoption of their current contracts as
these parties were.
Employer Position
The Employer says the expiring contract was essentially a four year agreement
and that just because this Act 312 proceeding took as long as it did beyond the
expiration date of the current contract is not justification for seeking a five year contract.
The Employer says a review of the comparable community contracts supports a shorter,
rather than a longer contract.
Discussion and Findings
The arbitrator finds the Union’s position to be the stronger position on this issue.
The current contract had a beginning and ending period of three years and 6 months.
By the time this Award is issued the new contract, under the Employer’s proposal,
would have a beginning and ending period of 8 months and under the Union’s
proposal one year and 8 months. The Arbitrator agrees with the Union that the parties
are better served by allowing time for the provisions of this agreement to take effect and
to perhaps let the emotions cool down before entering into negotiations on a new
93

contract. Hopefully the parties will be successful in those future negotiations so that
they can return to a more traditional three or four year contract period.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of revising the language in Article
35, the proposed language to modify Article 35 as proposed by the Union in its
last offer of settlement will be incorporated into the agreement. [Effective upon
issuance of this Award]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #36 – Proposed new Article re: Food Allowance
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to add a new Article entitled “Food Allowance” effective no
later than 30 days after issuance of the Award as follows:
“All bargaining unit members shall receive a food allowance of four hundred
seventy-five dollars ($475.00) annually. The first annual payment for 2007 shall be made
within thirty (30) days of issuance of the Act 312 Award in MERC Case No. L04 B-7005.
Annual payments thereafter shall be made by the second Monday of April of each year
(i.e., payment made at the same time as the boot allowance).”
Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed the ‘status quo’, no change.
Union Position
Members of the bargaining unit do not currently receive a food allowance. It is
undisputed that the majority of the full-time firefighters work a 24-hour shift and are
not permitted to leave work to go home for meals. The fire stations have kitchens but
firefighters are responsible for purchasing their own food. The Union points to external
comparables in support of its position. It notes that of the five comparable community
contracts who have collectively bargained agreements, three have a provision for a food
allowance. (U-20) Union exhibit (U-20) reveals that the food allowance payment by
those comparable communities currently paying a food allowance is: $575 annual as of
94

7/1/06; $150 annual; $7.50 each day worked as of 7/1/07 (assuming 100 days worked
per year = $750 annual). The Union says the Employer’s position of providing no food
allowance is not supportable given that three of the four established unionized
comparables (the Union says Grand Haven Township should not be considered an
“established” unionized comparable because the first ever contract was just recently
adopted) and three of the six comparables have a food allowance.
Employer Position
The Employer, in its post hearing brief, says this issue is purely about money.
The Employer says the Union shaped their request in the guise of compensating
employees for the “extra expense” of eating their meals in the station, but there is no
extra expense of eating their meals in the station, or if there is it is minimal. The
Employer says it also must be recognized that the bargaining unit employees only work
nine shifts a month. The Employer notes that the external comparable communities are
split on the issue with three having a food allowance and three not. (E-20) The
Employer says none of its other Township employees receive a food allowance.
Discussion and Findings
This is a straightforward issue and the Arbitrator tends to agree with the
Employer, it is about money. The Arbitrator has viewed this issue, along with the other
issues in this proceeding involving money, in the context of Act 312, Section 9 factors.
Particularly for those issues involving money, the Arbitrator has tried to give proper
consideration and weight to the factors described in subsections (c)((d)(f) and (h) of
Section 9. This issue is therefore viewed in the context of the panel’s decision on issues
13-17, 19, 20, 21, 26, 27, and 39. The Arbitrator also agrees with the statement made in
the Employer’s post hearing brief that “It is the purpose of the Act 312 to replicate an
agreement as close to what the parties would have agreed to, if able.”
In the context of the decisions made on other economic issues in this Award the
Arbitrator finds the Union’s proposal for the annual food allowance is reasonable and,
again, in the context of those other decisions, more likely to be close to what the parties
would have agreed to. As noted, the external comparables are split evenly on this issue.
Another consideration was the dollar amount sought in the proposal. The
average annual payment among the comparable communities which have a food
allowance will be $492 on 7/01/07. (U-35) This contract will extend to April 2009 and
the Union’s proposal is that it be prospective, not retroactive. The annual amount
sought by the Union of $475 appears reasonable. The Employer notes that the
95

employees work only 9 shifts a month. At that rate the employee’s daily allowance
would be about $4.40 (9 shifts x 12 months = 108 days divided into $475 = $4.40 per
day). The amount sought appears to be reasonable in comparison with the
Comparables.
The Employer notes this will add roughly the equivalent of a 1% increase to the
unit member’s annual wage. That is true, but when considered in the context of the
wages granted in this Award, and the fact that three of the comparable communities
provide an annual food allowance averaging $492 in addition to wages, this is not an
unreasonable benefit. The other feature of the benefit is that it is an equal amount for
each firefighter. Unlike the Union’s proposal for a longevity payment, this payment is
equal for all members – which it should be, considering food costs the same for
everyone – and is a fixed amount that will not change over time unless agreed to by the
parties.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the Union’s
last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the applicable
factors in Section 9. Therefore, the Agreement will be revised to add a new
Article containing the language proposed by the Union in its last offer of
settlement. [Effective upon the issuance of the Award]
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #37 – Withdrawn
Issue #38 – Article 33, Miscellaneous, new section re: limiting requirement to be
instructor (non-economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to add a new Section to Article 33 as follows:
“No bargaining unit employee shall be required to be a lead instructor for a CPR
class, nor shall be required to be a certified instructor of any kind.”
96

Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed the “status quo,” no change.
Union Position
There is no language in the current contract addressing this issue. The Union
points out that under Article 33, Section 5 of the current contract all bargaining unit
members are required to maintain certain licenses and certifications, including CPR
certification. In order to obtain CPR certification classes have to be presented by a
person with a CPR instructor certification. Record testimony revealed that several
bargaining unit employees have voluntarily obtained the CPR instructor certification
and the Employer has paid for the training and for the time spent in training, including
overtime, if necessary. The Union testified that during the negotiations the Union had
sought to clarify that the Employer would pay for any expense related to the cost of
CPR instructor training and that the unit members doing the training do so only for
Plainfield Township personnel. The Union says some of its members do not feel
comfortable training others, outside the Department. In its post hearing brief, the Union
offered alternative language for the panel’s consideration that includes a statement that
“No employee shall be required to become or remain a certified instructor.”

The

language further states however, that the Employer may require a unit member who
holds that certificate to be a lead instructor for CPR classes for Plainfield Township fire
department personnel only and that the unit member could volunteer to provide
instruction for a class that includes persons from outside the Plainfield Township fire
department. The Union says the Union’s way of attempting to address this issue in the
Agreement is preferable to the Employer’s approach of no language at all, which, the
Union says, would most likely lead to further litigation between the parties when the
Employer attempts to mandate CPR instructor certification or those who are certified to
serve as lead instructors for classes.
Employer Position
The Employer objects to the Union’s proposal indicating that currently there is
no limitation regarding the Chief’ ability to have bargaining unit employees conduct
CPR training classes or to become certified instructors. The Employer says this is the
way it should be. The Employer says it has paid for the training associated with
employees obtaining CPR instructor certification and that having bargaining unit
members certified as CPR instructors is the most efficient way to provide CPR
97

certification to employees who must maintain certification as a job requirement. The
Chief also testified that there is also efficiencies in providing training to Plainfield
Township firefighters and other fire department employees of other communities and
classes sometimes include both. The Chief testified that as a service to community
groups, i.e. school bus drivers, lifeguards, school cafeteria workers, etc. the Department
conducts CPR classes for these groups four or five times per year. (T-565) The Chief
acknowledged that during negotiations the Union’s bargaining unit team explained that
some employees were not comfortable teaching CPR classes to individuals in outside
groups such as bus drivers, lifeguards, etc. (T-567) On the issue of training firefighters,
the Chief indicated he is a strong proponent of more, not less, regionalized training, and
he would not want the Department to be limited in conducting training for outside the
department fire service members. The Chief expressed concern that any language in the
contract on training of CPR might impact his ability to require employees to conduct
training on other topics. (T-593)
Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator has reviewed the record testimony carefully and has crafted
language that attempts to accommodate the parties’ positions and concerns as best as
possible. The Employer urges no language at all, but the Arbitrator believes the Union’s
view is more likely correct, no language could lead to more animosity between the
parties. On the other hand, the language of the Union’s last offer of settlement is
impractical.
It is in both parties’ interest that the bargaining unit members have within their
ranks, members who are CPR instructor certified and that those individuals conduct
CPR training for employees who must have it to retain their jobs. With no language in
the contract it is unclear whether the Employer has the authority to mandate that
employees become CPR instructor certified, and if the Employer doesn’t have this
authority it would have to turn to outside or non-bargaining unit sources for CPR
instruction. This doesn’t make sense. It also makes sense that training classes be taught
including other fire departments’ personnel when feasible to do so. The language
would require that to occur if feasible. What it would not do, is mandate that unit
members conduct classes for non firefighter personnel. But it doesn’t prohibit them
from doing so voluntarily.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the
following language, crafted by the Panel, to more nearly comply with the
98

applicable factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of adding a new section
to Article 33, as proposed by the Union, the following new section will be added
to Article 33 stating [Effective upon issuance of the Award]:
“The Employer shall have the authority to seek volunteers within the
bargaining unit, or if no bargaining unit members volunteer, to select bargaining
unit members to obtain and maintain CPR instructor certification and to serve as
lead instructor for the following: 1) to conduct CPR certification classes for
Plainfield Township fire department personnel only, 2) to conduct CPR
certification classes sponsored by Plainfield Township which include fire
service personnel from other communities and Plainfield Township personnel
who are participating in the class to obtain CPR certification or re-certification.
The Employer shall pay for all costs related to the bargaining unit members’
obtaining and maintaining CPR instructor certification and for time and
expenses related to instruction provided by the lead instructor(s).”
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Issue #39 – Proposed new Article re: longevity benefit (economic)
The Parties Proposals
Union Proposal
The Union proposed to add a new Article entitled “Longevity Pay” to be
effective December 2007 as follows:
Effective December 2007, each bargaining unit employee shall receive an annual
longevity payment, to be paid by separate check together with the first regular
paychecks paid in each December, in accordance with the following schedule and based
on the number of years of completed service the employee had as of the most recent
December 1:
0 to 4 years of completed service:
$-05 to 9 years of completed service:
$600.00
10 to 14 years of completed service:
$900.00
15 to 19 years of completed service:
$1,200.00
10 and over years of completed service: $1,500.00
All payments will be prorated upon termination of employment (and payable to
beneficiary in the event of death), with the pro rata share being computed to the nearest
full month of completed service.

99

Employer Proposal
The Employer proposed the “status quo,” no change.
Union Position
The Union urges the panel to consider the external comparable communities
when reviewing this proposal, particularly those which have an established, unionized
labor relationship. It notes that all four have some form of longevity pay. (U-37) The
Union says a fifth comparable, Grand Haven Township, also supports the Union’s
position because it has a percentage benefit system based on income and with a
graduated percentage based on longevity. The Union says that the dollar amounts
requested at the various steps in its proposal are also reasonable, considering they are
less than the average amounts paid in the comparables. (U-37) The Union says
awarding this proposal would compensate for the inferior wages paid to bargaining
unit members in comparison with these comparables. (U-38)
Employer Position
The Employer says that one of the reasons the Union gave for advancing the
proposal is that it is an incentive for a member to remain in the position once the
maximum pay level has been reached. (T-605)

The Employer notes that there are

several other employee benefits linked with additional length of service and this one is
not needed for that purpose and is costly. The Employer provided testimony of Bob
Homan who made the observation that the trend was showing communities scaling
back their longevity benefits. He referred to Norton Shores as a community that had
scaled back its benefit for those hired after July 1, 2000 and that Muskegon Township
had a very modest benefit capped at $500. (E-32) The Employer noted that none of its
non-union employees or employees within the PTMEA bargaining unit have a
longevity benefit. The Employer says the cost of this benefit would be substantial. The
cost would be $7,500 in 2007, $8,700 in 2008 and grow each year from there. The
Employer notes that in 2008 every member of the current bargaining unit would receive
some level of longevity benefit, which the Employer says, contradicts the Union’s
statement that this is needed as an additional incentive for the member to remain in the
position.
Discussion and Findings
The Arbitrator has analyzed this issue similar to that done with issue 36. This
issue, like issue 36, is an issue primarily involving money. Again, the challenge is to
100

give proper consideration and weight to the factors described in subsections (c)((d)(f)
and (h) of Act 312, Section 9. Like issue 36, this issue is therefore viewed in the context
of the panel’s decision on issues 13-17, 19, 20, 21, 26, and 27. As with all of the issues in
this proceeding, the Arbitrator has attempted to reach a balance that fashions an
agreement that is as close as possible to what the parties would have agreed to.
In the context of the decisions made on other economic issues in this Award the
Arbitrator finds the Employer’s proposal for the status quo is reasonable and, again, in
the context of those other decisions, more likely to be close to what the parties would
have agreed to. On this issue, the external comparables tend to favor the Union’s
position, but not overwhelmingly. And on this issue, in contrast to issue 36, the internal
comparables favor the Employer. It is true that none of the internal comparables
favored the Union on issue 36, but neither do any of the other Township employees
work 24-hour shifts. This proposal, if adopted, would also be quite costly to the
Employer and would increase in cost over time. The Arbitrator believes the decisions of
this panel on wages and other benefits provide a proper balance between the
Employees overall compensation and the Employer’s ability to meet those costs. It also
appears, based on the longevity of the current bargaining unit staff, that the absence of
this benefit will not significantly influence a members’ decision to remain or leave the
position.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, the panel finds the
Employer’s last offer of settlement on this issue to more nearly comply with the
applicable factors in Section 9. Therefore, on the issue of adding a new Article
to the Agreement addressing longevity pay as proposed by the Union, there will
be no change from the current contract.
Employer:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

Union:

Agree______________________

Disagree_____________________

101

SUMMARY
This concludes the award of the panel. The signatures of the delegates herein and
below, along with the signature of the Independent Arbitrator below, indicate that this
opinion and award is a true statement of the award. All agreements reached in
negotiations during the course of this proceeding and within the submission of last
offers of settlement and stipulated to by the parties as noted herein, as well as all
mandatory subjects of bargaining contained in the prior contract, will be carried
forward into the collective bargaining agreement reached by the panel.
Re:

Plainfield Township and Plainfield Township Fire Association
MERC Case No. LO4 B-7005 (Act 312)
Date:
William E. Long
Arbitrator/Chair
Date:
Steven K. Girard
Employer Delegate
Date:

Alison L Paton
Union Delegate

102
