MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
Between the
City of Brockton
And
SEIU, Local 888: Brockton Department Heads Unit
(July 1, 2019 - June 30, 2022)
This Memorandum sets forth the material tenns of a successor collective bargaining
agreement reached between the Union's and the City's negotiating teams, subject to ratification
by the Union membership of the Union, and funding by the Brockton City Council as required by
law. For purposes of further negotiations and/or impasse procedures, this Memorandum shall be
considered off-the-record until ratification and funding occur. Failing such ratification or funding,
both parties will be free to revert to their on-the-record positions.
The Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) which expired on June 30, 2019 shall be
extended without change for a period of three years except as provided herein. Upon bargaining
unit ratification, joint execution of this Memorandum of Agreement, and requisite City Council
adopting action, the parties agree to integrate the amendments set forth herein with the existing
CBA, as well as make non-substantive modifications to the fonn of the agreement to correct any
typographical, grammatical or fonnatting errors. The following provisions represent the material
changes in the parties' agreement for an agreement through June 30, 2022.

1. Base Wages:
Effective July 1, 2021, base wages shall be increased for all unit members by two percent
(2.0%). The parties agree that there shall be no retroactive base wage increase for FY2020 and
FY2021.
The existing wage scales shall be amended and listed in Appendix "A" to reflect the two
(2.0%) percent base wage increase.
Quoted salary amounts in Appendix "A" are subject to verification of mathematical
calculations by the Auditor's Office.

2. Casb Payments:
Effective July 1, 2021, all unit members shall receive a cash payment as follows:
a. One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) for FY2020; and
b. One Thousand Eight Hundred Dollars ($1,800) for FY202 l.

3. Educational Incentive
Article XXIX: Educational Incentive shall be amended as follows:

Delete:
Effective, July 1, 2016, the employer shall pay a non cumulative base
pay differential to all employees in the Union, on their regular pay
period, with the following:
1% -

for a Bachelor's Degree.

1% -

for a Master's Degree.

1% -

for a Doctorate

Replace with:
Effective July 1, 2021, employees with higher education degrees
shall receive a base pay increase as follows:
c.
d.
e.

$2,500 per year for a Bachelor's Degree;
$3,000 per year for a Master's Degree; and
$3,500 per year for a Doctorate.

The aforementioned payments shall be paid out in equal amounts in
the employee's regular paycheck and shall be non-cumulative, i.e.
an employee with multiple degrees may only receive compensation
for their highest degree earned.

4. Longevity:
Article XX- Longevity, subsection (a) shall be amended to add additional annual
longevity increment payments as follows:

Add:

Over 30 ... ...... .. .... . ...... .. . ............ ... .. .

$1500.00

Over 35 . .... .... ........... ........... .. . .. ...... .

$2000.00

2

5. Director of Council on Aging:

Effective July 1, 2021, "Appendix A" shall be amended to place the Director of the Council
of Aging position at the same pay scale as the Director of Veteran's Services position (Munis job
code: S-54A). Effective July 1, 2021, the incumbent Director of the Council of Aging shall be
compensated at Step 4 on the amended pay scale.
6. City Engineer:
Effective July 1, 2021, "Appendix A" shall be amended to place the City Engineer position
at the same pay scale as the Superintendent of Parks and Procurement Officer positions (Munis
job code: S-56D). Effective July 1, 2021, the incumbent City Engineer shall be compensated at
Step 4 on the amended pay scale.
7. Juneteenth:

Effective July 1, 2021, Article X-Holidays shall be amended to add Juneteenth to the list
of holidays provided under the Article.
8. Janus v. AFSCME:

To comply with Janus v. AFSCME, the parties agree to strike Article XVII
in its entirety and replace it with the following:

XVII. AGENCY SERVICE FEE/UNION DUES
No employee shall be required, as a condition of employment, to join
the Union; however, any employee who elects to join the Union shall
sign and submit to the City the authorization of dues forms.
Any employee may elect to pay an Agency Fee, equal to the dues
amount, to the Union by executing an Agency Fee authorization form,
expressly authorizing the City to deduct the Agency Fee.
Upon receipt of an authorization of dues/agency form, the Employer
agrees to deduct, each week, union membership dues or agency fees
levied in accordance with the Constitution of the Union from the pay of
each employee in the unit who executes or has executed said form.
No such deductions shall be made without an authorization dues/agency
form. Deductions may be made for all bargaining unit employees who
have executed said form, regardless of their probationary status.

3

The Union shall be responsible for providing a welcome packet to all
new employees who are members of the bargaining unit, with the forms
required herein.
In consideration of the employer's entering into this collective
bargaining Agreement, which Agreement includes union dues and
agency service fee provisions, the Union hereby agrees to indemnify the
said employer and hold it harmless from any and all claims, liabilities
or costs of the employer which arise out of entering into or enforcement
of said provision or which arise out of the payroll deduction of the union
dues and agency service fees.
There shall be no discrimination by Department Heads/Supervisors or
other agents of the Employer against any employee because of their
activity or membership in the Union (pursuant to M.G.L. c. l 50E s.10).
There shall be no discrimination by union members against any
employee because of his/her refusal to join the Union or pay an Agency
Fee. The Employer further agrees that there will be no discrimination
against any member for his/her adherence to any provision of this
Agreement.

9. Housekeeping:
a. Health Insurance:
The parties agree to amend the CBA to remove language relative to health insurance
benefits, including, but not limited to, health insurance plans, plan designs, contribution rates, or
policies between the City, as the City has accepted M.G.L. c. 328, § 19, and such provisions have
been deemed superseded by the Public Employee Committee (PEC) Agreement. Specifically, the
parties agree to amend the Collective Bargaining Agreement as follows:
Delete

Subsections (a) and (b) of Article XXI - Health Insurance

4

Dated this 2'1day of July, 2021.

SEIU, 888,

CITY OF BROCKTON,
By Its Mayor,

ROBERTF. SULLIVAN

DAS TO FORM:

Law Department

5
