11/05/2021
2675-01
21-MED-09-1172
21-MED-09-1173
40982

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE

TITLE

PAGE

1.

PREAMBLE

1

2.

PURPOSE AND INTENT

2

3.

RECOGNITION

2

4.

DUES DEDUCTION

3

5.

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

4

6.

EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

5

7.

NO STRIKE

7

8.

ASSOCIATION REPRESENTATION

7

9.

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

8

10.

ARBITRATION PROCEDURE

10

11.

DISCIPLINE

11

12.

NON-DISCRIMINATION

12

13.

HEADINGS

12

14.

TOTAL AGREEMENT

12

15.

CONFORMITY TO LAW

13

16.

SENIORITY

14

17.

DUTY HOURS

15

18.

OVERTIME PAY AND COURT TIME

16

19.

HOLIDAYS

17

20.

VACATION

18

21.

SICK LEAVE

19

22.

FUNERAL LEAVE

21

23.

JURY DUTY LEAVE

21

24.

MILITARY LEAVE

21

25.

LAYOFFS

22

26.

WAGES

23

27.

INSURANCE

24

28.

UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

25

29.

TRAINING AND SCHOOLING

25

30.

EXPENSE ALLOWANCE

26

31.

RETENTION OF BENEFITS

26

32.

SA VINOS CLAUSE

27

33.

PROBATIONARY PERIOD

27

.34.

INJURY LEA VE

28

35.

DURATION OF AGREEMENT

29

36.

EXECUTION

30

11

ARTICLE 1
PREAMBLE
Section 01.
This Agreement is hereby entered into by and between the Board of Trustees of
Lawrence Township, hereinafter refetTed to as the "Employer", and the Fraternal Order of
Police, Ohio Labor Council, Inc., hereinafter refetTed to as the "FOP."

1

ARTICLE2
PURPOSE AND INTENT
Section 01.
In an effort to continue harmonious relations with members of the bargaining unit
and to insure its orderly and uninte1rupted efficient operations, the Employer and the FOP hereby
enter into this Agreement with the purpose and intent to;
(I)
Promote individual efficiency and timely effective service and Police
protection to the residents of Lawrence Township;
(2)
To set forth the wages, terms and other conditions of Employment for
those employees in the bargaining unit;
To avoid interruptions or interferences with the effective Operation of the
(3)
Employers business, and;
(4)
To provide a basis for the adjustment of matters of mutual interest by
means of amicable discussion and for the peaceful resolution of disputes between the parties.

ARTICLE3
RECOGNITION
Section 01.
The Employer hereby recognizes the FOP as the exclusive bargaining agent with
respect to wages, hours of work and all other terms and conditions of employment for all full
time Patrol Officers, and Sergeants of the Lawrence Township Police Department. All other
employees of the Employer are excluded from the bargaining unit.
Section 02.
The Employer will furnish the FOP with a list of all employees in the
classifications covered by this Agreement indicating their starting date of employment. The
Employer will notify the FOP of any addition and/or deletions to this list as they occur.

2

ARTICLE4
DUES DEDUCTION
Section 01.
During the term of this Agreement, the employer shall deduct initiation fees,
assessments levied by the FOP and the regular monthly FOP dues from the wages of those
employees who have voluntarily signed dues deduction authorization forms permitting said
deductions.
Section 02.
The initiation fees, dues assessments so deducted shall be in the amounts
established by the FOP from time to time in accordance with its constitution and by-laws. The
FOP shall ce1tify to the Employer the amounts due and owing from the employees involved.
Section 03.
The Employer shall deduct dues, initiation fees or assessments from each pay in
equal installments, in each calendar month. If the employee has no pay due on that pay date, such
amount shall be deducted from the next or subsequent pay.
Section 04.
A check in the amount of the total dues withheld from those employees
authorizing a dues deduction shall be tendered to the treasurer of the FOP within thirty (30) days
from the date of making said deductions.
Section 05.
The FOP hereby agrees to hold the Employer harmless from any and all liabilities
or damages that may arise from the performance of its obligations under this Article, and the
FOP shall indemnify the Employer from any such liabilities or damages that may arise.

3

ARTICLES
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Section 01.
The Collective Bargaining Agreement, except as expressly modified by this labor
Agreement, shall in no way be construed to impair or limit Employer's Rights and responsibility
to:

(1)

Determine matters of inherent managetial policy which include, but
are not limited to, areas of discretion or policy such as the functions
and programs of the Employer, standards of service, its overall and
depmtmental budget, utilization of technology and organizational
structure;

(2)

Direct, supetvise or hire employees;

(3)

Maintain and improve efficiency and effectiveness of the
governmental operations;

(4)

Detemtine the overall methods, process, means or personnel
by which governmental operations are to be concluded;

(5)

Suspend, discipline, demote or discharge for just cause, or lay off,
transfer, assign, schedule, promote or retain employees;

(6)

Determine the adequacy of the work force;

(7)

Determine the overall mission of the Employer as a unit of
government;

(8)

Effectively manage the work force;

(9)

Take actions to cany out the mission of the Employer as a
governmental unit.

4

ARTICLE6
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS
Section 01.
At all times refeTI"ed to under this Article an employee may have a representative
of the FOP present.
Section 02.
An employee questioned as a suspect in any investigation of any criminal charges
against him shall be advised of his constitutional rights before any questioning starts.
Section 03.
Before an employee may be charged with any violation of the rules and
regulations or for a refusal to answer any questions or participate in an investigation, he shall be
advised that his refusal to answer such questions or participate in such investigation will be the
basis of such a charge.
Section 04.
Questioning or interviewing of an employee in the course of an internal
investigation will be conducted at hours reasonably related to the employee's shift, unless
operational necessities require otherwise. During questioning or interviewing of an employee in
the course of an internal investigation, the employee may record such inteTI"ogation ifhe has a
recording device available so as not to delay the investigation. The Employer may have a
transcript of such recording at the Employer's expense. Interrogation sessions shall be for
reasonable periods of time and intervals shall be provided for rest periods and attendance to
physical necessities.
Section 05.
An employee will be informed of the nature of the investigation involving the
employee p1ior to any questioning. If the employee being questioned is, at that time, a witness
and not under investigation, he shall be so advised.
Section 06.
An employee may request an opportunity to review his personnel file, add
memoranda to the file clarifying any documents contained in the file and may have a
representative of the FOP present when reviewing his file. A request for copies of items included
in the file shall be honored. All items in the employee's file with regard to complaints and
investigations will be clearly marked with respect to final disposition.
Section 07.
All complaints by civilians that may involve suspension or discharge of an
employee, shall be in writing and signed by the complainant. The Employer will furnish a copy
of the complaint to the employee against whom the complaint has been filed when such
employee is notified of the investigation. If there is no written complaint by a citizen, there may
be no disciplinaiy action against a member of the bargaining unit based upon a citizen's
complaint.

5

Section 08.

(A)
Records of written reprimands or disciplinary action that are more than
two (2) years old shall, upon written request of the employee, be sealed and not valid for purpose
of discipline.
(B)
Records of disciplinaty action of five (5) or more days suspension that are
more than three (3) years old, shall upon w1itten request of the employee, be sealed and not valid
for purposes of discipline.

Section 09.
In the event an employee is requested to provide a statement or supplemental
repo1t relating to an incident, and a pe1iod of one week or more time has elapsed since the
subject incident, the employee shall be given the opportunity to view any and all audio/video of
the situation/incident/altercation that is the subject of the inquiry
Section 10. An employee involved in a critical incident related to use-of-force or use of a
motor vehicle, involving a life-threatening selious physical injury or death of another, said
employee shall be provided paid administrative leave for a minimum of three (3) sleep cycles
(72) hours prior to being compelled to submit to a formal interview, provide a written statement
or report. Inquiries limited to essential basic facts shall be permitted to protect the safety of the
public and to preserve evidence. An employee involved in a critical incident shall be afforded the
opportunity to review all relevant video and audio records prior to being interviewed or
preparing a written statement or repo1t. The employee shall be afforded an opportunity to have a
non-employee representative or attorney present prior to pa1ticipating in a formal investigation.

6

ARTICLE?
NO STRIKE
Section 01.
The Employer and the FOP agree that the grievance procedures provided herein
are adequate to provide a fair and final determination of all grievances arising under this
Agreement. It is the desire of the Employer and the FOP to prevent work stoppage and strikes.
Section 02. Neither the FOP nor any member of the bargaining unit, for the duration of this
Agreement, shall directly or indirectly call, sanction, encourage, finance, participate, or assist in
any strike, slow down, walkout, concerted sick leave or mass resignation, work stoppage or slow
down, or other unlawful interference with the normal operations of the Employer for the duration
of this Agreement .. A breach of this section may be grounds for discipline. 111e FOP shall not be
held liable for the unauthorized activity of the employees it represents or its member who are in
breach of this section provided that the FOP meets all of its obligations under this aiticle.
Section 03.
The FOP shall, at all times, cooperate with the Employer in continuing the
operations in a nonnal manner and shall actively discourage an attempt to prevent any violation
of the "No Strike" clause.
Section 04.
Agreement.

The Employer shall not lock out any employees for the duration of this

ARTICLES
ASSOCIATION REPRESENTATION
Section 01.
The parties recognize that it may be necessary for an employee representative of
the FOP to leave a normal duty assignment while acting in the capacity of a representative. The
FOP recognizes the operational needs of the Employer and will cooperate to keep, at a minimum,
the time lost from duty by representatives. Before leaving an assignment pursuant to this article,
the representative shall first obtain the consent of the Chief or his designee, which consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld. An employee who is "off duty", who is required to attend a
meeting by the Employer shall be compensated for all time spent at such meeting.
Section 02.
The FOP associate or his designee shall be afforded one (I) scheduled shift off
with pay on a bin10nthly basis for purposes of attending FOP Board Meetings, associate's
meetings and/or general membership meeting.

7

ARTICLE9
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Section 01. Evety employee shall have the right to present his gtievance in accord with the
procedures provided herein, free from any interference, coercion, restraint, disctimination or
reprisal and except at the informal step shall have the right to be represented by a representative
of the FOP at all remaining stages of the gtievance procednre. It is the intent and putpose of the
parties to this Agreement that all grievances shall be settled, if possible, at the lowest step of this
procedure.
Section 02.

For the pmpose of this procedure, the below listed terms are defined below;

(A)

Grievance - A dispute or controversy atising from the misapplication or
misinterpretation of the specific and express wtitten provisions of this
Agreement.

(B)

Grievant - An employee or group of employees within the bargaining unit
of the FOP.

(C)

Party in interest - An employee named in the grievance who is not
the gtievant.

(D)

Day - As used in this procedure, shall mean calendar day, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays as provided for in this Agreement.

Section 03. The following procedure shall apply to the Administration of all grievances filed
under this procedure.

(a)
Except at the informal step, all gtievances shall include the name and position of the
grievant, the specific provisions of the Agreement alleged to have been violated; the time and
place where the alleged events or conditions giving rise to the gtievance took place, the identity
of the party responsible for causing said grievance if known to the gtievant; and the general
statement of the nature of the gtievance and the remedy sought by the grievant.
(b)
Except at the informal step, decisions shall be rendered in writing at each step of the
gtievance procedure. Each decision shall be delivered to the gtievant and his representative, if
any;
Nothing contained herein shall be constrned as limiting the tight of any employee having
(c)
a gtievance to discuss the matter informally with any approptiate member of the administration
and having said matter informally adjusted without the intervention of the FOP, provided that the
adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of this Agreement. In the event that the Agreement
is adjusted without formal determination, pursuant to this procedure, while such adjustment shall
be binding upon the gtievant and shall, in all respects, be final, said adjustment shall not create a
precedent or rnling binding upon the Employer of the FOP and future proceedings;

8

(d)
The existence of the gtievance procedure shall not be deemed to require any employee to
pursue the remedies herein provided and shall not impair or limit the tight of any employee to
pursue any other remedies available under law, except that any employee who pursues any other
available remedy other than provided in this procedure, shall automatically have waived and
forfeited any remedies provided by this procedure.
(e)
The time limits provided herein will be strictly adhered to and any gtievance not filed
initially or appealed within the specified time limits will be deemed waived and void. If the
Employer fails to reply within the specified time limit, the gtievance shall automatically be
sustained in favor of the gtievant. The time limit specified for either pa1ty may be extended only
by wtitten mutual agreement.
TI1is procedure shall not be used for the purpose of adding to, subtracting from or altering
(f)
in any way, any of the provisions of this Agreement, unless the parties mutually agree to do so.
In the event that any such alteration is mutually agreed to, a fonnal settlement agreement shall be
reduced to w1iting, signed by both parties and attached hereto as an addendum to this
Agreement.
(g)
All pre-arbitrations gtievance settlements reached by the gtievant and the Employer shall
be final, conclusive and binding on the Employer, the Gtievant and the FOP, as to that gtievance.

Section 04. All gtievances shall be administered in accordance with the following steps of the
gtievance procedure.
Informal Step An employee who believes he may have a grievance shall notify his
(a)
immediate supe1visor of the grievance within five (5) days of the occurrence of facts giving rise
to the g1ievance or within five (5) days of the occurrence being !mown. The Chief or his designee
will schedule an informal meeting with the employee within five (5) days ofthe notice from the
employee, at which time the issue in dispute will be discussed with the objective of resolving the
matter informally.
Step One If the dispute is not resolved at the informal step of this procedure, it shall be
(b)
reduced to wtiting by the gtievant and presented as a gtievance to the Chief of Police within five
(5) days of the informal meeting or within five (5) days of the Chief or his designee's answer at
the informal step, whichever is later. The chief of Police or his designee shall convene a fonnal
heating within five (5) days of his receipt ofthewtitten gtievance. The Chief shall give his
answer within five (5) days of the conclusion of that meeting.
(c)
Step Two If the grievant is not satisfied with the wtitten decision at the conclusion of
Step One, a w1itten appeal of the decision may be filed with the Board of Township Trustees
within five (5) days of the date of the rendering of the decision at Step One. Copies of the wtitten
informal answer and Step One decision shall be submitted along with the gtievance to the Board
of Trustees. The Board of Township Trustees, or their designee, shall convene a heating within
fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the gtievance. The heating will be held with the gtievant, his
FOP representative and any other party necessary to provide the required information for the
rende1ing of a proper decision. The Board of Township Trustees or their designee shall issue a
w1itten decision to the employee and his FOP representative within fifteen (15) days from the
9

conclusion of the hearing. If the grievant is not satisfied with the decision at this stage of the
proceedings, he may proceed to arbitration pursuant to the arbitration procedure contained
below.
ARTICLElO
ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
Section 01.
Any grievance unresolved after being processed through all steps of the grievance
procedure, unless mutually waived, then within fourteen (14) days after the rendering of the
decision at Step Two, the FOP may submit the grievance to arbitration. After the submission of
the grievance to arbitration, there shall be fourteen (14) calendar day period in which the parties
will meet to attempt to mutually agree upon an arbitrator. If such an agreement is not reached,
the parties shall promptly request to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Services to submit a
panel of arbitrators and the parties will alternately strike the arbitrators names until one name is
left and that name shall be the arbitrator.
Section 02.
The arbitrator shall have no power or authority to add to, subtract from, or in any
manner, alter the specific te1ms of this Agreement or to make any award that itself is contrary to
the te1ms and conditions of this Agreement.
Section 03.
The hearing or hearings shall be conducted pursuant to the mies of voluntary
arbitration of the Federal Mediation Conciliation Service.
Section 04.
The fees and expenses of the arbitrator and the cost of the hearing room, if any,
shall be equally shared by the parties in arbitration. All other expenses shall be borne by the
party incurring them. Neither party shall be responsible for any of the expense incurred by the
other party. All arbitration hearings shall be held within Lawrence Township, Stark County,
Ohio.
Section 05.
Any employee requested to appear at the arbitration hearing by the party shall
attend without the necessity of the subpoena and shall be compensated at his regular hourly rate
for all hours during which his attendance is required by either party. Any request made by either
party for the attendance of witnesses shall be made in good faith and at no time shall the number
of employees in attendance exceed three (3) employees.
Section 06.
The arbitrator's decision and award will be in writing and delivered within thirty
(30) days from the date the record is closed. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and
binding upon the parties.

10

ARTICLE 11
DISCIPLINE
Section 01.
Disciplinary action taken by the Employer shall be fair, reasonable and for just
cause. Discipline will be progressive in nature, however, the Employer reserves the right to
impose discipline commensurate with the facts of each incident.
Section 02.
Prior to disciplinary suspension or dismissal, the Employer will hold a predisciplinary hearing for the purpose of affording the employee an opportunity to respond to the
charge. An employee may be suspended with pay, pending a hearing, at the discretion of the
Chief or his designee.
Section 03.
The Employer, FOP and members of the bargaining unit agree to waive the
provisions ofO.R.C. Section 505.491through505.495 concerning discipline of members of the
bargaining unit in lieu of the disciplinaiy provisions of this Agreement.
Section 04.
A member of the bargaining unit may appeal any disciplinary action through the
grievance provisions of this Agreement starting at the level where the disciplinary action was
imposed by the Employer.

11

ARTICLE12
NON-DISCRIMINATION
Section 01.
The Employer and the FOP agree not to discriminate against any employee on the
basis of race, religion, color, creed, national origin, age, sex, sexual preference or political
affiliation.
Section 02.
The Employer and the FOP agree not to discriminate against any employee as a
result of membership or non-membership in the FOP or as a result of participation or refusal to
participate in any activities of the FOP.

ARTICLE 13
HEADINGS
Section 01.
It is understood and agreed that the use of headings before articles of this
Agreement are for purposes of convenience only and that no heading shall be used in the
interpretation of the articles nor affect any interpretation of any such article.

ARTICLE 14
TOTAL AGREEMENT
Section 01.
This Agreement represents the entire Agreement between the Employer and the
FOP unless specifically set forth in the expressed written provisions of this Agreement, all rules,
regulation, benefits and practices previously and presently in effect will be continued.
Section 02.
In the event the FOP detennines that any new work rules or regulations effect the
wages, hours and/or terms and conditions of bargaining unit employees, then the Employer and
the FOP shall meet to negotiate the effects of such rules and regulations.

12

ARTICLE 15
CONFORMITY TO LAW
Section 01.
This Agreement shall be subject to all present and future Federal and State Laws,
rules and regulations. Should any provision(s) of this Agreement be declared invalid by reason of
a change in existing law or enactment of future laws, applicable rule or regulation, such change
shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions contained herein.
Section 02.
In the event any portion(s) of this Agreement is rendered invalid or unenforceable
as a result of determination of a court of final and competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this Agreement.
Section 03.
In the event a provision(s) of this Agreement is rendered invalid or unenforceable
pursuant to this aiticle, the parties shall enter into negotiations for the pmpose of renegotiating an
acceptable alternative provision. Negotiations will commence within fourteen (14) days of a
request by the pmty to negotiate and in the event the parties are unable to reach an agreement,
the dispute will be subject to the final offer dispute settlement procedures set forth in O.R.C.
4117.

13

ARTICLE16
SENIORITY
Section 01.
Seniority will be defined as the length of continuous service of a full time member
of the bargaining unit with the police department and shall be used for the purposes of
determining shift assignment, vacation, layoffs, and recall rights. In the event that employees
have the same date of hire, seniority shall be detennined by the date of application. In the event
that the application date is the same, the tie breaker will be determined using the last four
numbers of the effected member's social security number. The member with the higher number
will be senior. A break in continuous service shall be defined as a failure to report to work as
directed from layoffs or leave of absence in excess of thirty (30) days. All the leaves contained in
this Agreement shall not break continuous service.

14

ARTICLE17
DUTY HOURS
(A) Work Day
A work day shall consist of eight (8) regularly scheduled, consecutive hours,
during a twenty-four (24) hour period of time.

Section 01.

(B) Work Week
Except as provided in Section C below, the workweek will consist of five (5)
consecutive work days followed by two (2) consecutive days off in each work week.

(C) Scheduling
The Employer reserves the right to change duty hours to a work day consisting of
ten (10) regularly scheduled, consecutive hours during twenty-four(24) hour period of time. If
such change is implemented, the work week will consist of four (4) consecutive work days
followed by three (3) consecutive days off in each work week.
(D) Notice of schedule change
Should the employer change the work week, the Employer agrees to give twentyone (21) days advance notice to the individual members of the bargaining unit and the FOP.
Section 02.
A nomml pay period shall consist of two (2) work weeks and all bargaining unit
employees shall be paid on a bi-weekly basis.
Section 03.
A work schedule shall be for four (4) consecutive weeks and shall be posted no
less than one (1) week in advance and may not be changed for purposes of avoiding overtime.
An employee may trade shifts, with the prior approval of the Chief or his
Section 04.
designee, as long as the shift trade is completed within the same pay period. An employee
desiring to trade shifts with another employee will submit a request to do so in advance and any
request so submitted is subject to the prior approval of the Chief or his designee.
Section 05. An off duty employee who is required to immediately report to work shall be paid
for all hours actually worked, or a minimum of three (3) hours, at one and one half times the
employee's hourly rate of pay, whichever is greater.
Section 06.
Whenever possible, an employee will be given no less than eight (8) non-duty
hours off between scheduled shifts. In no event shall any one (I) employee be required to work
more than two (2) consecutive work days with less than eight (8) non-duty hours between those
scheduled shifts within a period of seven (7) consecutive days.

15

ARTICLE18
OVERTIME PAY ANDCOURTTIME
Section 01. Employees shall be paid overtime pay for all hours worked in excess of eight (8)
or ten (10) hours per day, whichever is applicable, or for all hours worked in excess of forty (40)
hours per week. Employees shall receive overtime pay at a rate equivalent to one and one half
(1 Yz) their regular hourly rate. All overtime worked shall be only upon the p1ior approval of the
Chief or his designee.
Section 02.
All court duty, not in conjunction with regularly scheduled duty, in response to a
subpoena or similar writ commanding appearance at criminal, quasi-c1iminal or civil court
arising out of any incident while on duty as an employee of the Township, shall cause the
employee to be compensated a minimum of three (3) hours pay at one and one halftimes the
employee's regular rate of pay, whichever is greater.
Section 03.
At the employee's option, compensatory time may be accumulated in lieu of paid
overtime. Compensatory time off shall be accrued at the rate of one and one half (1 Yz) hours of
overtime work and the maximum amount of accumulated compensatory time off shall not exceed
two hundred and forty (240) hours.
Section 04.
An employee shall be compensated for all overtime pe1formed in excess of the
accumulated compensatory time limit of two hundred and f01ty (240) hours.
Section 05.
Use of accrued compensatory time shall be with the prior approval of the Chief or
his designee and shall be in increments of not less than one (1) hour.
Section 06.
Ove1time earned, with the prior approval of the Chief or his designee, in
increments of less than one (I) hour shall be paid in accordance with the following table:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)

00 to 15 minutes
one quarter (1/4) hour
16 to 30 minutes
one half (1/2) hour
31 to 45 minutes = three quarter (3/4) hours
46 to 60 minutes = one (I) hour

Section 07.
An employee, upon retirement, shall be paid for all accrued but unused
compensat01y time off. In the event of the employee's death, while employed by the Township,
payment pursuant to this provision shall be made to the employee's legal heirs. This payment
shall be based upon the employee's rate of compensation at the time of his retirement.

16

ARTICLE 19
HOLIDAYS
Section 01.

All members of the bargaining unit shall receive the following holidays.
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Veteran's Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day

New Year's Day
Maitin Luther King
Day President's Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Juneteenth

Section 02. A bargaining unit member who works on a holiday, as described in Section 1,
shall be compensated for holiday pay at the rate of two- and one-half times the members regular
rate of pay for all hours worked on the holiday. The bargaining unit member may elect to receive
one- and one-half times his regular rate of pay for all hours worked on a holiday, and his regular
rate of pay as compensato1y time for the same holiday. When an employee elects to take eight
(8) hours of compensatory time, the employee shall designate the day he wishes to take off,
subject to the prior approval of the Chief or his designee, as to when they may actually be taken.
The compensat01y time shall be taken within one year of the time within which it is earned at the
cun-ent rate of pay then in effect. In the event that an employee wishes to celebrate a different
holiday other than those listed, the employee must submit a request by December 15 forthe
following year.
Section 03. Ifthe holiday falls on the employee's regular scheduled day off, the employee
may elect to be paid eight (8) hours pay for that holiday or take the holiday at a later date, upon
p1ior approval of the Chief or his designee.
Section 04.
Each member will receive two (2) personal days each year of the Labor
Agreement, effectiveJanua1y 1, of each year of the agreement. The personal days must be used
each year of the agreement and can-yover shall only apply if the Employer denies any request of
the personal days off.

17

ARTICLE20
VACATION
Each member of the bargaining unit shall earn paid vacation in accordance with
Section 01.
the following schedule.

LENGTH OF SERVICE

NUMBER OF WEEKS

After one (1) year
After five (5) years
Afterten(lO) years
After fifteen (15) years
After twenty (20) years

80 hours
120 hours
160 hours
200 hours
240 hours

Section 02. Following completion of one (1) year of service, employees will be given eighty
(80) hours of vacation and begin accrning vacation on a prorated on a bi-weekly basis. With
prior approval of the Chief of Police or his designee, vacation may be used as it is earned.
Section 03.
On step anniversaries, employees are given 40 hours of vacation and accrne at the
appropriate prorated bi-weekly basis of se1vice.
Section 04.
An employee who has earned vacation time with the Police Department shall be
able to transfer his vacation time to another depaitment within the jurisdiction of the Employer,
should he elect such a transfer.
Section 05. Any unused balance of vacation due for such year may be taken at the employee's
convenience in order of seniority, and upon p1ior approval of the Chief of Police or his designee.
Vacation time will be selected and granted as far as is possible, in order of departmental
seniority.
Section 06. Any employee who resigns, retires or is terminated shall be paid for all accrned
vacation time.
Section 07.
Any unused vacation time may be carried over to the following year, but no
employee may accrue more than six (6) weeks (240 hours) of unused vacation leave. The
employee shall not suffer any loss of vacation time if vacation was canceled, or the vacation
leave was denied by the employer.

18

ARTICLE21
SICK LEAVE
Section 01.
Sick leave, for the purpose of this Agreement, shall be an absence from duty with
pay necessitated by illness or injury to the employee, exposure by the employee to contagious
disease communicable to other employee's, illness or injury to a member of the employee's
immediate family residing within the same household as the employee.
Section 02.
All members of the bargaining unit shall earn sick leave at a rate of 4.6 hours per
bi-weekly pay period and may accumulate it without limit. Anytime an employee works over and
above their n01mally scheduled eight or ten (8 or ten) hour shift or normally scheduled forty (40)
hour work week, the employee will earn sick time propo1tionately.
Section 03.
Sick leave shall be compensated at the employee's regular hourly rate of
compensation. Sick leave shall not be used in segments of less than one (!) hour.
Section 04.
An employee who is to be absent on sick leave shall notify the appropriate
supervisor of such absence and the reason therefore within one half hour prior to the start of his
scheduled shift.
Section 05.
A member of the bargaining unit who transfers from this department to another
department of the employer shall be allowed to transfer his accumulated sick leave to the new
depaitment.
Section 06.
Before an absence of five (5) consecutive days may be charged against the
accumulated sick leave, the Chief or his designee may require such proof of illness or injury. If
the employee fails to submit adequate proof of illness, or injury, such leave may be considered
an unauthorized leave and shall be without pay.
Section 07.
Any abuse of sick leave or the pattern use of sick leave shall be just and sufficient
cause for discipline.
Section 08.
The Chief may require an employee who has been absent do to a personal illness
or injury, prior to and as a condition of his return to duty, to be examined by a physician
designated and paid for by the employer, to establish that he is not disabled from the
performance of his nonnal duties and that his return to duty will not jeopardize the health and
safety of other employees.
Section 09.
When the use of sick leave is due to illness or injury in the immediate family,
"immediate family" shall be defined to only include the employee's spouse, children or parent
residing in the same household as the employee.

19

Section 10. All bargaining unit members shall have their sick leave benefit, that upon death,
retirement, or a detennination of disability retirement, of a full-time employee, such employee or
his heirs, shall receive a cash payment equal to his daily rate of pay at the time of retirement,
death, or disability retirement, multiplied by the total number of accumulated but unused sick
days earned by the employees, certified by the Township Clerk, providing that such resulting
number of days to be paid shall not exceed thirty (30) days (240 hours).
Section 11.
Any employee who has not used any sick leave in excess ofhalf(l/2) a work day
during any quarter of the year shall receive half (1/2) a day's worth of personal time for the
quarter.
For the purpose of this section the quarter shall be;
Januaiy 1
April 1
July 1
October 1

through March 3 pt
through June 30th
through September 30th
through December 31st

Any personal time earned in this section must be taken within six (6) months of the end
of the calendar year in which it was earned.

Section 12. For the purposes of definition; separation shall be when the employee leaves or
terminates his/her employment with the Township within any specified time limit as provided in
the sections above.

20

ARTICLE22
FUNERAL LEAVE
Section 01.
An employee shall be granted time off with pay, not to be deducted from the
employee's sick leave, for the purpose of attending the funeral of a member of the employee's
immediate family. The employee shall be entitled to a maximum of three (3) work days for each
death in his immediate family. "Immediate Family" for pmposes of this article, shall be defined
as the employee's spouse, child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, sibling, sibling-in-law,
grandparent- in- law or parent-in-law.
Section 02.
Upon prior approval of the Chief or his designee, any additional funeral leave
time in excess of the time provided for in section 01, may be deducted from the employee's sick
time.

ARTICLE23
JURY DUTY LEAVE
Section 01.
Any employee who is called for jury duty either, Federal, County of Municipal
shall suffer no loss of regular compensation. Any compensation received from such court, for
jmy duty, shall be surrendered to the Employer.

ARTICLE24
MILITARY LEAVE
Section 01.
After one hundred and eighty (180) days of service with the Employer, any
member of the bargaining unit inducted into the anned forces of the United States shall be
entitled to the re-employment rights provided by State or Federal Law. Such employee shall be
reinstated to their similar position and seniority and pay status. Such employee must apply for
reinstatement within ninety (90) days from the date of discharge. National Guard or Military
Reserve leave will be paid up to the maximum of thirty-one (31) days annually, provided that the
employer is given copies of orders authenticated by the Commanding Officer of the individual's
militaiy unit.

21

ARTICLE25
LAYOFFS
Section 01.
In the event of a layoff, bargaining unit employees will be laid off by order of
reverse departmental seniority. (Last hired or promoted, first laid off)
A member of the bargaining unit who is laid off shall be subject to recall from
Section 02.
layoff for a period of thirty-six (36) months.
Section 03.

A lay off shall only be forlack of work, lack of funds, or job abolishment.

Section 04.

Recall from layoff will be by order of seniority. (Last laid off first recalled)

Section 05. Before any member of the bargaining unit may be laid off, all part time patrol
officers shall be first laid off.
Section 06. Auxiliaiy or reserve Police Officers shall not be considered as paid part time
employees for purposes of this contract.

22

ARTICLE26
WAGES
Section 01.

EffectiveJanuaty 1, 2022-3%:

Statting Salaty
1 through 2 yrs.
2 through 3 yrs.
Completion of 3 yrs:

Section 02.

Effective January 1, 2023 - 3%:

Starting Salary
1 through 2 yrs
2 through 3 yrs.
Completion of3 yrs:

Section 03.

Hourly
$27.40
$28.69
$30.19
$31.43

$28.22
$29.55
$31.10
$32.37

Effective January 1, 2024-3%:

Starting Salary
1 through 2 yrs.
2 through 3 yrs.
Completion of3 yrs:

$29.07
$30.44
$32.03
$33.34

Sergeants:
Effective:

Janua1y 1, 2022
$36.30

January 1, 2023
$37.39

23

January 1, 2024
$38.51

ARTICLE27
INSURANCE
Section 01.
The Employer will provide and pay for each bargaining unit member's selected
benefit coverage for hospitalization, major medical and other medical services coverage on
behalf of each member of the bargaining unit, their spouse and dependent children. Any changes
in providers or third-party administrators shall be first negotiated with and approved by the FOP.
Such assent and approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Section 02.
Such hospitalization shall also be provided for use by retired employees and for
the surviving spouse of deceased employees, pursuant to Federal and State Law (C.0.B.R.A.)
Section 03.
The Employer will provide and pay the full premium for all members of the
bargaining unit for a convertible life insurance policy in the face value of twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000).
Section 04.
The Employer shall provide a dental and optical program to all bargaining unit
members, effective the date of execution of this Agreement.

24

ARTICLE28
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
Section 01.
EffectiveJanuaiy 1, 2003, all members of the bargaining unit shall receive an
annual unifonn allowance in the amount of one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00).
Section 02.
Uniform allowance may be utilized by a member of the bargaining unit, upon
receipt reimbursement system, for all required nnifonn clothing, components, shoes, rain gear,
leather, weapons, badges, prescription and corrective lenses and other required decoration.
Section 03.
The employer will provide and assign a protective vest to each bargaining unit
member. Should the bargaining unit member already have the vest the Township will replace the
vest at the manufacturer's suggested replacement date. Said protective vest shall remain the
propetty of the employer. All bargaining unit members shall be required to wear said protective
vest at all time that they are in uniform.

ARTICLE29
TRAINING AND SCHOOLING
Section 01.
Each member of the bargaining unit, upon prior approval of the Chief or his
d esignee, may attend seminars, specialized training or continuing legal education, so long as the
scope or topic of said program or session is directly related to the employee's job duties and
responsibilities.
Section 02.
Upon prior approval of the Chief or his designee, all cost associated with such
training (fees, tuition, supplies and room and board) shall be paid by the Employer.
Section 03.
The Employer will furnish a Township vehicle fortranspottation or reimburse the
employee for use of his personal vehicle ifa Township vehicle is not available foruse.
Section 04.
The Employer shall pay the employee for all time traveling to and from schooling
outside the limits of the Township. All verified flat rate fees, tuition, lodging and related
expenses, shall be paid in advance to the vendor. In no event shall the employer be required to
pay an employee more than eight (8) hours for any travel time to, attendance at, or travel time
from said schooling or seminar within a twenty-four(24) petiod.

25

ARTICLE30
EXPENSE ALLOWANCE
Section 01. Any full-time employee who is required, upon prior approval of the Chief or his
designee, to use his personal vehicle in the performance of such employee's Township duties,
other than transportation to and from his place of duty, shall be reimbursed for mileage at the rate
of thirty cents ($.30) per mile upon submission to the Chief or his designee a statement
indicating the date, time and purpose of the travel and the number of miles actually driven. Any
employee required by the Employer to stay overnight, outside the limits of the Township, in the
perfmmance of his Township duties, or fortraining purposes, shall be reimbursed for the cost of
any overnight accommodation incurred and for meals, consistent with Township policy.
Section 02.
The employee agrees to not seek reimbursement for food and lodging when such
food and lodging is available through the Ohio State Highway Patrol Academy or the Ohio
Police Officers Training Academy.

ARTICLE31
RETENTION OF BENEFITS
Section 01. Effective January 1, 2013, the Employer shall no longer pay the Employee's
contribution to the Ohio Public Employees Retirement System. Each bargaining unit member
shall have the propmtionate amount deducted from the bargaining unit member's bi-weekly
payroll check. All of the Employer's rnles, regulations, resolutions and practices, as they are
cmrently in effect, and as they may be changed from time to time, shall remain in full force and
effect during the life of this Agreement. Any current rnles, regulations, resolutions and practices
that conflict with the tern1s of this Agreement shall be deemed as subservient to the terms of this
Agreement. In no way is this or any provision of this Agreement to be constrned as limiting or
impairing management rights as enumerated in Article 6.

26

ARTICLE32
SA VIN GS CLAUSE
In the event that any one or more provision(s) of this Agreement is (or are) invalid
Section 01.
or unenforceable by any final decision of a court or governmental agency, that portion shall be
deemed severable from the rest of the Agreement and all such other parts of this Agreement shall
remain in full force and effect. In such event, the Employer and the FOP will, at the request of
either party hereto, enter into negotiations for the purpose of renegotiating a mutually agreeable
alternative provision.

ARTICLE33
PROBATIONARY PERIOD
All new members of the bargaining unit shall be subject to three hundred and
Section 01.
sixty five (365) day probationary period during which every effmt shall be made by the
Employer to orient the employee to their job function and to the Employer's procedures. Prior to
the end of the probationary period, the Chief or his designee will review the employee's
perfonnance evaluations and general adaptability to determine if continued employment will be
mutually satisfactory.

27

ARTICLE34
INJURY LEAVE
Section 01. When a bargaining unit employee is injured in the line of duty while actually
working for the Employer, he shall be eligible for a paid leave not to exceed ninety (90) working
days from the injury date, provided that he files for Workers' Compensation benefits and signs a
waiver or assignment form assigning to the Employer those sums of money he would ordinarily
receive as his weekly compensation as detennined by law and for the number of weeks that he
receives benefits under this Article. The employee shall provide to the Employer a copy of the
claim form that has been filed with the Bureau of Workers' Compensation and that medical
treatment was required by a ce1tified physician. Sick leave will be fully reimbursed if any
Workers' Compensation benefits are received by the Employer for days when the employee used
sick leave.
Section 02. If at the end of the ninety (90) day period and the employee is still disabled, the
leave may, at the Employer's sole discretion, be extended for up to ninety (90) additional
working days.
Section 03.
The Employer shall have the right to require the employee to have a physical
examination by a physician appointed by and paid for by the Employer. The certification of the
physician that the employee is unable to work due to the injury is a condition precedent to the
employee receiving any benefits under this Article.
Section 04.
In the event that the employee's claim is rejected by the Bureau of Workers'
Compensation, the employee shall be obligated to repay to the Police Department any amounts
paid pursuant to this Article.

28

ARTICLE35
DURATION OF AGREEMENT
Section 01.
This Agreement shall be effective January 1, 2022 shall remain in full force and
effect until December 31, 2024. If either party decides to make any changes in the Agreement for
a period subsequent to December 31, 2024, notices of such desire shall be given prior to October
1, 2024 pursuant to O.R.C.4117. If such notice is given, this Agreement shall remain in effect
until the parties reach agreement on a new contract.

29

ARTICLE36
EXECUTION
In witness whereof, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly executed this
_ _lst_ _ day ofNovember 2021.
Tfle Fraternal 01·der ofPolice
Ohio Labor Council, llzc.

The Board ofTrustees
For

~7k_~~

Lawrence Township
Stal'k County, Ohio

Brad Henson, LTPD, Sergeant
Bargaining Unit Representative

Les Kamph, Trustee
ChuckAliff,F P/OLC
Staff Representative
Shawm Lockhart, Trustee

30
