LABOR CONTRACT
TOWN OF AMHERST
&
CENTRAL FIRE ALARM OFFICE ASSOCIATION

JANUARY 1, 2025 – DECEMBER 31, 2029

LEGISLATIVE REVIEW
IT IS AGREED BY AND BETWEEN THE PARTIES THAT ANY PROVISION OF THIS
AGREEMENT REQUIRING LEGISLATIVE ACTION TO PERMIT ITS IMPLEMENTATION
BY AMENDMENT OF LAW OR BY PROVIDING THE ADDITIONAL FUNDS
THEREFORE, SHALL NOT BECOME EFFECTIVE UNTIL THE APPROPRIATE
LEGISLATIVE BODY HAS GIVEN APPROVAL.

PREAMBLE
THIS AGREEMENT entered into by and between the TOWN OF AMHERST, COUNTY
OF ERIE, STATE OF NEW YORK and the CENTRAL FIRE ALARM OFFICE
ASSOCIATION for the purpose of establishing for those employees covered by this
Agreement equitable and uniform wage rates and working conditions compatible with joint
responsibilities of the Town and its employees to serve the public. It shall be the further
purpose of this Agreement of the parties to promote the highest degree of efficiency in
the conduct of the Town’s services.
WITNESSETH:
It is mutually agreed and understood that this Agreement is made and executed pursuant
to the Public Employees Fair Employment Act, Article 14 of the Civil Service Law of the
State of New York, as now is in effect and as may hereafter be amended from time to
time, and also pursuant to the provisions of the Local Laws of the Town of Amherst.
For the purpose of this Agreement, the parties shall be hereinafter referred to as follows:
(a)

Town of Amherst, “Town”.

(b)

Central Fire Alarm Office Association, “C.F.A.O.A.”.
Page 2 of 52

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
The Town of Amherst, Erie County, New York, hereby recognizes the Central Fire Alarm
Office Association as the exclusive bargaining agent for all employees in the Central Fire
Alarm Office. The C.F.A.O.A. agrees that it will not interfere with, coerce or intimidate any
employee into joining the C.F.A.O.A. The C.F.A.O.A. recognizes that no employee is
required to join the C.F.A.O.A. but that every employee has the right to choose of his or
her own free will as to whether or not he or she will or will not join the C.F.A.O.A.

ARTICLE 2
MANAGEMENT
Without limitations upon the exercise of its statutory powers, duties and responsibilities,
except as herein specifically provided to the contrary, the Town Board and Department
Heads shall have the unquestioned right to exercise all normally accepted management
prerogatives, subject to the grievance procedure hereinafter provided, including:
A.

Subject to the provisions of the Civil Service Law of the State of New York and

such rules as the personnel officer of the County of Erie may adopt and make applicable
to the Town, to appoint such employees as it may require for the performance of its duties,
fix and determine their qualifications, duties, job titles and compensation, to suspend,
discharge, discipline, promote, demote, or transfer or release employees because of lack
of work or for other proper and legitimate reasons.
B.

The right to fix operating and personnel schedules, determine workloads, arrange

transfers, order new work assignments, and issue any other order or directive intended
Page 3 of 52

to carry out the managerial responsibilities and duties imposed upon the Town officials by
law.
C.

The Town shall have the right to implement a new electronic timekeeping system

that must be utilized by Union employees. This system will be used when employees
clock in at the beginning of the day and clock out at the end of the day.

ARTICLE 3
CHECK OFF OF ASSOCIATION DUES
[RESERVED]
ARTICLE 4
PERSONNEL RULES
The Personnel Rules shall be as set forth on Attachment A attached hereto and made a
part of this Agreement so far as the same are not inconsistent with State, County or Local
Laws or departmental working rules as adopted and modified from time to time.
ARTICLE 5
WORKING CONDITIONS
Section 1. The Town shall notify the C.F.A.O.A. at least thirty (30) days in advance of any
change in working methods or working conditions, except where such change is required
because of an emergency or major disaster over which the town has no control.
Section 2. Schedules of work assignments shall be posted approximately thirty (30) days
in advance but will be subject to change or amendment in the event of emergency,
disaster or illness.

Page 4 of 52

ARTICLE 6
COMPENSATION
Section 1. Pay Schedule, as a rate per hour, as agreed upon.
Jan 1, 2025

Jan 1, 2026

Jan 1, 2027

Jan 1, 2028

Jan 1, 2029

(12 hr shift)

(12 hr shift)

(12 hr shift)

STEP A

$23.106

$23.337

$23.337

$23.570

$24.042

STEP B

$27.101

$27.372

$27.372

$27.646

$28.199

STEP C

$31.357

$31.671

$31.671

$31.987

$32.627

STEP D

$33.317

$33.650

$33.650

$33.987

$34.666

Section 2. [RESERVED]

Section 3. [RESERVED]

Section 4. The compensation paid hereunder shall be based upon actual hours worked,
in addition to paid absences as outlined in Article 7, Section 2.

Section 5. All employees are required to attend customary briefing sessions prior to the
beginning of their assigned shift of fifteen (15) minutes and shall be paid at the overtime
rate of time and one half as compensation for this time. This payment shall be limited to
days actually worked and for authorized paid leaves.

Page 5 of 52

Section 6. The hourly compensation of part-time fire dispatchers shall be at such rate as
shall be established by the Town from time to time; provided, however, that part-time fire
dispatchers shall not be compensated at hourly rates in excess of 97% of the hourly rate
paid full-time dispatchers.

Section 7. Shift Differential.

Employees shall receive additional compensation as shift

differential at the following rates: $1.25 per hour effective Jan 1, 2025, $1.50 per hour
effective Jan 1, 2028, and $1.75 per hour effective January 1, 2029. Shift differential will
apply only to those shifts designated as afternoon, overnight and/or weekend shifts based
on an 8-hour shift schedule, and to those shifts designated as overnight and/or weekend
shifts based on a 12-hour shift schedule. Shift differential will be limited to hours actually
worked and will not be paid for any paid time off. Employees whose schedule is the day
shift and who work overtime for less than four (4) hours shall not receive shift differential
for those overtime hours worked.

Section 8.

Emergency Medical Dispatch (EMD) Certification.

All employees are

responsible for maintaining current EMD certification on an ongoing and continuous basis
by performing and completing all required training, testing and other requisite procedures.
Effective January 1, 2025, employees shall receive a yearly stipend of $1,000.00 paid
quarterly at $250.00 per quarter. Effective January 1, 2027, employees shall receive a
yearly stipend of $1,100.00 paid quarterly at $275.00 per quarter. Effective January 1,
2028, employees shall receive a yearly stipend of $1,200.00 paid quarterly at $300.00
per quarter.
Page 6 of 52

Section 9. Emergency Fire Dispatch (EFD) Certification. All employees are responsible
for maintaining current EFD certification on an ongoing and continuous basis by
performing and completing all required training, testing and other requisite procedures.
Effective January 1, 2025, employees shall receive a yearly stipend of $1,000.00 paid
quarterly at $250.00 per quarter. Effective January 1, 2027, employees shall receive a
yearly stipend of $1,100.00 paid quarterly at $275.00 per quarter. Effective January 1,
2028, employees shall receive a yearly stipend of $1,200.00 paid quarterly at $300.00
per quarter.

Section 10. Trainer Pay. In addition to the established wage rates, any Dispatcher
designated to train a new hire (trainer) shall be paid an additional $3.00 per hour for each
hour spent actively training. Trainers shall be determined by the Supervising Fire
Dispatcher and required to meet the criteria they have established. All new hires shall be
assigned a trainer based on seniority, and trainers can be rotated or changed as deemed
necessary by the Supervising Fire Dispatcher. Any dispatcher requested to be a trainer
can decline unless the need arises where it is deemed absolutely necessary

Section 11. Senior Dispatcher on Duty Stipend. Effective January 1, 2025, the top 4
dispatchers in seniority shall receive a yearly stipend of $750.00 paid quarterly at
$187.50 per quarter. Effective January 1, 2027, the top 4 dispatchers in seniority shall
receive a yearly stipend of $1,000.00 paid quarterly at $250.00 per quarter. Effective
January 1, 2029, the top 4 dispatchers in seniority shall receive a yearly stipend of
$1,250.00 paid quarterly at $312.50 per quarter.
Page 7 of 52

Section 12. The Amherst Town Board shall appoint a Deputy Supervising Fire Dispatcher
based on the criteria above to assist the Supervising Fire Dispatcher. The Deputy will
remain a member of the CFAOA and shall received a yearly stipend of no less than
$12,000 (paid out over the 26 regular pay periods in the calendar year). This stipend
provides compensation for temporarily assuming the duties of the Supervising Fire
Dispatcher and attending meetings outside of regular working hours. Such meetings
include but are not limited to Staff meetings, Monthly Town Chief’s Association meetings,
Department Budget meetings, radio committee meetings and EMS board meetings. The
stipend does not include overtime for regular working shifts picked up to cover other
members’ requested time off or other conditions included in this Collective Bargaining
Agreement.
ARTICLE 7
OVERTIME
Section 1. Effective January 1, 1976, all work actually performed over forty (40) hours in
any one calendar week (Sunday, 12:01 a.m. to Saturday, midnight) shall be considered
as overtime and paid for at the applicable overtime rate, in line with state and federal law
and this contract.
Effective January 1st, 2027, and continuing while the Town utilizes a 12-hour schedule for
the employees impacted by this Collective Bargaining Agreement, all work actually
performed over forty (40) hours in any one calendar week (defined as the beginning of
the first shift on a Sunday, through the end of the second shift that begins as the second
shift on a Saturday and ends on a Sunday morning), shall be considered as overtime and
paid at the applicable overtime rate, in line with state and federal law and this contract.
Page 8 of 52

Section 2. Overtime will be paid only for hours actually worked in excess of forty (40)
hours per calendar week. Paid absences for holidays provided for in Article 11, paid
absences for vacation provided for in Article 12, and paid absences for personal leave as
provided for in Article 14 Section 4, paid absences for jury duty as provided for in Article
14 Section 2 and paid absences for bereavement leave provided for in Article 14 Section
1 shall be considered as time worked for the purpose of computing overtime.
Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays, when carried into the next calendar year, shall be
considered as time worked for the purpose of computing overtime. Absences from work
for any reason, regardless of whether such absences are otherwise compensated or paid
for, including, without limitation, absences for sick leave, meal breaks taken off the
premises, and time spent on standby shall not be considered as time worked. Time spent
on clean-up and rest periods in conformity with Rule III of the Personnel Rules shall be
considered time worked.

Section 3. Overtime will be paid at the employee’s regular hourly rate on a straight-time
basis for all work performed in excess of eight (8) hours in any one day. This section will
be deleted and marked “RESERVED” effective 1/1/27.

Section 4. Overtime shall be distributed and rotated as equally as practical among fulltime employees within the department. Overtime shall be offered to full-time employees
before part-time employees except during emergency situations.

Page 9 of 52

Section 5.

Subject to Department Head approval, employees shall be entitled to

compensatory time on the basis of one and one-half hours off for each hour of overtime
worked.

Section 6. Christmas Day shall be designated as a Super Holiday, and any employees
scheduled and actually working that day shall be compensated at the rate of double time.

Section 7. Attendance at staff meetings scheduled by the Department Head, not
conducted during working hours shall be compensated at applicable overtime rate for a
minimum of two (2) hours.
ARTICLE 8
LONGEVITY PAY
All employees who have been engaged in full-time and continuous employment
with the Town for the years indicated shall receive longevity pay on their anniversary date
in accordance with the following schedule. For the purposes of this Article: (i) part-time
employment shall not be counted toward years of service; and (ii) where employment with
the Town is interrupted for a period longer than a year for any reason except military leave
and leaves of absence for which the employee is paid, the accumulation of longevity
entitlement shall terminate upon the date of the interruption and shall begin anew upon
the employee’s return to full-time and continuous employment.

Page 10 of 52

Jan 1, 2025

Jan 1, 2026

Jan 1, 2027

Jan 1, 2028

Jan 1, 2029

5 years

-

$750.00

$800.00

$850.00

$900.00

10 years

$1,300.00

$1,350.00

$1,400.00

$1,450.00

$1,500.00

15 years

$1,400.00

$1,450.00

$1,500.00

$1,550.00

$1,600.00

20 years

$1,500.00

$1,550.00

$1,600.00

$1,650.00

$1,700.00

25 years

$1,700.00

$1,750.00

$1,800.00

$1,850.00

$1,900.00

**Over 25 Years add $100 for each additional year of employment

ARTICLE 9
RETIREMENT BENEFITS
The Town agrees to maintain the present retirement plan as authorized by Law,
including the provision for allowance of unused sick leave as provided by Section 41j of
the New York State Retirement and Social Security Law.

ARTICLE 10
MEDICAL COVERAGE
Section 1. The Town agrees to pay the full cost of Family Type PPO medical coverage as
is in effect January 1, 2006 under a plan issued by Independent Health or by any other
company, provided the coverage is at least equal to that provided under the present policy
with Independent Health. The plan shall provide coverage for retired employees who have
worked for the Town on a fulltime and continuous basis for at least five (5) years prior to
their retirement, and shall extend to the retired employee's spouse, spouses of deceased
Page 11 of 52

in-service employees and their insured children, as defined in said policy, for the life of
the spouse or until remarriage.
The Town shall also continue to provide a Traditional style plan issued by
Independent Health or by any other company, provided the coverage is at least equal to
that provided under the present Traditional style policy with Independent Health.
Employees and eligible retirees choosing the Traditional style plan shall pay the difference
between the premium cost of the Traditional style plan and the premium cost of the PPO
plan on a pre-tax basis.
The Town shall have the option at any time to include or discontinue within the
Independent Health Traditional style policy a $250 hospitalization deductible. Such
deductible shall be self-insured by the Town. Employees incurring the hospitalization
deductible or a portion thereof shall be reimbursed by the Town within two weeks of
submission of a hospital bill to the Town.

Section 2. The Town will provide a tiered prescription coverage with both of the
aforementioned plans that will not exceed $1/14/30. In the event that any employee
incurs un-reimbursed prescription co-pay expenses exceeding $200.00 in any quarter of
the year, the Town shall reimburse the employee for the amount in excess. All prescription
drug coverage referenced above shall be limited to those actively employed.

This

coverage shall not be extended to those who subsequently retire.

Section 3. The Town will provide a dental plan through The Guardian Life Insurance
Company of America or an equivalent carrier. This coverage shall be limited to those
Page 12 of 52

actively employed. This coverage shall not be extended to employees currently on
retirement or those actively employed who subsequently retire.

Section 4. The Town shall provide vision coverage through Vision Service Plan (VSP) or
an equivalent carrier. The coverage shall be limited to those actively employed. This
coverage shall not be extended to employees currently on retirement or those actively
employed who subsequently retire.

Section 5. Employees hired on or after December 31, 2011 will be eligible for medical
coverage within the first three (3) months of full-time service. Employees hired on or after
December 31, 2011, shall be required to contribute 20% of the annual premium for health
insurance, including prescription drug, dental and vision. This payment shall be made
through payroll deduction on a biweekly basis. Employees hired prior to December 31,
2011 shall contribute 15% of the annual premium for health insurance, including
prescription drug, dental and vision. All contributions referenced above shall be made
through payroll deduction biweekly on a pre-tax basis.

All employees shall be responsive for the following maximum medical copayments;
Office and out-patient - $10.00
Preventative - $0.00

Section 6. For pregnancies, the Town agrees to take such steps as are necessary to
provide reimbursement to employees for physicians' services in an amount equal to the
Page 13 of 52

difference between that provided by the medical coverage of Section 1 of this Article and
$400.00.

Section 7. Upon reasonable advance written application or notice to the Personnel
Department, employees may continue health insurance coverage in the Town of Amherst
health insurance group while on authorized leave without pay (excluding leaves because
of extended illness pursuant to provisions of current agreement) provided that the
employee makes full payment of the monthly premium on or before the first day of each
month that the employee is on leave.

Section 8. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1 above, employees who are
appointed on a permanent basis on or after January I, 1977, and who subsequently retire,
shall have their medical coverage discontinue on the last day of the month in which they
retire. However, retirees may, at their option, elect to continue their health insurance
coverage provided they make the required premium payments to the Town of Amherst for
such health insurance coverage.
Employees who retire may, at their option, elect to continue their prescription drug
and/or dental coverages provided they make the required premium payments to the Town
of Amherst for such prescription drug and/or dental coverages.
Employees who retire may, at their option, elect to continue their vision coverage
provided they make the required premium payments to the Town of Amherst for such
vision coverage.

Page 14 of 52

Section 9. Double Coverage – Effective July 1, 2020, The Town agrees to pay employees
One Thousand, Five Hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per year for waiving individual
coverage, and Three Thousand ($3,000.00) per year for waiving family coverage. Such
option must be exercised each year during the month of October (open enrollment
period), to be effective the following January 1. This option is not self-renewing and
employees wishing to receive a waiver payment must notify the Human Resources Office
each October in order to be eligible for payment. Payment will be made the first pay period
in April.
This payment can be made only when the employee signs a statement that the
employee has or will procure health insurance through the employee’s spouse's
employment, other employment of the employee, or through a private insurance plan. The
statement shall contain a waiver of all responsibility and hold harmless the Town and the
Bargaining Unit for any consequences that may arise when an employee exercises this
option.
The Town agrees to let the employee rejoin the plan after one year. The employee
must notify the Town in writing in October for coverage to be effective the following
January 1.
If the employee wishes to rejoin the plan within the year, the employee must show
an unanticipated change in circumstances regarding the alternative health plan (nonvoluntary loss of coverage), and repay the prorated portion of the waiver payment.
Employees who resign or are terminated prior to the end of the year shall repay
the prorated portion of such payment.

Page 15 of 52

Employees on probation may waive their health insurance coverage at the time of
eligibility and be paid on a prorated basis for the remainder of the calendar year.
If both husband and wife are employed by the Town with no dependent children,
they shall be eligible for two (2) individual health insurance policies. In the event family
coverage becomes necessary due to the addition of dependents, the change from
individual to family coverage shall occur as soon as possible. If the Town employs both
husband and wife with dependent children, they shall be eligible for one family plan policy,
and the double coverage waiver for one individual policy pursuant to this section.
Employees exercising the waiver option pursuant to this section shall remain
eligible for dental and vision coverage subject to Section 5 and any other applicable
Sections of Article 10.

Section 10. The parties agree to reopen negotiations with regard to the subject of Medical
Coverage upon the written request of either party. In the event any insurance provider
should unilaterally change, modify or delete any benefit, the parties agree to immediately
negotiate the impact of such change, modification or deletion.

Section 11. The Town of Amherst shall have the right to offer a voluntary separation
incentive with flexible parameters and a minimum of 2 years of continuing health
insurance option to CFAOA during the calendar years 2026 and 2028 with ample prior
notice. The package offered in a voluntary separation incentive (VSI) shall be consistent
for all targeted employees and not vary from any contractual benefits if any are involved,
and shall be finalized each offering year by an MOA between the parties. CFAOA
Page 16 of 52

reserves the right to request in writing to the Town of Amherst for a VSI in years 2025,
2027 and 2029. All employees shall have a CFAOA union representative present during
any proposal. An employee shall have a minimum of 10 days to render a decision on any
separation incentive offer.

Article 11
HOLIDAYS
1. Paid Holidays shall be New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, Lincoln’s
Birthday, Washington’s Birthday, Juneteenth, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Columbus Day, Election Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas,
Good Friday, Easter and any other day as may be approved by the Town Board.
2. If emergency or continuous service requires that an employee work on one of the
holidays listed in this Rule, and such holiday work is authorized by the Department
Head, the employee shall be granted equivalent time off in lieu thereof or shall be
compensated as overtime service.

ARTICLE 12
VACATION
1. Vacation Allowance. Except where other provisions are made by law for annual,
weekly, per diem or hourly employees, employees shall be entitled to an annual
vacation with pay not to exceed as follows:
Ten (10) work days after completion of one year of continuous service.
Page 17 of 52

Fifteen (15) work days after completion of five years of continuous service.
Twenty (20) work days after completion of ten years of continuous service.
Twenty-Five (25) work days after completion of fifteen years of continuous service.
Thirty (30) work days after completion of twenty years of continuous service.
Provided that any employee continuously employed for six months or more may
be granted vacation in proportion to the number of months employed.

2. Time of Vacation. Wherever possible, vacations shall be granted at the time
requested by the employee. If the nature of the work makes it necessary to limit
the number of employees on vacation at the same time, the employee with the
greater seniority shall be given the choice of vacation period in the event of any
conflict over vacation periods. Vacation periods shall be taken each year.

3. Holidays Not Included. In calculating the time allowed for vacation, intervening
holidays will not be counted as vacation days.

4. Vacation Not Cumulative. Vacation time shall not be cumulative, and if not taken,
expires at the end of the calendar year; except, however, that scheduled vacations
which are deferred at the Town’s request shall be carried into the next calendar
year and shall be scheduled and taken during the months of January, February,
March, April and May.

Page 18 of 52

5. Reinstatement and Leave of Absence. A leave of absence without pay or a
resignation followed by reinstatement within one year shall not constitute an
interruption of service, provided, however, that leave without pay for more than six
months, or the period between resignation and reinstatement, shall not be counted
in determining the eligibility for annual vacation in any calendar year.

6. Vacation Pay at Retirement. Effective January 1, 1986, an employee who retires
from the service of the Town will receive vacation pay on a pro-rata basis for the
calendar year in which the employee retires.

7. Death. In the case of death of an employee, payment for such vacation period
shall be made to the employee’s estate.

8. Part-time Employees. A part-time employee who is required to work a fixed
number of hours, five days per week, shall also receive vacation as provided
herein, but the employee’s total pay for such a period of vacation shall be the
amount which would have been due the employee if he or she had been working
regularly at their usual hours for such a period.

9. Employees with earned vacation may elect to receive the cash equivalent of up to
five (5) vacation days in lieu of taking such time off. In order to exercise this option,
employees must provide written notice to the Department Head and Finance
Director of their intention to receive such payment no later than August 1st of the
year in which the vacation would normally have been taken. Payment will be made
Page 19 of 52

by February 15th of the following year. The Town reserves the right to allow
additional vacation days to be purchased solely at the discretion of the Town.

10. Vacation pay shall be based on a forty-hour week and at the rate in effect for the
week immediately preceding the vacation of any employee. For any employee
who has consecutively worked more than forty hours per week for a three-month
period immediately preceding a vacation period, the employee shall receive
compensation for vacation based on the employee’s average work week for the
three months immediately preceding the vacation.

ARTICLE 13
SICK LEAVE
1. Application of Rule. This rule shall not apply to temporary employees.
2. Reasons for Granting of Sick Leave. Sick Leave with pay may be granted in
accordance with this Rule to an employee when incapacitated or unable to
perform the duties of their position because of:
(a) Sickness or injury.
(b) Serious illness in the employee’s immediate family requiring care and
attendance of the employee. Immediate family shall include the parent,
spouse, brother, sister, son, daughter, grandparent, or other blood
relative who is an actual member of the employee’s household. Effective
January 1, 1999 immediate family shall also include stepchild.
(c) Quarantine regulations.
Page 20 of 52

(d) Medical or dental visits.
3. Sick Leave Credits. A credit for sick leave under this Rule shall be allowed at the
following rates:
Employees hired prior to 12/31/02:
One and one-quarter (1-1/4) working days per month of service commencing as of
the date of employment. Such leave as is not used shall accumulate but not to
exceed 300 days. A physician’s certificate as to illness or injury shall be required
for three continuous days of absence.
Employees hired after December 31, 2002:
One (1) working day per month of service. Such leave as is not used shall
accumulate but not to exceed 300 days. A physician’s certificate as to illness or
injury shall be required for three continuous days of absence.
4. Sick Leave Credits to Part-time Employees.

Part-time employees who are

required to work a fixed number of hours, five days per week, shall earn sick leave
credits pro-rated on the basis of the number of hours required to work per week.
5. Extended Sick Leave. An employee who has been engaged in full-time and
continuous employment with the Town for at least five (5) years may receive
additional sick leave with pay as may be recommended by the Department Head
and approved by the Town Board, up to a maximum of seven (7) months, in
addition to sick leave credits accumulated by such employee. A leave of absence
without pay or a resignation followed by reinstatement within one year shall not
constitute an interruption of continuous service.

Page 21 of 52

6. Notice of Absence on Sick Leave. When absence is required under this Rule, the
employee shall report the same to the immediate supervisor at least two hours
before the starting time of the shift, where possible.
7. Sick Leave Records. Accurate records of the attendance and sick leave status of
each employee shall be maintained and open for inspection.
8. Transfer of Sick Leave Credits. In case of transfer to a different department,
accumulated sick leave shall be transferred with the employee and the employee
shall receive credit in the department to which the employee is transferred.
9. Absence for Less Than Full Day. Absences of less than a full day due to illness
shall be chargeable to sick leave in one-hour increments, subject to Department
Head or designee’s approval
10. Injury on the Job. When an employee is injured on the job, any time required
immediately after the injury to obtain first aid or treatment by a physician shall be
considered as time worked, unless the employee is admitted as an inpatient in a
hospital.
11. Absence Due to Injury. Employees who are unable to perform the duties of their
employment because of injuries received in the service of the employer, and who
receive Workers’ Compensation benefits, shall receive a supplemental sum equal
to the difference between their wages and their compensation benefits, chargeable
to sick leave on a pro-rata basis.
12. Physician’s Examinations. The expense of any physical examination requested
by the Town shall be paid for by the Town and be performed during the employee’s
working hours
Page 22 of 52

13. Sick Leave Buy-back. The Town agrees that upon retirement, any accumulated
unused sick leave up to a limit of 100 days can be bought back at a ratio of 1:3
(e.g., an employee with 300 days of unused sick leave may use only 100 days at
a ratio of 1:3). The remainder can be applied to the employee’s additional service
credit for retirement as per Section 41-j of the New York State Retirement and
Social Security Law.
Employees hired prior to December 31, 2011 wishing to apply accumulated unused
sick leave on a pre-tax basis toward either 100% or 50% (at the employees’ option)
of the premium payment for continued health coverage upon retirement in lieu of
a lump sum buy back may do so up to a limit of 100 days at a ratio of eighty (80)
percent (maximum 80 days). The unused sick time will be used first in paying for
any retiree health insurance premiums and will be completely exhausted prior to
the employees accumulated vacation time being applied to the payment of retiree
health insurance benefits. Employees may also elect to apply any or all accrued
vacation time due upon retirement pursuant to Rule V, Section 6 toward health
coverage in the same manner. Any sick leave and vacation time banked for
purposes of being applies toward the future payment for continued health coverage
upon retirement is subject to all Federal and State withholding and other tax
requirements during the calendar year in which it is banked.
14. Sick Leave Sell Back.
Each calendar year, employees who have accumulated eight hundred (800) sick
leave hours may redeem up to eighty-eight (88) sick leave hours, provided a
minimum of eight hundred (800) sick leave hours are maintained. Payment shall
Page 23 of 52

be at the employee’s regular rate of pay. Any employee electing to exercise this
option must inform the Town of the intention to do so no later than August 1st of
the calendar year. Once the employee has notified of his or her intention to sell
back this time the number of hours redeemable may not be increased. However,
if the employee elects to redeem less time, the request shall be granted. Payment
will then be made by the Town by April 1st of the following calendar year.
Employees shall also have the option of applying up to eighty-eight (88) sick leave
hours on a pre-tax basis toward either 100% or 50% (at the employee’s option) of
the premium payment for continued health coverage upon retirement in lieu of the
lump sum sell back.
15. Sick Leave Use.
Prior to returning to work following three (3) or more continuous days of sick leave,
employees shall be required to provide a physician’s certificate to the Director of
Human Resources.

However, medical documentation for absences “of any

duration” of fewer than three (3) days may be required at the discretion of the
Director of Human Resources if sick leave misuse or abuse is suspected. The
Director of Human Resources will in turn notify the Department Head that the
employee has complied with contractual obligations. In the event an employee is
required to undergo a physical examination by a Town Doctor at the discretion of
the Director of Human Resources before returning to work, the employee shall visit
the Town Doctor and receive medical clearance prior to returning to work.

Page 24 of 52

Both parties to this Agreement believe that paid sick leave is an important benefit
for employees and that any abuse of sick leave is detrimental both to the Town and
Union members. While recognizing that only a small fraction of employees may
abuse sick leave, the parties agree that no abuse of sick leave should be tolerated
or condoned. Situations which suggest abuse may include any absences which
suggest a pattern, as for example, absences occurring on Mondays, Fridays and
days immediately preceding or following holidays or vacation periods, or any
excessive use of sick leave. In addition, use of sick leave for purposes other than
those defined in Section 2 of this Article will be considered evidence of sick leave
abuse. Department Heads and/or supervisors are expected to monitor employee
usage of sick leave. When sick leave abuse is suspected based on reasonable
grounds, the employee will be notified of such suspicions, and will be given specific
reasons for the supervisor’s suspicion and may be required to provide a written
medical certificate for any sick leave absence. If suspected abuse of sick leave
continues, the employee will be subject to the progressive disciplinary process.
The Town will never discriminate or retaliate against any employee for the
legitimate, authorized use of sick leave.
ARTICLE 14
LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITH PAY
1. Leave Because of Death in Family. Leave of absence with pay of not to exceed
five (5) days shall be granted to an employee in the event of death occurring in the
employee’s immediate family, namely, spouse, parent, child, brother or sister.
Page 25 of 52

Leave of absence of not to exceed three (3) days shall be granted upon the death
of an employee’s grandparent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sisterin-law, grandchild, stepchild, or any other blood relative residing in the employee’s
household. Leave of absence with pay not to exceed one (1) day shall be granted
upon the death of an employee’s aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, or cousin.
Employees may, upon prior request and approval of the Department Head or
designee in consultation with the Director of Human Resources, be granted one
(1) day to attend the funeral of any individual not included in the family set forth
above.
2. Leave for Jury Duty. On proof of required jury duty, leave of absence shall be
granted with pay to all employees, provided, however, that such employees shall
reimburse the Town for jury fees received by them.

3. Time Off for Civil Service Examinations. An employee will be permitted time off
without loss of pay to take Civil Service examinations for any position within the
Town’s service.

4. Personal Leave
All employees shall be allowed six (6) personal leave days per year, noncumulative. Any unused personal leave shall be added at the end of each calendar
year to the employee’s total number of sick leave credits, but in no event shall the
total sick leave credits exceed the maximum allowed under Rule VI, subparagraph

Page 26 of 52

(3) Whenever possible, advance written application of 72 hours shall be submitted
to the department head or their designee on a “Request For Time Off” form.

5. Paid Family Leave
CFAOA agrees to future negotiations regarding a Paid Family Leave.
ARTICLE 15
LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY
1. Eligibility Requirements. Employees shall be eligible for leaves of absence after
six (6) months service with the employer.

2. Application for Leave Without Pay. Any request for a leave of absence shall be
submitted in writing by the employee to the Department Head. The request shall
state the reason the leave of absence is being requested and the approximate
length of time off the employee desires, which shall not exceed one year.

3. Maternity Leave. A female employee to be confined shall be entitled to leave
without pay, and regardless of any sick leave credits accrued, for a period of not
more than six months, of which not more than four months shall be pre-natal.

4. Leave Because of Extended Illness. When an employee has exhausted all sick
leave credits and is still incapacitated and unable to perform the duties of the
position, the employee may be granted a leave of absence without pay for a period
not to exceed one year.
Page 27 of 52

Employees on extended sick leave without pay, pursuant to Town Board
resolution, shall not be entitled to accrue sick leave.

5. Leave for War Work.

A permanent employee may, at the discretion of the

Department Head and approved by the Town Board, be granted a leave of absence
without pay for a period not exceeding one year to enter the service of the Federal
Government in time of war. Such leave of absence may be renewed for additional
periods, not exceeding one year in each instance. However, no such renewal of
leave of absence without pay shall extend beyond six months after the termination
of the war.

6. Educational Leave for Veterans. Any veteran who is qualified to receive education
or training or vocational rehabilitation under the provisions of any Federal or New
York State Law, shall be granted leave of absence without pay for the period of
such education, training or vocational rehabilitation. Such leave of absence shall
not extend beyond a period of four years, nor beyond the period for which the
veteran shall be eligible to continue the education, training or vocational
rehabilitation, and it shall terminate at any time that the veteran ceases actual
attendance upon the courses required by the education, training or rehabilitation
program.

7. Employment Opportunities.

Employees shall be granted a leave of absence

without pay to enable such employee to serve temporarily, provisionally, for trial
Page 28 of 52

periods, or for periods necessary to qualify for permanent appointment to a
competitive class, or another position of a higher class that requires such
conditions to be met, or where an employee is offered a job on a permanent
transfer, so long as said employment is with an agency of the employer.

8. In addition to accruing seniority while on any leave of absence granted under the
provisions of this Agreement, employees shall be returned to the position they held
at the time the leave of absence was requested.

ARTICLE 16
MILITARY LEAVE OF ABSENCE
Any employee who is required to render ordered military duty shall be granted military
leave of absence pursuant to the Military Law.

ARTICLE 17
SENIORITY
1. Definition.

Where permissible by law or regulation, “seniority” means an

employee’s length of continuous service with the Town’s Fire Alarm Office since
his or her last date of hire. Otherwise, “seniority” shall mean an employee’s length
of continuous service with the Town since his or her last date of hire.

2. Seniority Lists. Once a year the employer shall post on all bulletin boards a
seniority list showing the continuous service of each employee. A copy of the
Page 29 of 52

seniority list shall be furnished to the Local Union when it is posted. The seniority
list will show the names, job titles and date of hire of all employees in the units
entitled to seniority.

3. Breaks in Continuous Service.
(a)

An employee’s continuous service record shall be broken by

voluntary resignation, discharge for just cause, and retirement. However,
if an employee returns to work in any capacity within one year, the break
in continuous service shall be removed from the employee’s record.
(b)

There shall be no deduction from continuous service for any time lost

which does not constitute a break in continuous. service.

ARTICLE 18
RESIDENCY CLAUSE
After ten (10) years of continuous full-time service with the Town, employees may move
their domiciles outside of the limits of the Town of Amherst. The distance of the new
residence may not exceed a 30-mile radius (excluding Canada) of the Central Fire Alarm
Office currently located at 500 John James Audubon Parkway, Amherst, NY 14228.

Prior to ten (10) years of continuous full-time service with the Town, employees will be
granted a residency waiver in order to move their domiciles outside the limits of the Town
of Amherst, provided this domicile is within the limits of the Central Fire Alarm Office
dispatching coverage area.
Page 30 of 52

ARTICLE 19
RECIPROCAL RIGHTS

Section 1. The Town recognizes the right of the employee to designate representatives
of the C.F.A.O.A. to appear on his or her behalf to discuss salaries, working conditions,
grievances and disputes as to the terms and conditions of this contract and to visit the
employee during working hours. Such employee representatives shall also be permitted
to appear at public hearings before the Town Board upon the request of the employee.

Section 2. The C.F.A.O.A. shall have the right to post notices and communications upon
the bulletin boards maintained on the premises and facilities of the Town in the Central
Fire Alarm Office. The material posted shall be restricted to C.F.A.O.A. business and will
not contain salacious or non-Association political material.

Section 3. The representatives of the C.F.A.O.A. who are designated or elected for the
purpose of adjusting grievances or assisting in the administration of this contract shall be
permitted a reasonable amount of time free from their regular duties to fulfill these
obligations which have as their purpose the maintenance of harmonious and cooperative
relations between the Town and the employee and the uninterrupted operation of
government.

Page 31 of 52

Section 4.

A representative of the C.F.A.O.A. who is designated to represent the

employees shall have the right to attend statewide conventions and meetings in
pursuance of his or her obligations as delegate of the C.F.A.O.A.

Section 5. Access to Premises. The employer agrees to permit a duly authorized
representative of the C.F.A.O.A. to enter the premises of the employer for individual
discussion of working conditions with employees, upon prior notice to the immediate
supervisor, provided said representative does not unduly interfere with the performance
of duties assigned to the employees.

ARTICLE 20
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
The Town and the C.F.A.O.A. desire that all members of the C.F.A.O.A. be treated
fairly and equitably. It is intended that this grievance procedure will provide a means of
resolving grievances at the lowest level and that nothing in this article should be
interpreted as discouraging a member of his or her representative from discussing any
problem in an informal manner with the employee’s immediate supervisor or department
head. Such discussion shall not interfere with the right of any member to process
grievances through the grievance procedure.
Grievances shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
The term “grievance” as used herein shall mean a complaint by either party to this contract
that there has been a violation, misapplication, misinterpretation, or inequitable
application of this agreement or of the Rules and Regulations of the C.F.A.O.A.; provided,
Page 32 of 52

however, that the term “grievance” shall not apply to any matter as to which (a) a method
of review is prescribed or provided by law or by any regulation having the force of law; or
(b) the Town is not empowered to act.
To encourage the resolution of the grievance at the department level, it shall be
the fundamental responsibility of supervisors at all administrative levels to make prompt
determination respecting grievances in accordance with these procedures. Both parties
shall have the right to present grievances in accordance with these procedures, free from
coercion, interference, restraint, discrimination and reprisal by any person or party to this
agreement.
A member may be represented at all steps of this grievance procedure by the
C.F.A.O.A. or counsel, or both. All grievance meetings shall be mutually agreed upon
and scheduled by the parties.
When several members of the C.F.A.O.A. have an identical grievance, the
C.F.A.O.A. may select one individual case for processing, with the understanding that the
disposition of such cases shall be applied to the other identical grievances.
A record of all grievances filed pursuant to these procedures and the disposition
made thereof shall be maintained by the C.F.A.O.A. for reference purposes.
The time limit specified herein shall be observed, unless extended in writing by
mutual agreement of the parties.

Failure of the grievant to request review of a

determination made at any step of the grievance procedure within the specified time limit
shall automatically conclude the grievance process as to such grievance.

Page 33 of 52

Grievances shall be filed within ten (10) working days from the time the grievant
became aware of the facts or omissions which gave rise to the grievance, unless for good
cause, the grievant is unable to do so.

STEP 1
The grievant shall present the grievance orally to his or her immediate supervisor and
attempt to adjust the matter.

STEP 2
If the grievance is not satisfactorily adjusted at Step 1, the grievant shall present the
grievance in writing, on a form to be provided, to the grievant’s immediate supervisor with
five (5) working days from the decision at Step 1. The written grievance shall contain a
factual statement outlining the acts constituting the grievance, the date, time and place of
the occurrence, and the relief requested. The written grievance shall contain a statement
of the section of the Collective Bargaining Agreement or the written Rules of the
C.F.A.O.A. which the employee contends have been violated. The immediate supervisor
shall give an answer in writing within five (5) working days of the receipt thereof.

STEP 3
If the grievance is not satisfactorily settled at Step 2, the C.F.A.O.A. representative, within
five (5) working days shall forward the grievance to the C.F.A.O.A.’s Grievance
Committee. If, upon review of the grievance, the Committee believes the grievance is
valid, it will forward a copy of the written grievance and the written answer of the
Page 34 of 52

immediate supervisor to the Town’s Personnel Director within five (5) working days of
receipt of the grievance by the Grievance Committee. The Personnel Director shall, within
a period of five (5) working days of presentation to him, discuss the matter with the
Grievance Committee in an attempt to satisfactorily settle the grievance. Should this
discussion fail to produce a satisfactory settlement within five (5) working days from the
date of completion of the discussion, then separate written reports of the dispute shall be
made by the Grievance Committee and the Personnel Director.
The written report made by the C.F.A.O.A.’s Grievance Committee and the
Personnel Director at Step 3 shall be filed within five (5) working days with the Town Clerk,
and at the same time, served on the other party.
The C.F.A.O.A.’s Grievance Committee shall consist of three (3) members
selected by the C.F.A.O.A. One Committee member shall be permitted to leave work with
no loss of pay after notice to the grievant’s supervisor for the purpose of adjusting a
grievance at Steps 1 and 2, and all three Grievance Committee members shall be
permitted to attend the meeting at Step 3 with the Personnel Director with no loss of pay.

STEP 4
Should the grievance fail to be resolved, as outlined at Step 3, either of the parties may
avail themselves of the services of the Public Employment Relations Board to provide a
list of five (5) arbitrators. The arbitration proceeding shall be conducted by the arbitrator
as soon as possible after selection. The method of selection of the arbitrator shall be that
the party requesting arbitration shall strike one name of the five submitted and the other
party shall then strike one name. This procedure shall be repeated until one arbitrator
Page 35 of 52

remains. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties, and the
arbitrator shall be requested to issue a decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing is
concluded. The parties shall share the cost of the arbitrator equally.
The arbitrator is prohibited from adding to, subtracting from, or modifying the terms
of the Collective Bargaining Agreement or the written Rules and Regulations of the
C.F.A.O.A.
Each party shall be responsible for compensating its own representative and
witnesses. The grievant and the three Grievance Committee members shall be permitted
to attend the arbitration hearing but shall not be paid by the Town for said attendance,
except for one Grievance Committee member who shall be excused from duty with no
loss of pay.
If either party desires a verbatim record of the proceeding, it may cause such a
record to be made, provided it pay for the record and makes a copy of the record
available, without charge, to the other party and the arbitrator.
STEP 5
Should any person be aggrieved by the determinations as provided for in this article,
application may be made for judicial review, as provided by law.

ARTICLE 21
MINIMUM EMPLOYMENT
The Town of Amherst shall maintain the Central Fire Alarm Office staffing level at eleven
(11) full-time dispatchers and one (1) Supervising Fire Dispatcher for the life of this
agreement.

Should a position become vacant, within a reasonable time period a
Page 36 of 52

replacement shall be hired from the current civil service list. If there is no current civil
service list the Town of Amherst shall, within a reasonable time period, initiate all required
steps to see that a new civil service test is scheduled. Once the results of this test are
published a replacement employee shall be hired within a reasonable time period.

ARTICLE 22
UNIFORMS
Section 1.

The Town of Amherst, at its cost, agrees to supply all uniforms for all

employees and agrees to repair and replace the same. The uniform shall consist of an
outer jacket of three-quarter length, lightweight uniform jacket, shoes or overshoes, shirt,
pants, sweater, hat, tie, name tag and badge. Uniforms shall be in such quantity and shall
be of a style and kind established or approved by the Department Head and the Town
and must be worn by all employees at all times while on duty, as from time to time
prescribed by the Department Head.

Section 2. All employees shall be responsible for maintenance of Town of Amherst
uniforms.

ARTICLE 23
DISAFFIRMENT OF RIGHT TO STRIKE
The C.F.A.O.A. affirms that it does not and will not assert the right to strike or to engage
in other stoppage of work or slowdown by its members against the Town, nor to assist or
participate in any such acts or to advise, urge or impose upon its members an obligation
Page 37 of 52

to conduct, assist or participate in such a strike or other acts as herein defined. In the
event that the C.F.A.O.A. or any of its members shall violate any of the provisions of this
Article, the C.F.A.O.A. or its said members shall be subject to all the penalties authorized
by law.

ARTICLE 24
SAVINGS CLAUSE
If any section, sub-section, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Agreement is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such
holding will not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 25
IMPASSE PROCEDURE
If the Town and C.F.A.O.A. are unable to reach an agreement in their negotiations in
future contracts as to any matter that may arise under Article 14 of the New York State
Civil Service Law, the matter or matters in dispute shall be referred to the New York State
Public Employees Relations Board pursuant to Section 209 of said Article for disposition.

ARTICLE 26
EFFECTIVE DATE
Section 1. The effective date of this Agreement shall be on the signed date, except as
otherwise provided herein, and the Agreement shall continue in full force and effect
Page 38 of 52

thereafter through December 31, 2029, unless extended or modified by mutual agreement
of the parties.
Shall neither party to this Agreement send a notice of intent to change or amend
this Agreement as herein provided, then this Agreement shall be considered to have been
automatically renewed for another year.

Section 2. Should either party to this Agreement wish to initiate collective bargaining
discussions over changes or amendments they wish to introduce into this Agreement, it
is agreed that notice of the substance of the changes or amendments and the language
thereof shall be mailed in writing to the other party to this Agreement not less than 180
days before the termination date of this Agreement or the termination date of the annual
renewal. The other party shall respond to the notice in writing within 90 days and, at the
same time, shall furnish written notice of any changes or amendments to the Agreement
it wishes to make. Collective bargaining meetings or sessions shall then commence
within 30 days and shall be held at regular intervals thereafter.

Section 3.

If no agreement is reached within a 60-day period following the

commencement of collective bargaining meetings, the parties shall implement the
impasse procedure above referred to.

[Remainder of Page Intentionally Left Blank]

Page 39 of 52

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have set their hands and seals this
Arr.; I 9-0 ,

CENTRAL FIRE ALARM
OFFICE ASSOCIATION
By

Date

&WI-

TOWN OF AMHE

T

By

Justin Woodruff

Shawn Lavin

President CFAOA

Supervisor, Town of Amherst

/ 7c.' /2-°74

Date LI

3-0 " ea°

By
Robert McCarthy
Human Resources Director
Date

Page 40 of 52

ATTACHMENT A
PERSONNEL RULES
FOR EMPLOYEES OF THE CENTRAL FIRE ALARM OFFICE

It is the purpose of the following Rules to provide a fair and uniform procedure for the
administration of attendance and other personnel matters not in contravention to the Civil
Service Law and Rules. The Rules shall apply to all male and female employees.

RULE I
SALARIES
1.

The payment of salaries and the granting of annual salary increments shall be
pursuant to the Plan of Class Titles and Salary Ranges as approved by the
Town Board of the Town of Amherst.

2.

Whenever an employee is required to work in a higher job classification for one
full shift of eight hours or more, the employee will be paid the rate of pay of the
higher job classification.

3.

The salaries and wages of employees shall be paid on the same day every two
weeks. In the event this day is a holiday, wherever possible, the preceding day
shall be the pay day.

Page 41 of 52

RULE II
CIVIL SERVICE PROCEDURES
Section 1. Appointment, promotion, transfer, reinstatement, probation, disciplinary action,
retirement and other civil service procedures shall be pursuant to the Civil Service Law
and the Rules for the Classified Civil Service of the County of Erie as issued by the
Personnel Officer and the provisions of the Town Law of the State of New York.

Section 2. Part-time fire dispatcher positions will be filled utilizing the following
procedures:
a.)

Retired CFAOA member provided retirement was less than three (3) years
from the date of hire as a part-time employee.

b.)

From an appropriate civil service list. If a list of eligible candidates for parttime positions is not existent, the Town shall appoint candidates who meet
qualifications that are determined and agreed upon by the Human
Resources Director, Department Head and the CFAOA.

Section 3. Change in Position Title. Within 90 days of contract ratification, The
Town of Amherst, following procedures required by the Erie County Civil Service
Commission and New York State Civil Service Law shall implement all necessary
requirements to change the civil service title of all existing employees with the civil service
title of "Fire Dispatcher" to that of "Public Safety Dispatcher". This change shall not result
in any loss or change of employment seniority, pay grade or benefits for any employee
with the current civil service title of "Fire Dispatcher". This agreement continues to apply
Page 42 of 52

to any non-exempt employees in the “Fire Dispatcher” title. Once there are no remaining
employees in the “Fire Dispatcher” title, this agreement will only apply to “Public Safety
Dispatchers,” and references to the “Fire Dispatcher” position will be removed.
RULE III
ATTENDANCE
1. Hours of Work.

All employees shall be scheduled to work on a regular work shift

and each work shift shall have a regular starting and quitting time. Work schedules
showing the employee’s shifts, work days and hours shall be posted on all
department bulletin boards at all times.
2. In line with the Town and Union’s agreement to enact twelve-hour shifts, beginning
on January 1st, 2027, employees will work a Schedule B, attached to this
agreement.
3. After July 1st, 2027, but prior to August 1st, 2027, either Party may demand, in
writing, that the 12-hour shift schedule be eliminated from the collective bargaining
agreement and that CFAOA employees should revert back to their prior schedules,
or a new schedule as agreed upon by the Parties. The Parties agree to meet to
discuss this issue within 14 days of such written demand to cease the 12-hour shift
schedule to work out any issues related to a change in schedule. If the Parties are
unable to come to an agreement on how to proceed by August 15th of 2027, the
12-hour shift schedule will end effective January 1st, 2028.
4. The above-mentioned procedure will also occur in the same manner in year 2028
in the event a Party desires to revert to their old schedule.

Page 43 of 52

5. In the event either Party triggers the 12-hour shift schedule to end, effective the
same day as the effective elimination of the 12-hour shift schedule, CFAOA
members will receive a raise equal to the average raise provided to its members
due to the 12-hour shift schedule (i.e. the approximate value of the overtime
generated by the new schedule). In no case will these be more than a 10%
salary raise.
6. Record of Attendance. Each department shall maintain a daily record of the
attendance and punctuality of each employee.
7. Tardiness. Each department shall establish rules regarding penalties for tardiness,
but such penalties shall not preclude disciplinary action in cases of tardiness.
8. Lunch Periods. In a manner consistent with providing adequate coverage of the
responsibilities of the Fire Alarm Office, all employees shall have a lunch period of
at least one-half hour.
9. Rest Periods. In a manner consistent with providing adequate coverage of the
responsibilities of the Fire Alarm Office, all employees’ work schedules shall
provide for a 15-minute rest period during each one-half shift. The rest period shall
be scheduled at the middle of the shift, whenever feasible.
10. Clean-up Time. In a manner consistent with providing adequate coverage of the
responsibilities of the Fire Alarm Office, employees shall be granted a 15 minute
personal clean-up prior to the end of each work shift.
11. Recall Time. An employee called in to work after the employee has returned home
will be entitled to a minimum of four hours pay at the straight time rate. Employees
called in to work for emergency or other work which entitles them to a minimum of
Page 44 of 52

four (4) hours pay shall have only the time actually worked counted for overtime
purposes.
RULE IV
WORK FORCE CHANGES
1. Definitions:
a. “Position” means one of the positions included under one class title in
Schedule A to the Agreement.
b. “Class” means a group of similar positions included under the same title in
Schedule B.
c. “Salary/Wage Range” means the range of compensation for “A” to “D”
appearing in Schedule B.
d. “Job Group” means a group of classes of positions allocated to the same
salary/wage range set out in Schedule B.
e. “Increment Step” means the point in the increment scale reached through
successful periods of actual service as designated in “A”, “B”, “C”, and “D”
in Schedule B.
f. “Actual Service” means active service in the position after deduction of any
periods of leaves without pay. Military Leave, pursuant to Section 243 of
the Military Law, shall be deemed actual service.
g. “Promotion” means the advancement of an employee to a higher class or
the reassignment of an employee to a higher paying position.

Page 45 of 52

h. “Demotion” means the reassignment, not requested by the employee, of an
employee from a position in one job classification to a lower paying position
in the same job classification or in another job classification.
2. New Appointments. An employee appointed to a position in a class title shall be
paid the “A” rate of pay established for the class as set forth in Schedule B.

3. Increments.
a. Regular increment dates for employees shall be either January 1 or July 1,
provided they have the required period of actual service.

Employees

appointed or promoted to a position shall be entitled to their first pay
increment to the amount shown under column “B” in Schedule B after nine
(9) months of actual service on January 1 or July 1, as the case may be.
Employees will be entitled to subsequent adjustments on a yearly basis
from that January 1 or July 1, as the case may be.
b. In cases of reinstatement, eligibility for an increment must total a year of
actual service.
c. All employees shall be eligible for and granted the increment shown under
“D” based on merit.
4. Promotions; Changes.
a. Whenever an opportunity for promotion occurs or a job opening occurs in
other than a temporary situation in any existing job classification, or as the
result of the development or establishment of a new job classification,
including but not limited to Supervising Dispatcher, Senior Fire Dispatcher,
Page 46 of 52

Senior Public Safety Dispatcher, Supervising Public Safety Dispatcher, or
any other title indicating Central Fire Alarm Office supervising duties and
responsibilities, or as a result of the development or establishment of a new
job classification, a notice of the opening shall be posted on all bulletin
boards stating the job classification, rate of pay and the nature of the job
requirements in order to qualify. The posting shall be for a period of not less
than ten (10) work days.
b. During this period, employees who wish to apply for the open position,
including employees on layoff, may do so. The application shall be in
writing, and it shall be submitted to the employee’s immediate supervisor.
c. The employer shall fill such job openings or vacancies from among those
employees who have applied who meet the standards of the job
requirements. The minimum qualifications and standards include; must be
a member of the CFAOA with a minimum of 10 years of experience as a
CFAOA dispatcher and have a current EMD and EFD Certification which
must be maintained. If two (2) or more candidates all have the same
qualifications, the employee with the greatest seniority shall be selected.
d. An employee appointed or promoted to a position in a higher job group shall
receive a salary or wage rate at the increment step in the range for the
higher position which is nearest to, but not less than, the salary or wage rate
paid to the employee at the time of appointment or promotion.
e. Any employee selected in accordance with the procedure set forth above
shall undergo a trial period of a minimum of sixty (60) days, but not to
Page 47 of 52

exceed ninety (90) days.

If it is found during the trial period that the

employee does not meet the requirements or responsibilities of the position
to which the employee has been selected, the employee shall be restored
to the employee’s former position.
f. If a job vacancy occurs which is to be filled the employer shall notify the
bargaining agent in writing immediately.
g. Shift preference will be granted where applicable on the basis of seniority
with the same classification where a vacancy exists. For purposes of this
subparagraph, “vacancy” shall mean a vacancy which is caused or occurs
by reason of employee death, promotion, retirement, resignation, or the
creation of a new position but shall not be deemed to include vacancies
caused by shift changes, reassignments, or other supervisory scheduling.
5. Demotions.
a. A permanent full-time employee who accepts appointment to a position that
is in a job group lower than the job group of the position in which the
employee is serving, shall, upon appointment to the lower position, receive
a salary or wage rate at the increment step in the salary or wage range in
the lower job corresponding to the increment step reached in the
employee’s former position.
b. An employee who is relegated back to a previous position from a higher
classification to which the employee was provisionally appointed because
of the employee’s inability to prove to the employer that the employee was
able to fulfill the standards of the job, or pass a Civil Service examination
Page 48 of 52

required for permanent appointment to that job, or who voluntarily
relinquishes such job, shall not be considered as demoted.

6. Layoff.
a. In the event the employer plans to lay off employees for any reason, the
employer shall meet with the bargaining agent to review such anticipated
layoff at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the date such action is to
be taken.
b. The employer shall forward a list of those employees being laid off to the
local bargaining agent secretary at least fourteen (14) days before they are
to be laid off.
c. No new employee shall be hired until all qualified employees on layoff status
desiring to return to work have been recalled.
d. Employees displaced by the elimination of jobs through job consolidation
(combining the duties of two or more jobs), the installation of new equipment
or machinery, the curtailment or replacement of existing facilities, the
development of new facilities, or for any other reason, shall be permitted to
exercise their seniority rights to transfer to any other job in the service of the
department.
e. When an employee is laid off due to a reduction in the work force, the
employee shall be permitted to exercise their seniority right to bump or
replace an employee with less seniority. Such employee may, if so desired
by the employee, bump an employee in an equal or lower job classification,
Page 49 of 52

provided the bumping employee has greater seniority than the bumped
employee’s, and the necessary qualifications.
f. When the work force is increased after a layoff, employees will be recalled
according to seniority. Notice of recall shall be sent to the employee at the
last known address on file by registered or certified mail. If any employee
fails to respond within seven (7) days within the date of mailing of the notice
of recall, the employee shall be considered a quit. Recall rights for an
employee shall expire after a period equal to the employee’s seniority
unless the employee is a quit. Written notice of expiration of recall rights
shall be sent to the employee at the last known address on file by registered
or certified. mail.

7. Reinstatement.
a. A permanent full-time employee covered by this Agreement who has been
laid off and subsequently reinstated to the same job in accordance with the
provisions of this Agreement shall be reinstated at the same salary or wage
step the employee occupied at the time of the layoff.
b. A permanent full-time employee who has resigned and is subsequently
reinstated pursuant to the appropriate provisions of this Agreement to the
same job shall be reinstated at the same salary or wage step the employee
occupied at the time of resignation.
c. An employee who is promoted temporarily or provisionally to a higher
position and who is returned to a position in a lower grade shall, upon return
Page 50 of 52

to the lower position, receive a salary or wage rate at the increment level
the employee would have reached had they continued to serve continuously
in that position.
8. Transfers.
a. Employees desiring to transfer to other jobs may submit an application in
writing to their immediate supervisor. The application shall state the reason
for the requested transfer.
b. Employees requesting transfers for reasons other than the elimination of
jobs may be transferred to equal or lower paying job classifications on the
basis of qualifications, provided a vacancy exists and the employee is
qualified.
c. If an employee is transferred to a position under the Town not included in
the unit, accrual of seniority shall be suspended while working in the
position to which the employee was transferred. Employees transferred
under the above circumstances shall retain all rights accrued for the
purpose of any benefits provided for in this Agreement.
d. An unresolved complaint as to the reasonableness of any new or existing
work rule shall be resolved through the grievance procedure.
e. Any current Full-Time employee with three (3) years or more of town service
transferring into the CFAOA from another bargaining unit shall start at the
next highest rate of pay (same as current promotional process).

Page 51 of 52

9. Reallocation. Upon the reallocation of a class of positions to a higher job group,
the employee or the employees serving in the reallocated positions shall receive a
salary or a wage at the increment step in the higher job group that corresponds
with the increment step in which they were serving in the lower group.
10. Reclassification. When an employee class title is reclassified to a higher title and
job group, it shall be considered as a new position and a promotion. The salary
will then be determined in accordance with the salary rule on promotions.
11. Leaves of Absence.
a. Military Leave, pursuant to Section 243 of the Military Law, shall be deemed
actual service.
b. Other Leaves Without Pay over three months shall constitute an interruption
of continuous service for computing yearly increments.
12. Exclusions. Employees in seasonal, part-time, non-regular or third-party
sponsored employment are excluded from these salary rules.

Page 52 of 52
