In the Matter of the Arbitration)
)
Between
)
)
VILLAGE OF WOODRIDGE
)
)
and
)
)
METROPOLITAN ALLIANCE OF POLICE,)
WOODRIDGE CHAPTER NO. 51
)

Case No. S-MA-15-130
Interest Arbitration

APPEARANCES
For the Union
Mr. Joseph R. Mazzone, Attorney
For the Employer
Mr. James J. Powers of Clark Baird Smith LLP, Attorney
O P I N I O N

A N D

A W A R D

Introduction
As a result of the inability of Village of Woodridge and
Metropolitan Alliance of Police Woodridge Chapter #51 to reach
agreement on a single issue, the method by which an officer may
obtain review of discipline, the Union initiated impasse resolution
proceedings under Section 14 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations
Act, 5 ILCS 315/1 et seq. (“IPLRA” or “the Act”). The parties
selected Sinclair Kossoff to serve as neutral arbitrator and
stipulated that he “shall serve as the sole arbitrator in this
bargaining dispute.” By letter dated December 14, 2015, from the
Illinois Labor Relations Board the undersigned was notified of his
appointment and was requested to provide available hearing dates to
the parties’ representatives. According to the stipulation of the
parties, “the procedural prerequisites for convening the arbitration
hearing have been met, and the Arbitrator has jurisdiction and

1

authority to rule on those issues submitted to him.” Hearing was
held in Woodridge, Illinois, on April 5, 2016, at which time the
parties exchanged final offers. The parties waived the provision in
Section 1230.90 a) of the applicable Administrative Code Rules that
the hearing commence within 15 days following appointment of the
arbitrator. Post-hearing briefs were received on June 16, 2016.
The Facts
The Village of Woodridge (“the Village”) is a home rule
municipality of approximately nine square miles situated about 25
miles west of downtown Chicago mostly in Du Page County, Illinois,
with parts extending into Will and Cook Counties. Its population is
almost 33,000. The Metropolitan Alliance of Police, Woodridge
Chapter No. 51 (“the Union”), is the certified exclusive bargaining
agent since 1991 for a unit of all employees classified as Patrol
Officer, excluding supervisory personnel, civilian employees of the
Police Department, and all other employees of the Village. Currently
there are approximately 36 bargaining unit members. Since its
certification the Union and the Village have been parties to seven
successive collective bargaining agreements negotiated without
interest arbitration for the following contract terms: 1991–1994,
1995-1998, 1998-2001, 2001-2004, 2004-2007, 2007-2012, and 2012-2015.
All prior collective bargaining agreements between the
parties have excluded discharge and other forms of discipline from
the grievance procedure. Instead the agreements provided that
discipline and discharge were subject to the jurisdiction of the
Chief of Police and the Board of Police Commissioners (“BOPC”) and
were not subject to the contractual grievance procedure.
Disciplinary charges against an officer that are heard by the Board
of Police Commissioners are governed by The Illinois Municipal Code,
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-17, which provides in pertinent part as follows:
Except as hereinafter provided, no officer or member of the
fire or police department of any municipality subject to
this Division 2.1 shall be removed or discharged except for
cause, upon written charges, and after an opportunity to be
heard in his own defense. The hearing shall be as
hereinafter provided, unless the employer and the labor
organization representing the person have negotiated an
alternative or supplemental form of due process based upon
impartial arbitration as a term of collective bargaining
agreement. Such bargaining shall be mandatory unless the
parties mutually agree otherwise. Any such alternative
agreement shall be permissive. . . . The board of fire and
2

police commissioners shall conduct a fair and impartial
hearing of the charges, to be commenced within 30 days of
the filing thereof, which hearing may be continued from
time to time. In case an officer or member is found
guilty, the board may discharge him, or may suspend him not
exceeding 30 days without pay. The board may suspend any
officer or member pending the hearing with or without pay,
but not to exceed 30 days. If the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners determines that the charges are not
sustained, the officer or member shall be reimbursed for
all wages withheld, if any. . . .
The provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and all
amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted
pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern all proceedings
for the judicial review of final administrative decisions
of the board of fire and police commissioners
hereunder. . . .
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent the
chief of the fire department or the chief of the police
department from suspending without pay a member of his
department for a period of not more than 5 calendar days,
but he shall notify the board in writing of such
suspension. The hearing shall be as hereinafter provided,
unless the employer and the labor organization representing
the person have negotiated an alternative or supplemental
form of due process based upon impartial arbitration as a
term of a collective bargaining agreement. Such bargaining
shall be mandatory unless the parties mutually agree
otherwise. Any such alternative agreement shall be
permissive.
Any policeman or fireman so suspended may appeal to the
board of fire and police commissioners for a review of the
suspension within 5 calendar days after such suspension,
and upon such appeal, the board may sustain the action of
the chief of the department, may reverse it with
instructions that the man receive his pay for the period
involved, or may suspend the officer for an additional
period of not more than 30 days or discharge him, depending
upon the facts presented.

3

The Village’s Board of Police Commissioners has promulgated Rules and
Regulations that govern the hiring, promotion, and discipline of
sworn officers in the rank of Patrol Officer and Sergeant. They also
govern hearings on charges, discharges, suspensions, and appeals.
According to the Rules and Regulations, “All hearings shall be
conducted and shall be public in accordance with the Open Meetings
Act.”
The Rules and Regulations of the Board of Police
Commissioners permits the Chief of Police to suspend any officer for
up to 80 hours without filing charges against the officer. The
officer, however, has the right to appeal the suspension to the Board
of Police Commissioners within five days, and the appeal stays the
suspension until the Board rules on the appeal. The officer has the
burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the suspension is not warranted. According to the Rules, “Upon
such appeal, the Board may sustain such action of the Chief of
Police, may reverse such suspension, may suspend the Officer for an
additional period of not more than 720 hours, or discharge said
Officer, depending on the evidence presented.”
Where the Chief of Police seeks to suspend the officer for
more than 80 hours or to discharge the officer, the Chief must file
written charges with the Board, after which the Board holds a factfinding hearing and renders a decision. The Chief of Police has the
burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, the
matters alleged in the charges.
The first time that the Union proposed to make discipline
subject to the parties’ contractual grievance-arbitration procedure
was in its opening proposals for the May 1, 2012, to April 30, 2015
Agreement. At that time the Union proposed to provide “nonprobationary employees with the right to choose between having a
dispute as to disciplinary action resolved through the grievance
arbitration procedure of this Agreement or by hearing conducted by
the Police and Fire Commission.” The Village rejected that proposal.
In their negotiations the parties reached agreement on all other
terms of the Agreement, and the Union withdrew its proposal
permitting arbitration of discipline. Village counsel stated that
“it appears that the Union’s bargaining employees were comfortable
enough with the Police commission back in 2012 that they decided to
drop their proposal to eliminate it and to renew the commission for
another three-year term, figuratively speaking.” On crossexamination Village counsel acknowledged that there was no
affirmative statement by Union counsel or another Union
representative that the Union was withdrawing its discipline proposal
4

because they thought the Police commission was a good thing or worked
perfectly.
On cross-examination Union counsel, who presented the
Union’s evidence in narrative form, testified that the Union withdrew
the proposal not because it was comfortable with the commission but
to settle the contract. “You had said no,” Union counsel stated.
“And rather than do what we did this time they said we will not allow
it to block a contract. We will allow the current language to
stand.” The Union had the opportunity to go to arbitration at that
time had it wanted to, Union counsel acknowledged.
The parties presented evidence about the history of
disciplinary hearings in the Village. In the ten years between
February, 2006, and February, 2016, there have been only two hearings
before the Board of Police Commissioners involving bargaining unit
members. The first one was held in February, 2011, brought by then
Police Chief Steven Herron in the course of which the accused officer
resigned on March 9, 2011. The second was held in October and
November, 2015, brought by the current Police Chief, Gina Grady, and
the Board rendered a decision discharging the officer. A third
complaint filed with the Commission occurred in March, 2000, but
involved a non-bargaining unit employee, a sergeant. That complaint
was brought by then Police Chief Geoff Korous and resulted in an
agreed order that the sergeant, who admitted his guilt, would serve a
25-day suspension, five days of which the sergeant was permitted to
use vacation accruals.
The record shows that from the year 2000 through 2015
there were 66 disciplinary suspensions issued to bargaining unit
officers. They may be broken down by years as follows: 2000, no
suspension; 2001, no suspension; 2002, 1 one-day suspension; 2003,
three suspensions, 2 for one day, and 1 for five days; 2004, 1 twoday suspension; 2005, no suspension; 2006, two suspensions, 1
day each; 2007, four suspensions, 3 for one day, and 1 for five days;
2008, five suspensions, 3 for one day, 1 for two days, and 1 for
three days; 2009, six suspensions, 5 for one day, and 1 for five
days; 2010, ten suspensions, 1 for one day, 3 for two days, 1 for
three days, 3 for five days, 1 for six days, and 1 for ten days;
2011, five suspensions, 4 for one day and 1 for three days; 2012,
seven suspensions, 3 for one day, 2 for two days, 1 for three days,
and 1 for five days; 2013, ten suspensions, 6 for one day, 3 for two

5

days, and 1 for three days; 2014, six suspensions, 4 for one day, 1
for two days, and one for 18 days (144 hours); 2015, six suspensions,
2 for one day, 1 for two days, 2 for three days, and 1 for 30 days
(240 hours).
None of the foregoing suspensions was appealed to the Board
of Police Commissioners, although the disciplined officer had the
right to do so for any discipline of not more than 80 hours (ten
days). Village counsel pointed out that the bargaining unit
experienced over 40 disciplinary suspensions between the year 2000
and the expiration of the 2007 – 2012 contract, but the Union
membership nevertheless dropped its proposal to eliminate the police
commission during the last round of negotiations for the 2009 – 2012
Agreement. From the Village’s perspective, counsel stated, this
defeats any claim that the bargaining unit feared that the commission
was a biased agency or that they were not going to be given a fair
shake if they ever pursued an appeal. On cross-examination Union
counsel asked Village counsel whether the failure to appeal the
discipline could be interpreted as compelling evidence “that maybe
they don’t feel confidence in the Police commission?” Village
counsel answered, “By all means I think that shows they felt the
discipline was fair.”
As part if its case the Union presented signed written
statements from some of the officers about discipline. According to
Union counsel, the statements were obtained within the ten days
preceding the arbitration hearing. One officer, Robert Fortino,
wrote that he believed the Village Police Department should have
arbitration for discipline in the current contract because it would
“bring fairness and equality to the table.” He stated, “Fairness and
equality has been lacking for several years, and has progressively
gotten worse.” Many officers are suspended, he stated, “and as of
late on a much more frequent basis.” In 2015, he wrote, an officer
was given a 30-day suspension for an incident that deserved
discipline, “but not to that extreme. Sadly, extreme is the way
discipline is being used.”
Officer Fortino said that he personally received a two-day
suspension for a “technicality” on a time sheet involving two hours,
where he had “no malicious intent to deceive the Village Police
Department.” He felt that he was being treated disparately because
officers are frequently asked to add or deduct hours from a time
sheet where they had made a mistake and, contrary to how he was
treated, receive no discipline. He feared, he stated, to go before
the Board of Police Commissioners. “Ever since I was hired at the
police department,” he wrote, “it was always told to me never to

6

challenge discipline because you would get fired by the Board of
Police Commissioners.”
Officer Fortino explained why he believed that the Board of
Police Commissioners is not impartial. The commissioners are
appointed by the mayor of Woodridge and the Village Board. The Chief
of Police, he explained, “works very closely with the board for
hiring, promotion and other police department issues.” “How would an
officer stand a chance of a fair hearing,” the officer asked, “when
the people that are hearing the case are friends of the people
bringing forward the charges?” The officer expressed the opinion
that “a change is necessary” and suggested that “[a]rbitration could
correct this problem and would make for a better work place.” He
believed, he stated, that “this would bring patrol and administration
closer as things become less personal and make for a better work
environment.”
A second officer, who did not give his name, wrote that the
Board of Police Commissioners format, although it “has been used in
good faith for years,” “is a naturally flawed system.” This is so,
the officer wrote, because “the commissioners themselves are
appointed by the same government officials that are recommending the
discipline. This does not create a fair and level playing field for
the officer facing the discipline.” The result, according to the
officer, is “in general, a rubber stamp for a Police Chief or Village
Manager’s opinion.” The officer stated that he would not want a
union board panel either; that “discipline issues should be heard by
an impartial third party so that neither side can claim any bias.”
This can be accomplished, the officer wrote, by an impartial
arbitrator.
A third officer, John Phelps, stated that the main reason
he is requesting that arbitration be allowed is fairness. He pointed
out that the commissioners on the BOPC are appointed by the mayor and
the Village Board and that the chief of police works very closely
with the BOPC, which plays a role in the hiring and promotion of
officers. The officer wrote that he served a 30-day suspension in
2015, “which I believe was excessive for the alleged ‘misconduct.’”
It was excessive, he stated, because he “did not steal, use excessive
force, or do anything illegal . . ., [but] simply made a mistake of
the mind.” The last time a Woodridge police officer received a 30day suspension, he stated, was in 1992, when the officer used

7

excessive force on an arrestee in the police station, something for
which “[t]hat officer deserved his suspension.”
Officer Phelps wrote that he has been on the force since
2009 with only a verbal warning and written warning on his record,
the latter for damaging the tires on a vehicle “trying to traffic
stop a theft in progress suspect on a wintery night.” He was given
two options with regard to his discipline, Officer Phelps stated, a
30-day suspension or a seven-day suspension, with a 12-month last
chance agreement. He declined the lesser suspension, he explained,
because “I knew in my heart that I could not physical[ly] and
mentally work the next 12 months with this agreement over my head.”
He feared to go before the BOPC to contest his suspension, he stated,
because of fear that “they would go for my job and would rule against
me.” He “truly believed,” he said, if his case had gone to
arbitration he would have taken discipline of a very few days “based
on my work ethic and past history, as this was not the ‘misconduct’
or behavior you are probably accustom[ed] to seeing for 30 day
suspensions.” The officer expressed his positive feelings for his
job and the Woodridge police department, describing it as “my dream
department of Woodridge, somewhere I have always wanted to get to
since I was in the academy.”
A fourth officer, who did not give his name, expressed his
own and what he said was the opinion of “many officers” that they
would not get a fair chance if they chose to fight the length of any
discipline they felt did not fit the violation they committed because
they could “possibly face a harsher discipline or lose their job as
an end result.” “Over the past few years,” the officer wrote, “it
seems discipline has increased to all employees of the department,
including civilian employees.” The officer expressed concern over
“the current political climate regarding law enforcement” and stated
that “a third party arbitrator would hopefully be fair to an officer
being disciplined” so “that the officer won’t be ‘thrown under the
bus’ or sacrificed to appease persons who protest against the
police.”
A fifth officer, who did not give his name, itemized
examples of what he believed to be evidence of a lack of “[a]
transparent objective process for discipline. . . .”
A sixth officer, who did not give his name, expressed the
opinion that “it is too easy for a BOPC to be manipulated and
corrupted to ‘rubber stamp’ any discipline handed out by the Chief of
Police.” The same officer stated that he feels “this may not be the
case with current or past Chiefs of Police” but that in the future “a
Chief that has yet to be hired may not be as honorable with their
8

discipline power and authority.” “If MAP 51 had the opportunity to
have legal counsel represent a case in an unbiased hearing,” the
officer wrote, “I feel that it would remove any doubt of any biases
by the BOPC.” The officer also said that “with the current climate
in policing” he felt that arbitration could better protect the
membership “against any unfair discipline that may result from
outside political pressures.”
A seventh officer, who did not give his name, wrote, “. . .
Having a Police Commission appointed by the Mayor and not familiar
with police procedure brings an unfair advantage to the
Administration when discipline is being challenged. This causes
officers to not bring forth complaints concerning the discipline
being handed out and affecting overall morale of the department. A
fair and impartial process is needed for officers to have the ability
to challenge unwarranted amounts of discipline. . . .”
An eighth officer, who did not give his name, characterized
the Board of Police Commissioners as being selected as commissioners
based on relationships in the community but with no police
experience; as being “politically tied to the municipality”; and as
not taking a neutral approach to the situation so as to discipline
based on fact and not emotion. These alleged characterizations were
contrasted with the neutrality and experience with police discipline
attributed to arbitrators.
The ninth and final written statement was that of the
president of MAP Chapter 51 who wrote, “It is my belief that
arbitration for discipline is a much more desirable system than
utilizing the Board of Police Commissioners for disciplinary
matters.” An “outside arbiter,” he stated, “is the only way to truly
have an impartial decision on issues that are currently brought in
front of the Board.” However, he concluded his statement with the
following remarks:
I feel that it is important to note that neither I, nor any
member that I have spoken with in regards to this, feels
that there have been any abuses by the Board or any
unnecessary discipline handed out. It is not my feeling
that the Board or anyone associated [with] the Board
harbors any personal agenda or anti-police feelings that
might unduly influence their decisions. That is not why I

9

want to see this change. I do, however, see the potential
for problems in the future if there were to be a change in
Board membership or leadership. Much has been discussed
during negotiations these past few months of “closing
loopholes,” and that is exactly what I feel we are
accomplishing if we move to arbitration for discipline. I
see no system more fair in the application of discipline
tha[n] using an outside arbiter.
Village counsel explained that although Officer Phelps was
disciplined for more than 80 hours, no charge was filed in his matter
before the Board of Police Commissioners because the amount of his
discipline was negotiated by Union counsel with the chief of police.
When the officer voluntarily accepts the discipline, Village council
stated, no charge is filed. The 144 hour suspension assessed in
July, 2014, also did not involve a charge before the Board because it
was negotiated.
Regarding the discipline of Officer Fortino, Village
counsel stated that the Village disagrees that he was disciplined for
a “technicality.” “Officer Fortino received a two-day suspension,”
counsel stated, “for what we view as falsifying a timecard, claiming
pay for a personal medical appointment, not properly reporting his
visits to this doctor through the chain of command and on top of it
using a Village of Woodridge squad car to transport himself to his
personal medical appointment.” The discipline of Officer Phelps,
Village counsel asserted, arose out of two separate incidents that
occurred in close proximity to each other. The first incident,
according to Village counsel, involved Officer Phelps’s failure to
properly handle and preserve a piece of important evidence, an
anonymous threatening note left by someone on the windshield of a
woman’s car. Instead of preserving it as evidence for
fingerprinting, he gave it back to the female victim. The second
incident, Village counsel stated, involved investigative breakdowns
in an incident where a 16-year-old teenage individual jumped or fell
out of a moving car. For example, according to counsel, he did not
interview witnesses properly; did not call and report the incident
through the chain of command properly; and did not promptly call for
a backup. “For both of these reasons together and those serious
breakdowns in his investigative techniques and preservation of
evidence,” Village counsel asserted, “the Chief viewed either a 30day suspension or 7-day suspension with a last chance agreement as
appropriate.” That arrangement, Village counsel noted, was
negotiated with Union counsel representing the officer.
In response Union counsel stated that Officer Fortino was
in touch with the Chief during the entire time. In Officer Phelps’s
10

case, Union counsel stated, he received a call that a lady jumped out
of a car. There are 20 or 30 people around, according to the Union,
he has no backup, sergeants are listening to this on the radio, and
nobody takes any corrective action. “So there is a presumption,” the
Union asserted, “the officer is doing things right and the crowd is
dispersing.” Because Officer Phelps was alone attending to a woman
with significant injuries from her fall out of the car and the people
were dispersing, Union counsel stated, he was unable to interview any
of them. In addition, according to the Union, drugs were involved.
The appropriate alternative to a 30-day suspension, according to the
Union, would have been retraining, maybe a performance improvement
plan, or ride-along.
Village counsel expressed the position of the Village that
having a Police commission is a benefit to the officers because,
under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, an officer has an
individual right, independent of the Union, to challenge in court a
Board of Police Commissioners decision regarding discipline where the
employee believes the decision is wrong. Under a grievance and
arbitration decision, counsel stated, the officer would have to rely
on the Union to take the matter to arbitration. Similarly, according
to Village counsel, it would be up to the Union to decide whether to
appeal an arbitration award to the circuit court whereas, with regard
to a decision by the Board of Police Commissioners, the individual
officer would have the right to determine whether to appeal the
Board’s decision to the circuit court.
The Village prepared a table of all Illinois Appellate
Court decisions involving administrative review appeals of decisions
on discipline rendered by boards of fire and police commissioners and
village civil service commissions during the period February 3, 2000,
through August 6, 2015. Of 22 Appellate Court decisions issued, 20
affirmed the Board’s or the Civil Service Commission’s decision and
only two reversed such decision. To the Village, counsel stated,
this suggests that no inherent bias or rampant inexperience is
present among such boards or commissions because otherwise one would
expect a much higher reversal rate by appellate courts. On crossexamination Village counsel stated that the standard for review of a
Board of Police Commissioners decision “would be exacting under an
administrative review action, but it’s even more exacting under an
arbitration process.” The review process, Village counsel
acknowledged, is “a high standard.”

11

The Village and the Union were unable to reach final
agreement on a successor contract to their May 1, 2012, to April 30,
2015 Agreement. Negotiations for a successor agreement did not start
until after 2012-2015 Agreement had expired when, near the end of
July, 2015, the Union submitted a bargaining proposal to the Village.
The first bargaining meeting of the parties was held on September 23,
2015, and at the end of the session the Union requested mediation
through the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service. Thereafter
the parties together with an FMCS mediator held three bargaining
sessions during which they were able to resolve and reach tentative
agreement on all outstanding contract issues except for a proposal by
the Union requiring that discharge or discipline involving time off
with loss of pay shall be for just cause and subject to the grievance
and arbitration procedure set forth in the Agreement. All of the
prior collective bargaining agreements of the parties had provided
that “[m]atters involving hiring, promotion, demotion, discipline,
and discharge are subject to the jurisdiction of the Chief and the
Board of Police Commissioners and are not subject to this grievance
procedure.” The Village proposed continuation of the status quo with
regard to discharge and other discipline.
The Union’s first offer, submitted by Union counsel to
Village counsel by email on July 28, 2015, proposed to add the
following new section to Article VI, GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:
Section 6.6

Application of Grievance and Arbitration
Procedure to Discipline

Discharge or discipline involving time off with loss of pay
of non-probationary bargaining unit employees shall be for
just cause and shall be subject to the grievance and
arbitration procedure set forth in this Agreement. The
contractual grievance and arbitration procedure shall be
the sole recourse for appealing such disciplinary action
and shall be in lieu of both the provisions of the Illinois
Municipal Code governing discipline and discharge (65 ILCS
5/10.2.1-17) and disciplinary proceedings before the
Village of Woodridge Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners. An arbitrator’s award shall be final and
binding, as stated in Section 4.3 of this Agreement, and
any request for judicial review shall be exclusively under
and in accordance with the Uniform Arbitration Act (710
ILCS 5/1, et seq.) and Section 8 of the Illinois Public
Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/8).

12

The Village’s opening economic and non-economic proposals, provided
to the Union on September 23, 2015, contained the following response
to the Union’s proposal on discipline: “VILLAGE REJECTS MAP’S
PROPOSED §6.6.” In addition, the Village proposed to retain in the
Agreement Sections 2.2 and 6.5, which had been included in every
collective bargaining agreement between the parties going back to the
2001-2004 Agreement:
ARTICLE II – MANAGEMENT
* * *
Section 2.2

Authority of the Board of Police
Commissioners.

This Agreement is not intended and shall not be construed
to diminish or modify the statutory authority of the Board
of Police Commissioners, Woodridge, Illinois, and the
parties hereto expressly recognized [sic] the authority of
the Board with respect to hiring, promotion, demotion,
discipline, and discharge of Patrol Officers.
ARTICLE VI – GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
* * *
Section 6.5

Certain Personnel Actions Excluded.

Matters involving hiring, promotion, demotion, discipline,
and discharge are subject to the jurisdiction of the Chief
and the Board of Police Commissioners and are not subject
to this grievance procedure. However, in the event the
Chief takes action against a Patrol Officer to impose
suspension or present charges to the Board of Police
Commissioners, the Patrol Officer and a representative of
the Association may request a meeting to discuss the
matter.1
1The 2001-2004 Agreement had erroneously used the title Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners in Sections 2.2 and 6.5, but this was
corrected to Board of Police Commissioners in all subsequent
collective bargaining agreements. The Village does not employ sworn
firefighters.

13

The Union’s first offer to the Village submitted on July 28, 2015,
also proposed to retain Sections 2.2 and 6.5 unchanged from the prior
Agreement.
According to Village counsel many of the same arguments
made by the Union in the present interest arbitration proceeding were
made by the Union in the negotiations. One argument alluded to by
Union counsel in the arbitration hearing based on Section 8 of the
Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, Village counsel stated, “was not
really raised.” In the first bargaining session, according to
Village counsel, “the focus was more on the perceived bias and
perceived partiality of the commission members and the inherent
unfairness.” The Village did not feel, Village counsel stated, that
the Union articulated a compelling significant change in the last
three years that would have justified the need to eliminate the Board
of Police Commissioners.
The Village, counsel explained, therefore
rejected the Union’s proposal to eliminate the Police commission.
In the negotiations, according to Village counsel, the
Village never informed the Union that it was totally unwilling to
negotiate a modification to the Board of Police Commissioners system.
He thinks, Village counsel stated, “there were some signals and hints
provided that there would be some willingness to consider that. We
always had an open mind.” By contrast, Village counsel asserted, the
Union never sent a similar signal during the first bargaining session
that it was willing to possibly modify its position on the
commission. The impression that the Village got, according to
Village counsel, was that the Union felt very passionate about its
position on discipline, and “the Village received the clear signal
that the Union was unlikely to drop its proposal as part of any type
of package.” This impression, according to the Village, was
confirmed as the negotiations progressed. The Union, Village
counsel asserted, never offered some sort of a valuable quid pro quo
in return for the Village’s acceptance of its proposal.
On cross-examination Union counsel asked Village counsel,
“What exactly did the Village offer the Union in terms of quid pro
quo to get you to agree to an arbitration of discipline?” Village
counsel answered, “Nothing, because we were not the moving party on
that issue.” Village counsel acknowledged that at one point in time
the Village stated that “maybe there might be something to persuade”
it. Asked, “And did you ever communicate as to what that might be?”,
Village counsel answered, “No.” Union counsel followed up with the
question, “In fact, there was nothing that could have persuaded you,
wouldn’t you say that’s true?” Village counsel stated, “I would not
say that’s true.” In one of the parties’ mediation sessions,
14

according to Village counsel, he asked Union counsel to be creative
and gave Union counsel the hypothetical “that if you gave 2 to 3
zeros a row in wages we would have to seriously consider that in
exchange” permitting the arbitration of discipline matters. Quite a
few times, Village counsel stated, he has traded non-economic issues
for concessions on economic issues.
Evidence was presented regarding how the right to contest
discipline is handled in surrounding communities. The Union
presented excerpts from the collective bargaining agreements of the
following jurisdictions where police officers have the right to
challenge discipline through the grievance-arbitration procedure:
city of Naperville (police sergeants unit may seek review of
suspension of five days or less through the grievance/arbitration
procedure or the Police and Fire Commission); village of Burr Ridge
(police officers may seek review of a suspension or a dismissal
through the grievance/arbitration procedure); village of Hinsdale
(grievance/arbitration procedure sole method for police officers to
appeal discipline); village of Indian Head Park (all suspensions and
terminations of police officers subject to arbitration); village of
Oak Brook (all suspensions and discharges subject to
grievance/arbitration procedure); city of Oakbrook Terrace (all
discipline of police officers subject to grievance/arbitration
procedure; village of Western Springs (all discipline of police
officers subject to review through grievance/arbitration procedure);
city of Wheaton (police officer may elect between
grievance/arbitration and Police and Fire Commission for review of
suspension or termination of employment); city of Darien (suspension
of more than five days or termination of employment appealable at
officer’s choice through grievance/arbitration or the Police
Commission); village of Lisle (Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
“no longer play a role in the discipline of bargaining unit members,
which shall instead be accomplished in accordance with the specific
provisions of this agreement”); village of Westmont (police officer
may select grievance and arbitration procedure in lieu of Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners for “appeal and review of of
disciplinary action or discharge decisions”; village of Clarendon
Hills (police officer may obtain review of suspension or dismissal
action through the grievance and arbitration procedure); village of
Romeoville (for suspension in excess of five days or discharge,
police officer may contest discipline through arbitration or the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners); village of Schaumburg

15

(discipline involving discharge or time off with loss of pay subject
to the grievance and arbitration procedure); village of Bolingbrook
(suspension or dismissal of police officer reviewable through
grievance and arbitration procedure).
Union counsel asserted that his method of selecting the
foregoing list was that they were surrounding towns to Woodridge and
all “have arbitration of discipline in some shape or form.” He also
looked for decisions on discipline, he stated, and found decisions by
arbitrators Benn, McAlpin, Feuille, Elliott Goldstein, Margo Newman,
and Peter Meyers wherein arbitration of discipline was allowed.
Referring to Section 8 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act,
Union counsel asserted that “there is a train of decisions and a
train of thought that says it’s an absolute right that any part of a
contract should be subject to the grievance procedure, and discipline
in a management rights clause ought to be grievable.”
On cross-examination Union counsel stated that the
comparable communities were selected on the basis of geographic area
within 35 or 40 miles of Woodridge. The list is not exhaustive, he
stated. He did not include contracts that still retain a board of
fire and police commissioners, and there are probably some
jurisdictions in Du Page County, he acknowledged, that still retain
the commission for disciplinary purposes.
The Village did not provide any comparable communities for
comparison by the arbitrator. Asked if there was any reason why the
Village did not address the matter of comparable jurisdictions,
Village counsel stated the Village disagrees with the way the Union
compiled the external comparables. “It seems they cherry picked,”
Village counsel stated. “It’s our understanding,” Village counsel
asserted, “there are a number of external comparables out there that
don’t have grievance arbitration and still retaining a commission,
one involving Warrenville.” The reason that the Village has not
really addressed the issue, Village counsel explained, “is because we
don’t think you get to external comparability when you go through the
break-through analysis.” Counsel referred to a decision involving
the city of Rock Island where 90 percent of the external comparables
provided grievance/arbitration for discipline but the arbitrator
ruled to maintain the status quo whereby the fire and police
commission reviewed discipline.

16

Final Offers
Union Final Offer
The parties exchanged final offers on the morning of the
arbitration hearing. The Union’s final offer departs from its
original offer regarding review of discipline in that it gives
employees the option of choosing arbitration or the Board of Police
Commissioners as the tribunal for the review of discipline. The
Union’s original proposal provided that the sole method for appealing
discharge or time off with loss of pay was through the grievance and
arbitration procedure of the Agreement to the exclusion of the Board
of Police Commissioners. The final offer presented to the Village on
the morning of the hearing provides as follows:
MAP OFFER ON ARBITRATION OF DISCIPLINE
April 5, 2016
Section 6.6 Application of Grievance and Arbitration
Procedure to Discipline
No Officer, other than a probationary officer, shall
be disciplined or discharged without just cause. Any such
action must not violate the provisions of 50 ILCS 725/1.
The Police Chief or his/her designee are hereby granted
authority to discipline bargaining unit members for just
cause (probationary employee without cause), including but
not limited to oral or written warnings/reprimands,
suspensions with or without pay of any appropriate and
statutorily authorized duration or termination, so long as
just cause for the imposition of such discipline exists.
Discharge or discipline involving any time off with
loss of pay of non-probationary bargaining unit employees
shall be only for just cause and shall be subject to
resolution through the grievance and arbitration procedure
set forth in this Agreement and shall commence at Section
6.2, Step 4 of the contract, that procedure, namely,
Arbitration, or through an appeal to the Woodridge Board of
Police Commissioners.

17

In the event an Officer is served, in writing, with a
notification of a disciplinary suspension of any length, or
notice of termination of employment, that Officer will have
the sole discretion fourteen [sic] within (14) business
days to serve written notice of his/her election to proceed
either before the Woodridge Board of Police Commissioners
or to proceed under the grievance procedure set forth in
this agreement. Such notice shall be served upon the Chief
of Police or his/her designee.
Once such written election has been made and served on
the Chief of Police or his/her designee, the parties shall
either follow the procedures set forth in the Rules of the
Woodridge Board of Police Commissioners or, in the event
the Officer elects the grievance procedure, in that Section
of the grievance procedure that regards the selection
process and appointment of an arbitrator, to resolve a
disciplinary issue. The parties agree that they will
accomplish the selection and appointment of an arbitrator
and to schedule a hearing in as expeditious a manner as
possible, excepting for the discovery procedure and other
procedural necessities in order to allow a fully informed
Officer and a fair and impartial hearing.
The contractual grievance and arbitration procedure or
a hearing before the Woodridge Board of Police
Commissioners shall be mutually exclusive of the other and,
once such election has been made, it shall be sole recourse
for appealing and resolving such disciplinary action and
shall either follow the provisions of the Illinois
Municipal Code governing discipline and discharge (65 ILCS
5/10.2.1-17) and the disciplinary proceedings rules of the
Village of Woodridge Board of Police Commissioners, or the
grievance procedure as contained in the contract.
An arbitrator’s award shall be final and binding, as
stated in Section 6.2, Step 4 of this Agreement, and any
request for judicial review shall be exclusively under and
in accordance with the Uniform Arbitration Act (5 ILCS
315/8). A decision by the Board of Police Commissioners is
subject to administrative review.
Village Final Offer
The final offer of the Village is as follows:

18

Maintain the status quo for the term of the parties 2015-18
collective bargaining agreement, including the current
contract language found in Sections 2.2 and 6.5 of the
2012-15 collective bargaining agreement.
Statutory Criteria
Section 14(h) of the Act provides that ". . . the
arbitration panel shall base its findings, opinions and order upon
the following factors, as applicable:"
(1) The lawful authority of the employer.
(2) Stipulations of the parties.
(3) The interests and welfare of the public and the
financial ability of the unit of government to meet those
costs.
(4) Comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of
employment of the employees involved in the arbitration
proceeding with the wages, hours and conditions of
employment of other employees performing similar services
and with other employees generally:
(A) In public employment in comparable communities.
(B) In private employment in comparable communities.
(5) The average consumer prices for goods and services,
commonly known as the cost of living.
(6) The overall compensation presently received by the
employees including direct wage compensation, vacations,
holidays and other excused time, insurance and pensions,
medical and hospitalization benefits, the continuity and
stability of employment and all other benefits received.
(7) Changes in any of the foregoing circumstances during
the pendency of the arbitration proceedings.

19

(8) Such other factors, not confined to the foregoing,
which are normally or traditionally taken into
consideration in the determination of wages, hours and
conditions of employment through voluntary collective
bargaining, mediation, fact-finding, arbitration or
otherwise between the parties, in the public service or in
private employment.
The Union’s Position
It is the position of the Union that Section 8 of the
Illinois Public Labor Relations Act requires that the Union proposal
regarding arbitration of discipline be adopted. It notes that
Section 8, in two places, uses the mandatory term “shall” in stating,
first, that the collective bargaining agreement shall contain a
grievance resolution procedure and, second, that it shall provide for
final and binding arbitration of disputes concerning the
administration or interpretation of the agreement unless mutually
agreed otherwise. The Union cites three interest arbitration
decisions by Arbitrator Edwin H. Benn that, it contends, hold that
“[w]hen faced with the question of whether or not a collective
bargaining agreement must contain an arbitration provision for
discipline, arbitrators have held that it must.”
The Union declares that “Arbitrator Benn is not alone in
this analysis” and cites what it characterizes as “a long line of
interest arbitration decisions that have allowed the Union’s proposal
for the arbitration of discipline.” These include arbitration
decisions by Arbitrators Perkovich (2013), Reynolds (2013),
McAllister (2013), Nielsen (2013), Behrens (2012), Newman (2011),
Hill (2011), McAlpin (2011), Feuille (2011), Meyers (2010), and Yaffe
(2009). This line of decisions, the Union contends, “shows a trend
toward more extensive application of grievance arbitration as an
alternative method of reviewing disciplinary action.”
The Union asserts that “[t]here can be little serious
question that review of a disciplinary matter by a neutral third
party, compared to the Commission, likely will involve fewer biases,
less impact from personal relationships and interactions and a more
dispassionate application of the applicable standard of review of
facts.” Even if there is no evidence of bias on the part of the
Board, the Union argues, the fact that the Board of Police
Commissioners is “essentially the same entity that issued the
discipline” will raise the question of fairness and of perceived lack
of due process. The “widespread distrust of the Commission review”
and the possible chilling effect of the Board’s right to increase the
20

disciplinary penalty, the Union contends, are an adequate basis in
themselves for ordering arbitral review of discipline.
A further basis for selecting the Union’s offer on
discipline over the Village’s, the Union argues, is that arbitrators
are more experienced in handling disciplinary cases than the
Commission, particularly in the light of the small number of cases
that come before the Commission. Arbitrators, the Union asserts, are
able to make rulings in accordance with the law and with just cause
while the Woodridge Board of Police Commissioner lacks the necessary
experience in legal proceedings or in handling police discipline
cases.
This arbitrator’s decision in City of Rock Island, S-MA-06142 (2007), where the employer’s proposal that the right of review of
officer discipline reside in the police and fire commission was
selected over the union’s proposal permitting the arbitration of
discipline, is distinguishable, the Union argues, because the right
to arbitrate was denied in the previous interest arbitration. The
Union quotes this arbitrator’s statement in City of Rock Island that
“it is one thing to award the right to arbitrate discipline when the
issue is presented in arbitration for the first time but quite
another to do so in an arbitration for the contract immediately
succeeding the contract for which the right to arbitrate discipline
was denied in arbitration.” Since this is the first interest
arbitration between the parties the Union requests the arbitrator “to
follow the long line of interest arbitration decisions that awarded
Union proposals for the arbitration of discipline.”
The Union disputes the Village’s position that its proposal
permitting the arbitration of any discipline involving time off with
loss of pay or termination of employment is a breakthrough subjecting
the Union to a higher standard of proof. It argues that until 2007
the procedures regarding the appeal and review of discipline were not
a mandatory subject of bargaining, and that the first time that this
issue became negotiable on a mandatory basis regarding Woodridge
patrol officers was for the 2009 – 2012 Agreement of the parties.
Accordingly, the Union contends, relying on Village of Skokie, S-MA12-124 (Robert Perkovich, 2013), neither the cost of the Union’s
proposal on discipline or the length of time that the current method
for reviewing discipline has been in effect as a mandatory subject of
bargaining would qualify its proposal regarding discipline as a

21

breakthrough. Concerning the latter point the Union cites City of
Harvard, S-MA-11-235 (Curtiss K. Behrens, 2012), which stated, “Where
an issue is not a mandatory subject of bargaining in prior
negotiations, current practice is not considered ‘status quo’ for
purposes of interest arbitration analysis.”
The Union also cites two decisions, County of Madison,
S-MA-12-093 (Brian E. Reynolds, 2013) and Village of Lansing, S-MA04-240 (Edwin H. Benn, 2007) as holding that Section 8 of the Act
provides for final and binding arbitration of disputes unless
mutually agreed otherwise and that arbitration of discipline cannot
be considered a breakthrough issue since it is required by Section 8
of the Act.
The Union further argues that even if the breakthrough
standard were applied, it could meet the standard because there is a
substantial and compelling need for employees to have the option of
having an independent arbitrator review discipline. First, the Union
asserts, the written statements of the Union members show concern
about fairness and equity where the Commission decides discipline.
These concerns are warranted, the Union argues, since the Commission
can increase the penalty on an appeal by an officer. Second,
according to the Union, there is no disagreement that the Village
resisted and refused to bargain over the Union’s proposal for the
arbitration of discipline.
Moreover, the Union maintains, its proposal provides a quid
pro quo in that it will eliminate any future litigation over the
review of discipline, which is a very costly process running into
thousands of dollars. In addition, the Union asserts, arbitration
brings finality to the process much quicker since judicial litigation
can take years. Further, the Union states, the employee gives up his
rights under the Administrative Review Law.
Finally, the Union argues, its proposal requiring just
cause for termination is a fairer standard than cause under cases
before the Commission. Just cause, the Union asserts, is an almost
universal standard for discipline and is often implied even when not
specifically expressed. The Village, the Union contends, has not
presented any evidence that it would suffer any harm if the Union’s
proposal is adopted. The Union requests the arbitrator to accept its
final offer on the review of discipline as more reasonable than the
Village’s.

22

The Village’s Position
It is the position of the Village that this arbitrator has
the authority to grant the Village’s final offer, which would
preserve the BOPC’s role as the sole review mechanism for patrol
officer discipline. On August 23, 2007, the Village notes, Section
10-2.1-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code was amended to make
bargaining for the “arbitration of discipline” a mandatory subject of
bargaining for non-home-rule units of local government. Even before
the amendment, however, the Village argues, home rule municipalities
were obligated to bargain over the use of arbitration to review
discipline. This was made clear by the Illinois Supreme Court
decision in Decatur v. AFSCME Local 268, 122 Ill.2d 353, 366-67
(1988), the Village contends, which, it states, held that home rule
communities could legally bargain over the arbitration of discipline
without violating the Illinois Municipal Code.
The Village maintains that because it is a home rule
municipality the arbitration of discipline has been a mandatory
subject of bargaining between the parties from the time of the
negotiation of the first contract between them in 1991. Section 8 of
the IPLRA does not require rejection of the Village’s offer because,
the Village argues, the phrase “unless mutually agreed otherwise”
applies to the present situation where the parties have bargained for
almost 25 years to have discipline reviewed by the Board of Police
Commissioners. The Village cites City of Rock Island, S-MA-03-211
(Harvey Nathan, 2004), where the arbitrator reasoned, “Although the
Union has a statutorily presumptive right to arbitration of
discipline, once it has negotiated an alternative system it must meet
the same burden of persuading the arbitrator of the need for a change
as it would had the presumption not existed.”
The Village asserts that in a subsequent interest
arbitration involving the same parties this arbitrator adopted
Arbitrator Nathan’s approach and rejected the union’s argument that
Section 8 of the IPLRA gives one or the other party the absolute
right to negate a historically agreed-upon commission form of
disciplinary review. The fact pattern in the present case, the
Village contends, even more persuasively calls for a “breakthrough
analysis” than in the Rock Island case since here the Union
voluntarily agreed to retain the BOPC for review of discipline in
their negotiations in 2012 for the prior contract.

23

It is well-established, the Village argues, that in order
to protect the bargaining process an arbitrator should not award any
breakthrough that would substantially change the status quo in the
absence of a substantial and compelling justification. The Village
cites a number of published interest arbitration awards in Illinois
recognizing the conservative nature of interest arbitration, that its
aim, wherever reasonably possible, should be to achieve a result
which the parties themselves would likely have achieved had they
exhausted the collective bargaining process. In that light, the
Village asserts, arbitrators require a party who wishes to change the
existing state of affairs to provide compelling evidence of the need
for change. The Village quotes one arbitrator who pronounced that in
the absence of providing “strong reasons and a proven need” to change
the status quo, a party who wishes “to significantly change the
collective bargaining relationship” “must show that there is a quid
pro quo or that other groups comparable to the group in question were
able to achieve this provision without the quid pro quo.” Another
arbitrator is cited in support of the principle that “what the
parties agreed to in the past is relatively strong evidence of what
they would have agreed to had the current round of negotiations been
successful.”
It is undisputed that the status quo involves the BOPC, the
Village asserts, as the exclusive tribunal for review of discipline
of patrol officers. The Village notes that going back to the first
Agreement of the parties, the 1991–1994 contract, and continuing in
every contract thereafter, the BOPC has been the designated tribunal
for reviewing discipline. Plainly, therefore, the Village observes,
the Union’s current proposal seeks to change the parties’ negotiated
status quo by permitting employees to choose between arbitration and
BOPC review. The Union, the Village contends, has a heavy burden to
establish that such a historical bargaining term should be changed,
“especially without evidence demonstrating why the existing system is
‘truly broken.’”
The Union, the Village asserts, has not demonstrated that
the historical BOPC disciplinary review system is broken. At most,
according to the Village, the Union has raised theoretical arguments
than in no way justify a change in the status quo. Nor, the Village
argues, do the written statements of the nine officers come close to
proving that the current BOPC system is broken. The relevant period
for showing problems with the existing state of affairs, the Village
contends, would be beginning in November, 2012, when the parties
executed their last collective bargaining agreement. Events
happening prior to November, 2012, are irrelevant, the Village
argues, because the MAP bargaining unit voluntarily accepted the BOPC
24

for another three-year term based on the facts as they existed in
November, 2012. There were no examples, according to the Village,
where the BOPC was accused of being unfair, arbitrary, or malicious.
Since November, 2012, the Village points out, there has been only one
disciplinary hearing before the BOPC, and the BOPC’s ultimate
discharge decision in that matter was affirmed by a Du Page County
Circuit Court judge. Absent concrete examples, the Village argues,
the Union has relied “on more generalized theoretical arguments based
on the perception of a handful of bargaining unit employees and the
Union counsel.” Arguments of this kind, the Village maintains, have
been rejected by arbitrators who, instead, have required concrete
proof of bias or unfair treatment. The fact that the Union’s final
offer retains the BOPC option for review of discipline, the Village
contends, shows that, in fact, the BOPC is not perceived as a biased
tribunal.
As evidence of the BOPC’s fairness and lack of bias the
Village cites the MAP Local Chapter president’s written statement
wherein he says that “neither I, nor any member that I have spoken
with in regards to this, feels that there have been any abuses by the
Board or any unnecessary discipline handed out.” The statement
further disavows any “feeling that the Board or anyone associated
[with] the Board harbors any personal agenda or anti-police feelings
that might unduly influence their decisions.” The reason he desires
change, the president states, is that he sees “the potential for
problems in the future if there were to be a change in Board
membership or leadership.”
With that message, the Village asserts, the Union’s
president has “essentially conceded that there is no pressing need to
change the BOPC review process, and that the Union’s desire for
change is based on rank speculation that a future BOPC might be
unfair.” Such hypothetical concerns, the Village argues, fall far
short of the type of concrete evidence that is necessary to carry a
union’s burden of proving the need for a breakthrough. The Village
further remarks that the fact that only nine officers felt strongly
enough about arbitral review of discipline, approximately 25 percent
of the bargaining unit, shows that “approximately 75 percent of the
bargaining unit did not feel strongly enough about eliminating the
BOPC review process to even submit an anonymous letter.”

25

Further, the Village argues, the review procedure outlined
in the BOPC’s Rules and Regulations bears no inherent unfairness for
the officers and has just as many built-in procedural safeguards as
arbitration. The Village contends that it is significant that
“employees retain primary decision-making authority with regard to
legal representation and appeals, and enjoy the opportunity to
challenge the sufficiency of disciplinary charges prior to a hearing
on the merits. By contrast,” the Village asserts, “a union can
potentially decline to pursue an employee’s grievance altogether.”
The Village further argues that judicial review is less deferential
under the Illinois Administrative Review Law than under the Uniform
Arbitration Act; that the Board’s review process generally requires
the employee to remain on the employer’s payroll until the
disciplinary proceedings are completed whereas under arbitration the
employee will be suspended or dismissed before arbitration commences;
and that the BOPC hearing process is much speedier than arbitration.
Any doubt about the fairness and professionalism of boards of fire
and police commissioners, the Village contends, is removed by the
evidence that since the year 2000 approximately 90 percent of all
legal challenges to commission disciplinary decisions have been
rejected at the appellate court level.
Another shortcoming in the Union’s case, the Village
contends, is the fact that the Union has not offered any quid pro quo
for changing the status quo for reviewing discipline. The Village
cites interest arbitration decisions requiring the party seeking
change of existing conditions of employment not only to establish the
need for the change but to offer a quid pro quo in exchange. The
Village asserts that it would have seriously considered a significant
economic concession in exchange for eliminating BOPC’s role in
reviewing discipline, but no substantive proposal or package toward
that end was received from the Union.
Of the traditional statutory factors that are relevant to
this case, the Village contends, none of them supports the Union’s
final offer. The Village anticipates that the Union may argue that
“[t]he interests and welfare of the public” factor favors the Union’s
final offer because of a public policy preference for arbitral
dispute resolution. That argument, the Village asserts, ignores the
fact that Section 10-2.1-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code does not
articulate a clear preference for either arbitration or commission
review, but merely states that unless an employer and union have
negotiated an alternative or supplemental form of due process based
on impartial arbitration, the BOPC’s review process will be used.
Therefore, the Village concludes, “the General Assembly has declined
to automatically require arbitration as the ultimate review process
whenever a labor organization is involved, as it could have easily
26

done through a simple change in words.” Arbitration, in the
Village’s interpretation, applies only if the parties agree to it,
and, the Village asserts, “it would be disingenuous to claim that the
General Assembly intended to require all municipalities with
unionized workforces to adopt arbitration.”
The Union’s set of external comparables, the Village
argues, does not satisfy its burden with regard to breakthrough.
External comparability, the Village asserts, is largely irrelevant in
the breakthrough context. The Village cites arbitration decisions
where the external comparables heavily favored arbitration for review
of discipline over commission review but where the union’s final
offer calling for arbitration was not accepted because of a failure
to make out a need for change. The Village also faults the Union’s
evidence on external comparability because “[o]nly three of the
Union’s proposed external contracts were current as of the date of
the interest arbitration hearing in this matter.”
In addition to the Union’s failure to prove the need for a
breakthrough and to offer a quid pro quo, the Village argues, the
Union’s final offer suffers from several ambiguities and defects
which are an additional reason for rejecting it. The Union final
offer, the Village notes, requires that discipline “must not violate
the provisions of 50 ILCS 725/1,” which is the Uniform Peace
Officers’ Disciplinary Act (“UPODA”), a statute that regulates how
police departments must conduct internal affairs investigations prior
to the issuance of discipline. The UPODA has nothing to with
arbitral review of discipline, the Village asserts. In addition,
usually UPODA provisions are treated as stand-alone items in interest
arbitration. Further, adding such a provision is a break from the
parties’ historical status quo, the Village states, since they have
never included a provision in any past contract that addresses the
UPODA. Finally, according to the Village, the UPODA reference
creates an ambiguity in the Union’s final offer since the offer does
not clarify the consequences of an innocent failure to comply with
the letter of the UPODA.
The Village also objects to the provision in the Union’s
final offer that a grievance protesting discipline commence at Step 4
of the grievance procedure, namely, arbitration. Skipping the
earlier steps of the grievance procedure, the Village observes,
especially Step 3, involving the Village Administrator, precludes the

27

possibility of settlement without entering into the expensive process
of litigation. Another shortcoming with the Union’s final offer, the
Village contends, is that the proposed contract language does not
make clear from which event the officer is allowed 14 days to elect
to proceed before the BOPC or to submit the matter to the grievancearbitration procedure.
If, as Union counsel clarified at the arbitration hearing,
the 14 days are counted from when the Police Chief files charges with
the BOPC, the Village asserts, the BOPC may schedule a disciplinary
hearing before the expiration of the 14 days. Should the officer
immediately select grievance-arbitration, the Village argues, the
Union may ultimately decide not to take the case to arbitration, and
the officer will be left in the lurch. These problems can be
avoided, according to the Village, by selecting the Village’s final
offer.
Finally, the Village contends, the “expeditiously as
possible” requirement for processing grievances in the Union’s final
offer is unworkably ambiguous. There is no definition of
“expeditious,” the Village points out, and the proposal is silent
about the consequences for non-expeditious processing of the
grievance. The reference in the offer to “discovery procedure” is
particularly troublesome, the Village asserts, “in light of the wellestablished principle that there is no pre-hearing discovery in
arbitration.” If the discovery language is intended to permit
deposing the grievant and other witnesses and the serving of
extensive interrogatories and document production, the Village
argues, the proposed language “would transform what is intended to be
an expedited and cost-effective dispute resolution procedure into
another form of state and federal court litigation.”
Based on the facts, precedent, and arguments set forth in
its brief, and in accord with the Section 14 criteria of the IPLRA,
the Village urges, the arbitrator should and must select the
Village’s final offer on the issue of retaining the BOPC status quo.
Analysis and Conclusions
The key to this arbitration is the interpretation of
Section 8 of the IPLRA, which provides as follows:
Section 8.

Grievance Procedure.

The collective bargaining agreement negotiated between
the employer and the exclusive representative shall contain
28

a grievance resolution procedure which shall apply to all
employees in the bargaining unit and shall provide for
final and binding arbitration of disputes concerning the
administration or interpretation of the agreement unless
mutually agreed otherwise. Any agreement containing a
final and binding arbitration provision shall also contain
a provision prohibiting strikes for the duration of the
agreement. The grievance and arbitration provisions of any
collective bargaining agreement shall be subject to the
Illinois “Uniform Arbitration Act”. The costs of such
arbitration shall be borne equally by the employer and the
employee organization.
The Union contends that Section 8 gives the bargaining unit a
statutory right of final and binding arbitration of all disputes
concerning the administration or interpretation of the agreement, and
that there is no exception for disputes involving discipline. The
Union asserts that the Village’s contention that there was mutual
agreement that for over 20 years the BOPC was the exclusive review
mechanism for discipline “ignores the fact prior to 2007, procedures
regarding the appeal and the review of discipline were not mandatory
subjects of bargaining.” It was only “[i]n 2007,” the Union argues,
that “the Act was amended to make such procedures a mandatory subject
of bargaining.”
The Village contends that in 2007 Section 10-2.1-17 was
amended to make bargaining for the arbitration of discipline
mandatory for non-home rule units of local government, but that home
rule units, such as the Village, could legally bargain over arbitral
disciplinary review without violating the Illinois Municipal Code.
Bargaining over discipline, the Village maintains, has been a
mandatory subject of bargaining for the Village both before and after
the 2007 amendment to Section 10-2.1-17 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, citing City of Decatur v. American Fed’n of State, County &
Mun. Employees, Local 268, 122 Ill.2d 353, 366-367. City of Decatur
held that Decatur could be required to bargain over a proposal by the
union that would permit employees to submit disciplinary grievances
to arbitration because Decatur’s civil service system, which
contained a procedure for reviewing discipline, was optional. The
City had contended that it had no duty to bargain over the proposal
because of the following provision in Section 7 of the IPLRA:

29

The duty “to bargain collectively” shall also include an
obligation to negotiate over any matter with respect to
wages, hours and other conditions of employment, not
specifically provided for in any other law or not
specifically in violation of the provisions of any law. If
any other law pertains, in part, to a matter affecting the
wages, hours and other conditions of employment, such other
law shall not be construed as limiting the duty “to bargain
collectively” and to enter into collective bargaining
agreements containing clauses which either supplement,
implement, or relate to the effect of such provisions in
other laws.
The Illinois Supreme Court disagreed and stated as follows:
Given the purpose of the Act [IPLRA], the nature of that
part of the civil service system at issue here, and the
legislature's express preference for arbitration as a
method for resolving disputes during the life of a labor
contract, unless mutually agreed otherwise, we conclude
that the State Board was correct in ordering the city to
bargain over the union's proposal. In these circumstances,
we construe the union's proposal as pertaining to a matter
not specifically provided for or in violation of another
law, and as supplementing, implementing, or relating to the
provisions of the civil service scheme adopted by the city.
We do not believe that the legislature would have intended
that the civil service system it made available, as an
optional matter, to municipalities in the Municipal Code
would eliminate the duty to bargain over the union's
proposal here. 122 Ill.2d at 366-367.
One can fairly make the same kind of argument with regard
to Section 10-2.1-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code. Prior to the
2007 amendment, Section 10-2.1-17 stated that bargaining for
impartial arbitration as an alternative to a hearing before the board
of fire and police commissioners would be permissive rather than
mandatory for non-home rule units. It would seem to follow by
implication that for home rule municipalities bargaining for
impartial arbitration as an alternative to the board of fire and
police commissioners would be mandatory. Stated another way, for
home rule jurisdictions the board of fire and police commissioners
would be an optional method of reviewing discipline so that, under
the City of Decatur decision, even prior to the amendment of the law
in 2007, the Village could have been required to bargain with the

30

Union over a proposal to make disciplinary actions subject to the
grievance-arbitration procedure.
The Village maintains that this arbitrator should reject
the Union’s argument that its final offer should be accepted on the
basis of Section 8 of the IPLRA, which is reproduced above at pages
28-29. The Village argues that Arbitrator Nathan and this arbitrator
have ruled that the phrase “unless mutually agreed otherwise” takes
on a special meaning when the parties have a long history of agreeing
to a commission form of disciplinary review.
The reference to Arbitrator Nathan is to his decision in
City of Rock Island, S-MA-03-211 (April 1, 2004). He noted that the
expired agreement and those before it mandated that disciplinary
appeals be submitted to the Rock Island Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners. Referring to Section 8 of the IPLRA, he stated that
it provides a “statutory presumption that binding arbitration is the
preferred method of deciding disputes” and mandates arbitration
“unless mutually agreed otherwise.” Arbitrator Nathan then
concluded, “The parties are permitted to agree otherwise and maintain
the Fire and Police Board. That is what the parties here have done.”
He further stated, “Although the Union has a statutorily presumptive
right to arbitration of discipline, once it has negotiated an
alternative system it must meet the same burden of persuading the
arbitrator of the need for a change as it would had the presumption
not existed.” Arbitrator Nathan observed that the union offered
evidence of one instance where an employee was allegedly treated
unfairly and was unable to secure satisfactory relief from the Fire
and Police Board. He found that the union “failed to demonstrate
that the Fire and Police Board system has not worked fairly and
appropriately” and did not select the union’s final offer that would
have permitted arbitration of disputes involving discipline.
Arbitrator Nathan’s interest arbitration award pertained to
the April 1, 2003, to March 31, 2006, collective bargaining agreement
of the parties. The parties also entered into impasse interest
arbitration for the successor agreement to that contract for the
period from April 1, 2006, to March 31, 2009, and they selected the
undersigned as their arbitrator. Once again the union proposed that
review of discipline be through the grievance/arbitration procedure,
and, when the employer did not accept its proposal, made the
arbitration of disciplinary disputes part of the union’s final offer.

31

This arbitrator selected the City of Rock Island’s final offer on
discipline, explaining his reasoning as follows:
I think that it is one thing to award the right to
arbitrate discipline when the issue is presented in
arbitration for the first time but quite another to do so
in an arbitration for the contract immediately succeeding
the contract for which the right to arbitrate discipline
was denied in arbitration. Arbitrator Nathan’s decision, I
believe, must be given the same weight as if the parties
had voluntarily negotiated exclusion of discipline from
their 2003-2006 contract. Otherwise, arbitration has
little meaning, and parties are encouraged to ignore direct
collective bargaining and, instead, to resort to
arbitration every contract. What one arbitrator fails to
give, another will be free to bestow, and the parties will
be relieved of any burden of showing changed circumstances
from the prior arbitration. There will be no
predictability because everything is up for grabs when the
contract expires.
I do not think the foregoing is what the legislature
envisioned or consistent with the principles that have
developed in interest arbitration over the years. One of
the principles is that when a contract is negotiated or is
awarded in arbitration, the party desiring a significant
change in the provision must provide compelling evidence of
the need for change. . . .
This arbitrator articulated in the Rock Island interest
arbitration case that it is one thing to award the right to arbitrate
discipline when the issue is presented in arbitration for the first
time but quite another to do so in an arbitration for the contract
immediately succeeding the contract for which the right to arbitrate
discipline was denied in arbitration. For example, Elkouri and
Elkouri, How Arbitration Works (Sixth Edition, Alan Miles Ruben
Editor-in-Chief, BNA, 2003) (hereinafter “Elkouri and Elkouri”) pp.
575-576, states, “Prior labor arbitration awards that interpreted the
existing terms of a contract between the same parties are not binding
in exactly the same sense that authoritative legal decisions are, yet
they may have a force that can be fairly characterized as
authoritative. This is true of arbitration awards rendered both by
permanent umpires and by temporary or ad hoc arbitrators.”
Although Arbitrator Nathan interpreted a statute rather
than a contract term, his interpretation of the statute related
directly to a term of the parties’ contract. In addition, Elkouri
32

and Elkouri further states at p. 591, “While precedential use of
awards occurs primarily in rights arbitration such use is by no means
unknown in interest arbitration. . . .” Further there was another
very strong factor that influenced this arbitrator in the Rock Island
case. This arbitrator noted in that case, “In a period of more than
three years since the effective date of the preceding contract, there
has been only one case of discipline.” The discipline was a threeday suspension.
In this arbitrator’s opinion it would be difficult to
defend disregarding the prior arbitrator’s award permitting the
continuation of the commission system for review of discipline when
in a period of more than three years from the expiration date of the
prior contract there had been only a single instance of discipline, a
three-day suspension, in the entire bargaining unit. Had the prior
arbitrator’s interpretation been clearly erroneous, that would be a
different story. Elkouri and Elkouri observes at p. 586 that
“arbitrators have agreed that an arbitrator is justified in refusing
to follow an award considered to be clearly erroneous or one whose
continued application is rendered questionable by changed conditions.
. . .” (footnote omitted). But, as the undersigned noted in his
opinion in the Rock Island case, “I think that the language [of
Section 8 of the IPLRA] is ambiguous. It is not clear what
constitutes ‘mutual agreement.’”
In his Rock Island opinion this arbitrator stated that
“Arbitrator Nathan apparently interpreted the section [Section 8] to
include within the concept of mutual agreement a negotiated provision
excluding discipline cases from arbitration that has been included by
the parties in a series of prior collective bargaining agreements
spanning a period of years.”
After giving Arbitrator Nathan’s
interpretation of Section 8, this arbitrator remarked, “I am not
prepared to state that Arbitrator Nathan’s interpretation is wrong.”
That is not the same, however, as saying that this arbitrator would
have given the same interpretation of the statute had the matter
initially come to him for decision. Rather this arbitrator, in
effect, was stating that Arbitrator Nathan’s interpretation was
compatible with the statutory language of an ambiguous statute.
The facts of this case, however, are very different from
the facts before this arbitrator in the Rock Island case. First,
there has been no prior interest arbitration between the parties

33

involving the issue of discipline. Second, unlike Rock Island where,
during the entire three-year period of the expired contract, there
had been only one disciplinary action administered by the employer, a
three-day suspension, in this case during the three-year period of
the prior agreement (2012–2015), there had been 22 disciplinary
actions. Although there had also been 22 disciplinary actions
administered during the 2009–2012 Agreement, the degree of discipline
assessed in the 2012–2015 contract far exceeded any discipline
assessed in the immediately preceding Agreement.
In the 2009-2012 contract the harshest discipline assessed
was an 80-hour suspension on November 22, 2010. In the 2012-2015
Agreement there were suspensions issued respectively in the amounts
of 144 hours (the equivalent of 18 workdays) and 240 hours (30
workdays). In addition, during the course of negotiations for the
2015-2018 Agreement, in November, 2015, three months before tentative
agreement was reached on the other terms of the contract besides
discipline, the officer who received the 144-hour suspension was
discharged by the Woodridge Board of Police Commissioners. In
reaching its discharge decision the Board relied heavily on the
officer’s disciplinary record, including his 144-hour suspension.
In this arbitrator’s opinion the significantly higher
assessments of discipline than in any previous case involving a
bargaining unit officer and the subsequent discharge of the officer
who received the suspension of 144 hours were a sufficient basis
under Section 8 of the IPLRA to require final and binding arbitration
of disputes involving the review of discipline unless mutually agreed
otherwise. In the present case the parties have not mutually agreed
otherwise. The fact that the parties mutually agreed otherwise in
the prior contract does not change the fact that they have not done
so for the present contract in a context of escalated suspensions and
a discharge. Those facts make this case very different from this
arbitrator’s Rock Island case where there had been only one
disciplinary action during the entire term of the prior contract, a
three-day suspension. The arbitrator has also discussed the
deference given in arbitration to a prior award on the same issue
involving the same parties which is not clearly erroneous even though
the arbitrator may not have ruled the same way if he had initially
made the decision.
Arbitrator Steven Briggs interpreted Section 8 of the IPLRA
in his decision in Calumet City, Case No. S-MA-99-128 (2000). The
existing contract language stated, “Any disciplinary action that
would require suspension in excess of five (5) days or discharge
shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the Police and Fire
Commission. . . .” The union proposed to make such discipline
34

subject to the grievance/arbitration machinery of the contract.
Calumet City is a home rule jurisdiction. Arbitrator Briggs noted,
“As confirmed by the Appellate Court of Illinois, home rule
communities such as Calumet City have the power to enter into
collective bargaining agreements which allow submission of discipline
or termination matters to grievance arbitration, even though a
previously adopted city ordinance may have vested a board of fire and
police commissioners with the exclusive authority to hear and decide
such cases. . . .”
Arbitrator Briggs stated “that Section 8 of the Act
mandates that collective bargaining agreements ‘shall contain a
grievance resolution procedure’ and that such procedure shall provide
for final and binding arbitration of ‘disputes concerning the
administration or interpretation of the agreement unless mutually
agreed otherwise.’” Arbitrator Briggs further addressed the question
of how Section 8 should be interpreted in a situation, present both
in the case before this arbitrator and in Calumet City, where in a
series of prior agreements the parties had agreed to submit
discharges and certain suspensions to the exclusive jurisdiction of
the board of fire and police commissioners for review:
The Union here “mutually agreed otherwise” in previous
collective bargaining agreements when it accepted the
language currently contained in Article VII, Sections B2
and B3. The Union no longer agrees that the Board should
have the exclusive authority to hear and decide discharge
cases and suspensions of greater than five days. The
Neutral Chair concludes, then, that under the present
circumstances the Act mandates arbitration as the means for
resolving disputes concerning the “administration or
interpretation of” the parties’ collective bargaining
agreement. (Decision, p. 14).
Other arbitrators have ruled the same way. See, for
example, the decision of Arbitrator Margo R. Newman dated January 31,
2011, in Village of Bolingbrook and MAP Ch. 3, found on the Illinois
State Labor Relation Board website among the archived interest
arbitration decisions. As Arbitrator Newman noted, Bolingbrook is a
home rule community. She further noted that “the current agreement
section providing for disciplinary review by the Board, has been in
all agreements between these parties since 1990.” After discussing

35

and rejecting the village’s position that the procedure for Board
review of discipline was a negotiated status quo, finding that “tacit
approval” was a more accurate characterization of the existing
contractual arrangement regarding discipline, Arbitrator Newman made
the following finding:
In any event, as noted in Village of Lansing, supra at
p. 18; Calumet City, supra at p. 14; Village of Elk Grove,
supra at p. 139; and Highland Park, supra at fn. 12, the
fact that the Union now seeks to have disciplinary matters
resolved through the grievance-arbitration procedure in the
agreement rather than solely before the Board makes it
clear that, regardless of what occurred in the past, the
parties no longer “mutually agree otherwise” so as to fall
within the only exception to the Act’s Section 8 mandate
for resolution of all disagreements about the meaning and
interpretation of the agreement through binding
arbitration. Thus, I find that there is no negotiated
status quo with respect to the arbitration of discipline
issue, the Union’s proposal is not a breakthrough provision
requiring a higher standard of proof of necessity, and
there is no “mutual agreement” to negate the mandate of
Section 8 of the Act.
Neither Arbitrator Briggs nor Arbitrator Newman, and none
of the arbitrators relied on in Arbitrator Newman’s decision, found
the breakthrough approach applicable in the situation, such as the
present case, where a union asserts a Section 8 right to arbitration
of disciplinary disputes, or required the granting of a quid pro quo.
In the case before her, Arbitrator Newman noted that she was adopting
the union’s position that there should be arbitral review of
discipline “despite the fact that the Union did not prove that . . .
they offered any quid pro quo for this provision during contract
negotiations. . . .” Village of Bolingbrook, supra at pages 20-21.
With regard to quid pro quo, the Village would no doubt
chafe, and rightly so, should a union request a quid pro quo for
agreeing to insert into a collective bargaining agreement one of the
management rights granted employers by Section 4 of the IPLRA. The
same reasoning applies to what the Illinois Supreme Court has called
“the public policy favoring arbitration as a means of public labor
dispute resolution” expressed in Section 8 of the IPLRA. AFSCME,
Council 31 v. Cook County, 145 Ill.2d 475, 486 (1991). Nor does it
make sense to call the granting of a statutory preference a
breakthrough.2 Certainly none of the arbitrators named or referred
2 In

the AFSCME case the Court referred to the “the legislature's
preference for arbitration as a means of dispute resolution, as
36

to in the first sentence of the immediately preceding paragraph
thought it appropriate to consider the awarding of a statutorily
preferred method of resolving disputes to be a breakthrough.3
After finding that as a matter of law the Act mandated
arbitration as the means for resolving disputes concerning the
administration or interpretation of the parties’ collective
bargaining agreement, Arbitrator Briggs stated as follows: “Aside
from the legal questions, the Arbitration Panel should consider
whether the current system for deciding discharge and lengthy
suspension cases has been effective.” He continued that whether the
decisions of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners in Calumet
City had “been sustained or overturned on appeal are valid criteria
for making such a determination.” Recently, he noted, a jury had
overturned three of the Board’s discharges, a statistic which, he
stated, called “its impartiality into question.” Arbitrator Briggs
then added the following observation:
Regardless of how one views the Board’s impartiality or
lack thereof, it is generally agreed among dispute
resolution professionals that a decision-making body
appointed unilaterally by one party to a dispute is less
likely to have a neutral perspective than one mutually
selected by both parties.20
20 That

principle is included in the Due Process Protocol, a
treatise endorsed by the American Arbitration Association,
the Labor and Employment Section of the American Bar
Association, the American Civil Liberties Union, the
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, the National
Academy of Arbitrators, and the Society of Professionals in
Dispute Resolution.
expressed in section 8 of the Act,” 145 Ill.2d at 486, citing City of
Decatur, 122 Ill.2d at 366.
3See also Arbitrator Raymond E. McAlpin’s decision in Village of Oak
Brook, S-MA-09-017 (2011), where he stated that an interest
arbitration where a union seeks the award of a Section 8 right to
arbitrate disciplinary disputes “is not your typical status quo
situation” and described the union’s burden of proof as follows: “The
Union does not have to show that the BFPC is broken, only that
grievance/arbitration is significantly preferable.” Decision, p. 16.

37

In the Village of Woodridge the mayor appoints the members
of the Board of Police Commissioners subject to the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees. Village Code, Title 2, Chapter 4,
§2-4-4. Such members are considered officers of the Village.
Village Code §2-4-3. Title 2, Chapter 1 of the Village Code, §2-1-1
states, “Any member of a board or commission may for good cause be
removed by a majority vote of the mayor and board of trustees.” In
addition to the Village Code, the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS
5/10-2.1-3, Sec. 10-2.1-3. states, “The members of the board [of fire
and police commissioners] shall be considered officers of the
municipality, and shall file an oath and a fidelity bond in such
amount as may be required by the governing body of the municipality.”
The Woodridge Board of Police Commissioners, in this arbitrator’s
opinion, when they rule on and decide disciplinary matters, would fit
what Arbitrator Briggs characterized as “a decision-making body
appointed unilaterally by one party to a dispute”. They are also
officers of that party, namely, the Village of Woodridge.
If you are an officer of an organization called upon to
make a decision in a matter of dispute between the organization and
an employee of the organization that could affect the order and
efficiency with which the organization operates, it takes a great
deal of self-discipline and strength of character not to be inclined
to favor the organization of which you are an officer. Even,
however, if you have that self-discipline and strength of character
you will not be able to avoid the appearance that you are not
impartial. The arbitrator is aware that members of the Board of
Police Commissioners are not subject to the Code of Conduct for
United State Judges4 (hereinafter “Code of Conduct”). The Code of
Conduct, however, can serve as a touchstone for what would be
considered appropriate conduct on the part of a person whose role it
is to decide disputes between contending parties.
Canon 2 states:
A Judge Should Avoid Impropriety and the Appearance of
Impropriety in All Activities
(A) Respect for Law. A judge should respect and comply
with the law and should act at all times in a manner that
promotes public confidence in the integrity and
impartiality of the judiciary.
4 The Code of Conduct is available at the following website:
http://www.uscourts.gov/judges-judgeships/code-conduct-united-statesjudges.
38

* * *
COMMENTARY
Canon 2A. An appearance of impropriety occurs when
reasonable minds, with knowledge of all the relevant
circumstances disclosed by a reasonable inquiry, would
conclude that the judge’s honesty, integrity, impartiality,
temperament, or fitness to serve as a judge is
impaired. . . . A judge must avoid all impropriety and
appearance of impropriety. . . .
The word “impair” is defined in The New Oxford American
Dictionary as “v. [trans.] weaken or damage (esp. a human faculty or
function): drug use that impairs job performance.” The arbitrator
believes that a reasonable mind would conclude that a decisionmaker’s impartiality is impaired (weakened or damaged), at least to
the extent that there is an appearance of impropriety, if that
individual is called upon to make a judgment in a dispute between the
organization of which he is an officer and another party. Other
arbitrators are of the same opinion. For example, Arbitrator Raymond
E. McAlpin, in selecting the Union’s final offer regarding discipline
in Village of Oak Brook, S-MA-09-017, stated, “Police/Fire
Commissioners are appointed by the people who are making disciplinary
decisions which affect this bargaining unit. There is an appearance,
perhaps not a fact, but at least an appearance that this is patently
unfair; and this Arbitrator agrees.” (Decision, pp. 17-18).
Similarly, Arbitrator Newman, citing five supporting interest
arbitration decisions, stated in Village of Bolingbrook, supra,
“. . . I am [in] agreement with those arbitrators who hold that it is
sufficient for the Union to show the perception of unfairness by the
affected employees to support the need for a change in [the] system.”
Decision, p. 20.5
5 In view of the fact that, by Illinois statute and the Woodridge
Village Code, members of the Board of Police Commissioners are
officers of the municipality, Canon 3(C)(1)(d)(i) of the Code of
Conduct is also highly pertinent. It states:
“(C)Disqualification. (1) A judge shall disqualify himself or
herself in a proceeding in which the judge’s impartiality might
reasonably be questioned, including but not limited to instances
in which: . . . (d) the judge or the judge’s spouse, or a person
related to either within the third degree of relationship, or the

39

Also pertinent on the question of the appearance of
impartiality is the Due Process Protocol for Mediation and
Arbitration of Statutory Disputes Arising Out of the Employment
Relationship dated May 9, 1995. The protocol was drafted by
representatives of the American Arbitration Association; Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service; Management, Union, and Neutral
Co-Chairs of the Arbitration Committee of the Labor and Employment
Section of the American Bar Association; National Academy of
Arbitrators; Society of Professionals in Dispute Resolution; American
Civil Liberties Union; and National Employment Lawyers Association.
The section on Panel Selection provides for selection of the mediator
or arbitrator from a list of qualified individuals to “be submitted
to the parties for their perusal prior to alternate striking of the
names on the list, resulting in the designation of the remaining
mediator and/or arbitrator.” A copy of the Protocol is available on
the National Academy of Arbitrators website.
Another important consideration in this case is what the
City of Decatur Illinois Supreme Court decision referred to as “the
legislature's express preference for arbitration as a method for
resolving disputes during the life of a labor contract, unless
mutually agreed otherwise.” 122 Ill.2d at 366. The Illinois Supreme
Court relied on that rule in finding that the Labor Board properly
ordered the City of Decatur to bargain with the union regarding the
latter’s disciplinary proposal even though the Court was aware that
“the parties' previous labor agreement did not attempt to affect the
provisions of section 10-1-18 concerning discharges and suspensions,
and it expressly left disciplinary suspensions of more than five
days, multiple suspensions within a six-month period, and
terminations within the exclusive jurisdiction of the municipal civil
service commission.” 122 Ill.2d at 363. This indicates that so far
as the Illinois Supreme Court is concerned the mere fact that the
parties, in a prior agreement, had negotiated a provision designating
the board of fire and police commissioners as the exclusive forum for
reviewing disciplinary suspensions of more than five days and
discharges did not mean that in a subsequent negotiation the
legislative preference for arbitration no longer applied. On the
contrary, City of Decatur teaches that the legislative preference for
arbitration should be taken into account so long as the union has not
agreed otherwise in the current negotiations.
Applying that legislative preference in this case, the
arbitrator finds it unnecessary to rule on whether it would be
appropriate to order a change in the status quo regarding the review
of discipline in a situation where there has been no change in the
spouse of such a person is: (i) a party to the proceeding, or an
officer, director, or trustee of a party; . . .”
40

disciplinary landscape regarding bargaining unit members since the
execution of the prior Agreement between the parties. Here, as
outlined above, there have been more than trivial or insignificant
changes in the disciplinary terrain. As noted, in the 2009-2012
contract the harshest discipline assessed was an 80-hour suspension
on November 22, 2010. In the 2012-2015 Agreement there were
suspensions issued respectively in the amounts of 144 hours and 240
hours. In addition, during the course of negotiations for the 20152018 Agreement, the officer who had received the 144 hour suspension,
an officer with ten years of service, was discharged for an incident
that was not considered especially serious in itself but largely on
the basis of the prior 144 hour suspension and other discipline on
that employee’s record. Employer Exhibit 24, transcript of hearing
before BOPC dated November 12, 2015, p. 79. In the arbitrator’s
opinion this escalation in the degree of bargaining unit discipline
with no avenue available to the officers for a review of the
discipline de novo by an objectively impartial tribunal is an
adequate basis for awarding final and binding arbitration of
disciplinary disputes in light of what the Illinois Supreme Court has
recognized as the legislature's preference for arbitration as a means
of dispute resolution, as expressed in Section 8 of the Act.
Citing Collura v. Bd. Of Police Comm’nrs of Vill. of
Itasca, 113 Ill.2d 361, 370 (1986) and Caliendo v. Martin, 250 Ill.
App. 3D 409, 421-22 (1st Dist. 1993), the Village argues that Illinois
law presumes the impartiality of administrative agency officials and
that “[a] mere possibility of prejudice is insufficient to show that
a board, or any of its members was biased.” It is important to point
out that the issue of whether the decision of a board of police
commissioners should be reversed on the grounds of bias and the issue
of whether arbitration or the police commission should be selected in
the first instance as the preferred tribunal for reviewing discipline
are very different. The decisions cited in the Village’s brief are
concerned with the former issue. They do not speak to the question
of which tribunal is the appropriate one for determining discipline
under the IPLRA. This arbitrator has not stated that the members of
the Village BOPC were biased or unfair in their discharge decision or
that they would biased or unfair in reviewing disciplinary cases. He
has stated that because of their method of appointment and the fact
that, by Illinois statute and the Village Code, they are officers of
the Village their appearance of impartiality is impaired. That,
together with the legislature’s express preference for arbitration as

41

a means of dispute resolution, as recognized by the Illinois Supreme
Court, is a reason for preferring arbitration as a method of
resolving disciplinary disputes over the police commission, but it is
not a reason for overturning the decisions of the commission.
The Village also argues that “[i]nstead of relying on
concrete examples of bias or unfairness, the Union has chosen to rely
on more generalized theoretical arguments based on the perception of
a handful of bargaining unit employees and the Union’s counsel.”
This arbitrator, however, has quoted Arbitrator Briggs to the effect
that “it is generally agreed among dispute resolution professionals
that a decision-making body appointed unilaterally by one party to a
dispute is less likely to have a neutral perspective than one
mutually selected by both parties,” citing the Due Process Protocol
in support of his statement. See above at page 37. At page 39 above
he has quoted Arbitrator McAlpin who opined, “Police/Fire
Commissioners are appointed by the people who are making disciplinary
decisions which affect this bargaining unit. There is an appearance,
perhaps not a fact, but at least an appearance that this is patently
unfair; and this Arbitrator agrees.”
In addition in Village of Bolingbrook, supra, at page 20,
Arbitrator Newman stated:
The use of arbitration for the resolution of
disciplinary disputes avoids the appearance of impropriety
inherent in a system where one party unilaterally appoints
the decision-makers. Village of Shorewood, supra [125 LA
1427 (Wolff, 2008)]; Town of Cicero, supra [S-MA-06-012
(Briggs 2009)]. In this case there is no evidence that
Board disciplinary review has, in fact been unfair or
inequitable. . . . However, I am [in] agreement with those
arbitrators who hold that it is sufficient for the Union to
show the perception of unfairness by the affected employees
to support the need for a change in system. See, Town of
Cicero, supra; City of Rock Island, supra; Village of
Western Springs, supra [99 LA 125 (Goldstein, 1992)];
Village of Oak Brook, supra. As Arbitrator Goldstein
stated in City of Elgin, supra at pp. 71-72:
. . . perception is often reality. Any system set up
to assess just cause for discipline must be perceived
by at least most of the participants as fair and
impartial. Under a collective bargaining arrangement,
employees ought not be required to accept a preexisting model for resolving disciplinary matters, if
they lack basic confidence in that procedure and press
42

a proposal for a voluntary procedure “which is nearly
universal under collective bargaining agreements,
i.e., arbitration.” Therefore, although I certainly
do not accept necessarily the factual underpinnings of
the conclusions of bargaining unit members that the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners might not
genuinely be neutral, feelings are entitled to weight
whether fully rational or not.
Contrary to the Village’s contention that the Union’s argument based
on a perception of a lack of impartiality on the part of a police
commission appointed by the Village mayor finds no support in
arbitral decisions, there is strong support among arbitrators for the
principle that the appearance of a lack of impartiality in a system
whereby one party to the dispute appoints the decision-makers
strongly favors the choice of arbitration for resolving disciplinary
disputes.
The arbitrator will now consider whether the statutory
criteria found in Section 14(h) favor the Village’s or the Union’s
final offer. The eight statutory factors are reproduced above at
pages 19-20. Factor (1), the lawful authority of the employer, does
not favor one party’s offer over the other. Neither final offer if
implemented would compromise the Village’s lawful authority. The
stipulations of the parties, factor (2), are not relevant to the
determination of which of the final offers to select. The financial
ability of the unit of government to meet the costs of putting the
offer into effect, part of factor (3), is not a consideration since
there is no indication that either offer would present a financial
hardship in its implementation. Nor is it clear which offer would
cost the Village more money over the life of the Agreement.
The second half of factor (3), the interests and welfare of
the public, clearly favors the Union’s final offer. This is so
because the Illinois Supreme Court has interpreted Section 8 of the
IPLRA as expressing a “public policy favoring arbitration as a means
of public labor dispute resolution” and “the legislature’s preference
for arbitration as a means of dispute resolution . . . .” AFSCME,
Council 31 v. Cook County, 145 Ill.2d 475 (1991) respectively at 486
and 482. In addition, the morale of the bargaining unit is likely to
be uplifted when working under a system where discipline is subject
to review by a tribunal jointly selected by both parties rather than

43

one composed of officers of the Village unilaterally appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
The Village argues that the public policy preference for
arbitral dispute resolution is not a factor supporting the Union’s
final offer because “such an argument ignores the fact that Section
10-2.1-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code does not articulate a clear
preference for either arbitration or commission review.” It asserts
that “arbitration will control only if the parties agree to it” and
that therefore “it would be disingenuous to claim that the General
Assembly intended to require all municipalities with unionized
workforces to adopt arbitration.” The provision of the Municipal
Code cited by the Village does not purport to deal with the preferred
content of a collective bargaining agreement with regard to the
method of resolving disputes concerning the administration or
interpretation of the agreement. Section 8 of the IPLRA does deal
with that subject and, as the Illinois Supreme Court has interpreted
that section, expresses the legislature’s preference for arbitration
as a means of resolution of such disputes. The applicable statute
therefore does articulate a clear preference for arbitration over
commission review for resolving disputes concerning the
administration or interpretation of the agreement with regard to
disputes concerning the imposition of discipline to bargaining unit
employees.
The fourth factor, commonly called “external comparables,”
clearly favors the Union’s final offer. According to the Village
brief, Woodridge is located primarily in Du Page County, with
portions extending into Will and Cook Counties. The Union has
introduced into evidence collective bargaining agreements for patrol
officer bargaining units from 15 municipalities that provide for
arbitration of disciplinary disputes. Eleven of those communities
are located either entirely in Du Page or in Du Page and an adjacent
county. The Village argues that “there is no indication that the
Union considered whether a particular municipality was comparable to
Woodridge in terms of population and equalized assessed valuation
(“EAV”).” Three of the jurisdictions in Du Page County selected by
the Union as comparables, however, have populations within 50% of the
population of Woodridge: the city of Darien and the Villages of Lisle
and Westmont. In the absence of any comparable jurisdictions offered
by the Village, this arbitrator is satisfied that the factor of
external comparables favors the Union’s final offer.
The Village also objects that the collective bargaining
agreements offered into evidence by the Union are not current except
for the Hinsdale, Clarendon Hills, and Schaumburg contracts. The City
of Darien collective bargaining agreement introduced into evidence is
44

for the term May 1, 2010 to April 30, 2014. It provides for
arbitration or appeal to the police commission, at the officer’s
choice, of all discipline involving a suspension of more than five
days or termination of employment. No objection was made to the
admission into evidence of the Darien agreement at the arbitration
hearing. Nor has any evidence been offered that the 2010-2014
agreement is not the latest agreement in effect between the parties
for patrol officers. In addition it is rare that a contract
provision permitting arbitration of disciplinary disputes will be
eliminated in a subsequent agreement. For these reasons the
arbitrator accepts the Darien agreement admitted into evidence as
reflective of the current situation with regard to the arbitration of
disciplinary disputes involving patrol officers in the City of
Darien.
The Village of Lisle collective bargaining agreement
introduced into evidence covering patrol officers is for the period
May 1, 2012, to April 30, 2015. It provides that the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners “shall no longer play a role in the
discipline of bargaining unit members, which shall instead be
accomplished in accordance with the specific provisions of this
agreement.” No objection was made at the arbitration hearing to the
admission of the agreement into evidence. No evidence has been
presented that there is a later agreement in effect between the
parties. In addition, it is rare that a provision depriving a fire
and police commission of any role in the discipline of employees
would be altered in a future agreement to permit such commission to
decide disciplinary disputes exclusively to the exclusion of a
concurrent role, at the option of the employee, for arbitration.
This arbitrator is satisfied that the Village of Lisle collective
bargaining agreement admitted into evidence covering patrol officers
reflects the current arrangement in effect in that municipality for
the resolution of disciplinary disputes involving the bargaining
unit.
The Village of Westmont collective bargaining agreement in
evidence is for the period May 1, 2010, to April 30, 2014. It
provides, “At the election of the Officer, discipline can be appealed
through the Labor Agreement’s Grievance Procedure Article 6 or the
Village’s Board of Fire and Police Commission, but not both.” All
discipline appears to be subject to arbitration, at the officer’s
choice, except for written or verbal warnings. There was no

45

objection to the admission of the agreement into evidence. No
evidence has been presented that there is a later collective
bargaining in agreement between the parties. It is rare that a
provision in a collective bargaining agreement permitting the
arbitration of disciplinary disputes will be eliminated from a future
agreement between the parties. This arbitrator is satisfied that the
collective bargaining agreement admitted into evidence for the
Village of Westmont shows the current procedure in effect in that
municipality for the resolution of disciplinary disputes involving
patrol officers.
What has been said about the Darien, Lisle, and Westmont
agreements applies equally to the other collective bargaining
agreements. No objection was made to the receipt of any of them into
evidence. No evidence has been presented that they are not the
latest collective bargaining agreements in effect between the parties
for those jurisdictions as of the date of the arbitration hearing.
For example, as of the date of the arbitration hearing on April 5,
2016, the latest agreement in effect between these parties was for
the period May 1, 2012, to April 30, 2015, and was therefore also not
current. This arbitrator has no way of knowing that the
jurisdictions for which a current agreement was not presented are not
in negotiations or impasse proceedings for such an agreement or in
the process of drafting and printing it. Absent an objection to the
receipt into evidence of the Union’s exhibits consisting of the
agreements for the other jurisdictions, any post-hearing challenge to
those agreements must be accompanied by evidence that there are later
agreements in effect.
The fifth factor, the average consumer prices for goods and
services, does not apply to the present issue, which the parties are
in agreement is non-economic. Nor is the sixth statutory factor, the
overall compensation presently received by the employees, applicable
to the disciplinary issue. Changes in any of the foregoing
circumstances during the pendency of the arbitration proceedings, the
seventh factor, is not applicable because there is no evidence of the
occurrence of a relevant change.
The eighth and final item, “[s]uch other factors, not
confined to the foregoing, which are normally taken into
consideration in the determination of wages, hours and conditions of
employment through voluntary collective bargaining, mediation, factfinding, arbitration or otherwise between the parties, in the public
service or in private employment,” also favors the Union’s position.
Some of these considerations were enumerated by Arbitrator Newman in
Village of Bolingbrook, supra, at pages 19-20:

46

There are other general factors relied upon by the
Union to support a showing of the need to change from a
Board system of review to one of access to binding
arbitration. The parties do not dispute the fairness of
the process of arbitration, where trained neutrals are
chosen by agreement of the parties for their impartiality.
Village of Shorewood, supra. The multitude of State cases
ordering arbitration of discipline reveal a trend toward
this method of dispute resolution, [citations omitted], a
public policy favoring arbitration [citation omitted], and
a clear legislative preference for arbitration as set forth
in Section 8 of the Act. [citations omitted]. . . .
As discussed above the choice of arbitration also avoids the
appearance of impaired impartiality and complies with the Due Process
Protocol. Arbitration, in addition, will eliminate a system whereby
appeal of discipline is allowed on the one hand, but discouraged on
the other, by subjecting the employee to the possibility of being
assessed more severe discipline during the course of the appeal
process. The arbitrator concludes that the applicable factors of
Section 14(h) of the IPLRA favor the Union’s final offer. The
arbitrator selects the Union’s final offer. Since the parties are in
agreement that the issue is non-economic, the arbitrator will modify
the Union’s proposed disciplinary language to read as set out below.
Before doing so, however, the arbitrator notes that he is
retaining the Union’s proposal to provide employees with the choice
of arbitration or a hearing before the Board of Police Commissioners
for contesting discipline. The retention of the BOPC as a means for
reviewing discipline will permit those officers who agree with the
Village’s arguments about the advantages of BOPC review to make use
of that system. Those, on the other hand, who deem arbitration a
fairer system will be entitled to utilize that process. The Village
correctly points out in its brief that an employee who chooses
arbitration may not know at the time he chooses that forum whether
the Union will indeed process his or her grievance all the way to
arbitration. The arbitrator, however, does not deem such problem to
be insuperable. The Union presumably was aware of that problem but
nevertheless decided to insist on impartial arbitration as a means
available to non-probationary bargaining unit employees for resolving
disciplinary disputes.

47

The following language concerning disciplinary action is
adopted by the arbitrator:
Section 6.6 Disciplinary Action. (a) Discipline of
non-probationary Patrol Officers shall be for just cause
and shall consist of Oral Reprimand, Written Reprimand,
Suspension, or Discharge depending on the seriousness of
the offense. Any such discipline may be administered by
the Employer without filing charges with or obtaining the
permission of the Board of Police Commissioners.
(b) A grievance with respect to any disciplinary
action may be raised by the affected Patrol Officer within
seven working days of being notified by the Employer of the
discipline. A grievance contesting an Oral Reprimand or
Written Reprimand shall be initiated at Step One of the
grievance procedure and may not be processed beyond Step
Three. A grievance contesting a suspension or discharge
shall be initiated by the affected Patrol Officer at Step
Three of the grievance procedure and shall be accompanied
by a signed statement by said Officer electing to contest
the said discipline through the grievance and arbitration
procedure and waiving the right to do so before the Board
of Police Commissioners. Said statement of election and
waiver may be included as part of the grievance document.
(c) Any suspension or discharge with respect to which
a grievance is not initiated and a signed statement of
election and waiver not presented by the affected Patrol
Officer at Step Three of the grievance procedure within
seven working days of notification by the Employer of said
discipline may no longer be processed as a grievance but
shall automatically be subject to appeal by said Patrol
Officer before the Board of Police Commissioners. Such
appeal must be initiated with the Board within ten working
days of notification of the suspension or discharge or the
right of appeal will be considered waived.
(d) Once an affected Patrol Officer has properly
elected, in a timely manner, to contest a suspension or
discharge through the grievance and arbitration procedure
said discipline shall no longer be subject to appeal or
review before the Board of Police Commissioners.
(e) The provisions contained in this Section 6.6 shall
be subject to the Illinois Uniform Arbitration Act.

48

(f) The provisions of this Section 6.6 shall be
controlling with regard to discipline of non-probationary
Patrol Officers notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in Section 2.2, 6.2, 6.3, or 6.5 of this
Agreement.
Two additional comments are in order. Since the new
Section 6.6 awarded by the arbitrator is inconsistent in some
respects with parts of Sections 2.2, 6.2, 6.3, and 6.5 of the
Agreement the parties might want to consider modifying the wording of
those other sections. The parties should also feel free to modify
the language awarded on discipline should they jointly agree on
substitute language.
A W A R D

and

O R D E R

1. The Union’s final offer on Discipline, as modified
by the arbitrator, is adopted for the parties’ collective
bargaining agreement effective May 1, 2015, through April
30, 2018.
2. All terms and condition of employment on which the
parties reached tentative agreement are hereby incorporated
into and made part of said agreement. All provisions of
the collective bargaining agreement between the parties
effective May 1, 2012, through April 30, 2015, shall remain
in full force and effect except as modified, altered, or
changed by this Award and Order.
Respectfully submitted,

Sinclair Kossoff
Arbitrator
Chicago, Illinois
August 22, 2016

49
