Expanded Study for the
City of Lakeway

FINAL REPORT

May 4, 2020

EVERGREEN SOLUTIONS, LLC
` 6/13

Expanded Study – City of Lakeway

In April 2019, Evergreen Solutions was retained by the City of Lakeway to conduct a
Compensation and Classification Study. The study was primarily designed to focus on internal
and external equity of both the structure by which employees are compensated, as well as the
way in which positions relate and compare to one another across the City. In addition, the
market survey contained a section asking peer organizations for specific information relating
to scheduling and awarding of stipends and extra-duty supplements for Police and
Telecommunication classifications.
In July 2019, Evergreen issued its final report which contained recommendations for
implementing a competitive salary schedule for all employees, eliminating scheduled
overtime for police and telecommunicators, and implementing a merit system combined with
cost of living increases in an effort to continually maintain the City’s competitive market
position in the future.
Following the release of that report:
1) The Council adopted the “Bring to Minimum” option to implement the new salary
schedules, meaning that the only changes in current employee salaries were made to
those employees whose current salary was below the minimum on the new scale.
2) The Council approved approximately a 3 percent increase for all non-sworn
positions, and a combination of the Bring to Minimum and the 3 percent increase were
applied and awarded to all eligible employees on October 1, 2019.
3) Sworn Officers were not included in the implementation, but instead continue to
receive their step increases on their anniversary date based on the current rather than
proposed schedule.
4) The recommendation to eliminate Scheduled Overtime (OT) for patrol and
telecommunicator positions was not completely implemented, however a partial
solution for telecommunicators was to move them to a new hourly rate to ensure that
their total annual compensation is at or above the newly adopted Unified Plan.
.
In October 2019, Lakeway retained Evergreen to expand on the original work provided as part
of the Compensation and Classification Study for the City of Lakeway. The specific objectives
for this extension would be to resurvey Police Departments that were a part of the original
study to determine additional information about their overtime policies, and specifically the
way these departments schedule sworn officers and dispatchers.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 1

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

The Scope of Work included the following:
• Review the originally proposed step plans for both sworn and non-sworn employees
and align the percentage allocated to annual step increases, proposed cost of living
increases and merit pay proposals to ensure sustainability of the plans in the future.


Obtain a minimum of a full month's schedule for both sworn officers and dispatchers
and make proposals for schedules that will eliminate or reduce overtime within federal
and state guidelines, if possible.



Obtain statistical and demographic data on the number and type of staff used by the
Police and Dispatch services, information on their general formulas and/or state and
federal guidelines for staffing in relation to workload, geographic coverages, and the
like. As appropriate, use these data in formulating proposed schedules.



Obtain copies and a greater understanding of the peers' human resource policies in
general and specifically policies relating to the sworn officers and dispatchers and
make recommendations for new and/or revised policies.

To begin the process, Evergreen went back to the original list of peers, and with input from
City administrators, developed an expanded list of peers to be surveyed as part of this study.
The expanded list included municipalities and counties that currently have both a law
enforcement office and 9-1-1 Call Center.
Exhibit A provides the peer list from which Evergreen requested copies of police and
telecommunicator work schedules, pay plans, and related personnel policies.
EXHIBIT A
CITY OF LAKEWAY
EXPANDED TARGET MARKET PEERS
Peer Organizations
City of Alamo Heights
City of Austin
City of Cedar Park
City of Elgin
City of Flowermound
City of Georgetown
City of Keller
City of Kyle
City of Lago Vista
City of Leander
City of Marble Falls
City of Pflugerville
City of Round Rock
City of San Marcos
Caldwell County
Hays County
Travis County
Williamson County

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

In Original
Salary Study
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

Page 2

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

While not all the peers were able to provide all the requested information, each provided
electronic copies or links to a portion of the requested data. Person interviews with key peer
administrators also helped to clarify the data received or fill in pieces of missing information
in terms of both policies and practices. The former Telecommunications Manager also
provided copies of an informal survey he had conducted following the release of the original
Evergreen Report, which contained data elements that proved useful.
The findings and conclusions of this study are presented in this report and are organized as
follows:
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0

1.0

Work Schedules, Elimination of Overtime, and Staffing
Salary Schedules and Step Plans
Merit System with Cost of Living Increases
Human Resource Policy

WORK SCHEDULES, ELIMINATION OF OVERTIME, AND STAFFING

Currently, certain City of Lakeway Police Officer positions, the Police Sergeant – Patrol
position, and Telecommunicator positions work seven 12-hour shifts over a two-week period,
for a total of 2,184 hours per year. Of that total, 1,976 hours are paid at a regular hourly rate,
with the remaining 208 hours paid at a time-and-a-half overtime rate (Exhibit B).
EXHIBIT B
CITY OF LAKEWAY
CURRENT POLICE AND TELECOMMUNICATOR TWO-WEEK WORK SCHEDULES

Days Worked
Shift Length
Hours Worked
Hours of Overtime

Week
One
3 Days
12 Hours
36 Hours
0 Hours

Week
Two
4 Days
12 Hours
48 hours
8 Hours

Two Week
Total
7 Days

Annual Total
(52 Weeks)
182 Days

84 Hours
8 Hours

2,184 Hours
208 Hours

The employee’s or team’s alternate schedules ensure at least minimum coverage is
maintained 24 hours per day, seven days per week.
FINDING
Telecommunicators fall under the provisions of the federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)
which requires the payment of overtime for most non-exempt employees who work more than
40 hours during a standard work week.
non-exempt sworn police officers are one exception to FLSA; however, the Texas Local
Government Code contains further restrictions.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 3

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

Local Government Code, §142.0015 HOURS OF LABOR AND VACATION OF MEMBERS OF
FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS IN MUNICIPALITY WITH POPULATION OF MORE THAN
10,000.
(j) If a majority of police officers working for a municipality sign a written waiver of the
prohibition in Subsection (f), the municipality may adopt a work schedule for police officers
requiring a police officer to work more hours than permitted by Subsection (f). The officer
is entitled to overtime pay if the officer works more hours during a calendar month than
the number of hours in the normal work month of the majority of the employees of the
municipality other than fire fighters and police officers.
The peer organizations surveyed as part of this study indicated that they have reached
agreement with non-exempt sworn police officers and either pay overtime when the number
of hours worked in a two-week period exceed 80 hours, or use a monthly approach for setting
the threshold for overtime. While unscheduled overtime for emergencies is paid, none of the
original peer organizations surveyed regularly scheduled non-exempt sworn police officers to
work overtime based on the guidelines shown above. Most of the organizations, however,
scheduled some overtime for telecommunicators. The 9-1-1 organizations that did not
schedule overtime were typically larger, and telecommunicators worked five 8-hour shifts or
four 10-hour shifts per week.
Schedules obtained from peers for Telecommunicator and Police positions varied, however,
most preferred a 12-hour shift and the most prevalent schedules included a flexible day where
the employee worked one 8-hour shift during the second week of the two-week period (Exhibit
C).
EXHIBIT C
CITY OF LAKEWAY
NON-EXEMPT SWORN POLICE OFFICER AND TELECOMMUNICATOR
FLEXIBLE WORK SCHEDULES

Days Worked
Shift Length
Hours Worked
Hours of Overtime
Telecommunicators
Non-Exempt Sworn
Police Officers

Week
One
3 Days

Two Week
Total
7 Days

Annual Total
(52 Weeks)
182 Days

36 Hours

Week
Two
4 Days
3X12 Hours
1X 8 Hours
44 hours

80 Hours

2,080 Hours

0 Hours

4 Hours

4 Hours

104 Hours

0 Hours

0 Hours

0 Hours

0 Hours

12 Hours

As shown above, in the second week of this option, telecommunicators would still be
scheduled to work four hours of overtime. Non-exempt sworn police officers would not be
scheduled or paid overtime unless the total hours worked over the two weeks exceeded 80
hours.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 4

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

RECOMMENDATION 1: Adopt a flexible schedule where Non-Exempt Sworn Police
Officers and Telecommunicators work one 8-hour shift during each two-week period.
For this schedule to work for telecommunicators, the 10 current budgeted positions must be
filled. To move to four 10-hour shifts per week with no scheduled overtime would require a
minimum of 12 full-time telecommunicators. If Lakeway can expand its 911 services to other
local governments and staffing is increased to meet coverage requirements, it may be
possible to move to that type of schedule.

2.0

SALARY SCHEDULES AND STEP PLANS

Over the last five or more years, Evergreen was told that the City Council has regularly provided
salary increases of approximately 3 percent per year, with some or all of that amount being
awarded based on merit. The adopted pay plan, however, has remained static. Evergreen
recommended that Lakeway, “Implement a modified approach for providing annual salary
increases that combines an annual cost of living increase that results in a change to the
salary plans with merit increases.”
This means that Lakeway would adjust their salary plans each year based on the consumer
price index (CPI) values for cost of living adjustments (COLAs), with an additional amount
allotted for merit increases. For example, assuming the Council determined that a 3 percent
salary increase was budgetarily appropriate, and the CPI rose by 1 percent in the prior year:
• a COLA increase of 1 percent would be allocated for all employees;
• all salary schedules and step plans would be adjusted upward by 1 percent; and
• all employees would receive the 1 percent COLA adjustment.
The remaining 2 percent would then be allocated for merit increases and that money would
be distributed to employees according to the Council-approved merit policy guidelines. This
approach does not require new money to be added to the budget, it simply reallocates the
money that the Council determines to be budgetarily appropriate for the fiscal year between
COLA and merit increases. The benefit of this system is the fact that the salary schedules are
being adjusted annually to keep pace with cost of living increases, while employees are
rewarded systematically for their levels of performance. The systematic approach and policies
for such increases are discussed in greater detail in Sections 3.0 and 4.0 of this report.
Sustaining a salary plan that contains both a COLA adjustment and a merit system was the
primary concern.
2.1

Unified Plan

Lakeway currently uses the Unified Plan as a guide for bringing in new employees, but
employees do not strictly fall on a given step within the plan. As the Council approves annual
salary increases, each employee’s salary moves up by the percentage of increase approved
by the Council rather than moving from step to step in the plan.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 5

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

Under a combination merit and cost of living increase system, the employees covered by the
Unified Plan would receive the approved increases, the salary plan would be adjusted upward
by the amount of the cost of living adjustment, and newly hired employees would be hired at
the new minimum rate based on the CPI adjustment. Since employees on the Unified Plan do
not move strictly from step to step in the plan, allocating salary increases to the merit and
cost of living components would not require a change to the step guidelines.
CONCLUSION: Agreement was reached that no adjustment in the Unified Plan would be
needed, as the step plan does not dictate salary increases. Further, the plan is sustainable
as no new money is being requested from the Council, it is merely a reallocation of the money
they have historically approved for annual salary increases.
2.2

Police Step Plan

Currently the Police Department has four separate step plans: Probationary Officers (2 steps);
Police Officers (12 Steps); Sergeants (Entry plus 7 steps); and Lieutenants and Captains (Entry
plus 10 steps). Officers and Sergeants move strictly from step to step in the plan. While there
are steps in the Lieutenant and Captain plans, typically these pay grades are awarded annual
percent increases, similar to the employees on the Unified Plan, and the steps are primarily
used as a guide. The plans and step systems used by the Lakeway Police Department are
organized in line with many of the salary and step plans provided by peer organizations.
Police officers are NOT eligible to receive across-the-board increases approved by the Council
– an officer’s annual increase is tied to the step increase.
For officers, movement to the next step in the pay plan occurs annually on the employee's
anniversary date in the position, at the discretion of the Chief of Police. Newly hired and
experienced employees are placed in the step best matching their years of experience.
Although the percentages vary somewhat, step increases for officers under the current plan
range from a low of 2.75 percent to a high of 4.0 percent.
A new hire with no experience will start as a Probationary Officer. After successfully completing
the field training program, which in most cases likely takes six (6) months to complete, the
officer will move to the final step of the Probationary Officer step plan (a 1.8 percent increase).
After one (1) year in the position from the hire date, the officer will move to Step 1 of the Police
Officer step pay plan (a 4.6 percent increase).
There are multiple options for implementing a combination merit and cost of living plan, for
police. The challenge is building a competitive plan that can be sustained over time,
recognizing that most organizations also use a traditional step plan for sworn officers.
The current step increases for police positions are on average, between 3 and 5 percent per
year. For a step plan to be sustainable, the total for cost of living, merit and step increases
will need to remain within that same range.
CONCLUSION: Agreement was reached that the percent of increase between steps for Police
positions would need to be reduced to create a sustainable step system that included both a
merit and cost of living component.
Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 6

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

2.3

Police Salary Schedule

The results of the original market survey conducted by Evergreen produced the following
results for Police salary ranges used by peer organizations (Exhibit D).
EXHIBIT D
MARKET PEER SALARY RANGES
Classifications
Police Officer
Detective
Police Officer-Animal Protection Officer
Sergeant - Patrol
Police Lieutenant
Police Captain

Survey Minimum
Average
$56,331
$63,153
$47,091
$76,156
$87,167
$93,267

Survey Midpoint
Average
$67,625
$72,969
$61,458
$86,560
$97,197
$109,285

Survey Maximum
Average
$78,919
$82,784
$75,826
$96,963
$107,226
$125,303

During this expanded study, Evergreen examined salary schedules and step plans from peer
organizations and found most peer organizations maintained a single scale for officers,
sergeants, lieutenants and captains, and used stipends and supplements to recognize
certification levels and extra duty assignments.
In addition, the peer salary schedules generally provided fewer steps and narrower pay ranges
for sergeant, lieutenant and captain classifications, meaning that the consistent 14 step plan
originally recommended by Evergreen resulted in some deviation from the market minimum
to maximum pay ranges for these classifications.
Exhibit E provides Evergreen’s recommended Police salary schedules and steps with
comparative information to the current plan, with and without scheduled overtime. The
proposed salaries assume that scheduled overtime is eliminated.
RECOMMENDATION 2: Adopt the Police Salary Schedule and Step Plan as shown in Exhibit E
with all employees currently working overtime being held harmless at their current rate of
take-home pay.
Like the option adopted for the employees on the Unified Plan, employee whose current salary
is below the minimum for their pay grade would be brought to the minimum. For employees
already above the minimum, the employees' base salaries would be increased to the next
highest/ closest step in the newly proposed pay plan. For example, if a Police Officer’s salary
is currently $55,000, they will be moved to the next highest step in the new pay plan which is
$56,500. Salary increases, therefore will always be less than a full step increase, as the
intent of this option is to simply place the employees on a step in the new plan.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 7

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

EXHIBIT E
RECOMMENDED POLICE SALARY RANGES AND STEPS
COMPARED TO CURRENT SALARY SCHEDULES WITH AND WITHOUT OVERTIME
Classification
Police OfficerProbationary
Police Officer
Animal Protection
DEA Liaison
K9 Officer
Motorcycle Officer
Police Detective
Police Sergeant
Professional Standards
Criminal Investigations
Patrol
Police Lieutenant
Police Captain

Grade

Minimum

Midpoint

Maximum

Steps

% Step
Increase

PD01
Current
Current
w/OT
PD02

$53,500
$48,660

N/A
N/A

$54,500
$49,390

2
2

1.9%
1.5%

$50,977

N/A

$51,742

2

1.5%

$56,500

$67,659

$78,818

16

Current

$50,872

$61,931

$72,990

12

2.2%
2.7 to
4.0%

Current
w/OT

$53,294

$64,880

$76,466

12

PD03

$76,650

$87,190

$97,729

11

Current

$65,628

$73,653

$81,678

Entry +7

$68,753

$77,160

$85,567

Entry +7

$86,000

$97,325

$109,650

11

Current

$65,209

$81,512

$97,814

Entry+ 11

PD05

$93,000

$109,275

$125,550

11

Current

$75,488

$94,359

$113,229

Entry+ 10

Current
w/OT
PD04

2.7 to
4.0%
2.2%
3.0 to
3.6%
3.0 to
3.6%
2.2%
3.4 to
5.0%
2.8%
3.4 to
5.0%

NOTE: This implementation option does not place officers on the step that corresponds to their years of service; the intent
is to simply move the employees from the current plan to the new plan, only.

Based on the employee’s current salaries with overtime, and the recommendation to hold all
employees harmless, meaning that no take home salaries would be reduced from the current
rate including overtime, the cost to implement this plan is approximately $43,575, with the
majority of the increases going to the officers at or near the entry level.
2.3

Telecommunicator Salary Schedules

Telecommunicators are part of the Unified Plan approved by the Council and effective in
October, 2019.
The results of the original market survey conducted by Evergreen produced the following
results for telecommunicator salary ranges used by peer organizations (Exhibit F). In addition
to the request for salary data for telecommunicators, Evergreen asked peers to provide salary
information for a possible new supervisory position.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 8

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

EXHIBIT F
MARKET PEER SALARY RANGES
Classification
Police Telecommunicator
Hourly rate based on 2080 hours
Police Telecommunications Supervisor - NEW

Survey Minimum

Survey Midpoint

Survey Maximum

Average
$36,785
$17.69
$50,888

Average
$45,186

Average
$53,586

$21.72
$61,092

$25.76
$71,296

The peer’s salary ranges were the base salary for telecommunicators without overtime. To
determine the amount of actual take home pay, an estimated 100-200 hours of overtime
would need to be added. Therefore, when proposing the annual salary range (assuming
Lakeway would adopt a no overtime schedule), the new salary range for telecommunicators
was set 9-12 percent higher than the average market base so that actual take home pay
would be competitive.
Because Lakeway’s staffing levels were such that they could not move to either 8- or 10-hour
shifts and still maintain adequate 24/7 coverage, the administration backed into the hourly
base salaries considering the 208 hours of overtime. Exhibit G shows the annual salary
converted to the hourly salary rates for the current 208 hours of overtime and the proposed
104 hours of overtime.
As shown, the 2019-20 annual salary ranges with overtime for telecommunicators is from
$4,000 to $6,000 higher than the salary ranges from 2018-19. Hourly rates in either
scenario of overtime are competitive with the hourly rates found in the market survey and are
significantly higher than the hourly rates paid to Lakeway telecommunicators in 2018-19
(Exhibit F). In summary, Lakeway’s telecommunicators’ hourly rates and annual salaries are
higher and telecommunicators, under this plan, will be required to work fewer hours.
EXHIBIT G
TELECOMMUNICATOR 2019-20 SALARY RANGES
COMPARED TO 2018-19 SALARY SCHEDULES WITH AND WITHOUT OVERTIME
Classification

Police Telecommunicator

Police Telecommunicator II
NEW
Police Telecommunicator
Supervisor NEW

Grade
U90 Total Salary with OT
Hourly Rate w/104 hours of OT
Hourly Rate w/208 hours of OT
2018-19 w/o OT
2018-19 Hourly Rate
2018-19 Total Salary w/ 208 hrs. OT
U110 Total Salary with OT
Hourly Rate w/104 hours of OT
U140 Total Salary with OT
Hourly Rate w/104 hours of OT

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Minimum
$40,203
$18.86
$17.57
$32,935
$15.83
$36,229
$46,540
$21.83
$51,310
$24.07

Midpoint
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

Maximum
$60,304
$28.29
$26.36
$49,403
$23.75
$54,343
$69,810
$32.74
$76,965
$36.10

Page 9

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

While implementation of the Bring to Minimum Schedule increased the salaries offered to
new hires, and impacted those employees who had recently been hired, the more tenured
employees were held harmless at their current rate of pay with overtime. Although some
salaries were adjusted to correct inter-equity issues, none of the existing employees were
reclassified as Telecommunicator II or Supervisor.
RECOMMENDATION 3: Maintain the approved salary schedule for Telecommunicators, which
is competitive based on the original market study, using the backed-in approach based on
104 hours of scheduled overtime; consider how the new positions of Telecommunicator II and
Supervisor may be used to reclassify employees that are performing additional duties.

3.0

MERIT SYSTEM WITH COST OF LIVING INCREASES

In its original report, Evergreen recommended that Lakeway implement a modified approach
for providing annual salary increases that combines an annual cost of living increase that
results in a change to the salary plans with merit increases. This section examines the
processes and procedures for implementing a combination salary system.
3.1

Administering Annual Cost of Living Increases

The benefit to adjusting the salary scales to keep pace with inflation is that the pay ranges
tend to stay in sync with the market for a longer period.
Many organizations adjust their salary scales annually based on a calculated cost of living
increase. This increase in the salary scales is based on recognized cost of living indices for
the area.
City administrators will typically gather the information from the various indices and present
their proposals to the Council during the budget cycle. Should a cost of living increase be
found appropriate and approved by Council, the increase will be effective October 1 and would
be included in any increases that are effective at the beginning of the fiscal year.
For employees on the Police Step Plan, the cost of living increase would raise the scale and
on their anniversary date, the cost of living increase would be reflected in the step increase,
as all steps in the pay plan would increase by the cost of living increase.
RECOMMENDATION 4: Adopt the practice of annually including cost of living increases in the
annual salary adjustment process and change all salary schedules and step plans by the
amount approved by City Council each year.
3.2

Administering Merit-Based System

While the City uses an informal process for awarding merit increases, there is no measurable
criteria in policy for such increases and the evaluation instruments in use at the time of the
original report did not contain clear and measurable criteria that could be used in such a
system.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 10

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

3.2.1 Evaluation Instrument - Police
Lakeway employees are evaluated annually. Police employees are evaluated periodically
during the year and on their anniversary date using an open-ended instrument that provided
the supervisor and employee and opportunity for comment. During this expanded study,
Evergreen identified a sample police evaluation instrument from the City of Oxnard, CA. This
evaluation model has three principal evaluation areas. Each performance area has rating
subsections. Subsections are assigned a rating score from the following list: Outstanding, Very
Good, Meets Standards, Improvement Needed, and Unsatisfactory. (Exhibit H)
EXHIBIT H
SAMPLE POLICE EVALUATION INSTRUMENT

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 11

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

As shown in Exhibit H, each of the primary evaluation areas has very specific and measurable
criteria which are not tied to a single act, but instead, the criteria speak directly to the
processes and procedure used by the officers.
CONCLUSION: The Lakeway Police Chief has adapted the Oxnard model evaluation
instrument to match the needs of this department and has begun using the new instrument
for evaluating it officers.
3.2.2 Evaluation Instrument – General Employees
General employees are evaluated annually, typically at or near the end of the fiscal year. The
current evaluation instrument is generic for all departments and lacks the type of specific and
measurable criteria as shown in the example provided for the Police Department. During the
course of the expanded study, Evergreen identified a number of examples of performance
evaluation instruments that could be adapted to meet the needs of the City overall, but would
also contain a section where the specific duties described in the job description for each
position could also be addressed.
In addition, Evergreen identified training documents for supervisory staff that could be used
to guide supervisors in goal setting, evaluation planning, and evaluation follow-up activities.
RECOMMENDATION 5: Adopt an employee evaluation instrument for general employees and
provide training and instructions to supervisors on the techniques for using the performance
evaluation system to continually improve employee performance.
3.3

Merit System

In a merit system, annual pay increases are based upon performance as a reward to
employees for ability and efficiency in performing their duties. Increases are not automatic;
instead merit increases are determined by annual performance evaluations and the amount
is determined annually by City Council and City budgetary processes.
A merit increase may be a percentage of pay added to base salary, percentage of pay lump
sum, or a one-time lump sum, approved in the budget and granted to recognize
acceptable/outstanding performance. Merit increases are not and should not be used to
recognize increased duties and responsibilities (a promotion or reclassification).
The amount of merit pay available each year is contingent on the amount of merit pay
budgeted by the Council in any given year. In years when the Council does not budget money
specifically for merit increases, no merit increases will be given.
The following describes the merit system outlined in the proposed policy:
Eligibility for Merit Increases - All employees, with the exception of non-exempt sworn police
officers, hired on or before March 1st will receive a performance evaluation before October 1
in order to be considered for a merit increase to be effective for the following fiscal year. Any
employee hired after March 1st or who had their probationary period extended, would not

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 12

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

receive a merit increase until the following October, providing their evaluation merits the
increase. Non-exempt sworn police officers are evaluated annually on their service date and
would be eligible for merit pay at that time, based on the results of that evaluation.
Probationary employees would be eligible for cost of living adjustments and/or market
adjustments as implemented to the pay plan. Only full-time staff are eligible to receive merit
pay. Part-time employees will not be eligible. Also, full-time employees must have six months
of continuous service before becoming eligible for merit pay.
Merit pay is based on the employee’s performance evaluation and will be based on the overall
performance of the employee. This determination will be documented on the performance
appraisal form and discussed with the employee during the performance appraisal meeting.
Performance Evaluations - Supervisors must complete the employee’s performance
evaluation on or before the end of the fiscal year. For police the evaluation would be
completed by the employee’s service date each year.
Goal setting is a crucial component to reaching strategic initiatives. Therefore, heavy
emphasis will be placed on the quality of the goals set and employee attainment of those
goals.
Rating and Award System
Unsatisfactory: The employee's overall performance is generally unsatisfactory and unless the
level of performance improves, based on a documented Performance Action Plan (PAP), future
employment is in jeopardy. No step, cost of living or merit increase will be awarded. A PAP
identifies performance and/or behavioral issues that need to be corrected and creates a
written plan of action to guide the improvement and/or corrective action. Once performance
has improved and/or behavior has been corrected the PAP can be eliminated, making the
employee eligible to receive any across the board increases approved by the Council for the
year in which the PAP was eliminated.
Needs Improvement: Although 50-75 percent of the overall ratings meet standards, there are
significant functional areas or issues where the employee's performance requires
improvement (i.e., poor attendance). Cost of living increases are given but the merit award is
less than the full amount approved by the Council. If after six months, performance improves,
the remaining amount may be awarded.
Meets Standards: The overall ratings meet standards, although in a limited number of
functional areas the employee may need moderate improvement or exhibit exceptional
performance. 100 percent of the Council-approved merit is awarded.
Outstanding: At least 50 percent of the employee's documented and supported performance
ratings exceed the stated expectations for the functional areas evaluated. Merit increases of
up to 1 percentage point above the merit percentage approved by the Council may be
awarded.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 13

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

Exceptional: At least 75 percent of the employee’s documented and supported performance
ratings exceed the stated expectations for the functional areas evaluated. Merit increases of
up to 1.5 percentage points above the percentage approved by the Council may be awarded.
Three types of merit increases can be authorized and will vary by employee group: percent of
base salary increase; one-time percent bonus; one-time lump sum bonus. For example:
Unified and PD Lieutenants and Captains: A percent of base salary increase on 10/1, with
varying percentages based on performance rating (i.e., 2%– Meets Standards; 2.5%–
Outstanding; 3%– Exceptional)
Police Officers and Sergeants: One-time lump sum on anniversary date with varying
amounts based on performance rating. (i.e., Step – Meets Standards; Step + $500 –
Outstanding; Step + $1,000 – Exceptional)
Exhibit I illustrates the example.
EXHIBIT I
SAMPLE MERIT SYSTEM SCENARIO
Rating/
Employee Type

Unsatisfactory

Needs
Improvement*

Meets
Standards

Outstanding

PD Officers/
Sergeants

No Step
Increase

½ Step
Increase

Step Increase

Step Increase +
$500 lump Sum

PD Lieutenants/
Captains

No Merit

Unified Plan

No Merit

½ of approved
Merit
½ of approved
Merit

Full Approved
Merit
Full Approved
Merit

Merit +1%
Merit
+ 1%

Exceptional
Step Increase +
$1,000 lump
Sum
Merit +1.5%
Merit + 1.5%

* Another ½ Merit/Step is possible when performance improves.

For budgeting purposes, supervisors will be asked to submit a list showing the employees that
they are nominating for a merit increase and the level at which they recommend that the
increase be given. The nomination for the increase must be supported by the employee’s
annual performance evaluation.
The amount of the merit increase and the method (lump sum, percent of salary, etc.) for
distributing the merit increases is variable from year to year, based on the decision of the City
Council and the City Manager.
RECOMMENDATION 6: Adopt the merit system as described, and annually consider merit
increases in the annual salary adjustment process.
Exhibits J, K, and L provide examples of how the system will work for a Police employee and a
Regular employee covered under the Unified Plan. For comparability purposes, the current
base salary remains constant for both employees at $60,000, as does the amount of the
Council-approved cost of living increase (1 percent) and the total percent allocated by Council
for the merit increase (2 percent). Only the employee’s performance level changes.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 14

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

EXHIBIT J
SALARY INCREASE SCENARIO – MEETS STANDARDS PERFORMANCE
Unified Plan
Base Salary Prior Year
COLA 1% Increase to Salary Schedule
Step Increase 2.2% New Schedule
Merit 2% Increase Over Prior Year
Total Salary for Meets Standards Performance
Percent Increase from Prior Year

$60,000.00
$60,600.00
N/A
$1,200.00
$61,800.00
3.0%

PD Officers/
Sergeants
$60,000.00
$60,600.00
$1,333.20
N/A
$61,933.20
3.2%

EXHIBIT K
SALARY INCREASE SCENARIO – OUTSTANDING PERFORMANCE
Unified Plan
Base Salary Prior Year
COLA 1% Increase to Salary Schedule
Step Increase 2.2% New Schedule
Merit 3% Increase/ $500 Lump Sum
Total Salary for Outstanding Performance
Percent Increase from Prior Year

$60,000.00
$60,600.00
N/A
$1,800.00
$62,400.00
4.0%

PD Officers/
Sergeants
$60,000.00
$60,600.00
$1,333.20
$500
$62,433.20
4.1%

EXHIBIT L
SALARY INCREASE SCENARIO – EXCEPTIONAL PERFORMANCE
Unified Plan
Base Salary Prior Year
COLA 1% Increase to Salary Schedule
Step Increase 2.2% New Schedule
Merit 3.5% Increase/ $1,000 Lump Sum
Total Salary for Exceptional Performance
Percent Increase from Prior Year

$60,000.00
$60,600.00
N/A
$2,100.00
$62,700.00
4.5%

PD Officers/
Sergeants
$60,000.00
$60,600.00
$1,333.20
$1,000
$62,933.20
4.9%

There is no new cost to the City for implementing this combination merit and cost of living
salary system. If the Council continues to allocate a percent of total salaries for annual
increases, the Council will simply allocate the approved percentage to the two categories. If
no salary increases are allocated or if the Council decides that no cost of living or no merit
increases are possible for a given year, employee salaries will remain unchanged or will be
moved by the approved amount.
RECOMMENDATION 7: Implement a merit system based on the guidelines shown above.

4.0

HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY

Changes and additions to the City of Lakeway Human Resource Policies will be required to
implement the changes to scheduled overtime and the work schedules for non-exempt sworn
police officers and telecommunicators, a combination merit system and cost of living increase
Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 15

Expanded Study for the City of Lakeway

system, and a system for evaluating reclassifications and initial hiring placements. Proposed
policy revisions and additions are found in Appendix A of this report, with proposed changes
to existing policy highlighted. Police Procedures have also been modified to reflect the
relevant changes.
Below is a summary of policy changes being submitted for Council consideration:
031 INTRODUCTORY PERIOD
 Probationary periods and initial salary increase when individual is fully trained
120 SALARY ADMINISTRATION
 Annual cost of living and merit increases
 Conducting small scale salary surveys
 Comprehensive surveys every 3-5 years
 Longevity Pay
 Salary administration
 Handling of topped out employees
 Step Increases for PD – Taken from PD Policy
 Recognition of prior experience for placement of new hires on the pay scale
(Regular employees and PD)
 Budgetary Requests for Merit Increases.
 Certification and shift differential pay guidelines
130 MERIT SYSTEM - NEW
 Process for administering merit increases
210 HOURS OF WORK AND PAYOLL PRACTICES
 Scheduling for PD and Dispatch
 Work Hours
220 OVERTIME NON-EXEMPT EMPLOYEES
 Overtime and appropriate use of overtime
 Provisions for training (both compensation of trainers and handling of time for trainees
– OT versus regular pay)
620 PROMOTIONS/RECLASSIFICATIONS
 Process for requesting and justifying promotions, creation of new positions, etc.
 Required documentation
 Use of Job Review Form and Job Assessment Tool (JAT)

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page 16

Appendix A
Personnel Policies for
Council Consideration

Personnel Policies and Procedures

031 INTRODUCTORY PERIOD
I. PURPOSE
To complete the employee selection process by providing an introductory period of on-the-job work
experience by which the new employee and the supervisor/department head shall evaluate
employment suitability in terms of knowledge, skill, ability, performance, compatibility, and interest.
II. SCOPE
This policy applies to all full-time and part-time employees.
III. POLICY
Newly hired employees or employees changing jobs (see Section IV. E. of this policy) will be in an
introductory period of 90 days.six months. The introductory period may extend beyond 90 dayssix
months when appropriate. The extension must be approved by the Human Resources Department
and the City Manager.
See the Lakeway Police Policy and Procedures Manual for specific guidelines for the Police
Department.
Supervisors/department heads may be held accountable for fairly evaluating the performance of
new employees and for retention of an employee performing below standards.
IV. PROCEDURE
A. Introductory Period
1. Newly hired full-time employees are not eligible to take vacation leave or to use their
personal day until the introductory period is completed. Vacation credit is accumulated
during this period for later use. Leave without pay during the introductory period may be
granted on the recommendation of the department head and approval by the City Manager.
See Leave Without Pay #321.
2. Newly hired full-time employees will not be eligible for annual medical benefit deductible
reimbursement until completion of the introductory period.
See Insurance Programs #330.
3. Supervisors/department heads should closely monitor employees and perform frequent and
informal counseling and evaluations. Supervisors/department heads should keep written
records of significant incidents that require supervisory input during the introductory period.
See Employee Performance Appraisals #612.
B. Termination During the Introductory Period
Department heads may recommend the termination of an introductory employee at any time. A
recommendation for termination must be submitted in writing to the Human Resources
Department for review. The recommendation should include a performance appraisal and a list

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-1

Personnel Policies and Procedures

of actions, if any, taken to assist the introductory employee. Actions to terminate must have the
prior approval of the Human Resources Department.
C. Formal Performance Appraisals
Prior to the end of the 90-daysix-month introductory period, the City will endeavor to perform a
performance appraisal of newly hired employees and employees who have changed jobs. During
this 90-daysix-month period the supervisor/department head should closely monitor the
employee and conduct frequent, informal counseling and evaluations, as warranted.
See Employee Performance Appraisals #612.
D. Completion of Introductory Period
At the conclusion of the introductory period, the department head, in consultation with the
Human Resources Department, will make one of the following recommendations:
1. Continued employment after the introductory period and potential salary action
Upon successful completion of the introductory period, the employee shall remain an at-will
employee and be evaluated utilizing procedures outlined in this manual. The
supervisor/department head may recommend a salary increase.
2. Extension of the introductory period
The City Manager may grant such an extension. The employee has no right to request a
continued introductory period. The City has no obligation to extend the introductory period
beyond the standard 90-daysix-month period.
3. Termination
The City Manager will evaluate the manager’s recommendation to terminate.
E. Change of Job
1. Employees who have changed jobs will have an introductory period in their new position for
a minimum of 90 days six-months.
2. Employees who change jobs and who have been with the City over six-months 90 days will
be eligible to use their accrued leave and personal day.
3. Receipt of a job change does not guarantee that an employee will be able to return to his/her
former position if he/she is unsuccessful in the new position.
However, if a suitable position is available and the employee's performance and experience
warrants, the employee may be offered reassignment
Introductory Period
Policy No. 031
Origination Date: December 17, 2007
Revision Date: n/a

.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-2

Personnel Policies and Procedures

120 SALARY ADMINISTRATION
I. PURPOSE
To maintain a program of internally equitable and externally competitive salaries, recognizing
the importance and value of each individual and maintaining a system of fair pay for equal work
in support of organizational goals.
II. SCOPE
This policy applies to all positions.
III. POLICY
The City will maintain a compensation system which is internally equitable and externally
competitive with industry in our community, other competing markets, and similarly sized and
situated cities.
Annually, and as needed, Human Resources will conduct targeted salary studies of peer
organizations to ensure that specific positions are and remain competitive with the market. A
compensation study will be conducted every three to five years, resulting in a compensation policy
which guides salary actions. The Human Resources Manager will annually prepare a
compensation plan for the City Manager to submit to the City Council for approval as a part of the
fiscal year budget. This plan will include recommendations for cost of living adjustments to the
existing compensation plan as well as any salary adjustment to specific positions based on the
results of any targeted salary studies.
A comprehensive compensation study will be conducted every three to five years, resulting in a
compensation plan which guides salary actions.
A. Cost of Living Increase
A cost of living increase will be considered each year, which is based on recognized cost of living
indices for the area. Should a cost of living increase be approved, the increase will be paid to all
employees and will adjust the pay plan to retain a competitive compensation plan.
A.B. Merit Increase
Annual pay increases are based upon performance as a reward to employees for ability and
efficiency in performing their duties. Increases are not automatic, but will be determined by
annual performance evaluations and the amount will be determined annually by City Council
and City budgetary processes.
A merit increase may be a percentage of pay added to base salary, percentage of pay lump sum,
or a one-time lump sum, approved in the budget and granted to recognize
acceptable/outstanding performance. An employee’s salary, not including lump sums, may not
exceed the maximum of the pay range for the position. Merit increases are not used to recognize
increased duties and responsibilities (a promotion or reclassification).
The amount of merit pay available each year is contingent on the amount of merit pay budgeted
by the Council in any given year. In years when the Council does not budget money specifically
for merit increases, no merit increases will be given.
See Merit System #130
Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-3

Personnel Policies and Procedures

IV. PROCEDURE
A. Official Job Titles
All positions shall be designated by official job titles. These official job titles shall be
approved by the Human Resources Manager and shall be used on all official records, payroll
and communications. No other job titles may be used.
B. Salary Pay Grades/Ranges
Each position is assigned to a pay grade. Each salary pay grade has been assigned a salary
range based on a range around market averages for similar positions.
For all employees, including Non-Exempt Police Officers and Police Sergeant Positions, when
an employee has reached the maximum salary for a pay grade, the employee will be eligible
for salary adjustments when the Council approves a cost of living increase that automatically
increases the stated maximum.
C. Step Increases - Non-Exempt Police Officer and Police Sergeant Positions
Sworn non-exempt police officers and police sergeant positions are on a step pay plan. The
step pay plan is based on the salary ranges approved by the City Council. from the City's
compensation study. The compensation study will be conducted every three to five years.
Adjustments to the step pay plan will be made at that time, if warranted.
Movement to the next step in the pay plan may occur annually on the employee's anniversary
date in the position at the discretion of the Chief of Police.
D. Placement on Salary Schedule at Time of Hire
At the time of hire, regular employees will be placed on the salary schedule based on their
credible experience while maintaining departmental equity. Credible experience is
experience matching or closely matching the job functions outlined in the job description for
the position they are assuming. For closely related experience performing similar or
subordinate level experiences to the job they are assuming will be considered.

Sworn Police Officers
Sworn Police Officers will be placed on the salary schedule based on their documented years
of experience at the time of hire, while maintaining departmental equity, at the discretion of
the Chief. The Chief will submit his recommendation on the step for a new hire with
appropriate documentation (i.e. TCOLE status report, relativeness to new hire's previous
position and previous agency) to the Human Resources department for the City Manager's
approval.
A new hire with no experience will start as a probationary police officer. After successfully
completing the field training program, which in most cases likely takes six (6) months to
complete, the officer will move to the final step of the probationary police officer step plan.
After one (1) year in the position from the hire date, the officer may move to Step 1 of the
police officer step pay plan.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-4

Personnel Policies and Procedures

C.E. Bilingual Incentive Pay
Full-time employees may receive bilingual incentive pay at an amount determined by the City
Manager. To be eligible, the employee must be proficient in English and Spanish and pass
the Level 2 fluency examination coordinated by Human Resources. Proof of successful
completion of the examination should be submitted to the Human Resources Department.
D.F. Certification Pay/ Assignment/ Incentive Pay
Employees may receive monthly certification/ assignment/ incentive pay at an amount
determined by the City Manager. The City Manager will determine which certifications may be
eligible. Criteria will include relevance of the certificate/ assignment/ incentive to the
employee’s current position, employee’s standing with the issuing organization, and
achievement of a level of certification above that required for employment.
Certificates or other documentation should be routed to the Human Resources Department for
insertion in the employee’s file. See Human Resources for current rates of certification
incentive pay.
1. Procedure
a. During preparation of the annual budget, department heads shall submit
certification/ assignment/ incentive pay request forms for employees holding
certifications for which certification pay is approved.
b. Department heads, including the Police Chief, shall submit requests for approval of
additions to the list of approved certifications/ assignment/ incentive to the Human
Resources Manager for routing to the City Manager.
c. Annually, a full list of all approved certification/ assignment/ incentive payments
will be published. As employees earn or renew, the department head will submit a
copy of the certification or renewal and stipulate the time frame during which the
certificate will remain valid.
Human Resources will authorize the certification/ assignment/ incentive pay for the
period stipulated. If certifications are not renewed or if Human Resources is not
notified of the renewal at the end of the stipulated period, the certification/
assignment/ incentive pay will be discontinued,

c.
E.G.

Longevity Pay
Longevity pay will be paid to all full-time City employees.

1. Definition
Regular Full-time Employees – Employees regularly scheduled to work 40 hours a week
or more.
Police Department Members – Per Texas Government Code 141.009, a police
department member is an employee of the police department who has been licensed

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-5

Personnel Policies and Procedures

as a peace officer by the Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and
Education.
2. All full-time employees including police department members (Toin conformance to
Texas Government Code 141.032), Police department members will receive longevity
pay.
a. Amount will be $48 per year after the first year of employment with the City, with an
increase of $48 per year thereafter.
b. The maximum years of service to compute longevity is 25.
c. Payment for longevity will be paid bi-weekly on paid as a lump sum in the next pay
period following the employee’s date of hire anniversary.
d. Military Service
The City of Lakeway complies with Federal Department of Labor laws governing
qualifying military leave under Uniformed Services Employment and
Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA).
See Military Leave #315.
e. Employees with interrupted service will establish eligibility from the latest date of
employment.
3. Longevity pay eligibility will be extended to full time licensed peace officer employees in
the Municipal Court department.
See Rehires #025.
V. SALARY ACTIONS
Budgeted salary changes are made effective October 1 of each year or at some pre- determined
date during the 12 months thereafter in accordance with the approved compensation plan and
subject to approval of the fiscal year budget. An employee newly hired, promoted, or reassigned
must complete at least six months of employment in order to qualify for a salary increase.
Department heads may request salary changes as described below.
A. Recommendation for Changes
Recommendation for changes may be made for the following reasons:
1. Promotion/Demotion
A change resulting from an employee’s assignment to a different position, the duties of which
are such that it is classified at a different salary grade level.
2. Reclassification

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-6

Personnel Policies and Procedures

A change resulting from a re-evaluation of the job duties of an employee’s position leading
to the placing of that position in a different salary grade level.

B. Preparation of Recommendations
1. Department heads should begin preparations several months in advance of the approval of
the new fiscal year budget.
2. Department heads should prepare recommendations for salary changes and submit to the
Human Resources Manager. Recommendations should include:




date and amount of last salary change
performance appraisal
type and amount of recommended salary change

3. The Human Resources Manager will review recommendations from department heads,
prepare salary recommendations for all employees, and submit to the City Manager for
review and approval as part of the City’s operating budget.

Salary Administration
Policy No. 120
Origination Date: December 17, 2007
Revision Dates: October 17, 2011
October 17, 2016, February 21, 2017

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-7

Personnel Policies and Procedures

130 MERIT SYSTEM
I.

PURPOSE
To establish a process by which annual pay increases are given based upon performance as a
reward to employees for ability and efficiency in performing their duties.

II.

SCOPE
This policy applies to all City employees.

III.

POLICY
Merit increases are not automatic, but will be determined by annual performance evaluations
and the amount will be determined annually by the City Council during the City budgetary
processes.
The amount of merit pay available each year is contingent on the amount of merit pay budgeted
by the Council in any given year. In years when the Council does not budget money specifically
for merit increases, no merit increases will be given.
A merit increase may be a percentage of pay added to base salary, percentage of pay lump sum,
or a one-time lump sum, approved in the budget and granted to recognize
acceptable/outstanding performance. An employee’s salary may not exceed the maximum of
the pay range for the position. Merit increases are not used to recognize increased duties and
responsibilities (a promotion or reclassification).

IV.

PROCEDURE
All employees, with the exception of non-exempt sworn police officers, hired on or before March
1st will receive a performance evaluation before October 1 in order to be considered for a
merit increase to be paid on the paycheck for the pay period that October 1 falls in subject to
funding by the City Council. Any employee hired after April 1st or who had their probationary
period extended, shall not receive a merit increase until the following October, providing their
evaluation merits the increase.
Non-exempt sworn police officers will be evaluated on their service date and will be eligible for
merit increases at that time.
A. Probationary employees shall be eligible for cost- of- living adjustments and/or market
adjustments as implemented to the pay plan. Only full-time staff is eligible to receive merit pay.
Part-time employees will not be eligible. Also, full-time employees must have six months of
continuous service before becoming eligible for merit pay.
B. Merit pay is based on the employee’s performance evaluation and will be based on the overall
performance of the employee. This determination will be documented on the performance
appraisal form and discussed with the employee during the performance appraisal meeting.
C. Performance Evaluations
1. Supervisors must complete the employee’s performance evaluation on or before September
1 of each year. Non-exempt Police Officers will be evaluated at least annually on their service
date and as deemed appropriate by the Chief.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-8

Personnel Policies and Procedures

2. Goal setting is a crucial component to reaching strategic initiatives. Therefore, heavy emphasis
will be placed on the quality of the goals set and employee attainment of those goals.
D. Rating and Award System
1. Unsatisfactory: The employee's overall performance is generally unsatisfactory and unless the
level of performance improves, based on a documented Performance Action Plan (PAP), future
employment is in jeopardy. No step, cost of living or merit increase will be awarded.
Performance Action Plan (PAP). A PAP identifies performance and/or behavioral issues that
need to be corrected and creates a written plan of action to guide the improvement and/or
corrective action. Once performance has improved and/or behavior has been corrected the
PAP can be eliminated, making the employee eligible to receive any across the board increases
approved by the Council for the year in which the PAP was eliminated.
2. Needs Improvement: Although 50-75 percent of the overall ratings meet standards, there are
significant functional areas or issues where the employee's performance requires
improvement (i.e., poor attendance). Cost of living increases are given but the merit award is
less than the full amount approved by the Council. If after six months, performance improves,
the remaining amount may be awarded.
3. Meets Standards: The overall ratings meet standards, although in a limited number of
functional areas the employee may need moderate improvement or exhibit exceptional
performance. 100 percent of the Council-approved merit is awarded.
4. Outstanding: At least 50 percent of the employee's documented and supported performance
ratings exceed the stated expectations for the functional areas evaluated. Merit increases of
up to 1 percentage point above the merit percentage approved by the Council may be awarded.
5. Exceptional: At least 75 percent of the employee’s documented and supported performance
ratings exceed the stated expectations for the functional areas evaluated. Merit increases of
up to 1.5 percentage points above the percentage approved by the Council may be awarded.
E. Annual Budget Request
1. During the annual budget process, department heads will submit to the City Manager a list
of all employees that they anticipate will qualify for a merit increase in the coming year and
the estimated dollar amount of the increase based on a percentage of pay added to base
salary, percentage of pay lump sum, or a one-time lump sum.
2. Based on the decision of the City Council, the final dollar amount of the estimated merit
increases is allocated by the City Manager in each departmental budget based on the
submitted estimates. Lump sum merits will be set by the City Manager, based on the
Council’s total merit allocation, and in collaboration with the department heads.
3. Merit increases as a percent of salary will be based on prior year evaluations and given
effective October 1.
4. Lump sum increases may be awarded to the employee on October 1, or on their service
date, based on a current year evaluation.
5. Lapsed merit increases not awarded (i.e., employee separations, promotions or transfers),
will be swept from the department budgets at the end of the fiscal year.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-9

Personnel Policies and Procedures

Merit System
Policy No. 130
Origination Date: May ??, 2020
Revision Dates: None

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-10

Personnel Policies and Procedures

200. HOURS OF WORK AND PAYROLL PRACTICES
210 HOURS OF WORK AND PAYDAYS
I.

PURPOSE
To comply with federal, state and local laws and provide employees with a reliable and
responsible system.

II.

SCOPE
This policy applies to all City employees.

III.

POLICY
This City shall establish the hours of employment in the City’s basic workweek and establish
pay periods and paydays to administer the payment of wages, salaries and overtime.

IV.

PROCEDURE
A. Hours of Work
The working time per week for full-time employees shall be 40 hours with special provisions
made in departments that require additional hours to meet existing conditions or
emergencies.
Part-time employees are typically scheduled for less than 30 hours per week.
Any proposed regular shift schedule modifications must be approved in advance by the City
Manager.
B. Business Hours
Regular business hours are Monday through Friday from 8 AM to 5 PM. The City Manager
shall approve the business hours for departments that do not operate during regular
business hours.
C. Work Week/Work Period
For pay purposes the work week begins at 12:01 AM on Sunday and ends at midnight on
Saturday.
Pursuant to Section 142.0015(j) of the Texas Local Government Code, a work period for nonexempt police patrol personnel is defined as 80 hours within a fourteen (14) day work cycle.
Any time less than one quarter hour is not compensable.
D. Pay Period
Employees are paid bi-weekly. If payday falls on a holiday, payday will be on the day
preceding the holiday.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-11

Personnel Policies and Procedures

E. Meal Period
With the exception of police officers and communication employees in the Police
Department, each employee will take an unpaid meal period each day.
The time for lunch will be for thirty minutes or one hour as set by each department. An
employee who is unable to take a meal period must report this to his/her
supervisor/department head and the time worked must be reported on that day’s time
card. Overtime during a meal period requires a supervisor/department head’s advance
approval.
F. Breast-Feeding Breaks
Nursing mothers will be provided reasonable unpaid break time and a private place to
express breast milk.
1. Reasonable break time
 Employers are not required to compensate an employee for this break time, unless
required by state law.
 Reasonable unpaid break time will be provided for up to one year after the birth of
the child each time the employee has a need to express the milk.
 The employee and department head will agree upon the amount of time
considered reasonable.
2. Private place
 The place will be some place other than a bathroom, shielded from view and free
from intrusion from co-workers and the public.
G. Employee Time Card Reporting of Hours Worked
1. Each employee shall be responsible for the accuracy of his/her own time sheet.
2. The employee’s signature is required on each time sheet acknowledging that the hours
worked are correct as shown.
3. Time sheets are to be reviewed and signed by the supervisor/department head.
H. Payroll Deductions
1. Mandatory





federal income tax withholding
social security tax
employee contribution to the Texas Municipal Retirement System (participation is
required of all full-time employees and part-time employees in a position that
normally requires at least 1,000 hours of work in a year)
court ordered payments

2. Optional Deductions May Include




medical and dental insurance for dependents
voluntary life insurance
voluntary accident and dismemberment insurance

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-12

Personnel Policies and Procedures




independent deferred compensation
supplemental insurance

Hours of Work and Paydays
Policy No. 210
Origination Date: December 17, 2007
Revision Date: May15, 2010

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-13

Personnel Policies and Procedures

220 OVERTIME: NON-EXEMPT EMPLOYEES
I. PURPOSE
To provide guidelines to administer overtime pay, in order to manage time and fiscal resources
and to comply with applicable federal and state regulations.
II. SCOPE
This policy applies to non-exempt employees.
III. POLICY
Hours compensated at the overtime rate shall be defined as the hours actually worked in
excess of 40 hours in a work week in conformance with the Fair Labor Standards Act. Benefit
hours or compensatory time taken within the work week are not used as the basis for
calculating actual hours worked.
Pursuant to Section 142.0015(j) of the Texas Local Government Code, a work period for nonexempt sworn police officers is defined as 80 hours within a fourteen (14) day work cycle. Any
time less than one quarter hour is not compensable. As such, non-exempt sworn police
officers are required to work a flexible schedule equating to 80 hours within the 14-day work
cycle which does not include regularly scheduled overtime. Unscheduled overtime will follow
the same guidelines as all other non-exempt City employees.
Due to operational needs, non-exempt Telecommunicators working a 12-hour schedule will
adhere to a flexible schedule that includes a maximum of 4 hours of scheduled overtime
during a two week pay period. Unscheduled overtime will follow the same guidelines as all
other non-exempt City employees.
See Hours of Work and Paydays #210.
IV. PROCEDURES
A. Authorization
All overtime must be authorized and approved in advance by the supervisor/ department
head. An employee may be required to work overtime to meet the operational needs of
the City. Overtime required to meet the operational needs of the City shall be allocated
as evenly as possible among all employees qualified to do the job.
Overtime requests for non-emergency, routine events, such as in-house training must be
approved in advance by the City Manager or designee. Where possible, the scheduling for
any routine matters involving non-exempt employees, including police personnel, should
be scheduled well in advance during normal working hours with planned coverage provided
by existing staff, as appropriate.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-14

Personnel Policies and Procedures

B. Compensation
Authorized overtime shall be compensated at the rate of one and one-half times the
regular rate of pay. At the discretion of the City, compensatory time at the rate of one
and one-half times the amount of overtime worked may be provided in lieu of overtime
pay.
C. Compensatory Time
Determination of whether hours worked may be allocated as comp time, in lieu of overtime
pay, shall be made in advance. The maximum amount of comp time that may be
accumulated at any one time shall be 80 hours.
Once comp time is accrued, it must be taken as comp time off, except in the following
circumstances:
1. An employee will be paid for any unused comp time upon separation. See
Compensatory Time #221. Appears to be covered in #220 OT for Non-Exempt
Employees
2. Non-exempt employees who are promoted to an exempt level position will be paid out
all comp time accrued at the rate of pay prior to promotion.
D. On-Call Pay
See On-Call Pay #211.
E. Emergency Response Situations
Employees called in to work in emergency response situations will be compensated on a
time and one-half basis.
The extra compensation will not be included in calculating the employee's "regular rate"
of pay for the purpose of determining overtime compensation, if due, for the work period,
pursuant to 29 U.S.C. § 207(e).
See Emergency Situations #750.
F. Holiday Work
1. Employees, including Police Officers, Telecommunicators and Code Enforcement Officers,
scheduled to work on a City holiday will be compensated as follows:



employee will be paid a premium rate of pay equal to one and one-half times regular
rate of pay
employee may choose to be paid for the holiday or to accrue the holiday

The extra compensation will not be included in calculating the employee's "regular rate"
of pay for the purpose of determining overtime compensation, if due, for the work period,
pursuant to 29 U.S.C. § 207(e).

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-15

Personnel Policies and Procedures

2. Comp time
Holiday pay will be paid in lieu of comp time.
3. Police Officers, Telecommunicators and Code Enforcement Officers whose regular
day off falls on a City holiday will accrue the holiday.
4. Hours accrued for holidays shall be used within six months of date accrued.
See Holidays #312.

Overtime: Non-Exempt Employees
Policy No. 220
Origination Date: December 17, 2007
Revision Dates: July 2, 2009
October 17, 2016

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-16

Personnel Policies and Procedures

620 PROMOTIONS/RECLASSIFICATIONS
I. PURPOSE
To support the basic organization-building process of promoting qualified employees to positions
of greater responsibility and recognition.
II. SCOPE
This policy applies to all positions.
III. POLICY
Opportunities to promote from within may be explored with the goal of filling positions with the
most capable individual available.
Receipt of a promotion does not guarantee that an employee will be able to return to his/her
former position if he/she is unsuccessful in the new position.
IV. GUIDELINESPROCEDURE
A.

Promotion to an Existing Vacant Position
1. Positions may be posted internally.
1.2.
Employees interested in applying for the position will submit an application. Input
for the internal selection process will include the qualifications of each candidate, the
employee appraisals and career counseling records.
3. The selected candidate will be placed on the salary schedule for the new position at the
entry level for the new position or an amount approved by the City Manager.

4. Police Department
The position will be placed on the salary schedule for the new position at the greater of the
entry level for the new position or the Step in the new Pay Grade closest to a 5 percent
increase on their base pay. After remaining in the position for one (1) year, the employee may
move to the next step. Exceptions must be approved by the City Manager.
A.B. Non-exempt employees who are promoted to an exempt level position will be paid out all
compensatory time accrued at the rate of pay prior to promotion.
C. Request to Create a New Classification
This process should be used when a department head or supervisor believes that an
employee’s assigned duties have substantially changed and the current classification and pay
grade may no longer apply.
1. Department Head/Supervisor submits completed Job Review Form to Human Resources
to request a job evaluation for either a new or existing position. Note that one form per job
should be submitted.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-17

Personnel Policies and Procedures

2. Human Resources (HR) staff receives completed Job Review Form and determines what
action is needed; if action requires completion of a JAT (Job Assessment Tool), a blank JAT
is emailed by HR to Department Head/Supervisor for completion. If the position is new, the
JAT should be filled out by the person with the most knowledge of the position. If no JAT is
needed, HR staff proceeds to Step 5.
3. Department Head/Supervisor completes JAT and submits to HR within 5 business days.
4. HR receives and reviews JAT for accuracy. Score is input into existing regression database.
5. If market data on file is greater than one year old or not available for the position in
question, fresh market data is collected from established peers.
6. Average market midpoint is entered into existing regression database by HR.
7. With JAT and market data, the regression database provides HR staff with an approximate
midpoint. This midpoint is used to place the position on the City salary schedule.
8. HR staff record final recommended pay grade and job title in the second section of the Job
Review Form.
9. A copy is emailed to the Department Head/Supervisor, as well as to the City Manager for
final approval.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-18

Personnel Policies and Procedures

Job Review Form
Please complete all fields, scan, and electronically submit to the Human Resources
Department.
DEPARTMENT HEAD COMPLETES
Requester Name and Title:
Phone:
E-mail Address:
Department:
Today’s Date:
Job Title for Review:
Position Type (New or Existing):
Reason for Review:

Desired Outcome:

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-19

Personnel Policies and Procedures

JOB REVIEW FORM – PART TWO*
HR USE ONLY
Form Received by:
Form Reviewed by:
Today’s Date:
Action:
JAT Sent (Y/N):
Market Data Needed (Y/N):

□ Yes
□ Yes

□ No
□ No

Once Returned, record date received____

Final JAT Score
Market Midpoint Value
Regression Midpoint
Title Recommendation:
Grade Recommendation:

Explanation of Findings:

Reviewer Notes:

Signature:

Signature:
Human Resources
Manager
Date:

Assistant City Manager
Date:

*Part One and Part Two are contained on the same sheet.

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-20

Personnel Policies and Procedures

V. RELATED POLICIES
Job Posting #021
Introductory Period #031
Salary Administration #120
Employee Performance Appraisal #612
Promotions
Policy No. 620
Origination Date: December 17, 2007
Revision Date: n/a

Evergreen Solutions, LLC

Page A-21
