City of Decatur, Georgia

BUDGET
Fiscal Year July 1, 2023 to June 30, 2024

Patti Garrett, Mayor
Tony Powers, Mayor Pro Tem
George Dusenbury, Commissioner
Lesa Mayer, Commissioner
Kelly Walsh, Commissioner

Cover
“Cultivate (2023)”
by Sanithna Phansavanh
Digital, 18 x 24
Artist conceptual design: “Botanicals are tended and nurtured to represent caring stewardship.”

BUDGET
Fiscal Year July 1, 2023 to June 30, 2024

City of Decatur, Georgia
509 North McDonough Street
P.O. Box 220
Decatur, GA 30031
404.370.4100 phone
678.553.6518 fax

www.decaturga.com

FISCAL YEAR 2023-2024

Table of Contents
BUDGET MESSAGE

vii

BUDGET GUIDE & SCHEDULE
BUDGET NARRATIVE
SUMMARY OF FUND BUDGETS
Fund Organizational Chart
Funds Impact Chart
Fund Balance Summary – All Funds
Summary of Expenditures – All Funds
Summary of Revenue & Expenditures – General Fund
All Funds Overview
FY 2023-2024 Planning Impacts Matrix
GENERAL FUND
Revenue Summary Overview
Revenue Summary
Expenditure Summary
Personnel Position Summary
Revenue Detail
Expenditure Detail
City Organizational Chart
Department Directory
Department Detail
CAPITAL PROJECTS FUNDS
Capital Projects Fund Narrative
Capital Projects Summary
Capital Improvement Projects Fund Detail
SPLOST Fund Detail
Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund Detail
2010 Urban Redevelopment Agency Fund Detail
2013 Urban Redevelopment Agency Fund Detail
Public Facilities Authority Fund
Tax Allocation District Fund Detail
Debt Service Summary
Debt Service Fund Detail
OTHER FUNDS
Children & Youth Services Fund
Emergency Telephone System (E911) Fund
Solid Waste Fund
Storm Water Utility Fund
Conference Center/Parking Deck Fund
Hotel/Motel Tax Fund
Tree Bank Fund
Confiscated Drug Fund
Community Grants Fund
School Zone Camera Safety Program Fund
Community Energy Fund
ARPA Fund
APPENDIX A – Glossary
APPENDIX B – Financial Policies
APPENDIX C – Position Classification Plan
APPENDIX D – 2023 Compensation Study Report
APPENDIX E – Demographics
APPENDIX F – 2022 Citizen Survey Results

1
13
35
37
38
40
41
42
43
59
63
65
70
72
74
75
83
84
85
86
109
111
118
124
132
133
134
135
136
138
139
142
146
148
150
152
154
154
155
155
156
157
157
158

CITY OF DECATUR

v

GOVERNMENT FINANCE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

Distinguished
Budget Presentation
Award
PRESENTED TO

City of Decatur
Georgia
For the Fiscal Year Beginning

July 01, 2022

Award of Distinguished Budget Presentation
Executive Director

The Government Finance Officers Association of the United States and Canada
(GFOA) presented a Distinguished Budget Presentation Award to the City of Decatur,
Georgia for its annual budget for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2022.
In order to receive this award, a governmental unit must publish a budget document
that meets program criteria as a policy document, as an operations guide, as a financial
plan, and as a communications device.
This award is valid for a period of one year only. We believe our proposed budget
continues to conform to program requirements, and we are submitting it to GFOA to
determine its eligibility for another award.

vi

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

May 15, 2023

City Commissioners,
It is my pleasure to present the 2022-2023 Revised Budget Estimates and the 2023-2024
Proposed Budget Estimates for your review. This budget message identifies key budget priorities, highlights specific projects and initiatives, and discusses principal issues that impact
the budget and the City organization.

Budget Message
from the
City Manager

The City ended the 2021-2022 fiscal year in a strong financial and organizational position
which has positively influenced the scope and sheer number of goals and priorities that may
be addressed in the proposed budget. A healthy fund balance, robust residential and commercial development, resilient local economy, engaged community members and a unified
elected body are just some of the factors that have contributed to this proposed budget for
your consideration.
In fiscal year 2021-2022, you were introduced to the Budget as Art Collection which uses
art to emphasize the vision and values reflected in the City’s budget. The Budget as Art
Collection continues with an original work of art by local artist, Sanithna Phansavanh,
with “Cultivate (2023).” The artist uses botanicals that are tended and nurtured to represent
caring stewardship. Elected officials and staff share a commitment and responsibility of
stewardship for our community and our city organization. The proposed budget cultivates
values and priorities that allow us to serve all people in the City of Decatur equitably and
with compassion. Just as the City is collecting stories to commemorate its bicentennial, the
budget tells the story of how we are committed to fulfilling the City’s vision:

Decatur will foster an equitable, thriving, and welcoming
community for all, today and in the future.
These are highlights of the proposed budget:
• The Proposed 2023-2024 General Fund Budget Estimate is $39,629,290, which is
$7,619,930 higher (23%) than the Revised 2022-2023 General Fund Budget Estimate;
the Revised 2022-2023 General Fund Budget Estimate is $32,009,360 which is $636,500
lower (-2%) than the Adopted 2022-2023 General Fund Budget Estimate.
• A reduction in the overall millage rate from 13.17 mills to 12.47 mills, a reduction of 0.70
mills.
• A recommended use of fund balance from the General Fund in the amount of $4,230,810
for the Revised 2022-2023 General Fund Budget, as compared to $3,883,500 in the
Adopted 2022-2023 General Fund Budget; and a use of fund balance in the amount of
$4,145,816 for the Proposed 2023-2024 General Fund Budget. ($1,898,825 was added to
the fund balance at the end of Fiscal Year 2021-2022.)
• An increase in the 2023 real property tax digest estimated at 14%.
• A modest increase of approximately $104,000 (+3%) in the health insurance budget over
the 2022-2023 Adopted Budget.
• Increases to all regular, full-time salaries in response to a pay and compression study,
including adjustments to a living wage and minimum increase of 8.35% to compete with
the job market in addition to compression adjustments.
• Multiple position reclassifications and eleven additional full-time positions.
• Creation of a new Parks and Recreation Department, combining the Active Living division and Children and Youth Services division. The transfer of the Children and Youth

CITY OF DECATUR

vii

Services budget from a separate fund to the General Fund accounts for 35% of the overall budget increase.
• Next steps for the Equity Action Plan, Downtown Master Plan, Parks and Recreation
Master Plan, Storm Water Master Plan and Clean Energy Plan.
• Creation of a Community Energy Fund with funding from the City’s energy franchise fee
revenue.
• Funding earmarked for the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
Our Most Valuable Resource-Dedicated Employees
At a recent retirement celebration in the Police department, I listened to heartfelt stories
from the retirees’ colleagues about their special memories of protecting the public and
protecting each other. These stories epitomize our employees who are called to public service, who serve selflessly and many who ultimately retire from the City with special bonds
to co-workers and community members. These are the same employees that continued to
come into work, in-person, during the pandemic while most people retreated to their home
offices. In addition to our first responders such as police officers, firefighters and public
works employees, there are dozens of other employees working to improve the quality of
life for people in our community. Our employees are leading us through difficult conversations, sharing tools to prioritize equity in our work, tending to all our public spaces, finding
creative ways to bring people together in those spaces, ensuring our actions are consistent
with sustainability and clean energy goals, reviewing plans, preparing communications and
so much more that is needed to operate a small city. All of this work is performed with an
emphasis on ethics, integrity and transparency. Employees are proud to do their work in
the public setting, open to public input, scrutiny and even criticism. We are proud that our
employees average 10 years of service and 36 employees have over 20 years of service.
In order to recruit and retain the brightest, most committed and caring public servants, the
City’s pay structure must be fair and competitive. The pandemic exacerbated a problem that
has been years in the making. Prior to the pandemic, annual salary increases lagged behind
the market, but regular updates to the salary ranges for recruitment purposes resulted in
some new hires earning as much or more than their more tenured counterparts. The current
personnel policies provide limited authority to address the resulting pay compression issues.
Furthermore, resignations during the pandemic have resulted in difficult-to-fill vacancies. While all departments are challenged to fill vacant positions, the Police department’s
vacancy rate has remained around 20% over the past 2 years. This challenge is not isolated
to Decatur as police agencies across the country struggle to fill vacancies. To address this
on-going challenge, the department is exploring new strategies to achieve community safety
such as leveraging technology and partnering with other organizations to serve the community’s needs.
In addition to evaluating processes and seeking innovative ways to provide public services, the City is committed to maintaining an employee pay system that provides fair and
equitable pay internally and that is competitive externally. With that goal in mind, the City
engaged a compensation consultant to review employee salaries and salary ranges. The
recommendations from the study in the proposed budget include:
• Moving the salaries of 37 employees to a living wage as determined by the MIT Living Wage calculator. The living hourly wage for one adult with no children is $18.93.
Working within the current pay range and step system, the actual hourly wage would be
$19.10.
• Making pay adjustments to 87 employee salaries to reduce compression.
viii

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

• Increasing all full-time salaries 8.35%. The salary survey of 18 area jurisdictions found

that actual city salaries are 7.6% behind the market.
• Shifting pay ranges 5%. (This does not impact current employee salaries).
• Increasing Firefighter I entry level pay from $41,434 to $48,402.

Budget Message
from the
City Manager

• Increasing Police Officer I entry level pay from $48,048 to $53,435.
Recommendations related to the City’s personnel policies for hiring and promotions will be
made outside of the budget process. The compensation study revealed the need for a deeper
analysis of job descriptions and classifications which may occur in the next fiscal year.
The research of employee motivation by psychologist Frederick Herzberg from the 1950s
and 1960s remains relevant today. Without belaboring his Motivation-Hygiene Theory, his
research identifies pay as a hygiene factor that does not serve to motivate employees when
fair and equitable, rather it creates dissatisfaction when not appropriately addressed. Addressing such job factors as pay and working conditions is necessary to reduce or eliminate
dissatisfaction. However, focus on proven motivation factors such as recognition, responsibility, meaningful work and involvement in decision-making is critical for an engaged
workforce.
A new position, the Innovation and Strategy Director, is proposed to continue the work of
employee engagement currently being led by a small group of employees called the Vision
team. The team has initiated the work to engage all employees in defining the organization’s
vision, values, philosophy, guiding principles, and identifying what these values and principles look like in practice. This organization development and work culture focus needs a
full-time director to advance this work.
As listed in more detail in the All Funds Overview, several reclassifications and new positions are recommended in the proposed budget. Firefighter I moves from range 6 to 7; Firefighter II moves from range 7 to 8; Crew Supervisor is reclassified as Crew Superintendent
and moves from range 9 to 11; Chief Court Clerk is reclassified to Court Administrator and
moves from range 11 to 15; City Clerk is retitled to Chief of Staff (City Clerk); Facilities
Superintendent and Sanitation Services Superintendent positions are recommended to be
reclassified to Assistant Public Works Director; a Planner position is recommended to be
reclassified to Planning and Zoning Manager; Digital Media Specialist is reclassified to
Communications Coordinator and the part-time Content Writer is recommended to become
a full-time Communications Coordinator; a part-time Administrative Investigator in Police
is recommended to become a full-time Accreditation Manager and Open Records Custodian
at range 13; a new Volunteer Coordinator is recommended at range 9 with one-half of funding from the Tourism Bureau; an additional Court Clerk as well as a Sanitation Equipment
Operator I position are recommended; and the Innovation and Strategy Director position at
range 18 is recommended.
To carry out the goals of the City’s new Parks and Recreation plan, six new positions are
needed including 3 Recreation Coordinators at range 2; Tennis Pro at range 8; Center Operations Manager at range 11; and Out-of-School Time Manager at range 11.
A number of organizational changes will be made in the next fiscal year in an effort to
improve service delivery. The Active Living division and Children and Youth Services division are being combined into the Parks and Recreation department. This merger will eliminate service redundancy for a similar customer base and will leverage resources to improve
all aspects of parks and recreation services, including out-of-school time (formerly afterschool and summer camp) programming. The Parks and Recreation department will move
from the Community and Economic Development department to the Public Works department. This will allow the parks and recreation facility needs to be more closely aligned with
the public works staff that support and maintain the recreation grounds and facilities.

CITY OF DECATUR

ix

Development services currently housed in the Public Works department will transfer to the
Community and Economic Development department. These services include developmentrelated licensing, inspections, permitting, codes enforcement and arborist. This organizational change will enhance coordination with the city planning function and result in an
improved experience for homeowners, contractors and developers. It is anticipated that this
transition will occur over a 6-month period. The reclassification of a Planner position to
Planning and Zoning Manager will enable the Planning and Economic Development Director to provide a greater focus on economic growth activities as described in the strategic plan.
Ultimately, the purpose of reclassifications, new positions, and reorganizations is to create
the best environment for employees to thrive and for employees to fulfill the goals of the
strategic plan and other supporting plans.
The Plan is the Story
As we spend the year of the City’s bicentennial documenting the stories that paint a picture
of our community, the City’s strategic planning process is a story that should not be overlooked. The planning process conducted every 10 years is practically taken for granted by
residents and many are not aware that the first strategic plan in 2000 grew out of community frustrations, anger and a general concern that the community lacked direction, and the
qualities of the City that people cherished felt threatened. The driver for the initial community dialogue, called the Decatur Roundtables, may be debated but there is no question that
these community conversations resulted in the 2000 strategic plan process. Decisions made
by community members and leaders 25 years ago set the foundation and expectation for
community visioning for decades.
There are six primary topic areas that reflect the themes that emerged from the 2020 strategic planning process:
•

Equity and Racial Justice

• Climate Action

• Civic Trust

• Affordable Housing

• Mobility

• Economic Growth

The plan identifies 60 specific action items to be accomplished by 2030 and provides the
blueprint for how the City will prioritize its work program and allocate its assets over the
ten-year Community Work Program Action Plan. The City has launched an online, visualization dashboard system to track progress on strategic plan goals. The budget narrative
provides details about the specific action items that are included the proposed budget in
support of the plan.
Here are some highlights of the priorities in the Proposed 2023-2024 Budget.

x

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Equity and Racial Justice
Training will continue with organizations such as the Racial Equity Institute and the AntiDefamation League to help us understand and address racism and inequity. In 2020, an
employee equity and inclusion team was developed and charged with promoting racial
equity training, hosting conversations about race and racism, and identifying and addressing systemic bias within the organization. The employee Racial Equity Action Plan will be
completed in the current fiscal year and makes recommendations to operationalize equity
within the workplace. Other efforts to advance equity include the Police department’s use
of Guardian Score to allow the public to rate their experience with the department. This tool
was identified by members of the Better Together Advisory Board and supported by the
Police department as a tool to improve its relationship with the community. The City will
participate in the Georgia Municipal Association’s Certified City of Diversity, Equity, Inclu-

sion, and Belonging program that recognizes cities that adopt policies and practices that
promote equity and inclusion within their municipal government and community. The City
continues to hold itself accountable to its racial equity stand.
Climate Action
The climate crisis demands strategies that mitigate impacts by reducing greenhouse gas
emissions, and strategies that help us adapt to climate changes already underway. The proposed budget includes a Community Energy Fund that will help pay for recommendations
in the Clean Energy Plan. Other initiatives include additional solar arrays on city buildings
including the Decatur Recreation Center and the Police department; a pilot composting
program; a green business certification; and conversion to LED lighting in city facilities.
Civic Trust
In order to fully meet the needs of its community, a government must earn and foster the
trust of that community. The strategic plan is a contract that the City has with the community and the City must be open and transparent about its progress towards specific goals.
The online dashboard for the strategic plan will continue to be enhanced over the next year
to make it a valuable tool for reporting on the plan. Other efforts to strengthen trust include
greater investments in communications staff and the future inclusion of youth on city advisory boards.
Affordable Housing
The Affordable Housing Task Force report from February 2020 has provided a guide for the
City’s actions to support and promote affordable housing. Most recently, the City Commission adopted the “missing middle” ordinance to allow duplex, triplex and quadplex
developments back into single-family neighborhoods. This policy will go into effect in June
2023. New and expanded homestead exemptions were passed in the State legislature this
past session and will be on a referendum in the fall. If approved, additional tax relief will
be provided to residential homeowners. The proposed budget includes funding for architectural plans for affordable housing on a handful of city-owned lots. Also, city staff will
explore options for an employer assisted housing program. The City will continue to work
closely with the Decatur Land Trust on opportunities to expand affordable housing. One
such opportunity will be the lot at the corner of Commerce Drive and E. Ponce de Leon
Avenue. The Decatur Land Trust was created in 2019 as a vehicle to preserve owner-occupied single-family homes at affordable prices, to promote and finance the construction of
accessory dwelling units as an aging-in-place affordable housing model, and to partner with
developers of for-sale dwellings to permanently maintain affordability to income-qualified
households.

Budget Message
from the
City Manager

Racial Equity
Stand
The City of Decatur is
an organization that
embraces diversity,
equity and inclusion with
clear intentional actions
in order to dismantle
systemic racism and bias.
We commit to proactively
listen, learn and act
to promote equitable
outcomes and to cultivate
a culture where everyone
feels heard, welcome and
valued. We accept this
responsibility and pledge to
hold ourselves accountable
for our actions.

A transfer of $100,000 is being recommended to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Policies and procedures are being developed to guide the use of the funds in the Trust Fund.
Mobility
Mobility initiatives seek safer and more affordable ways to move more people around the
City. City staff will assess the GoDecatur circulator bus and make recommendations for
improvements as needed. Over the next year, there will be updates to the Unified Development Ordinance related to alternative fuel infrastructure in developments and staff will initiate a parking management plan. With an emphasis on safety and a desire to slow vehicles
in school zones, the school zone speed enforcement program is expected to start next fall in
five school zones.
CITY OF DECATUR

xi

Economic Growth
Decatur’s economic growth initiatives seek to help existing businesses thrive and attract
affordable, equitable and diverse businesses to the community. The City will continue
to partner with the Downtown Development Authority on such programs as the façade
improvement program, a guide to opening a new business and a retail recruitment plan. A
major driver of the direction of future economic growth will be the Town Center Plan 2.0,
the Downtown Master Plan that is expected to be completed near the end of the current fiscal year.
An Urban Oasis-the Natural and Built Environment
At a Decatur Youth Council meeting this year, when members were asked what they liked
about the City, we heard comments about walkability, the Square, parks, bike lanes, trees,
recreation centers, and Decatur Legacy Park. These amenities are a combination of the
natural and built environment that complement each other to create our urban oasis. Over
the next year, the City will continue to invest in capital infrastructure as part of the built
environment including:
• South Columbia Drive multi-use path
• Atlanta Avenue railroad crossing improvement and W. Howard Avenue traffic calming
• Installation of electric vehicle charging stations
• North Decatur Road improvements
• Adair Street traffic calming
• Sidewalk maintenance and improvements
• Street milling, repair and paving
A number of projects to protect the natural environment are included in the budget:
• Invasive plant removal and woodland restoration at Decatur Legacy Park and other parks
under the guidance of an Urban Naturalist
• Community education about the tree canopy ordinance
• Converting City property on N. Parkwood Road to greenspace
• Urban Greening pilot program
• Storm water master plan projects
Many of these projects are budgeted in the Capital Improvement Fund. Transfers totaling
$3,050,000 over both fiscal years are proposed from the General Fund to the Capital Improvements Fund to fund the gap between the Capital Improvements Fund tax revenues and
proposed expenditures. Use of fund balance for one-time capital projects is appropriate and
supported by the City’s financial policies.
In addition to the funds generated by the Capital Improvement Fund tax, the Special
Purpose Local Option Sales Tax (SPLOST) approved by the voters in November 2017 is
earmarked for existing debt service, the Atlanta Avenue railroad crossing improvement and
other transportation-related improvements such as sidewalks, multi-use trails and transportation safety. If revenue projections are accurate, we will be able to cover outstanding debt
service, the Atlanta Avenue and West Howard Avenue improvements project and have funds
available for other improvements that benefit pedestrians and bicyclists. The State legislature approved a bill for SPLOST II which will be on a referendum in November 2023. If
approved, the revenue from SPLOST II will continue to cover outstanding debt service as
well as capital projects that will be identified in advance of the November referendum.
xii

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Federal/State Funds Making a Local Impact
For the first time in over a decade, community project funding at the federal level is available to local governments. The City has been awarded over $2 million in community
project funding over the past year for the following projects.

Budget Message
from the
City Manager

• $750,000 – Legacy Park South Housing Village – Congressman Hank Johnson
• $209,000 – Legacy Park Creative Village – Congressman Hank Johnson
• $750,000 – Solar at Decatur Recreation Center – Congresswoman Nikema Williams
• $500,000 – Solar at Decatur Police Department – Senator Jon Ossoff
Other recent grant awards include:
• $170,000 – Pilot Composting Program - Environmental Protection Division
• $388,950 – Floodplain Repetitive Loss – FEMA
• $75,000 – Summer Camp – GA Department of Education
• $50,000 – Legacy Pond Boardwalk – National Fish and Wildlife Foundation
In March 2021, the federal American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) was authorized to provide
financial relief and support programs in response to the effects of the coronavirus pandemic.
The City was allotted $9,595,820 paid in two equal installments of $4,797,910. This is a
substantial sum for a community that normally has under $5,000,000 to spend annually on
capital needs. These federal funds will allow the City to complete priority capital projects
that otherwise would have been delayed or not achieved. To date, the City has committed
over $3,700,000 to the South Housing Village affordable housing development at Legacy
Park and $3,000,000 for partial funding of an athletic field and track at Legacy Park in
partnership with the City Schools of Decatur, and $115,000 for hybrid meeting technology
at the Decatur Recreation Center. Spent funds include $513,340 for pandemic premium
pay, $21,338 on municipal court video streaming and recording technology, and $22,488 on
Covid-19 testing supplies. It is anticipated that the remaining $2,000,000 will be committed
to storm water capital projects identified in the storm water master plan.
Financial Discipline Creates Opportunities
Historically, the City has employed conservative budget and financial policies and practices.
A 2022 ratings report from Moody’s Investor Service stated, “The Aa1 rating reflects the
city’s strong operating performance resulting in healthy fund balance and liquidity levels,
supported by conservative budgeting practices and adherence to formalized fiscal policies.”
For example, the City fully funds all positions as though they will be filled throughout the
whole fiscal year and uses realistic collection rates when estimating property tax collections.
This conservative budgeting approach has resulted in a healthy fund balance which has enabled the City to weather economic downturns, be prepared for unanticipated expenditures
and have funds available for unique opportunities consistent with strategic plan goals that
are not included in the budget.
The proposed budget leverages the City’s strong financial position to advance a variety of
bold community goals and make significant investments in the internal organization of the
City.
The City’s financial policies recommend maintaining a fund balance equal to twenty to
thirty percent of operating expenses. A prudent use of fund balance consistent with our
conservative financial policy continues in this budget. At the end of 2021-2022, the fund
balance for the General Fund totaled $16,591,233 which is 51% of the 2022-2023 Revised
Budget Estimate. The 2022-2023 Revised Budget anticipates using $4,230,810 in fund balance. This is $347,310 more than the amount originally planned in the 2022-2023 adopted

CITY OF DECATUR

xiii

budget and will reduce fund balance to $12,360,423 or 39% of the 2022-2023 Revised Budget Estimate. The increase in the use of fund balance is primarily due to an increase in the
transfer to the Capital Improvements Fund from $750,000 to $2,500,000. The 2023-2024
Proposed General Fund budget anticipates using $4,145,816 of fund balance and will leave
a fund balance of $8,214,607 or 21% of the 2023-2024 Proposed General Fund budget.
The fund balance policy expressly allows the City to budget the use of fund balance for
one-time expenditures. One-time expenditures paid for by the use of fund balance in 20232024 include the balance of the Downtown Master Plan, a Cultural Arts Plan, a transfer to
the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and a transfer to the Capital Improvement Fund.
The remaining fund balance will be within the City’s adopted policy guidance and is adequate to meet unanticipated or emergency needs.
The property tax digest is the value of all taxable property within the City. The budgeted
property tax revenue assumes a 14% increase in the tax digest. These increases reflect a
robust real estate market in which home sales remain strong and new development and
investment in commercial property continue.
Due to the increase in the value of the tax digest, a 0.70 mill reduction in the 2023 millage
rates is recommended as follows: General Fund from 10.59 to 10.09 mills, Bond Fund from
2.20 to 2.03 mills and DDA Fund from .0.38 to 0.35 mills.
In addition to the positive financial indicators described above, the City maintains an AA+
bond rating from Standard & Poor’s and Aa1 from Moody’s. The proposed budget includes
payments of all annual debt service and is described in detail in the Debt Service Summary.
We Cultivate What We Cherish
As we reflect on our community’s bicentennial and look toward the next 200 years, our focus is on what our community cherishes most – our children and youth. Children and youth
are at the core of every decision, every plan, every project. Through organizations like the
Decatur Youth Council and Child Friendly Cities Initiative, the voices of the next generation are amplified and included in decision-making and policy setting. In June 2023, City
leaders, staff and Decatur teens will share our story on a national stage at the National Civic
League’s All-America City Award event about how we are creating a thriving community
through youth engagement. Not only are we investing in community improvements for our
children and youth, we are making those improvements with them. The recent skate park
design initiated by city youth is an excellent example of how the community will be better
for listening and engaging with our youth.
In the spirit of the budget’s cover art, “Cultivate,” the proposed budget reflects the highest
ideals of public stewardship. It honors the City’s commitment to implementing the strategic
plan; it provides the means for an engaged workforce; it elevates equity in decision-making;
and it cultivates our future leaders.
Completion of the 2022-2023 Revised Budget Estimates and 2023-2024 Proposed Budget
Estimates would not be possible without the assistance of our Finance and Human Resources staff, the teamwork and support shown by City employees in all departments, and
particularly without the dedication and work of City Clerk Meredith Roark.

xiv

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Andrea Arnold
City Manager

Budget Guide
& Schedule
Budget FY 2023-2024

FISCAL YEAR 2023-2024

Budget Guide
The city’s charter requires the City Manager to prepare an annual budget on the basis of
estimates submitted by the directors of departments and approved by the City Commission.
The budget document is the result of months of planning. The budget allocates the city’s
limited financial resources to provide services based on organizational and community
priorities. The resulting document becomes the plan that guides departments’ operations
throughout the fiscal year.
The budget period is the city’s fiscal year which begins on July 1 and ends on June 30.
While budgeting is an ongoing process, departments officially submit budget requests to
the City Manager, or her designee, in February. The budget is scheduled for adoption by the
City Commission on the third Monday in June. A detailed budget schedule is attached.
Georgia state law requires that the operating budget be balanced with current revenues and
other financing sources, including unreserved fund balance. Any unencumbered appropriations lapse at year-end and do not carry forward into the next fiscal year.
Throughout the year, the City Manager and department heads are provided with periodic
financial reports of revenues, expenditures and encumbrances compared with the adopted
budget. These reports allow staff to monitor and manage the budget as authorized by the
City Commission.

Process

In January, departments are notified in writing of the budget schedule including budget due
dates and departmental budget hearings. Any necessary forms related to the budget, performance measures and capital improvements planning are provided at this time.
Departments use prior and current year expenditure information to determine the resources
necessary to maintain the current level of service. Based on City Commission and community priorities, estimates may be developed for a change in service level. While departments
use past expenditures to develop their budgets, the budget process is a form of zero based
budgeting because departments must justify each account request annually (i.e. a budget
allocation in one year does not guarantee a continued allocation in the following year.)
Department budget requests are submitted to the City Manager and Chief of Staff for
review in late February. All department heads meet as a group with budget staff to present
their work plans and discuss their budget requests for the next year. This meeting is held in
March. During this time, vision-based budgeting teams are convened to prepare the narratives and document the resources being allocated towards each strategic plan principle.
Proposed and revised budget documents are presented to the City Commission at the
second commission meeting in May. Work sessions are held with the City Commission and
public hearings are held prior to the final adoption of the budget in June.

Budgetary Funds

The City’s accounts are organized by fund groups, each of which is treated as a separate accounting entity. Annual operating budgets are approved for the following funds:
General Fund: The general operating fund of the city. It accounts for resources tradition-

CITY OF DECATUR

3

ally associated with government that are not required to be accounted for in another fund.
Capital Improvement Fund: Established to account for the receipt and expenditures
of money from major capital projects. This fund is general in nature and may be used to
finance any capital project that the City Commission designates.
SPLOST Fund: Established to account for the receipt and expenditures of money from the
Special Purpose Local Option Sales Tax (SPLOST) that was approved by voters in November 2017. This fund will be used to finance debt service, construction of the Atlanta Avenue
transportation project and other transportation projects.
General Obligation Bond Fund: Established to account for the receipt and expenditures of money from the general obligation bond issued in 2007.
Urban Redevelopment Agency Funds: Established to account for the receipt and
expenditures of money from the bonds issued by the Urban Redevelopment Agency of the
City of Decatur in 2010 and 2013.
Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund: Established to account for the financing and
expenditure activity of a capital nature occurring within the cemetery. Financing is provided
by one-half of the proceeds from cemetery lot sales. This fund is intended to provide for the
capital needs of the cemetery into perpetuity.
Tree Bank Fund: Established for the purpose of collecting fees in lieu of planting replacement trees required for compliance with the tree ordinance. Fees are used to purchase
and plant trees in public parks, rights of way and other public properties, the purchase of
green space, and similar activities associated with maintaining and improving the city’s
public tree canopy.
Conference/Parking Deck Fund: Established to account for the activity of the conference center and parking deck.
Storm Water Utility Fund: Established to account for the collection of fees for repairs,
maintenance and construction of stormwater drains and other related expenses.
Solid Waste Enterprise Fund: Established to account for the collection of fees for residential and commercial sanitation service.
Debt Service Fund: Established to account for the accumulation of resources and payment of long-term obligations.
Grant Fund: Established to account for grants received from federal or state sources.
Confiscated Drug Fund: Established to account for the use of confiscated drug money
and/or assets by the city’s Police Department.
School Zone Camera Safety Program Fund: Established to account for the use of
fines by the city’s Police Department for public safety initiatives that were collected due to
violation of speed limits in school zones.
Emergency Telephone System (E911) Fund: Established to account for funds received for all emergency 911 charges and wireless enhanced charges.
Hotel/Motel Tax Fund: Established to account for the hotel/motel taxes collected as
required by general law.
4

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Children & Youth Services Fund: Established to account for the collection of participa-

tion fees and grants and expenditures related to the city’s after-school and summer programs. This fund will cease operating at the end of fiscal year 2022-2023.

Budget
Guide

Public Facilities Authority Fund: Established to account for the financial activities of
the City of Decatur Public Facilities Authority including debt issuance and debt service payments for Decatur Legacy Park.
Tax Allocation District Fund: Established for account for the tax allocation district
(TAD) in East Decatur Station area. A TAD is a tool used to pay for infrastructure and other
improvements in underdeveloped or blighted areas so that property becomes productive and
enhances the surrounding neighborhoods.
American Rescue Plan Act Funds: Established to account for the use of federal funds
granted to aid states, counties, and cities in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic and its
impacts “on the economy, public health, state and local governments, individuals, and businesses” for the period of March 2021 through December 2026.
Community Energy Fund: Established to account for the use of funds to advance the
City’s adopted clean energy goals by directing financial support to energy efficiency, electrification, and renewable energy projects in the Decatur community.

Basis of Budgeting

All fund budgets described above, with the exception of the stormwater, solid waste and
conference/parking deck funds, are prepared on a modified accrual basis meaning that
expenditures are budgeted if the obligation will be incurred that fiscal year and revenues are
budgeted if they are measurable and available. For example, an outstanding purchase order
is an example of an incurred expenditure. “Measurable” means the amount of the transaction can be determined and “available” means collectible within the budgeted fiscal period
or soon enough thereafter to pay liabilities of that fiscal period. For example, real property
tax bills that are billed in April and due in June are budgeted as revenue in the billing year.
The remaining funds are enterprise funds which are budgeted on a full accrual basis. Expenditures are recognized when a commitment is made and revenues are recognized when they
are obligated to the city (i.e. stormwater fee bill is generated).
The basis of accounting refers to the time at which revenues and expenditures or expenses
and the related assets and liabilities are recognized in the accounts and reported in the financial statements. In the city, the basis of budgeting and the basis of accounting are the same.

Account Coding Structure

The City of Decatur follows the State of Georgia’s Uniform Chart of Accounts for Local
Governments. The primary goal for the development of this chart is to improve government
accountability by making financial information reported more comparable, thereby enabling
local policy makers and taxpayers to better understand and evaluate local government
operations and service delivery.
100 – The first 3 digits represent the fund. For example, 100 is the General Fund.
1320 – The next 4 digits represent the department/division for expenditures, or 0000 for
revenues.
52 – The next 2 digits represent the account class. This is either an asset, liability, revenue
or expenditure.
3400 – The last 4 digits represent the balance sheet account, revenue source or expenditure
object.
CITY OF DECATUR

5

The following are examples of the City’s account coding structure.
100-1320-523400
This series of numbers would be used to code an expense to the City Manager’s Office.
100 – General Fund
1320 – City Manager’s Office
523400 – Printing & Binding
215-0000-342500
This series of numbers would be used to code the Emergency Telephone System fund’s
revenue from wired phone lines.
215 – E911 Fund
0000 – Revenue
342500 – E911 Phone Line Fees
After the 3 digit fund number, the next 4 numbers for expenditures represent the function
classifications.
1000 – General Government
2000 – Judicial
3000 – Public Safety
4000 – Public Works
6000 – Culture/Recreation
7000 – Housing and Development

Line Item Descriptions
PERSONNEL
Personnel Services include expenditures made as compensation for services rendered by
City employees and officials.
511100 Regular Salaries and Wages. Includes the salaries of all City employees who are
working full time hours as defined in the City of Decatur’s Employee Handbook.
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages. Includes the wages of all City employees who are working part time hours or on a contract basis as defined in the City of Decatur’s Employee
Handbook.
511300 Overtime. Includes the overtime costs anticipated during the fiscal year.
511400 Special Events Overtime. Includes the overtime costs associated with working during special events that will be reimbursed by the event organizer.
512100 Employer Group Insurance. Includes the City’s portion of health, dental, life and
disability insurance for employees and their dependents.
512200 Social Security (FICA). Includes the mandatory withholding match for FICA that is
a fixed percentage of salaries.
512300 Medicare. Includes the mandatory withholding match for Medicare that is a fixed
percentage of salaries.
6

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

512400 Retirement Contributions. Includes the City’s retirement contribution for all employees.

Budget
Guide

512401 Retirement Contributions – ICMA. Includes the City’s retirement contribution for
the City Manager, Deputy City Manager and Assistant City Managers.
512600 Unemployment Insurance. Includes the employer payment of Unemployment
Insurance paid on behalf of employee.
512700 Workers Compensation. Includes the employer payment of Workers Compensation
premiums paid on behalf of employee.

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Other Services and Charges include all expenses that involve the performance of a certain
service by an outside individual &/or organization or for a particular business concern. Such
service usually involves no tangible or concrete articles.
521200 Professional Services. Includes all fees for the retention of professional or technical
services provided by outside individuals, organizations or firms including legal an auditing
services.
522200 Repairs and Maintenance. Includes all fees for the repair and maintenance of city
facilities, communication equipment, machines, office equipment and vehicles.
522310 Rental of Land and Buildings. Includes all expenditures associated with renting
space not owned by the City of Decatur.
522320 Rental of Equipment and Vehicles. Includes all costs associated with renting/leasing
copiers, printers and similar equipment or vehicles needed for travel to out of state training.
522321 Auto Allowance. Includes all expenses involved in the compensation of city employees for use of private vehicle on city business.
522500 Other Contractual Services. Includes all services that cannot be reasonably allocated to any of the other services and charges accounts.
523101 Insurance- Awards. Includes all expenses involved in the payout of insurance
claims.
523201 Postage. Includes all postage meter charges and other postage expenses related to
the cost of outgoing city mail.
523202 Telephone. Includes all expenses involved in telephone service for city business.
523300 Advertising. Includes all costs of classified and legal advertising.
523400 Printing and Binding. Includes all costs of materials, printing or processing involved in the reproduction of items by an outside firm which items are specifically designed
or reproduced for the use of a city department/division.
523600 Dues and Fees. Includes all costs involved in subscriptions to periodical magazines
and professional publications as well as charges for dues to professional organizations.
523700 Education and Training. Includes registration and tuition expenses related to training courses and seminar costs. This account also includes funding for educational financial
assistance for college and technical schooling related to the job.
523701 Business Meetings. Includes all expenses related to meals, lodging associated with
authorized travel.

CITY OF DECATUR

7

523800 Licenses. Includes all costs involved in obtaining professional certifications.
523911 Bank Charges. Includes all expenses related to the processing of credit card transactions for city business purposes.

SUPPLIES
Supplies includes all purchases of tangible parts, provisions and tools for replacement purposes and any new equipment purchases which are less than $5,000.
531101 Supplies – Building and Fixed Equipment. Includes all expenses involved in repairing and maintaining city facilities.
531102 Supplies – Janitorial. Includes all items used in cleaning and general custodial
maintenance for city facilities.
531104 Supplies – Miscellaneous Maintenance. Includes all items for maintenance that cannot be reasonably allocated to any of the other supply accounts.
531105 Supplies – Office. Includes all office supplies designed for general use in any office.
531106 Supplies – Pesticides and Herbicides. Includes all purchases of fertilizers and insecticides used to maintain existing shrubbery and lawns.
531107 Supplies – Specialized Departmental. Includes all items for use in a department that
cannot be reasonably allocated to any of the other supply accounts.
531108 Supplies – Tires and Batteries. Includes all items used to repair, maintain or replace
tired on city vehicles and equipment.
531109 Supplies – Vehicles and Equipment. Includes all purchases of lubricants and expendable supplies used by motor equipment and vehicles.
531111 Computer Equipment. Includes all purchases of hardware less than $5,000. Examples include laptops, keyboards, mouse, flash drive and small multi-function printers.
531112 Computer Software. Includes all purchases of software less than $5,000 as well as
the ongoing maintenance fees associated with software systems.
531113 Office Equipment and Furniture. Includes all purchases of minor furniture pieces
having a cost less than $5,000 such as chairs, bookcases and file cabinets.
531114 Outdoor Furniture. Includes all purchases of minor furniture pieces for use outside
having a cost less than $5,000 such as picnic tables, benches and pool deck chairs.
531115 Batteries. Includes all purchases of batteries for city equipment and vehicles.
531270 Gasoline. Includes all purchases of fuel used by motor vehicles and equipment.
531300 Food – Subsistence and Support. Includes all food purchases for whatever purpose.
531400 Books and Periodicals. Includes all single issue purchases of copies of magazines,
books, pamphlets and training manuals.
531500 Supplies – Purchased for resale. Includes all items purchased with city funds that
are sold in concession stands and at retail locations.
531600 Small Equipment. Includes all purchases of minor equipment such as calculators,
handheld radios, chainsaws, etc. having a value of less than $5,000.
531700 Uniforms and Protective Equipment. Includes all purchases of uniforms and work
clothing.
8

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

CAPITAL OUTLAY
Capital outlay includes the purchase of furniture, fixtures, equipment, machinery, software
and infrastructure improvements which an original cost of over $5,000 and a life span of
more than two years. Such items should represent an addition to the new worth of the City.
Included below are the number and name of each capital line item presently in use.

Budget
Guide

541100 Sites.
541101 Right of Way.
541200 Site Improvements.
541300 Buildings.
541301 Building Improvements.
541400 Infrastructure.
542100 Machines, Motors and Power Tools.
542101 Communications Equipment.
542102 Office Machines/Equipment.
542200 Vehicles.
542301 Outdoor Furniture and Equipment
542401 Computer Systems Software.
542500 Miscellaneous Equipment.

Fund Balance

The accounting definition of fund balance is the difference between assets and liabilities on
the balance sheet. If revenues exceed expenditures at the end of the fiscal year, the remainder is identified as ‘fund balance’. The practice of conservative revenue estimates and
carefully monitored expenditures may result in a fund balance. The city’s financial policies
recommend an unassigned, formerly ‘unreserved’, fund balance between twenty and thirty
percent of the operating budget. The city does not budget for contingencies and therefore,
must rely on the fund balance for emergency expenditures. In some years, the city may
budget to use fund balance for one-time, non-recurring expenditures while remaining within
the acceptable level for fund balance.
In June 2011, the City Commission amended the city’s financial policies to reflect new
fund balance requirements under the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB)
Statement 54. The five classifications of fund balance can be found in the financial policies
in Appendix B.
In the fiscal year ending June 30, 2022, the general fund balance totaled $16,591,233 or
52% of the 2022-2023 revised operating budget. This was an increase of $3,576,535 from
the previous year’s fund balance. In the Revised 2022-2023 budget estimates, the city has
budgeted to use $4,238,810 of fund balance. In the FY 2023-2024 budget estimates, the city
has budgeted to use $4,145,816 of fund balance. Fund balance is estimated to be $8,214,607
at the end of FY 23-24 or 21% of the proposed operating budget.

Budget Revisions

Since the legal level of budgetary control is at the departmental level, each department head
has the authority to recommend budget transfers within the department budget to the City
Manager for approval. State law prohibits transfers within the ‘salaries’ line-items without
approval of the governing body.

CITY OF DECATUR

9

Concurrent with the budget process for the next fiscal year, revisions to the current year’s
budget are developed. The current year revised budget is adopted with the next year’s proposed budget. In the case that unanticipated budget revisions are necessary before the end
of the fiscal year, the budget may be amended with the approval of the City Commission.

Performance Measures

The city incorporates performance measures and objectives into the budget document. For
each department, there are at least three years of actual performance data. The city will
continue to improve upon the performance measurement program and make it a substantive
part of the budget development process.

Strategic Planning

In the fall of 1998 the city sponsored a community forum known as the Decatur Roundtables which involved 500 community members. A report of key concerns and action teams
developed from this process. This report and recommendations from the action teams
guided many of the City’s activities. Over 200 stakeholders helped develop a ten-year strategic plan based on the work of the Roundtables project. The strategic plan was completed
in the summer of 2000. Three core principles emerged from the plan:
A. Manage Growth While Retaining Character
B. Encourage Community Interaction
C. Provide Quality Services Within Fiscal Limits
In the spring and summer of 2010, the process was repeated with 1,500 stakeholders and the
2010 Strategic Plan was adopted in March 2011. The three core principles from the 2000
plan were updated and a fourth was added. For internal purposes, city staff developed a fifth
principle that recognizes the need for a city organization to support and achieve the other
strategic plan principles.
A. Manage Growth While Retaining Character
B. Encourage a Diverse and Engaged Community
C. Serve as Good Stewards of the Environment and Community Resources
D. Support a Safe, Healthy, Lifelong Community
E. Provide the Necessary Support within City Government to Achieve the Vision and Goals
of the Community
The plan identifies goals and specific tasks for each principle. The plan is reviewed annually
in conjunction with the budget to ensure the budget supports the plan’s principles and tasks
and incorporates community input into the budget process.
The 2020 Strategic Plan kickoff occurred in January 2020 and community roundtables met
through mid-March until needing to be paused due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The planning process resumed in Fall 2020 with citizen roundtable sessions that were held virtually
on four topics: Mobility, Housing, Equity & Racal Justice and Climate Change. The work
planning continued in 2021 with the hosting of online surveys and outdoor “pop-up” events
around the city to help compensate for the participation challenges imposed by the pandemic. The plan was adopted by the City Commission on October 28, 2021.

10

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

The 2020 Strategic Plan, also known as Destination:2030, includes six interconnected
themes:

Budget
Guide

• Equity & Racial Justice
• Climate Action
• Civic Trust
• Affordable Housing
• Mobility
• Economic Growth
The plan identifies policies and action items for each theme. The plan will be reviewed annually in conjunction with the budget to ensure the budget supports the plan’s themes and
action items and incorporates community input into the budget process.

Community Engagement

Each budget season, the city invites interested citizens to participate in discussions of the
budget process. These community budget gatherings were first held in 2002. Because of
the success and contribution of these meetings to the budget process, the city continues to
invite active citizen participation in the budget process through these community gatherings. The goal of the community budget gatherings is to provide relevant budget and financial information in an informal environment so that participants can better understand the
city’s budget process including how revenue and expenditure recommendations are made.
Starting in 2013, the city has held an annual Budget Expo or ‘Touch a Budget’ event. At this
event, structured much like a science fair or vendor expo, city staff set up stations representing each strategic plan principle and display equipment, documents and other materials that
are in the proposed budget and support each strategic plan principle. The public is invited
to attend and visit each principle area to learn more about the budget requests and how
they support the city’s overall strategic vision. This offers an informal setting for citizens
to meet employees from all departments and engage in a dialogue about City services and
programs. After a hiatus during 2020 and 2021, the event returned in March 2022 and was
combined with the City’s Touch a Truck Event. A repeat of the combined event occurred in
March 2023.

Budget Reporting

State law requires that the budget be posted on the Tax and Expenditure Data (TED)
website maintained by the Carl Vinson Institute of Government. In addition to complying
with that State law, the city also posts the budget on the city website and makes hard copies
available at multiple locations within the city.

CITY OF DECATUR

11

FISCAL YEAR 2023-2024

BUDGET SCHEDULE
January 23		Budget Memo and Schedule to Departments
February 24 PROPOSED and REVISED BUDGET REQUESTS including BVE
Worksheet(s), VBB-Strategic Plan Principles Worksheet(s) and
CIP Requests DUE BY 5:00 pm
March 3

Proposed Personnel Requests due to City Manager’s Office

March 3

Personnel Estimates and Health Insurance Estimates Due

March 6		City Commission Adopts Billing Ordinance, 2023 Sanitation
Fees and 2023 Storm Water Utility Fees
March 6		Budget Narrative drafting begins
March 14

BUDGET REVIEW MEETING-DEPARTMENT HEADS

March 21

Budget Request Follow-up

March 22

10 Year Capital Plan Drafting

March 25

BUDGET EXPO with Touch A Truck (Rain date = April 1st)

March 31		Prepare Notice for Decatur FOCUS
April 1

Tax Bill Mailing Deadline

April 5

Revenue Projections Due

April 5

BUDGET NARRATIVE FINALIZED

April 14

Draft Proposal to City Manager (tentative)

April 28

Preliminary Budget Complete

May 11

Public Hearing Announcements to Legal Organ

May 15		Presentation of Budget to Commission and Adoption of
Tentative 2023 Millage Rates
May 18

Public Hearing Ads Published in Legal Organ

May 25

Public Hearing Ads Published in Legal Organ

June 1

Public Hearing Ads Published in Legal Organ

June 5

Public Hearing on Budget and Millage Rates

June 7

Extended Work Session

June 13		Public Hearing on Budget and Millage Rates
June 20

Public Hearing on Budget and Millage Rates,
Adoption of FY 2023-2024 Budgets and Revised 2022-2023
Budgets, and Adoption of Final 2023 Millage Rates

12

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Budget
Narrative
Budget FY 2023-2024

FISCAL YEAR 2023-2024

Budget
Narrative

F

irst chartered as a municipality by the State of Georgia in 1823, the City of
Decatur serves as the county seat of DeKalb County, a large, urban county in
the Atlanta metropolitan area. Decatur’s population has steadily increased since
1990 and with almost 25,000 residents as of the 2020 Census, it now exceeds the
previous high of 22,000 persons in 1960. The City currently occupies a land area
of approximately 4.7 square miles, making it one of the most densely populated
cities in the State of Georgia. The City’s sustained commitment to a long-range vision with
balanced growth and development has resulted in a community well known for its high
quality of life, vibrant commercial districts and a model of Smart Growth in the region.

Decatur will
foster an
equitable,
thriving, and
welcoming
community for
all, today and
in the future.

The City of Decatur’s central location in DeKalb County and proximity to the City of Atlanta and Emory University make it an attractive location for a wide range of professional
services, legal, financial, medical and technology businesses. Decatur is home to educational institutions such as Agnes Scott College and Columbia Theological Seminary, as well
as the headquarters for a number of non-profit organizations including the Task Force for
Global Heath. A number of locally owned restaurants and retail businesses also make the
City of Decatur a destination shopping and dining district in metro-Atlanta. The essential
nature of these services and the stability of health and education-related businesses provide
a solid basis for the City’s economic wellbeing.
The City of Decatur centers on a thriving downtown business district that is surrounded
by beautiful, historic neighborhoods reflecting a variety of architectural styles. Downtown
Decatur offers a healthy mix of office, retail, restaurant and residential uses designed to
encourage walking and an active lifestyle for persons of all ages. New buildings blend with
historic commercial buildings and surround a traditional courthouse square. Downtown
residents in mid-rise, mixed-use condominiums and apartments have created a new type
of neighborhood providing a desirable housing option for empty nesters and young professionals seeking an urban lifestyle. These residents contribute to the economic vitality of
the downtown commercial district. Smaller neighborhood commercial centers scattered
throughout the City also contribute to the sense of community and vibrancy of surrounding
neighborhoods by providing opportunities for residents to walk to a variety of shopping and
dining options.
The City’s well-regarded local public school system attracts families to the City’s neighborhoods. The City Schools of Decatur provide one citywide early childhood education center,
five neighborhood K-2 elementary schools, two system-wide 3-5 upper elementary schools,
one middle school and one high school.
The City of Decatur is authorized to levy a property tax on both real and personal properties located within its boundaries, and the City provides a full range of municipal services

CITY OF DECATUR

15

to support its residents, businesses and visitors. These services include public safety, public
works, planning and zoning, sanitation, engineering, municipal court, parks and recreation,
a municipal cemetery and community and economic development. The City also owns a
280-space parking facility and a 25,000 square foot conference center. In addition to these
traditional municipal services, the City of Decatur is committed to providing a high quality
of life for its residents and supports a volunteer program, an award-winning afterschool
program and a wide variety of special events and civic engagement activities.
The City has three MARTA transit stations and multiple bus routes within its 4.7 square
miles, providing direct transit access to downtown Atlanta, Hartsfield-Jackson International
Airport and many of the region’s colleges and universities. In addition to public transit, the
City supports and encourages a wide variety of alternative transportation options including
walking, bicycling, the Clifton Corridor shuttle to Emory University and the GoDecatur
Circulator Shuttle connecting Decatur residents to goods and services in its commercial
districts.
Decatur’s tree-lined streets, strong sense of community, high quality services and nationally
recognized public school system continue to draw residents to the City. The City of Decatur
has evolved into a livable, small urban city with all the benefits of living in a major metropolitan area. This balance of urban amenities and small town character has made the City of
Decatur an attractive option for business owners, entrepreneurs and individuals seeking an
opportunity to reside and work in the same community.
History
The City of Decatur was incorporated on December 10, 1823 and is named in honor of
Commodore Stephen Decatur, a U.S. Naval hero. Commodore Decatur died in 1820 and
Congress decreed that his name be honored throughout the nation. As a result, more than
40 cities and counties around the United States bear his name. The City of Decatur, Georgia
is the second oldest municipality in the Atlanta metropolitan area and the seat of DeKalb
County. Decatur adjoins Atlanta’s city limits and is six miles east of downtown Atlanta.

This painting of
Captain Stephen
Decatur, USN, by
John Wesley Jarvis,
is part of the U.S.
Naval Academy Museum Collection.

16

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

The courthouse square in downtown Decatur is located on a rise of land where
two Native American trails once crossed. The Old Courthouse on the Square is
the fourth courthouse building to occupy the Square. Historically, the courthouse square served as the community-gathering place. Today, it continues
as the heart of the community, hosting festivals, special events, providing
greenspace and an open space to meet and relax with family and friends. The
historic commercial district is connected to the City’s surrounding residential
neighborhoods by an expanding network of sidewalks, bicycle lanes and a
regional trail system.
Decatur will celebrate its 200th birthday in 2023 with a variety of bicentennial events and activities designed to leave a legacy for generations to come.
Activities include collecting 200 stories about past and present Decatur, planting 200 trees throughout the community, and a contributing fundraiser for the
Decatur Land Trust, among others. The celebration culminates with a community celebration in December 2023 when Decatur was officially incorporated.
Government
The City of Decatur operates under the commission-manager form of government. The City
Commission determines the policies of the local government and enacts local laws necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. The City Commission provides
leadership in identifying community needs and developing programs to meet community
objectives. There are five City Commissioners, elected in nonpartisan elections, for overlap-

ping four-year terms. Two commissioners are elected from the north district, two from the
south district and one commissioner is elected at-large, giving every voter in the City the
opportunity to elect three of the five commissioners. Every year at its organizational meeting in January, the City Commission elects one of its members to serve as Mayor/Chair of
the City Commission. Patricia Garrett was elected Mayor in 2016. She has been a member
of the City Commission since 2009. Tony Powers was elected by his fellow commissioners
to serve as Mayor pro tem in 2018 and has served on the City Commission since 2016. The
other Commissioners are George Dusenbury, who has served since 2020; Lesa Mayer, who
has served since 2020; and, Kelly Walsh, who has served since 2018. It is the responsibility
of the Mayor to preside over all meetings of the City Commission. While the Mayor has
no veto power, the position retains the right to vote on all matters brought before the City
Commission. The Mayor’s vote carries the same weight as any other Commissioner.

Budget
Narrative

The City Commission appoints the members of a number of
volunteer boards and commissions who carry out responsibilities specified by State law, the City Charter, and local ordinances. These boards and commissions include the Decatur
Housing Authority, the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Decatur
Downtown Development Authority, the Planning Commission
and the Historic Preservation Commission. Special advisory
committees and task forces are also appointed by the City
Commission to provide community input on issues and projects
as needed. Currently, these boards include the Active Living
Board, the Better Together Advisory Board, the Lifelong Community Advisory Board, the Decatur Youth Council and the
Environmental Sustainability Board.
The City Commission appoints the Municipal Court Judges and
the City Attorney, who provides legal counsel for the government. The City Commission also appoints a City Manager to
provide professional management and direct the day-to-day
operations of the City. The City Manager serves as the Chief
Executive and Administrative Officer and is responsible for carrying out the policies and
ordinances of the City Commission, for overseeing the daily operations of the government,
the recruitment of all employees and serves at the pleasure of the commission. The current
City Manager, Andrea Arnold, has served in this position since January 2019, and has been
employed with the City since 1997.

The Decatur City Commission
(clockwise from bottom right);
Mayor Patti Garrett, Mayor Pro Tem
Tony Powers, and Commissioners
George Dusenbury, Kelly Walsh,
and Lesa Mayer.

Vision and Mission
Decatur will foster an equitable, thriving, and welcoming
community for all, today and in the future.
Successful organizations have a clear vision of where they are going and how they intend to
achieve their mission. The City of Decatur has a long history of engaging community members in crafting a strategic vision for the City – most recently in 2000, 2010 and 2020. To
support the vision, the City Commission holds an annual working retreat to reflect on past
achievements, identify future goals and discuss strategies and challenges to implementing
those goals. With the community vision as a guide, City Commissioners must balance the
needs of a diverse population, limited financial resources, federal and state mandates and
investments in aging public infrastructure, both planned and unanticipated.
Decatur’s Strategic Plan guides City government at the highest level by providing direction on policies and actions to bring the community’s vision for its future to life. In January

CITY OF DECATUR

17

MISSION
STATEMENTS
We Will:
1. THINK HOLISTICALLY.

Identify and leverage opportunities
to create interconnected policies,
programs, and projects that achieve
equitable outcomes across all
community priorities.

2. CONFRONT CLIMATE
CHALLENGES.

Align our goals and practices
to strengthen environmental
sustainability and resilience in our
city and region.

3. WORK TOGETHER.

Design and promote ample
and ongoing opportunities
for community engagement,
collaboration, and regional, crosssector partnerships.

4. EMBRACE
ACCOUNTABILITY.

Define what success looks like,
measure outcomes along the way,
and tell our story.

5. PIONEER
INNOVATION. Inspire

ourselves and others by continuing
to seek bold and creative solutions
in planning and doing.

18

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

2020, the City kicked off the planning process to create the award-winning 2020 Strategic
Plan as a guide for the next decade. An extensive effort was made to ensure broad participation by race, age, gender and geographical location in the planning process about issues
facing Decatur and to identify participants’ hopes and dreams for the City’s future. The task
list from the 2010 Strategic Plan served as a framework for budgeting and implementing
projects and programs over the last decade. By the time planning began for the next decade,
93% of the tasks on that previous list had been accomplished or were underway.
Using the information collected through Citizen Roundtables, Decatur 202 sessions, and
other virtual forums and pop-ups, the 2020 Strategic Plan known as Destination: 2030 was
developed and includes the following five mission statements you’ll find in the sidebar.
The 2020 Strategic Plan also contains themes, tasks and action items that present a shared
vision for our community. The six themes are:
Equity & Racial Justice
Climate Action
Civic Trust
Affordable Housing
Mobility
Economic Growth
As the diagram shows, the core themes are interrelated and one theme cannot be addressed
without considering the others. Emphasis is placed on Equity & Racial
Justice as it must be prioritized and
considered with each of the core
themes.
Ultimately more than 3,200 comments were received through the
three roundtable discussions; and the
robust community discussion guided
the development of the Strategic Plan
at every stage. Each comment was
recorded, analyzed and included in
the final report that the City Commission adopted in October 2021. The
entire plan is available at https://www.
decaturnext.com/2020-strategic-plan
and includes six themes/topics, 140
tasks and action items to be implemented over the course of 10 years,
some of which are incorporated into
the City’s comprehensive plan five-year community work program. The Strategic Plan is
also the foundation for Decatur’s annual budget, each part of which is tied directly to this
plan to show residents how city resources are allocated to support the community’s vision
and goals.
Performance Management
A progressive organization needs to know how well it is doing toward achieving its vision
and goals. The City has developed quantifiable measurements to track how efficiently
and effectively the organization is meeting its objectives. New measures are currently

in development for the recently adopted 2020 Strategic Plan. Selective benchmarking is
undertaken during the development of departmental budget requests. Performance measures
are reviewed by a cross-departmental committee on a regular basis to identify successful
processes and work on areas that need improvement. Measures are included throughout the
budget narrative to illustrate how the City is performing.

Budget
Narrative

Between 2006 and 2016, the City participated in the International City/County Management
Association’s (ICMA) Comparative Performance Measurement Program (CPM). CPM
provided performance measures in 16 service areas that the City used to evaluate existing services, to benchmark results with other communities and to exchange best practices
within a group of participating jurisdictions. In late 2016, CPM transitioned from being a
subscription-based service to a being a program advisor. Beginning in 2017, the City embarked on its own performance measurement program which was updated in 2022.
Budget
The annual budget serves as the foundation
for the City’s financial planning and control.
All city work groups submit departmental
budget requests to the City Manager’s Office by the first week of March. Utilizing the
tasks and action items described in the Strategic Plan, the departmental requests are the
starting point for developing the proposed
budget. Once departmental budgets are
submitted, department heads and senior staff
meet collectively to review all requests.
The proposed budget is formally presented
to the City Commission on the third Monday
in May. The operating budget includes both
proposed expenditures and revenues. The
City publishes a summary of the proposed
budget in the official legal organ (currently
The Champion Newspaper), makes copies available to the residents of the City, provides copies to the local library and posts the
proposed and revised budgets on the City’s website. Public hearings on the proposed budget
are held in June. The budget is then legally enacted through adoption of a budget resolution
by the City Commission, normally on the third Monday in June but no later than June 30,
the close of the fiscal year.
The budget document is a written plan that provides the financial basis for implementing
the City’s vision and related goals. It represents City departments’ best efforts at achieving
the vision within an environment of competing goals and limited resources. More information on the budget and the budget process can be found in the Budget Guide prior to this
section, beginning on page 3.
Vision Based Budgeting
As the City implements the 2020 Strategic Plan, the annual budget will serve as the primary
implementation tool to bring the community’s vision to life. The Vision Based Budget is a
financial planning document that allows the City to connect the community’s vision with
the necessary resources (personnel, equipment and funding) required for implementation. It
also describes in a narrative and with numbers, the programs, policies and projects identified in the Strategic Plan and each City department’s relationship to them.

CITY OF DECATUR

19

Equity & Racial Justice
Integrating proactive equity ambitions into every plan

National
Citizen Survey
2022
Would recommend living here
to someone who asks (% reported very
likely)
2008.................................................. 75
2010.................................................. 74
2012.................................................. 78
2014.................................................. 84
2016.................................................. 72
2018.................................................. 96
2020.................................................. 94
2022.................................................. 94
Openness and acceptance of the
community towards people of diverse
backgrounds (% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................. 82
2008.................................................. 87
2010.................................................. 88
2012.................................................. 90
2014.................................................. 82
2016.................................................. 79
2018.................................................. 77
2020.................................................. 76
2022.................................................. 75
Sense of Community
(% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................. 84
2008.................................................. 90
2010.................................................. 86
2012.................................................. 92
2014.................................................. 91
2016.................................................. 83
2018.................................................. 86
2020.................................................. 90
2022.................................................. 79
Residents’ connection and
engagement with their community
(% rated excellent/good)
2020.................................................. 85
2022.................................................. 80

20

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

In the field of local government, racism and its systemic impacts are often minimized and
relegated to the past. That exclusionary history is embedded in how we provide access
to everything from jobs to housing. To remove such barriers, we must plan in ways that
honor all perspectives and tell our stories in ways that incorporate the complete history of
our community, including the painful lessons of the past. Learning from these lessons will
require rethinking old priorities and altering status quo assumptions. While such changes
are too often framed as sacrifices, they are actually accelerants for achieving the stabilizing,
long-term goals of shared opportunity for all.
The following projects and action items have been identified in the 2020 Strategic Plan’s
Community Work Program to be completed over the next five years to support the Equity &
Racial Justice theme:
a. Establish a Reparations Task Force.
b. Update the Decatur Police Department’s Strategic Plan.
c. Achieve recognition as a Child-Friendly City.
d. Update the 2015 Better Together Community Action Plan.
e. Acknowledge and document Decatur’s entire history.
f. Launch a childcare voucher pilot program.
g. Designate staff to implement equity goals.
h. Create a diversity, equity and inclusion certificate program.
All of the themes, projects and action items are supported through the teamwork of staff
members across all city departments and various other stakeholders from the community.
The Reparations Task Force will be established as a community-directed task force that will
document historic and ongoing injustices committed against Black people in the City due
to enslavement, segregation, incarceration, displacement and gentrification and will also
address reparations.
The Police Department is committed to collaborating with community members in updating
its departmentally focused strategic plan that will guide all aspects of the Police Department, including equity, quality of life, mental health and use of force policies. Additionally,
popular programs such as the Junior Police Academy and Citizens Police Academy that
were paused due to the COVID-19 pandemic were reintroduced in fiscal year 2022-2023 in
order to continue strengthening the department’s bond with community members.
Organizational introspection is needed in order to meet the growing needs of the community. The creation of the 2020 Strategic Plan presented the City with an opportunity to
review existing policies and programs, plan updates and create new ones. City employment
at all levels should reflect the full diversity of the Atlanta region and employees should be
educated on the City’s commitment to equity. Every department partners with the Human
Resources Division in the Administrative Services Department to ensure that the City proactively recruits, hires and retains diverse and qualified staff.
A cross-departmental Employee Equity Team was created in early 2020 to create an environment of equity and inclusion where everyone in the organization is treated fairly, has
equitable opportunities and outcomes, and truly feels welcome and valued. In fiscal year
2022-2023, this team engaged with other staff members to develop a Racial Equity Action
Plan that spells out specific actions for how the City can become more equitable, including
the role of each department. The team also worked to develop equity-informed decision-

making tools for employees and leaders to employ to evaluate fairness of processes and
outcomes, intent and impact.

Budget
Narrative

The City recognizes that this work also needs dedicated staff to ensure that the goals presented in the Racial Equity Action Plan are eventually implemented. In fiscal year 2022-23
the City created and filled a new position, an Equity and Engagement Director, who coordinates efforts throughout the organization to implement equity-related goals. Some specific
tasks include creating and evaluating toolkits and policies related to equity and racial
justice. In partnership with the City Manager’s Office, Community and Economic Development Department and the Human Resources Division, the Equity and Engagement Director will coordinate internal anti-racism training, provide guidance on conflict resolution,
investigate concerns related to workplace discrimination, build relationships throughout all
levels of the organization and help boost morale.
In fiscal year 2023-24 the City plans to continue its efforts to diversify events and festivals,
business types, housing options and more. Events like the International Festival, first held
in March 2023, Decatur Day, a long-time tradition celebrating past and present residents of
the City of Decatur and the Beacon Hill Concert Series all celebrate cultural traditions that
will attract new audiences and may also offer opportunities for education and learning for
residents and visitors. This year the Beacon Hill Concert will appear in the form of a music
festival planned for May 20, 2023 and will highlight the stories of Beacon Hill, the thriving
Black community in Decatur during segregation. To diversify businesses in the City, a new
Guide to Opening a Business in Decatur coupled with a retail recruitment plan will move
this goal forward.
The City is looking at creative ways to expand housing options that promote diversity by
examining parcels owned by the City as potential locations for additional affordable housing units. Plans to generate new housing options at Decatur Legacy Park made headway
in fiscal year 2022-23 through a partnership with Decatur Housing Authority for the South
Housing Village where 132 affordable housing units are planned. The Cottage Court project
– which will provide workforce housing for City, City Schools of Decatur and Decatur
Housing Authority employees – also made headway in fiscal year 2022-23 with six new
small homes under development on Commerce Drive just north of College Avenue.
As Decatur uncovers its full history, an effort to record stories related to diverse lived
experiences in Decatur is a planned feature
of the bicentennial celebration. The 200
Stories Project – a partnership with Story
Corps and Savannah College of Art and
Design – will be unveiled to commemorate
the city’s 200th birthday as part of the festivities at a community celebration planned
for December 8-10, 2023. Another way the
City plans to address its history includes
land acknowledgement signs on city-held
properties to acknowledge that native
people previously occupied these lands and
were unjustly removed from it.

THEME 1: EQUITY AND RACIAL JUSTICE
Integrating proactive equity ambitions into every plan.
DEPARTMENT

ESTIMATED FINANCIAL IMPACT

Governmental Control.............................................................................................. $67,402
General Government ............................................................................................ $595,919
Community & Economic Development ....................................................... $381,789
Administrative Services . ...................................................................................... $702,585
Fire .................................................................................................................................. $271,462
Police ......................................................................................................................... $1,819,720
E-911. ............................................................................................................................. $462,029
Public Works .......................................................................................................... $1,862,280
Solid Waste.................................................................................................................. $805,530
Stormwater................................................................................................................. $268,510
Parks & Recreation................................................................................................ $4,225,674
TOTAL.............................................................................................. $11,462,899
CITY OF DECATUR

21

Climate Action
Cut emissions for the long-term, prepare to adapt now

National
Citizen Survey
2022
Quality of overall natural
environment (% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................n/a
2008.................................................. 78
2010.................................................. 75
2012.................................................. 81
2014.................................................. 87
2016.................................................. 79
2018.................................................. 78
2020.................................................. 84
2022.................................................. 80
Overall quality of natural
environment (% feel should focus on
in next two years)
2014.................................................. 84
2016.................................................. 86
2018.................................................. 87
2020.................................................. 89
2022.................................................. 86
Quality of recycling services
(% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................. 80
2008.................................................. 87
2010.................................................. 89
2012.................................................. 92
2014.................................................. 91
2016.................................................. 86
2018.................................................. 87
2020.................................................. 82
2022.................................................. 82

The climate crisis demands strategies that mitigate impacts by reducing greenhouse gas
emissions, and strategies that help us adapt to changes already underway. Challenges are
global, but Decatur can build local resilience by planning for intense storms, heat waves,
and other shocks; combining climate policies with policies addressing challenges in transportation, housing, and equity; and expanding partnerships with governments and non-profits at all levels. Residents, neighborhoods and businesses have roles, too. Our diets, energy
consumption, and waste disposal habits contribute to the problem and to potential solutions.
Without action, impacts will fall disproportionately on those already socially and economically disadvantaged.
The following projects and actions items have been identified in the 2020 Strategic Plan’s
Community Work Program to be completed over the next five years to support the Climate
Action theme:
a. Establish greenhouse gas reduction and clean energy targets.
b. Convert all City lighting to LED.
c. Create a Climate Action and Sustainability Plan.
d. Establish a green business certification.
e. Create a pilot compost collection program.
f. Conduct an urban heat island assessment.
g. Increase the tree canopy goal.
h. Require carbon footprint documentation with building permit applications.
i. Implement the Storm Water Master Plan.
j. Update the Community Forestry Management Plan.
k. Prepare a Greenspace and Recreation Facilities Master Plan.
In September 2022, the City of Decatur commission adopted Clean Energy Decatur, the
City’s Clean Energy Plan. City residents identified climate change as a top priority and this
plan will guide the City’s response to this pressing concern. The Clean Energy Plan sets
goals and outlines steps to efficiently and equitably transition Decatur away from fossil fuels. The plan also established greenhouse gas reduction and clean energy targets for
residents, visitors and overall city operations. Since all the themes are connected, the plan
also looks at data with a lens of equity. As cities work to incorporate social equity into climate policy and programs, many of them have found that accessing equity data has been a
major challenge. The Clean Energy Plan utilizes the Greenlink Equity Map, an online map
designed to help cities visualize equity-related issues and how burdens are spread across
neighborhoods. This platform is accessible to all city residents.
The Public Works Department is leading the City’s efforts in transitioning away from fossil fuels to clean energy. Conversion of streetlights and all outdoor fixtures, in addition to
indoor lighting, to energy saving LEDs was initiated in fiscal year 2022-2023 with more
to come in 2023-2024. The City is also creating a grant-funded pilot compost collection
program through which compostable material can be collected from local residences on a
fee-supported program basis. Additionally, the City’s internal sustainability policies related
to purchasing, building construction and performance, events and resource usage are under
review for clean energy updates. Staff is in the process of conducting an urban heat island
assessment which evaluates neighborhood-level impacts of increasing temperatures, heat
waves and power outages, particularly with regard to vulnerable populations. Solar panels

22

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

and battery storage has been installed on the Public Works building and additional solar
installations are planned for the Decatur Recreation Center and Police Department facility.

Budget
Narrative

The City revised its Tree Canopy Conservation Ordinance in January 2022, which included
an increase in the citywide tree canopy goal to 65%. A second arborist position was added
mid-year to the full-time staff roster to assist property owners and the City in achieving
its tree-related goals. An urban naturalist position was added in fiscal year 2022-2023 to
address the upkeep of the City’s natural areas and greenspaces. A multi-year invasive plant
removal project at Decatur Legacy Park is already underway with assistance from the
experts at Trees Atlanta.
The City is committed to investing in its
future by implementing the Storm Water
Master Plan which was adopted in December
2020. The plan is directed toward mitigating
flooding, solving drainage problems, improving water quality and quality of life in the
City. In fiscal year 2022-2023, design of three
projects took place: Park Drive and Candler
Drive, Brower Street and McClean Street, and
Derrydown Way.
In fiscal year 2022-23 the City developed
a Parks and Recreation Master Plan – also
known as Recreatur – which identifies and
addresses community priorities including
greenspace acquisition and preservation as
well as upgrades to and maintenance of parks
and City facilities to be sure that they continue
to be attractive, efficient, sustainable and accessible. Representatives from the City, City
Schools of Decatur, Decatur Youth Council,
Active Living Advisory Board, Environmental
Sustainability Board, Better Together Advisory Board, Decatur Housing Authority, Safe
Routes to School Committee, Beacon Hill
Black Alliance and Agnes Scott College were
appointed to the Parks and Recreation Master
Plan Steering Committee in March 2022.
The Steering Committee served as an advisory group to the consultants and city staff
throughout the project, which was adopted by
the City Commission in March 2023.
In fiscal year 2023-2024, new initiatives are
planned in the Community and Economic Development Department (CED). CED plans to
partner with the Decatur Business Association
and the Environmental Sustainability Board
to develop a green business certification. CED
also plans to establish incentives or requirements related to greenspace requirements to
meet goals of the parks and recreation plan.

THEME 2: CLIMATE ACTION
Cut emissions for the long-term, prepare to adapt now.
DEPARTMENT

ESTIMATED FINANCIAL IMPACT

Governmental Control......................................................................................... $67,402
General Government ....................................................................................... $529,706
Community & Economic Development ................................................. $763,578
Administrative Services . ................................................................................. $351,293
Fire ............................................................................................................................ $678,654
Police ....................................................................................................................... $145,578
E-911. ........................................................................................................................... $27,178
Public Works ...................................................................................................... $1,427,748
Solid Waste............................................................................................................. $537,020
Stormwater........................................................................................................ $1,074,040
Parks & Recreation.............................................................................................. $704,279
TOTAL............................................................................................ $6,306,475
CITY OF DECATUR

23

Civic Trust
Empowering bold ambitions with high trust

National
Citizen Survey
2022
Overall opportunities for education,
culture and the arts (% rated
excellent/good)
2006-2012........................................n/a
2014.................................................. 91
2016.................................................. 88
2018.................................................. 87
2020.................................................. 86
2022.................................................. 74

The following projects and action items have been identified in the Strategic Plan’s Community Work Program to be implemented over the next five years to support the Civic Trust
theme:

Availability of affordable quality
child care (% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................. 51
2008.................................................. 52
2010.................................................. 50
2012.................................................. 55
2014.................................................. 76
2016.................................................. 60
2018.................................................. 59
2020.................................................. 62
2022.................................................. 49

e. Expand community information kiosks.

Quality of services provided by the
City of Decatur (% rated as excellent/
good)
2006.................................................. 84
2008.................................................. 88
2010.................................................. 89
2012.................................................. 94
2014.................................................. 90
2016.................................................. 90
2018.................................................. 91
2020.................................................. 88
2022.................................................. 81
Quality of emergency preparedness
(% rated as excellent/good)
2006.................................................n/a
2008.................................................. 68
2010.................................................. 81
2012.................................................. 84
2014.................................................. 79
2016.................................................. 79
2018.................................................. 80
2020.................................................. 82
2022.................................................. 85
24

A community thrives when governments and citizens work together to respond to challenges. Success moves at the speed of trust—trust that comes with citizens’ confidence that
government is responding to their concerns with actions that solve problems and expand
opportunities. The greater the trust, the more support for ambitious plans. The tools Decatur
uses to build and inspire trust include constant community conversation about the alignment
of goals and the strategies to achieve them; a track record of connecting listening, action
and measurable outcomes; and a commitment to transparency every step of the way.

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

a. Develop a formalized public information process.
b. Create a one-stop app.
c. Create an online permit portal.
d. Launch a plan implementation dashboard.
The City Manager’s Office, in partnership with every department, charts the course in
clearly asserting the City’s responsibility to its citizens through various means. It is critical to leverage existing citizen networks as communication partners to ensure community
members are provided with public input opportunities that allow them to take ownership of
and actively shape municipal affairs. Developing a formalized public information process
is an important action item that will authorize the Public Information Officer to establish
consistent communications protocols and build a website-centric communications strategy.
The City’s robust website will become the primary source of community information, but
a variety of means will still be important to get the word out to the diverse members of the
broader community. For example, community information kiosks will be introduced and
located in major nodes to provide information about events, community meetings and commonly asked questions.
The Decatur Police Department is invested in broadening the means of community engagement in fiscal year 2023-2024 through various community education programs such as
Revved Up Kids and R.A.D. (Rape Aggression Defense) women’s self-defense course that
had to be paused due to the Covid-19 pandemic. If the Covid-19 pandemic taught us one
thing, it highlighted and reinforced the importance of taking care of each other mentally and
physically. In fiscal year 2022-23 the Fire Department added a Captain position to focus on
community wellness and risk reduction programming. The new Fire Captain works alongside city staff and community partners to develop and manage initiatives and programming
designed to keep Decatur safer from harms such as preventable illnesses and injuries.
City staff and the consultants who were involved in the creation of the 2020 Strategic Plan
launched a plan implementation dashboard in Spring 2023. The dashboard, accessible via
the City website, shows the progress made on the Strategic Plan with visuals and regularly
updated information. This action item, among others, will also support the City’s vision
to become a Plan First Community, a state designation that recognizes communities that
consistently implement plans. The dashboard is located at https://performance.envisio.com/
dashboard/decaturga1794.

Citizen empowerment is a foundational aspect of
the Civic Trust theme in the Destination 2030 plan.
The Decatur Youth Council (DYC) was chartered
in 2017 as a resident advisory board comprised of
high school students. The DYC meets monthly
and provides the City’s youth with the opportunity to participate in the City’s decision-making
process, create projects and activities for the
community, and to instill a sense of civic responsibility, thereby becoming effective leaders helping
to shape the future of Decatur. The Decatur Youth
Council members are a voice of the adolescent
population and will assist with implementing the
recommendations of the various citywide plans.
To date, members of the DYC have planted the orchard at Decatur Legacy Park, collected over 1,000
pounds of food and toiletries for local non-profits
and cleaned up the planters on West Howard. During the most recent school year, the DYC crafted
public service announcements regarding the topics
of Climate Awareness and Drug and Alcohol
Awareness.

Budget
Narrative

In fiscal year 2022-23, citizen engagement across
the City was reflected in the Parks and Recreation
Master Plan process which engaged over 800
citizens from across the community to develop a
plan for the parks and recreation system in the next
10 years. Since the kick-off of the Decatur Town Center Plan 2.0 in December 2022, over
1,100 Decatur voices have engaged in the process. The Decatur Town Center Plan 2.0 is
the first comprehensive look at downtown since the original 1982 Town Center Plan. There
have been over 300 attendees among the three community meetings, over 300 participants
in community pop-up events that included local elementary school students, nearly 100
stakeholders engaged in focus group conversations, and over 400 participants in online
activities that included online survey responses and interactive map submissions. The input
during the public participation opportunities helped the City refine the master plan goals
and objectives, as well as give focus to the implementation action items of the 10-year plan.
The City initiated one of the largest zoning district changes since the 1980s to address housing affordability and housing choice. With nearly 70 percent of land within the City subject
to the policy change, single-family only zoning districts were expanded to also allow
duplexes, triplexes, and quadplexes. A robust public participation process was developed
for the initiative, which started in 2021. A website launch, online housing storymap, video
testimonials, postcard notifications, social media posts, an online survey, a phone hotline,
and three public focused conversations on missing middle housing were all completed in
the first phase of public participation. Information gleaned from this first phase assisted with
the initial drafts of the policy. The second phase of public participation included additional
community and neighborhood meetings, tables at public pop-up events, a virtual housing
forum, another online survey, and postcard and media post communications that encouraged participation. The additional participation provided the City with feedback on draft
policy development and helped the City to further refine the policy. In the final phases of

STRATEGIC PLAN 2020
IMPLEMENTATION
DASHBOARD

performance.envisio.com/
dashboard/decaturga1794

CITY OF DECATUR

25

public participation, two public work sessions and a public hearing were held, followed by
two additional public hearings prior to adoption. Over 500 public notice signs were posted
throughout the affected zoning districts that communicated the final phase of the public
participation process. Community priorities and concerns throughout the process were used
to help shape the policy that was adopted on February 6, 2023.
Treating all residents fairly
(% rated excellent/good)
2014.................................................. 74
2016.................................................. 67
2018.................................................. 72
2020.................................................. 74
2022.................................................. 70
Decatur as a place to raise children
(% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................. 90
2008.................................................. 93
2010.................................................. 90
2012.................................................. 95
2014.................................................. 96
2016.................................................. 97
2018.................................................. 96
2020.................................................. 96
2022.................................................. 92
Overall customer service by Decatur
employees (% rated as excellent/
good)
2006.................................................. 79
2008.................................................. 77
2010.................................................. 78
2012.................................................. 85
2014.................................................. 84
2016.................................................. 87
2018.................................................. 89
2020.................................................. 89
2022.................................................. 84
The job Decatur government does at
welcoming resident involvement (%
rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................. 75
2008.................................................. 77
2010.................................................. 82
2012.................................................. 87
2014.................................................. 83
2016.................................................. 79
2018.................................................. 82
2020.................................................. 79
2022.................................................. 77

26

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

The Child Friendly Cities Initiative engaged 160 middle school students, over 100 high
school students and over 300 K-5th graders in surveys to determine gaps and needs for children and youth in Decatur. The City’s first Teen Leadership Team met throughout the 202223 school year to develop a Local Action Plan for youth as part of the City’s partnership
with UNICEF. The Teen Leadership Team is seeking to make improvements to Decatur in
five priority areas:
• All young people – regardless of background (including race, religion and gender) – are
treated equally.
• Improve access to and awareness of mental health resources for youth.
• Make Decatur a more environmentally conscious city.
• Improve public spaces – especially as regards opportunities for children of all abilities.
• Increase trust with police and security guards.
In line with the Decatur Child Friendly Cities Initiative and the strategic plan goal around
involving youth in decision-making, youth voices have been sought out for various City
efforts. In 2022-23 improvements to McKoy Skate Park were expanded and the project
design fundamentally changed in response to input from the Decatur High School Skate
Club. The Legacy Park Inclusive Playground – inspired by a need identified by Oakhurst
Elementary School 3rd graders – was activated in winter 2023. The Environmental
Sustainability Board (ESB) plans to pave the way for youth participation by exploring
the possibility of adding youth members to the ESB in the 2023-24 fiscal year.

THEME 3: CIVIC TRUST
Empowering bold ambitions with high trust.
DEPARTMENT

ESTIMATED FINANCIAL IMPACT

Governmental Control............................................................................................. $84,252
General Government ............................................................................................ $595,919
Community & Economic Development ....................................................... $381,789
Administrative Services . .................................................................................... $3,161,633
Fire .............................................................................................................................. $3,393,270
Police .......................................................................................................................... $1,310,198
E-911. .............................................................................................................................. $135,891
Public Works ........................................................................................................... $1,365,672
Solid Waste................................................................................................................... $537,020
Stormwater.................................................................................................................. $537,020
Parks & Recreation................................................................................................... $704,279
TOTAL.............................................................................................. $12,206,943

Affordable Housing
Ensuring housing diversity through innovative policymaking
Safe, stable housing is the foundation on which families and entire communities can build
their futures. Expanding access to housing serves a range of goals, particularly equity and
diversity goals, so this theme is about more than just shelter. Since Black and Brown families are largely among those displaced when cost of living soars, Decatur’s racial and socioeconomic diversity is eroding. Attainable housing in the right places also makes biking,
walking and use of public transit more convenient and helps reduce our carbon footprint by
providing more compact neighborhoods.
The following projects have been identified in the 2020 Strategic Plan’s Community Work
Program to be implemented over the next five years to support the Affordable Housing
theme:
a. Create an Affordable Housing Advisory Board.
b. Hire permanent staff to advance affordable housing goals.
c. Amend RS-17 zoning.
d. Revise the tax payment assistance program.
e. Create a rental assistance program.
f. Create an accessory dwelling unit (ADU) finance program.
g. Amend single-family zoning to allow duplexes, triplexes, and quadplexes.
h. Adopt development impact fees.
i. Create an Age-Friendly Community Action Plan.
j. Implement the housing recommendations of the Legacy Park Master Plan.
k. Generate a comprehensive list of City incentives and exemptions.
l. Adopt universal building design guidelines.
m. Establish minimum density thresholds near MARTA stations.
n. Start an employer-assisted housing program.
o. Expand where boardinghouses and rooming houses are allowed.

Budget
Narrative

National
Citizen Survey
2022
Availability of affordable quality
housing (% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................. 34
2008.................................................. 48
2010.................................................. 43
2012.................................................. 45
2014.................................................. 38
2016.................................................. 23
2018.................................................. 17
2020.................................................. 21
2022.................................................. 15
Variety of housing options
(% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................n/a
2008.................................................. 69
2010.................................................. 65
2012.................................................. 71
2014.................................................. 61
2016.................................................. 45
2018.................................................. 40
2020.................................................. 44
2022.................................................. 40
Decatur as a place to live
(% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................. 93
2008.................................................. 97
2010.................................................. 97
2012.................................................. 96
2014.................................................. 98
2016.................................................. 97
2018.................................................. 97
2020.................................................. 96
2022.................................................. 95

CITY OF DECATUR

27

In 2018, the City of Decatur hosted an Affordable Housing Summit to focus on the critical need for affordable housing in our community. The Affordable Housing Task Force,
established the following year, drew from a wealth of local experts to create a detailed
analysis of needs and strategies to move forward. The City has already started to implement
these strategies. The recommendations of the task force not limited by legal constraints are
included in the 2020 Strategic Plan.
Community Land Trusts are non-profit organizations that hold land and sell or lease homes
on that land to ensure permanently affordable housing. The Decatur Land Trust Board was
established in 2019, but the organization has not been fully funded or staffed. In fiscal year
2022-2023, the Community and Economic Development Department hired a full-time staff
member to provide capacity for planning and implementation of the affordable housing
goals. In the 2023 legislative session, the State legislature approved the expansion of three
homestead exemptions and the creation of a new exemption for owner-occupied homes
on land owned by the Land Trust. The exemptions will be on a ballot referendum in the
November 2023 election.
In October 2021, the City Commission approved amendments to the City’s Unified Development Ordinance that will level the zoning code playing field between cottage court and
townhouse developments. Similarly, amendments to the single-family zoning districts to allow duplexes, triplexes and quadplexes were approved by the City Commission in February
2023. While the City is already designated as an Age-Friendly Community by the AARP,
the City will also create an Age-Friendly Community Action Plan. The community engagement portion of this plan will also serve as an excellent opportunity for synergy, collaboration and youth input as it ties in to the Parks and Recreation Department-led Child Friendly
Cities Initiative whose goals align with positive outcomes for all age groups.
Though cottage courts have been allowed since passage of the Unified Development
Ordinance in early 2015, local builders have been reluctant to veer from the dependable
single-family homes to which they have historically been accustomed. In response to extensive resident requests for action on housing affordability and more options for workforce
housing, the City of Decatur and its Development Authority are pursuing a cottage court
demonstration project at 230 Commerce Drive as a more affordable, neighborhood-scale
alternative to single-family infill.
Working to balance city housing goals and market viability, the project named “Oak Cottage Court” is set to demonstrate unmet demand for cottage homes sized roughly 530 to
1,500 square feet, and identify and address any regulatory barriers that might be preventing

28

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

the development of similar projects by other developers. The Development Authority has
partnered with a non-profit affordable housing developer to carry out the construction of six
cottages surrounding shared courtyards. The City anticipates offering the cottages of this
demonstration project for sale in 2023 to employees of the City of Decatur, City Schools of
Decatur and the Decatur Housing Authority who meet income qualifications. The long-term
affordability of the homes will be possible as the land on which the cottages reside will be
held by the Decatur Land Trust.

Budget
Narrative

In October 2021, an advisory board was formed to explore the application of impact fees in
the City, and while impact fees cannot directly support affordable housing, they can be used
to free up other resources. A decision on whether or not to adopt and implement impact fees
is expected in fiscal year 2023-24.
Of the 77 acres at Decatur Legacy Park located at 500 South Columbia Drive, approximately six acres at the corner of Katie Kerr Drive and Columbia Drive will be the site upon
which buildings associated with the Village at Legacy have been proposed. The Village at
Legacy is a two-phase development project to be completed by the Housing Authority of
the City of Decatur. Phase I will consist of the demolition of 10 vacant housing units and
the construction of 66 new affordable housing family units on the site, and Phase II will
consist of the construction of 66 new family units bringing the total to 132 units. Phase
I housing units will have a range of 1-, 2-, and 3-bedroom sizes among a mix of housing
types, including duplexes and garden style apartments.
The Village at Legacy successfully incorporates housing into its park setting. Not only will
residents in Village at Legacy have site amenities, the residents will be able to walk from
their homes directly on to Decatur Legacy Park with playgrounds, hiking trails, recreational
fields, arboretum, fishing and many other recreational programs and activities. Residents
will have access to local jobs and the highly desirable amenities of nearby Downtown Decatur, as well as the City Schools of Decatur. Residents will also have access to a MARTA
bus stop located immediately adjacent to the site. The full-service Avondale MARTA Transit Station with multiple bus routes and transfers is about a mile away via the East Decatur
Greenway adjacent to Decatur Legacy Park.

THEME 4: AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Ensuring housing diversity through innovative
policy-making.
DEPARTMENT.............................................. ESTIMATED FINANCIAL IMPACT
Governmental Control. ............................................................................................ $67,402
General Government ............................................................................................ $529,706
Community & Economic Development ...................................................... $954,473
Administrative Services . ................................................................................... $1,053,878
Fire ................................................................................................................................... $45,244
Police ........................................................................................................................ $2,183,664
E-911. ................................................................................................................................. $27,178
Public Works .............................................................................................................. $310,380
Solid Waste.................................................................................................................. $134,255
Stormwater................................................................................................................. $134,255
Parks & Recreation................................................................................................... $352,140
TOTAL................................................................................................ $5,792,573

CITY OF DECATUR

29

Mobility
Safer and more affordable ways for getting around — for
more people, more of the time

National
Citizen Survey
2022
Ease of public parking
(% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................n/a
2008.................................................n/a
2010.................................................n/a
2012.................................................n/a
2014.................................................. 38
2016.................................................. 25
2018.................................................. 24
2020.................................................. 27
2022.................................................. 35
Ease of walking
(% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................. 78
2008.................................................. 87
2010.................................................. 86
2012.................................................. 91
2014.................................................. 89
2016.................................................. 83
2018.................................................. 88
2020.................................................. 92
2022.................................................. 70
Ease of travel by bicycle
(% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................. 61
2008.................................................. 66
2010.................................................. 63
2012.................................................. 70
2014.................................................. 66
2016.................................................. 53
2018.................................................. 55
2020.................................................. 64
2022.................................................. 63

30

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Making biking, walking, and transit more convenient has multiple community benefits.
Eliminating just one vehicle per household can free up $700 or more a month (AAA
estimate) to buy or rent a home. This is a boost for equity since non-white families are
more likely to experience income and cost of living imbalance. Fewer cars means lower
greenhouse gas emissions and opportunities to transition pavement and parking to other
uses, including trees or storm water management. Additionally there are health benefits for
individuals and for a community that feels more neighborly because it is experienced on
foot or bike instead of through a car window.
The following projects and action items have been identified in the 2020 Strategic Plan’s
Community Work Program to implement over the next five years to support the Mobility
theme:
a. Implement the 2018 Community Transportation Plan.
b. Expand intelligent transportation systems.
c. Update regulations to require alternative fuels infrastructure.
d. Expand the Clifton Corridor Transportation Management Association (TMA) serving
Decatur or explore creating a new Decatur TMA.
e. Install more wayfinding signs focused on walking and biking.
f. Expand pedestrian amenities.
g. Continue to implement the citywide sidewalk assessment.
h. Continue to implement the Safe Routes to School program.
i. Encourage more bike parking.
j. Continue implementing the Decatur PATH Plan.
k. Work with MARTA to provide circulator bus service.
l. Conduct a parking and curb space utilization study.
m. Update regulations to prevent the construction of space exclusively for parking.
Transportation planning in the City focuses on opportunities to promote a safe, integrated
transportation system that encourages bicycling and walking as viable alternatives to
vehicular travel, increased connectivity between neighborhoods and destinations, and
transportation equity for users of all ages and abilities. Citywide transportation initiatives
are guided by the 2018 Community Transportation Plan, which provides recommended
policies, programs, and projects that emphasize a healthy and active community. In fiscal
year 2022-23, the City Commission approved the creation of a full-time Senior Transportation Engineer position. This position will work on the numerous mobility related projects in
the City’s work plan.
The installation of priority corridor improvements, intersection improvements and traffic
calming improvements included in the 2018 Community Transportation Plan is an ongoing
process. Other ongoing projects include: expanding pedestrian amenities such as benches,
street trees and shade structures, public restrooms and drinking fountains to make walking
more appealing; continuing to implement the citywide sidewalk assessment to make sure
all sidewalks are in good repair and meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act; and, continuing to implement the Safe Routes to School program in partnership
with the City Schools of Decatur. As a pioneer in the field, the City will also continue the
installation of smart traffic signals and crosswalk signals to expand intelligent transportation
systems.

The 2018 Community Transportation Plan proposed two circulator shuttles. Before making
such a large investment, the Community and Economic Development Department, with
financial support from the Decatur Downtown Development Authority (DDA), has invested
in an eight month pilot program. The launch of the new service coincides with the conclusion of the free shuttle initiative in fiscal year 22-23 that provided transportation from
downtown Decatur to Publix, a 90-day pilot program commissioned through a partnership
with Let’s Ride Atlanta and Publix. It also revives the GO60+ shuttle the City operated
prior to the pandemic for local seniors to access commercial districts and services. The
combination of the GO60+ shuttle and the Let’s Ride Atlanta shuttle service is another step
toward fulfilling one of the core goals of the City’s 2020 strategic plan. Additionally, the
Community and Economic Development and Public Works Departments will work together
to craft regulations to require alternative fuels infrastructure in fiscal year 2023-2024.

Budget
Narrative

GoDecatur Circulat
or

Mondays and Wednesda
ys, 9:30 am to 1 pm
K

YMCA

SCOTT BLVD.

N. ARCADIA AVE.

B

SYCAMORE ST.
DECATUR
RECREATION CENTER

ARCADIA AVE.

.

PURE STATION

M
PUBLIX

SAMS CROSSING

Y PL

A

ONE WAY

INIT

D
WAR
E. HO

CHURCH ST.

E. TR

L

COMMERCE DR.

HISTORIC
DEKALB
COURTHOUSE

F

N. CANDLER ST.

DECATUR
VISITOR
CENTER
E. PONCE DE LEON AVE.

HAMPTON
INN & SUITES

N. MCDONOUGH ST.

G

COURTYARD
BY MARRIOTT

W. TRINITY PL.

ELECTRIC AVE.

Head to a shuttle pick-up
location and get a free
ride around Decatur!

N

AVE.

E. COLLEGE AVE.

E.

E AV
LLEG

C

LEGACY
PARK

.

BROUGHT
TO YOU BY:

IEW

OAKV

HARMONY PARK

EAST LAKE DR.

O

DR

D

E

RD.

map not to scale

BIA

OAKHURST

AGNES SCOTT

M
LU

OAKHURST
RECREATION
CENTER

E.

CO

W..

AVE.

AV
EGE
COLL

S. CANDLER ST.

D
WAR
W. HO

S.

E. CO

MAP

S. MCDONOUGH ST.

The GoDecatur Circulator
transports residents and
visitors throughout the city
to 15 popular destinations
including Publix at Sams
Crossing, CVS in downtown
Decatur, the Decatur-DeKalb
YMCA, and Legacy Park. This
new service runs continuously
from 9:30 a.m. to 1 p.m. on
Mondays and Wednesdays in
both directions.

CVS

I

E. COURT SQ.

SWANTON WAY

9:30 am to 1 pm

AVE.

POST
OFFICE

COMMERCE DR.

H

CHURCH ST.

W. PONCE DE LEON

CLAIREMONT AVE.

PONCE DE LEON PL.

Mondays and
Wednesdays

J
COMMERCE DR.

More information and
the latest updates at

DECATURGA.COM/SH

UTTLE

Shuttle Route
A Decatur Recreation
Center
231 Sycamore St.
B Philips Tower
218 E. Trinity Pl.
C Oakview Walk
1111 Oakview Rd.
D Harmony Park
630 East Lake Dr.
E Oakhurst
Recreation Center
450 East Lake Dr.

F Oliver House
1450 Commerce Dr.
G Park Trace Apartm
ents
700 Atlanta Ave.
H
520 W. Ponce de
Leon Ave.
I Commerce Square
/
CVS Shopping Center
225 W. Ponce
de Leon Ave.
J Clairemont Oaks
441 Clairemont Rd.

K YMCA
1110 Clairemont Rd.
L Town Square Condo
s/
Pure Service Station
249 E. Ponce de Leon
Ave.
M Publix/Sam’s Crossi
ng
2720 E. Ponce de
Leon Ave.
N Columbia Residences
590 E. Freeman St.
O Legacy Park
500 S. Columbia Dr.

THEME 5: MOBILITY
Safer and more affordable ways for getting around - for
more people, more of the time.
DEPARTMENT

ESTIMATED FINANCIAL IMPACT

Governmental Control.............................................................................................. $67,402
General Government ............................................................................................ $529,706
Community & Economic Development ....................................................... $381,789
Administrative Services ......................................................................................... $351,293
Fire .................................................................................................................................... $45,244
Police ............................................................................................................................ $363,944
E-911................................................................................................................................... $27,178
Public Works ........................................................................................................... $1,055,292
Solid Waste.................................................................................................................. $268,510
Stormwater................................................................................................................. $268,510
Parks & Recreation................................................................................................... $704,279
TOTAL................................................................................................ $4,063,146

CITY OF DECATUR

31

Economic Growth
What’s good for quality of life for everyone is good for
business

National
Citizen Survey
2022
Vibrancy of downtown/commercial
area (% rated excellent/good)
2006-2012........................................n/a
2014.................................................. 93
2016.................................................. 90
2018.................................................. 94
2020.................................................. 91
2022.................................................. 86
Quality of Economic Development
(% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................. 74
2008.................................................. 78
2010.................................................. 69
2012.................................................. 73
2014.................................................. 84
2016.................................................. 73
2018.................................................. 74
2020.................................................. 75
2022.................................................. 72
Well-planned commercial growth
(% rated excellent/good)
2006-2012........................................n/a
2014.................................................. 93
2016.................................................. 90
2018.................................................. 94
2020.................................................. 91
2022.................................................. 86
Overall Quality of business and
service establishments
(% rated excellent/good)
2006.................................................n/a
2008.................................................. 89
2010.................................................. 83
2012.................................................. 91
2014.................................................. 87
2016.................................................. 83
2018.................................................. 87
2020.................................................. 93
2022.................................................. 90

32

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

How can we leverage Decatur’s unique identity and amenities to grow not just jobs, but social and economic opportunity for everyone? Every step taken toward broadening opportunity serves other goals as well, including our ambitions for expanding affordability, equity,
and diversity. This effort starts with understanding what is already working, what we can do
to help existing businesses thrive, and how to improve the support system for new launches.
In a time when companies are thinking more about employees’ quality of life, Decatur has a
compelling story to tell to businesses considering relocation.
The following projects and action items have been identified in the 2020 Strategic Plan’s
Community Work Program to implement over the next five years to support the Economic
Growth theme:
a. Enhance high-speed internet access.
b. Start a business incubator.
c. Create a Decatur rewards program.
d. Update the sign ordinance.
e. Adopt healthy building design guidelines.
f. Start a façade improvement program.
g. Prepare a new Downtown Master Plan.
Buildings and outdoor spaces should take into account the unique needs of the people
that use them. This means making sure they are based on a realistic understanding of the
diversity of potential users, and their habits, desires, and behaviors. The Decatur Downtown
Development Authority (DDA) created the Decatur Retail Incubator Program in fiscal year
2021-2022 which provided online-only, homegrown businesses the opportunity to test their
concepts and adapt to a brick-and-mortar shop. Three businesses were identified as part of
the inaugural retail recruitment incubator in a downtown storefront leased by the DDA for
one year. Upon conclusion of the inaugural incubator program, the DDA then filled another
storefront with a bicycle-centric business offering custom-built bicycles and repairs, community meeting space and coffee, and community programs such as cyclist meet-ups and
organized rides. This incubator is planned to last through 2024. The incubator program is
expanding to include a mobile food cart program in two commercial districts. The ordinances with rules and requirements are in place, and the vendor permits for these small
businesses are scheduled to be issued in fiscal
year 2023-2024. There is potential for these
businesses to be given opportunities and grow
into brick-and-mortar locations.
The Downtown Master Plan – Decatur Town
Center Plan 2.0 – was developed in fiscal year
2022-23. The plan recommends a comprehensive vision that includes public space
improvements, historic preservation, green
space, economic growth strategies , shared
street designations, and improving the quality
of the downtown experience, among other
things. Next year will see the Modera mixeduse development spring to life as the retail
spaces and the apartments become occupied

in downtown. The Northwood Ravin backed development along East College Avenue will
break ground and the recently opened Publix anchored mixed-use development will continue to bring new life to the east side of the City.
The Community and Economic Development Department developed a façade improvement
grant program for commercial storefront business owners and property owners. Funding in
the amount of $100,000 was made possible through the Decatur Downtown Development
Authority (DDA). In Winter 2023, the DDA approved 13 requests for façade improvement
grants. A second round of grant applications were received in Spring 2023. Projects eligible
for grant funding include: masonry repairs, storefront reconstruction, exterior painting
and stucco, awnings and canopies, window and door repairs and replacements, permanent
exterior lighting, repair/replacement of gutters and down spouts, repairs to the roof (affecting the building’s facade), sign design and installation, decking and stairs, or improvement
to outdoor seating areas.

Theme 6: Economic Growth
What’s good for quality of life for everyone is good for business.
DEPARTMENT

Budget
Narrative

As evidenced by the
narrative, the City
is taking specific
and clear actions
to implement the
2020 Strategic Plan.
New and expanded
resources are included
in the proposed budget
to support these efforts
and to ensure the
successful execution
of the plan. The 2020
Strategic Plan builds on
the solid foundation
of prior plans, while
identifying bold
actions to carry out a
transformative plan for
the future.

ESTIMATED FINANCIAL IMPACT

Governmental Control.............................................................................................. $67,402
General Government ............................................................................................ $529,706
Community & Economic Development ...................................................... $954,473
Administrative Services . ................................................................................... $1,405,170
Fire .................................................................................................................................... $90,487
Police ......................................................................................................................... $1,455,776
E-911............................................................................................................................... $679,455
Public Works .............................................................................................................. $186,228
Solid Waste.................................................................................................................. $402,765
Stormwater................................................................................................................. $402,765
Parks & Recreation................................................................................................... $352,140
TOTAL................................................................................................ $6,526,365

CITY OF DECATUR

33

DECATUR 200 / FULL CELEBRATION

FUN
FACTS
IN DECATUR HISTORY

Governmental Control

A voucher for $267.50 was ordered drawn to Thomas L. Cooper to be used in the purchase of
the lot now known as City Hall in June 1913.

General Government

P.P. Pilcher was named as the City’s first City Manager on January 3, 1921 at a salary of $3,600
annually.

Community & Economic Development

In 1996 when the Olympics came to Atlanta, Decatur staged a 2-week Hometown to the World
Festival downtown with activities, concerts, and events every night. The Old Courthouse on the
Square became Irish House and was home to the Irish Olympic Council and their athletes and
guests. The Decatur Recreation Center became Africa House was home to the Burkina Faso
athletes.

Parks & Recreation

In 1984, the City of Decatur and City Schools of Decatur started their partnership. The Recreation Department operated the first afterschool program to take place in school buildings
in Decatur at two schools - Glennwood and Westchester Elementary Schools.

Administrative Services

The City has been using fund accounting since at least 1924 as shown by the
100-year-old tax receipt at left.

Public Works

The City of Decatur City Commission passed a Resolution officially naming the new
Public Works Building as the Eloise T. Leveritt Building on December 19,1977. Eloise T.
Leveritt was the city’s first female commissioner. The building was re-dedicated in 2015
and provides a state-of-the-art facility that helps the Public Works Department deliver
more and better services, while meeting city standards for environmental sustainability.

Police

A motion was made and carried that allowed the Police Department to sell a horse and buggy
at auction and buy a motorcycle in February 1917.

Fire

When the Fire Department was in early operation, around 1930s, the alarm system in the station consisted of a rattrap fitted to a light switch. In an emergency, the station number was dialed, which sprang the trap, turning the lights on, thus letting the crew know they were needed.
34

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Summary of
Fund Budgets
Budget FY 2023-2024

City of Decatur
Fund Organizational Chart
Governmental
Funds

Other Non-Major
Governmental
Funds

Enterprise Funds

Fiduciary Funds

Conference
Center/Parking
Deck Fund

Agency Funds

General Fund

Cemetery Capital
Fund

Capital
Improvement
Fund

Hotel/Motel Tax
Fund

Solid Waste Fund

SPLOST
Fund

Tree Bank Fund

Stormwater Fund

General Obligation
Bond Fund

Confiscated Drug
Fund

Urban
Redevelopment
Agency Fund 2010

School Zone
Camera Safety
Program Fund

Urban
Redevelopment
Agency Fund 2013

Grant Fund

Debt Service Fund

American Rescue
Plan Act Fund

Children & Youth
Services Fund

Tax Allocation
District Fund

Emergency 911
Fund

Community
Energy Fund

DDA
Municipal Court

Pension Trust
Fund

The City’s accounts are organized by fund groups,
each of which is treated as a separate accounting
entity. Fund accounting is designed to demonstrate
legal compliance and to aid financial management
by segregating transactions related to certain
government functions or activities.
Fund budgets are presented within this budget
document. Fund descriptions may be found in the
Budget Guide (pages 4-5).


Public Facilities
Authority
CITY OF DECATUR

37

FUNDS IMPACT CHART
This matrix illustrates the relationsips between
functional units/departments and all funds.

GOVERNMENTAL
FUNDS
CAPITAL

GE
NE
RA
L

FU
ND
E91
1F
UN
D
GR
AN
TF
UN
D
HO
TEL
/M
OT
EL
TAX
TR
EE
FU
BA
ND
NK
FU
ND
CO
NF
ISC
ATE
DD
SC
RU
HO
GF
OL
UN
ZO
D
NE
CA
AM
M
ER
ER
ICA
AF
UN
NR
D
ES
CU
CA
EA
PIT
CT
AL
PLA
IM
PR
NF
OV
SP
UN
EM
LO
D
E
ST
NT
FU
F
UN
ND
D
200
7G
OB
ON
DS
FU
ND

SPECIAL REVENUE FUNDS

FUNCTIONAL UNIT/DEPARTMENT
GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL /CITY COMMISSION

■		■ ■				■ ■ ■

GENERAL GOVERNMENT/ CITY MANAGER

■

■ ■

■ ■

COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

■

■ ■ ■

■ ■

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES

■

■

■ ■

POLICE

■

■

FIRE

■

■

■ ■ ■ ■

PUBLIC WORKS

■

■ ■

■ ■ ■ ■

PARKS & RECREATION

■

■

■ ■ ■ ■

■ ■ ■ ■ ■

E911
■

38

SOLID WASTE

■

STORM WATER
■

■ ■

DECATUR TOURISM BUREAU

■

CONFERENCE CENTER/PARKING DECK

■

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024



201
0U
RA
BO
ND
201
SF
UN
3U
D
RA
BO
ND
CE
SF
ME
UN
TER
D
YC
AP
ITA
DE
BT
LF
SE
UN
RV
D
ICE
PU
BL
IC
FAC
ILIT
YA
TAX
UT
AL
HO
LO
RIT
CA
YF
TIO
UN
ND
CO
D
MM
IST
UN
RIC
ITY
TF
UN
EN
SO
D
ER
GY
LID
F
WA
UN
ST
D
EF
UN
ST
OR
D
MW
ATE
RF
CO
UN
NF
D
ER
EN
CE
CE
PE
NT
NS
ER
ION
/P
AR
TR
KIN
US
GD
TF
MU
UN
EC
NIC
K
D
IPA
LC
OU
CS
RT
OD
FU
ND
FU
ND
DD
AF
UN
D


PROPRIETARY
FUNDS

PROJECTS FUNDS
ENTERPRISE FUNDS

■ ■
■

■ ■ ■
■ ■

■

■

■
■

■
■ ■ ■

■
■ ■
■

■

■
■

■ ■
■
■
■

FIDUCIARY
FUNDS

AGENCY FUNDS


■ ■

■ ■ ■ ■ ■

■

■

■ ■

■

■

■

■





CITY OF DECATUR

39

40

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024
27,356,750
923,200
814,000
100,000
5,577,700
472,000
115,500
0
5,500
118,824
$35,483,474

General
Fund
8,797,400
0
0
0
0
2,312,880
190,000
0
0
0
$11,300,280

Capital
Project Funds
1,550,000
0
0
0
30,600
12,151,260
0
0
22,190
0
$13,754,050

Non-Major
Governmental Funds
6,000,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
$6,000,000

Debt
Service Fund
0
0
0
0
630,000
0
0
0
0
0
$630,000

E911
Fund

0
0
0
0
6,878,550
0
0
0
0
0
$6,878,550

Enterprise
Funds

$17,139,912
$18,725,022
$19,704,078
$21,710,020
$22,793,585

$43,704,150
$923,200
$814,000
$100,000
$13,116,850
$14,936,140
$305,500
$0
$27,690
$118,824
$74,046,354

Total
Revenues

$51,658,336
$52,789,344
$56,444,388
$62,365,512
$57,745,219

Fund Balance, end of year

Total Other Financing Sources

$0
$8,214,607

$4,054,041

$2,493,360

$2,851,646

$2,204,590

$4,576,047

$0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6,164,340
0
0

$63,647

$425,000

1,058,310
275,750
24,850
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

$2,147,000
$24,185,575

$47,105,563

7,269,950

$4,300,000
$5,492,810
($2,522,860)
$0
$0

($17.909,609)

$91,955,960

0
235,550
0
12,171,260
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Total Expenditures
$39,629,290
$24,763,050
$12,406,810
$6,164,340
$1,358,910
$7,633,560
Excess (deficinecy) of revenues
over (under) expenditures
($4,145,816)
($13,462,770)
$1,347,240
($164,340)
($728,910)
($755,010)
Other Financing Sources (Uses)
Proceeds from Capital Lease/Debt Issuance
0
2,165,000
0
0
0
2,135,000
0
4,721,850
624,590
0
425,000
(278,630)
Transfers In
Transfers Out
0
(4,393,490)
1,580,000
0
0
290,630
Reserved for Bond Projects
0
0
0
0
0
0
Use of Reserves
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
5,154,850
600,000
12,106,500
0
6,901,700
0
0
0
0
0
0

$27,362,550
$17,903,570
$5,562,110
$26,412,760
$934,600
$6,901,700
$54,330
$660,000
$0
$6,164,340
$0
$0

24,439,080
10,683,370
4,506,840
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1,865,160
1,554,050
430,420
2,135,000
934,600
0
54,330
660,000
0
0
0
0

Personnel Services
Other Services and Charges
Supplies
Capital Outlay
Indirect Costs
Debt Services
Lease Payments
Depreciation/Amortization
OPEB Costs
Bond Principal and Interest
Cost of Asset Sale
Transfers

EXPENDITURES

Taxes
Licenses and permits
Fines and forfeitures
Interest income
Charges for services
Intergovernmental
Contributions
Sale of Assets
Miscellaneous
Transfers
Total Revenues

REVENUES

Historic Ending Fund Balances FY 18-19 through FY 21-22
Fund Balance, end of FY 18-19
$10,696,463
$17,444,985
$287,146
$4,254,829
$526,072
Fund Balance, end of FY 19-20
$12,559,843
$15,525,416
$273,264
$4,287,735
$552,713
Fund Balance, end of FY 20-21
$14,692,408
$15,358,262
$1,185,059
$4,768,288
$546,187
$16,591,233
$16,094,739
$1,952,206
$4,973,176
$573,116
Fund Balance, end of FY 21-22
Fund Balance, beginning of FY 23-24 (est)
$12,360,423
$15,033,451
$2,289,816
$4,740,387
$367,557

Fund Balance Summary - All Funds

CITY OF DECATUR 2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET

CITY OF DECATUR 2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET

Summary of Expenditures - All Funds
ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2018-2019

ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2019-2020

ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2020-2021

ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2021-2022

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2023-2024

DEPARTMENT
GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL

238,447

268,440

241,537

264,837

371,730

394,960

421,260

GENERAL GOVERNMENT

1,411,777

1,288,644

1,725,134

2,138,031

2,241,790

2,688,670

3,310,660

COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

1,983,855

1,937,672

2,044,692

1,521,419

2,340,740

2,227,760

3,817,890

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES

4,302,696

4,393,975

4,853,055

5,678,373

6,160,130

6,048,370

7,025,850

POLICE

5,578,653

5,526,544

4,758,393

5,403,551

6,978,170

6,618,030

7,278,880

FIRE

3,589,662

3,479,389

3,178,113

3,979,501

4,127,270

4,271,010

4,524,360

PUBLIC WORKS*

3,710,123

3,562,456

6,081,227

5,403,315

7,269,290

6,705,740

6,207,600

DESIGN, ENVIRONMENT & CONSTRUCTION

1,806,689

1,838,576

PARKS & RECREATION**
ACTIVE LIVING

2,669,073

2,193,562

1,572,568

2,317,490

3,156,740

3,054,820

GENERAL FUND TOTAL EXPENDITURES

25,290,975

24,489,258

24,274,719

26,706,518

32,645,860

32,009,360

7,042,790
39,629,290

OTHER FUNDS
CAPITAL PROJECTS-CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT (350) 6,268,613

6,967,029

4,731,685

4,502,945

14,183,950

9,888,750

12,635,320

SPLOST FUND (320)

1,020,799

1,080,072

1,035,790

1,012,497

5,286,290

1,906,290

6,981,980

URA 2010 BONDS FUND (340)

1,162,828

1,154,045

1,060,092

752,004

753,760

753,760

754,520

URA 2013 BONDS FUND (345)

1,880,750

1,883,550

32,978,593

2,034,395

1,626,350

1,853,850

1,637,950

DEBT SERVICE FUND (410)

5,626,427

5,728,325

5,831,725

5,941,750

6,057,790

6,057,790

6,164,340

CHILDREN & YOUTH SERVICES FUND (225)

2,142,307

1,983,540

1,125,174

1,591,425

2,497,990

2,035,340

EMERGENCY TELEPHONE (E911) (215)

904,446

904,721

983,670

945,897

1,208,360

1,180,560

1,358,910

CAPITAL PROJECTS-CEMETERY CAP. IMP. (355)

12,693

25,765

17,920

47,505

80,000

30,000

70,000

HOTEL MOTEL TAX FUND (275)

802,873

875,513

685,082

1,328,728

1,200,000

1,550,000

1,550,000

TREE BANK FUND (260)

7,776

0

9,400

8,750

0

35,000

6,000

CONFISCATED DRUG FUND (210)

553

0

4,790

40

50

50

50

SCHOOL ZONE CAMERA SAFETY PROGRAM FUND (216)

403,200

COMMUNITY GRANTS FUND (220)

0

21,000

223,000

43,500

929,500

AMERICAN RESCUE PLAN FUND (222)

9,955

0

44,353

8,891,260

973,360

11,401,260

TAX ALLOCATION DISTRICT FUND (370)
PUBLIC FACILITIES AUTHORITY (344)

2,076,233

2,349,044

916,250

514,000

532,000

594,850

624,590

2,352,830

30,529,739

3,003,110

2,708,400

2,753,280

CONFERENCE CTR/PARKING DECK FUND (555)

253,677

186,838

13,072

9,552

15,000

15,000

15,000

SOLID WASTE ENTERPRISE (540-4520)

2,252,560

2,481,031

2,196,227

2,206,667

2,618,160

3,070,450

2,685,100

STORMWATER UTILITY FUND (505)

1,656,375

458,448

2,282,757

1,321,358

4,304,800

3,550,470

4,215,530

COMMUNITY ENERGY FUND (360)

138,350

OTHER FUNDS TOTAL EXPENDITURES

26,078,865

26,077,921

56,225,056

52,812,604

52,481,870

36,247,420

54,324,880

TOTAL EXPENDITURES

51,369,840

50,567,179

80,449,775

79,519,122

85,127,730

68,256,780

93,954,170


* The Public Works Department and the Design, Environment & Construction Division budgets were combined at the beginning of FY 2021-2022.

** The Parks and Recreation Department was reestablished in FY 2023-2024 by combining the Active Living Division and the Children & Youth Services Fund.


CITY OF DECATUR

41

CITY OF DECATUR 2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET

Summary of Revenues and Expenditures - General Fund
Estimated Beginning Fund Balance:							 $12,360,423
FY 18-19
ACTUAL

FY 19-20
ACTUAL

FY 20-21
ACTUAL

FY 21-22
ACTUAL

FY 22-23
ADOPTED

FY 22-23
REVISED

FY 23-24
ADOPTED

REVENUES
Taxes
22,051,931
Licenses and permits
605,710
944,160
Fines and forfeitures
14,446
Interest income
Charges for services
1,848,541
350,598
Intergovernmental
Contributions
162,099
39,618
Miscellaneous
(560,616)
Transfers In
Current Year Revenues
$25,456,487
(165,513)
Fund balance appropriation - Use of Reserves

23,358,383
807,711
978,692
19,870
1,296,661
382,480
83,201
129,412
(703,771)
$26,352,639
(1,863,380)

24,080,197
1,459,222
393,798
5,050
888,879
408,360
1,154
38,080
(867,454)
$26,407,285
(2,132,565)

25,457,221
671,838
659,697
16,131
1,493,195
304,790
58,831
42,555
(98,916)
$28,605,343
(1,898,825)

25,657,940
859,400
742,000
15,000
1,598,050
340,500
63,000
7,500
(516,030)
$28,767,360
3,883,500

25,942,750
868,700
664,000
160,000
1,628,400
362,300
110,500
55,500
(2,013,600)
$27,778,550
4,230,810

27,356,750
923,200
814,000
100,000
5,577,700
472,000
115,500
5,500
118,824
$35,483,474
4,145,816

$25,290,974

$24,489,259

$24,274,720

$26,706,518

$32,650,860

$32,009,360

$39,629,290

Total Revenues

EXPENDITURES
Governmental Control
238,447
268,440
241,537
264,837
371,730
394,960
1,411,777
1,288,644
1,725,134
2,138,031
2,241,790
2,688,670
General Government
1,983,855
1,937,672
2,044,692
1,521,419
2,340,740
2,227,760
Community and Economic Development
4,302,696
4,393,975
4,853,055
5,678,373
6,160,130
6,048,370
Administrative Services
5,578,653
5,526,544
4,578,393
5,403,551
6,978,170
6,618,030
Police
3,589,662
3,479,389
3,178,113
3,979,501
4,127,270
4,271,010
Fire
3,710,123
3,562,456
6,081,227
5,403,315
7,269,290
6,705,740
Public Works
1,806,689
1,838,576
0
Design, Environment & Construction*
Active Living
2,669,073
2,193,562
1,572,568
2,317,490
3,156,740
3,054,820
Parks & Recreation**
$25,290,975

Total Expenditures

$24,489,258

$24,274,719

$26,706,518

$32,645,860

$32,009,360

421,260
3,310,660
3,817,890
7,025,850
7,278,880
4,524,360
6,207,600

7,042,790
$39,629,290

Estimated Ending Fund Balance:							 $8,214,607
* The Public Works Department and the Design, Environment & Construction Division budgets were combined at the beginning of FY 2021-2022.
** Active Living and Children & Youth Services were combined at the beginning of FY23-24 to create the Parks & Recreation Department.


Revenues & Expenditures

The Georgia State law requires that municipalities adopt balanced budgets where
expenditures do not exceed revenues. It is
possible to achieve a balanced budget by
using available fund balance or reserves.
Fund balance should be used prudently
and only in accordance with the city’s fund
balance policy. The 2023-2024 budget
uses just over $4,100,000 from fund
balance. This will result in a fund balance
of $8,214,607 which is 21% of the city’s
operating budget. The city’s policy states
that the fund balance should be within
20-30% of the operating budget.

40
39
38
37

Millions of $

36
35
34
33
32
31
30
29
28
27
26
FY2019

42

FY202

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

FY2021

FY2022

FY2023

FY2024

Summary of Fund Budgets

All Funds
Overview
2022-2023 REVISED GENERAL FUND BUDGET ESTIMATE

The 2022-2023 Revised General Fund Budget Estimate is $636,500 less than the approved
2022-2023 Budget Estimate, an almost 2% decrease, and totals $32,009,360. Overall, personnel services expenditures decrease in the revised estimate by $1,296,330. Specifically,
there are decreases expected for full-time and part-time salaries and health insurance. The
majority of the salary savings are a result of vacancies because the approved budget funds
all full-time positions as if they are filled throughout the entire fiscal year. In FY 2020-2021,
the City Commission authorized a one-time payout of accrued vacation leave, up to 80
hours, to staff who would otherwise lose the time because of personnel policy regulations.
The payout was granted in December 2021. A more permanent version of the program was
adopted in December 2022 with the payout in January 2023. During FY 2022-2023, the
payout was capped at 30 hours for staff with less than 10 years of service and 60 hours for
staff with more than 10 years of service. The vacation payout was implemented without
negative impact on the budget. Funding for this program will be authorized annually as part
of the budget process. Other areas in the revised budget that experienced significant savings
include training, computer equipment and electricity.
Overtime increases approximately $506,000 in the revised expenditure estimates. Most of
the increase is in the Police and Fire departments which have minimum staffing levels. The
overtime is required when employees are sick, on approved leave and positions are vacant.
The demand on overtime has been exacerbated by staff vacancies as a result of the tight
labor market. While overtime increases, there are offsetting reductions in regular, full-time
salaries due to vacancies. In the current fiscal year, the Fire department continued a parttime firefighter program in an effort to curb overtime costs while still meeting minimum
staffing requirements in a safe and effective manner. However, due to the nature of this
work, part-time staff were not always available as they were needed at their primary place
of employment. While overtime costs in the 2022-2023 revised budget for the Fire department exceed what was anticipated in than the approved 2022-2023 budget, the costs are
budgeted to return to typical levels in 2023-2024.
Professional services increase by $59,000 primarily due to an increase in the costs associated with legal services. The other large expenditure in professional services is associated
with permitting and inspections services provided by a third party, Safebuilt. Even though
construction activity remained strong during this fiscal year including two significant
projects – redevelopment of the former Bank of America site as a new downtown bank
and mixed-use development and the townhouse & stacked flat development on the former
AT&T site – growth was not as strong as in past years. In addition, the position of Building Official was vacant for over two years and Safebuilt has been providing the necessary
services in the interim.
Group insurance decreased in the revised budget as the actual claims experience has been
better than anticipated with budgeted expectations. This trend is expected to continue
through the end of the fiscal year. As of March 2023, only one participant exceeded the
$85,000 specific stop-loss deductible compared to four at this time last year but there are
other claimants approaching the stop loss. The City is self-insured up to the specific stop
loss per member and the aggregate stop-loss as a whole. The specific stop-loss carrier has

CITY OF DECATUR

43

paid only $162,300 for claims over the stop-loss limit. This is a dramatic departure from
last year when the stop loss carrier paid over $1 million for claims over the stop loss.
The 2022-2023 Revised General Fund revenue estimates are $363,500 less than the approved 2022-2023 budget. Before taking into consideration interfund transfers and use of
fund balance, the revised revenue estimates are $513,760 or 2% more than the approved
2022-2023 revenue estimates. Real estate property taxes increase by $44,000 primarily
due to an increased billing after appeals were settled and prior year balances paid in fiscal
year 2022-2023. There are increases in other revenue categories including an increase of
$313,250 in the insurance premiums tax, $85,000 in recreation service fees and an increase
of $119,500 in franchise taxes.
Other adjustments are shown for transfers between the Capital Improvements Fund, Solid
Waste Fund, the Storm Water Utility Fund, Hotel/Motel Tax Fund, E911 Fund and the
Children and Youth Services Fund. The charges to the Solid Waste and Storm Water Funds
reflect stable overhead costs. The anticipated revenue from the Hotel/Motel Tax Fund
increases by $131,250 based on higher occupancy rates. The transfer to the Children and
Youth Services Fund was reduced from $200,000 to $0 since the fund will be closed out at
the end of the fiscal year due to the merging of the Active Living and Children & Youth Services divisions into the Parks & Recreation Department. Until FY 2020-2021, that operation
had reduced its financial dependency on the General Fund but needed assistance due to the
suspension of programming as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The E911 Fund transfer
remains at $350,000 for fiscal year 2022-2023. There is a transfer of $467,480 to fund the
East Decatur Tax Allocation District (TAD) Fund for the tax increment received since the
TAD’s inception in 2015. Additionally, a transfer of $100,000 was earmarked for the Affordable Housing Trust Fund. A transfer of $2,500,000 is budgeted to the Capital Improvement Fund as there are several large projects currently in construction that need funding.
There is an increase in the amount needed from the fund balance. The 2022-2023 Adopted
General Fund Budget anticipated using $3,883,500 of fund balance. The 2022-2023 Revised General Fund Budget anticipates using $4,230,810 in fund balance after adjustments
to revised revenues and expenditures as well as the transfer of $2,500,000 to the Capital
Improvements Fund. This will result in a fund balance of approximately $12,360,423 or
39% of the 2023-2024 Proposed General Fund Budget expenditures.

2023-2024 ADOPTED GENERAL FUND BUDGET EXPENDITURES
The 2023-2024 Adopted General Fund Budget Estimate of $39,629,290 is $6,983,430 or
21.4% more than the initial 2022-2023 Adopted General Fund Budget Estimate and
$7,619,930 or 23.8% more than the Revised General Fund Budget Estimate.

The Personnel Services category increases $5,588,230 in the 2023-2024 Adopted General
Fund Budget Estimate over the 2022-2023 Revised General Fund Budget Estimate. Within
that category, full-time salaries increase $3,431,310 due to the full funding for all authorized
positions, the addition of 11 full-time positions and the implementation of recommendations
received from an outside consultant’s work on a compensation and compression study. Parttime salaries increase $1,542,620 primarily due to an increase of the hourly wage for Parks
& Recreation positions to meet market demands as well as adding four additional crossing
guard positions and increasing the hourly rate for crossing guards by 50¢ an hour.
The City estimates full funding for all positions in the proposed budget. Any salary savings
due to unfilled positions are accounted for during the revised budget process. Because it can
be difficult to predict the City’s actual employee recruitment and retention rate and a schedule for filling vacancies, it is prudent to fund all positions and it does provide departments
with some financial flexibility for unanticipated expenses during the budget year.

44

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

In January 2023, the City contracted with Slavin Management Consultants to conduct
an analysis of the current pay system to determine if it provided fair and equitable pay
internally and was competitive externally. As part of the analysis, a compensation survey

questionnaire was designed to solicit information about salaries and pay practices and it
was sent to 18 comparable jurisdictions in February 2023. Once analyzed, the results of
the survey concluded that the City was relatively competitive in the placement of positions
into the appropriate pay ranges but that the actual pay for several positions was below the
market based on years of service and years in the position. In order to address this issue, the
proposed budget includes a recommendation to relieve some of the compression at a cost
of approximately $190,000. The adopted budget also includes a recommendation to bring
the pay of approximately 35 employees up to a living wage of $18.93 an hour or $39,374
annually. The cost for this increase is approximately $145,000. A third recommendation of
the analysis is to increase salaries for all regular, full-time staff in order to remain competitive with the market. The study found that internal pay is approximately 7.6% behind the
market. Taking into account reclassifications of some positions and the continuation of the
salary range and step system, the increase could be at least 8.35% for most employees,
unless the employee is already at the top of the salary range. The cost to increase pay just
ahead of the market is around $1,100,000.
In addition to the major recommendations from the compensation and compression study,
the 2023-2024 Adopted Budget also includes the following adjustments based on the
recommendations from the study: increasing the pay tables by at least 5%; increasing
Firefighter entry level pay to $48,402 to keep up with the current labor market; increasing
Police Officer entry level pay to $53,435 to keep up with the current labor market; and,
revising compensation rules and policies to give more flexibility when hiring and promoting
employees. The budget also proposes to reclassify several positions based on the survey results, the current labor market, internal equity issues, job duties or a combination of the five.
The reclassifications being recommended are: Firefighter I – range 6 to range 7; Firefighter
II – range 7 to range 8; Crew Supervisor to Crew Superintendent – range 9 to range 11; and
Chief Court Clerk to Court Administrator – range 11 to range 15. The City Clerk position
in the City Manager’s Office is recommended to be retitled Chief of Staff to focus on City
Commission needs in addition to budgeting, records and elections duties. The part-time
Content Writer in the Equity & Engagement Division will become a full-time position and
be retitled to Communications Coordinator. The current Digital Media Specialist position
will also be retitled to Communications Coordinator. The Community & Economic Development Department has requested that a Volunteer Coordinator position be reestablished
with half of the salary paid for by the Decatur Tourism Bureau; and, that one of the Planner
positions be retitled Planning & Zoning Manager and reclassified from range 9 to range
16. The Licensing and Inspections Division as well as the Code Enforcement Division will
be moving from Public Works to Community & Economic Development. An Innovation
and Strategy Director in range 18 is proposed in the Administrative Services Department
to focus on organization development for the entire organization; an additional Court Clerk
position is also proposed. The Police Department has requested the addition of an Accreditation Manager and Open Records Custodian in range 13 to assist with the work that goes
into keeping the department in good standing and responding to open records requests. The
Facilities Superintendent and the Sanitation Services Superintendent in the Public Works
Department are recommended to be retitled as Assistant Public Works Director. The Solid
Waste Division has also requested an additional Sanitation Equipment Operator I position.
In March 2023, the City Commission adopted the Parks & Recreation Master Plan, known
as the Recreatur Plan. In addition to providing a road map for guiding programming and
capital improvement decisions related to parks and greenspace, the plan reestablished
the Parks & Recreation Department by merging the Active Living and Children & Youth
Services divisions after more than a decade of operating separately. The reestablishment of
the department resulted in the need for changes to positions and job titles in the department
as well as the recommendation for six new positions to improve the quality of services:
Assistant Program Supervisors and Site Directors become Recreation Coordinators in range
2; Program Supervisors become Recreation Supervisors in range 8; Assistant Director of
Active Living and CYS become Assistant Parks & Recreation Directors in range 16; CYS

All Funds
Overview

The living wage of $18.93 represents
the hourly rate an individual in a
household must earn to support
themselves and their family in the
Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Roswell,
Georgia Metropolitan Statistical Area
(MSA). For more information, refer to
livingwage.mit.edu/metros/12060.

CITY OF DECATUR

45

Director becomes Deputy Parks & Recreation Director in range 18; and Active Living
Director becomes Parks & Recreation Director in range 20. The proposed new positions for
the Parks & Recreation Department include 3 additional Recreation Coordinators to serve at
the Decatur Recreation Center, Ebster Recreation Center and Oakhurst Recreation Center; a
Tennis Pro to serve at the Glenlake Tennis Center in range 8; a Center Operations Manager
in range 12 to oversee the operation of the recreation centers and an Out-of-School Time
Manager in range 12 to lead the afterschool and summer camp operations. The funding for
the Tennis Pro and the Center Operations Manager will begin January 2, 2024.
If approved, the entire slate of personnel recommendations would go into effect on July 3,
2023, unless otherwise noted.
In the revised 2022-2023 estimates, the City’s general fund contribution towards health
costs decreased 9% from the original budget. For the fiscal year 2022-2023 plan year,
claims administration costs for Allied remain flat at approximately $275,000. The specific
stop-loss, which will be close to $950,000, decreases 3% mostly due to fewer plan members. In addition to the specific stop-loss, the primary budget driver is the annual expected
claims and annual maximum claims for which the City is responsible, up to the specific
stop-loss deductible and/or the maximum claims liability. The specific stop-loss deductible
is at $95,000. In the current fiscal year, the maximum claims liability, as determined by the
stop-loss carrier, is close to $4,300,000 and the City budgeted just over $3,900,000 in fiscal
year 2022-2023 based on current and anticipated claims. In the revised budget, the City is
expecting to spend up to 60% of the maximum claims liability, or close to $2,500,000 for
claims across all funds. This significant reduction is due to lower than anticipated claims.
To put this data in perspective, the City’s actual expenditures on health claims were 72%
of the maximum claims liability in fiscal year 2021-2022, and are on track to be just under
60% of the maximum claim liability in the current fiscal year. However that percentage has
fluctuated over the past years and even exceeded the maximum liability in a recent year.
The City’s assigned fund balance is useful for a self-insured health plan that can be sensitive to a number of high claims. The proposed fiscal year 2023-2024 budget uses $400,000
in assigned fund balance towards health costs. The City’s health insurance broker has performed a comparison of the City’s partially self-insured plan with a fully insured plan and
confirmed that the self-insured plan is still more affordable than a fully insured plan. Also,
the City is participating in a prescription assistance program to control prescription drug
costs that has resulted in savings of $115,930 over the past 12 months.
The City’s funding policy for health costs are calculated based on employee contributions
funding 20% of the overall cost and the city paying the remaining 80%. Early retirees (pre65) are offered a high deductible health insurance plan. In March 2023, the City’s Human
Resources division conducted a benefits survey to gauge employees’ opinions on the City’s
benefit offerings. The top three enhancements requested by employees were:
• Free or reduced Employee-Only medical insurance contributions
• Lower bi-weekly medical insurance contributions for all coverage tiers
• Lower medical insurance deductibles

46

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

The adopted health insurance plan incorporates all three of these requests. The bi-weekly
employee contribution for Employee-Only coverage will decrease $26 or close to 30%.
This will result in the employer contribution increasing to 85% of the total premium for
Employee-Only coverage. The City’s positive claims experience has resulted in an attractive renewal allowing employee contributions for all other coverage tiers to decrease about
5.5% or, on average, $11 per pay period. The City’s contribution remains at 80% for these
coverage tiers. The individual deductible decreases from $1,000 to $750 and the dental
calendar year maximum benefit increases to $1,500. A choice between vision networks is
being added to the plan at no additional charge to the employees. The surcharge for spouses
that have access to coverage with another employer was added in the 2017-2018 fiscal year
and remains in place. There are 13 employees paying the surcharge.

Employees have the opportunity to reduce their insurance contribution by up to 30%
through participation in the city’s wellness program. The 13th full year of the city’s wellness program will continue in the next budget year. The City partners with Corporate Health
Partners (CHP) to provide wellness services. Based on the results of a biometric and health
risk assessment, an employee meets with a health coach during the year to identify health
risks and develop strategies for addressing the risks. Additional services provided by CHP
include tobacco cessation classes, weight loss programs and fitness-related competitions.
The cost of the wellness premium discount plus the health coaching program is estimated to
be around $185,000.

All Funds
Overview

The City’s required contribution to the City of Decatur Employees’ Retirement System is
proposed to increase from 9% to 9.3% of payroll, which equates to a total contribution of
about $1,286,340 in the General Fund. In 2016, the Retirement Board of Trustees approved
a reduction in the discount rate from 7.5% to 7% to more accurately reflect lower interest rates. The change in the discount rate is being phased in over five years. The required
contribution also funds the prorated cost-of-living adjustment approved by the Retirement
Board of Trustees effective July 1, 2018. The previous retirement benefit adjustment was
March 2001. The most recent actuarial valuation (July 1, 2022) resulted in a slightly higher
employer contribution to the plan from 8.6% to 9.26%, primarily due to the increased volatility in today’s market.
After salaries and health insurance, contractual services is the next largest expenditure,
totaling $3,818,390 in the adopted budget, an increase of $1,039,880. Included in this
category are a number of non-recurring projects including completion of the downtown
master plan, a fleet electrification study and an equity action plan as well as the pool contract and services for 311 fiber locates. Professional services total $3,425,520, an increase
of $478,270. Professional services include legal services, IT support services, accounting
services and services from other professional and technical fields. Other specific projects
that are budgeted in professional services include updates to departmentally focused strategic plans, solar array technical assessments, job description analysis, downtown parking
analysis and arrangements for the City’s Bicentennial Celebration in December 2023.
While the COVID-19 pandemic may not have as large of an impact on expenditures in the
proposed 2023-2024 fiscal year, planning for the next emergency remains a priority. Expenditures for general operating items such as public safety education and prevention programs,
safety equipment for fire and police personnel, CPR and First Aid training for City employees and residents, training and professional development for City employees, turf and park
maintenance, invasive plant control, AEDs for city facilities, community-wide Parks & Recreation programs, creative business recruitment strategy, the Fire and Police CAPS programs,
support of social equity and inclusion efforts and continued emphasis on pedestrian and
bicycle safety and environmental initiatives are included in the adopted budget.

2023-2024 ADOPTED GENERAL FUND BUDGET REVENUES

The 2023-2024 Adopted General Fund revenue estimates are $7,619,930 or 23.8% higher
than the Revised 2022-2023 General Fund revenue estimates.
The 2023-2024 Adopted General Fund real property tax estimate is $1,384,000 more than
the Revised 2022-2023 budget. The estimate assumes a 14% increase in the real property
digest for 2023, a conservative tax collection rate due to the continued economic impact of
inflation on property owners and the general fund millage rate reduced from 8.32 to 7.92
mills. The total estimate for real property tax revenue is $21,673,000 which is 61% of total
anticipated revenues and 6% higher than the revised 2022-2023 real property tax revenues
budget. The proposed estimate takes into account the passage of a referendum to increase
the GH-1, GH-2 and GH-3 homestead exemptions as well as the creation of a new homestead exemption (LT-1) for owner-occupied homes on land managed through a 501 (c)(3)
whose primary mission is affordable housing. The referendum will be included on the November 2023 general election ballot and if approved, changes would go into effect in 2024.

CITY OF DECATUR

47

After real property taxes, the largest revenue category is the insurance premiums tax which
is expected to produce $2,013,650 in General Fund revenue. Franchise taxes are the next
largest category and are expected to produce $1,693,500 in revenue. Franchise tax categories include electric utility, cable, telephone, video service, natural gas and energy excise
taxes. All of these are flat revenue sources. Construction permits are estimated slightly
higher and closer to fiscal year 2018-2019 levels although current development activity
remains strong. The revised 2022-2023 development-related fees are budgeted at just over
$719,000; a significant decrease over the $1,540,125 received in fiscal year 2021-2022. The
estimate for fiscal year 2023-2024 remains conservative at $773,000. Additional permitting that could impact construction permit fee revenue is for construction of the townhome
development at Talley Street and New Street and the Northwood-Ravin mixed-use development at East College Avenue and Sams Street. Fines and forfeitures are expected to be close
to $647,000 or flat compared to previous years. This is a combination of traffic fines, school
bus stop arm violations, parking tickets and other court fees. These revenues are sensitive to
staffing levels and patrol assignments. During the public health emergency fewer citations
were issued and court dates were suspended until March 2021. Parking meter fees and
violations are expected to be close to $550,000.
Starting in fiscal year 2015-2016, the City began distributing 50% of net revenues from
alcoholic beverage excise taxes, licenses and server permits to the City Schools of Decatur.
In fiscal year 2021-2022, the actual transfer to the school system was close to $362,635.
Alcohol related revenues are estimated to be flat compared to the revised fiscal year 20222023 budget.
Other business-related revenues are expected to see minor increases. Occupation tax
revenue is estimated to remain stable in 2023-2024 and is on its way to returning to prepandemic estimates. Recreation-related activities including youth sports have rebounded in
the last year, with recreation fees budgeted to increase almost $4,000,000 from the revised
budget and the actual amount received in fiscal year 2021-2022. The increase is primarily
due to the inclusion of revenue from the afterschool and summer camp programs that were
previously accounted for in a separate fund. The reestablishment of the Parks & Recreation
Department and the cost recovery model the department plans to follow for its centers and
programs will also impact future revenues.
A transfer from the Solid Waste Fund to the General Fund is shown as revenue to cover
the indirect costs of providing residential and commercial solid waste services minus the
cost of services provided to the City of Decatur and to the City Schools of Decatur, the cost
for street sweeping and the cost for emptying litter containers in the commercial district.
A transfer from the Storm Water Utility Fund to the General Fund is shown as revenue to
cover indirect costs of supporting storm water activities. The indirect costs for both funds
are credited for the value of the senior fee offsets that were approved in March 2021.
A transfer from the hotel/motel tax fund is budgeted to be $581,250 or $131,250 more than
the originally budgeted 2022-2023 transfer. This change reflects the return to normal occupancy rates at the City’s four hotels as well as the collection of taxes from short-term rentals.
The E-911 Fund accounts for all the revenues and expenditures associated with operating
the emergency public safety dispatch system. Fees from telephone lines as well as cellular
phone service are dedicated to this purpose. However, a transfer from the general fund is
required to meet the balance of the expenditures not covered by the E-911 fees. The 20232024 Adopted General Fund estimate shows a $425,000 transfer to the E-911 fund, which
is $75,000 more than the 2022-2023 Revised budget due to the addition of a E911 Communications Manager position that was added mid-year. This position replaced a Lieutenant
position that had been accounted for in the General Fund.

48

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

To continue the City’s support of affordable housing, a $100,000 transfer to the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund has been included to be used as determined by the City Commission as
well as a $490,850 transfer of the tax proceeds over the 2015 base value, otherwise known

as a tax increment, to the East Decatur TAD Fund. A transfer of $550,000 is recommended
for several pressing infrastructure repair projects for which there is not adequate funding in
the Capital Improvement Fund.

All Funds
Overview

ENTERPRISE FUNDS

The City Commission will adopt 2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Budgets for three
Enterprise Funds. Enterprise Funds are used to account for operations that are financed
and operated in a manner similar to private business enterprise where the intent is that the
cost of providing goods or services to the general public on a continuing basis be financed
primarily through user charges.
Conference Center/Parking Deck
The City entered into a long-term lease with the Decatur Downtown Development Authority (DDA) for operation and management of the conference center and parking deck. The
DDA sublets the management and operation of the conference center and the DDA manages the parking deck through a contract with a parking management vendor. Hotel/motel
tax collections for the upkeep and maintenance of the conference center are placed in a
reserve account to be used for maintenance of the facility. That is the only public financial
obligation for operation, maintenance and capital improvements for the conference center. A
strong economy and the popularity of downtown Decatur as a destination for personal and
professional travel historically have contributed to the revenue available for facility maintenance and capital improvements.
The 2022-2023 Revised Budget includes a transfer of $290,630 from the Hotel/Motel Tax
Fund to cover maintenance costs. This is approximately $65,000 more than the prior year.
The 2023-2024 Adopted Budget revenues include a transfer of $290,630 from the Hotel/
Motel Tax Fund for the capital maintenance reserve account. The funds in the capital maintenance reserve will be available to address future capital needs of the conference center.
A maintenance reserve account has also been created with revenue from the parking deck
management contract. The revenue in this account is available for maintenance and repairs
for the parking deck. At the end of 2023-2024, the net assets in the account are estimated to
be close to $244,000.
Solid Waste
Effective July 1, 2000, solid waste services began to be accounted for using an Enterprise
Fund. Sanitation fees and income from refuse bag sales are shown in the Solid Waste Fund
along with all operational expenses.
A transfer of $376,000 will be made from the 2022-2023 Revised Solid Waste Fund to the
2022-2023 Revised General Fund Budget to cover the indirect cost of services paid for by
the General Fund for solid waste management services minus a credit for the cost of street
sweeping, the cost of collecting the downtown litter containers and a credit for services
provided but not billed to the City and to the City Schools of Decatur.
An estimated transfer of $436,600 will be made from the 2023-2024 Adopted Solid Waste
Fund to the 2023-2024 Adopted General Fund Budget to cover the indirect cost of services
paid for by the General Fund for solid waste management services minus a credit for the
cost of street sweeping, the cost of collecting the downtown street cans and a credit for
services provided but not billed to the City and to the City Schools of Decatur.
Using an estimate of total solid waste costs included in the 2023-2024 Adopted Budget, the
2023 recommended user fees for various sanitation services were calculated earlier this year
and the City Commission adopted the following schedule of fees:
• Retained the annual assessment at $305 for residential properties.
• Retained the per cubic yard charge for dumpster service at $4.25.
• Retained the annual assessment of $800 per single 95-gallon cart for once a week pick-

CITY OF DECATUR

49

up, with fees increasing based on the number of carts and the number of pick-ups per
week.
• Retained the annual assessment at $1,210 per 3 cubic yard dumpster collection with
increased charges depending on the number of pick-ups per week.
• Retained the charges for the costs of residential garbage bags at $1.40 per 30-gallon bag,
$0.70 per 15-gallon bag, and $0.40 per 8-gallon bag to cover disposal costs.
In addition to collecting residential solid waste accounts, the City collects for residential
recycling services after a contract with Latham Home Sanitation could not be renegotiated
in Spring 2018. The recently adopted residential service fee covers the cost for providing
this service.
Total revenues for 2023-2024 are estimated to be $3,144,100 and expenses prior to non-operating expenses like depreciation are estimated to be $2,685,100. Revenues are estimated
using a conservative collection rate.
Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2023-2024 for solid waste operations includes the purchase of a compost collection vehicle.
The fund includes expenditures of $170,000 for a pilot compost program that will be funded
through a grant of the same amount form the Georgia Environmental Protection Division.
Storm Water Utility
The major activity of this fund has been the construction of downtown and neighborhood
storm drainage improvements. In December 2020, the City Commission adopted an updated Storm Water Master Plan. According to the Storm Water Master Plan, $38 million is
needed for implementation of Priority A and B projects over a 20-year period. Funding for
these improvements can be raised equitably with an Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) fee
system for commercial properties and a 4-tier fee system for residential properties, based
on impervious areas. In March 2021, the City Commission established the rate at $215 per
Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU), up from $100 per ERU. Prior to this change, the fee
was last updated in 2017. In March 2022, the fee was increased to $285, which is the fee
recommended in the plan to fund the capital projects.
Revenue from fees for the 2022-2023 Revised Storm Water Utility is $3,544,500. Expenses,
including transfers to other funds, indirect costs, depreciation and costs related to other
post-employment benefits (OPEB) are estimated to be $3,550,470. Revenue from fees for
the 2023-2024 Adopted Storm Water Utility is $3,734,550 and expenses are estimated to
be $4,215,530. In the 2023-2024 Adopted Storm Water Utility Fund, $100,000 is budgeted
for roadway milling, $200,000 for a FEMA grant match to remove a flood prone property,
$400,000 for bioswale projects and $1,400,000 for the construction of a Storm Water Master Plan project.
A transfer of $441,630 will be made from the 2022-2023 Revised Storm Water Utility Fund
to the 2022-2023 Revised General Fund Budget to cover the indirect cost of services paid
for by the General Fund for storm water management. A transfer of $498,000 will be made
from the 2023-2024 Adopted Storm Water Fund to the 2023-2024 Adopted General Fund
Budget to cover the indirect costs.

OTHER FUNDS

50

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

The City Commission will adopt 2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Budgets for the
Capital Improvement Fund, the SPLOST Fund, the 2010 and 2013 Urban Redevelopment
Agency Funds, the Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund, Children and Youth Services
Fund, the Debt Service Fund, the Tree Bank Fund, the Emergency Telephone System
(E911) Fund, the Community Grants Fund, the Confiscated Drug Fund, the Public Facilities Authority Fund, the East Decatur Tax Allocation District (TAD) Fund, the American
Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) Fund, the Community Energy Fund and the School Zone Camera
Safety Program Fund.

Capital Improvement Fund
The 2022-2023 Revised Capital Improvement Fund budget includes $5,900,000 in tax
revenue and $2,569,260 in intergovernmental revenue. The intergovernmental revenue is
from the Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) for right-of-way acquisition for the Clairemont/
Commerce and Church/Commerce intersection improvements, funding from the State of
Georgia for street repair, patching and resurfacing under the Local Maintenance and Improvement Grant (LMIG) program and funding from DeKalb County for the installation of
an inclusive playground at Decatur Legacy Park.

All Funds
Overview

Examples of capital outlay projects in the 2022-2023 Revised Capital Improvement Fund
Budget Estimate include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Clairemont/Church/Commerce Pedestrian & Bike Improvements
Playground equipment replacement
Public Works and Public Safety Vehicles
Street patching, repair and paving
Facility maintenance and upkeep projects such as carpet replacement and painting
Implementation of Police department’s take home car program
Fire Station fitness equipment
Shadowmoor Drive sidewalks

The 2022-2023 Revised Capital Improvement Fund budget includes expenditures of
$1,149,750 for debt service to cover payments for previously purchased equipment.
Fiscal year 2017-2018 was the last year that the City received Homestead Option Sales
Tax (HOST) proceeds. In a November 2017 referendum, the HOST was replaced with an
EHOST (Equalized Homestead Option Sales Tax). The EHOST will apply 100% of its proceeds to homestead exemptions from DeKalb County property tax funds for maintenance
and operations and the hospital authority in owner-occupied, single family residences. This
eliminates the differential benefit among unincorporated and incorporated taxpayers under
the HOST. At the same time, a six-year SPLOST was approved which will fund the debt
service payments previously covered by HOST as well as finance improvements to the
Atlanta Avenue/West Howard Avenue/West College Avenue intersection and other bicycle,
pedestrian and traffic calming improvements. The current SPLOST expires in March 2024.
A referendum for a new SPLOST will be on the ballot in November.
In the 2022-2023 Revised Capital Improvement Fund budget, HOST funds are designated
for projects including Clairemont/Church/Commerce Bike & Pedestrian Improvements
($731,700) and Sidewalk Construction and Repair ($200,000), Access Control and Security
Upgrades at Park facilities ($165,000) and Public Art ($10,000.)
The 2023-2024 Adopted Capital Improvement Fund budget includes $6,117,500 in tax
revenue and $1,615,260 in intergovernmental revenue. The tax revenue estimate is based
on a conservative tax collection rate. The intergovernmental revenue is Livable Centers
Initiative (LCI) funding for right-of-way acquisition and construction for the Clairemont/
Commerce and Church/Commerce intersection improvements, the State of Georgia for
street repair, patching and resurfacing under the Local Maintenance and Improvement Grant
(LMIG) program and the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation for pond bank stabilization
at Decatur Legacy Park. The City will also receive $750,000 in community project funding
from the office of Congresswoman Nikema Williams for the installation of a solar array at
the Decatur Recreation Center.
Examples of capital outlay projects in the 2023-2024 Capital Improvement Fund Budget
Estimate include:
•
•
•
•

Ebster Field turf and lighting installation
Clairemont/Church/Commerce Pedestrian & Bike Improvements
Playground equipment replacement
Public Works and Public Safety Vehicles & equipment

CITY OF DECATUR

51

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Street patching, repair and paving
Facility maintenance and upkeep projects such as carpet replacement and painting
Continuation of Police department’s take home car program
Fire helmet replacement
Derrydown Way sidewalks
Electric vehicle charging stations
LED lighting upgrades at City facilities

The 2023-2024 Capital Improvement Fund budget estimate funds the final installment of
a five-year plan to address sidewalk repairs and install new sidewalks throughout the City.
The Capital Improvement Fund allocates $200,000 per year from HOST fund balance and
at least an additional $50,000 from the fund’s regular tax proceeds. If tax proceeds are
adequate, an additional $200,000 per year may be allocated from SPLOST proceeds for
sidewalk repair and construction.
The 2023-2024 Adopted Capital Improvement Fund budget includes expenditures of
$1,524,470 for debt service to cover payments for previously purchased equipment plus
anticipated debt service for financing Ebster Field improvements. HOST funded projects
include Sidewalk Construction and Repair ($200,000), Traffic Calming Projects ($400,000),
Replacement server for camera system ($52,000) and Public Art ($10,000.)
The debt service associated with the purchase of Decatur Legacy Park is paid out of the
Public Facilities Authority Fund. A portion of the Capital Improvement Fund generates the
revenue needed for the annual debt service. Of the roughly $2.1 million needed for annual
debt service, $1 million was provided in fiscal year 2018-2019 from the General Fund’s
fund balance. The millage rate was increased from 1.52 to 2 mills in 2019 to fully cover
the debt service on Decatur Legacy Park. An additional 0.15 mills was approved in 2020
to bring the total capital improvements levy to 2.15 mills. A transfer of $2,250,000 to the
Public Facilities Authority fund is recommended for annual debt service and facility maintenance and capital upgrades at Decatur Legacy Park.
After budgeting for street repair and paving and obligated debt service, there is very little
discretionary revenue remaining from tax revenue for capital outlay. Federal and state
revenues are critical to the City’s ability to fund significant capital projects. The City has
identified several needed capital outlay items that will not be funded in the next fiscal year
unless funding exceeds budget estimates. These projects have been prioritized and will be
brought to the City Commission for approval if funding is available.
It is recommended that the levy for capital improvement purposes remain be reduced from
2.27 to 2.17 mills.
Special Purpose Local Option Sales Tax (SPLOST) Fund
The Special Purpose Local Option Sales Tax (SPLOST) Fund accounts for the revenue
generated from the tax and the project expenditures as approved by voter referendum in
November 2017. Collections from the tax were effective April 1, 2018. The original estimate provided by DeKalb County was that the fund would receive $20,529,000 over the
six-year period of the tax. With two years of collections, the revenue was projected to be
closer to $18,989,000, or 8% less than original projections. However, recent revenues have
been stronger than expected, most likely aided by the collection of online sales taxes since
July 2020. Revenues of $11,925,100 will cover debt service payments for the URA 2010
and URA 2013 bond projects - Fire Station #1, Decatur Recreation Center, Leveritt Public
Works Building and the Beacon Municipal Center. Prior to the 2020 refinancing on this debt
that total was $13,400,000 and at least another $6,000,000 will fund the improvements to
the Atlanta Avenue/West Howard Avenue/West College Avenue intersection. This is the last
remaining intersection improvement project from the 2007 Community Transportation Plan.
52

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

The 2022-2023 Revised SPLOST Fund budget estimates $4,000,000 in tax revenue, up
from the original budget of $3,800,000, an overall increase of 5%. Transfers of $632,160

and $1,263,680 will be made to the 2010 URA and 2013 URA Funds, respectively. The
revised budget reflects project expenses for the Atlanta Avenue intersection project and use
of the SPLOST proceeds to pay the related debt service over six years.

All Funds
Overview

The 2023-2024 Adopted SPLOST Fund budget estimates $2,679,900 in tax revenue; this
includes $1,629,900 from SPLOST I, at which point the total estimate of $20,529,000 will
be reached. The additional $1,050,000 assumes revenue from SPLOST II in April to June
2024. Transfers of $632,920 and $1,270,930 will be made to the 2010 URA and 2013 URA
Funds, respectively. Debt service on the SPLOST bonds will total $956,980 for 20232024. In addition to the project expenses for Atlanta Avenue, the proposed budget includes
$1,630,000 for the South Columbia multi-use path.
SPLOST revenue will be monitored monthly through the current and next fiscal year. If
revenue projections are not met, other revenue sources will be needed for the City’s debt
obligations.
2010 Urban Redevelopment Agency (URA) Fund
The 2010 URA Fund accounts for bonds that were issued by the URA in December 2010.
The bond revenue was used for construction and renovation of Fire Station #1, Decatur
Recreation Center and the Public Works facility.
The 2022-2023 Revised 2010 URA Fund budget includes $121,600 in rent revenue from
the City Schools of Decatur for their use of the joint maintenance facility on Talley Street.
These funds are applied towards the 2010 URA debt service.
The 2022-2023 Revised 2010 URA Fund budget accounts for the debt service on the bond
proceeds. SPLOST proceeds are budgeted as a transfer from the SPLOST Fund for the debt
service ($753,760).
The 2023-2024 Adopted URA Fund budget includes $121,600 from the City Schools of Decatur for rent for their use of the joint maintenance facility on Talley Street.
Expenditures for the 2023-2024 Proposed URA Fund budget include debt service payments
in the amount of $754,520, and will be paid with funds transferred from the SPLOST Fund.
The series 2010A bonds were refunded through the issuance of the URA series 2020A
bonds for an annual savings over $390,000.
2013 Urban Redevelopment Agency (URA) Fund
The 2013 URA Fund accounts for the revenue bonds that were issued by the URA in April
2013. The revenue from these bonds was used for construction and renovation of the Beacon Municipal Center.
The 2022-2023 Revised 2013 URA Fund budget accounts for the debt service for two URA
bond series, Series 2013A/2020B and 2013B/2020B. Series 2013A/2020B includes the
City portions of the project and series 2013B/2020B includes the City Schools of Decatur
portion of the project. In October 2020, the 2013A and 2013B bonds were refinanced and
combined into the Series 2020B bonds.
SPLOST proceeds are budgeted as a transfer from the SPLOST Fund in the amount of
$1,263,680 for debt service. The school system is responsible for $362,670 in debt service.
The 2023-2024 Adopted URA Fund expenditure budget accounts for the debt service on the
revenue bonds. Debt service totals $1,637,950 for the Series 2013B/2020B bonds including
$367,020 that is the financial responsibility of the school system. A transfer of $1,270,930
will be made from the SPLOST Fund proceeds for the City’s portion of the debt service.
Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund
The 2022-2023 Revised Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund reflects revenue of $25,000
that is mainly revenue from sales of lots. Expenditures are estimated at $30,000 for improvements to the landscaping.

CITY OF DECATUR

53

The 2023-2024 Adopted Budget includes $30,000 in revenues from lot sales which reflects
the limited supply of available grave sites. Budgeted expenditures total $70,000 and include
completion of improvements to the entrance and landscape maintenance. In order to fund
the total project budget for major cemetery improvements in 2010, a transfer was made by
the Capital Improvement Fund to the Storm Water Utility Fund to cover some of the costs
of the cemetery project. For several years, the Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund will
transfer funds back to the Capital Improvement Fund and Storm Water Fund. In FY 20222023 and FY 2023-2024 transfers of $18,000 to the Capital Improvement Fund and $12,000
to the Storm Water Utility Fund are budgeted. At the end of fiscal year 2023-2024 the ending fund balance is expected to be $2,923.
Debt Service Fund
The 2022-2023 Revised Debt Service Fund budget shows $2,025,000 in tax revenue to
retire debt on the 2007 general obligation bond issue of $33,245,000 that was split evenly
between the City and City Schools of Decatur. There is a $956,090 interest payment and
a $1,060,000 principal payment for the bonded debt. At June 30, 2023 it is estimated that
there will be approximately $1,326,835 in fund balance for debt service for the City’s 2007
general obligation bonds.
The 2023-2024 Adopted Debt Service Fund budget shows $2,070,000 in tax revenue to
retire debt on the 2007 bond issue. There is a $934,890 interest payment and a $1,110,000
principal payment for bonded debt included in the 2023-2024 Adopted Debt Service Fund
budget. At June 30, 2024 it is estimated that there will be approximately $1,351,945 in fund
balance for the City’s general obligation bonds.
In February 2016, the City issued $75,000,000 in general obligation bonds for the City
Schools of Decatur capital projects. The 2022-2023 Revised Debt Service Fund budget
shows $3,800,000 in tax revenue for debt service on the 2016 school general obligation
bonds. At June 30, 2023 it is estimated that there will be approximately $3,413,774 in the
2016 school general obligation bonds fund balance.
The 2023-2024 Adopted Debt Service Fund budget shows revenues of $3,930,000 in tax
revenue for debt service on the 2016 school general obligation bonds. A $2,189,450 interest
payment and a principal payment of $1,930,000 for bonded debt are included in the 20232024 Adopted Debt Service Fund budget for debt service on the 2016 school general obligation bonds. At June 30, 2024 it is estimated that there will be approximately $3,224,324
in fund balance for the 2016 school general obligation bonds.
It is recommended that the levy for the 2016 school general obligation bonds remain be
reduced from 1.43 to 1.32 mills and that the levy for the 2007 general obligation bonds be
reduced from .77 mills to .71 mills for a total debt service levy of 2.03 mills.
Tree Bank Fund
The Tree Bank Fund was established to receive payments from property owners in lieu of
planting replacement trees required for compliance with the city’s tree ordinance. Fees are
used to purchase and plant trees in public parks, rights of way and other public properties,
the purchase of green space, funding tree care educational programs and similar activities
associated with maintaining and improving the city’s public tree canopy.
The 2022-2023 Revised Tree Bank Fund budget shows $5,180 in revenues and $35,000 in
expenditures. The balance in the tree bank as of June 30, 2022 was $48,508. At the end of
fiscal year 2022-2023, the Tree Bank Account balance is estimated to be $18,688.
The 2023-2024 Adopted Tree Bank Fund budget shows $600 in contributions to the tree
bank as developers are opting to plant trees on site or elsewhere instead of making a payment in lieu of planting. Expenditures are estimated to be $6,000. At the end of fiscal year
2023-2024, the Tree Bank Account balance is estimated to be $13,288.
54

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Emergency Telephone System Fund
The City collects $1.50 per land phone line, cell phone line and voice over IP account in the
City for provision of E-911 emergency telephone services. This is the maximum amount allowed by State law. In August 2011, the City Commission approved a resolution to impose
a 911 charge on prepaid wireless services to be paid directly from the State to the City.
The City is required to maintain a separate Emergency Telephone System Fund to account
for the revenues from E-911 fees and to account for the expenditures for provision of the
service. Therefore, all E-911 fees and all E-911 expenditures are accounted for in this fund.
Because it costs the City more to provide E-911 services than is collected through fees, a
transfer from the General Fund covers the balance.

All Funds
Overview

House Bill 751 was approved in the 2017-2018 Georgia General Assembly session and
was signed by the Governor on May 7, 2018. It established the Georgia Emergency Communications Authority (GECA), housed within the Georgia Emergency Management and
Homeland Security Agency. GECA includes within its membership all local governments
that operate or contract for the operation of an E-911 system. Starting on January 1, 2019,
all E-911 fees were submitted directly to the State as opposed to individual E-911 agencies.
GECA, through a contract with the Department of Revenue (DOR), will disburse the funds
to each local government. GECA will be authorized to contract with DOR to audit telecommunications service providers to ensure proper payment of E-911 fees.
Revenues for the 2022-2023 Revised Emergency Telephone System Fund total $625,000
and expenditures are estimated to be $1,180,560. Revenues for the 2023-2024 Adopted
Emergency Telephone System Fund total $630,000 and expenditures are estimated to be
$1,358,910. The 2023-2024 budget includes funding for an E911 Communications Manager position as well as an upgrade to the wiring for the recently upgraded new phone system
in the E-911 call center.
A transfer of $350,000 will be made to the 2022-2023 Revised Emergency Telephone
System Fund from the 2022-2023 Revised General Fund budget to cover the cost of providing E-911 services not covered by E-911 fees. A transfer of $425,000 is estimated from the
2023-2024 Adopted General Fund budget to the 2023-2024 Adopted Emergency Telephone
Fund for the same purpose. At the end of 2023-2024, the fund balance is expected to be
$63,647.
Children and Youth Services Fund
Upon the completion of the 21st Century Learning Center grant, the City established a
special revenue Children and Youth Services Fund to account for grants, program fees,
accumulated fees, contributions from other partners and a transfer from the General Fund
for support of children and youth services which includes after-school programs and summer camps. The department pursued and received after-school re-accreditation for all nine
programs during the fiscal year.
Revenue for the 2022-2023 Revised Children and Youth Services (CYS) Fund is anticipated
to be $1,866,490 and expenditures are estimated to be $1,927,210. The revised budget
includes funding for summer camp at Decatur Recreation Center and Decatur Legacy Park
as well as afterschool programming at seven sites. It also includes funds to purchase a Gator
utility vehicle for use on the Decatur Legacy Park property. At the conclusion of the current
fiscal year, the fund will no longer be needed to account for program fees since CYS will be
merging with the Active Living Division to form the Decatur Parks & Recreation Department. The remaining fund balance in the amount of $302,174 will be transferred to the
General Fund.
Confiscated Drug Fund
The purpose of this fund is to account for monies and goods confiscated when the Police
Department makes an arrest and obtains a conviction in a drug-related case. Funds are made
CITY OF DECATUR

55

available to the department when the case has been successfully prosecuted. Expenditures
from this fund can only be made for law enforcement purposes.
The 2022-2023 Revised Confiscated Drug Fund Budget shows revenues of $0 and expenditures of $50 for bank account fees. It is estimated that the fund balance at June 30, 2023 will
be $22,238. The 2023-2024 Confiscated Drug Fund Budget Estimate shows no revenues
and expenditures of $50 for bank account fees. It is estimated that the fund balance at June
30, 2024 will be $22,188.
Hotel/Motel Tax Fund
The purpose of this fund is to account for monies collected pursuant to the imposition of a
hotel/motel tax on rooms rented by hotels and motels within the City. Expenditures from
this fund can only be made for purposes defined in state law, including the support of a
conference center, support of a tourism bureau and for general purposes. In April 2021, the
State enacted House Bill 317 authorizing municipalities to collect hotel/motel taxes on short
term rentals such as those offered by VRBO and Airbnb. The law became effective in July
2021.
The 2022-2023 Revised Hotel/Motel Tax Fund budget shows revenues of $1,550,000 and
expenditures of $678,120 for the support of the Decatur Tourism Bureau, a transfer of
$290,630 to the Conference Center Fund and a $581,250 transfer to the General Fund. This
is an increase of 23% from the original budget of $1,200,000 and is based on occupancy
through March 2023.
The 2023-2024 Adopted Hotel/Motel Tax Fund budget estimate shows revenues of
$1,550,000. Expenditures include $678,120 for the support of the Decatur Tourism Bureau; a $290,630 transfer to the Conference Center Fund; and a transfer of $581,250 to the
General Fund.
Public Facilities Authority Fund
The City of Decatur Public Facilities Authority (PFA) was created by the Georgia General
Assembly in 2017. In 2017, the authority issued the PFA Series 2017 revenue bonds in the
amount of $29,625,000 and received a low-interest loan from the Georgia Environmental
Finance Authority (GEFA) in the amount of $11,452,000 for the purchase of the seventyseven acre Children’s Home property. The GEFA loan funded the purchase of twenty-two
of the seventy-seven acres for the purpose of conservation. The property was purchased
from the United Methodist Children’s Home of the North Georgia Conference, Inc. in
August 2017. This property provides valuable greenspace and recreational facilities for the
community. The long-term future of the property was determined through a communitywide master planning process which was completed in 2018 and resulted in the name of the
property as Decatur Legacy Park.
The two budgetary accounts shown in the fund are the 1.) Capital Account and 2.) Operating Account. The Capital Account reflects the proceeds from the debt issuances, related
issuance costs and the property acquisition. About $459,000 remained in the capital account
subsequent to the property purchase. These funds are available for property improvements.
The Operating Account includes rent from a property tenant and funding from DeKalb
County to undertake certain projects in the conservation area on the Decatur Legacy Park
property such as trail construction, pond improvements and removal of invasive species.
The annual debt service payments are accounted for in the Operating Account. In August
2020, the City entered into a management agreement with the Decatur Legacy Project,
Inc. to manage the on-going operations and implementation of the master plan for Decatur
Legacy Park.

56

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

At the end of fiscal year 2022-2023, the Capital Account will end with a fund balance of
approximately $201,085 restricted for property improvements; and, the Operating Account
will end with a fund balance of approximately $734,475 of which $450,069 is restricted
for conservation area improvements and $294,405 is restricted for future debt service. A

transfer of $2,250,000 is budgeted from the Capital Improvement Fund to cover the debt
service obligations of the PFA plus about $200,000 for property maintenance, repairs and
renovation.

All Funds
Overview

The 2023-2024 Adopted Public Facilities Authority Fund budget estimate for the Operating Account reflects $209,000 in revenue for the establishment of a creative village from
Congressman Hank Johnson’s Office community project funding and $140,000 in expenditures from the DeKalb County grant towards improvements in the conservation area as well
as an engineering assessment of the buildings in the creative village to prepare them for
tenants. Additional capital expenses include wayfinding signage ($30,000), invasive species
removal ($200,000) and the Postal Pond assessment ($100,000). These improvements will
allow for more rental opportunities.
Debt service payments will total $2,027,780 which include $1,045,310 in principal and
$982,470 in interest payments. A transfer of $2,250,000 is budgeted from the Capital
Improvement Fund to cover the full amount of debt service obligations of the PFA. At the
end of fiscal year 2023-2024, the Operating Account is anticipated to end with a fund balance of $440,195, of which $250,069 is restricted for conservation area improvements and
$190,125 is restricted for future debt service.
East Decatur Tax Allocation District (TAD) Fund
In December 2015, the Decatur City Commission established Tax Allocation District (TAD)
No. 1 – East Decatur to leverage the tax digest growth from private investment within the
district and invest the incremental tax proceeds back in the district. As property within the
TAD is redeveloped and improved, the City receives additional tax revenues as a result
of the increased property values. This additional revenue, or tax increment, is accounted
for in a separate fund. While the TAD has been in place since 2015, the TAD Fund was
established in fiscal year 2020-2021. The transfer into the fund in fiscal year 2022-2023 is
estimated at $594,850 and 2023-2024 is estimated at $624,590.
American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) Fund
In March, 2021 the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) was authorized to provide financial
relief and support programs in response to the effects of the coronavirus pandemic. Part of
the funding was designated as “Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds” (SLFRF). As part of the SLFRF, the City of Decatur was allotted $9,595,820 to be paid in two
equal tranches of $4,797,910. Consolidated funding for all payments to local jurisdictions
with populations under 50,000 was provided to the State of Georgia for distribution.
On January 6, 2022 the United States Treasury released the ARPA Final Rule, establishing some administrative guidelines while reaffirming others that had been included in the
temporary rules. In the final rules, the lost revenue replacement provision was changed for
government service expenditures so that local jurisdictions could either select a standard
allowance of up to $10 million or use the continued calculation of actual revenue loss. The
City Commission authorized the use of the “Standard allowance” on April 4, 2022. By
doing so, the City is now allowed to expend funds on a broad array of services and investments that are defined as “government services”. This includes road building and maintenance and other infrastructure; general government administration and administrative facilities; the provision of public safety services; as well as numerous other opportunities during
the entire period of performance (obligated by December 31, 2024 and spent by December
31, 2026).
While revenues must be recognized only as expenditures are made, the Revised 2022-2023
Budget includes expenditures in the amount of $973,360 for planning & design of the Athletic Field and Track at Decatur Legacy Park, installation of hybrid meeting technology at
the Decatur Recreation Center and pandemic premium pay for employees. The 2023-2024
Adopted Budget includes expenditures in the amount of $11,401,260. These expenditures
include $5,660,000 for the installation of an Athletic Field and Track at Decatur Legacy

CITY OF DECATUR

57

Park; $3,741,50 to fund Decatur Legacy Park South Housing Village public infrastructure;
and, $2,000,000 for storm water master plan infrastructure improvements. The City Schools
of Decatur will be contributing $3 million to the Athletic Field and Track project. At the end
of fiscal year 2023-2024, the fund balance is estimated to be $0.
School Zone Camera Safety Program Fund
The City Commission approved an agreement with Blue Line Solutions in February 2023
for the creation of a school zone speed enforcement program. The goal of the program is to
increase roadway safety in five city school zones by reducing the number of speeding vehicles. The program is violator funded and any fines collected have to be used to fund local
law enforcement or public safety initiatives.
The Adopted 2023-2024 Budget includes $500,000 in revenues collected from fines and
forfeitures and $403,200 in expenditures. The public safety items to be funded with the proceeds from this program include $30,000 for Police Department promotion testing materials; $97,100 for patrol vehicle equipment; $52,300 for officer safety gear; $113,000 for an
upgrade to the department-issued Tasers; $19,650 for the implementation of policy development and analysis software; $12,000 for a NETCLOCK in the E911 Communications
Center and $77,000 for security cameras in the business districts. At the end of 2023-2024,
the fund balance is projected to be $96,800.
Community Energy Fund
In September 2022, the Decatur City Commission voted unanimously to adopt the Decatur
Clean Energy Plan which established the City’s clean energy goals and provided recommendations to achieve those targets. A key recommendation of the plan was to establish
a Community Energy Fund to provide a sustainable funding mechanism to support the
community’s clean energy efforts. These projects will almost exclusively result from decisions made by home- and building-owners, with financing provided both out-of-pocket
and through loans and other financing mechanisms from private institutions. It is recommended that the revenue for the fund will be generated through a combination of a transfer
of a portion of the City’s franchise fee revenue from the General Fund as well as accrued
electricity costs savings. The franchise fee revenue, which is primarily generated by agreements outlining compensation for the use of City-owned right-of-way, has traditionally
been directed to the City’s general fund. It could include funds received from our electricity
utility, Georgia Power, the natural gas providers that serve Decatur, and energy excise taxes
allocated by DeKalb County. The second potential funding source is the City’s savings on
its electricity bills through its on-site clean energy projects. Assuming a conservative 40%
reduction in electricity purchased from Georgia Power from the solar and battery storage
projects at Public Works, the Decatur Recreation Center and the Police Department.
The Adopted 2023-2024 Budget includes a transfer of $138,350 from the General Fund
which is 10% of the energy-related franchise fees to cover the costs associated with providing support for clean energy projects in the community.
Community Grants Fund
The Community Grants Fund is used to account for moneys received from outside entities.
The Revised 2022-2023 Budget includes expenditures of $43,500 for the installation of
public art at the Sam’s Crossing Shopping Center. The money was granted in 2021-2022 as
part of an agreement with the site’s developer.
The Adopted 2023-2024 Budget includes $750,000 in revenues from Congressman Hank
Johnson’s Office community project funding for the offset of installing infrastructure at the
Legacy Park South Housing Village. Expenditures total $929,500 and include additional art
installations at the Sam’s Crossing Shopping Center site and the site improvements at Decatur Legacy Park. At the end of 2023-2024, the fund balance is estimated to be $71,496.
58

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Fiscal Year 2023-2024
Planning Impacts Matrix

The City of Decatur is committed to collaborative community planning and to the necessary follow through that supports and acts on those plans. The City has a long history of
using strategic planning and master planning to meet the needs of the community. These
plans represent investments in the community’s future and provide roadmaps to achieving
the many goals and objectives identified in the plans. The following list of planning tools
explains the purpose and budgetary impact(s) of the major plans in use today.

PLANNING
TOOL

PURPOSE

BUDGETARY IMPACT

2020 STRATEGIC PLAN
DESTINATION: 2030

Inclusive of the Comprehensive Plan Update
and the Livable Centers Initiative (LCI)
Study Update, the Strategic Plan serves as
long-range guide for city policy, funding,
and programming decisions to support:

Operational revenue and expenditures, property values
and tax rate and debt service obligations included in the
plan are used as a basis for the City’s annual general
fund and capital budgets.

• Equity and Racial Justice
• Climate Action
• Civic Trust
• Affordable Housing
• Mobility

• Property tax revenue is expected to remain flat or increase as properties are reassessed and new developments are captured in the property tax digest.
• One-time capital expenditures are included in the
budget based on facilities and infrastructure needs
identified in the plan.

• Economic Growth
Recommendations include future land use,
zoning, housing opportunities, transportation, economic development, urban design,
historic resources, environment and open
space, and public facilities in order to
enhance the City’s existing spaces.

BETTER TOGETHER
COMMUNITY ACTION
PLAN

Identifies specific actions in for individuals,
organizations, and the city to undertake
in order to encourage a more welcoming,
inclusive, and equitable city.

Operating budget includes funding for training costs
identified in the plan.

CITY OF DECATUR

59

FY 2023-2024 Planning Impacts Matrix continued
PLANNING
TOOL

PURPOSE

BUDGETARY IMPACT

CULTURAL ARTS
MASTER PLAN

Examines the possibilities for, and
strengths of, the city’s cultural offerings in
collaboration with Agnes Scott College, City
Schools of Decatur, Decatur Business Association, Decatur Downtown Development
Authority and the Decatur Arts Alliance,
developing initiatives to expand existing
cultural and public art assets.

Based on funding availability, cultural offerings and
initiatives identified in the plan are included in the City’s
annual general fund and capital improvements fund
budgets.

ENVIRONMENTAL
SUSTAINABILITY PLAN

Identifies tasks for individuals, organizations, businesses and the city to reduce
their environmental impact on:

Based on funding availability, sustainability initiatives
identified in the plan are included in the City’s annual
general fund and capital improvements fund budgets.

• Food and Agriculture
• Natural Systems
• Buildings and Energy
• Transportation
• Resource Conservation and Waste
Reduction
• Government Management Practices

CLEAN ENERGY PLAN

Establishes clean energy goals for City
operations and the Decatur community
and provides recommendations to guide
Decatur to a 100% clean and renewable
energy future. Policies and programs
recommended by the plan address:
• Energy Efficiency
• Building Electrification
• Renewable Energy Generation and
Procurement
• Vehicle Electrification
• Alternative Transportation
• Utility Engagement and Advocacy

60

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Expenditures for facility improvements and fleet electrification are included in the City’s general fund and capital
budgets.
The Plan recommends the dedication of a portion of
energy franchise fee revenue, typically directed to the
general fund, to advance community-wide electrification
and energy efficiency goals.

2023-2024 Planning Impacts Matrix continued
PLANNING
TOOL

PURPOSE

BUDGETARY IMPACT

PARKS AND
RECREATION MASTER
PLAN 2023

The parks and recreation master plan creates a long-range, community-supported
vision for how the City will move the parks
and recreation system forward. The plan is
data-driven and rooted in understanding the
current conditions of the park system and
city, coupled with planning for projected
changes and expected future improvements. It provides recommendations for
the facilities, programs, services, improvements, and more, all with the mission of
making Decatur more resilient, healthy, and
thriving.

Recommendations from the plan are reflected in creation
of the Parks and Recreation Department including staffing increases in the Parks and Recreation operating budget. Small capital improvements projects may be funded
through the operating budget. Larger capital projects
are reliant upon grant funding and other opportunities
outside the capital improvements fund for FY23-24.

2018 COMMUNITY
TRANSPORTATION
PLAN

Promotes transportation equity, encourages
biking and walking as viable alternatives to
cars, increases connectivity between destinations, and emphasizes the relationship
between health, quality of life, and transportation choices through a focus on:

Based on service level expectations and available funds,
capital improvements and associated operational costs
identified in the plan are included in the City’s general
fund and capital budgets.

• Bicycle and Pedestrian Improvements

• Funding from the PATH Foundation will impact construction of the Commerce Drive cycle track.

• Key Intersection Improvements
• Circulation

EAST LAKE MARTA
STATION LCI STUDY

Addresses the underutilized and aging area
surrounding the East Lake MARTA station
and makes recommendations with regard to
transportation, land use, urban design, and
economic development.

The proposed budget is not impacted by the recommendations of the plan.

CITY OF DECATUR

61

PLANNING
TOOL

PURPOSE

BUDGETARY IMPACT

DECATUR PATH
CONNECTIVITY
IMPLEMENTATION
PLAN

Identifies 9.2 miles of bicycle and pedestrian trail connectivity opportunities primarily
within the city limits and achieves the goal
of linking the downtown business district,
city parks, neighborhoods, and visitor and
employment centers.

Based on service level expectations and available funds,
capital improvements and associated operational costs
identified in the plan are included in the City’s general
fund and capital budgets.

DECATUR LEGACY PARK
MASTER PLAN

Guides the development of the former United
Methodist Children’s Home property, which
was recently purchased by the city.

Funding for the Decatur Legacy Park improvements
would be funded by partnerships based on particular
development needs.
For now, the City’s general fund, capital improvements fund
and public facilities authority fund budgets will experience
impact from development projects.

STORM WATER
MASTER PLAN

Provides direction for mitigating flooding,
solving existing drainage problems, improving water quality and quality of life in the
city of Decatur.

The City has made major storm water infrastructure
improvements in downtown Decatur over the past two
decades. Infrastructure in most residential neighborhoods is generally more limited, older and not designed
to modern standards.
The City Commission adopted updates to the storm water fee schedule in March 2021. The rates are now based
on an Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) of 1 ERU per
4,000 square feet at $285 a year. The fees are structured
into a 4 tier-system.
Projects will be funded in a pay-as-you go fashion over
the next 20 years.

ADMINISTRATIVE
SERVICES STRATEGIC
PLAN

62

A department-specific strategic plan.

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Based on funding availability and service level needs, Administrative Services Department projects are included
in the City’s general fund and capital improvements fund
budgets.

Summary of General
Fund Revenues and
Expenditures
Budget FY 2023-2024

FISCAL YEAR 2023-2024

General Fund
Revenue
Summary
The City of Decatur has six broad revenue categories: taxes, licenses and permits, intergovernmental revenue, charges for services, fines and forfeitures, and miscellaneous revenue.
The majority of revenues are collected directly by the Revenue division of the Administrative Services department. The Revenue division collects taxes and fees in accordance with
all relevant federal, state, and local laws.
Revenue estimates are developed using conservative forecasting techniques especially with
the more elastic revenue sources.
Taxes
Taxes are the city’s largest revenue category, accounting for $26,323,750 or 77% of total
general fund revenues, excluding transfers. Traditionally, this percentage has remained consistent but the transfer of the out-of-school time operations to the general fund resulted in a
smaller percentage of revenues attributed to taxes. Within this category, there are a variety
of tax sources including property, public utilities, utility franchises, excise and insurance
premiums.
Real Property Taxes
Taxes on real property make up 78% of all taxes collected by the city and are expected
to total over $20 million in the next fiscal year. Real property tax revenue is budgeted to
increase just under 2% from the revised budget which reflects an anticipated increase in the
property tax digest, applies conservative collection rates and factors in the new and expanded homestead exemptions that will be on a referendum in November 2023. If approved, the
exemptions would be applied to the first installment tax billing of 2024. The impact of the
exemptions on the general fund for one-half of a year is approximately $420,000. Unlike
other revenue categories, real property tax revenue remained stable during the pandemic
as property values continued to rise. The real property tax revenue for fiscal year 2024 is
based on an assumption of a 5% increase in the 2023 tax digest. The assessed values of
real property within the city are determined by the DeKalb County Property Appraisal
department. Residential and commercial values in the 2022 tax digest as a percentage of
the overall property values total 77% and 23%, respectively. This represents a slow, slight,
but steady increase in commercial values as a percentage of the overall digest. In fact, last
year was the first time the commercial digest was over 20% since 1997. The City bills and
collects real property taxes in two annual installments. The 2021 collection rate for real
property taxes was 99.96% by October 2022. The 2023 preliminary real property digest
increased 14% over the 2022 digest. This increase is consistent with the City’s data about
new construction, redevelopment and property sales over the past year. Twenty-two percent

CITY OF DECATUR

65

of the increase is attributed to new construction and redevelopment and 78% represents
market revaluation. Historically, real property taxes have not been significantly impacted by
recessions and other negative economic events, and most recently, by the pandemic. In the
near term, property values are expected to remain stable. It is this inelasticity of the general
fund’s largest revenue source that protects the budget from significant revenue losses.
Franchise Taxes
Franchise taxes are a significant revenue source for the city. Franchise agreements establish
the terms under which a utility may use the municipal right of way to conduct their private
business operations such as delivering natural gas, telephone, cable television, and other
telecommunications services. One of the terms in a franchise agreement is the amount paid
by the utility for use of the right of way. The city collects over $1.6 million in franchise taxes from electric, natural gas, cable and telephone utilities and this amount reflects about 5%
of all general fund revenues. Little change is budgeted for fiscal year 2024 as the demand
for the utilities’ services is expected to remain constant. The fiscal year 2024 budget proposes to use 10% of energy franchise taxes, including electric, natural gas and energy excise,
to provide funding to the community energy fund. This fund will serve to advance the city’s
clean energy goals from the Clean Energy Plan that was adopted in September 2022.
Insurance Premiums Tax
One of the largest single revenue categories for the city is the insurance premiums tax. The
tax generated $1,627,960 in fiscal year 2022 and $2,013,250 in fiscal year 2023. The tax is
budgeted at that same amount, $2,013,250, for fiscal year 2024. Insurance premiums taxes
are collected by the Georgia Commissioner of Insurance and distributed to municipalities
based on premiums allocated on a population ratio formula.
Construction Permits
Over the past five years revenues from construction permits have averaged $1,057,950 with
a high of $1,540,125 at the end of fiscal year 2021 and a low of $760,816 in fiscal year
2019. Based on current revenues and construction activities, revenues are expected to be
just over $770,000 for fiscal year 2024. Construction permits in fiscal year 2024 are projected to remain at similar levels to fiscal year 2023. Current construction activity reflects
a number of projects that were permitted in fiscal year 2021 and 2022 and are at or nearing
completion such as the Bank of America site and a townhome development on Talley Street
and New Street. Upcoming projects include a Northwood Ravin mixed-use development
and a multi-family housing development by Columbia Residential, both in East Decatur
Station. In addition to commercial and multi-family development, single-family residential
improvement activity remains robust. The city contracts with a private vendor for permitting and inspection services. A percentage of construction permit revenues is used to pay
for those services. A corresponding expenditure is budgeted in the License and Inspection
division of the Public Works budget.

66

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Fines from Code Violations
During the latter part of fiscal year 2011, the city implemented new court-related fines
to make them consistent with similar fines in metro-Atlanta area jurisdictions. The city
collected $853,000 from code violation fines in fiscal year 2020. In fiscal year 2021, that
amount dropped to $240,000 due to the closure of municipal court during the COVID-19
pandemic. Court resumed hearings in a virtual format near the end of fiscal year 2021 and
all hearings are currently scheduled in-person with fewer scheduled cases per court session
than prior to the pandemic. Revenues are estimated to reach $497,000 in fiscal year 2023
and $647,000 in fiscal year 2024. Court personnel are developing a schedule to address the
court backlog, including an amnesty program, which will have an impact on code violation revenue. Through an agreement with the school system and Verra Mobility (formerly
American Traffic Solutions), the city is enforcing school bus stop arm violations through
the use of an automated camera system. Revenues from the school bus camera program

are shared with the school system and Verra Mobility. The city has contracted with Blue
Line Solutions to manage a school zone speed enforcement program in accordance with
O.C.G.A. 40-14-18. A separate fund has been created to account for the revenues generated
by this program which is expected to start in the 2023-2024 school year. According to the
State law, revenues from the program may only be used to fund local law enforcement or
public safety initiatives.

General Fund
Revenue
Summary

Parking
In May 2014, the City implemented a new parking management system including new
parking meters that accept multiple forms of payment including credit cards, use of a smartphone app and pay by text. In addition to the updated parking meters, the City contracts
with a private company for parking enforcement and collection of delinquent parking fees.
In fiscal year 2023, parking meter fees are expected to generate close $500,000, compared
to actual revenues of $397,139 in fiscal year 2022, and parking violations may generate
another $45,000, compared to $46,851 in fiscal year 2022. The impact of the public health
emergency on parking revenues was immediate as businesses closed and residents adhered
to stay-at-home orders. Parking meter revenue has been slow to recover and is estimated at
$550,000 for fiscal year 2024 which is still below pre-pandemic amounts.
Recreation Fees
Fees are charged for a variety of recreation activities including team sports, summer camps
and special-interest classes. The City’s recreation facilities, including Decatur Recreation
Center, Ebster Recreation Center at the Beacon Municipal Center, Glenlake Tennis Center,
three outdoor pools and, most recently, the Oakhurst Recreation Center including a yearround indoor pool, offer a variety of opportunities for recreation activities. After operating
in a separate fund for 15 years, after-school and summer camp activities (out-of-school
time) will re-join the general fund as part of the newly formed Parks and Recreation department which combines the Active Living and Children and Youth Services divisions. A combination of new fees and fees from the out-of-school time programs are expected to result in
an increase of over $3.8 million in recreation fees for a total of $4,617,000.
Motor Vehicle Tax
Legislation passed in 2012 eliminates the annual ad valorem tax and sales tax on the purchase of vehicles after March 1, 2013 and replaces it with a one-time title fee or Title Ad
Valorem Tax (TAVT) of up to 7%. The revenue has been split at a variable rate between local governments and the state. The legislation is designed to make local governments whole
for ad valorem collections through the end of the fiscal year. The city currently receives
around $525,000 annually from the ad valorem tax or about 1.5% of general operating revenues. Legislation effective July 1, 2019, set a permanent state/local split and increase the
local share of TAVT revenues to 65%; however, certain components of the TAVT are being
reduced.
Sales and Excise Tax
With the addition of a SPLOST for capital improvements effective April 1, 2018, the City
has an 8% sales tax rate: statewide 4% sales tax, 1% education sales tax (e-SPLOST), 1%
equalized homestead option sales tax for 100% funded homestead exemptions for County
maintenance and operations and the hospital authority taxes (EHOST), 1% MARTA public
transit tax and 1% SPLOST for city and county capital projects. The City does not have a
local option sales tax for general operations.
The City collects sales and excise tax from wholesale and retail sales of alcohol. Revenue
from alcohol sales has increased about 80% since fiscal year 2009 and historically has not
been negatively impacted during economic downturns, nor the pandemic. In the current
fiscal year and proposed fiscal year, revenues from alcohol excise taxes are predicted to be
$345,000, which is higher than the $249,000 from the previous year.

CITY OF DECATUR

67

Starting in fiscal year 2016, one half of the net revenues related to alcoholic beverage sales
were distributed to the City Schools of Decatur. Just over $362,000 was distributed to the
school system in fiscal year 2022.
Penalties and Interest
Georgia House Bill 960, effective July 1, 2016, changed the annual interest rate that may be
charged by cities and counties for delinquent taxes. The annual interest rate is now the bank
prime rate plus 3 percent. The new law also set the penalty for non-payment at 5 percent of
unpaid taxes for every 120 days of delinquency, not to exceed a total penalty of 20 percent.
The budget for fiscal year 2023 and fiscal year 2024 for penalties and interest is $167,000
based on year to date revenue.
Occupation Taxes
All businesses in the city are required to pay an occupation tax annually. The City uses profitability ratios to determine the rate paid by each business as opposed to assessing the tax
on actual gross receipts. Although occupation tax rates have not increased, revenues have
increased steadily since fiscal year 2009, reflecting sustained economic growth. The fiscal
year 2023 occupation tax revenues are projected to be similar to fiscal year 2022; and occupation tax revenue for 2024 are predicted to be $530,000. The City anticipates revenues
from occupation taxes to increase slightly as organizational changes will result in a greater
focus on the economic health of the community.

REVENUE-OTHER FUNDS
Hotel/Motel Taxes
State law allows hotel/motel taxes to be collected and distributed to the City’s tourism
bureau, conference center/parking deck fund and general fund. The Georgia General Assembly approved an increase in the City’s hotel/motel tax rate from 7% to 8% of the taxable
room rental which went into effect in October 2018. This resulted in a change in the distribution formula: tourism bureau (43.75%), conference center/parking deck (18.75%), and
general fund (37.5%). The pandemic resulted in a near shutdown of the hotels resulting in
total revenues of $875,513 in fiscal year 2020 and $685,000 in fiscal year 2021. Revenues
rebounded in fiscal year 2022 to $1,328,798. Revenues are estimated to be $1,550,000 for
fiscal years 2023 and 2024. In July 2021, a new State law, HB317, went into effect requiring short-term home rental companies, such as VRBO and Airbnb, to pay hotel/motel taxes.
The annual impact of this revenue source is close to $200,000.
Sanitation Fees
The City’s Solid Waste enterprise fund is dependent upon sanitation service fees for its
operation. The Sanitation Service division provides commercial and residential sanitation collection services and residential recycling. Fees remained unchanged for 2023. The
single-family residential fee is $305 per unit. For commercial rates, the rate for 95 gallon
carts is $800 per cart for weekly service; the annual charge for 3 cubic yard containers is
$1,210; and the per cubic yard fee for dumpsters remains at $4.25. The pay-as-you-throw
bag prices remain unchanged. The revenue from the pay-as-you-throw bag sales covers
waste disposal costs and the residential and commercial fees cover fixed costs and collection costs. The Solid Waste fund has budgeted to collect just over $2.9 million in residential
and commercial sanitation fees and solid waste bag sales. Sanitation fees are billed in April
for the calendar year service and due in June of each year. The residential fee is included
on the tax bill and commercial sanitation fees are billed separately. The Solid Waste fund
reflects a grant in the amount of $170,000 for a pilot composting program.

68

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Storm Water Fees
All developed properties are assessed a storm water fee. In March 2021, an increase in the
annual fee was approved from $100 per equivalent residential unit (ERU) to a 4-tier fee

system for residential properties. Property owners are charged a portion of the ERU fee,
ranging from 0.4 ERU to 1.4 ERU, based on the property’s impervious area. Non-residential properties pay based on their actual impervious surface. The fee for one ERU was set
at $285 in 2022. This is the fee recommended by the Storm Water Master Plan that was
adopted by the City Commission in December 2020. The fee will generate just around $3.2
million each year to be used toward the $38 million in storm water capital projects identified in the master plan. The storm water fee is included on the tax bill. Starting in fiscal
year 2015, the storm water utility began to receive revenue from participants in the regional
storm water facility that is part of the Beacon Municipal Center project. The Beacon detention vault was designed to store storm water generated from properties in their developed
condition in the upper Peavine basin. Properties being developed in the upper Peavine basin
have the option to use the Beacon detention facility to store storm water in lieu of on-site
water storage. In addition to the storm water fee revenue, the budget includes $388,950
from FEMA’s Hazard Mitigation Grant Program to purchase a property that has experienced multiple flood losses, and to restore the property to greenspace.

General Fund
Revenue
Summary

Coronavirus Relief Fund-CARES Act Funds
In April 2020, DeKalb County received $125,341,475.20 from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security (CARES) Act. The County qualified for the funds directly from
the federal government based on its population, including the populations from the cities (excluding Atlanta) within DeKalb. In September 2020, DeKalb County and the cities
within the County executed an intergovernmental agreement for the County to disburse a
portion of the funds to the cities based on population. The City received $2,914,440 from
the County in CARES Act funds, all of which has been expended and accounted for in
accordance with federal law. Over $1,600,000 was awarded in grants to small businesses
and non-profits during the pandemic, in addition to facility upgrades, protective equipment,
public safety pandemic pay and other needs related to the pandemic.
American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) Fund-State and Local Fiscal Relief Funds
(SLFRF)
In March 2021, the American Rescue Plan Act was authorized to provide financial relief
and support programs in response to the effects of the coronavirus pandemic. Part of the
funding was designated as “Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds” (SLFRF).
As part of the SLFRF, the City was allotted $9,595,820 to be paid in two equal tranches of
$4,797,910, both of which have been received. The ARPA Final Rule allows jurisdictions to
select a standard allowance for lost revenue replacement up to $10 million. In April 2022,
the City Commission approved the standard allowance selection which will ease the administrative burdens and make it easier to use the funds in a timely manner. The funds will
continue to be accounted for separately and in a manner that is consistent with the purposes
of the ARPA statute. The ARPA funds have been committed to support infrastructure for
affordable housing at the South Housing Village in Legacy Park ($3,741,251), a track and
field complex at Legacy Park ($3,000,000), pandemic premium pay ($513,340), and hybrid
technology at the Decatur Recreation Center ($115,000). It is anticipated that the remaining
~$2,000,000 will be formally committed to storm water infrastructure projects in the next
fiscal year.
Fees-General
Annually, fees are reviewed by each department and a fee schedule is adopted. The fee
schedule includes fees for alcoholic beverage licenses, cemetery fees, development fees,
parking fines, recreation program and rental charges and special events permits, to name a
few. Fees are compared to cities and counties in the metro Atlanta area. Some fees have a
differential based on residency.
CITY OF DECATUR

69

CITY OF DECATUR 2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET

General Fund — Summary of Revenues




ACTUAL
REVENUE
2018-2019

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2019-2020

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2020-2021

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2021-2022

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2023-2024

311110
311190
311200
311300
311400
311600
311700
314000
316100
316200
319100
321000
322100
330000
351000
361000
341000
342000
343000
347000
349000
371000
381000
389000

PUBLIC UTILITY TAXES
PAYMENT IN LIEU OF TAXES
REAL PROPERTY TAXES
MOTOR VEHICLE /RAILROAD EQUIPMENT TAXES
BUSINESS PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES
OTHER TAXES
FRANCHISE TAXES
SALES & EXCISE TAXES
OCCUPATIONAL TAXES
OTHER TAXES - INSURANCE
PENALTY & INTEREST
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES & PERMITS
CONSTRUCTION PERMITS & FEES
GRANT REVENUE - INTERGOVERNMENTAL
PENALTIES & FINES
INTEREST
MISCELLANEOUS FEES
PUBLIC SAFETY FEES & CHARGES
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS FEES & CHARGES
RECREATION FEES
CHARGES FOR OTHER SERVICES
GIFTS & CONTRIBUTIONS
USE OF PROPERTY
MISCELLANEOUS REVENUES

142,676
60,000
16,749,779
496,611
224,310
227,099
1,670,207
532,664
541,392
1,407,194
88,706
(155,106)
760,816
350,598
855,454
14,446
93,182
217,290
733,718
706,350
98,001
15,000
147,099
39,618

225,414
60,000
18,245,747
301,194
95,727
205,221
1,682,114
485,948
562,033
1,494,985
125,470
(92,853)
900,564
382,480
853,222
19,870
162,148
211,893
512,312
327,246
83,062
0
83,201
127,901

197,090
60,000
18,643,631
482,919
199,691
406,699
1,569,138
440,082
504,433
1,576,514
142,224
(80,904)
1,540,125
408,360
251,574
5,050
87,235
168,707
181,736
373,920
77,280
10
1,144
38,080

170,640
60,000
19,811,022
534,983
194,973
345,171
1,643,825
611,675
530,576
1,627,966
128,775
(101,880)
773,718
304,790
530,922
16,131
90,536
198,897
397,139
722,213
79,685
500
58,331
34,747

170,640
60,000
20,245,000
550,800
210,500
317,000
1,574,000
320,000
510,000
1,700,000
95,000
142,900
716,500
340,500
647,000
15,000
98,500
179,350
550,000
695,000
70,200
0
63,000
7,500

145,000
60,000
20,289,000
525,500
186,500
180,000
1,693,500
345,000
505,000
2,013,250
167,000
149,700
719,000
362,300
497,000
160,000
93,000
175,300
500,000
780,000
80,100
0
110,500
55,500

145,000
60,000
21,673,000
525,500
191,500
180,000
1,693,500
345,000
530,000
2,013,250
167,000
150,200
773,000
472,000
647,000
100,000
138,800
191,800
550,000
4,617,000
80,100
0
115,500
5,500

GENERAL FUND CURRENT REVENUE

26,017,103

27,054,898

27,274,739

28,765,335

29,278,390

29,792,150

35,364,650

FIXED ASSETS
383
881
0
57,415
10,000
5,000
TRANSFERS & OTHER
Operating Transfer from Solid Waste Fund
150,380
231,440
275,880
367,180
368,580
376,000
Operating Transfer from Stormwater Utility Fund
330,400
375,590
372,760
436,190
463,390
441,630
Operating Transfer from (To) Capital Improvement Fund
0
0
(450,000)
(500,000)
(750,000) (2,500,000)
Transfer from (to) Stormwater Utility Fund
0 (1,290,000)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from (to) Public Facilities Authority Fund (1,000,000)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from (to) Urban Redevelopment Agency Fund
Transfer (to) from E911 Fund
(350,000)
(350,000)
(350,000)
(350,000)
(350,000)
(350,000)
308,221
328,318
256,906
498,299
450,000
581,250
Transfer (to) from Hotel/Motel Tax Fund
0
0
(250,000)
(200,000)
(200,000)
0
Transfer (to) from Children & Youth Services Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer (to) from Small Business Relief Fund
Transfer (to) from Affordable Housing Trust Fund
0
0
0
(100,000)
(100,000)
(100,000)
Transfer (to) East Decatur TAD Fund
0
0
(723,000)
(380,000)
(408,000)
(467,480)
Transfer (to) Community Energy Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer (to) from Coronavirus Relief Fund

5,000
436,600
498,000
(550,000)
0
0
0
(425,000)
581,250
302,174
0
(100,000)
(490,850)
(138,350)
0

TOTAL OTHER

118,824

(560,616)

(703,771)

(867,454)

(170,916)

(516,030)

(2,013,600)


From (To) Fund Balance
(165,513) (1,863,380) (2,132,565) (1,898,825)
3,883,500
4,230,810
4,145,816

70

GENERAL FUND OTHER REVENUE - TOTAL

(726,129)

(2,567,151)

(3,000,019)

(2,069,741)

3,367,470

2,217,210

4,264,640

GENERAL FUND TOTAL REVENUES

25,290,974

24,487,748

24,274,720

26,695,594

32,645,860

32,009,360

39,629,290

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

General Fund Revenues
FY 2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET
“Where the Money Comes From”
SOURCE
Taxes
Licenses, Permits & Inspections
Penalties, Fines & Forfeitures
Charges for Current Services
Intergovernmental Revenues
Miscellaneous Revenue
Sale of Fixed Assets
Operating Transfers
Appropriation From (To) Fund Balance
TOTAL REVENUES

AMOUNT
27,356,750
923,200
814,000
5,554,400
472,000
244,300
5,000
113,824
4,145,816
$39,629,290

69%
2.3%
2.1%
14.0%
1.2%
0.6%
0.0%
0.3%
10.5%
100.0%

1.1%
8.4%

17.7%

11.4%

0.6%
0.3%

14.0%
10.5%

69%

FY 2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET
“Where the Money Goes”

17.8%

18.4%

1.2%

General Fund
Expenditures

9.6%

15.7%

2.3%
2.1%

DEPARTMENT
AMOUNT
Governmental Control
421,260
General Government
3,310,660
Community & Economic Development
3,817,890
Administrative Services
7,025,850
Police
7,278,880
Fire
4,524,360
Public Works
6,207,600
Parks & Recreation
7,042,790
TOTAL EXPENDITURES
$39,629,290

%
1.1%
8.4%
9.6%
17.7%
18.4%
11.4%
15.7%
17.8%
100%

CITY OF DECATUR

71

CITY OF DECATUR 2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET

General Fund — Summary of Expenditures
ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2018-2019

ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2019-2020

ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2020-2021

ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE
2021-2022

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2023-2024

DEPARTMENT
GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL

238,447

268,440

241,537

264,837

371,730

394,960

421,260

GENERAL GOVERNMENT

1,411,777

1,288,644

1,725,134

2,138,031

2,241,790

2,688,670

3,310,660

COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

1,983,855

1,937,672

2,044,692

1,521,419

2,340,740

2,227,760

3,817,890

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES

4,302,696

4,393,975

4,853,055

5,678,373

6,160,130

6,048,370

7,025,850

POLICE

5,578,653

5,526,544

4,578,393

5,403,551

6,978,170

6,618,030

7,278,880

FIRE

3,589,662

3,479,389

3,178,113

3,979,501

4,127,270

4,271,010

4,524,360

PUBLIC WORKS

3,710,123

3,562,456

6,081,227

5,403,315

7,269,290

6,705,740

6,207,600

DESIGN, ENVIRONMENT & CONSTRUCTION

1,806,689

1,838,576



PARKS & RECREATION
ACTIVE LIVING

GENERAL FUND TOTAL EXPENDITURES

72

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

2,669,073

2,193,562

1,572,568

2,317,490

3,156,740

3,054,820

25,290,975

24,489,258

24,274,719

26,706,518

32,645,860

32,009,360

7,042,790

39,629,290

Departmental Expenditures
Adopted FY 22-23, Revised FY 22-23 and
Proposed FY 23-24
Budget Comparison
Departmental
Expenditures
ADOPTED FY 2022-23, REVISED FY 2022-23 AND ADOPTED FY 2023-2024 BUDGET COMPARISON

$8,000,000

$7,000,000

$6,000,000

$5,000,000

$4,000,000

$3,000,000

$2,000,000

$1,000,000

RE
CR
EA
TI O
N

W
OR
KS

/P
AR
KS
&

PU
BL
IC

PO
LI C
E

FI R
E

AC
TI V
EL
IV
IN
G

CO
M
M

GO
VE
RN
M
EN
T

AL

CO
GE
NT
NE
RO
RA
L
UN
LG
ITY
OV
&
ER
EC
NM
ON
EN
OM
T
IC
DE
VE
LO
AD
PM
M
IN
EN
IST
T
RA
TIV
ES
ER
VI
CE
S

$0

BUDGET ESTIMATE 2022-2023
REVISED ESTIMATE 2022-2023
BUDGET ESTIMATE 2023-2024
CITY OF DECATUR

73

CITY OF DECATUR 2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET

Personnel Position Summary


FY

2020-2021

FY
2021-2022

FY
2022-2023

FY 23-24
Changes*

FY
2023-2024

Governmental Control
City Manager’s Office (1320)
5
5
5
1.00
6
Equity & Engagement (1570)
3
1.00
4

5
5
8
2.00
10

Community & Economic Development Services
Administration (7510)
3
3
3		3
Economic Development (7550)
2
2
2
2
Planning (7410)
3
3
4		4
Tourism & Special Events (7520)
3
4
2
1.00
3
Permitting & Inspections (7200, 7450)
5
6
6
2.00
8
Parking Management (3230)
0
0
0
0

16
18
17
3.00
20

Administrative Services
Administration (1510)
6
6
7
1.00
8
Accounting (1512)
3
3
3		3
Revenue Collections (1514)
4
4
4
4
Municipal Court (2650)
3
3
3
1.00
4

16
16
17
2.00
19

Public Works Services
Administration (4510)
3
5
5
(1.00)
4
Solid Waste (540-4520)
18
18
18
1.00
19
Facilities Maintenance (1565, 1566)
22
22
24
1.00
25
Cemetery (4950)
6
6
6		6
Motor Maintenance (4900)
3
3
3
3
Central Supply (4910, 4911)
1
1
1
1
Engineering (4220, 7340, 505-5320)
15
16
16
(2.00)
14
Parks & Recreation (6110, 6121, 6122, 6135)
26
25
25
6.00
31

94
96
98
5.00
103

Emergency Management Services
Fire & Rescue (3500)
39
39
40
40
Police (3210, 3221, 3223, 215-3800)
60
60
62
62
		99
99
102		 102


TOTAL FULL-TIME POSITIONS

230

234

242

12.00

254

* Includes mid-year 2022-2023 addition of E911 Communications Manager. Actual increase in positions from 2022-2023 to 2023-2024 is 11.

74

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

General Fund Revenue
Estimate Detail
Budget FY 2023-2024

CITY OF DECATUR 2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET

General Fund — Revenue Estimate Detail




ACTUAL
REVENUE
2018-2019

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2019-2020

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2020-2021

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2021-2022

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2023-2024

311110 PUBLIC UTILITY TAXES
311110 Utility Property Taxes
PUBLIC UTILITY TAXES

142,676

225,414

197,090

170,640

170,640

145,000

145,000

142,676

225,414

197,090

170,640

170,640

145,000

145,000


311190 PAYMENT IN LIEU OF TAXES
311191 Philips Tower
311192 Clairemont Oaks
PAYMENT IN LIEU OF TAXES - TOTAL

23,500

23,500

23,500

23,500

23,500

23,500

23,500

36,500

36,500

36,500

36,500

36,500

36,500

36,500

60,000

60,000

60,000

60,000

60,000

60,000

60,000


311200 REAL PROPERTY TAXES
311210 2010 Taxes

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

311211 2011 Taxes

0

0

4,697

0

0

0

0

311202 2012 Taxes

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

311203 2013 Taxes

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

311204 2014 Taxes

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

311215 2015 Taxes

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

311216 2016 Taxes

2,024

271

0

0

0

0

0

311217 2017 Taxes

104,125

(43,279)

(231)

0

0

0

0

311218 2018 Taxes

8,893,053

125,194

(13,814)

0

0

0

0

311219 2019 Taxes

7,750,577

9,870,120

33,496

2,724

0

0

0

311220 2020 Taxes

0

8,293,441

10,378,475

46,542

0

9,000

0

311221 2021 Taxes

0

0

8,241,008

10,559,152

35,000

160,000

0

311222 2022 Taxes

0

0

0

9,128,955

10,610,000

10,570,000

100,000

311223 2023 Taxes

0

0

0

0

9,600,000

9,550,000

11,575,000

311224 2024 Taxes
PROPERTY TAXES - TOTAL

0

0

0

0

0

0

9,998,000

16,749,779

18,245,747

18,643,631

19,737,412

20,245,000

20,289,000

21,673,000


311300 MOTOR VEHICLE/RAILROAD EQUIPMENT TAXES
311310 Motor Vehicle Tax
311350 Railroad Equipment Tax
MOTOR VEHICLE TAXES - TOTAL

496,611

300,323

482,097

534,621

550,000

525,000

525,000

0

872

821

363

800

500

500

496,611

301,194

482,919

534,983

550,800

525,500

525,500


311400 BUSINESS PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES
311410 2010 Taxes & Prior Years

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

311411 2011 Taxes

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

311402 2012 Taxes

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

311403 2013 Taxes

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

311404 2014 Taxes

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

311405 2015 Taxes

271

290

0

0

0

0

0

311416 2016 Taxes

248

411

0

0

0

0

0

311417 2017 Taxes

2,104

1,054

788

36

0

0

0

311418 2018 Taxes

221,686

704

676

0

0

0

0

311419 2019 Taxes

0

93,267

(164,032)

555

0

0

0

311420 2020 Taxes

0

0

362,260

5,297

0

0

0

311421 2021 Taxes

0

0

0

189,085

0

1,500

0

311422 2022 Taxes

0

0

0

0

500

185,000

1,500

311423 2023 Taxes
BUSINESS PERSONAL PROPERTY - TOTAL

0

0

0

0

210,000

0

190,000

224,310

95,727

199,691

194,973

210,500

186,500

191,500


continued
CITY OF DECATUR
77

CITY OF DECATUR 2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET

General Fund — Revenue Estimate Detail continued




ACTUAL
REVENUE
2018-2019

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2019-2020

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2020-2021

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2021-2022

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2023-2024

311600 OTHER TAXES
311600 Intangibles Tax

158,294

167,647

336,532

241,037

242,000

120,000

120,000

311601 Property Transfer Tax

68,805

37,574

70,168

104,134

75,000

60,000

60,000

227,099

205,221

406,699

345,171

317,000

180,000

180,000

OTHER TAXES - TOTAL


311700 FRANCHISE TAXES
311710 Electric Franchise

1,029,896

1,056,219

965,442

974,892

974,000

1,073,500

1,073,500
160,000

311730 Natural Gas Franchise

137,296

135,033

145,755

189,297

150,000

160,000

311740 Video Service Franchise

109,523

103,319

82,424

68,240

70,000

60,000

60,000

311750 Cable Franchise

220,587

210,361

210,086

204,178

200,000

200,000

200,000

311760 Telephone Franchise

51,989

50,270

51,458

55,000

50,000

50,000

50,000

311790 Energy Excise Tax
FRANCHISE TAXES - TOTAL

120,916

126,912

113,974

152,217

130,000

150,000

150,000

1,670,207

1,682,114

1,569,138

1,643,825

1,574,000

1,693,500

1,693,500


314000 SALES & EXCISE TAXES
313010 General Sales Tax

(66)

0

206

0

0

0

0

314200 Beer & Wine Sales

168,008

169,561

177,276

208,635

110,000

110,000

110,000

314300 Liquor Sales
SALES & EXCISE TAXES - TOTAL

364,722

316,387

262,599

403,041

210,000

235,000

235,000

532,664

485,948

440,082

611,675

320,000

345,000

345,000


316100 OCCUPATIONAL TAXES
316100 Business & Occ. Licenses

369,722

389,940

339,644

226,172

210,000

210,000

220,000

316101 Professional Taxes

127,289

128,773

123,605

132,432

130,000

135,000

140,000

316102 Insurance Occupation Taxes

44,381

43,321

41,184

50,182

50,000

45,000

50,000

0

0

0

121,790

120,000

115,000

120,000

541,392

562,033

504,433

530,576

510,000

505,000

530,000

316300 Financial Institution Taxes
OCCUPATIONAL TAXES - TOTAL


316200 OTHER TAXES - INSURANCE
316200 Insurance Premiums Tax

1,407,194

1,494,985

1,576,514

1,627,966

1,700,000

2,013,250

2,013,250

OTHER TAXES - TOTAL

1,407,194

1,494,985

1,576,514

1,627,966

1,700,000

2,013,250

2,013,250


319100 PENALTY & INTEREST
319110 Penalty & Interest - Real Property

84,728

120,352

127,152

123,865

90,000

165,000

319120 Penalty & Interest - Personal Property

3,977

5,118

15,071

4,910

5,000

2,000

2,000

88,706

125,470

142,224

128,775

95,000

167,000

167,000

PENALTY & INTEREST - TOTAL

165,000


321000 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES & PERMITS
321110 Beer Licenses

79,150

77,150

75,800

82,040

44,000

41,000

41,000

321120 Wine Licenses

430

0

200

5,050

2,700

0

0

321130 Liquor Licenses

113,250

113,435

107,029

107,200

57,000

60,000

60,000

321135 Server Permits

8,272

4,815

30

910

3,000

500

500

(376,108)

(305,803)

(308,893)

(362,635)

0

0

0

600

2,700

1,050

1,200

1,200

1,200

1,200
1,000

321139 School Portion of Excise Tax
321140 Corking Licenses
321150 Caterer Licenses

0

0

2,000

2,000

2,000

1,000

321190 Restaurant District License Fee

0

0

0

0

2,000

0

500

13,800

13,800

37,830

57,030

30,000

45,000

45,000

321500 Film Permits

78

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

continued





ACTUAL
REVENUE
2018-2019

322000 Non Business License

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2019-2020

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2020-2021

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2021-2022

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2023-2024

5,500

1,050

4,050

5,325

1,000

1,000

1,000

ALCOHOLIC BEV. LICENSES & PERMITS - TOTAL (155,106)

(92,853)

(80,904)

(101,880)

142,900

149,700

150,200


322100 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS & FEES
322120 Building Permits

489,828

654,529

855,404

417,568

400,000

415,000

322130 Plumbing Inspection Fees

29,886

43,186

82,735

27,971

30,000

30,000

35,000

322140 Electrical Inspection Fees

62,181

76,298

144,878

70,635

70,000

50,000

55,000

322160 HVAC Inspection Fees

110,194

54,105

88,641

73,982

80,000

45,000

50,000

0

0

0

16,345

15,000

15,000

20,000

322165 Fire Inspection Fees

450,000

322190 ROW Permit

25,875

14,138

30,590

33,079

0

0

0

322191 ROW Permit - Utilities

4,400

40

0

0

0

0

0

322210 Zoning & Land Use Application Fees

34,658

54,973

336,458

131,330

120,000

160,000

160,000

322230 Sign Permits

2,370

1,770

1,420

1,380

1,000

1,000

1,000

322240 Special Events Permit Fee

925

1,025

0

928

500

3,000

2,000

322250 Logo Licensing Fees

500

500

0

500

0

0

0

760,816

900,564

1,540,125

773,718

716,500

719,000

773,000

CONSTRUCTION PERMITS & FEES - TOTAL


330000 INTERGOVERNMENTAL
337200 DDA Management Services Agreement

316,140

382,480

408,360

304,790

340,500

362,300

472,000

INTERGOVERNMENTAL - TOTAL

350,598

382,480

408,360

304,790

340,500

362,300

472,000


341000 MISCELLANEOUS FEES
341322 Tree Plan Review Fees

20,825

18,750

28,470

22,740

341400 Copying Charges

2,539

4,471

3,473

1,978

2,000

1,000

1,000

0

0

0

0

2,500

2,000

2,000

341910 Election Fees

0

2,625

0

960

0

0

0

341920 Advertising Fee

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

8,325

9,889

5,856

8,525

6,500

8,000

7,000

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

341941 Reimbursement from Decatur Tourism Bureau

40,880

42,193

43,349

41,533

47,500

52,000

98,800

341990 Other Fees

20,614

84,219

6,087

14,800

15,000

5,000

5,000

93,182

162,148

87,235

90,536

98,500

93,000

138,800

341401 Public Records Retrieval Fees

341930 Maps & Publications Charges
341940 Reimbursement for Capital Construction Management

MISCELLANEOUS FEES - TOTAL

25,000

25,000

25,000


342000 PUBLIC SAFETY FEES & CHARGES
342140 Police Background Check Fee
342150 CPR-Non-Resident Fee

12,460

11,267

3,040

3,361

2,000

14,000

14,000

42

190

0

730

400

800

500

7,225

2,388

860

554

400

2,700

2,000

342215 Other Revenues - Fire

0

900

13,045

550

0

250

250

342220 Fire Report Copies

40

75

40

25

50

50

50

342200 Fire Alarm Fees

342900 Other Public Safety Fees
342905 Public Safety OT Reimbursements
342910 Opioid Settlement-Fire Dept.

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

79,720

66,351

49,904

76,323

57,500

57,500

60,000

0

808

0

0

0

0

0

342915 CSOD Resource Officer

108,669

121,005

97,865

102,161

115,000

100,000

115,000

342920 School Crossing Guard

8,639

8,909

3,952

15,193

4,000

0

0

342925 FIRE Reim for O/T

495

0

0

4,725

5,000

2,500

2,500

217,290

211,893

168,707

203,622

179,350

175,300

191,800

PUBLIC SAFETY FEES & CHARGES

continued
CITY OF DECATUR
79

CITY OF DECATUR 2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET

General Fund — Revenue Estimate Detail continued




ACTUAL
REVENUE
2018-2019

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2019-2020

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2020-2021

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2021-2022

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2023-2024

343000 STREETS & SIDEWALKS FEES & CHARGES
343910 Parking Meter Fees
STREETS & SIDEWALKS FEES & CHARGES

733,718

512,312

181,736

397,139

550,000

500,000

550,000

733,718

512,312

181,736

397,139

550,000

500,000

550,000


347000 RECREATION FEES
347200 Recreation Service Fees
347500 Recreation Sale of Goods
RECREATION FEES - TOTAL

695,591

317,283

363,947

722,213

695,000

780,000

4,617,000

10,759

9,962

9,973

0

0

0

0

706,350

327,246

373,920

722,213

695,000

780,000

4,617,000


349000 CHARGES FOR OTHER SERVICES
349100 Cemetery Service Fees
349300 Return Check Fees
CHARGES FOR OTHER SERVICES - TOTAL

97,751

82,612

76,980

79,225

70,000

80,000

250

450

300

460

200

100

80,000
100

98,001

83,062

77,280

79,685

70,200

80,100

80,100


351000 PENALTIES & FINES
351170 Fines from Code Viol.

732,543

742,996

219,055

383,830

500,000

350,000

351173 ATS - School’s Portion

(39,915)

(49,509)

(4,538)

(107,206)

0

0

500,000
0

351171 School Bus Stop Arm Violations

105,167

109,018

6,000

206,638

100,000

100,000

100,000

351400 Court Hearing Reschedule Fees

5,520

2,784

0

810

2,000

2,000

2,000

351930 Parking Violations

52,139

47,933

31,057

46,851

45,000

45,000

45,000

855,454

853,222

251,574

530,922

647,000

497,000

647,000

PENALTIES & FINES - TOTAL


361000 INTEREST
361000 Interest on Investments
INTEREST - TOTAL

14,446

19,870

5,050

16,131

15,000

160,000

100,000

14,446

19,870

5,050

16,131

15,000

160,000

100,000


371000 GIFTS & CONTRIBUTIONS
371200 Gifts & Contributions
GIFTS & CONTRIBUTIONS - TOTAL

15,000

0

10

500

0

0

0

15,000

0

10

500

0

0

0


381000 USE OF PROPERTY
381010 Bandstand Rentals
381020 Recreation Facilities Rentals
USE OF MONEY & PROPERTY - TOTAL

5,281

1,650

200

1,375

3,000

500

500

141,818

81,551

944

56,956

60,000

110,000

115,000

147,099

83,201

1,144

58,331

63,000

110,500

115,500



continued

80

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024





ACTUAL
REVENUE
2018-2019

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2019-2020

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2020-2021

ACTUAL
REVENUE
2021-2022

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

REVISED
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

BUDGET
ESTIMATE
2023-2024

389000 MISCELLANEOUS REVENUES
383010 Insurance Reimbursement

21,072

389000 Misc. Revenues
MISCELLANEOUS REVENUES - TOTAL

120,427

44,264

29,185

5,000

55,000

5,000

18,545

7,474

(6,184)

13,370

2,500

500

500

39,618

127,901

38,080

42,555

7,500

55,500

5,500


GENERAL FUND CURRENT REVENUE

26,017,103

27,054,898

27,274,739

28,704,259

29,278,390

29,792,150

35,364,650


392100 FIXED ASSETS
392100 Sale of General Fixed Assets
FIXED ASSETS - TOTAL

383

881

0

57,415

10,000

5,000

5,000

383

881

0

57,415

10,000

5,000

5,000


TRANSFERS & OTHER
Operating Transfer from Solid Waste Fund

150,380

231,440

275,880

367,180

368,580

376,000

436,600

Operating Transfer from Storm Water Utility Fund

330,400

375,590

372,760

436,190

463,390

441,630

498,000

Transfer (to) from Storm Water Utility Fund

0

(1,290,000)

0

0

0

0

0

Transfer (to) from Capital Improvement Fund

0

0

(450,000)

(500,000)

(750,000)

(2,500,000)

(550,000)

Transfer (to) from Public Facilities Authority Fund (1,000,000)
Transfer (to) from Hotel/Motel Tax Fund

308,221

Transfer (to) from Urban Redevelopment Agency Fund

0

0

0

0

0

0

328,318

256,906

498,299

450,000

581,250

581,250

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

(350,000)

(350,000)

(350,000)

(350,000)

(350,000)

(350,000)

(425,000)

Transfer (to) Children/Youth Services Fund

0

0

(250,000)

(200,000)

(200,000)

0

302,174

Transfer (to) Small Business Relief Fund/DDA

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Transfer (to) from E911 Fund

Transfer (to) Affordable Housing Trust Fund

0

0

0

0

(100,000)

(100,000)

(100,000)

Transfer (to) East Decatur TAD Fund

0

0

(723,000)

(408,000)

(408,000)

(467,480)

(490,850)

Transfer (to) from Coronavirus Relief Fund

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Transfer (to) from Community Energy Fund

0

0

0

0

0

0

(138,350)

Transfer (to) Community Grants Fund

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Transfer (to) Tree Bank Fund

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

(560,616)

(703,771)

(867,454)

(98,916)

(516,030)

(2,013,600)

118,824

TOTAL OTHER


From (To) Fund Balance

(165,513)

(1,863,380)

(2,132,565)

(1,898,825)

3,883,500

4,230,810

4,145,816

GENERAL FUND OTHER REVENUE - TOTAL

(726,129)

(2,567,151)

(3,000,019)

(1,997,741)

3,367,470

2,217,210

4,264,640

GENERAL FUND TOTAL REVENUES

25,290,974

24,487,748

24,274,720

26,706,518

32,645,860

32,009,360

39,629,290

CITY OF DECATUR

81

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts

General Fund
Expenditure
Estimate Detail
Budget FY 2023-2024

City Organization

City Organization
Voters
City Commission

Chief of Staff
Records
Management

City Manager

Budget

Equity and
Engagement

Deputy City Manager
Capital Construction
Projects
Environmental Sustainability
Police / E911

Assistant City Manager
Administrative Services

Assistant City Manager
Public Works Services

Assistant City Manager
Community & Economic
Development Services

Finance
• Revenue
• Accounting

Economic & Business
Development
• Tourism, Special Events &
Film Permits
• Parking

Municipal Court

Public Works
• Solid Waste & Recycling
• Motor Maintenance
• Building & Grounds
Maintenance
• Cemetery
• Engineering
• Fleet Maintenance
• Streets
• Stormwater
• Permitting & Inspections
• Codes Enforcement
• Development Services

Innovation & Strategy

Parks and Recreation

Technology
Insurance
Human Resources
• Payroll
• Wellness
• Recruitment
• Employee Relations

Fire

84

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Planning & Zoning
• Lifelong Community
• Affordable Housing
• Permitting & Inspections
• Codes Enforcement
• Development Services

Department Directory
GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL page 86
1110

City Commission

GENERAL GOVERNMENT
DEPARTMENT page 88
1320
1400
1530
1570
1580
3920

City Manager
City Elections
City Attorney
Equity & Engagement
Records Management
Emergency Management CRF Fund

POLICE DEPARTMENT page 106
3210
3221
3223

General Management
Criminal Investigation
Uniform Patrol

215-3800 E-911 Fund page 148

COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT page 90
7510
7200
7450
7520
7410
7550
3230

CED Administration
Permits & Inspections
Codes Enforcement
Tourism & Special Events
Planning
Economic Development
Parking Management

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
DEPARTMENT page 100
1510
1512
1514
1535
1567
1555
2650

Administrative Services
Accounting
Revenue
Information Technology
Utilities & Services
General Insurance
Municipal Court

FIRE DEPARTMENT page 104
3500

Fire & Rescue Services

PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT page 95
4510
1565
1566
4900
4910
4950

PW Administration
Buildings Maintenance
Grounds Maintenance
Motor Maintenance
Central Supply
Cemetery

540-4520
505-4320

Solid Waste Fund page 150
Storm Water Utility Fund page 152

7340
4220

Engineering Administration
Engineering & Streets

PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT page 93
6110
6121
6122
6135

Active Living Administration
Athletic Services
Recreation Services
Out of School Time

CITY OF DECATUR

85

GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT
ADOPTED 2023-2024 BUDGET ESTIMATE

Overall Quality of Life in Decatur

Five City Commissioners are elected in nonpartisan elections to staggered four-year terms.
Each January, Commissioners select one of their members to serve as Mayor and Mayor
pro tem. The City Commission meets in public open session on the first and third Mondays
of each month in City Hall.

98%

City Vision Statement:
Decatur will foster and equitable, thriving, and welcoming community for all, today and in
the future.

96%
94%
92%
90%
88%
86%
84%

2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022

Priorities for FY 2023-2024:
• Continue to recognize the value of investing in Decatur’s civic infrastructure (e.g., storm
water, transportation, bicycle and pedestrian assets, greenspace) to maintain the community’s sustainability and improve its quality of life.
• Improve process to engage community members on resident boards & commissions.

Job the City Does at Making All
Residents Feel Welcome
84%

• Initiate charter review process.

Decatur City Commission:

83%
82%

Mayor Patti Garrett — District 2

81%

Mayor Pro Tem Tony Powers — At-large

80%
79%

Commissioner George Dusenbury – District 1

78%

Commissioner Lesa Mayer – District 2

77%

2020

Commissioner Kelly Walsh – District 1

2022

Contacted Elected Officials to
Express an Opinion
at least once
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%

86

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Citizen Satisfaction Survey Responses:
Overall quality of life
2006: 89% rated as excellent/good
2008: 95% rated as excellent/good
2010: 95% rated as excellent/good
2012: 96% rated as excellent/good
2014: 97% rated as excellent/good
2016: 94% rated as excellent/good
2018: 96% rated as excellent/good
2020: 95% rated as excellent/good
2022: 94% rated as excellent/good

Contacted elected official to express
your opinion
2006-2012: n/a
2014: 25% at least once
2016: 23% at least once
2018: 24% at least once
2020: 23% at least once
2022: 19% at least once
Job City does at making all
residents feel welcome
2006-2018: n/a
2020: 83% rated as excellent/good
2022: 79% rated as excellent/good

GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT
2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET



EXPENDITURE OBJECTS

1110
TOTAL
REVISED
BUDGET
BUDGET
BUDGET
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
2023-2024
2022-2023
2022-2023

PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
0
0
0
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
63,000
63,000
63,000
512200 Social Security (FICA)
3,940
3,940
3,910
512300 Medicare
920
920
920
512600 Unemployment Insurance
0
0
0
512700 Workers Compensation
2,350
2,350
2,000
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

69,830

70,628
77,021
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
45,156
0
3,484
0
0
37,995
26,833
836

342,850

70,210

0
63,425
3,932
920
0
2,351

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
521200 Professional Services
201,800
180,000
160,000
0
0
0
522201 Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
0
0
522202 Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
0
0
522203 Repair and Maint-Landscape
522205 Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
0
0
0
522206 Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
0
0
0
0
0
0
522320 Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
0
0
0
522321 Auto Allowance
522500 Other Contractual Services
62,500
62,500
62,500
0
0
0
523202 Telephone
5,750
5,750
5,750
523300 Advertising
523400 Printing and Binding
0
0
0
0
0
0
523450 Signs
523600 Dues and Fees
41,000
38,000
38,000
523700 Education and Training
30,800
30,500
25,450
1,000
2,000
2,000
523701 Business Meetings
TOTAL OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES

70,210

AUDIT
2021-22

318,750

293,700

SUPPLIES
531102 Supplies-Janitorial
0
0
0
531104 Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
0
0
0
531105 Supplies-Office
250
250
250
531106 Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
0
0
0
531107 Supplies-Specialized Dept
1,250
1,250
1,250
531108 Supplies-Tires and Batteries
0
0
0
531109 Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
0
0
0
531111 Computer Equipment
1,000
1,000
1,000
0
0
0
531270 Gasoline
531300 Food-Subsistence and Support
5,700
3,500
5,700
531400 Books and Periodicals
0
0
0
531500 Supplies-Purchased for Resale
0
0
0
531600 Small Equipment
0
0
0
531700 Uniforms and Protective Equipment
0
0
0
TOTAL SUPPLIES
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

191,324
0
0
24
0
939
0
0
452
0
1,335
135
0
0
0

8,200

6,000

8,200

2,885

0

0

0

0

421,260

394,960

371,730

264,837

CITY OF DECATUR

87

GENERAL GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT
ADOPTED 2023-2024 BUDGET ESTIMATE

National Citizen Survey Response
Rate
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%

2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022

Non-White Resident Board &
Commission Members
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%

2019

2020

2021

Mission Statement:
Our mission is to work with the citizens of Decatur to meet the needs of the community
while serving all with respect and integrity. We strive to do so with Competence, Accessibility, Responsiveness, and Excellence. We Care!
Priorities for FY 2023-2024:
• Continue to operate as a high-tech and high-touch organization.
• Continue implementing recommendations from the Communications Audit.
• Facilitate work to achieve City’s equity goals.
• Focus on strategies to recruit and retain a talented workforce.

Performance Measures:

30%

0%

The General Government Department manages daily operations of the city including capital
improvements, communications, departmental performance, records management, elections
and the budgeting process. Staff ensures that policies of the City Commission are carried
out effectively, at the lowest possible cost, and are legally sound.

2022

National Citizen
Survey Response Rate
2008: 40%
2010: 46%
2012: 40%
2014: 40%
2016: 41%
2018: 37%
2020: 32%
2022: 21%

Non-White
Resident Board and
Commission Members
FY 2016: unavailable
FY 2017: unavailable
FY 2018: 13%
FY 2019: 18%
FY 2020: 23%
FY 2021: 28%
FY 2022: 25%

Total Streaming Video
Views
FY 2019: 1,939
FY 2020: 5,170
FY 2021: 4,042
FY 2022: 2,098


CITY
CITY
EQUITY &
TOTAL
TOTAL
TOTAL
GENERAL GOVERNMENT

MANAGER’S ATTORNEY
ENGAGEMENT
RECORDS
202320222021DEPARTMENT
PERSONNEL

OFFICE 1320
1530
1570*
1580
2024
2023
2022
SUMMARY

REGULAR JOB CLASSES
City Manager
1
0
0
0
1
1
Deputy City Manager
1
0
0
0
1
1
Chief of Staff
1
0
0
0
1
0
City Clerk & Budget Director
0
0
0
0
0
1
Operations Analyst
1
0
0
0
1
1
Energy & Sustainability Manager
1
0
0
0
1
0
Equity & Engagement Director
0
0
1
0
1
1
Communications Manager/PIO
0
0
1
0
1
1
Digital Media Specialist
0
0
0
0
0
1
Communications Coordinator
0
0
2
0
2
0
Office Manager
1
0
0
0
1
1
6
0
4
0
10
8
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES


OTHER JOB CLASSES
City Attorney
0
1
0
0
1
1
Capital Projects Manager
1
0
0
0
1
0
Records Specialist
0
0
0
1
1
1
Content Editor/Writer
0
0
0
0
0
1
Graduate Intern
1
0
0
0
1
1
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES
2
1
0
1
4
4
88

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
5
1
0
1
0
1
3

*Division moved from Community & Economic Development Department to General Government Department in FY 22-23.

GENERAL GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT
2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET


TOTAL				 1570		3920

BUDGET
1320
1400
1530
EQUITY
1580 EMERGENCY
REVISED
BUDGET

ESTIMATE
CITY
CITY
CITY
AND RECORDS
MGMT
ESTIMATE ESTIMATE
AUDIT
EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
2023-2024
MGR ELECTION
ATTY ENGAGEMENT
MGMT
CRF FUND 2022-2023 2022-2023 2021-22

PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
946,500
661,900
0
0
284,600
0
0
528,500
527,000
588,923
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
214,500
169,000
0
0
16,000
29,500
0
257,880
269,380
246,536
511300 Overtime Wages
400
200
0
0
0
200
0
200
200
0
512100 Employer Group Insurance
201,800
134,900
0
0
66,900
0
0
170,000
147,000
134,272
512200 Social Security (FICA)
67,000
46,450
0
0
18,650
1,900
0
49,850
49,500
46,946
512300 Medicare
16,950
12,100
0
0
4,400
450
0
12,130
11,630
12,171
512400 Retirement Contributions
87,500
61,600
0
0
25,900
0
0
48,000
47,450
54,730
512401 Retirement Contributions-ICMA
36,850
36,850
0
0
0
0
0
42,000
35,000
35,647
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
512403 HSA Contributions - Employer Provided
840
490
0
0
280
70
0
770
700
0
512600 Unemployment Insurance
9,000
5,400
0
0
2,700
900
0
9,000
10,900
12,813
512700 Workers Compensation
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

1,581,340

1,128,890

0

0

419,430

33,020

0

1,118,330 1,098,760 1,132,038

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
521200 Professional Services
765,580
20,000 550,000
128,380
0
701,500
618,100
47,200
20,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
521303 Misc Personal Service Fees
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522200 Repairs and Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522201 Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522202 Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522204 Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
522205 Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
350
200
0
0
0
150
0
350
350
522206 Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522310 Rental of Land & Buildings
4,500
2,500
0
0
2,000
0
0
2,500
60
522320 Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
10,000
10,000
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
522321 Auto Allowance
696,510
65,850
0
0
440,160
15,500
175,000
638,350
295,480
522500 Other Contractual Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523101 Insurance-Awards
0
0
523201 Postage
40,000
0
0
0
40,000
0
0
38,900
38,900
523202 Telephone
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
380
0
523300 Advertising
5,300
300
3,000
0
2,000
0
0
6,100
8,300
523400 Printing and Binding
8,200
6,000
0
0
2,000
200
0
8,300
8,300
523450 Signs
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523600 Dues and Fees
18,160
13,900
0
0
4,060
200
0
16,710
16,710
523700 Education and Training
57,250
35,600
0
0
21,150
500
0
50,640
43,850
523701 Business Meetings
30,000
20,000
0
0
9,800
200
0
21,600
23,700
523800 Licenses
4,000
0
0
0
4,000
0
0
0
1,330
523911 Bank Charges
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
TOTAL OTHER SVCS AND CHARGES

1,639,850

201,550

23,000 550,000

653,550

36,750

175,000

1,495,330 1,065,080

699,597
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9,959
134,694
0
22,840
0
1,845
8,251
759
11,127
22,415
13,644
1,200
0
926,331

SUPPLIES
531101 Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
100
100
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
65
531102 Supplies-Janitorial
200
200
0
0
0
0
0
200
200
1,647
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531104 Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
0
0
531105 Supplies-Office
3,550
2,500
300
0
500
250
0
3,000
5,050
3,525
531106 Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531107 Supplies-Specialized Dept
49,250
7,250
0
0
1,500
500
40,000
46,150
48,500
54,221
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531108 Supplies-Tires and Batteries
531109 Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
30
30
0
0
0
0
0
30
0
25
531111 Computer Equipment
9,230
2,000
0
0
7,230
0
0
2,600
1,200
3,172
531112 Computer Software
7,550
0
7,200
0
350
0
0
9,700
9,700
9,859
531113 Office Equipment and Furniture
3,000
3,000
0
0
0
0
0
3,580
3,000
0
531115 Supplies- Batteries
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531270 Gasoline
250
250
0
0
0
0
0
250
250
153
531300 Food-Subsistence and Support
11,750
6,350
0
0
5,300
100
0
6,100
6,100
6,429
1,150
500
0
0
500
150
0
900
950
317
531400 Books and Periodicals
100
0
0
0
0
100
0
0
0
0
531500 Supplies-Purchased for Resale
531600 Small Equipment
2,060
0
0
0
2,060
0
0
1,500
1,500
0
531700 Uniforms and Protective Equipment
1,250
750
0
0
500
0
0
900
1,400
250
TOTAL SUPPLIES
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

89,470

22,930

7,500

0

17,940

0

0

0

0

0

3,310,660

1,353,370

30,500 550,000

1,090,920

1,100

40,000

75,010

77,950

79,662

0

0

0

0

70,870

215,000

2,688,670 2,241,790 2,138,031

CITY OF DECATUR

89

COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT

Opportunities to Participate in
Community Matters
89%
87%
85%

Mission Statement:
The mission of the Community and Economic Development Department is to enhance the
economic vitality of the city, strengthen Decatur’s sense of community, improve the City’s
ability to serve our citizens’ needs through every stage of life and provide opportunities to
connect, educate and inform our citizens.

83%
81%
79%
77%
75%

2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022

Number of New Public Art
Installations
100
90
80
70
60
50

Priorities for FY 2023-2024:
• Prepare and adopt an Age-Friendly Community Action Plan and a Downtown Parking
Management Plan.
• Install land acknowledgment signage in City parks and facilities.
• Rebrand the Go 60+ shuttle as the GoDecatur Circulator shuttle.
• Host a series of community wide-educational events.

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:

40
30
20
10
0

ADOPTED 2023-2024 BUDGET ESTIMATE
The Community & Economic Development Department is responsible for economic development initiatives, community engagement and education, special events and strategic
planning. The department works to actively market the City and recruit new businesses
and help existing businesses thrive. The department also handles development and land-use
regulation and services through plan review, construction, property inspection, and code
enforcement.

2019

2020

2021

2022

Opportunities to participate in
community matters
2006: N/A
2008: 81% rated as excellent/good
2010: 82% rated as excellent/good
2012: 88% rated as excellent/good
2014: 88% rated as excellent/good
2016: 85% rated as excellent/good
2018: 88% rated as excellent/good
2020: 83% rated as excellent/good
2022: 83% rated as excellent/good

Variety of business and service
establishments
2006-2018: N/A
2020: 79% rated as excellent/good
2022: 78% rated as excellent/good

Performance Measures:
Decatur 101
participants
FY 2018: 84
FY 2019: 70
FY 2020: 58
FY 2021: cancelled
FY 2022: 35

90

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Value of volunteer
hours for special events
FY 2018: not tracked
FY 2019: $316,480
FY 2020: $150,000
FY 2021: $48,500
FY 2022: $85,350

Number of new public
art installations:
FY 2018: NA
FY 2019: 39
FY 2020: 87
FY 2021: 28
FY 2022: 28

COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET


TOTAL
7510
7520
7550
7410
7200* 7450*
3230

BUDGET
TOURISM
REVISED*
BUDGET*

ESTIMATE		 & SPEC
ECON PLAN- LICENSE CODES PARKING
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
AUDIT*
EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
2023-2024
ADMIN EVENTS
DEV
NING & INSP.
ENF
MGMT 2022-2023 2022-2023 2021-22
PERSONNEL SERVICES


511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
1,375,400 306,050 199,200 148,000 287,500 366,000 68,650
0
733,150
797,750 589,509
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
103,800
2,500
8,000
7,500 10,200
52,000
0
23,600
30,500
50,000
55,857
511300 Overtime Wages
2,500
2,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,500
646
512100 Employer Group Insurance
303,400
50,850
50,500 33,650 67,500
84,100 16,800
0
188,500
203,750 120,472
512200 Social Security (FICA)
86,500
18,500
12,400
9,200 17,900
22,700 4,300
1,500
47,990
51,410
38,906
512300 Medicare
20,500
4,500
2,900
2,200
4,200
5,350 1,000
350
11,760
12,090
9,025
512400 Retirement Contributions
119,500
28,500
18,550 13,800 26,800
25,400 6,450
0
65,500
71,900
55,374
512401 Retirement Contributions-ICMA
20,450
20,450
0
0
0
0
0
0
19,450
19,030
18,884
512403 HSA Contributions - Employer Provided
2,250
0
0
2,250
0
0
0
0
2,550
0
0
512600 Unemployment Insurance
1,330
210
210
140
280
350
70
70
910
910
0
512700 Workers Compensation
16,600
2,000
2,700
1,800
2,000
6,300
900
900
9,400
11,700
10,521
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES
2,052,230 436,060 294,460 218,540 416,380 562,200 98,170
26,420 1,109,710
1,221,040 899,194


OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
822,460
44,500
24,000 50,360 106,000 584,000 3,800
9,800
192,350
254,650
84,881
Repairs and Maintenance
2,500
0
0
0
0
0 1,000
1,500
1,500
1,500
0
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Landscape
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
300
0
0
0
0
300
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
3,500
0
0
0
0
2,500 1,000
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
500
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
500
500
182
Rental of Land & Buildings
36,050
36,050
0
0
0
0
0
0
34,350
34,350
25,836
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Auto Allowance
7,200
7,200
0
0
0
0
0
0
7,200
7,200
3,738
Other Contractual Services
588,200
11,750
64,000 218,000 286,000
0
0
8,450
666,250
625,250 448,326
Insurance-Awards
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Insurance-Legal Liability
30
0
0
0
0
0
30
0
0
0
0
Postage
2,500
0
0
0
0
2,500
0
0
0
0
0
Telephone
500
500
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
500
300
Advertising
19,300
0
5,000 12,000
1,550
750
0
0
18,550
18,550
390
Printing and Binding
11,250
1,500
2,000
2,000
2,000
750
0
3,000
11,500
11,500
6,622
Signs
38,500
3,250
2,500 30,000
500
750
0
1,500
29,550
10,750
3,048
Dues and Fees
28,790
4,850
3,200
7,000
9,940
1,000
50
2,750
25,140
30,640
5,734
Education and Training
60,290
12,900
12,750 13,390
8,750
6,500 2,500
3,500
42,350
42,350
17,252
Business Meetings
5,830
2,500
1,330
1,000
1,000
0
0
0
5,000
5,000
884
Licenses
12,030
0
1,330
0 10,000
700
0
0
14,430
9,130
5,200
Bank Charges
5,000
0
1,000
4,000
0
0
0
0
3,000
2,000
2,634
1,644,730 125,000 117,110 337,750 425,740 599,750 8,380
31,000 1,052,170
1,053,870 605,028
TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES


521200
522200
522201
522202
522203
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523102
523201
523202
523300
523400
523450
523600
523700
523701
523800
523911

531101
531102
531103
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531111
531112
531113
531114
531115
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
100
0
0
0
0
100
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Janitorial
700
0
600
0
0
100
0
0
1,100
1,100
85
Supplies-Landscape Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Office
7,450
6,500
0
0
500
300
150
0
7,000
7,000
3,714
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Specialized Dept
50,050
2,500
11,050 10,000
0
25,000
0
1,500
29,000
29,000
7,174
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
1,000
0
0
0
0
0
800
200
200
200
149
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
5,000
4,800
0
0
0
0
0
200
200
200
302
Computer Equipment
3,000
0
0
0
3,000
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
3,100
Computer Software
2,000
0
0
0
2,000
0
0
0
2,000
2,000
0
Supplies - Office Equipment
300
0
0
0
0
0
0
300
3,300
3,300
0
Furniture and Fixtures
28,600
27,000
1,600
0
0
0
0
0
8,000
9,500
0
Supplies-Batteries
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Gasoline
8,200
0
0
5,000
0
1,500 1,700
0
0
0
67
Food-Subsistence and Support
8,800
0
8,000
0
500
100
0
200
1,000
1,000
1,600
Books and Periodicals
800
0
300
0
250
250
0
0
550
250
327
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Small Equipment
1,550
0
0
0
0
1,150
0
400
1,900
400
0
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
3,380
380
250
250
500
1,000
500
500
1,630
1,880
680
TOTAL SUPPLIES
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY

TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES


120,930

41,180

21,800

15,250

6,750

29,500

3,150

3,300

65,880

65,830

17,198

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

3,817,890

602,240

433,370 571,540 848,870 1,191,450 109,700



60,720

2,227,760


2,340,740 1,521,419

CITY OF DECATUR
91
* Estimates and Actuals include 3230, 7410, 7510, 7520 and 7550
** 7200 and 7450 were moved from the Public Works Department in FY23-24



REGULAR JOB CLASSES

ADMIN
7510

Assistant City Manager
Planning & Economic Development
Director
Planning & Zoning Manager
Senior Planner
Planner
Business Development Manager
Downtown Programs Manager
Lifelong Community Program
Manager
Special Events Coordinator
Volunteer Coordinator
Tourism Manager
Community Information Services &
Volunteer Coordinator
Operations Analyst
Building Official
Building Inspector
Engineering Inspector
Arborist
Code Enforcement Officer
Planning & Zoning Technician
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Services Assistant
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES
OTHER JOB CLASSES
Engineer
Planning Intern
P/T Special Events Volunteer
Coordinator
P/T Parking Attendant
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES

ECON
DEV. PLANNING
7550
7410

TOURISM
& SPECIAL
EVENTS
7520*

LICENSES &
PERMITTING
7200**

CODE
ENFORCE- PARKING
MENT
MGMT
7450**
3230

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

TOTAL
20222023

TOTAL
20212022

1
1

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

1
1

1
1

1
1

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
1
0
0

1
0
2
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

1
0
2
1
0
1

0
0
3
1
0
1

0
1
1
0
1
1

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
0

1
0
1
0

1
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
3

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3

0
1
1
1
2
0
1
1
0
7

0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
0
20

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
11

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
10

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
1
0

0
0
1

1
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

1
1
1

1
1

1
1

0
0

0
0

0
1

0
1

0
1

0
0

4
4

4
7

4
6

4
6

* Division was created in FY 22-23.
** Divisions moved from Public Works in FY 23-24.

92

TOTAL
20232024

PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT

Safe Routes to School Participation

ADOPTED 2023-2024 BUDGET ESTIMATE

4,500

The Parks and Recreation Department was established in July 2023 as the Active Living
and Children and Youth Services divisions merged together after more than a decade as
separate divisions. The Parks and Recreation Department is responsible for recreation centers, recreation programs, pools, parks, dog parks, tennis, pickleball, summer camps, youth
sports camps and clinics, out-of-school time programs, youth and adult athletics, walking,
running and cycling events, facility rentals, and recreation special events..

3,500

4,000

Mission Statement:
The mission of the City of Decatur Parks and Recreation Department is to provide quality
experiences to promote healthy living and connections.

3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0

2019

2020

2021

2022

Availability of Paths and Trails
80%
70%
60%

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Recreational opportunities
2010: 74% rated as excellent/good
2012: 85% rated as excellent/good
2014: 79% rated as excellent/good
2016: 80% rated as excellent/good
2018: 80% rated as excellent/good
2020: 79% rated as excellent/good
2022: 84% rated as excellent/good

Availability of paths and trails
2010: 63% rated as excellent/good
2012: 69% rated as excellent/good
2014: 74% rated as excellent/good
2016: 63% rated as excellent/good
2018: 65% rated as excellent/good
2020: 75% rated as excellent/good
2022: 76% rated as excellent/good

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022

Priorities for
FY 2023-2024:

Performance Measures:
Total attendance at all city pools
FY 2019: 34,747
FY 2020: 21,658
FY 2021: 35,826
FY 2022: 36,945

50%

Safe Routes to School Participation
FY 2019: 4,264 students and parents
FY 2020: 2,662 students and parents
FY 2021: 1,680 students and parents
FY 2022: 1,849 students and parents

• Continue implementation of Recreatur: Parks and Recreation Master
Plan.
• Install improvements at Ebster Park
for use by teenage patrons.
• Make improvements at Glenlake
Park.


ADMIN
ATHLETICS
REC
PARKS
& RECREATI0N

6110
6121
CENTERS
PERSONNEL
SUMMARY
				6122

OUT-OFTOTAL
TOTAL
TOTAL
SCHOOL TIME
2023202220216135
2024
2023
2022
REGULAR JOB CLASSES
Parks & Recreation Director
1
0
0
0
1
Deputy Parks & Recreation Director
1
0
0
0
1
Assistant Parks & Recreation Director
2
0
0
0
2
Facilities Operation Manager
1
0
0
0
1
Center Operations Manager
0
0
1
0
1
Out-of-School Time Manager
0
0
0
1
1
Recreation Supervisor
1
1
4
2
8
Recreation Coordinator
0
3
3
7
13
Tennis Pro
0
0
1
0
1
Administrative Assistant
0
0
2
0
2
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES
6
4
11
10
31
27
25
OTHER JOB CLASSES
Recreation Specialist
0
0
31
51
82
Tennis Instructor
0
0
10
0
10
Swim Team Coach
0
0
5
0
5
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES
0
0
46
51
97
178
198
CITY OF DECATUR

93

PARKS & RECREATION DEPARTMENT
ADOPTED 2023-2024 BUDGET ESTIMATE


TOTAL
6110
6121
6122
6135			ACTIVE

BUDGET
OUT OF
REVISED
BUDGET
LIVING

ESTIMATE
ADMINIS- ATHLETIC RECREATION
SCHOOL
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
AUDIT
2023-2024
TRATION SERVICES
CENTERS
TIME
2022-2023
2022-2023
2021-22*
		EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
1,706,800
533,000
199,300
566,000
408,500
703,000
806,050
665,259
1,677,500
0
159,230
715,200
803,070
535,900
535,900
255,114
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
15,860
0
2,080
6,000
7,780
10,510
7,500
4,237
511300 Overtime Wages
512100 Employer Group Insurance
507,210
101,310
66,900
184,000
155,000
189,400
238,820
150,144
512200 Social Security (FICA)
212,400
33,100
22,400
79,900
77,000
70,100
83,930
56,248
512300 Medicare
48,800
7,750
4,500
18,700
17,850
17,030
19,690
12,866
512400 Retirement Contributions
163,550
49,600
18,550
52,300
43,100
65,800
72,860
60,598
512403 HSA Contributions - Employer Provided
750
0
0
0
750
0
0
0
512600 Unemployment Insurance
2,170
420
280
770
700
3,410
910
4,754
512700 Workers Compensation
57,850
4,500
3,600
13,500
36,250
21,600
22,400
26,331
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

4,392,890

1,550,000

1,616,750

1,788,060

1,235,552

521200
521301
521302
522200
522201
522202
522203
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523201
523202
523300
523400
523450
523600
523700
523701
523800
523911

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
Instructor Fees
Official Fees
Repairs and Maintenance
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
Repair and Maint-Landscape
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
Rental of Land & Buildings
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
Auto Allowance
Other Contractual Services
Insurance-Awards
Postage
Telephone
Advertising
Printing and Binding
Signs
Dues and Fees
Education and Training
Business Meetings
Licenses
Bank Charges


156,260
152,510
120
330
3,300
177,200
0
87,720
0
89,480
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5,340
2,460
0
2,400
480
2,500
2,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12,820
12,820
0
0
0
9,270
1,690
1,280
2,520
3,780
1,155,880
428,300
619,810
88,800
18,970
2,500
2,500
0
0
0
500
250
0
0
250
32,210
32,210
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20,610
18,760
500
1,050
300
17,100
14,000
0
2,100
1,000
64,420
5,720
35,560
510
22,630
117,100
36,300
11,850
34,100
34,850
4,000
3,000
0
500
500
730
0
0
0
730
100,410
100,410
0
0
0

87,350
78,800
400
2,500
42,000
200
78,000
0
0
0
0
14,400
780
704,900
2,000
0
0
0
24,600
3,650
29,980
8,400
31,850
0
26,000

68,750
68,800
400
2,500
42,000
300
78,000
0
0
0
0
14,400
880
715,100
2,000
0
0
0
17,600
3,800
24,380
8,470
30,800
0
16,500

67,090
61,336
0
27
19,124
0
59,907
0
0
0
0
7,766
292
633,545
0
0
0
0
7,989
0
14,239
7,979
16,796
0
19,064

TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES

1,878,850

1,135,810

1,094,680

915,155

531101
531102
531103
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531111
531112
531113
531114
531115
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
Supplies-Janitorial
Supplies-Landscape Maintenance
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
Supplies-Office
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
Supplies-Specialized Dept
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
Communication Equipment
Computer Equipment
Computer Software
Office Equipment
Outdoor Furniture and Fixtures
Batteries
Gasoline
Food-Subsistence & Support
Books and Periodicals
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
Small Equipment
Uniforms and Protective Equipment


18,000
0
0
18,000
0
10,500
10,260
1,300
4,000
3,600
1,360
1,250
6,000
6,000
0
0
0
9,150
0
0
0
0
0
0
22,900
5,500
0
13,400
4,000
8,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
234,800
14,580
55,110
65,740
99,370
96,680
1,840
1,840
0
0
0
1,000
3,000
3,000
0
0
0
3,000
0
0
0
0
0
150
15,150
3,600
0
9,000
2,550
3,000
0
0
0
0
0
500
45,750
30,000
0
10,000
5,750
0
0
0
0
0
0
17,700
200
200
0
0
0
200
3,400
3,400
0
0
0
3,400
217,290
20,600
2,500
10,200
183,990
16,560
2,360
350
0
600
1,410
650
0
0
0
0
0
5,500
43,660
15,550
2,000
11,650
14,460
4,550
146,440
10,900
94,220
3,200
38,120
120,470

10,500
1,350
9,150
0
11,000
0
94,480
1,840
3,000
150
3,000
600
0
17,700
200
3,400
16,560
700
5,500
4,400
90,470

1,015
613
2,273
0
11,276
0
60,500
308
121
0
2,328
0
0
2,526
532
2,434
9,465
87
6,948
836
65,521

TOTAL SUPPLIES

771,050

116,820

157,830

145,390

351,010

302,260

274,000

166,783

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY

729,680

813,430

476,840

756,840

1,636,370

132,310

176,270

DIVISION TOTAL
7,042,790
1,659,930 1,391,510
1,914,070 2,077,280
3,054,820
3,156,740
2,317,490


* Active Living and Children & Youth Services were combined at the beginning of FY23-24 to create the Parks & Recreation Department.
Actuals include Active Living divisions 6110, 6121,6122,6124,6126 and 6130.

94

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT

ADOPTED 2023-2024 BUDGET ESTIMATE
The Public Works Department keeps Decatur beautiful through progressive refuse and
recyclables collection, street cleaning services and the careful maintenance of city buildings, grounds and cemetery using well-maintained fleet and motorized equipment. Staff is
responsible for the administration, planning, maintenance, construction management and
technical engineering of the City’s infrastructure. The department also operates the Stormwater Utility, which is responsible for the maintenance of the City’s stormwater system.
Mission Statement:
The mission of the City of Decatur Public Works Department is to provide the highest
quality public works services to the community and other City departments, balanced with
efforts to maintain a cost effective operation and to provide these services in a responsible
and efficient manner. This mission is accomplished through the prudent use of resources,
technology, innovations, teamwork and coordination with other departments and community partners.

Quality of Sidewalk Maintenance
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

Cleanliness of Decatur
92%
90%
88%
86%
84%
82%
80%
78%

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Cleanliness of Decatur
2012: 91% rated as excellent/good
2014: 88% rated as excellent/good
2016: 86% rated as excellent/good
2018: 89% rated as excellent/good
2020: 89% rated as excellent/good
2022: 83% rated as excellent/good

Quality of Garbage Collection
2012: 91% rated as excellent/good
2014: 91% rated as excellent/good
2016: 87% rated as excellent/good
2018: 92% rated as excellent/good
2020: 90% rated as excellent/good
2022: 89% rated as excellent/good

Performance Measures:
Tons of leaves
collected during
street sweeping
FY 2019: 436
FY 2020: 226
FY 2021: 258
FY 2022: 348

Total tons of recylable
material collected
FY 2019: 2,593
FY 2020: 2,867
FY 2021: 2,410
FY 2022: 1,858

Number of
potholes repaired
FY 2019: 30
FY 2020: 131
FY 2021: 97
FY 2022: 73

Trees planted in public
rights of way
FY 2019: 53
FY 2020: 325
FY 2021: 302
FY 2022: 276



Burials at Decatur
Cemetery
Calendar Year 2019: 85
Calendar Year 2020: 83
Calendar Year 2021: 113
Calendar Year 2022: 99

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

No. of Potholes Repaired
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Quality of Sidewalk Maintenance
2012: 55% rated as excellent/good
2014: 51% rated as excellent/good
2016: 42% rated as excellent/good
2018: 45% rated as excellent/good
2020: 50% rated as excellent/good
2022: 49% rated as excellent/good

2012

2019

2020

2021

2022

Priorities for FY 2023-2024:
• Implement a composting pilot
project.
• Install two additional solar battery
arrays at the Beacon Municipal
Complex and the Decatur
Recreation Center.
• Continue to support improvements
that increase pedestrian and
cyclist safety through a proactive
maintenance program for roadways
and other critical infrastructure.
• Implement a “Community Energy
Fund” in the Fiscal Year 2023-2024
Budget. This fund will advance the
City’s adopted clean energy goals
by directing financial support to
energy efficiency, electrification,
and renewable energy projects in
the Decatur community.
• Continue to implement
improvements from the Phase I
Storm Water Master Plan Projects.
CITY OF DECATUR

95

PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
PERSONNEL SUMMARY

			 SOLID
BUILDING
GROUNDS
MOTOR

ADMIN
WASTE
MAINTENANCE
MAINTENANCE
CEMETERY
MAINTENANCE

4510
540*
1565
1566
4950
4900
REGULAR JOB CLASSES
Assistant City Manager
1
0
0
0
0
0
Deputy Public Works Director
1
0
0
0
0
0
Assistant Public Works Director
0
1
1
0
0
0
Sanitation Services Superintendent
0
0
0
0
0
0
Facilities Maintenance Superintendent
0
0
0
0
0
0
Project Manager
1
0
0
0
0
0
Energy & Sustainability Manager
0
0
0
0
0
0
Development Services Manager
0
0
0
0
0
0
Senior Engineer
0
0
0
0
0
0
Senior Transportation Engineer
0
0
0
0
0
0
Building Official
0
0
0
0
0
0
Project Civil Engineer
0
0
0
0
0
0
Urban Naturalist
0
0
0
1
0
0
Building Inspector
0
0
0
0
0
0
Engineering Inspector
0
0
0
0
0
0
Arborist
0
0
0
0
0
0
Planning & Zoning Technician
0
0
0
0
0
0
Code Enforcement Officer
0
0
0
0
0
0
Crew Superintendent
0
1
1
1
1
0
Crew Supervisor
0
0
0
0
0
0
Crew Leader
0
0
0
0
0
0
Crew Worker
0
0
7
8
2
0
0
0
2
2
0
Equipment Operator
0
Building Maintenance Specialist
0
0
4
0
0
0
Motor Maintenance Supervisor
0
0
0
0
0
1
Automotive Mechanic
0
0
0
0
0
2
Office Manager
1
0
0
0
0
0
Administrative Assistant
0
0
0
0
0
0
Sanitation Equipment Operator II
0
5
0
0
0
0
Sanitation Equipment Operator I
0
12
0
0
0
0
Facilities Security & Procurement Officer
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Cemetery Specialist
0
0
0
0
1
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES
4
19
13
12
6
3



OTHER JOB CLASSES
Plan Reviewer
0
0
0
0
0
0
Facility Monitor
0
0
2
0
0
0
Crew Worker (P/T)
0
1
0
2
0
0
Seasonal Laborer
0
0
1
4
2
0
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES
0
1
3
6
2
0

* For budget estimate detail, see page 150
** For budget estimate detail, see page 152

96

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

CENTRAL
ENGINEERING			 TOTAL
TOTAL
SUPPPLY
ADMIN
STREETS
STORMWATER
202320224910
7340
4220
505**
2024
2023

0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0.5
0.5
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
1
1
2
2
0
0
3
2
22
20
0
0
2
0
6
7
0
0
0
0
4
4
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
2
2
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
5
5
0
0
0
0
12
11
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
3
6.5
4.5
72
79

TOTAL
20212022
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
2
1
1
0
5
2
19
7
4
1
2
1
1
5
11
1
1
77






0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
2
2
0
0
0
0
3
3
0
1
1
1
10
10
0
1
1
2
16
16

REGULAR JOB CLASSES
Assistant City Manager
Deputy Public Works Director
Assistant Public Works Director
Sanitation Services Superintendent
Facilities Maintenance Superintendent
Project Manager
Energy & Sustainability Manager
Development Services Manager
Senior Engineer
Senior Transportation Engineer
Building Official
Project Civil Engineer
Urban Naturalist
Building Inspector
Engineering Inspector
Arborist
Planning & Zoning Technician
Code Enforcement Officer
Crew Superintendent
Crew Supervisor
Crew Leader
Crew Worker
Equipment Operator
Building Maintenance Specialist
Motor Maintenance Supervisor
Automotive Mechanic
Office Manager
Administrative Assistant
Sanitation Equipment Operator II
Sanitation Equipment Operator I
Facilities Security & Procurement Officer
Cemetery Specialist
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES

1
2
3
10
16

OTHER JOB CLASSES
Plan Reviewer
Facility Monitor
Crew Worker (P/T)
Seasonal Laborer
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES

CITY OF DECATUR

97

PUBLIC WORKS

2023-2024
ADOPTED BUDGET



EXPENDITURE OBJECTS

TOTAL
4510
1565
1566
BUDGET
ESTIMATE
ADMINIBUILDING
GROUNDS
2023-2024
STRATION
MAINT
MAINT

4900
4950
MOTOR
MAINT
& SUPPLY
CEMETERY

511100
511200
511300
512100
512200
512300
512400
512401
512403
512600
512700

Regular Salaries & Wages
Temp Salaries and Wages
Overtime Wages
Employer Group Insurance
Social Security (FICA)
Medicare
Retirement Contributions
Retirement Contributions-ICMA
HSA Contributions - Employer Provided
Unemployment Insurance
Workers Compensation

2,649,580
129,000
135,800
803,780
177,860
42,730
246,390
9,800
0
3,710
45,900

336,150
0
0
67,460
16,500
4,900
31,260
9,800
0
280
4,500

682,350
46,000
25,000
217,500
46,710
10,950
63,500
0
0
1,050
11,700

543,350
66,000
25,000
200,400
39,400
9,250
50,400
0
0
910
10,800

184,950
0
35,000
50,300
13,650
3,000
17,220
0
0
210
2,700

308,610
9,000
35,000
100,500
21,900
5,130
28,700
0
0
490
4,500

72,100
0
800
16,820
4,500
1,100
6,710
0
0
70
900

TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

4,244,550

470,850

1,104,760

945,510

307,030

513,830

103,000

521200
522110
522200
522201
522202
522203
522204
522205
522206
522210
522310
522320
522321
522322
522500
523101
523102
523201
523202
523300
523400
523450
523600
523700
523701
523800

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
380,300
207,500
12,000
4,200
10,500
8,100
5,000
Solid Waste Disposal
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repairs and Maintenance
6,450
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
161,000
0
155,000
0
1,500
3,000
1,500
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
2,850
2,000
400
150
200
100
0
Repair and Maint-Landcape
271,400
0
0
270,000
0
1,000
0
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
5,900
0
1,000
3,500
700
700
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
1,400
300
100
0
0
200
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
18,250
750
3,500
4,300
1,000
2,000
0
Repair and Maint-Infrastructure
30,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Land & Buildings
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
24,400
5,000
1,400
3,000
1,400
600
0
Auto Allowance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Other Rentals
4,600
2,000
0
0
600
0
0
Other Contractual Services
434,900
20,000
320,000
0
5,000
4,000
3,500
Insurance-Awards
15,000
0
5,000
5,000
0
5,000
0
Insurance-Legal Liability
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Postage
950
0
0
100
0
0
0
Telephone
1,300
0
500
100
0
0
0
Advertising
800
0
200
100
0
0
500
Printing and Binding
11,600
10,000
400
0
500
100
100
Signs
25,750
0
0
0
0
0
0
Dues and Fees
6,100
3,500
600
0
0
0
0
Education and Training
61,800
15,000
4,600
3,500
5,000
4,500
1,200
Business Meetings
6,450
1,500
3,000
1,700
100
0
0
Licenses
150
0
0
0
0
0
0

531101
531102
531103
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531111
531112
531113
531114
531115
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
72,800
0
70,000
0
800
0
300
Supplies-Janitorial
61,050
250
45,000
15,000
0
500
0
Supplies-Landscape
64,000
0
0
62,000
200
1,800
0
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Office
11,500
5,000
0
0
400
800
300
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
2,500
0
0
2,000
0
400
0
Supplies-Specialized Dept
62,950
5,000
10,000
3,000
8,700
10,000
1,000
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
12,800
1,200
2,800
2,500
0
1,800
0
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
26,800
2,000
3,000
9,000
1,200
2,600
0
Communications Equipment
1,850
1,000
0
0
100
0
0
Computer Equipment
6,000
2,000
1,000
0
500
0
2,500
Computer Software
900
0
0
0
500
400
0
Supplies - Office Equip & Furniture
1,250
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Outdoor Furniture
7,000
2,000
0
5,000
0
0
0
Supplies-Batteries
3,200
1,000
500
500
350
200
0
Gasoline
72,400
4,000
20,000
22,000
5,000
10,000
200
Food-Subsistence and Support
10,200
7,000
0
250
0
800
0
Books and Periodicals
400
100
100
0
0
100
0
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Small Equipment
49,300
0
5,000
20,000
9,100
4,000
100
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
24,800
1,000
7,000
6,700
3,000
3,000
500

TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES

TOTAL SUPPLIES
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY

1,471,350

267,550

507,700

295,650

26,500

29,300

4910
CENTRAL
SUPPLY
ADMIN

11,800

491,700

31,550

164,400

147,950

29,850

36,400

4,900

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES
6,207,600
769,950
1,776,860
1,389,110
363,380
579,530
119,700



98 ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024


7340
4220

ENGINEERING
STREETS
ADMIN

PW
REVISED
ESTIMATE*
2022-2023

PW
BUDGET
ESTIMATE*
2022-2023

PUBLIC
WORKS
AUDIT*
2021-2022

230,750
5,000
0
34,000
16,000
4,200
21,500
0
0
210
4,500

291,320
3,000
15,000
116,800
19,200
4,200
27,100
0
0
490
6,300

2,494,520
136,800
176,800
943,520
177,650
43,580
233,550
9,500
0
4,130
53,100

2,977,540
224,800
117,800
996,830
205,500
48,240
267,460
11,200
0
4,130
51,170

2,194,771
87,099
150,232
741,512
144,730
33,292
203,779
10,952
0
0
60,148

316,160

483,410

4,273,150

4,904,670

3,626,516


88,000
45,000
927,900
894,200
0
0
0
0
6,450
0
3,000
7,450
0
0
189,500
121,000
0
0
1,150
3,350
0
400
251,400
251,400
0
0
7,300
5,900
0
1,850
10,100
800
1,500
5,200
25,050
11,550
0
30,000
20,000
30,000
0
0
0
0
12,000
1,000
29,600
24,400
0
0
0
0
2,000
0
1,600
4,600
2,400
80,000
386,480
381,000
0
0
7,500
12,500
0
0
0
0
800
50
180
2,680
500
200
2,500
1,500
0
0
820
1,550
500
0
4,050
4,350
750
25,000
26,000
26,300
1,000
1,000
6,160
6,110
13,600
14,400
48,100
68,300
150
0
6,750
6,430
150
0
0
0

592,853
0
16,994
105,591
1,181
245,487
4,700
0
1,009
1,850
0
24,557
0
0
383,901
0
0
7
0
745
5,474
12,575
2,128
19,093
305
400

130,600

202,250

1,946,890

1,874,670

1,418,851


1,500
200
52,100
67,600
38,251
100
200
70,150
61,350
47,796
0
0
63,800
64,000
25,346
0
0
400
0
7
5,000
0
12,100
11,950
7,048
0
100
2,000
2,500
69
250
25,000
79,250
85,650
52,913
500
4,000
12,200
13,600
29,229
1,000
8,000
40,100
26,800
29,476
0
750
2,550
1,850
158
0
0
2,800
6,000
764
0
0
9,700
5,900
5,608
1,250
0
1,200
250
1,351
0
0
2,000
2,000
0
0
650
3,050
3,200
(2,017)
1,000
10,200
68,900
73,100
78,221
2,000
150
12,150
6,200
7,889
100
0
350
450
343
0
0
0
0
0
100
11,000
25,200
32,150
13,965
600
3,000
25,700
25,400
21,530
13,400

63,250

485,700

489,950

357,948

0

0

0

0

0

460,160
748,910
6,705,740
7,269,290
5,403,315



* Estimates and Actuals also include 7200 and 7450

CITY OF DECATUR

99

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DEPARTMENT
ADOPTED 2023-2024 BUDGET ESTIMATE

The Administrative Services Department includes the accounting, revenue, information
technology, municipal and human resources divisions. Most of the City’s resources, such
as employees, finances and technology, are directly supported by this department. Much of
the department’s work supports the goals of other city departments but the department also
provides many public facing functions such as municipal court and tax billing. The Administrative Services Department also budgets for the City’s property and liability insurances
and utilities such as electricity and natural gas.

Properties Claiming GH-1
Exemption
5,700
5,650
5,600
5,550
5,500

2019

2020

2021

2022

Mission Statement:
The Administrative Services Department will be collaborative while using innovations,
effective practices and strategic thinking to deliver continuous exceptional service to the
community and the organization.

Properties Claiming GH-1 Exemption

Value of Services for Taxes Paid
76%
74%
72%
70%
68%

Priorities for FY 2023-2024:
• Continue to recruit highly qualified candidates as well as retain high-performing employees.
• Provide training to all staff in the most effective manner possible.
• Protect the city’s IT network from cybersecurity incidents.

66%
64%

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:

62%
60%
58%
56%

2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022

Hires of FT Personnel
80
70
60
50
40
30

Value of services for taxes paid
2006: 63% rated as excellent/good
2008: 64% rated as excellent/good
2010: 65% rated as excellent/good
2012: 72% rated as excellent/good
2014: 74% rated as excellent/good
2016: 66% rated as excellent/good
2018: 70% rated as excellent/good
2020: 74% rated as excellent/good
2022: 63% rated as excellent/good

20

Contacted the City for help or
information in the last 12 months
2006: 53% reported as yes
2008: 61% reported as yes
2010: 57% reported as yes
2012: 54% reported as yes
2014: 51% reported as yes
2016: 52% reported as yes
2018: 55% reported as yes
2020: 52% reported as yes
2022: 48% reported as yes

10
0

2019

2020

2021

2022

Performance Measures:
Most Adjudicated Case Types in Municipal Court
FY 2019: Speeding – 1,128; Failure to Stop at Stop sign – 787
FY 2020: Unlawful Use of a Wireless Device – 659; Speeding – 637
FY 2021: Speeding – 369; Expired tag – 173
FY 2022: Speeding – 273; Expired tag – 229
Number of properties
claiming GH-1 Homestead
Exemption
FY 2019: 5,650
FY 2020: 5,630
FY 2021: 5,649
FY 2022: 5,578

100

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Hires of full-time
personnel
FY 2019: 50
FY 2020: 45
FY 2021: 72
FY 2022: 63

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL

SUMMARY


TOTAL
20222023

TOTAL
20212022

REGULAR JOB CLASSES
Assistant City Manager
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
Human Resources Director
3
0
0
0
3
HR Generalist
Administrative Assistant
1
0
0
0
1
Finance Director
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
Accountant
Accounting Specialist
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
1
0
1
Revenue Manager
Revenue Officer
0
0
3
0
3
Court Administrator
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
Chief Court Clerk
Court Clerk
0
0
0
3
3
Innovation & Strategy Director
1
0
0
0
1

1
1
3
1
1
1
2
1
3
0
1
2
0

1
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
3
0
1
2
0

TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES

17

16

OTHER JOB CLASSES
Intern
0
0
0
1
1
1
Chief Judge
0
0
0
1
1
1
Judge
0
0
0
7
7
7
Marshall
0
0
0
1
1
1
Bailiff
0
0
0
1
1
1
Solicitor
0
0
0
1
1
1
Public Defender
0
0
0
1
1
1
Customer Service Clerk
0
0
0
2
2
2

1
1
7
1
1
1
1
2

TOTAL OTHER CLASSES

15



ADMIN		 REVENUE
SERVICES
ACCTG COLLECTIONS
1510
1512
1514

8

3

4

MUNICIPAL
COURT
2650

4

TOTAL
20232024

19



0

0

0

15

15

15

CITY OF DECATUR

101

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DEPARTMENT
2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET





EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
511300 Overtime Wages
512100 Employer Group Insurance
512200 Social Security (FICA)
512300 Medicare
512400 Retirement Contributions
512401 Retirement Contributions-ICMA
512403 HSA Contributions - Employer Provided
512600 Unemployment Insurance
512700 Workers Compensation

521200
522201
522202
522204
522205
522206
522320
522321
522500
523101
523102
523104
523105
523106
523107
523201
523202
523203
523300
523400
523600
523700
523701
523800
523911

TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES
2,286,380
995,300
264,860
305,830
0
0
OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
684,320
119,500
214,820
77,000
185,000
0
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
600
0
0
0
600
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
4,000
0
2,600
1,000
0
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
35,000
3,500
0
3,000
0
0
Auto Allowance
4,500
0
0
0
0
0
Other Contractual Services
599,000
130,000
17,000
80,000
360,000
0
Insurance-Awards
50,000
0
0
0
50,000
0
Insurance-Legal Liability
195,000
0
0
0
0
195,000
Insurance-Property
130,000
0
0
0
0
130,000
Insurance-Vehicles
162,500
0
0
0
0
162,500
Insurance-Performance Bond
300
0
0
0
0
300
Insurance-Commercial Excess Liability
55,000
0
0
0
0
55,000
Postage
20,700
200
0
7,000
0
0
Telephone
280,400
0
0
400
0
0
Internet Service
60,000
0
0
0
0
0
Advertising
26,700
25,000
500
1,200
0
0
Printing and Binding
7,000
0
0
6,000
0
0
Dues and Fees
15,600
8,000
3,000
500
0
0
Education and Training
63,270
28,500
5,620
2,000
3,150
0
Business Meetings
6,300
4,700
250
550
300
0
Licenses
0
0
0
0
0
0
Bank Charges
31,500
0
8,000
23,500
0
0

531101
531102
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531111
531112
531113
531115
531210
531215
531220
531230
531231
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES
2,431,690
319,400
252,390
202,150
548,450
592,800
SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Janitorial
750
0
0
150
0
0
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Office
25,100
3,500
4,000
15,000
0
0
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
200
0
200
0
0
0
Supplies-Specialized Dept
8,600
7,000
0
600
0
0
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
Computer Equipment
11,580
1,500
0
510
5,570
0
Computer Software
29,010
700
0
0
25,310
0
Supplies-Office Equipment and Furniture
2,150
650
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Batteries
0
0
0
0
0
0
Water and Sewer
445,000
0
0
0
0
0
Stormwater Utility
1,005,000
0
0
0
0
0
Natural Gas
70,000
0
0
0
0
0
Electricity
425,000
0
0
0
0
0
Street Lighting
270,000
0
0
0
0
0
Gasoline
200
0
0
200
0
0
Food-Subsistence and Support
9,840
5,600
240
500
0
0
Books and Periodicals
1,400
300
0
100
0
0
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
0
0
0
0
0
0
Small Equipment
50
0
0
50
0
0
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
3,900
800
300
600
1,200
0
TOTAL SUPPLIES
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

102

TOTAL
1510
1512
1514
1535
1555
BUDGET
ESTIMATE
ADMIN
ACCOUNTING
REVENUE
INFORMATION
GENERAL
2023-2024
SERVICES
COLLECTIONS
TECHNOLOGY
INSURANCE

1,329,350
721,350
176,500
196,500
0
0
310,000
0
0
0
0
0
47,400
0
4,400
5,000
0
0
320,250
135,850
50,300
67,000
0
0
104,100
44,750
10,950
12,250
0
0
24,560
10,600
2,600
2,900
0
0
123,650
67,100
16,450
18,300
0
0
10,100
10,100
0
0
0
0
1,310
560
750
0
0
0
1,260
490
210
280
0
0
14,400
4,500
2,700
3,600
0
0

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

2,307,780
0
7,025,850

20,050
0
1,334,750

4,740
0
521,990

17,710
0
525,690

32,080
0
580,530

0
0
592,800

1567
2650

MUNICIPAL
REVISED
BUDGET
UTILITIES &
COURT
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
AUDIT
SERVICES
SERVICES
2022-2023
2022-2023
2021-22

0
235,000
984,000
1,051,200
836,153
0
310,000
210,000
263,400
154,135
0
38,000
48,100
59,100
35,212
0
67,100
272,500
314,300
238,612
62,411
0
36,150
81,750
87,350
0
8,460
19,300
20,530
14,280
0
21,800
93,100
94,660
76,094
0
0
9,220
9,220
7,322
0
0
750
0
0
0
280
1,680
1,680
7,117
0
3,600
14,400
16,300
19,160

0
720,390
1,734,800
1,917,740

0
88,000
529,300
557,640
0
0
0
600
0
0
0
800
0
0
0
0
100
300
3,050
1,400
0
0
0
0
25,000
3,500
38,200
31,520
0
4,500
4,000
3,500
0
12,000
556,900
464,480
0
0
70,000
37,800
0
0
150,000
113,600
0
0
101,000
100,000
0
0
126,000
126,500
0
0
300
300
0
0
42,000
42,300
13,500
0
22,200
21,500
280,000
0
262,620
280,900
0
42,000
45,000
60,000
0
0
23,700
11,700
0
1,000
5,000
12,000
2,600
1,500
8,380
11,150
0
24,000
60,300
60,350
0
500
5,400
5,150
0
0
0
0
0
0
34,000
23,000

1,450,497
461,872
0
0
0
322
0
26,167
3,520
525,559
28,331
108,784
95,080
120,382
200
40,192
16,790
254,975
142,958
2,219
4,536
7,580
30,504
1,076
0
23,720

381,200
135,300
2,084,350
1,951,190
1,894,765

0
0
0
0
0
0
600
750
650
529
0
0
0
0
0
100
2,500
28,600
28,600
27,460
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,000
8,810
6,750
5,558
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4,000
12,520
15,050
7,434
0
3,000
11,050
16,060
14,871
0
1,500
24,150
3,300
2,593
0
0
0
0
0
445,000
0
445,000
410,000
388,739
1,005,000
0
1,003,300
1,003,300
1,003,286
70,000
0
68,700
58,000
74,325
425,000
0
410,000
450,000
513,414
270,000
0
205,000
290,000
289,011
0
0
150
100
99
0
3,500
6,800
4,300
2,064
0
1,000
940
1,440
478
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50
50
3
0
1,000
3,400
3,600
3,248
2,215,100
0
2,596,300

18,100
0
873,790

2,229,220
0
6,048,370

2,291,200
0
6,160,130

2,333,111
0
5,678,373

CITY OF DECATUR

103

FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT
ADOPTED 2023-2024 BUDGET ESTIMATE

The Fire & Rescue Department provides fire suppression, emergency medical and rescue
services, hazardous materials emergency response, environmental protection, and fire
cause/arson investigation services. The Fire Department responds to all fires, medical calls,
accidents and emergencies and enforces fire and life safety code compliance.

Quality of Fire Services
100%

Mission Statement:
The mission of the City of Decatur Fire & Rescue Department is to preserve life and property, provide education awareness and enhanced level of customer service to the community
to improve the quality of life to the community.

99%
98%
97%
96%
95%
94%
93%

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:

92%
91%
90%

2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022

Total Fire/EMS Calls Responded To
4,500
4,000
3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000

Quality of Fire services
2006: 93% rated as excellent/good
2008: 97% rated as excellent/good
2010: 96% rated as excellent/good
2012: 97% rated as excellent/good
2014: 98% rated as excellent/good
2016: 97% rated as excellent/good
2018: 99% rated as excellent/good
2020: 99% rated as excellent/good
2022: 95% rated as excellent/good

500
-

2019

2020

2021

Quality of Fire Prevention and
Education
2006: 75% rated as excellent/good
2008: 87% rated as excellent/good
2010: 83% rated as excellent/good
2012: 88% rated as excellent/good
2014: 89% rated as excellent/good
2016: 92% rated as excellent/good
2018: 90% rated as excellent/good
2020: 88% rated as excellent/good
2022: 90% rated as excellent/good

2022

Performance Measures:
Priorities for FY 2023-2024:
• Develop strong recruitment/hiring
efforts to maintain staffing levels
and reduce overtime costs.
• Continue to focus on employee
wellness initiatives.
• Conduct a Citywide risk assessment
to assist with hazard mitigation efforts.
• Enhance quality of inspection and
investigation services to community
members and business owners.

104

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Total Fire & Medical
calls responded to
FY 2019: 3,943
FY 2020: 3,595
FY 2021: 3,261
FY 2022: 3,758

Number of
EMS Calls
FY 2019: 2,300
FY 2020: 2,133
FY 2021: 1,781
FY 2022: 2,123

Community education
programs conducted
FY 2019: 108
FY 2020: 75
FY 2021: 42
FY 2022: 53

FIRE DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL


FIRE
TOTAL
TOTAL
TOTAL
SUMMARY

3500 2023-2024 2022-2023 2021-2022
REGULAR JOB CLASSES
Fire Chief
1
1
1
1
Deputy Fire Chief
1
1
1
1
Assistant Fire Chief
1
1
1
1
Administrative Fire Captain
1
1
1
0
Fire Station Captain
3
3
3
3
Fire Lieutenant
3
3
3
3
Fire Sergeant
3
3
3
3
Fire Inspector
3
3
3
3
Fire Apparatus Operator
12
12
12
12
Firefighter
12
12
12
12
TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES
40
40
40
39
OTHER JOB CLASSES
Firefighter
15
15
15
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES
15
15
15

15
15

FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT
2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET



3500

TOTAL

BUDGET
REVISED
BUDGET
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
AUDIT

ESTIMATE
EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
2023-2024
2022-2023
2022-2023
2021-22
PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
2,668,500
2,355,000
2,390,000
2,240,563
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
150,000
100,000
100,000
100,149
511300 Overtime Wages
150,000
340,000
100,000
344,830
512100 Employer Group Insurance
671,550
668,550
738,550
580,324
512200 Social Security (FICA)
18,800
11,000
11,000
7,541
512300 Medicare
43,100
38,000
38,000
36,177
512400 Retirement Contributions
248,150
210,000
215,750
199,090
512403 HSA Contributions - Employer Provided
1,500
1,500
0
0
512405 Georgia Firefighter Pension - Employer Provided
12,000
0
0
0
512600 Unemployment Insurance
2,800
2,800
2,800
0
512700 Workers Compensation
49,500
49,500
58,010
68,189
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES
521200
522200
522201
522202
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523102
523105
523201
523202
523300
523400
523600
523700
523701
523800
523911

3,654,110

3,576,863

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
121,300
104,310
110,310
Repairs and Maintenance
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
4,000
4,000
4,000
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
2,800
4,600
2,600
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
14,000
8,510
13,510
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
33,900
43,900
28,900
Rental of Land & Buildings
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
7,500
6,920
6,920
Auto Allowance
500
500
500
Other Contractual Services
0
4,600
4,600
Insurance-Awards
2,500
2,500
2,500
Insurance-Legal Liability
0
0
0
Insurance-Vehicle
0
0
0
Postage
300
300
300
Telephone
8,100
1,500
0
Advertising
750
750
750
Printing and Binding
2,700
1,700
2,700
Dues and Fees
7,000
5,300
5,300
Education and Training
69,400
48,900
63,900
Business Meetings
5,000
4,000
4,000
Licenses
0
0
0
Bank Charges
0
1,000
0

4,015,900

106,824
0
997
3,978
8,491
0
71,738
0
6,662
0
4,990
2,581
0
0
51
534
0
1,051
3,543
32,497
3,150
920
486

TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES

248,491

279,750

3,776,350

243,290

250,790

531101
531102
531103
531104
531105
531106
531107

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
3,500
3,500
3,500
Supplies-Janitorial
8,000
8,000
8,000
Supplies-Landscape Maintenance
1,000
1,000
1,000
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
3,800
4,800
4,800
Supplies-Office
3,000
3,000
3,000
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
0
0
0
Supplies-Specialized Dept
61,500
54,520
54,520

0
4,095
988
2,581
2,823
0
43,405

531108
531109
531110
531111
531112
531113
531115
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

Supplies-Tires and Batteries
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
Communications Equipment
Computer Equipment
Computer Software
Office Equipment and Furniture
Supplies - Batteries
Gasoline
Food-Subsistence & Support
Books and Periodicals
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
Small Equipment
Uniforms and Protective Equipment

4,200
16,000
4,000
2,000
1,000
0
1,500
46,500
3,500
4,600
0
500
64,110

4,200
14,000
7,890
1,500
0
0
1,500
53,000
3,500
4,550
0
22,300
64,110

4,200
14,000
7,890
1,500
1,000
0
1,500
34,000
3,500
4,550
0
11,300
64,110

1,883
10,410
2,487
374
0
0
1,603
32,230
3,213
3,901
0
41
44,114

TOTAL SUPPLIES

228,710

251,370

222,370

154,147

TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

0

0

0

0

4,524,360

4,271,010

4,127,270

3,979,501

CITY OF DECATUR

105

POLICE DEPARTMENT

ADOPTED 2023-2024 BUDGET ESTIMATE
The Police Department ensures the safety of Decatur residents and visitors through proactive patrolling, crime prevention and investigation. Employees of the Police Department
also provide information and general assistance to the public.
Quality of Police Services
100%
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%

2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022

Mission Statement:
The mission of the Decatur Police Department is to be open and responsive to the needs
of the entire community and solve problems through community relationships, innovative
technology and exceptional service.
Priorities for FY 2023-2024 :
• Recruit quality applicants and retain current employees to provide a high level of service
to the community.
• Establish a Clergy Police Academy to collaborate with local clergy to bridge relationships with the community.
• Establish community programs that enable staff to build trust and relationships with the
youth in the community.
• Focus on policy development and improvement through a comprehensive outside review.

Citizen Satisfaction Survey responses:
Quality of Police services
2012: 89% rated as excellent/good
2014: 92% rated as excellent/good
2016: 90% rated as excellent/good
2018: 94% rated as excellent/good
2020: 92% rated as excellent/good
2022: 83% rated as excellent/good

Feeling “very” or “somewhat” safe in
your neighborhood
2014: 96%
2016: 97%
2018: 98%
2020: 99%
2022: 96%

Performance Measures:
DUI arrests
FY 2019: 82
FY 2020: 67
FY 2021: 62
FY 2022: 60

106

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

911 calls received
FY 2019: 70,925
FY 2020: 55,991
FY 2021: 54,963
FY 2022: 63,700

POLICE DEPARTMENT
2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET


TOTAL
3210
3221
3223

BUDGET				REVISED
BUDGET

ESTIMATE
POLICE
CRIME INV.
UNIFORM
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
AUDIT
EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
2023-2024
ADMIN
& TRAINING
PATROL
2022-2023 2022-2023
2021-22
PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
3,199,350
791,650
353,200
2,054,500
2,646,000
3,107,800
2,717,416
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
824,100
177,600
59,200
587,300
595,200
595,200
342,064
279,500
58,000
21,500
200,000
497,000
279,500
352,172
511300 Overtime Wages
511400 Special Events Overtime
181,500
8,000
32,500
141,000
186,500
181,500
38,070
512100 Employer Group Insurance
822,450
152,000
84,050
586,400
818,650
887,200
727,523
512200 Social Security (FICA)
57,900
18,000
3,400
36,500
59,000
43,000
38,276
512300 Medicare
61,850
13,250
5,600
43,000
56,600
59,350
47,222
297,600
73,650
32,850
191,100
231,000
280,650
228,321
512400 Retirement Contributions
512403 HSA Contributions - Employer Provided
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
512404 POAB Contributions - Employer Provided
14,100
0
0
14,100
5,000
0
0
512600 Unemployment Insurance
4,130
840
420
2,870
3,500
3,500
904
53,100
8,100
4,500
40,500
53,100
55,270
64,968
512700 Workers Compensation
5,795,580 1,301,090
597,220
3,897,270
5,151,550
5,492,970
4,556,935
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES
521200
522201
522202
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523102
523201
523202
523300
523400
523600
523700
523701
523800

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
293,500
278,700
2,800
12,000
283,600
283,600
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
38,200
35,400
800
2,000
19,700
19,700
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
14,500
3,000
2,500
9,000
15,750
14,500
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
0
0
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
2,750
1,200
800
750
2,750
2,750
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
84,400
3,500
9,500
71,400
84,400
84,400
Rental of Land & Buildings
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
34,500
25,200
1,800
7,500
34,500
34,500
Auto Allowance
0
0
0
0
0
0
Other Contractual Services
281,400
164,800
19,600
97,000
230,100
230,100
Insurance-Awards
20,000
0
0
20,000
34,000
27,500
Insurance-Legal Liability
62,500
11,000
6,500
45,000
56,000
62,500
Postage
1,100
400
200
500
1,100
1,100
Telephone
0
0
0
0
0
0
Advertising
40,000
0
0
40,000
40,000
40,000
Printing and Binding
14,000
10,000
500
3,500
14,000
14,000
Dues and Fees
2,950
1,600
400
950
2,950
2,950
Education and Training
98,000
31,000
15,000
52,000
88,000
88,000
Business Meetings
5,400
3,500
400
1,500
5,400
5,400
Licenses
1,100
300
0
800
1,100
1,100
TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES
994,300
569,600
60,800
363,900
913,350
912,100

239,127
468
3,554
0
260
36,591
0
18,212
0
67,575
0
51,419
50
0
20,048
2,371
1,422
33,033
425
456
475,012

531101
531102
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531111
531112
531113
531114
531115
531270
531300
531400
531600
531700

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
Supplies-Janitorial
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
Supplies-Office
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
Supplies-Specialized Dept
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
Communications Equipment
Computer Equipment
Computer Software
Office Equipment and Furniture
Outdoor Equipment and Furniture
Supplies- Batteries
Gasoline
Food-Subsistence & Support
Books and Periodicals
Small Equipment
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
TOTAL SUPPLIES

CAPITAL OUTLAY
542200 Capital Outlay-Vehicles
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

4,200
2,850
1,000
16,500
100
62,100
25,700
50,450
0
34,000
40,700
10,700
3,600
1,400
139,600
23,400
5,000
700
67,000
489,000
0
0
7,278,880


0
200
2,000
100
0
500
16,500
0
0
0
11,000
7,300
3,500
4,000
3,500
9,000
0
0
2,000
3,000
17,000
1,600
8,900
800
3,600
0
0
400
12,500
14,000
21,000
400
2,500
500
0
200
8,000
9,000
112,000
51,000

4,000
750
500
0
100
43,800
18,200
37,950
0
29,000
22,100
1,000
0
1,000
113,100
2,000
2,000
500
50,000
326,000

6,200
2,850
1,000
16,530
100
73,300
25,700
50,450
0
8,000
55,700
10,700
68,100
1,400
141,600
21,300
4,500
700
65,000
553,130

6,200
2,850
1,000
16,500
100
73,300
25,700
50,450
0
33,000
55,700
10,700
69,500
0
136,600
21,300
4,500
700
65,000
573,100

0
357
0
12,355
51
50,966
6,650
12,994
0
17,772
18,956
-120
6,257
319
82,772
13,303
0
86
45,234
267,954


0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0

0
0

103,650
103,650

6,618,030

6,978,170

5,403,551

1,982,690

709,020

4,587,170

CITY OF DECATUR

107


GEN		UNIFORM		 TOTAL
TOTAL
POLICE DEPARTMENT

MGMT
E911*
PATROL
CID20232022PERSONNEL SUMMARY

3210
3800
3223
2023
3221
2024
REGULAR JOB CLASSES

Police Chief
Deputy Police Chief
Police Captain
Police Lieutenant
Police Sergeant
Police Investigator†
Community Education & Information Manager
Police Officer, MPO, SRO††
Accreditation Manager & Open Records Custodian
Support Services Technician
Office Manager
E911 Communications Manager
Communications Team Leader
Communications Officer

TOTAL REGULAR CLASSES

1
1
3
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
0

9

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
10

13

0
0
0
4
6
0
0
25
0
0
0
0
0
0

35

0
0
0
0
1
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

5

1
1
3
4
7
4
1
25
1
1
1
1
2
10

62

1
1
3
5
7
4
1
25
0
1
1
0
2
9

61

60

OTHER JOB CLASSES
Animal Control Officer
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
44
0
44
40
School Crossing Guard†††
Crossing Guard Manager
0
0
1
0
1
1
Administrative Investigator/ Permit Clerk
1
0
0
0
1
1
Evidence Custodian
0
0
0
1
1
1
Fingerprint Examiner
0
0
0
1
1
1
Technical Services Manager
1
0
0
0
1
0
TOTAL OTHER CLASSES
2
0
46
2
50
45

1
40
0
1
0
1
0
43

† Investigator positions are assignments, not permanent positions, and are at the same salary range as Master Police
Officer (MPO.)
†† Two School Resource Officers (SRO) are included per the request of the City Schools of Decatur.
††† The Police Department currently is allocated 43 crossing guard positions. One additional position is funded by the
City Schools of Decatur bringing the total number of crossing guards to 44.

* For E911 budget detail, see page 148

108

1
1
3
5
7
4
1
25
0
1
1
0
2
10

TOTAL
20212022

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Capital
Projects
Budget FY 2023-2024

FISCAL YEAR 2023-2024

Capital
Projects
Narrative
The Capital Projects Funds are used to account for financial
resources to be used for the acquisition or construction of
major capital facilities and capital outlay.
Capital investments are critical to the maintenance and sustainability of public assets.
Deferred maintenance may be a cost-cutting option but as many local governments have
learned, this shortsighted view results in major problems and expensive solutions later on.
The City of Decatur takes its responsibility as a trustee of community resources seriously.
By identifying long-term capital investment needs and budgeting for these expenses, the
City makes certain that public buildings and infrastructure are well maintained. Over the
past 15 years, the City has completed major renovations or replacements of all city facilities, invested in its parks and made significant improvements to its storm drainage and
pedestrian-bicyclist infrastructure. This work represents the most extensive capital investment made by the City since the late 1950s. As a result, the City has ensured that these
community assets will serve the public for the next 50 years. More recent projects being
planned, under construction or completed in the past 5 years are described below. Many
of these respond directly to goals listed in the
City’s Strategic Plan. In addition, a comprehensive transportation master planning update has
been completed, a master plan to guide development at the East Lake MARTA Station has been
adopted, and a city-wide storm water master
plan is being implemented. While delayed by
the COVID-19 outbreak, the Decatur community completed the 2020 Strategic Plan, the City
Commission has adopted Decatur Recreator, a
city-wide recreational facilities master plan and
will soon consider Decatur Town Center 2.0, a
comprehensive downtown master plan.

Legacy Park in Decatur
In August 2017, the City Commission purchased
the 77-acre United Methodist Children’s Home
on South Columbia Drive for $40 million. Acquisition is being financed through the Decatur
Public Facilities Authority, the Georgia Envi-

CITY OF DECATUR

111

ronmental Finance Authority and other sources. Now named Legacy Park in Decatur, the
City Commission adopted a comprehensive master plan in December 2018. The plan can
be found at decaturnext.com. Initial site improvements include facilities upgrades to the
administration building, trail improvements, a volunteer-led a competition cross-country
course, and an orchard. In partnership with Trees Atlanta, work has commenced on a multiyear effort to remove invasive plants from the park’s woodland areas. Planning for restoring
the park’s pond is expected to start in 2023. An innovative and inclusive playground was
built in 2023.
In a major joint investment in community facilities, the City Schools of Decatur and the
City have started design of a running track and synthetic turf athletic field with lighting
and a concessions building with public restrooms. Funding for this community athletic and
recreational facility is through the local Education Special Purpose Local Option Sales Tax
(ESPLOST) and the federal American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (ARPA). Completion is
expected in late 2024.
The City of Decatur and the Decatur Housing Authority have completed planning and
financing arrangements for the South Housing Village, a 132-dwelling affordable housing
development at the intersection of South Columbia Drive and Katie Kerr Road. One of the
most challenging and exciting elements of the Legacy Park Master Plan, the South Housing
Village will jump start the City’s efforts to encourage greater diversity, equity and inclusion
in Decatur.

Oakhurst Recreation Center
In 2020, the City of Decatur purchased the Samuel Jones Boys and Girls Club at 450 East
Lake Drive, adjacent to Oakhurst Park. Now called the Oakhurst Recreation Center, this
5.5-acre property includes a gym, classrooms and the indoor Oakhurst Pool, an athletic field
and the Oakhurst Dog Park. The cost of the purchase was $4.94 million. A modest investment in painting and furnishing the center has allowed the Center’s use while a master plan
for Oakhurst Park and the Oakhurst Recreation Center is considered.

Under Construction
Pedestrian Safety Improvements at Clairemont Avenue and
Commerce Drive and at Church Street and Commerce Drive;
Church Street Cycle Track
Construction is nearing completion on the long-planned pedestrian safety improvements at
the intersections of Clairemont Avenue and Commerce Drive and Church Street and Commerce Drive and a cycle track on Church Street. The improvements will improve pedestrian
accessibility and safety at these two busy intersections in downtown Decatur and to provide
protected bicycle lanes and traffic calming features on Church Street from downtown Decatur to the northern city limits just past Forkner Drive.
This project is the most recent leg in a planned citywide network of protected bicycle lanes
and is based on Decatur’s 2007 and 2018 Community Transportation Plans and the 2016
PATH Decatur Connectivity Plan. Design was funded through the MARTA offset program.
About $4.2 million in funding has been secured through the City’s HOST fund (25%) and
from the Georgia Department of Transportation through the Atlanta Regional Commission’s
(ARC) Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) program (75%). Lewallen Construction of Marietta
is the general contractor. A team led by Thomas & Hutton (formerly Development Planning
and Engineering, Inc.) of Buford designed the improvements.
112

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

In Progress
Railroad Crossing Improvements at Atlanta Avenue
West Howard Avenue Traffic Calming

Capital
Projects
Narrative

In March 2022, the City Commission approved the final plan for Railroad Crossing Improvements at Atlanta Avenue. Construction documents are under review by CSX Transportation and the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT). The plan includes a new,
simplified crossing at Adair Street between West Howard Avenue and West College and a
modern traffic signal system at the new railroad crossing and at Olympic Place.
Civic engagement for the new railroad crossing was interrupted by COVID-19. This was
re-started in late 2020 to help complete the planning and design of improvements for pedestrians and bicyclists, traffic calming, landscape and streetscape amenities for the project.
The planning team of Landis-Evans & Partners and Atkins completed the plan based on the
comments and ideas provided by participants in both in-person and virtual workshops to
make the rail crossing and intersection safe and comfortable for pedestrians, bicyclists, and
motorists.
The project will be locally funded by the special purpose local option sales tax program
(SPLOST) but will require coordination and compliance with GDOT design guidelines and
CSX requirements.
The City Commission also approved permanent traffic calming improvements on West
Howard Avenue building on the Re-Imagine West Howard Avenue effort in 2017. The goal
of this project is to provide a “complete street” to improve safety and comfort for pedestrians and bicyclists and reducing vehicle speeds in the Howard Avenue corridor between
Commerce Drive and the western city limits. West Howard Avenue will be permanently
reduced from four to two vehicle lanes with a landscaped median and a two-way cycle track
along the CSX right-of-way.

Storm Water Improvements
Implementation of storm water improvements recommended by the 2020 Storm Water
Master Plan has begun. Civic engagement and design of four high-priority storm water
projects is underway with construction expected to start in 2024. Projects will include green
infrastructure practices to improve water quality by infiltration where possible, as well as
traditional infrastructure to mitigate the impact of larger storms.
Initial improvements are planned reduce flooding in and near the following neighborhoods:
• Derrydown Way, South Columbia Drive and Hilldale Drive
• Candler Drive and Park Drive
• Brower Street and McClean Street
• North Decatur Road, Willow Lane, Ferndale Drive and Superior Avenue. These storm
water improvements are being coordinated with a Safe-Streets initiative on North Decatur
Road.
Funding for these storm water improvements is being provided by fees from the City’s
storm water utility and from ARPA. Additional improvements are expected to continue in
Decatur’s residential neighborhoods through 2040.

Street Smarts - North Decatur Traffic Calming
City officials, public works employees, members from local neighborhood associations, and
representatives from MARTA, Emory University, and DeKalb County have started planning

CITY OF DECATUR

113

for ways to make North Decatur Road safer for pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists. Strong
collaboration between Decatur and DeKalb County is essential for success particularly as
it relates to portions of the roadway outside the control of the City. This project is being
planned in coordination with storm water improvements on North Decatur Road, Willow
Lane, Ferndale Drive and Superior Avenue.

Sidewalk and Traffic Calming Improvements
Multi-use trail and sidewalk improvements to help extend the City’s Safe Routes to School
program are being implemented to support the Talley Street Upper Elementary School.
The South Columbia multi-use trail is under construction. New sidewalks on Shadowmoor
Drive and Hilldale Drive have been completed. The first phase of traffic calming measures
have been implemented in the Parkwood neighborhood and planning for a new intersection
improvement at East Lake Road and Parkwood Road are underway. Planning for traffic
calming measures on Adair Street is nearing completion with construction to follow in the
2023-2024 fiscal year. Significant traffic calming improvements are also being considered
for the intersection at Huron and Champlain Streets and Coventry Road. The City also has
received a federal Safe Streets for All grant to develop a local street safety plan.

Ebster Field Improvements
Planning is underway to convert Ebster Field from a natural to a synthetic turf athletic field
and to add athletic field lighting. This will provide a high quality, year-round athletic field
for several sports. Completion is expected in 2024.

Clean Energy Plan Improvements
The City Commission adopted a Clean Energy Plan (cleanenergydecatur.com) in September 2022 to guide sustainable growth and to reduce carbon emissions. Initial investments
in clean energy include a rooftop solar installation in 2022-23 at the Leveritt Public Works
Building, financed by the Georgia Environmental Finance Authority, and planned solar energy improvements at the Decatur Recreation Center, with funding provided by Congressman Hank Johnson. Future rooftop solar investments are planned for the Decatur Police
Department.

D E C A T U R, G A

CLEAN
ENERGY
PLAN

Recently Completed
1

Fiber Optic Network
The City of Decatur, in partnership with the City Schools of Decatur, has completed a resilient, self-healing underground fiber ring linking all City and City Schools facilities. This
replaces the current network that was built in 2000 and is presently owned by Comcast. The
fiber ring provides a modern fiber optic network for all City and City Schools of Decatur
facilities and provide the infrastructure necessary for video, WiFi and smart cities technology that is not currently available. Network Cabling Infrastructures, Inc. (NCI) of Duluth
installed the network. The project budget was $2.35 million.

Talley Street Multimodal Transportation Improvements

114

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Intersection and traffic signal improvements have been implemented to improve safety for
pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists at Talley Street and South Columbia Drive in coordination with the opening of the Talley Street Upper Elementary School, new private investments such as the Avondale MARTA mixed used development, and additional residential
and commercial redevelopment in the East Decatur Station Area. Pond & Co. was the
consultant for the multimodal study and designed the intersection and signal improvements.
The new signal system includes innovative technology to recognize pedestrians as they approach and utilize the crosswalks. Sunbelt Traffic of Tucker was the general contractor.

PATH Decatur Commerce Drive Cycle Track
Construction was completed in early 2020 on the PATH Decatur Commerce Drive Cycle
Track on East Trinity Place and Commerce Drive between North McDonough Street and
Church Street. Cycle tracks are physically separated from the vehicle roadway and are also
known as protected bicycle lanes. The Commerce Drive cycle track will connect the PATH
Stone Mountain Trail with the recently completed North
McDonough Street Cycle Track and the new Church Street
Cycle Track, extending the City’s bicycle network and providing opportunities for persons of all ages and skills to use
bicycles as a safe and healthy way to get around Decatur.
The Commerce Drive Cycle Track is collaborative effort
by the PATH Foundation of Atlanta, the City of Decatur
and AMLI of Atlanta and is the first project of the PATH
Decatur Connectivity Plan. The project was designed by
the Kaizen Collaborative of Tucker. Lewallen Construction
of Marietta was the general contractor.

Capital
Projects
Narrative

North McDonough Streetscape
Improvements
Construction of the North McDonough Streetscape Improvements was completed in 2019. The primary goals of
the North McDonough Streetscape Improvements were to
improve safety and accessibility for pedestrians, bicyclists
and others using North McDonough Street. The project
was based on Decatur’s 2007 Community Transportation Plan which encourages healthy
lifestyles and active living in Decatur.
The project budget was $3 million. Design was funded through the MARTA offset program. Construction was funded by the City’s HOST fund and other local sources and a $2.3
million grant from the Georgia Department of Transportation through the Atlanta Regional
Commission’s (ARC) Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) program.
The improvements reduced North McDonough to two vehicle lanes, widened sidewalks on
both sides of the street, and add a 2-way “cycle track” on the west side of the street, along
with traditional streetscape improvements and on-street parking. The project also features a
significant investment in “green infrastructure” to improve storm water quality. The project
was designed by AECOM and Sprinkle Consulting (now Landis-Evans & Partners). BRTU
Construction was the general contractor.

Railroad Crossing Improvements at Candler and McDonough
Streets
Construction of the Railroad Crossing Improvements at Candler and McDonough Streets
was completed in 2019. The project improves pedestrian accessibility and safety around and
across two CSX railroad crossings at the intersections of College Avenue, Howard Avenue,
Candler Street and McDonough Street. Advanced traffic control technology provided by the
Georgia Department of Transportation provides additional protected left turns for vehicles
at several legs of both crossings as well. The project was based on recommendations in
Decatur’s Community Transportation Plan. The total project budget was $2.7 million, with
$1.2 million provided by the HOST fund and other local sources and about $1.5 million
from the Georgia Department of Transportation’s Transportation Enhancement Program.
The project was designed by AECOM of Atlanta. BRTU Construction was the general
contractor.
CITY OF DECATUR

115

Downtown Decatur Storm Drainage Improvements
Phase 2 of downtown Decatur’s storm drainage improvements was completed in 2017
and includes new storm drainage improvements that begin at Decatur Fire Station No. 1,
run easterly along East Trinity Place and East Howard Avenue then finish on Barry Street.
The project also included renewal of a failing sanitary sewer system and construction of
streetscape improvements in the same community. The project was originally planned
almost 40 years ago and replaced some of the oldest infrastructure in metro Atlanta. This
phase cost $2.1 million and concluded the major planned improvements to the upper
Peavine section of the downtown drainage system. Astra Grading and Pipe of Woodstock
was the general contractor. The project was funded by the City’s Storm Water Utility and
was designed by Atkins North America of Atlanta.

Park Pavilions, Concession Buildings,
Arbors and Storage Buildings
New arbors and storage buildings were completed in 2019 in Scott,
Ebster, Oakhurst and McKoy Parks. These were designed by Trey
Lucas Architects of Decatur and built by Everlast Construction of
Alpharetta.
Construction was completed in 2018 on new pavilions and concession buildings at McKoy and Oakhurst Parks. The new buildings
include all-season restrooms and replacement of outdated park
amenities that were originally built in the 1970s. The total cost was
about $1.3 million. The improvements were designed by Lyman
Davidson Dooley Architects. The general contractor was BM&K
Construction of Braselton.

Ongoing Investments
Greenspace Acquisition and Improvement
About 1.3 acres of greenspace on Green Street was purchased in 2021. This property borders the College Place-Green Street PATH Trail and will be maintained in a natural state.
An additional 4.2 acres of greenspace bordering the Dearborn Park Trail was purchased
in 2018. Including DeKalb County’s Dearborn Park and the natural area bordering Shoal
Creek, the entire Dearborn Park area now includes over 17 acres of passive greenspace.
In addition to invasive plant removal and woodland restoration at Decatur Legacy Park, the
City is continuing its program to remove and control invasive plants in various locations
around Decatur. This program is focused on the eradication of kudzu, English ivy, privet
and similar invasive plants that harm native plants and reduce habitat in the City’s greenspaces.
New artificial turf has been installed over the Decatur MARTA Station on the Courthouse
Square in downtown Decatur.
The City of Decatur and Trees Atlanta will continue their on-going partnership to plant trees
and increase the City’s tree canopy in anticipation of Decatur’s bicentennial in 2023.

Sidewalk Improvement Program
In a joint effort with Agnes Scott College and the Department of Transportation to improve
pedestrian safety, a new pedestrian crossing with flashing beacon has been installed in the
100-block of South Candler Street. A new island in South Candler Street near Midway
Road was recently completed.
116

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2022-2023

The City Commission continues to appropriate funding each year
for improvements to the City’s sidewalk, pedestrian and bicycle
facilities and for traffic calming improvements to discourage
speeding and make walking and biking safer in Decatur. The
City partnered with the PATH Foundation of Atlanta to complete
the East Decatur Greenway Trail on South Columbia Drive and
Katie Kerr Road in 2018.
Recent improvements have focused on repairs to existing
sidewalks throughout Decatur using the innovative technique
pioneered by Georgia Safe Sidewalks. Sidewalk and pedestrian
improvements completed since 2017 include the Olympic Place
pedestrian trail, a sidewalk extension on Harold Byrd Drive
and new decorative crosswalks in downtown Decatur. A major
sidewalk repair and replacement program has been completed on
South Candler Street. Derrydown Way and North Candler Street
are next.
The Georgia Department of Transportation completed installation of pedestrian hybrid beacons on South Candler Street and
Clairemont Avenue and provided funding for the recent installation of a beacon on Scott Boulevard at Westchester School. Pedestrian hybrid beacons allow
pedestrians to safely cross busy streets while stopping vehicle traffic only as needed.

Local Street Repairs and Paving
Along with annual grants from the Georgia Department of Transportation, significant local
funding is appropriated each year to repair and repave local streets. Sycamore Drive and
Merrill Avenue were repaved in 2021-22. South McDonough Street from Oakview Road to
Garland Avenue, along with East Ponce de Leon Avenue and Arcadia Avenue from Sycamore Drive to the City limits were repaved in 2022-23. In 2023-24, repaving is planned for
Glendale Avenue, West Dougherty Street, parts of South McDonough and Adair Streets,
part of Coventry Road and an additional section of Third Avenue. Repaving is coordinated
with sidewalk and curb ramp repairs when necessary.

Coordination with the Georgia Department of Transportation
and DeKalb County
On-going planning and coordination with the Georgia Department of Transportation
(GDOT) has resulted in numerous bicycle and pedestrian improvements, including pedestrian hybrid beacons on Clairemont Avenue, Scott Boulevard and South Candler Street,
streetscape improvements in downtown Decatur and Oakhurst Village, and the Pedestrian
Safety Improvements at Clairemont Avenue and Commerce Drive and at Church Street and
Commerce Drive and Church Street Cycle Track.
Similar planning efforts presently include the following:
• Pedestrian hybrid beacon on Scott Boulevard at Nelson Ferry Road.
• Road diet and bicycle/pedestrian improvements on East College Avenue between South
Candler Street and the Avondale city limits.
• Planning for intersection improvements at Clairemont Avenue and Scott Boulevard.
• A possible roundabout at Scott Boulevard and West Ponce de Leon Avenue.
• Traffic safety improvements on North Decatur Road.
CITY OF DECATUR

117

Capital Projects
Summary
Capital Improvement Program
A Capital Improvement Program (CIP) is a planning process that identifies the capital
investments a local government intends to make over a period of time. Capital includes the
facilities and materials needed to perform the City’s functions and to produce and deliver
the services expected of it.
The following guidelines determine what a capital project is:
• Relatively high monetary value (at least $5,000)
• Long life (at least two years)
• Results in creation of a capital asset, or the revitalization of a capital asset
Included within the above definition of a capital project are the following items:
• Construction of new City facilities
• Remodeling or expansion of existing facilities
• Purchase, improvement, and development of land
• Street construction, reconstruction, resurfacing, or road improvements
• Sidewalks, drainage, and stormwater projects
• Vehicles, heavy equipment, computers, and other machinery & equipment
• Planning and engineering costs related to specific capital improvements
The City develops and updates a five-year Capital Improvement Program (CIP) annually.
The capital budget is the first year of the CIP and provides the basis for control of expenditures for the acquisition of significant City assets and construction of all capital facilities.
As capital improvement projects are completed, they are capitalized and the operations and
maintenance are funded in the annual general fund operating budget.

The FY 2024-2028 Capital Improvement Program
The FY 2024-2028 capital improvement program totals $60,588,880. A summary of the
plan is as follows:
FY 2024
Proposed

Capital Improvements Fund
9,899,490
HOST projects
689,200
SPLOST Fund
6,981,980
PFA Fund
330,000
ARPA Fund
8,571,260
Cemetery Capital Improvements Fund
15,000
Solid Waste Fund
296,600
Stormwater Fund
866,700
E911 Fund
School Zone Camera Fund
373,150

118

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

FY 2025
Proposed

12,813,750
27,200
18,000
212,200
166,700
238,000
-

FY 2026
Proposed

9,487,150
27,200
18,000
182,200
109,500
72,000
-

FY 2027
Proposed

FY 2028
Proposed

4,449,850
4,111,950
27,200
27,200
18,000
18,000
130,200
130,200
109,500
109,500
62,000
-

Total

$40,762,190
$798,000
$6,981,980
$330,000
$8,571,260
$87,000
$951,400
$1,361,900
$372,000
$373,150

The projects included in the Adopted FY 2024-2028 Capital Improvement Program are
listed on the following pages.

Capital Improvements Fund Capital
Description

FY 22-23
Revised
Estimate

FY 23-24
CIP
Estimate

FY 24-25
CIP
Estimate

FY 25-26
CIP
Estimate

FY 26-27
CIP
Estimate

FY 27-28
CIP
Estimate

Total
FY 23-24 to
FY 27-28

CITYWIDE
Telephone System Upgrade
250,000
250,000
Fiber Network Installation
274,800
274,800
274,800
274,800
274,800
274,800
Wireless Network Upgrade/Refresh
264,000
CCC Ped Safety & Bike Lane Improvements
2,215,300
Outdoor Tornado Siren System
26,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
Outdoor Water Bottle/Drinking Fountain Stations
30,000
30,000
30,000
Electric Vehicle Charging Stations
120,000
120,000
120,000
120,000

500,000
1,374,000
264,000
105,000
90,000
480,000

CITYWIDE:

$309,800

$2,813,000

FACILITIES MAINTENANCE UPKEEP
LED Lighting Upgrade in all city facilities
155,000
195,000
15,000
15,000
Bandstand Painting and Repair
35,000
City Hall Carpet
261,000
Decatur Legacy Park - Inclusive Playground
100,000
Decatur Legacy Park - Postal Pond Bank Restoration
293,400
Decatur Legacy Park Inside Building Network Infrastructure
231,660
Decatur Legacy Park Outside Underground Fiber Option Network
130,000
Decatur Recreation Center Interior Painting
30,000
Decatur Recreation Center Wood Floor Re-finish
15,000
Decatur Recreation Center Floor Covers
50,000
Decatur Recreation Center Boiler
50,000
Decatur Recreation Center Chiller
15,000
Decatur Tennis Center Roof
25,000
Glenlake Pool House Roof
15,000
Oakhurst Park Waterline Replacement
20,000
Fire Station 1 Stair Stabilization
31,100
Fire Station 1 Bay Floor Repair
61,000
Police Bullet Proof Windows (eastside of building)
35,000
Public Works Facility Exterior Refresh/Upgrade
25,000
50,000
Public Works Building B Office Buildout
36,000
Public Works Building Motor Maintenance Bay Floor Epoxy
500,000
Public Works Building Solar Array project
750,000
Decatur Recreation Center Solar Array Project
423,000
Decatur Cemetery Roadway Repaving
15,000
MARTA Plaza Paver Re-sanding
15,000
Crosswalk Removal at Clairemont-Ponce de Leon intersection
610,000
50,000
Property Purchase and Demolition - 600 Commerce Drive
400,000
50,000
Property Purchase and Demolition - 1010 N Parkwood Road
55,000
Streetlight replacement project - One Town Center

350,000
15,000
100,000
293,400
231,660
130,000
30,000
15,000
50,000
50,000
15,000
25,000
15,000
31,100
35,000
50,000
36,000
750,000
423,000
15,000
15,000
50,000
50,000
55,000

$2,516,100

150,000
250,000

CMO:

$400,000

$400,000

continued

$-

$459,800

CITY MANAGER’S OFFICE
Records Management Enterprise Software
150,000
City Hall Back-up Power Supply
250,000
$-

$1,515,160

$709,800

$2,830,160

$-

$1,315,000

$938,800

$-

FACILITIES UPKEEP:

$1,927,000

$394,800

$-

$-

$-

$-

CITY OF DECATUR

119

Capital Improvements Fund Capital continued
FY 27-28
CIP
Estimate

Total
FY 23-24 to
FY 27-28

COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC DEV
PALS Vehicle
10,000
10,000
10,000
DDA Conference Room and Reception Area Furniture Replacement
27,000
DDA Conference Room Technology Upgrade
12,000
Decatur Square shade systems fabric and installation
88,000
East Decatur Station branding and signage including benches
51,000

30,000
27,000
88,000
51,000

Description

CED:

FY 22-23
Revised
Estimate

$12,000

FY 23-24
CIP
Estimate

$37,000

FY 24-25
CIP
Estimate

$149,000

FY 25-26
CIP
Estimate

$10,000

FY 26-27
CIP
Estimate

$-

$-

$196,000

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
AS:
$$$$$$-

$-

FIRE
Fire Engine Truck
100,000
100,000
100,000
300,000
Quint Fire Truck
179,900
179,900
179,900
179,900
179,900
719,600
Reserve Fire Engine Replacement
42,900
42,900
42,900
85,800
12,500
12,500
12,500
15,000
52,500
Fire Admin vehicle
10,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
36,000
Fire Admin/Inspections Vehicle
67,500
67,500
HazMat Truck (2008)
24,800
24,800
24,800
24,800
74,400
Portable Radio Replacement (25)
53,430
53,430
53,430
106,860
Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus
25,000
25,000
Helmet Replacement (40)
15,000
20,000
35,000
Station Furniture
35,000
Stations 1 & 2 Appliances and Fitness Equipmment
30,000
30,000
Extrication Equipment
38,000
43,000
43,000
43,000
43,000
172,000
Mini Fire Pumper #1
19,500
19,500
Medical Closet Vending Machine
14,500
14,500
Fire Extinguisher Training Unit
$178,000

$1,738,660

PARKS & RECREATION
Ebster Pool Shell Resurfacing
25,000
10,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
Playground Equipment
365,000
Skatepark Equipment
12,000
12,000
Active Living Shuttle Bus
8,000
8,000
8,000
Active Living Shared Hybrid SUV
60,000
Sand Volleyball Courts
1,000,000
Ebster Field Turf Upgrades
150,000
150,000
150,000
150,000
150,000
Ebster Field Lighting Upgrades
125,000
McKoy and Oakhurst Fields Dugout Improvements

25,000
75,000
365,000
12,000
24,000
60,000
1,000,000
750,000
125,000

FIRE:

P&R:

120

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

$384,030

$22,000

$387,530

$1,675,000

$466,030

$258,000

$372,200

$173,000

$334,900

$165,000

$165,000

$2,436,000

Capital Improvements Fund Capital continued
Description

FY 22-23
Revised
Estimate

FY 23-24
CIP
Estimate

FY 24-25
CIP
Estimate

FY 25-26
CIP
Estimate

FY 26-27
CIP
Estimate

FY 27-28
CIP
Estimate

Total
FY 23-24 to
FY 27-28

POLICE
2021 Admin Vehicle
9,400
9,400
9,400
Take Home Car Program - Multi Year Financing
800,000
415,000
1,215,000
Intoxilyzer 9000
10,000
10,000
10,000
30,000
Police Motorcycle
11,000
11,000
22,000
Mobile Command Trailer
60,000
60,000
License Plate Reader system
3,810
3,810
3,810
7,620
Firearms Replacement
50,000
50,000
Body worn cameras storage server
54,000
58,350
58,350
58,350
58,350
58,350
291,750
CAD Activation System
85,000
Digital Radio Upgrade (65 portable radio replacement)
65,000
65,000
65,000
65,000
260,000
Patrol Rifles
100,000
100,000
Taser Assurance Program
11,000
11,000
22,000
Live Scan fingerprint system
5,000
5,000
5,000
5,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
Latent Print Server
13,700
Training Simulator
25,300
Evidence Room Shelving
34,000
Security Upgrades
10,000
10,000
Electric Golf Cart
$139,350

$2,117,770

PUBLIC WORKS
Admin Vehicle
12,800
12,800
12,800
10,000
10,000
10,000
Buildings Pickup
10,000
10,000
10,000
Buildings Pickup
12,000
Grounds Zero Turn Mower
22,000
22,000
22,000
22,000
22,000
Cemetery Loader Backhoe
13,500
13,500
13,500
Grounds Crew Pickup
10,000
Grounds Pickup
13,000
13,000
Grounds Brush Chipper
30,000
30,000
Grounds Grapple Truck
7,500
7,500
7,500
Engineering Division Admin Vehicle (Ford Escape)
20,000
Streets Crew F750 Dump Truck
15,000
15,000
15,000
Streets Crew Pickup F250 Truck
1,060,000
3,000,000
3,000,000
3,000,000
3,000,000
3,000,000
Roadway Patching, Repair & Repaving (LMIG)
250,000
250,000
250,000
250,000
250,000
Sidewalk Installation & Repair
75,000
75,000
75,000
75,000
75,000
Street Repairs
240,000
Safe Streets for All
307,700
Shadowmoor Dr Sidewalk Construction
200,000
200,000
Derrydown Way Sidewalk Construction
50,000
350,000
Adair Complete Streets
250,000
Scott Blvd Sidewalks
Pavement Management Study
50,000
S. McDonough Complete Streets
250,000
N. Decatur Rd Corridor Improvements
180,000
270,000
3,000,000
2,500,000
Coventry Rd Traffic Calming
350,000
E. Lake Dr at Parkwood Rd Intersection
15,000
500,000
Swanton Way Pavement Failure
250,000
Jefferson Place Pavement Failure
350,000
Scott Blvd and Clairemont Ave Intersection Improvements
400,000
1,800,000
1,800,000

25,600
30,000
30,000
12,000
110,000
40,500
13,000
30,000
22,500
30,000
15,000,000
1,000,000
375,000
240,000
200,000
350,000
250,000
50,000
5,770,000
350,000
500,000
250,000
350,000
4,000,000

PW:

29,028,600

POLICE:

$225,210

$2,413,500

$881,560

$5,897,800

$648,160

$8,465,800

$299,350

$7,950,000

$149,350

$3,368,000

$3,347,000

continued
CITY OF DECATUR

121

Capital Improvements Fund Capital continued
FY 27-28
CIP
Estimate

Total
FY 23-24 to
FY 27-28

HOST Funded Capital
Public Art
10,000
10,000
CCC Pedestrian/Bike Improvements
731,700
Traffic Calming Planning & Projects
400,000
Sidewalk Construction and Repair
200,000
200,000
Access Control and Security Upgrades
165,000
52,000
Grounds Tractor
10,100
10,100
10,100
10,100
10,100
Grounds Battery Powered Mower
24,000
Mini Excavator
17,100
17,100
17,100
17,100
17,100

10,000
400,000
200,000
52,000
50,500
85,500

HOST:

$1,130,700

$689,200

$27,200

$27,200

$27,200

$27,200

$798,000

CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND TOTAL:

$7,499,840

$10,588,690

$12,840,950

$9,514,350

$4,477,050

$4,139,150

$41,560,190

CEMETERY CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND
Cemetery Marker and Wall Restoration
15,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
20,000
Landscape Maintenance

87,000
-

Description

FY 22-23
Revised
Estimate

54,400
52,000
60,000
261,000
156,000
88,000
150,000
130,000

$296,600

$212,200

$18,000

FY 26-27
CIP
Estimate

SOLID WASTE FUND
2019 40YD Front Loader
54,400
54,400
52,000
52,000
2020 25YD Rear Loader - NEW 19-20
30,000
30,000
30,000
2021 Collection Vehicles (4)
52,200
52,200
52,200
52,200
52,200
2022 Rear Loader
52,000
52,000
52,000
2024 Front Loader
22,000
22,000
22,000
22,000
2025 6YD Rear Loader
43,720
2017 Street Sweeper
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
2023 Street Sweeper (refurbished)
16,000
2018 Recycling Collection Vehicles (2)
26,000
26,000
26,000
26,000
26,000
Compost Collection Vehicle
$196,120

$18,000

FY 25-26
CIP
Estimate

$87,000

SOLID WASTE:

$15,000

FY 24-25
CIP
Estimate

$18,000

CEMETERY TOTAL:

$20,000

FY 23-24
CIP
Estimate

$182,200

$18,000

$130,200

$130,200

STORMWATER FUND
Vacuum Jetter
50,000
50,000
16,700
16,700
16,700
2015 F250 Drainage Pickup Truck Replacement
22,000
2017 F750 Drainage Dump Truck Replacement
9,500
9,500
9,500
2018 Inspector SUV
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
Roadway Milling
200,000
200,000
S. Columbia Multi-Use path bioswale construction
500,000
Additional Bioswale Construction Project
200,000
FEMA Grant Match
Capital Project Funding
300,000
Ebster Vault Clean Out
STORMWATER:

$1,561,900

E911 FUND
Dictaphone Recording System/NICE Recording System
12,000
12,000
12,000
Back-up System
166,000
Computer Replacement
10,000
10,000
Console Replacement
50,000
50,000
50,000

36,000
166,000
20,000
150,000

E911:

$372,000

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

$0

$1,066,700

$0

$166,700

$238,000

$109,500

$72,000

$109,500

100,000
33,400
28,500
500,000
200,000
500,000
200,000
-

$109,500

122

$638,700

$951,400

$62,000

$0

Capital Improvements Fund Capital continued
FY 27-28
CIP
Estimate

Total
FY 23-24 to
FY 27-28

SCHOOL ZONE CAMERA SAFETY PROGRAM FUND
Tasers
113,000
Policy Review and Development Software
19,650
Flock Safety Cameras
37,000
Downtown Business District Cameras
40,000
Police Officer Safety Gear and Equipment
149,400
Netclock for E911 Communications Center
14,100

113,000
19,650
37,000
40,000
149,400
14,100

SCHOOL ZONE CAMERAS:

$373,150

Description

FY 22-23
Revised
Estimate

$0

FY 23-24
CIP
Estimate

$373,150

FY 24-25
CIP
Estimate

$0

FY 25-26
CIP
Estimate

$0

FY 26-27
CIP
Estimate

$0

$0

CHILDREN & YOUTH SVCS FUND
Gator XUV for Legacy Park
30,000

-

CYS:

$0

$0

SPLOST FUND
URA Debt Service
956,290
956,980
950,000
4,395,000
Atlanta Avenue redesign
1,630,000
S. Columbia Multi-Use Trail

956,980
4,395,000
1,630,000

$30,000

30,000
100,000
200,000
209,000

$0

$0

$0

$330,000

ARPA FUND
Decatur Recreation Center Hybrid Technology
115,000
170,000
2,830,000
Decatur Legacy Park Track and Athletic Field
3,741,260
Decatur Legacy Park South Housing Village Infrastructure
2,000,000
Storm Water Infrastructure Improvements

2,830,000
3,741,260
2,000,000

ARPA:

$285,000

$8,571,260

$0

$0

$0

$8,571,260

OTHER FUNDS TOTAL:

$3,472,110

$17,634,690

$634,900

$381,700

$319,700

PFA:

$0

$0

$0

PFA FUND - DECATUR LEGACY PARK
Legacy Park - Barn Interior Replacement
180,000
80,000
Legacy Park - Industrial Kitchen Upgrade
45,500
Legacy Park - ADA Ramps (Williams and Gillespie)
25,000
30,000
Legacy Park - Signage
100,000
Legacy Park - Postal Pond Restoration Assessment
200,000
Legacy Park - Invasive Plant Removal
30,000
Legacy Park - Williams Roof Replacement
15,500
Legacy Park - Playground Fencing
Legacy Park - Hyatt Cottage Porch and Floor Repairs
20,000
Legacy Park - Creative Village
209,000
$330,000

$0

$0

$6,981,980

$396,000

$6,981,980

$0

$0

SPLOST:

$1,906,290

$0

$0

$0

$257,700 $19,228,6900

CITY OF DECATUR

123

CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND (350)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates





CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20

CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21

CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22

CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23

CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
REVISED
2022-23

CAPITAL
IMP. FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
10,817,107
9,173,137
7,117,421
5,991,340
4,930,638
6,196,709
5,611,949

REVENUES
311200 General Taxes
3,393,546
4,679,851
5,107,796
5,484,214
5,800,000
5,900,000
6,117,500
313300 Homestead Option Sales Tax (HOST)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
334100 Intergovernmental-School
220,762
389,164
254,219
0
0
0
0
334110 Intergovernmental-Federal/State
0
116,486
17,907
916,942
3,367,000
2,354,000
1,400,000
334300 Intergovernmental-LMIG
276,707
221,570
191,773
208,993
208,990
215,260
215,260
336000 Local Grants
0
450,027
0
0
0
0
0
361000 Interest
10,170
15,549
16,131
20,088
0
0
0
371200 Gifts & Contributions
0
10,604
0
0
0
0
190,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
381000 Use of Property/Rent
389000 Miscellaneous
53,160
0
24,118
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
393150 Bond Expense Reimbursement
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
383010 Insurance Claims/Losses
Total Revenue
3,954,345
5,883,250
5,628,103
6,630,236
9,375,990
8,469,260
7,922,760

EXPENDITURES
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES
521200 Professional Services
189,376
285,817
200,914
77,535
220,000
240,000
560,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522200 Repairs & Mnt.
96,475
40,315
223,394
20,000
214,600
190,000
350,000
522201 R&M Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522202 R&M Communications Equipment
0
0
0
0
100,000
0
100,000
522203 R&M Landscape
15,226
0
0
0
0
0
0
522206 R&M Vehicles
436,131
(13,880)
1,755,745
1,350,921
1,960,000
1,510,000
3,675,000
522210 R&M Infrastructure
46,167
37,232
18,616
0
0
0
0
522310 Rental of Land/Bldgs
0
0
2,753
0
0
0
0
522320 Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522321 Auto Allowance
390,551
29,291
108,344
79,343
64,000
79,000
183,350
522500 Other Contractual Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523103 Insurance - Misc
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523202 Telephone
120
0
180
0
0
0
0
523300 Advertising
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523400 Printing & Binding
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523450 Signs
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523600 Dues & Fees
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523700 Education & Training
523701 Business Meetings
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523800 Licenses
66
500
432
90
0
0
0
523911 Bank Charges
Total Services
1,174,111
379,275
2,310,378
1,527,889
2,558,600
2,019,000
4,868,350

SUPPLIES
531101 Bldg. & Fixed Equipment
5,243
0
0
0
8,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531103 Landscape Supplies
531105 Office Supplies
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531107 Specialized Departmental Supplies
48,063
30,199
13,949
11,072
49,300
35,000
59,000
531110 Communications Equipment
43,529
0
0
0
0
0
0
27,820
3,489
31,888
61,508
285,000
165,000
52,000
531111 Computer Equipment
0
0
9,269
0
88,000
85,000
0
531112 Computer Software
8,855
0
0
0
25,300
25,300
42,000
531113 Off Eqp Furnishings
145,323
49,212
5,472
3,962
327,000
271,000
417,000
531114 Outdoor Furn and Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531300 Food-Subsistence & Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531400 Books & Periodicals
8,371
0
0
0
0
0
0
531600 Small Equipment
Total Supplies
287,204
82,900
60,578
76,542
783,100
581,300
570,000


continued
124

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024


CAPITAL
CAPITAL
CAPITAL
CAPITAL
CAPITAL
CAPITAL
CAPITAL

IMP. FUND
IMP. FUND
IMP. FUND
IMP. FUND
IMP. FUND
IMP. FUND
IMP. FUND

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE

2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23
2022-23
2023-24
CAPITAL OUTLAY
541100 Sites
2,180,000
0
0
424,215
0
1,010,000
0
541101 Right of Way
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
541200 Site Improvements
25,000
0
55,893
0
1,650,000
75,000
1,800,000
541300 Buildings
77,256
7,370
0
0
0
0
0
155,682
20,082
9,632
303,000
750,000
500,000
750,000
541301 Building Improvements
541400 Infrastructure
1,341,136
4,215,041
1,108,878
1,185,648
5,788,000
3,569,700
2,340,000
542100 Machines, Motors & Power Tools
63,245
0
8,801
0
186,000
160,000
110,000
542101 Communications Equipment
0
0
0
123,833
0
0
0
542102 Office Machines/Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
542200 Vehicles
440,885
1,668,885
150,026
43,695
866,000
824,000
552,500
39,660
0
1,500
0
60,000
0
120,000
542301 Outdoor Furniture & Equipment
123,877
0
0
0
0
0
0
542401 Computer Systems Software
0
(50)
208,715
0
0
0
0
542500 Miscellaneous Equipment
Total Capital Outlay

4,446,742

5,911,328

1,543,445

2,080,390

9,300,000

6,138,700

5,672,500


DEBT SERVICES
581100 Principal-Bonds
150,000
357,844
369,091
380,528
410,000
410,000
420,000
148,975
115,109
307,122
316,015
887,000
522,000
880,000
581200 Principal-Capital Leases
45,235
103,476
93,198
82,598
121,000
121,000
111,670
582100 Interest-Bonds
16,346
17,096
47,873
38,983
124,250
96,750
112,800
582200 Interest-Capital Leases
Total Non-operating

360,556

593,525

817,284

818,124

1,542,250

1,149,750

1,524,470

Total Expenditures
6,268,613
6,967,029
4,731,685
4,502,945
14,183,950
9,888,750
12,635,320

OTHER USES
611100 Transfer (to) from General Fund
0
0
450,000
500,000
750,000
2,500,000
550,000
(2,250,000)
(2,250,000)
(2,250,000)
(2,250,000)
(2,250,000)
(2,250,000)
611344 Transfer (to) from Public Facilities Auth. (1,300,000)
611340 Transfer (to) from URA 2010 Debt Service (277,169)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
611340 Transfer (to) from URA 2010 Project
0
0
0
0
0
0
611345 Transfer (to) from URA 2013 Debt Service (517,778)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
611345 Transfer (to) from URA 2013 Project
230,560
0
0
0
0
0
0
391310 Transfer (to) from GO Bond Fund
32,885
21,885
21,885
21,885
0
0
0
391505 Transfer (to) from Stormwater Utility
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
391355 Transfer (to) from Cemetery Cap. Imp. Fund 18,000
0
10,000
0
0
0
0
0
392100 Sale of Fixed Assets
393501 Proceeds from Capital Leases
2,483,799
1,338,520
0
0
2,300,000
800,000
2,165,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
393100 Issuance of Long-term Debt
611220 Transfer (to) from Grant Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
(110,842)
(107,218)
(105,808)
(105,000)
(105,900)
(105,900)
611286 Transfer (to) from Downtown Development Auth.
611287 Transfer (to) from TAD Fund
0
0
(162,510)
(106,000)
(106,000)
(127,370)
(133,740)
Total Other Uses
670,299
(972,437)
(2,029,843)
(1,921,923)
607,000
834,730
243,360

ENDING FUND BALANCE

9,173,137

7,116,922

5,983,498

6,196,709

729,677

5,611,949

1,142,749

Restricted-HOST
0
0
0
0
420,074
815,104
13,104

ENDING ASSIGNED FUND BALANCE
9,173,137
7,116,922
5,983,498
6,196,709
309,604
4,796,845
1,129,645

CITY OF DECATUR

125

126

FY 2022-2023 CAPITAL ITEMS

IMPACT ON OPERATING BUDGET

Active Living: Playground Equipment Replacement
($10,000) (531114)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment and reduce liability
for injuries

Active Living: Shuttle Bus (4th of 5 Lease Payments)
($12,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment

Active Living: Legacy Park Inclusive Playground Equipment Installation ($261,000) (531114)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment and reduce liability for
injuries

Buildings Maintenance: Bandstand Painting ($15,000)
(522201)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating budget

Buildings Maintenance: City Hall Carpet Replacement
($35,000) (522201)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating budget

Buildings Maintenance: Fire Station 1 Stair Stabilization
($20,000) (522201)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance cost
associated with older equipment and infrastructure

Buildings Maintenance: Public Works Building B Office
Suite Buildout ($25,000) (522201)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating budget.
Once buildout is complete and space is occupied, costs
associated with utilities will impact operating budget

Citywide: Clairemont/Church/Commerce Pedestrian &
Bike Improvements ($2,215,300) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: Property Purchase - 600 Commerce Dr
($610,000) (541100)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating budget

Citywide: Property Purchase - 1010 N. Parkwood Rd
($400,000) (541100)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating budget

Engineering: F750 Dump Truck (5th of 5 Lease Payments)
($20,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment

Engineering: Sidewalk Construction and Repair
($250,000) (522210) (includes Ga Safe Sidewalks)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: Patching, Repair and Resurfacing
($1,060,000) (522210)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: Shadowmoor Drive Sidewalks ($307,700)
(541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: Derrydown Way Sidewalks ($200,000)
(541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: Adair Street Traffic Calming ($50,000)
(541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: East Lake Drive and Parkwood Road Intersection Improvements ($15,000) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: S. McDonough Complete Streets ($250,000)
(541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: N. Decatur Rd Corridor Improvements
($180,000) (521200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Fire: Mini-Pumper (5th of 5 Lease Payments) ($38,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment

Fire: Replacement Administrative Vehicle (4th of 4 Lease
Payments) ($10,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment

Fire: Replacement Quint Fire Engine (3rd of 7 Lease Payments) ($179,900)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

FY 2022-2023 CAPITAL ITEMS

IMPACT ON OPERATING BUDGET

Fire: Reserve Fire Engine Replacement (1990) (3rd of 5
Lease Payments) ($42,900)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment

Fire: SCBA Replacement (2nd of 4 Lease Payments)
($53,430)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment and increase in
staff safety

Fire: Portable Radio Replacement (2nd of 5 lease payments) ($24,800)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment and increase in
staff safety

Fire: Station Fitness Equipment and Appliance Replacement ($35,000) (531107)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment and increase in
staff wellness

General Government: Outdoor Warning Siren System (5th
of 5 Lease Payments) ($26,000)

Ongoing program – increase community safety

Grounds Maintenance: Pickup with Dump Body (5th of 5
Lease Payments) ($10,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment

Grounds Maintenance: Brush Chipper (4th of 5 Lease Payments) ($13,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment

Grounds Maintenance: Replacement Grapple/Knuckle
Boom Loader Truck (4th of 5 Lease Payments) ($30,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment

Police: Admin Vehicle (2nd of 3 Lease Payments) ($9,400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment

Police: Police Training Simulator (5th of 5 Lease Payments) ($13,700)

Ongoing program – increase staff efficiencies

Police: Camera Data Storage ($54,000) (522500)

Ongoing program – increase staff efficiencies

Police: Automated License Plate Reader ($3,810) (3rd of 5
Lease Payments)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment

Police: CAD Activation System ($85,000) (531112)

One-time cost – recurring impact on operating budget due
to annual maintenance fee but it will result in increased
staff and community efficiencies

Police: Evidence Room Shelving ($25,300) (531113)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating budget

Police: Security Upgrades ($34,000) (522201)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment and increase in staff
safety

Police: Bulletproof Window Laminate Installation
($61,000) (522201)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment and increase in staff
safety

Public Works: Solar Array ($500,000) (541301)

One-time cost – recurring impact on operating budget due
to annual maintenance fee but it will result in increased
electrical efficiencies at the facility

Technology: Fiber Network Replacement (4th of 10 Lease
Payments) ($274,800)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment

Technology: DDA Conference Room AV Tech Equipment
($12,000) (531111)

One-time cost – recurring impact on operating budget due
to annual maintenance fee but it will result in increased
staff and community efficiencies

Capital Projects
Fund
Capital
Improvements
(350)

CITY OF DECATUR

127

128

FY 2022-2023 HOST ITEMS

IMPACT ON OPERATING BUDGET

Citywide: Clairemont/Church/Commerce Bike & Pedestrian Improvements ($731,700) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older infrastructure

Citywide: Sidewalk Construction and Repair ($200,000)
(522210)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older infrastructure

Community & Economic Development: Public Art
($10,000) (522500)

Ongoing program – nominal impact on operating budget

Technology: Access Control & Security Upgrades at Park
Facilities ($165,000) (531111)

One-time cost – recurring impact on operating budget due
to annual maintenance fee but it will result in increased
staff and community efficiencies

Grounds Maintenance: Battery Powered Zero-Turn Mower
($24,000) (542100)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

FY 2023-2024 CAPITAL ITEMS

IMPACT ON OPERATING BUDGET

Buildings Maintenance: Glenlake Pool House Roof
($25,000) (522201)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance cost
associated with older equipment and infrastructure

Buildings Maintenance: Public Works Exterior Facility
Refresh ($35,000) (522201)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance cost
associated with older equipment and infrastructure

Buildings Maintenance: Public Works Building B Office
Suite Buildout ($50,000) (522201)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating budget.
Once buildout is complete and space is occupied, costs
associated with utilities will impact operating budget

Buildings Maintenance: Maverick Pickup Truck (1st of 3
Lease Payments) ($10,000) (542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Buildings Maintenance: Maverick Pickup Truck (1st of 3
Lease Payments) ($10,000) (542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Cemetery: Loader Backhoe (1st of 5 Lease Payments)
($22,000) (542100)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Citywide: City Facility LED Light Upgrade Project
($155,000) (522201)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Citywide: One Town Center Streetlight Replacement
($55,000) (522201)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance cost
associated with older equipment and infrastructure

Citywide: Electric Vehicle Charging Stations ($120,000)
(542301)

Ongoing program – nominal impact on operating budget.
Once buildout is complete and stations are providing
power, costs associated with utilities will impact operating
budget

Citywide: Crosswalk Removal at Clairemont Ave-Ponce de
Leon Ave Intersection ($15,000) (522500)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance cost
associated with older equipment and infrastructure

Citywide: Demolition - 1010 N. Parkwood Rd ($50,000)
(522500)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating budget.

Citywide: Demolition - 600 Commerce Dr ($50,000)
(522500)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating budget.

Community & Economic Development: Office Suite Furniture Replacement ($27,000) (531113)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating budget.

Engineering: Safe Streets for All ($240,000) (521200)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: N. Decatur Rd Corridor Improvements
($270,000) (521200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older infrastructure

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

FY 2023-2024 CAPITAL ITEMS

IMPACT ON OPERATING BUDGET

Engineering: Patching, Repair and Resurfacing/LMIG
($3,000,000) (522210)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: Coventry Rd Traffic Calming ($350,000)
(522210)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: Pavement Assessment ($50,000) (522210)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: Street Repairs ($75,000) (522210)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: Derrydown Way Sidewalks ($200,000)
(541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: Adair Street Traffic Calming ($350,000)
(541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: East Lake Drive and Parkwood Road Intersection Improvements ($500,000) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: Jefferson Place Pavement Failure ($350,000)
(541400)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance associated with older infrastructure

Engineering: Scott Blvd and Clairemont Ave Intersection
Improvements ($400,000) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older infrastructure

Fire: Replacement Quint Fire Engine (4th of 7 Lease Payments) ($179,900)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Fire: Reserve Fire Engine Replacement (1990) (4th of 5
Lease Payments) ($42,900)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Fire: SCBA Replacement (3rd of 4 Lease Payments)
($53,430)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Fire: Portable Radio Replacement (3rd of 5 lease payments) ($24,800)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Fire: Replacement Administrative Vehicle (1st of 3 Lease
Payments) ($12,500) (542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Fire: Helmet Replacement ($25,000) (531107)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Fire: Medical Supply Vending Cabinet ($19,500)
(5311107)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment and increase in staff
wellness

Fire: Virtual Reality Fire Extinguisher Training Unit
($14,500) (531107)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment and increase in staff
wellness

Fire: Station Furniture Replacement ($15,000) (531113)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older equipment and increase in staff
wellness

Grounds Maintenance: Brush Chipper (5th of 5 Lease
Payments) ($13,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Grounds Maintenance: Replacement Grapple/Knuckle
Boom Loader Truck (5th of 5 Lease Payments) ($30,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Grounds Maintenance: MARTA Plaza paver resanding
($15,000) (522201)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Grounds Maintenance: Postal Pond Bank Restoration
($100,000) (522203)

One-time cost – nominal impact on operating budget

Capital Projects
Fund
Capital
Improvements
(350)

CITY OF DECATUR

129

130

FY 2023-2024 CAPITAL ITEMS

IMPACT ON OPERATING BUDGET

Parking: Ford Maverick Truck with bed cover (1st of 3
Lease Payments) ($10,000) (542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Parks & Recreation: McKoy Park Skate Park ($365,000)
(531114)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Parks & Recreation: Ebster Field Turf ($1,000,000)
(541200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment and possible
increase in lighting utility fees

Parks & Recreation: Ebster Field Lighting (1st of 5 Lease
Payments) ($150,000) (541200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment and possible
increase in lighting utility fees

Parks & Recreation: Playground Equipment Replacement
($15,000) (531114)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment and reduce liability
for injuries

Parks & Recreation: Shuttle Bus (5th of 5 Lease Payments) ($12,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Parks & Recreation: Decatur Recreation Center Solar Array ($750,000) (541301)

One-time cost – recurring impact on operating budget due
to annual maintenance fee but it will result in increased
electrical efficiencies at the facility

Parks & Recreation: Oakhurst Park Waterline Replacement
($15,000) (522201)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Parks & Recreation: Hybrid SUV (1st of 3 Lease Payments) ($8,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Parks & Recreation: McKoy and Oakhurst Field Dugouts
($125,000) (541200)

One-time cost – decrease in annual maintenance costs
associated with older infrastructure

Police: Admin Vehicle (3rd of 3 Lease Payments) ($9,400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Police: Take Home Car Program Implementation (MultiYear Financing - Phase 1) (1st of 5 Lease Payments)
($160,000)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Police: Take Home Car Program Implementation (MultiYear Financing - Phase 2) ($415,000) (542200)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Police: Camera Data Storage ($58,350) (522500)

Ongoing program – increase staff efficiencies

Police: Automated License Plate Reader ($3,810) (4th of 5
Lease Payments)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Police: Electric Golf Cart ($10,000) (542200)

One-time cost – decrease in equipment rental fees

Public Works: Admin Vehicle (1st of 3 Lease Payments)
($12,750)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Technology: Fiber Network Replacement (5th of 10 Lease
Payments) ($274,800)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

FY 2023-2024 HOST ITEMS

IMPACT ON OPERATING BUDGET

Citywide: Sidewalk Construction and Repair ($200,000)
(522210)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older infrastructure

Citywide:  Traffic Calming Planning and Projects
($400,000) (541400)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older infrastructure

Community & Economic Development: Public Art
($10,000) (522500)

Ongoing program – nominal impact on operating budget

Technology: Server Replacement at Police Department
for Camera System ($52,000) (531111)

One-time cost – recurring impact on operating budget due
to annual maintenance fee but it will result in increased
staff and community efficiencies

Grounds Maintenance: Mini Excavator (1st of 5 Lease
Payments) ($17,100)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Grounds Maintenance: Tractor (1st of 5 Lease Payments)
($10,100)

Ongoing program – decrease in annual maintenance
costs associated with older equipment

Capital Projects
Fund
Capital
Improvements
(350)

CITY OF DECATUR

131

SPLOST FUND (320)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates



BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

SPLOST FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

SPLOST FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20

SPLOST FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21

SPLOST FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22

SPLOST FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23

SPLOST FUND
REVISED
2022-23

SPLOST FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24

760,465

5,913,001

5,833,974

6,574,181

7,631,301

7,719,512

7,917,382



313200
334100
361000
389000

REVENUES
Special Purpose Local Option Sales Tax
3,217,372
3,154,048
3,546,903
4,050,173
3,800,000
4,000,000
2,679,900
Intergovernmental
Interest
90,383
75,088
1,075
3,555
0
0
0
Miscellaneous

Total Revenue
3,307,755
3,229,136
3,547,978
4,053,728
3,800,000
4,000,000
2,679,900

EXPENDITURES
521200 Professional Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522500 Other Contractual Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523600 Dues & Fees
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Services

SUPPLIES
531100 General Supplies & Materials
533
0
0
938
0
30
0
531101 Bldg. & Fixed Eqp
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531300 Food-Subsistence & Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
533
0
0
938
0
0
0
Total Supplies

CAPITAL OUTLAY
541400 Infrastructure
184,097
123,891
80,202
54,903
4,330,000
950,000
6,025,000
Total Capital Outlay
184,097
123,891
80,202
54,903
4,330,000
950,000
6,025,000

DEBT SERVICE
581100 Principal
674,000
838,000
884,000
907,000
932,000
860,000
907,000
582100 Interest
72,825
118,182
72,656
49,290
24,980
95,588
49,290
584000 Cost of Issuance Long Term Debt
89,344
0
0
0
0
0
0
836,169
956,182
955,588
956,656
956,290
956,290
956,980
Total Non-operating

1,020,799
1,080,072
1,035,790
1,012,497
5,286,290
1,906,290
6,981,980
Total Expenditures

OTHER USES

611340 Transfer (to) from URA 2010 Debt Service
(750,240)
(747,710)
(668,428)
(630,420)
(632,160)
(632,160)
(632,920)
611345 Transfer (to) from URA 2013/2020 Debt Service (1,479,180)
(1,480,380)
(1,103,554)
(1,265,480)
(1,263,680)
(1,263,680)
(1,270,930)
393100 Proceeds from debt issuance
5,095,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Other Uses

2,865,580

(2,228,090)

(1,771,981)

(1,895,900)

(1,895,840)

(1,895,840)

(1,903,850)

Ending Fund Balance
5,913,001
5,833,974
6,574,181
7,719,512
4,249,171
7,917,382
1,711,452

FY 2023-2024 CAPITAL ITEMS
South Columbia MUP Construction ($1,630,000) (541400)-2 Phases
Railroad Crossing and Howard Avenue Improvements ($4,395,000) (541400)

132

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

CAPITAL PROJECTS FUND - CEMETERY CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT (355)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates
CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2019-2020

CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2020-2021

CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
ACTUAL
2021-2022

CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23

CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
REVISED
2022-23

CEMETERY
CAP. IMP. FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
168,457
143,914
129,549
123,729
100,629
107,923
72,923

REVENUES
Interest
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Facility Lease Payments
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Lot Sales
16,650
41,400
37,100
54,950
30,000
25,000
30,000
State Grants
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Loss Reimbursement
0
0
0
6,750
0
0
0
Miscellaneous
1,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5,000
0
0
0
0
Gifts and Contributions

EXPENDITURES
Maint. & Repair
0
0
0
0
0
0
50,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Capital Outlay
12,693
25,765
17,920
47,505
80,000
30,000
20,000
Cont. Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Claims, Losses
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Land Other Than ROW

TOTAL EXPENDITURES

12,693

25,765

17,920

47,505

80,000

30,000

70,000


18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
To Capital Imp Fund
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
To Stormwater Fund
To GO Bond Fund
(24,543)
(14,365)
(5,820)
(15,806)
(80,000)
(35,000)
(70,000)
To (From) Fund Balance


ENDING FUND BALANCE

143,914

129,549

123,729

107,923

20,629

72,923

2,923



FY 2022-2023 CAPITAL ITEMS
Cemetery: Landscape Maintenance $20,000

FY 2023-2024 CAPITAL ITEMS
Cemetery: Entrance Improvements $50,000
Cemetery: Landscape Maintenance $20,000



CITY OF DECATUR

133

2010 URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY FUND (340)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates






BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

URA
2010
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

URA
2010
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20

URA
2010
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21

URA
2010/2020A
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22

URA
2010/2020A
BONDS FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23

URA
2010/2020A
BONDS FUND
REVISED
2022-23

URA
2010/2020A
BONDS FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24

(1)

277,202

276,374

368,081

368,081

428,739

428,739


REVENUES
361000 Interest
0
0
0
90,996
0
0
0
381000 Rental Income
0
0
121,605
91,247
121,600
121,600
121,600
392200 Property Sale
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
393200 Federal Subsidy
291,017
283,903
212,555
0
0
0
0
389000 Miscellaneous
121,605
121,605
0
0
0
0
0
334,160
182,243
Total Revenue
412,622
405,508
121,600
121,600
121,600

EXPENDITURES
Total Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Supplies

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Total Capital Outlay

0

0

0

0

0

0

0


DEBT SERVICE
581100 Principal-RZEDB Series A
395,000
405,000
440,000
395,273
385,000
385,000
405,000
582100 Interest-RZEDB Series A
716,667
697,122
404,000
356,731
291,850
291,850
272,600
581100 Principal-Series B
25,418
26,942
28,560
0
32,090
32,090
34,020
582100 Interest-Series B
25,743
24,981
48,332
0
44,820
44,820
42,900
584000 Cost of Issuance Long Term Debt
0
0
139,201
0
0
0
0
Total Non-operating
1,162,828
1,154,045
1,060,092
752,004
753,760
753,760
754,520
Total Expenditures

1,162,828

1,154,045

1,060,092

752,004

753,760

753,760

754,520


OTHER USES

Transfer from (to) General Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from Stormwater Utility
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from Capital Improvements Fund 277,169
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from SPLOST Fund
750,240
747,710
668,428
630,420
632,160
632,160
632,920
Adjust Construction Retainage
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
393100 Proceeds from debt issuance series A
0
0
9,370,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,218,741
0
0
0
0
393400 Premium on Note
393100 Proceeds from debt issuance series B
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
582120 Refunding Escrow
0
0
(10,439,530)
0
0
0
0

134

Total Other Uses

1,027,409

747,710

817,638

630,420

632,160

632,160

632,920

Ending Fund Balance

277,202

276,374

368,081

428,739

368,081

428,739

428,739

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

2013 URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY FUND (345)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates






BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

361000
334100

URA
2013/2020
BONDS FUND
ESTIMATE
2021-22

URA
2013/2020
BONDS FUND
REVISED
2022-23

URA
2013/2020
BONDS FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24

156

518,267

518,521

763,420

357,300

357,320

129,820

401,903

403,425

380,916

362,815

362,670

362,670

367,020

0

0

0

0

0

450

0

0

0

0

13,202

0

3,050

0

CAPITAL OUTLAY
Buildings
0
0
4,954,310
0
0
0
0
Building Improvements
0
0
0
58,931
0
130,000
0
Total Capital Outlay

581100
582100
581100
582100
581100
582100
581100
582100
582120
584000

URA
2013/2020
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22

SUPPLIES
Bldg. & Fixed Eqp
0
0
0
13,202
0
3,050
0
Total Supplies

541300
541301

URA
2013
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21

EXPENDITURES
R&M Bldg Fixed Equip
0
0
0
0
0
450
0
Total Services

531101

URA
2013
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20

REVENUES
Taxes
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Interest
328
250
15
0
0
0
0
Intergovernmental
401,575
403,175
380,901
362,815
362,670
362,670
367,020
Total Revenue

522201

URA
2013
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

0

0

4,954,310

58,931

0

224,000

0

DEBT SERVICE
Principal-Series 2013A
470,000
490,000
505,000
710,000
540,000
540,000
0
Interest-Series 2013A
1,009,175
990,375
516,613
186,367
21,600
21,600
0
Principal-Series 2013B
210,000
220,000
230,000
235,000
245,000
245,000
0
Interest-Series 2013B
191,575
183,175
100,038
14,300
4,900
4,900
0
Principal-Series 2020B-City
0
0
185,000
200,000
205,000
205,000
780,000
Interest-Series 2020B-City
0
0
118,680
503,080
497,080
497,080
490,930
Principal-Series 2020B-School
0
0
30,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
280,000
Interest-Series 2020B-School
0
0
20,864
88,515
87,770
87,770
87,020
Payment to Escrow Agent
0
0
25,687,899
0
0
0
0
Cost of Issuance Long Term Debt
0
0
630,191
0
0
0
0
Total Non-operating

1,880,750

1,883,550

28,024,283

1,962,262

1,626,350

1,626,350

1,637,950

Total Expenditures

1,880,750

1,883,550

32,978,593

2,034,395

1,626,350

1,853,850

1,637,950

OTHER USES
Transfer from (to) Cap. Imp. Fund
517,778
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from SPLOST Fund
1,479,180
1,480,380
1,103,554
1,265,480
1,263,680
1,263,680
1,270,930

393100 Proceeds from debt issuance series 2013A
0
0
30,750,000
0
0
0
0
Premium on Note
0
0
989,022
0
0
0
0
393100 Proceeds from debt issuance series 2013B
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total Other Uses

1,996,958

1,480,380

32,842,576

1,265,480

1,263,680

1,263,680

1,270,930

Ending Fund Balance

518,267

518,521

763,420

357,320

357,300

129,820

129,820

CITY OF DECATUR

135

Public Facilities Authority Fund (344)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates






BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

PFA 2017
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

PFA 2017
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20

PFA 2017
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21

PFA 2017
BONDS FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22

PFA 2017
BONDS FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23

PFA 2017
BONDS FUND
REVISED
2022-23

PFA 2017
BONDS FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24

1,349,248

1,613,376

1,729,625

1,669,082

1,292,712

1,392,460

945,560


REVENUES
Taxes
361000 Interest
13,137
8,677
1,191
1,439
0
1,500
0
334100 Intergovernmental
0
0
0
22,050
209,000
0
209,000
371000 Gifts & Contributions
0
32,000
0
0
0
0
0
381000 Use of Property/Rent
27,224
55,691
41,097
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
118,925
0
0
0
383010 Insurance Reimbursement
0
0
0
389000 Miscellaneous
0
0
0
0
215,293
209,000
Total Revenue
40,361
42,287
23,489
1,500
209,000

EXPENDITURES
521200 Professional Services
522201 R&M Bldg and Fixed Equipment
522500 Other Contractual Services
523300 Advertising
523911 Bank Charges
Total Services

0
0
0
11,678
18,000
4,017
100,000
0
140,000
0
160,207
20,197
94,238
67,000
20,000
75,000
0
27,000
174,864
161,073
70,500
71,200
71,000
0
0
0
160
0
90
0
486
75
261.23
393
500
500
500
198,959
238,000
486
213,482
259,720
91,790
286,500


SUPPLIES
531101 Bldg. & Fixed Eqp
3,200
0
0
5,509
80,000
80,000
0
531107 Specialized Departmental Supplies
0
8,745
6,600
0
0
0
0
531114 Outdoor Furn and Equipment
0
0
0
0
20,000
50,500
30,000
531300 Food-Subsistence & Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
100,000
130,500
Total Supplies
3,200
12,475
6,600
5,509
30,000

CAPITAL OUTLAY
0
0
0
541100 Sites
0
0
0
0
541200 Site Improvements
0
8,500
9,932
131,498
200,000
200,000
200,000
541300 Buildings
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
541301 Building Improvements
0
0
54,518
81,837
439,000
260,000
209,000
Total Capital Outlay
0
69,063
64,450
213,335
639,000
460,000
409,000

continued


136

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024



PFA 2017
PFA 2017
PFA 2017
PFA 2017
PFA 2017
PFA 2017
PFA 2017

BONDS FUND
BONDS FUND
BONDS FUND
BONDS FUND
BONDS FUND
BONDS FUND
BONDS FUND

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE

2018-19
2020-21
2021-22
2023-24
2019-20
2022-23
2022-23
DEBT SERVICE
581100 Principal-Series 2017/2022 and Housing Bond
878,819
908,939
944,146
984,443
1,159,840
1,159,840
1,045,310
582100 Interest-Series 2017/2022 and Housing Bond
1,193,728
1,159,608
1,124,151
1,087,104
866,270
866,270
982,470
582120 Debt Escrow
0
0
0
27,521,346
0
0
0
584000 Cost of Issuance Long Term Debt
0
0
0
458,281
0
0
0
2,068,547
2,026,110
2,026,110
Total Non-operating
2,072,547
2,068,297
30,051,174
2,027,780

2,349,044
3,003,110
2,708,400
Total Expenditures
2,076,233
2,352,830
30,529,739
2,753,280
OTHER USES
Transfer from General Fund
1,000,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from (to) Cap. Imp. Fund
1,300,000
2,250,000
2,250,000
2,250,000
2,250,000
2,250,000
2,250,000
392200 Proceeds from Sale of Fixed Assets
0
0
0
4,060,000
0
0
0
393100 Loan Proceeds
0
0
0
21,855,000
0
0
0
393400 Premium on Note
0
0
0
2,064,627
0
0
0
2,250,000
2,250,000
2,250,000
Total Other Uses
2,300,000
2,250,000
30,229,627
2,250,000
Ending Fund Balance
Restricted-Grant
Restricted-Other
Ending Assigned Fund Balance

1,613,376

1,729,625

1,669,082

1,392,460

748,602

935,560

641,280

800,000
813,376
0

791,500
938,125
0

781,568
887,515
0

650,069
742,391
0

449,568
299,035
0

450,069
495,491
0

250,069
391,211
0


FY 2022-23 CAPITAL ITEMS
Hyatt Cottage Porch and Floor Repairs ($20,000) (522201)
Industrial Kitchen Upgrade ($80,000)(531101)
Wayfinding Signs Phase I ($25,000) (531114)
Playground Fencing ($15,500) (531114)
Invasives Removal ($200,000) (541200) (Grant)
Barn Interior Renovation ($180,000) (541301) (Cap Account)
Williams Roof Replacement ($33,000) (541301) (Cap Account)
Williams & Gillespie ADA Upgrades ($45,500) (541301) (Cap Account)
FY 2023-24 CAPITAL ITEMS
Postal Pond Assessment ($100,000) (521200)
Wayfinding Signs Phase II ($30,000) (531114)
Invasives Removal ($200,000) (541200) (Grant)
Creative Village at Legacy Park ($209,000) (541301)

CITY OF DECATUR

137

Tax Allocation District Fund (370)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates






BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

TAX ALLOCATION
DISTRICT FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21
0

TAX ALLOCATION
DISTRICT FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22
916,250

TAX ALLOCATION
DISTRICT FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23
1,448,250

TAX ALLOCATION
DISTRICT FUND
REVISED
2022-23
1,478,990

TAX ALLOCATION
DISTRICT FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24
2,094,970


REVENUES
Taxes
0
0
0
0
0
361000 Interest
0
0
0
0
0
334100 Intergovernmental
0
48,740
0
21,130
22,190
389000 Miscellaneous
0
0
0
Total Revenue
0
48,740
0
21,130
22,190

EXPENDITURES
Total Services
0
0
0
0
0
Total Supplies

0

0

0

0

0


CAPITAL OUTLAY
0
0
0
541200 Site Improvements
0
0
0
0
0
541300 Buildings
0
0
Total Capital Outlay
0
0
0
0
0

DEBT SERVICE
581100 Principal
0
0
0
0
0
582100 Interest
0
0
0
0
0

Total Non-operating
0
0
0
0
0
Total Expenditures

0

0

0

0

0


OTHER USES
Transfer from (to) General Fund
723,000
408,000
408,000
467,480
490,850
Transfer from (to) Capital Improvements Fund 162,510
106,000
106,000
127,370
133,740
Transfer from (to) DDA Fund
30,740
0
18,000
0
0

Total Other Uses
916,250
514,000
532,000
594,850
624,590
Ending Fund Balance

138

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

916,250

1,478,990

1,980,250

2,094,970

2,741,750

FISCAL YEAR 2023-2024

Capital Projects Debt
Service Summary
Capital Projects Funds are used to account for financial
resources to be used for the acquisition or construction of
major capital facilities and capital outlay.

City Direct Debt

Historically, the City has utilized debt cautiously, conservatively and sparingly. Until the
City issued general obligation bond debt in 2007, it had not issued long-term debt since the
1950s, instead relying on pay-as-you-go financing and short-term financing mechanisms.
Advantages of issuing long-term debt as opposed to pay-as-you-go financing include the
ability to complete more capital projects in a shorter amount of time and an allocation of the
project costs to the citizens that benefit from the projects.

Revenue Bonds

$62,072,000

Capital Leases

$1,111,000

Notes Payable

$11,720,000

Certificates of
Participation

$2,055,000

Total direct debt

$177,662,000

In November 2017, voters approved a referendum to replace the Homestead Option Sales
Tax (HOST) with an Equalized Homestead Option Sales Tax (EHOST). All proceeds from
the EHOST will be used to fund homestead exemptions from DeKalb County property tax
funds for general county operations and the hospital authority. In addition to the EHOST,
voters approved a Special Purpose Local Option Sales Tax (SPLOST) which increased
the countywide sales tax by one cent. The SPLOST proceeds will replace the funding
the City previously received from HOST. The SPLOST is anticipated to provide around
$20,000,000 to the City of Decatur over six years. Approximately $12,000,000 of the
SPLOST receipts are committed to debt service for the Urban Redevelopment Agency
series 2010A/2020A, 2010B and 2013A/2020B bonds. Prior to the bond refinancing in October 2020, this amount was $13,500,000. In September 2018, the City issued $5,095,000
in general obligation SPLOST bonds for the Atlanta Avenue Railroad Crossing Improvement project. Legislation passed in the 2023 State legislative session to place a SPLOST on
the November ballot to continue the tax for another six years.

as of June 30, 2022
General Obligation debt $100,704,000

In November 2020, through the Urban Redevelopment Agency, the City issued $5,500,000
in revenue bonds through a Series 2020C issuance to finance the purchase of the former
Samuel L. Jones Boys and Girls Club. The savings realized through the refunding of Series
2010A, 2013A and 2013B bonds made this purchase feasible.
As of June 30, 2022, the City had just over $177,662,000 in debt outstanding. This is a decrease from the prior year’s outstanding debt of approximately $188,897,000. This includes
$100,704,000 in general obligation bond debt for city and school capital projects from the
2007 bond issuance and the general obligation bond debt for school capital projects from
the 2016 bond issuance. In December 2010, the City issued $13,760,000 in Recovery Zone
Economic Development Bonds to cover the cost of construction of improvements to the
Decatur Recreation Center, Fire Station #1 and the Decatur Public Works facility. In December 2012, the City issued $5,415,000 in sales tax bonds on behalf of CSD which have
been paid in full. In April 2013, the Urban Redevelopment Agency issued $29,290,000 in
revenue bonds for the construction of the Beacon Municipal Complex to include the police
department, E911 operation, municipal court and an active living facility as well as a large
stormwater project on the site. The City Schools of Decatur (CSD) is financially responsible for $5,360,000 of the overall bond issue for the School’s administrative facility on
the site. In December 2014, the Downtown Development Authority borrowed $1,785,000
to purchase the historic Scottish Rite hospital property in the Oakhurst neighborhood.
The property was sold in February 2019 and the bonds were retired. In November 2015,

CITY OF DECATUR

139

Decatur voters approved a $75 million general obligation bond issuance for City Schools of
Decatur capital improvements projects. A separate millage rate was approved by the City
Commission in March 2016 to generate the revenue needed to make the debt service payments on the school bonds.
In March 2017, the City of Decatur Public Facilities Authority (PFA) was created as
part of an effort to acquire a seventy-seven acre property owned by the United Methodist Children’s Home, Inc. In July 2017, the PFA issued revenue bonds in the amount of
$29,625,000 and secured a low-interest loan from the Georgia Environmental Finance
Authority in the amount of $11,452,000 for the purchase of the property.
In April 2022, the City purchased approximately 7 acres of the southeast corner of Decatur
Legacy Park from the PFA in the amount of $3,827,737 for an affordable housing development. The land acquisition was financed through the issuance of a Series 2022 Housing
Authority Bond by the Decatur Housing Authority on behalf of the City in the total amount
of $4,060,000, an amount that included the “purchase price” and the costs of issuance. The
$3,827,737 was used to redeem the portion of the Series 2017 PFA bonds attributed to the
7 acres. At the same time as the property transaction, the PFA refinanced the remainder of
the Series 2017 PFA bonds with the issuance of Series 2022 PFA Bonds in the amount of
$23,919,626.
Other debt includes Certificates of Participation for the renovation and addition of City
Hall, the Georgia Municipal Association lease pool agreement and capital leases for equipment.
Many of the bond funded projects are described in the Capital Projects Narrative.
Under state law, the City’s outstanding general obligation debt should not exceed 10%
of total assessed property value. As of June 30, 2022, the City’s general obligation debt
equaled 3.5% of total assessed property value which remains within the legal debt limit.

Debt Refinancing
In February 2015, the City negotiated a decrease in the interest rate on the certificates of
participation that were issued in 2005 for the renovation and addition of City Hall. The
reduction will result in a net present value savings of approximately $132,000 over the term
of the loan.
In April 2015, in an effort to take advantage of favorable interest rates, the City completed
an advance refunding of the outstanding series 2007 general obligation bonds. The refunding will result in a net present value savings of approximately $2,600,000 or $155,000 per
year over the term of the bonds.
In October 2020, the City issued Series 2020A and Series 2020B in Urban Redevelopment
Agency bonds to refund all or a portion of Series 2010A, Series 2013A and Series 2013B
bonds resulting in a net present value savings of $7,640,000 or approximately $332,000 per
year over the term of the bonds.
In April 2022, the PFA refinanced the remainder of the Series 2017 PFA bonds with the issuance of Series 2022 PFA Bonds in the amount of $23,919,626. The PFA bonds refinancing combined with the issuance of the housing authority bonds results in a net present value
savings close to $1,600,000 or approximately $64,000 per year over the term of the bonds.

140

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Debt Service
Summary

Schedule of Debt Service Payments
A summary of scheduled debt service payments for FY 2023-2024 is provided below:
			Ending
2023-2024 PAYMENTS
Interest
Principal
Balance

Final
Maturity

Certificates of Participation (Capital Improvements Fund)

   14,560

180,000

380,000

2026

General Obligation Bonds (2007/15) (Debt Service Fund)

934,890

1,110,000

23,175,000

2037

School General Obligation Bonds (2016) (Debt Service Fund)

2,189,450

1,930,000

60,565,000

2042

Urban Redevelopment Agency Revenue Bonds
(2010/2020A URA Fund)

315,500

439,020

9,225,797

2038

Urban Redevelopment Agency Revenue Bonds
(2013/2020B URA Fund)

577,950

1,060,000

21,555,000

2044

Urban Redevelopment Agency Revenue Bonds
(2020C Capital Fund)

97,118

240,000

4,835,000

2040

Public Facilities Authority GEFA Loan (PFA Fund)

162,268

325,310

9,368,539

2047

Public Facilities Authority Revenue Bonds (2022) (PFA Fund)

761,750

0

21,855,000

2047

Housing Authority Revenue Bond (2022) (PFA Fund)

58,443

720,000

2,500,000

2028

GO Sales Tax Bonds (2018) (SPLOST Fund)

24,980

932,000

0

2024

Bond Ratings
The City’s bond ratings reflect its financial strength as evaluated by the bond rating agencies. When the City issues general obligation debt or other securities, rating agencies analyze the City’s current and future ability to repay debt. The City’s current bond ratings are
AA+ from Standard & Poor’s (S&P) Ratings Services and Aa1 from Moody’s Investors
Service. These are relatively high ratings for a mature city of this size. A positive bond
rating reduces the City’s cost of borrowing thus saving money for the City taxpayer.

Positive contributing factors to the City’s bond ratings include:
• Very strong economy
• Financial stability bolstered by conservative budgeting
• Diverse employment base
• Good management policies and practices
• Healthy fund balance levels
• Strong socioeconomic indices
• High-density development, including transit-oriented development
• Very strong budgetary flexibility and financial liquidity
• Recent significant tax base growth
• Strong wealth and income levels
The ratings could improve with continued tax base growth and a reduced debt burden.
Alternately, if the fund balance falls below policy limits, the debt burden increases, or if
revenues dedicated to paying debt service decline then the ratings could be threatened.

CITY OF DECATUR

141

DEBT SERVICE FUND (410)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates
DEBT SVC
FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

DEBT SVC
FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20

DEBT SVC
FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21

DEBT SVC
FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22

DEBT SVC
FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23

DEBT SVC
FUND
REVISED
2022-23

DEBT SVC
FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
4,057,859
4,254,832
4,287,375
4,768,286
4,776,528
4,973,177
4,740,387

REVENUES
Taxes-Conference Center
Taxes-GO Bond (2007/2015)
1,921,721
1,875,632
2,129,874
2,151,324
2,025,000
2,025,000
2,070,000
Taxes-School GO Bond (2016)
3,901,676
3,885,237
4,182,764
3,995,316
3,750,000
3,800,000
3,930,000
Interest
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Miscellaneous-School
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

EXPENDITURES
GO Bond Principal (2007/2015)
865,000
905,000
955,000
1,005,000
1,060,000
1,060,000
1,110,000
School Sales Tax Bond Principal (2012)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
School GO Bond Principal (2016)
1,165,000
1,300,000
1,440,000
1,595,000
1,760,000
1,760,000
1,930,000
GO Bond Interest (2007/2015)
1,030,681
1,013,381
995,300
976,181
956,090
956,090
934,890
School Sales Tax Bond Interest (2012)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
School GO Bond Interest (2016)
2,565,744
2,509,944
2,441,425
2,365,569
2,281,700
2,281,700
2,189,450
Loan Fees-School Board
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
General Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Bank Charges
2
0
0
0
0
0
0


Total Expenditures
5,626,427
5,728,325
5,831,725
5,941,750
6,057,790
6,057,790
6,164,340

To Fund Balance
196,972
32,544
480,913
204,891
(282,790)
(232,790)
(164,340)

ENDING FUND BALANCE
4,254,832
4,287,375
4,768,288
4,973,177
4,493,738
4,740,387
4,576,047
School Sales Tax Reserve
City GO Debt Service Reserve

142

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

(220)
1,010,957

(220)
968,208

(220)
1,147,782

(220)
1,317,925

(220)
1,225,502

(220)
1,326,835

(220)
1,351,945

Other
Funds
Budget FY 2023-2024

CHILDREN & YOUTH SERVICES FUND (235)
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM (E911) FUND (215)
SOLID WASTE ENTERPRISE FUND (540-4520)
STORM WATER UTILITY FUND (505)
CONFERENCE CENTER/PARKING DECK FUND (555)
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX FUND (275)
TREE BANK FUND (260)
CONFISCATED DRUG FUND (210)
COMMUNITY GRANTS FUND (220)
COMMUNITY ENERGY FUND (360)
SCHOOL ZONE CAMERA FUND (216)
AMERICAN RESCUE PLAN ACT FUND (222)
REVISED 2022-2023 and ADOPTED 2023-2024 BUDGET ESTIMATES

2022 Citizen Satisfaction Survey* responses:
Housing Unit types
Single-family detached: 52%
Building with 2+ apartments or
condos: 46%
Other: 2%

Presence of Older Adults in
Household
No: 76%
Yes: 24%

Housing Tenure (Rent/Own)
Rented: 34%
Owned: 66%

Gender
Female: 58%
Male: 40%
Identify in another way: 1%

Monthly Housing Cost
Less than $500: 4%
$500 to $999: 10%
$1,000 to $1,499: 16%
$1,500 to $2,499: 33%
$2,500 or more: 36%

Health Considered to Be
Excellent: 39%
Very Good: 41%
Good: 16%
Fair: 3%
Poor: 0%

Presence of Children in Household
No: 59%
Yes: 41%

* For a more detailed explanation of the demographic responses, go to
www.decaturga.com/citizensurvey.

Age
18 to 24 years: 2%
25 to 34 years: 29%
35 to 44 years: 22%
45 to 54 years: 25%
55 to 64 years: 10%
65 to 74 years: 12%
75 years or older: 9%
Race*
American Indian or Native
American: 2%
Asian, Asian Indian or Pacific
Islander: 8%
Black or African American: 14%
White: 77 %
Other: 4%
* Total may exceed 100% as respondents
could select more than one option.

CITY OF DECATUR

145

CHILDREN AND YOUTH SERVICES FUND (225)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates


CYS
CYS
CYS
CYS
CYS
CYS

FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
2018-2019
2022-2023
2022-2023
2019-2020
2020-2021
2021-2022

BEGINNING FUND LANCE
1,368,502
1,308,929
865,351
190,106
167,896
471,024

331100 Federal Grants
0
0
0
0
0
0
334100 State Grants
0
0
0
0
0
75,000
336000 Local Grants
0
0
3,500
0
0
0
347200 Recreation Service Fees
2,082,734
1,539,962
196,429
1,672,343
2,241,480
1,791,490
347500 Recreation Sale of Goods
0
0
0
0
0
0
347900 Other Recreation
0
0
0
0
0
0
361000 Interest Income
0
0
0
0
0
0
371200 Gifts & Contributions
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
381020 Recreation Facilities Rentals
TOTAL REVENUES
511100
511200
511300
512100
512200
512300
512400
512403
512600
512700

1,539,962

199,929

1,672,343

2,241,480

1,866,490

PERSONNEL SERVICES
Regular Salaries & Wages
585,872
654,364
632,315
561,627
590,120
576,150
Temp Salaries and Wages
557,009
481,079
33,684
305,933
726,650
404,100
Overtime Wages
11,617
9,711
1,038
5,495
24,630
10,780
Employer Group Insurance
209,230
159,219
213,325
207,815
221,390
205,000
Social Security (FICA)
69,705
68,742
39,953
53,208
83,410
60,950
Medicare
16,309
16,077
9,343
12,150
19,660
14,560
Retirement Contributions
44,165
50,743
53,432
51,999
53,150
54,250
HSA Contributions - Employer Provided
0
0
0
0
0
750
Unemployment Insurance
0
0
0
0
840
840
Workers Compensation
19,650
35,590
19,937
36,968
31,450
36,250
1,235,196

1,751,300

1,363,630

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
48,652
47,991
41,965
37,682
Instructor Fees
65,242
44,271
19,712
101,246
0
0
0
0
Official Fees
Repairs and Maintenance
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
0
195
0
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Landscape
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
0
0
0
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
195
195
0
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
0
0
0
0
Rental of Land & Buildings
0
0
0
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
3,990
714
130
447
Auto Allowance
1,314
386
0
2,222
Other Contractual Services
99,030
104,353
20,525
60,772
Insurance-Awards
0
0
0
0
Postage
16
14
0
58
Telephone
10,233
10,985
9,004
8,792
Advertising
0
0
0
0
Printing and Binding
1,218
807
0
93
Signs
0
0
0
0
Dues and Fees
472
493
80
4,720
Education and Training
12,282
22,616
394
15,893
Business Meetings
550
114
0
55
Licenses
29,438
5,036
0
0
Bank Charges
63,359
59,101
8,748
38,267

66,410
75,680
0
0
0
0
0
0
480
2,000
0
7,600
3,910
87,240
0
250
10,320
0
4,550
1,000
22,460
57,350
900
730
52,000

66,410
93,680
0
0
0
0
0
0
480
2,000
0
7,600
4,850
66,760
0
250
10,320
0
4,550
1,000
22,460
48,210
1,200
730
43,000

TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES

392,880

373,500

TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES
521200
521301
521302
522200
522201
522202
522203
522204
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522500
523101
523201
523202
523300
523400
523450
523600
523700
523701
523800
523911

2,082,734

1,513,556

335,991

1,475,526

297,077

1,003,027

100,753

270,247

CHILDREN AND YOUTH SERVICES FUND (225) continued

146

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

CHILDREN AND YOUTH SERVICES FUND (225) CONTINUED
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates




EXPENDITURE OBJECTS
531101
531102
531103
531104
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531111
531112
531113
531114
531115
531270
531300
531400
531500
531600
531700

CYS
FUND
ACTUAL
2018-2019

CYS
FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

CYS
FUND
REVISED
2022-2023

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Janitorial
989
934
451
1,640
1,360
Supplies-Landscape Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Office
6,767
4,070
879
3,670
6,000
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Specialized Dept
39,533
41,942
7,955
49,837
109,220
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
93
0
0
0
1,800
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
189
6
184
0
1,500
Communication Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
Computer Equipment
5,362
975
766
626
7,320
Computer Software
0
0
0
83
0
Office Furniture and Equipment
2,797
1,974
1,140
0
3,700
Outdoor Furniture and Fixtures
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Batteries
0
99
0
0
200
Gasoline
81
0
0
0
2,200
Food-Subsistence & Support
127,119
100,348
3,153
14,280
144,670
Books and Periodicals
368
531
0
65
2,110
Supplies-Purchased for Resale
0
0
0
0
0
Small Equipment
8,927
1,013
114
5,130
14,960
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
19,117
15,409
6,752
10,651
40,270

0
1,360
0
0
4,500
0
99,270
1,800
1,500
0
5,080
0
3,700
0
200
0
94,160
2,110
0
14,960
39,570

21,394

CYS
FUND
ACTUAL
2021-2022

268,210

CAPITAL OUTLAY
Sites
0
0
0
0
0
Site Improvements
0
0
0
0
0
Buildings
0
0
0
0
0
Building Improvements
0
0
0
0
0
Infrastructure
0
0
0
0
0
Machinery
0
0
0
0
0
Communication Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
Office Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
Vehicles
0
0
0
0
18,500
Furniture and Fixtures
81,418
43,638
0
0
0
Outdoor Furniture and Fixtures
0
0
0
0
0
Computers
0
0
0
0
0
Computer Software
0
0
0
0
0
Capital Outlay-Miscellaneous Equipment
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
0
0
0
0
0

TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY

81,418

43,638

0

0

18,500

30,000

TOTAL EXPENDITURES

2,142,307

1,983,540

1,125,174

1,591,425

2,497,990

2,035,340

Excess (deficiency) of revenues
391100 Transfers In from General Fund
Final (Cost)/Gain

(59,573)
0
(59,573)

(443,578)
0
(443,578)

(925,245)
250,000
(675,245)

80,918
200,000
280,918

(256,510)
200,000
(56,510)

(168,850)
0
(168,850)

Ending Reserved Fund Balance

1,308,929

865,351

190,106

471,024

111,386

302,174

Transfer to General Fund

302,174

541100
541200
541300
541301
541400
542100
542101
542102
542200
542300
542301
542400
542401
542500

167,299

CYS
FUND
ACTUAL
2020-2021

335,310

TOTAL SUPPLIES

211,342

CYS
FUND
ACTUAL
2019-2020

85,982


FY 2022-23 Capital Items
CYS: Gator SUV ($30,000) (542200)




CITY OF DECATUR

147

EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM (E911) FUND (215)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates






E-911
FUND
ACTUAL
2018-2019

E-911
FUND
ACTUAL
2019-2020

E-911
FUND
ACTUAL
2020-2021

E-911
FUND
ACTUAL
2021-2022

E-911
FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

E-911
FUND
REVISED
2022-2023

E-911
FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-2024

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
434,452
526,073
552,713
546,187
485,147
573,117
367,557

REVENUES
342500 E911 Phone Line Fees
156,856
83,572
130,888
123,676
125,000
125,000
525,000
342550 E911 Wireless Fees
409,362
410,257
393,630
388,160
400,000
400,000
0
313900 E911 Prepaid Wireless Distribution
79,849
87,532
102,626
110,992
105,000
100,000
105,000
TOTAL REVENUES
646,067
581,361
627,144
622,827
630,000


625,000

630,000

PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries & Wages
496,308
504,576
540,608
491,591
578,500
502,750
620,600
511200 Temp Salaries and Wages
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
511300 Overtime Wages
68,811
81,424
67,535
88,314
75,000
132,000
92,000
511400 Special Events Overtime
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
512100 Employer Group Insurance
164,410
125,772
170,585
163,200
221,000
218,000
217,200
512200 Social Security (FICA)
33,680
34,880
35,953
34,539
40,550
39,400
44,200
512300 Medicare
7,877
8,157
8,432
7,977
9,500
9,300
10,400
512400 Retirement Contributions
42,665
41,575
39,953
41,393
52,100
45,000
57,750
512403 HSA Contributions - Employer Provided
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
512600 Unemployment Insurance
0
0
0
0
840
840
910
512700 Workers Compensation
8,186
14,827
7,214
15,105
12,850
15,250
15,250
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

821,937

811,211

870,281

842,119

990,340

962,540

1,058,310


OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
521200 Professional Services
56,733
65,003
66,102
72,840
78,620
78,620
84,700
521310 Wireless Collection Fees
2,603
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
500
500
522200 Repairs and Maintenance
522201 Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
0
0
0
5,300
5,300
2,300
522202 Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
1,022
13,144
23,973
16,700
29,500
29,500
29,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522204 Repair and Maint-Machines and Tools
522205 Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
0
0
4,020
0
400
400
400
522321 Auto Allowance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
522500 Other Contractual Services
0
0
0
0
72,050
72,050
144,050
523101 Insurance-Awards
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523102 Insurance-Legal Liability
523201 Postage
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523400 Printing and Binding
595
0
384
640
1,200
1,200
1,200
523600 Dues and Fees
523700 Education and Training
7,505
1,817
3,713
6,281
13,000
13,000
13,000
523701 Business Meetings
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
523800 Licenses
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES

68,458

79,963

98,192

96,461

200,670

200,670

275,750

EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM (E911) FUND (215) continued

148

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM (E911) FUND (215) CONTINUED
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates


E-911
E-911
E-911
E-911
E-911
E-911
E-911

FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE

2018-2019
2019-2020
2023-2024
2020-2021
2021-2022
2022-2023
2022-2023

SUPPLIES
531101 Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
0
450
0
0
500
500
500
531102 Supplies-Janitorial
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531103 Supplies-Landscape Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531104 Supplies-Misc. Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531107 Supplies-Specialized Dept
0
0
444
521
500
500
500
531108 Supplies-Tires and Batteries
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531109 Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531110 Communications Equipment
622
941
0
500
2,000
2,000
2,000
531111 Computer Equipment
0
7,256
0
1,098
2,100
2,100
2,100
9,900
4,900
14,700
4,900
11,000
11,000
11,000
531112 Computer Software
0
0
0
248
1,000
1,000
8,500
531113 Office Equipment and Furniture
531400 Books and Periodicals
3,530
0
0
0
250
250
250
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531500 Supplies-Purchased for Resale
531600 Small Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
531700 Uniforms and Protective Equipment
0
0
53
0
0
0
0
TOTAL SUPPLIES

14,052

13,547

15,197

7,317

17,350

17,350

24,850


TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY

0

0


581200 Lease Payment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
582200 Interest

0
0

TOTAL DIVISION EXPENDITURES

0

904,446

0

904,721

0

983,670

0

945,897

0

1,208,360

1,180,560

1,358,910


Proceeds from Capital Leases
393501 Capital Lease Proceeds
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
391100 Transfers in
350,000
350,000
350,000
350,000
350,000
350,000
425,000

From Wireless Reserve
Excess (deficiency) of revenues
91,621
26,640
(6,525)
26,930
(228,360)
(205,560)
(303,910)


ENDING FUND BALANCE

526,073

552,713

546,187

573,117

256,787

367,557

63,647

CITY OF DECATUR

149

SOLID WASTE ENTERPRISE FUND (540-4520)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates

Beginning Fund Balance
311193
313010
334110
344000
344121
344122
344123
344124
344125
344126
344127
344128
344129
344110
344111
344112
344113
344114

REVENUES
Payment in Lieu of Taxes - DHA
General Sales and Use Tax
Intergovernmental-Federal/State
Sanitiation - Commercial
2011 and Prior Years Sanitation Fees
2012 Sanitation Fees
2013 Sanitation Fees
2014 Sanitation Fees
2015 Sanitation Fees
2016 Sanitation Fees
2017 Sanitation Fees
2018 Sanitation Fees
2019 Sanitation Fees
2020 Sanitation Fees
2021 Sanitation Fees
2022 Sanitation Fees
2023 Sanitation Fees
2024 Sanitation Fees
TOTAL FEE REVENUE

59,623
31
0
418,550
290
0
0
0
5,440
(220)
2,056
73,474
1,766,205
0
0
0
0
0
2,325,448

60,559
31
0
435,733
300
0
0
0
0
0
(278)
3,464
80,332
1,802,118
0
0
0
0
2,382,259

0
3
0
438,931
(3,454)
0
0
0
0
0
0
(754)
3,799
144,435
1,797,670
300
0
0
2,380,930

0
7
0
405,736
(600)
3,536
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9,312
97,268
1,871,671
0
0
2,386,929

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3,000
170,000
2,257,000
0
2,430,000

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3,000
210,000
2,278,000
0
2,491,000

0
0
170,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3,000
210,000
2,278,000
2,661,000

424,886
11,180
250
0
0
2,761,764

474,687
9,974
250
33,950
0
2,901,119

486,259
21,975
960
0
0
2,890,663

494,013
14,170
0
0
0
2,895,112

485,000
10,000
100
0
0
2,925,100

478,000
5,000
100
0
0
2,974,100

478,000
5,000
100
0
0
3,144,100

666,179
29,604
141,887
262,080
47,850
11,191
(36,752)
6,000
0
0
12,553
1,140,592

794,362
24,649
77,903
237,647
51,982
12,157
174,890
63,335
0
0
22,744
1,459,671

868,355
26,094
91,980
248,784
57,290
13,468
2,853
12,394
0
0
12,592
1,333,809

783,439
14,830
137,563
266,161
54,646
12,562
49,344
70,927
0
0
25,096
1,414,569

876,910
30,000
75,000
331,400
60,880
14,250
78,920
0
0
1,330
21,350
1,490,040

830,000
30,000
205,000
330,000
65,000
15,100
81,000
0
0
1,330
26,500
1,583,930

909,000
35,000
75,000
317,550
63,200
14,850
84,550
0
0
1,330
26,500
1,526,980

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
6,113
Solid Waste Disposal
424,512
Recycling Services
1,090
Repair and Maint-Bldg and Fixed Equipment
0
Repair and Maint-Communication Equip
0
Repair and Maint-Office Equipment
0
Repair and Maint-Vehicles-Outside Labor
95,906
Rental of Land & Buildings
0
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
105
Auto Allowance
0
Other Rentals
0
Other Contractual Services
36,089
Insurance-Awards
1,912
Insurance-Legal Liability
0
Postage
29
Telephone
2,396
Advertising
120
Printing and Binding
330
Dues and Fees
180
Education and Training
738
Business Meetings
0
Licenses
1,126
Bank Charges
0

6,044
329,804
0
313
429
0
74,010
0
0
0
0
56,088
0
0
14
2,465
60
684
170
1,206
0
850
0

6,190
431,405
0
0
0
0
63,486
0
0
0
0
0
16,172
0
0
2,626
0
0
215
0
0
800
0

6,985
344,464
63,034
0
0
0
45,597
0
0
0
0
74
0
0
0
3,401
0
319
220
0
0
1,083
0

8,500
380,000
154,000
0
600
100
60,000
0
400
0
0
1,500
5,000
0
0
2,600
240
5,000
1,600
12,000
3,700
880
0

8,500
380,000
154,000
0
600
100
70,000
0
400
0
0
1,500
5,000
0
0
2,600
240
5,000
1,600
12,000
2,000
880
0

8,500
380,000
154,000
0
600
100
60,000
0
400
0
0
1,500
5,000
0
0
2,600
240
5,000
1,600
12,000
3,700
880
0

344150-344157 Solid Waste Bag Sales
344160 Recycling Income-Sanitation
344190 Other Revenues-Sanitation
383010 Insurance Reimbursement
392100 Sale of Fixed Assets
TOTAL REVENUES
511100
511200
511300
512100
512200
512300
512400
512401
512403
512600
512700

521200
522110
522115
522201
522202
522205
522206
522310
522320
522321
522322
522500
523101
523102
523201
523202
523300
523400
523600
523700
523701
523800
523911

150

SOLID WASTE
SOLID WASTE SOLID WASTE SOLID WASTE SOLID WASTE
SOLID WASTE
SOLID WASTE
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE
2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23
2022-23
2023-24
616,731
1,032,603
1,273,340
1,552,434
1,436,084
1,645,823
1,300,213

EXPENDITURES
Regular Salaries & Wages
Temp Salaries and Wages
Overtime Wages
Employer Group Insurance
Social Security (FICA)
Medicare
Retirement Contributions
GASB 68 Pension Expense
HSA Contributions - Employer Provided
Unemployment Insurance
Workers Compensation
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

SOLID WASTE ENTERPRISE FUND (540-4520) continued

SOLID WASTE ENTERPRISE FUND (540-4520) CONTINUED
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates




TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES
531101
531102
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531111
531112
531115
531270
531300
531400
531501
531502
531503
531600
531700

SOLID WASTE
FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19
570,643

SOLID WASTE
FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20
472,136

SOLID WASTE
FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21
520,895

SOLID WASTE
FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22
465,175

SOLID WASTE
FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23
636,120

SOLID WASTE
FUND
REVISED
2022-23
644,420

SOLID WASTE
FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24
636,120

SUPPLIES
Supplies-Bldg & Fixed Equip
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies-Janitorial
1,206
781
702
1,124
6,300
6,300
6,300
Supplies-Pesticides and Herbicides
7
0
30
0
300
300
300
Supplies-Specialized Dept
10,303
15,746
9,428
17,349
36,000
23,500
76,000
Supplies-Tires and Batteries
18,010
22,746
20,777
23,838
46,500
46,500
46,500
Supplies-Vehicles and Equipment
72,914
94,291
40,968
52,519
48,000
77,000
48,000
Communications Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Computer Equipment
0
0
1,085
0
0
0
0
Computer Software
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Batteries
434
860
282
495
1,500
1,500
1,500
Gasoline
77,682
53,006
54,572
92,562
63,000
80,000
73,000
Food-Subsistence and Support
713
539
244
1,724
2,200
2,700
2,200
Books and Periodicals
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
8 Gallon Refuse Bags
23,806
22,597
23,184
28,928
24,000
32,000
24,000
15 Gallon Refuse Bags
45,287
29,984
35,814
53,664
55,000
79,000
55,000
33 Gallon Refuse Bags
37,073
44,546
23,333
42,607
48,000
67,000
48,000
Small Equipment
665
166
0
120
1,100
1,200
1,100
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
9,404
12,563
11,305
11,993
10,000
13,000
10,000
TOTAL SUPPLIES

297,504

297,824

326,923

221,723

342,000

430,100

392,000

CAPITAL OUTLAY
542200 Capital Outlay-Vehicles
243,820
251,399
119,800
0
150,000
412,000
130,000
243,820

251,399

119,800

0

150,000

412,000

130,000

2,252,560

2,481,031

2,196,227

2,206,667

2,618,160

3,070,450

2,685,100

NON-OPERATING EXPENSES
Depreciation
193,306
195,699
208,433
199,215
215,000
215,000
Annual OPEB Cost
0
0
0
0
0
0
Indirect Costs
150,380
231,440
275,880
367,180
368,580
376,000
Bad Debt Expense
(6,532)
(7,914)
41,564
21,745
0
0
Principal-Capital Leases
0
0
60,991
0
65,780
65,780
Interest-Capital Leases
0
11,525
9,264
6,916
4,480
4,480

215,000
0
436,600
0
52,380
1,950

TOTAL NON-OPERATING EXPENSES

TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
TOTAL OPERATING EXPENSES
561000
512850
551540
574000
581200
582200

TOTAL EXPENSES

337,155

430,751

596,133

595,056

653,840

661,260

705,930

2,589,714

2,911,781

2,792,360

2,801,723

3,272,000

3,731,710

3,391,030

NON-OPERATING REVENUE
982300 Capital Outlay to Balance Sheet
243,820
251,399
119,800
0
150,000
412,000
130,000
TOTAL NON-OPERATING REVENUE

243,820

251,399

180,791

0

150,000

412,000

130,000

TOTAL DIVISION

2,345,895

2,660,382

2,611,569

2,801,723

3,122,000

3,319,710

3,261,030

Retained Earnings

415,870

240,737

279,094

93,389

(196,900)

(345,610)

(116,930)

1,032,603

1,273,340

1,552,434

1,645,823

1,239,184

1,300,213

1,183,283

Accumulated Retained Earnings
FY 2022-2023 CAPITAL ITEMS

FY 2023-2024 CAPITAL ITEMS

2017 Street Sweeper (5th of 5 Lease Payments)
($43,720)

Solid Waste: 2019 40yd Front Loader for Commercial/Multi-Family Solid Waste Collection (5th of 5
Lease Payments) ($54,400)

2019 40yd Front Loader for Commercial/Multi-Family
Solid Waste Collection (4th of 5 Lease Payments)
($54,400)
Recyclables Collection Vehicles (2) (4th of 4 Lease
Payments) ($16,000)
2020 High Compaction Rear Loader for Residential
Solid Waste Collection (4th of 5 Lease Payments)
($52,000)
Kubota Residential Collection Vehicles (4) (2nd of 4
Lease Payments) ($30,000)

Solid Waste: 2020 High Compaction Rear Loader for
Residential Solid Waste Collection (5th of 5 Lease
Payments) ($52,000)
Solid Waste: Kubota Residential Collection Vehicles
(4) (3rd of 4 Lease Payments) ($30,000)
Solid Waste: 2022 Rear Loader for Residential Solid
Waste Collection (1st of 5 Lease Payments) ($52,200)
Solid Waste: Refurbished Street Sweeper (1st of 5
Lease Payments) ($30,000)
Solid Waste: Compost Collection Vehicle (1st of 5
Lease Payments) ($26,000) (542200)

CITY OF DECATUR

151

STORM WATER UTILITY FUND (505)

2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates
STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
REVISED
2022-23

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

16,099,480

15,788,108

17,155,160

17,868,194

19,284,300

19,790,295

21,234,475

334110
344142
344143
344144
344145
344146
344147
344148
344149
344260
344261
344262
344263
344264
344166

REVENUES
Intergovernmental Revenue
Stormwater Utility Fees-2012
Stormwater Utility Fees-2013
Stormwater Utility Fees-2014
Stormwater Utility Fees-2015
Stormwater Utility Fees-2016
Stormwater Utility Fees-2017
Stormwater Utility Fees-2018
Stormwater Utility Fees-2019
Stormwater Utility Fees-2020
Stormwater Utility Fees-2021
Stormwater Utility Fees-2022
Stormwater Utility Fees-2023
Stormwater Utility Fees-2024
Regional Stormwater Facility Fees
TOTAL REVENUES

0
0
0
0
0
828
2,363
62,479
1,252,676
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,318,345

0
0
0
0
0
0
300
2,451
62,323
1,329,437
0
0
0
0
0
1,394,511

0
0
0
0
0
5,700
5,800
2,365
281,261
1,633,557
0
0
0
0
1,927,323

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
17
10,839
276,702
2,869,343
0
0
77,133
3,233,668

570,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5,000
50,000
3,258,000
0
0
3,883,000

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
13,000
238,000
3,245,500
0
48,000
3,544,500

388,950
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
100,000
3,245,500
0
3,734,450

511100
511200
511300
512100
512200
512300
512400
512401
512403
512600
512700

EXPENDITURES
Regular Salaries & Wages
Temp Salaries and Wages
Overtime Wages
Employer Group Insurance
Social Security (FICA)
Medicare
Retirement Contributions
GASB 68 Pension Expense
HSA Contributions - Employer Provided
Unemployment Insurance
Workers Compensation
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES

178,420
2,622
4,351
74,730
11,130
2,603
20,765
0
0
0
6,335
300,956

140,613
1,610
3,766
56,276
8,973
2,099
12,331
(16,590)
0
0
11,474
220,552

152,450
0
6,199
77,047
9,633
2,270
(24,690)
10,912
0
0
6,296
240,116

108,864
0
3,274
73,558
7,076
1,625
11,934
0
0
0
10,991
217,321

182,360
4,200
4,250
91,800
11,300
2,700
16,410
0
0
350
9,350
322,720

177,850
0
4,500
84,500
11,300
2,700
16,650
0
0
350
11,750
309,600

201,500
0
6,500
83,400
12,900
3,000
18,780
0
0
350
11,750
338,180

Professional Services
Repair and Maint.- Machines and Tools
Repair and Maint.- Office Equipment
Repair and Maint. - Vehicles
Repair and Maint. - Infrastructure
Rental of Equipment and Vehicles
Contractual Services
Postage
Telephone
Advertising
Printing
Signs
Dues and Fees
Education and Training
Business Meetings
Licenses
TOTAL OTHER SVCS. AND CHARGES

398,186
328
0
70
96,819
1,758
21,580
0
1,088
140
0
0
587
150
0
50
520,756

281,009
0
0
3,497
1,095
1,559
3,365
46
1,065
60
763
0
570
87
0
0
293,116

109,051
40
0
2,112
46,848
0
912
0
1,120
0
607
0
175
0
0
50
160,916

23,389
281
0
0
154,511
0
19,197
0
1,118
0
0
0
1,230
4,050
0
150
203,926

642,700
2,000
0
2,000
200,000
3,000
20,000
30
1,400
200
500
0
600
4,000
0
200
876,630

642,700
2,000
0
2,000
150,000
3,000
65,000
30
1,400
200
500
0
600
4,000
500
200
872,130

650,000
2,000
0
2,000
200,000
3,000
50,000
30
1,400
200
500
2,000
600
6,000
0
200
917,930

521200
522204
522205
522206
522210
522320
522500
523201
523202
523300
523400
523450
523600
523700
523701
523800

STORMWATER UTILITY FUND (505) continued

152

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

STORM WATER UTILITY FUND (505) CONTINUED
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates
STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
REVISED
2022-23

STORMWATER
UTILITY FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24

531102
531103
531105
531106
531107
531108
531109
531110
531113
531115
531270
531300
531400
531600
531700

Janitorial & Cleaning Supplies
Landscape Maintenance Supplies
Office Supplies
Pesticides, Herbicides, Chemicals
Specialized Dept Supplies
Tires and Batteries
Vehicle and Equipment Maint Supplies
Communications Equipment
Office Equipment and Furniture
Batteries
Gasoline
Food-Subsistence and Support
Books and Periodicals
Small Equipment
Uniforms and Protective Equipment
TOTAL SUPPLIES

29
0
91
5
3,464
0
4,453
0
0
112
7,993
0
0
2,981
1,857
20,985

12
0
50
0
2,380
349
2,151
8
114
0
4,945
90
0
255
1,562
11,916

8
0
30
0
6,769
1,760
525
0
0
270
8,287
0
0
3,620
1,150
23,194

11
0
95
0
4,240
237
1,017
33
0
115
9,489
0
0
1,832
831
17,899

150
0
250
0
15,000
2,000
4,000
0
100
200
10,000
200
20
4,000
2,400
38,320

150
0
250
0
15,000
2,000
4,000
0
100
200
10,000
200
20
4,000
2,400
38,320

150
0
250
0
15,000
2,000
4,000
100
100
200
10,000
200
20
4,000
2,400
38,420

541100
541400
542200
542301

Capital Outlay-Sites
0
Capital Outlay-Infrastructure
20,500
Capital Outlay-Vehicles
26,659
Capital Outlay-Outdoor Furniture and Equipment
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
47,159

0
418,775
0
16,625
435,400

0
1,068,468
0
0
1,068,468

0
0
0
0
0

190,000
1,700,000
50,100
250,000
2,190,100

0
1,100,000
50,150
300,000
1,450,150

200,000
1,750,000
55,000
0
2,005,000

DIVISION TOTAL

889,856

960,984

1,492,694

439,146

3,427,770

2,670,200

3,299,530

Transfers to GO Bond Fund
Transfer to Capital Improvements Fund
32,885
Transfer from Capital Improvements Fund
0
Transfer from Cemetery Cap. Imp. Fund
(12,000)
Transfer from General Fund
0
Indirect Costs
330,400
Depreciation
407,325
Annual OPEB Cost
0
Bad Debt Expense
7,909
581200 Principal-Capital Leases
0
582200 Interest-Capital Leases
0
TOTAL EXPENSES
1,656,375

21,885
0
(12,000)
(1,290,000)
375,590
405,389
0
(3,402)
0
0
458,448

21,885
0
(12,000)
0
372,760
402,870
0
4,548
0
0
2,282,757

21,885
0
(12,000)
0
436,190
426,452
0
9,685
0
0
1,321,358

0
0
(12,000)
0
463,390
405,000
0
0
20,000
640
4,304,800

0
0
(12,000)
0
441,630
430,000
0
0
20,000
640
3,550,470

0
0
(12,000)
0
498,000
430,000
0
0
0
0
4,215,530

0
26,659
26,659

0
430,988
430,988

0
1,068,468
1,068,468

9,790
0
9,790

0
2,190,000
2,190,000

0
1,450,150
1,450,150

0
2,005,000
2,005,000

TOTAL DIVISION

1,629,716

27,459

1,214,289

1,311,568

2,114,800

2,100,320

2,210,530

Retained Earnings

(311,371)

1,367,052

713,034

1,922,101

1,768,200

1,444,180

1,523,920

ENDING FUND BALANCE

15,788,109

17,155,160

17,868,194

19,790,295

21,052,500

21,234,475

22,758,395

NON-OPERATING REVENUE
392100 Sale of Fixed Assets
Capital to Balance Sheet
TOTAL NON-OPERATING REVENUE

FY 2022-2023 CAPITAL ITEMS
Stormwater: Drainage Dump Truck Replacement (5th of 5 Lease Payments) ($22,000)
Stormwater: Roadway Milling ($100,000) (522210)
Stormwater: S. Columbia Mutli-use Path Bioswale Construction ($50,000) (541400)
Stormwater: Additional Bioswale Construction Project ($50,000) (541400)
Stormwater: Storm Water Capital Project Funding ($1,000,000) (541400) (Park Drive, N. Decatur Road, Derrydown Way and/or Brower Street)
Stormwater: Ebster Vault Clean Out ($300,000) (542301)
FY 2023-2024 CAPITAL ITEMS
Stormwater: F250 Crew Cab Truck (1st of 3 Lease Payments) ($16,750)
Stormwater: F250 Crew Cab Truck (1st of 3 Lease Payments) ($18,350) (542200)
Stormwater: Roadway Milling ($100,000) (522210)
Stormwater: FEMA Grant Matching Funds ($200,000) (541100)
Stormwater: S. Columbia Mutli-use Path Bioswale Construction ($150,000) (541400)
Stormwater: Additional Bioswale Construction Project ($250,000) (541400)
Stormwater: Storm Water Capital Project Funding ($1,400,000) (541400) (Park Drive, N. Decatur Road, Derrydown Way and/or Brower Street)

CITY OF DECATUR

153

CONFERENCE CENTER/PARKING DECK FUND (555)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates


CONF CTR/
CONF CTR/
CONF CTR/
CONF CTR/
CONF CTR/
CONF CTR/
CONF CTR/

DECK FUND
DECK FUND
DECK FUND
DECK FUND
DECK FUND
DECK FUND
DECK FUN

ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE

2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
2021-2022
2022-2023
2022-2023
2023-2024
REVENUES
Taxes
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Interest
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Service Fees
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Monthly Revenue
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total

0

0

0

0

0

0

0


EXPENDITURES
R&M Building/Fixed Equipment
0
164,159
0
0
0
0
0
253,677
22,679
13,072
9,552
15,000
15,000
15,000
Depreciation/Amoritization
Total

253,677

186,838

13,072

9,552

15,000

15,000

15,000

OTHER USES
Transfer to (from)
Debt Service Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Hotel/Motel Tax Fund
(163,690)
(164,159)
(128,453)
(249,150)
(225,000)
(290,630)
(290,630)
Capital Improvements Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Principal to Balance Sheet
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Prepaid Items
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Capital Reserve Deposit
163,690
0
128,453
249,150
225,000
290,630
290,630
Sale of General Fixed Assets
Total Net Assets
319,201
296,522
283,450
273,897
268,450
258,897
243,897

HOTEL/MOTEL TAX FUND (275)

2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates





HOTEL/MOTEL
TAX FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

HOTEL/MOTEL
TAX FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20

HOTEL/MOTEL HOTEL/MOTEL
TAX FUND
TAX FUND
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
2020-21
2021-22

HOTEL/MOTEL
TAX FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23

HOTEL/MOTEL
TAX FUND
REVISED
2022-23

HOTEL/MOTEL
TAX FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

REVENUES
Taxes
802,873
875,513
685,082
1,328,798
1,200,000
1,550,000
1,550,000

EXPENDITURES
Decatur Tourism Bureau
330,962
383,037
299,723
581,349
525,000
678,120
678,120
Transfer to Conference Center/TPD
163,690
164,158
128,453
249,150
225,000
290,630
290,630
Transfer to General Fund
308,221
328,318
256,906
498,229
450,000
581,250
581,250

ENDING FUND BALANCE
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

154

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

TREE BANK FUND (260)

2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates




BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

TREE
BANK FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

TREE
BANK FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20

TREE
BANK FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21

TREE
BANK FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22

TREE
BANK FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-2023

TREE
BANK FUND
REVISED
2022-2023

TREE
BANK FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-2024

62,151

62,674

63,154

57,258

47,968

48,508

18,688

REVENUES
Sponsorships
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Tree Bank Account
8,299
480
3,504
0
600
5,180
600

EXPENDITURES
Cont. Services
66
0
0
8,750
0
0
0
Capital Outlay
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Public Improvements
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
R&M Landscaping
0
0
9,400
0
0
35,000
6,000
R&M Machines & Tools
7,710
0
0
0
0
0
0
TOTAL EXPENDITURES
7,776
0
9,400
8,750
0
35,000

Reserve for Tree Plantings
34,783
481
29,187
481
29,247
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer to GO Bond Fund
Transfer from General Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0

To (From) Unreserved Fund Balance
0
0
0
0
0
0
589
480
28,706
(5,972)
25,846
0
To (From) Reserved Fund Balance


6,000

ENDING FUND BALANCE

62,674

63,154

57,258

48,508

48,568

18,688

13,288

Reserved For Tree Plantings
Unreserved Fund Balance

34,783
27,891

481
62,673

29,187
28,071

481
48,027

29,247
19,321

0
18,688

600
12,688

600
0
0
0
0

CONFISCATED DRUG FUND (210)

2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates




BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20

CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21

CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22

CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23

CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
REVISED
2022-23

CONFISCATED
DRUG FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24

15,608

15,062

15,065

22,326

22,286

22,288

22,238

REVENUES
Interest
7
3
1
2
0
0
0
Confiscated Currency
0
0
12,050
0
0
0
0
Sale of General Fixed Assets
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

EXPENDITURES
0
0
0
0
Public Safety
553
0
63
0
0
0
0
Other Contractual Services
0
0
4,600
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Specialized Dept
0
0
127
0
0
0
0
Capital Outlay - Computers
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Bank Charges
0
0
0
40
50
50
50

To Fund Balance
(546)
3
7,261
(38)
(50)
(50)
(50)

ENDING FUND BALANCE
15,062
15,065
22,326
22,288
22,236
22,238
22,188

CITY OF DECATUR

155

COMMUNITY GRANTS FUND (220)

2023-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates




BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

GRANT
FUND
ACTUAL
2018-19

GRANT
FUND
ACTUAL
2019-20

GRANT
FUND
ACTUAL
2020-21

GRANT
FUND
ACTUAL
2021-22

GRANT
FUND
ESTIMATE
2022-23

GRANT
FUND
REVISED
2022-23

GRANT
FUND
ESTIMATE
2023-24

75,451

65,496

65,496

65,496

294,496

294,496

250,996

REVENUES
Intergovernmental
0
0
0
250,000
0
0
750,000
Interest
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Misc. Revenues
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21-C Program Fees
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
REVENUE TOTAL

0

0

0

250,000

0

0

750,000

EXPENDITURES
PERSONNEL SERVICES
511100 Regular Salaries& Wages
0
0
0
0
0
0
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES
521200
521300
522206
522500
523400
523600
523700
523701

531102
531104
531105
531107
531109
531110
531111
531112
531114

542200
542400
541100
541200

0

0

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
Professional Services
0
0
0
21,000
23,000
0
Technical Services
0
0
0
0
0
0
R & M Vehicles - Outside Labor
0
0
0
0
0
0
Other Contractual Services
9,955
0
0
0
200,000
43,500
Printing and Binding
0
0
0
0
0
0
Dues & Fees
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Training Expenses
Business Meetings Expenses
0
0
0
0
0
0

23,000
0
0
156,500
0
0
0
0

TOTAL OTHER SVS. AND CHARGES

179,500

0

0

0

0

21,000

0

0

0

9,955

0

223,000

43,500

SUPPLIES
Janitorial
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Misc Maintenance
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Office
0
0
0
0
0
0
Specialized Departmental Supplies
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Vehicles
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Communications
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Computer Equip.
0
0
0
0
0
0
Supplies - Computer Software
0
0
0
0
0
0
Outdoor Furniture & Equipment
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

TOTAL SUPPLIES

0

0

CAPITAL OUTLAY
0
0
0
0
0
0
Vehicles
0
0
0
0
0
0
Computers
0
0
0
0
0
0
Sites
Site Improvements

0
0
0
750,000

TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

750,000

9,955

0

0

21,000

223,000

43,500

929,500

OTHER USES
0
0
0
0
0
0
Refunds
Transfer to Children & Youth Services Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from (to) General Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from Capital Improvement Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0
Transfer from Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

OTHER USES TOTAL

0

EXPENDITURE TOTAL

0

0

0

0

0

0

To (From) Fund Balance
(9,955)
0
0
229,000
(223,000)
(43,500)
(179,500)

Ending Fund Balance
65,496
65,496
65,496
294,496
71,496
250,996
71,496
Reserved 21 C Sustainment Fund Balance
UNRESERVED FUND BALANCE
65,496
65,496
65,496
294,496
71,496
250,996
71,496


FY 2023-24 ITEMS
Public Art at Sam’s Crossing Shopping Center ($250,000)
Infrastructure Improvements-Legacy South Housing Village ($750,000)

156

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

COMMUNITY ENERGY FUND

2023-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates




COMMUNITY ENERGY
REVISED 2022-2023

COMMUNITY ENERGY
PROPOSED 2023-2024

0

0

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

REVENUES
Intergovernmental
0
0
Interest
0
0
Misc. Revenues
0
0
Revenue Total

0

0

EXPENDITURES
Total Personnel Services

0

0

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
521200 Professional Services

138,350

Total Other Svs. And Charges

0

138,350

Total Supplies

0

0

Total Capital Outlay

0

0

Expenditure Total

0

138,350

OTHER USES
Transfer from General Fund
Other Uses Total

To (From) Fund Balance
Ending Fund Balance

138,350

0

138,350

0

0

0

0

SCHOOL ZONE SAFETY CAMERA PROGRAM FUND
2023-2024 Adopted Budget Estimates




SCHOOL ZONE CAMERA
SAFETY PROGRAM
ESTIMATE 2023-24

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE

0

REVENUES
Fines & Forfeitures
Interest

500,000
0

TOTAL REVENUES

500,000

EXPENDITURES
Professional Services
Supplies - Specialized Dept
Capital Outlay - Computer Software
Bank Charges

30,000
353,500
19,650
50

TOTAL EXPENDITURES

403,200

To Fund Balance

96,800

ENDING FUND BALANCE

96,800

FY 2023-2024 PUBLIC SAFETY ITEMS
Police Department Promtional Testing ($30,000)
Police Patrol Vehicle Equipment ($97,100)
Police Officer Safety Gear ($52,300)
Taser trade-in and upgrade ($113,000)
Police Policy Development Lexipol Software Implementation ($19,650)
E911 Netclock ($14,100)
Security Cameras for business district ($77,000)

CITY OF DECATUR

157

AMERICAN RESCUE PLAN ACT FUND (222)
2022-2023 Revised and 2023-2024 Adopted Budget


ARPA
ARPA
ARPA
ARPA

FUND
FUND
FUND
FUND

ACTUAL
ESTIMATE
REVISED
ESTIMATE

2021-22
2022-2023
2023-24
2022-2023

BEGINNING FUND BALANCE
0
4,737,910
0
(170,000)

REVENUES
Intergovernmental
44,353
4,797,910
803,360
8,571,260
0
0
0
3,000,000
Intergovernmental-CSOD
0
0
0
0
Interest
Misc. Revenues
0
0
0
0
REVENUE TOTAL
44,353
4,797,910
803,360
11,571,260
511100
511200
511300
511300
511900
512200
512300
512400
512600
512700
512901

EXPENDITURES
PERSONNEL SERVICES
Regular Salaries & Wages
0
0
0
Temp Salaries & Wages
0
0
0
Overtime - Salaries
0
0
0
Group Insurance
0
0
0
Pandemic Pay
0
0
486,430
FICA
0
0
20,040
Medicare
0
0
6,890
Retirement
0
0
0
Unemployment Insurance
0
0
0
Workers’ Comp
0
0
0
CARES Public Safety Reimbursement
0
0
0
TOTAL PERSONNEL SERVICES
0
0
513,360

OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES
521200 Professional Services
525
0
0
TOTAL OTHER SVS. AND CHARGES
525
0
0

0
0

SUPPLIES
531107 Specialized Departmental Supplies
22,489
35,000
5,000
TOTAL SUPPLIES
22,489
35,000
5,000

0
0

CAPITAL OUTLAY
Site Improvements
0
3,000,000
340,000
5,660,000
Capital Outlay Buildings
0
0
0
0
Infrastructure
0
5,741,260
0
5,741,260
Computers
21,339
115,000
115,000
0
TOTAL CAPITAL OUTLAY
21,339
8,856,260
455,000
11,401,260

EXPENDITURE TOTAL
44,353
8,891,260
973,360
11,401,260

To (From) Fund Balance
0
(4,093,350)
(170,000)
170,000
Ending Fund Balance
0
644,560
(170,000)
0

FY 2022-23 CAPITAL ITEMS
ARPA: Athletic Field and Track at Legacy Park ($170,000) (541200)
ARPA: Hybrid Meeting Technology at Decatur Recreation Center ($115,000) (542400)
541200
541301
541400
542400

FY 2023-24 CAPITAL ITEMS
ARPA: Athletic Field and Track at Legacy Park ($2,830,000) (541200)
ARPA: South Housing Village Public Infrastructure ($3,741,260) (541400)
ARPA: Storm Water Infrastructure Improvements ($2,000,000) (541400)







				158


0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Appendix A
Glossary
Budget FY 2023-2024

FISCAL YEAR 2023-2024

Glossary
The following is an abbreviated list of the specialized governmental budgeting and accounting terms used in this budget:

AAAG
ACRONYMS AT A GLANCE:

ACCOUNT NUMBER – A line item code defining an appropriation.

BVE

ACCOUNTS PAYABLE – A liability account reflecting amounts on open account owing to
private persons or organizations for goods and services received by a government.

Budget variance
explanation

CIP

ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE – An asset account reflecting amounts owing on open account
from private persons or organizations for goods and services furnished by a government.

Capital Improvement
Program

CSOD

City Schools of Decatur

ACCRUAL ACCOUNTING – A basis of accounting in which revenues are recognized in
the accounting period in which they are earned, and expenses are recognized in the period
in which they occur.

DEC

Design, Environment
and Construction
Division

AD VALOREM TAXES – Commonly referred to as property taxes, are levied on both real
and personal property according to the property’s valuation and the tax rate.

DOT

Department of
Transportation

AMORTIZATION – The reduction of debt by regular payments of principal and interest
sufficient to retire the debt by maturity.

FTE

Full-time equivalent

GAAP

Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles

GASB

Governmental
Accounting Standards
Board

GMA

Georgia Municipal
Association

LCI

Liveable Centers
Initiative

LMIG

Local Maintenance &
Infrastructure Grant
Program

OPEB

Other Postemployment benefits

PFA

Public Facilities
Authority

ANNUAL BUDGET – A budget applicable to a single fiscal year.
APPROPRIATION – A legal authorization granted by a legislative body to make expenditures and to incur obligations for specific purposes. An appropriation is usually limited in
amount and as to the time when it may be expended.
ASSESSED VALUATION – A valuation set upon real estate or other property by a government as a basis for levying taxes.
ASSETS – Resources owned or held by a government which have monetary value.
BALANCED BUDGET – A budget in which planned revenues available equals planned
expenditures.
BASIS OF ACCOUNTING – A system used by an individual government to determine
when revenues have been realized and when expenditures have been incurred. The City
uses the modified accrual method.
BASIS OF BUDGETING – A system used by an individual government to determine
when budgetary revenues have been realized and when budgetary expenditures have been
incurred. The City uses the modified accrual method.
BOND – A written promise to pay a specified sum of money, called the par value or principal, at a specified date or dates in the future, together with periodic interest at a specified
rate.

SPLOST Special Purpose Local
Options Sales Tax

BONDED DEBT – That portion of indebtedness represented by outstanding bonds.

TAD

Tax Allocation District

BUDGET – A service plan for a given period embodying estimated expenditures for
providing services and the proposed means of financing them. A balanced budget limits
expenditures to available resources.

URA

Urban Redevelopment
Agency
CITY OF DECATUR

A-3

BUDGET AMENDMENT – A revision of the adopted budget that, when approved, replaces the original provision and increases or decreases the budget appropriation.
BUDGET CALENDAR – The schedule of key dates that a government follows in preparation and adoption of the budget.
BUDGET ORDINANCE – The governmental action which appropriates revenues and fund
balances for specified purposes, functions, or activities for a budget period.
BUDGET PERIOD – The period for which a budget is proposed or a budget ordinance is
adopted. Normally coincides with the fiscal year.
BUDGET TRANSFER – A procedure utilized by City Departments to revise budget appropriations within the departmental operating budget accounts. Transfers monies from one
account to another and does not increase or decrease the overall budget appropriation for
the department.
BUDGETARY CONTROL – The control or management of a government or enterprise
in accordance with an approved budget for the purpose of keeping expenditures within the
limitations of available appropriations and available revenues.
CAPITAL ASSETS – Assets of significant value and having a useful life of several years.
Capital assets for the City of Decatur have a purchase cost of $5,000.00 or over and have a
useful life of more than one year. See also Fixed Assets.
CAPITAL OUTLAY – Expenditures for the acquisition of capital assets.
CAPITAL PROJECT – A project that results in the purchase or construction of capital
assets. Capital projects may encompass the purchase of land, construction of a building or
facility, or purchase of a major piece of equipment.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND – A fund established to account for the receipt and
expenditures of money from major capital projects.
CHART OF ACCOUNTS – A numbering system that assigns a unique number to each
type of transaction and to each budgetary unit in the organization. The City of Decatur
utilizes the Uniform Chart of Accounts for Local Governments in Georgia as mandated by
the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA).
CIP – Capital Improvement Program.
COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT – The report that summarizes
financial data for the previous fiscal year in a standardized format.
CSOD – City Schools of Decatur, the City’s independent school district.
DEBT – An obligation resulting from the borrowing of money or from the purchase of
goods and services over a period of time. Debts of government include bonds, time warrants, notes, and floating debts.
A. General Obligation Debt is secured by the pledge of the issuer’s full faith, credit, and
taxing power.
B. Revenue Debt is a bond, debt, or obligation for which principal and interest are payable
exclusively for the earnings of a government enterprise. This term can refer more broadly to
any state or local government debt that is not a general obligation.
DEBT LIMIT – The maximum amounts of gross or net debt that is legally outstanding debt.
DEBT SERVICE – Payment of principal and interest to lenders or creditors on outstanding
debt.
A-4

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

DEBT SERVICE FUND – A fund that is established to account for the accumulation of
resources for the payment of long-term obligations.

Appendix A
Glossary

DEFICIT – The excess of an entity’s liabilities over its assets or the excess of expenditures
or expenses over revenues during a single accounting period.
DEPRECIATION – Expiration in the service life of capital assets attributable to wear and
tear, deterioration, action of the physical elements, inadequacy or obsolescence.
DOT – Department of Transportation.
ENTERPRISE FUND – Enterprise Funds are used to account for operations that are
financed and operated in a manner similar to private business enterprise where the intent
of the governing body is that the cost of providing goods or services to the general public
on a continuing basis be financed primarily through user charges. Services accounted for in
enterprise funds are tangible, and it is possible to determine the extent to which they benefit
individual service consumers.
EXPENDITURES – Decreases in net financial resources. Expenditures include current operating expenses, which require the current or future use of net current assets, debt service,
and capital outlays.
EXPENSES – Decreases in net total assets. Expenses represent the total cost of operations
during a period regardless of the timing of related expenditures.
FIDUCIARY FUND – Those trust and agency funds used to account for assets held by a
local government in a trustee capacity or as an agent for individuals, private organizations,
other governmental units, or other funds.
FINANCIAL INDICATORS – Comparison of planned vs. actual expenditures, cost, obligations, receipts, allocations or losses.
FISCAL YEAR (FY) – The accounting period for which an organization’s budget is termed
the fiscal year. In Decatur, the fiscal year runs from July 1 to June 30 of the following year.
FIXED ASSETS – A financial resource that is tangible in nature, has a useful life of more
than one year, is not a repair part or supply item and has a value equal to, or greater than,
the capitalization threshold of $5000. See also Capital Assets.
FTE – Full-time equivalent-in reference to personnel.
FUND – A fund is an independent financial and accounting entity. It has a balanced set
of accounts and records, cash and other resources together with all related liabilities and
residual equities or balances which are segregated for the purpose of carrying on specific
activities or attaining certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions
or limitations. Though funds are independent entities with the financial records of a government, there need not be physical segregation of assets.
FUND ACCOUNTS – All accounts necessary to set forth the financial position and results
of operations of a fund.
FUND BALANCE – The difference between assets and liabilities on the balance sheet.
GAAP – See Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
GASB – See Governmental Accounting Standards Board.
GENERAL FUND – This fund accounts for the revenues and activities not required by law
or administrative decision to be accounted for in a special fund. Ordinarily, the General
Fund has a great variety of revenues and is used to finance many more activities than any
other fund. The General Fund provides general-purpose governmental services.

CITY OF DECATUR

A-5

GENERAL OBLIGATION (GO) BONDS – Bonds that are secured by the issuer’s full
faith and credit pledge. Most GO bonds are backed by the issuer’s ability to level an ad
valorem tax in an amount sufficient to meet debt service requirements.
GENERAL REVENUE – The revenue of a government other than those derived from and
retained in an enterprise. If a portion of the net income in a Proprietary or Enterprise Fund
is contributed to another non-enterprise fund, such as the General Fund, the amount transferred constitutes general revenue to the government.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES (GAAP) – Uniform minimum,
standards used by state and local governments for financial accounting, recording and reporting, encompassing the conventions, rules and procedures that define accepted accounting principles; established by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB).
GMA – Georgia Municipal Association, organization representing municipalities in Georgia.
GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD (GASB) – The body that
sets accounting standards specifically for governmental entities at the state and local level.
GOVERNMENTAL FINANCE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (GFOA) – Professional
association of state/provincial and local finance officers in the Unites States and Canada
dedicated to the sound management of government financial resources.
GRANTS – A financial gift, donation or award that is made from a funding source, usually
a governmental unity, to the City for the acquisition of goods, services or land. The grant
award agreement defines the City’s responsibilities and duties to be exchanged for the grant.
Grants are often earmarked for a specific purpose of program.
INTERNAL SERVICE FUNDS – A fund used to account for the financing of goods or
services provided by one department to other departments within the City on a cost-reimbursement basis.
INVESTMENTS – Securities and real estate held for production of revenue in the form of
interest, dividend, rentals or lease payments. The term does not include fixed assets used in
governmental operations.
LCI (Livable Centers Initiative) – A grant program sponsored by the Atlanta Regional
Commission that incentivizes local jurisdictions to re-envision their communities as
vibrant,walkable places that offer increased mobility options, encourage healthy lifestyles
and provide improved access to jobs and services.
LEVY – To impose taxes, special assessments of service charges for the support of governmental activities.
LINE-ITEM BUDGET – A budget format in which departmental outlays are grouped according to the items that will be purchased, with one item or group of items on each line.
LMIG – Local Maintenance & Infrastructure Grant Program – Grant program sponsored by
the Georgia Department of Transportation.
LONG-TERM DEBT – Debt with a maturity of more than one year after the date of issuance.
MAJOR FUND – Funds with revenues, expenditures, assets or liabilities that make up at
least 10 percent of the total for the fund category or type and at least five percent of the
aggregate amount of all governmental and enterprise funds. The general fund is always
considered a major fund.
MILLAGE RATE – The rate used in calculating taxes based upon the value of property,
A-6

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

expressed in mills per dollar of property value.
MISSION – The reason or purpose for the organizational unit’s existence.

Appendix A
Glossary

NET INCOME – Enterprise Fund in excess of operating revenues, non-operating revenues,
and operating transfers-in over operating expenses, non-operating transfers-out.
NON-MAJOR FUND – A fund in which the revenues, expenditures, assets or liabilities
do not make up at least 10 percent of the total for the fund category or type and at least five
percent of the aggregate amount of all governmental and enterprise funds.
OBJECTIVES – The specified end result expected and can include the time at which it will
be achieved.
OPEB – Other Post-employment benefits.
OPERATING EXPENSES – Enterprise Fund expenses that are directly related to the fund’s
primary service activities.
OPERATING INCOME – The excess of Enterprise Fund operating revenues over operating expenses.
OPERATING REVENUES – Enterprise Fund revenues that are directly related to the
fund’s primary service activities. They consist of user charges for services.
PFA – Public Facilities Authority.
PROPRIETARY FUND – Used to account for a government’s ongoing organizations and
activities that are similar to those often found in the private sector (enterprise and internal
service funds). All assets, liabilities, equities, revenues, expenses and transfers relating to
the government’s business and quasi-business activities – where net income and capital
maintenance are measured – are accounted for through proprietary funds.
REVENUES – Increases in governmental fund type net current assets from other than expenditure refunds and residual equity transfers.
SPLOST – Special Purpose Local Options Sales Tax.
TAX ALLOCATION DISTRICT – A TAD is a tool used to pay for infrastructure and other
improvements in underdeveloped or blighted areas so that property becomes productive and
enhances the surrounding neighborhoods
TAX DIGEST – The total assessed value of all real estate property, motor vehicles, mobile
homes, timber and heavy-duty equipment in the City of Decatur, Georgia.
TAX RATE LIMIT – The maximum rate at which a government may levy a tax. Overall tax
rate limits usually restrict levies for all purposes and of all governments, state or local, having jurisdiction in a given area. Taxes are levied via a Tax Levy Ordinance.
TAXES – Compulsory charges levied by a government for the purpose of financing services
performed for a common benefit. This term does not include specific charges made against
particular persons or property for current or permanent benefits such as special assessments.
UNIFORM CHART OF ACCOUNTS – State mandated financial reporting format for
governments. See “Chart of Accounts.”
URA – Urban Redevelopment Agency.

CITY OF DECATUR

A-7

This page left blank to preserve
double-page layouts

Appendix B
Financial Policies
Budget FY 2023-2024

FISCAL YEAR 2023-2024

Financial
Policies
I. Purpose and Objective
The City of Decatur has a responsibility to carefully account for public funds, to manage municipal finances wisely, and to plan for the provision of public services. Sound
financial policies are necessary to carry out these objectives responsibly and efficiently.
The City of Decatur’s financial policies set forth below are the basic framework for its
overall financial management. These policies incorporate long-standing principles and
traditions that have served the City well in maintaining a sound and stable financial
condition.
The broad purpose of the following financial policies is to enable the City of Decatur
to achieve and maintain a long-term positive financial condition. The key values of the
City’s financial management include fiscal integrity, prudence, planning, accountability,
honesty, and openness. Specifically, the purpose is to provide guidelines for planning,
directing, and maintaining day-to-day financial affairs.

II. Operating Budget
A. Preparation
Budgeting is an essential element of the financial planning, control, and evaluation process of municipal government. The “operating budget” is the City’s annual
financial operating plan. The annual budget includes the operating departments
of the general fund, special revenue fund, debt service fund, capital project fund,
enterprise funds, and other approved funds that may be established as needed. The
budget encompasses a fiscal year that begins on July 1 and ends on June 30. The
budget is prepared by the City Manager with the cooperation of all City departments, on a basis that is consistent with generally accepted accounting principles.
1.

Proposed Budget – A proposed budget shall be prepared annually by the City
Manager with participation of all City Departments consistent with provisions
of the City Charter and state budget laws.
a.

The budget shall include (1) revenues, (2) personnel costs, (3) operating
and maintenance supply costs, (4) general services costs, and (5) capital
and other (non-capital) costs.

b.

The budget review process shall include public hearings. At the time the
proposed budget is transmitted to members of the City Commission by
the City Manager, a copy will be made available for public inspection at
City Hall and advertised in a local newspaper of general circulation. No
earlier than seven days after the proposed budget is transmitted to the
City Commission and at least seven days in advance of budget adoption,

CITY OF DECATUR

B-3

a public hearing takes place to give the public an opportunity to comment
on the proposed budget. Notice of public hearing must be advertised at
least seven days in advance of the public hearing.
c.

2.

The City Commission, prior to the first day of the fiscal year, will
adopt an annual budget at a public meeting. The annual budget shall be
advertised at least one week prior to the meeting. The proposed budget
is prepared by the City Manager and transmitted to members of the City
Commission for its review with sufficient time given for the City Commission to address policy and fiscal issues.

Adoption – The budget shall be adopted by the approval of a budget resolution that specifies the anticipated revenues by appropriate categories, the proposed expenditure totals for each department, each non-departmental expense,
and for each fund covered by the budget. Amendments to the budget must be
approved by resolution. The budget shall be adopted at the fund/department
level, which is the legal level of budgetary control. The current year’s budget
may be adjusted to reflect changes in local economy, changes in priorities or
services needs, receipt of unbudgeted revenues and for unanticipated expenditures.

B. Balanced Budget
The operating budget will be balanced with anticipated revenues, including appropriated unencumbered surplus, equal to proposed expenditures. All funds within
the budget shall also be balanced.

C. Planning
The City will utilize a decentralized budget process. All departments will be given
an opportunity to participate in the budget process and submit funding requests to
the City Manager.

D. Reporting
Periodic financial reports will be prepared and distributed to the City Manager
and Department Heads. These reports allow Department Heads to manage their
budgets and enable the City Manager to monitor and control the budget. Summary
financial and budgetary reports should be presented by the City Manager to the
City Commission monthly.

E. Control and Accountability
Each Department Head is responsible for ensuring that his/her department expenditures do not exceed budgeted funds. Departments cannot exceed appropriations
described in the budget. Failure to achieve budgetary control will be evaluated and
investigated by the City Manager.

F. Performance Measures
The City integrates performance measures and objectives into the budget document. The City will also develop a system to monitor performance in meeting
these objectives.

G. Budget Transfers
Contingent upon remaining within the confines of the total department budget,
each Department Head has the authority to recommend budget transfers to the City
Manager. Funds within departmental budget line items can be transferred upon the
recommendation of the Department Head and with approval of the City Manager.
B-4

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

III. Capital Budget Policies and Capital Improvement
Plan

Appendix B
Financial Policies

A. Scope
A capital projects plan will be developed and updated annually. A five-year Capital
Improvement Program will assist in the planning, acquisition, and financing of
capital projects. A major capital project is generally defined as a non-recurring
capital expenditure that has an expected useful life of more than 10 years and an
estimated total cost of $25,000 or more. Examples include parks improvements,
streetscapes, computer systems, trucks, loaders, and expansion of facilities.
Major capital projects will be budgeted in the Capital Improvement Fund reflecting all available resources. With the involvement of responsible departments, the
City Manager will prepare the capital budget annually. The City’s capital budget
will be adopted with the operating budget.

B. Control
All capital expenditures must be approved as part of each department budget or
in the Capital Improvement Fund. Before committing to a capital improvement
project, the City Manager or his/her designee must verify fund availability.

C. Program Planning
The capital budget provides annual funding for long-term capital projects identified in the Capital Improvement Program (CIP). During the annual budget process,
each department submits its budget request including operating and capital needs.
Upon review of the requests, major capital projects are placed in the capital improvements fund. Other capital outlay is placed in the department’s operating budget. Capital outlay is generally defined as an individual item of excess of $5,000
with a life expectancy of more than two years but less than 10 years.
Citywide capital improvements are assessed and prioritized based on the City’s
objectives and goals, the City’s comprehensive work plan, and the City’s strategic
plan.

D. Timing
At the beginning of the fiscal year, the City Manager or his/her designee will work
with Department Heads to schedule the appropriate timing of capital purchases to
ensure the availability of funds.

E. Reporting
Periodic financial reports will be provided to enable the City Manager to monitor
and control the capital budget and to enable the Department Heads to manage their
capital budgets.

IV. Debt
A. Policy Statement
Debt results when one borrows from an individual or an institution. The borrower
receives funds to acquire resources for current use with an obligation for repayment later. The debt from borrowing generally must be repaid with interest.
The City of Decatur recognizes that to maintain flexibility in responding to changing service priorities, revenue inflows, and cost structures, a debt management
strategy is required. The City strives to balance service demands and the amount
of debt incurred. The City realizes that failure to meet the demands of growth may

CITY OF DECATUR

B-5

inhibit its continued economic viability, but also realizes that too much debt may
have detrimental effects as well.
The goal of the City’s debt policy is to maintain a sound fiscal position and to protect the credit rating of the City. When the City of Decatur utilizes debt financing,
it will ensure the debt is financed soundly and conservatively.

B. Conditions for Using Debt
Debt financing of capital improvements and equipment will be done only when
one or more of the following four conditions exist:
1.

When non-continuous projects (those not requiring continuous annual appropriations) are desired;

2.

When it can be determined that future users will receive a benefit from the
improvement;

3.

When it is necessary to provide basic services to residents and taxpayers;

4.

When total debt, including that issued by overlapping government entities,
does not constitute an unreasonable burden to residents and taxpayers.

C. Sound Financing of Debt
When the City utilizes debt financing, it will ensure that the debt is soundly
financed by:
1.

Taking a prudent and cautious stance toward debt, incurring debt only when
necessary;

2.

Conservatively projecting the revenue sources that will be used to pay the
debt;

3.

Insuring that the term of any long-term debt incurred by the City shall not
exceed the expected useful life of the asset for which the debt is incurred and
shall be limited to capital improvements only;

4.

Determining that the benefits of the improvement exceed the costs, including
interest costs;

5.

Maintaining a debt service coverage ratio which ensures that combined debt
service requirements will not exceed revenues pledged for the payment of
debt;

6.

Analyzing the impact of debt service on total annual fixed costs before
bonded long-term debt is issued; and,

7.

Maintaining total debt service for general obligation debt that does not exceed
10 percent of the net operating revenues. Net operating revenues are all general fund revenues available after accounting for transfers between other City
funds.

D. Post-Issuance Tax Compliance for Tax-Exempt Debt
The City shall comply with all federal and state laws, rules and regulations related
to the issuance of debt.
1.

B-6

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Responsibility- The City Manager shall be responsible for reviewing the requirements and responsibilities of the City under the Policy with bond counsel
on or before the closing date of any Debt issued by the City to include preparation of disclosure documents such as the Preliminary Official Statement.

Proper personnel shall have the opportunity to review the Preliminary Official
Statement for completeness and accuracy. Continuing disclosure obligations
shall also be met.
2.

Dissemination and Training- The policy shall be disseminated to all relevant
personnel in the City and to the auditor. Appropriate training will be provided
to all personnel directly involved in the administration of tax-exempt debt to
ensure they comply with the provisions of the Policy. The City Manager shall
consult as appropriate with qualified attorneys with respect to the content of
such training.

3.

Review- The policy shall be reviewed and revised annually by the City Manager and redistributed to all relevant personnel in the City and to the auditor
as needed. The City Manager shall annually conduct a due diligence review
of all Debt currently outstanding to ensure proper compliance with each of the
provisions of the Policy. If the City Manager discovers non-compliance with
any provisions of the Policy, steps necessary to correct the noncompliance
will be taken within ten (10) business days of the conclusion of the annual due
diligence review. Records of all corrective action taken shall be retained in
accordance with the Policy.

4.

Provisions
a.

Record Keeping – All records relating to the Debt needed to comply
with Section 6001 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended
(the “Code”) shall be maintained. These records shall be kept in paper or
electronic form and shall include, among other things, (i) basic records
relating to the transaction (including the bond documents, the opinion
of bond counsel, etc.), (ii) documents evidencing the expenditure of the
proceeds of the Debt, (iii) documentation evidencing the use of Debtfinanced property by public and private entities (e.g., copies of management contracts, leases and research agreements) and (iv) documentation
pertaining to any investment of Debt proceeds (including the purchase
and sale of securities, SLG subscriptions, yield calculations for each class
of investments, actual investment income received from the investment
of the proceeds of the Debt, guaranteed investment contracts and rebate
calculations. Such records must be maintained as long as the Debt is
outstanding, plus three years after the final payment or redemption date
of the respective Debt.

b.

Use of Proceeds – A list of all property financed with the proceeds of the
Debt shall be created and maintained. The use of such property shall be
monitored to ensure that such use does not constitute “private business
use” within the meaning of the Code. Without limiting the foregoing,
each contract, including but not limited to management contracts and
leases, relating to such property shall be reviewed by legal counsel prior
to the execution of such contract. The list of property shall be reviewed at
least annually to ensure that none of the property has been sold.

c.

Remedial Action – In the event that property financed with the proceeds
of the Debt is used in a manner that constitutes “private business use” or
the property is sold, the remediation provisions of Treasury Regulation §
1.141-12 shall be carried out in consultation with bond counsel.

d.

Yield Restriction – If bond counsel advises that a fund or account needs
to be yield restricted (i.e., not invested at a yield in excess of the Debt),

Appendix B
Financial Policies

CITY OF DECATUR

B-7

the moneys on deposit in such fund or account shall be invested in United
States Treasury Obligations – State and Local Government Series, appropriate “yield reduction payments” shall be made if permitted by the Code
or the City Manager shall establish other procedures to ensure that such
fund or account is yield restricted.
e.

Rebate – At the time the Debt is issued, the City Manager shall determine
if he or she reasonably expects that one of the arbitrage rebate exceptions will be satisfied. If the arbitrage rebate exception relates to the time
period over which the proceeds of the Debt are spent, the City Manager
shall verify that the appropriate expenditures have been made at each
milestone. If one of the milestones is not satisfied or the City Manager
does not reasonably expect that one of the arbitrage rebate exceptions
will be satisfied, an outside arbitrage rebate consultant shall be retained
unless the City Manager has determined that positive arbitrage will not
be earned.

V. Accounting, Audits, and Financial Reporting
The City shall maintain a system of financial monitoring, control, and reporting for all
operations and funds in order to provide effective means of ensuring that overall City
goals and objective are met.

A. Accounting Records and Reporting
The City will maintain its accounting records in accordance with state and federal
laws and regulations and in a manner to facilitate an efficient audit process. The
City will report its financial condition and results of operations in accordance with
state regulations and Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) described
in Governmental Accounting, Auditing, and Financial Reporting (GAAFR). The
City’s accounts shall be kept in such a manner as to show fully the financial conditions of the City. In addition, the books shall be open to the public during business
hours.
The City will maintain a Chart of Accounts that complies with requirements of the
State of Georgia and is in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.

B. Auditing
An independent auditor or auditing firm will annually perform the City’s financial
audit. The auditor must be a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) that can demonstrate that s/he has the capability to conduct the City’s audit in accordance with
generally accepted auditing standards. The auditor’s opinions will be supplemented in the City’s Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR). A copy of the
audit will be sent to the State Auditor who will respond with comments regarding
compliance. Results of the annual audit shall be provided to the City Commission
in a timely manner.

C. Simplified Fund Structure
The City will attempt to minimize the number of funds. Funds will be categorized
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for reporting
purposes.

D. Financial Reporting
B-8

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

As a part of the audit, the auditor shall assist with the preparation of the required
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR). The CAFR shall be prepared in

accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The CAFR will be presented in a way to communicate effectively with citizens about the financial affairs
of the City. The CAFR shall be made available to the elected officials, creditors,
and citizens. In addition, two sets are maintained with the City’s records.

Appendix B
Financial Policies

Internal financial reports will be prepared that are sufficient to plan, monitor, and
control the City’s financial affairs. Monthly accounting reports are meant to transmit information regarding the financial situation of the City. These regular reports
are made available to the City Commission, City Manager, Department Heads, and
other staff as necessary.

VI. Revenues
A. Characteristics
The City shall strive for the following characteristics in its revenue structure:
1.

Simplicity – The City shall strive to maintain a simple revenue structure in
order to reduce compliance costs for the taxpayer and/or service recipient.
A corresponding decrease in the City’s cost of collection and a reduction in
avoidance to pay should result.

2.

Equity – The City shall make every effort to maintain equity in its revenue
system. The City shall seek to minimize subsidization between entities, funds,
service, customer classes, and utilities.

3.

Adequacy – The City shall require that a balance in the revenue system be
achieved. The revenue structure’s base shall have the characteristics of fairness and neutrality as it applies to cost of service, willingness to pay, and
ability to pay.

4.

Administration – The benefits of a revenue source shall exceed the cost of
levying and collecting that revenue. The price of collection shall be reviewed
periodically for effectiveness as a part of the indirect cost of service analysis.

5.

Diversification and Stability – The City shall maintain a diversified and
stable revenue structure to shelter it from short-term fluctuations in any single
revenue source. The revenue mix shall combine elastic and inelastic revenue
sources to minimize the effect of economic downturns.

6.

Conservative Estimates –Revenues will be estimated realistically and
prudently. Revenues of a volatile nature will be estimated conservatively.
Conservative revenue estimates based on prior year collections may be used
for revenue projections.

7.

Rigorous Collection Policy – The City shall follow a rigorous and thorough
policy of collecting revenues. As a last resort, real property will be sold to
satisfy non-payment of property taxes.
a.

Pre-Collections. Whenever possible, City staff shall record information
from payers including name, mailing address, phone number, and email
address in searchable databases for easier tracing of payers. Businesses
shall provide all necessary contact information before receiving a business license, alcohol beverage license, or commercial sanitation service.

b.

Initial Notification. Property tax payments are the responsibility of the
property owner. Failure to receive a bill does not waive this responsibility. However, efforts shall be made by City staff to send tax bills to the
most recent addresses available from County records to encourage timely

CITY OF DECATUR

B-9

remittances. Initial notices shall also be sent to payers for other taxes,
fees, and fines before collection activities are escalated. Invoices, tickets,
or enclosures may reference the consequences of nonpayment such as
penalties and interest.
c.

Payment Arrangements. Partial payment arrangements may be authorized
by City staff. After the due date, waivers of penalties or interest may be
authorized by management if the payer has provided required justification and meets eligibility criteria.

d.

Enforcement Techniques. Collection techniques shall include but are not
limited to second notices, emails, follow-up letters, certified mailings,
and phone campaigns. City staff may use skip-tracing tools to find alternate contact information for delinquent payers. Such tools shall be used
only to support compliance with tax, licensing, or other legal requirements. Site visits are also authorized for delinquent commercial accounts
and, if necessary, chronically delinquent residential accounts. Amounts
that remain past due are subject to liens, levies, or citations depending on
the category of the debt. The City does not impose padlock levies against
businesses for delinquent taxes.
Multiple notifications and legal advertisements are required before delinquent properties may be auctioned during a tax sale in accordance with
the State Revenue Code. Private debt collections agencies or third-party
collections agencies may be used to collect certain debts.

e.

Reporting. Departments shall maintain printed or electronic reports of delinquent accounts including individual customer debts and a grand total.
Such reports are periodically reviewed by management.

B. Issues
The following considerations and issues will guide the City in its revenue policies
concerning specific sources of funds:
1.

Non-Recurring Revenues – One-time or non-recurring revenues shall not be
used to finance current ongoing operations. Non-recurring revenues should
be used only for non-recurring expenditures and will not be used for budget
balancing purposes.

2.

Property Tax Revenues – All real and business personal property located
within the City shall be valued at 50% of the fair market value for any given
year based on the current appraisal supplied to the City by the DeKalb County
Board of Tax Assessors.

3.

User-Based Fees and Service Charges – For services associated with a
user fee or charge, the direct and indirect costs of that service shall be
offset by a fee where possible. There will be an annual review of fees
and charges to ensure that the fees provide adequate coverage of cost.
The City Commission shall set schedules of fees and charges.

4.

B-10

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Intergovernmental Revenues (Federal/State/Local) – These revenue
sources will be expended only for the intended purpose of grant aid. It must
be clearly understood that operational requirements set up as a result of a
grant or aid could be discontinued once the term and conditions of the project
have terminated.

5.

Revenue Monitoring – Revenues received shall be compared to budgeted
revenues. Significant variances will be investigated by the City Manager or
designee.

Appendix B
Financial Policies

VII. Purchasing
A. Intent
The purpose of this policy is to provide guidance for the procurement of goods and
services in compliance with procurement provisions of the City and the State of
Georgia. The goal of this policy is to establish, foster, and maintain the following
principles:
1.

To consider the best interests of the City in all transactions;

2.

To purchase without prejudice, seeking to obtain the maximum value for each
dollar expenditure with maximum quality standards;

3.

To subscribe to and work for honesty and truth in buying.

B. Vendors
The City will make every effort to obtain high quality goods and services at the
best possible price. All procurement procedures will be conducted in a fair and
impartial manner with avoidance of any impropriety. All qualified vendors have
access to City business. No bidder will be arbitrarily or capriciously excluded. It
is the intent of the City that competition be sought to the greatest practical degree.
The conditions of the contract shall be made clear in advance of the competition.
Specifications shall reflect the needs of the City.
1.

Solicitation of Vendors and Submission of Bids
When a purchase for a single good is expected to exceed $25,000, competition is required to the extent that it exists. Each department must attempt to
obtain a minimum of three bids from different sources. If three sources are not
possible, the seeker of the bid must attempt to obtain as many vendors as possible. Each department head shall document the competitive bidding process
with records of the vendor and bids received.
Each department has full authority to determine and obtain professional and
contractual services as provided for in the budget. When possible and practical, competitive quotes for professional and contractual services should be
obtained. If competitive quotes are not possible, the City Manager must be
notified in writing. Each department head shall document the process.

2.

Interest of City Officials in Expenditure of Public Funds
No official of the City of Decatur will be interested directly or indirectly in
any transaction with, sale to, work for, or contract of the City or any department of government or service involving the expenditure of public funds in
violation of the City’s “Ethics Ordinance.” The City shall not use a vendor
who is a member of the immediate family of a City Commissioner, City Attorney, City Manager, Assistant City Manager, a Department Head, Personnel
Officer, or Payroll Clerk. The City shall not use a vendor for services in an operating department who is a member of the immediate family of an employee
of that operating department.

3. Request for Proposal
It is suggested that, whenever appropriate, a Request For Proposal (RFP)
process be used for procuring products and services. The RFP should specify
the service, evaluation criteria, and terms and conditions required by the City.

CITY OF DECATUR

B-11

Large purchases should be advertised in the legal organ and other venues as
time and advertising funds allow.
4.

Award of Bids
Bids are awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. A responsive bid is one that conforms in all material respects to the need of the City.
Responsible means a bidder who has the capability to perform the requirements.

5.

Local Bidder Preference
If all other relevant factors are met, each department is authorized to negotiate with and select a local vendor if the local vendor’s bid is within 10% of
the lowest offer. A current City of Decatur business license is required to be
considered as a local vendor.

6.

Equal Opportunity
The City of Decatur will provide an equal opportunity for all businesses to
participate in City contracts regardless of actual or perceived race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity,
age, disability, marital status, familial status, or veteran/military status. The
City will actively seek to ensure that minority-owned and operated firms have
the opportunity to participate in the purchasing process, including bidding,
negotiations and contract awards. The City will not knowingly conduct business with contractors who do not have a non-discrimination policy in place
that prohibits discrimination based on actual or perceived race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, disability, marital status, familial status, or veteran/military status.

7.

Contractors to provide drug-free workplace
Successful bidders must certify that they and their subcontractors provide a
drug-free workplace for their employees.

8.

Ineligible Vendors
Any person, firm, or corporation who is in arrears to the City for taxes, or
otherwise, will not be qualified to bid on any purchase until their lien to the
City has been cleared. No requisition will be approved for such vendors.

9.

State Contracts
The City is authorized to use state contracts in lieu of issuing bids to vendors
or buying locally when it is to the economic advantage of the City or deemed
appropriate by the City Manager. The state contract price may be used to
establish the maximum price for a good or service.

10. Back-up Policy and Emergency Purchases
The City should strive to decrease dependency on single-source vendors in
order to achieve maximum efficiency in its purchases. In order to achieve the
City’s fiscal independence, it is strongly suggested that each department have
back-up vendors for each recurring and/or large purchase.
In cases of emergency, a contract may be awarded without competitive bidding, but the procurement shall be made with as much competition as the
circumstances allow (i.e., informal quotes). An emergency is defined as a
threat to life or property, or an unforeseen situation that curtails or greatly diminishes an essential service as determined by the City Manager. In the event
of an emergency, the City Manager shall be contacted.
B-12

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

C. Decentralization of Purchasing Authority
1. Purchasing of Goods

Each department head shall have the authority to purchase individual goods
costing less than $1,000 each as long as costs remain within the approved
budget. Each department head is responsible to ensure that internal control
procedures, including those issued by the City Manager, are followed.

Appendix B
Financial Policies

For individual goods costing over $1,000, the department shall make every
effort to solicit a minimum of three competitive prices. To the extent that an
emergency condition exists or an item is supplied by only one source, the
Department Head shall inform the City Manager and make an appropriate
notation.
2.

Monitoring of Purchases
Although authority may be delegated, the ultimate responsibility rests with
the City Manager. Purchases must be monitored to assure compliance with
City policy.

D. Purchase Order (PO)
Purchase orders are not required by the City. If a vendor requires a purchase order,
a PO cannot be issued unless sufficient funds are available in the budget.
The following is the established City procedure if a purchase order is required:
1.

An item or service is required and sufficient funds exist in the approved budget to cover the cost of the item or service.

2.

The item or service is ordered by a department.

3.

The item or service is received and verified by the department.

4.

The department is invoiced by a vendor for the required item or service.

5.

A PO is prepared and the invoice is attached. The departmental purchasing
authority must certify that funds are available to cover the cost of the purchase.

6.

The PO is approved by the departmental purchasing authority.

7.

The invoice and PO are reviewed by the bookkeeper or designee.

8.

The invoice and PO are reviewed and authorized by the City Manager and/or
the City Manager’s designee.

9.

Payment to the vendor is generated.

E. Petty Cash
Petty cash is used to make small cash disbursements for those purchases that must
be made quickly and without prior notice on a contingency basis.
Each department has a petty cash expense account. Petty Cash is incurred as an
expense for each department. Departments are monitored at least twice a year to
verify account balances.
The following is the City’s policy on petty cash distributions:
1.

Under $50 – cash is distributed at the department level with department head
approval.

2. Over $50 – cash distribution must be approved by the City Manager.
The following is the City’s procedure for petty cash:
1.

Petty cash request form is completed. The Petty Cash request form contains
details of the request and documented account numbers.

CITY OF DECATUR

B-13

2.

The petty cash request is approved by the department head.

3.

Petty cash is then received by the requesting party.

4.

Once the purchase is made, a receipt must be obtained.

5.

The receipt is then attached to the request form and returned to the petty cash
box.

6.

On a regular basis, a check request must be submitted for the department’s
purchases and cash box replenished and balanced.

F. City Credit Cards
1.

General
For the purpose of this policy, the term ‘credit card’ equates to ‘financial
transaction card’ as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30.
Each City Commissioner and the City Manager will be issued a city credit
card. Per City Manager approval, management level employees will be issued
a city credit card. The credit card is to be used for City business only to purchase goods, services, or for specific expenditures incurred under approved
conditions. All purchases utilizing a city credit card must be in accordance
with city policy and state law. The cardholder is the only person authorized
use the credit card.
Before being issued a city credit card under this policy and state law, all authorized cardholders shall sign and accept an agreement with the city that the
cardholder will use the city credit card only in accordance with the policies of
the city.

2.

Regulations of Use
The established monthly credit card limit per card for City Commissioners
is $3,000. The City Manager is authorized to approve credit limits for city
employees.
City credit cards may not be used for the following:
a.

Any purchases for personal use.

b.

Cash refunds or advances.

c.

Items specifically restricted by this policy, unless a special exemption is
granted by the City Manager.

d.

Purchases or transactions in violation of purchasing policy, transactional
limits or state law.

City credit cards may be used for official city business to purchase goods and/
or services that are not prohibited by this policy or state law.
3.

Roles and Responsibilities
The City Clerk is designated as the administrator of the city’s credit cards.
The administrator’s responsibilities are determined by the City Manager and
shall include, but not be limited to:

B-14

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

a.

Serve as liaison between the city’s cardholders and the issuer(s) of such
cards.

b.

Maintain the cardholder agreement for all cardholders.

c.

Provide instruction, training, and assistance to cardholders.

d.

Upon receipt of information indicating fraudulent use or lost/stolen cards,
report such incident to the appropriate parties, including the issuer, in a
timely manner.

e.

Conduct monthly review and audit of credit card transactions.

f.

Recommend the credit card issuer and system for documenting credit
card transactions by cardholders.

g.

Make available for public inspection those documents related to purchases using city credit cards in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(b).

Appendix B
Financial Policies

Employees designated as credit card approvers are responsible for reviewing
the monthly credit card statement of each employee for whom they have been
assigned as an approver. Responsibilities include reviewing all transactions
for compliance with the city policy and state law, ensuring each transaction is
coded correctly and that receipts have been produced for each transaction.
The credit card holder is responsible for documentation and safekeeping of
the credit card during the employee’s issuance. A receipt for each transaction
must be obtained by the employee when a purchase is made using the City
credit card. This receipt shall be dated and a description of the service or item
purchased and account codes shall be written on the back of every receipt or
otherwise documented during the monthly statement reconciliation process.
Each month, the credit card holder must submit on a timely basis documentation of credit card purchases with the credit card statement. Late submittal of
credit card documentation may result in credit card privileges being cancelled.
The same standards for credit cards of receipts, documentation, reconciliation,
and cancellation shall apply to membership/store cards offered by merchants
such as warehouse clubs and hardware stores when an organizational account
is maintained by the City.
4. Violations
Violation of the city’s credit card policy or state law regarding the use of
government-issued credit cards may result in suspension or revocation of city
credit card privileges. Violation of the city’s credit card policy may constitute
a violation of the city’s Personnel Rules and Regulations and cardholder may
be subject to disciplinary action including, but not limited to, reprimand,
suspension, demotion, or termination.
Nothing in this ordinance shall preclude the City Manager from referring
misuse of a credit card for criminal prosecution.
In the event that a cardholder inadvertently makes a transaction in violation of
city policy, the cardholder must report the transaction to the card administrator within 10 business days of receipt of the card transaction statement. The
cardholder will be responsible for reimbursing the City the full amount of the
unacceptable transaction.

G. Expense Reimbursements
Receipts for City business related expenses requiring reimbursement from the
City of Decatur must be submitted to the accounting office with an expense
reimbursement within 30 days of the date the expense was incurred. Each receipt shall be dated and contain a description of the service or item purchased
and account codes shall be written on the back of every receipt. Each expense

CITY OF DECATUR

B-15

reimbursement form must be approved by the appropriate departmental supervisor. Failure to submit the required documentation will result in forfeiture of
the reimbursement.

H. Travel Expenses
When City business travel requires advance payment to the employee for estimated travel expenses, a travel expense/reimbursement form shall be submitted to
the accounting office no less than two weeks before the travel date. Within 30 days
of the final day of travel, all receipts with dates and a description of the service
or item purchased will be submitted to accounting for verification purposes. If
documented expenses exceed the travel advance, a reimbursement will be provided to the employee. If documented expenses are less than the travel advance,
the employee will provide the City with the difference between the advance and
actual expenses. Failure to provide the appropriate documentation will result in
the advance being reported as income on the employee’s W-2 and may result in
disciplinary action. Fines such as parking violations or similar citations are not
reimbursable.

VIII. Investments
A. Scope
This investment policy applies to all funds under the City of Decatur’s
control; excluding the City’s pension funds which are invested at the direction of
the City of Decatur Employees’ Retirement System Board of Trustees.

B. Objectives
The following investment objectives shall be met with this policy:
1.

Safety – Preservation of principal shall always be the foremost objective in
any investment transaction involving City funds. Those investing funds on the
City’s behalf must first ensure that capital losses are avoided by limiting credit
and interest risk. Credit risk is the risk of loss due to the failure of the security
issues or backer. Interest risk is the risk that market value portfolios will fall
due to an increase in general interest rates.

2.

Liquidity – The second objective shall be the maintenance of sufficient liquidity within the investment portfolio. The City’s investment portfolio shall be
structured such that securities mature at the time when cash is needed to meet
anticipated demands (static liquidity). Additionally, since all possible cash
demands cannot be anticipated, the portfolio should maintain some securities
with active secondary or resale markets (dynamic liquidity).

3.

Return on Investment – The third objective shall be the realization of competitive investment rates, relative to the risk being assumed. However, yield
on the City’s investment portfolio is of secondary importance compared to the
safety and liquidity objectives described above.

C. Delegation of Authority
The overall management of the investment program is the responsibility of the
City Manager. Responsibility for the daily investment activities will be assigned
by the City Manager. The City Manager may designate an employee or employees to assist with the management and implementation of the City’s investment
program.
B-16

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Responsibilities to fulfill this authority include: opening accounts with banks,
brokers, and dealers; arranging for the safekeeping of securities; and executing

necessary documents. A system of internal controls over investments is established
and approved by the City’s independent auditors. The controls are designed to
prevent losses of public funds arising from fraud, error, misrepresentation by third
parties, unanticipated changes in financial markets, and/or imprudent action by
staff and City officials. No person may engage in an investment transaction except
as provided for under the terms of the policy.

Appendix B
Financial Policies

D. Authorized Investments
All investment activity is required to be in compliance with Chapter 83 of Title 36
of the Official Code of Georgia, which establishes guidelines forlocal government
investment procedures.
The City of Decatur may invest funds subject to its control and jurisdiction in the
following:
1.

Certificates of Deposit (CD’s) issued by banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Deposits in excess of FDIC coverage
must be collateralized by securities
with a market value equal to at least 110% of the deposit. Only those securities described in Georgia Code 50-17-59 can be pledged as collateral;

2.

Certificates of Deposit (CD’s) issued by savings and loans associations issued
by the Federal Saving s and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC). Deposits
in excess of the FSLIC coverage must be collateralized by securities equal to
at least 110% of the deposit. Only those securities described in Georgia Code
50-17-59 can be pledged as collateral;

3.

Obligations issued by the United States government;

4.

Obligations fully insured or guaranteed by the United States government or a
United States government agency;

5.

Obligation of any corporation of the United States government;

6.

Obligation of the state of Georgia or of other states;

7.

Obligation of other political subdivision of the state of Georgia;

8.

The Local Government Investment Pool of the state of Georgia
managed by the State Department of Administrative Services,
Fiscal Division;

9.

Repurchase agreements (REPO’s) issued by commercial banks
insured by the FDIC and collateralized by securities described
in Georgia Code 50-17-59 with a market value equal to at least
103% of the Repurchase Agreements’ maturity value;

10. Repurchase agreements (REPO’s) issued by primary dealers supervised by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and collateralized by securities described
in Georgia Code 50-17- 59 with a market value of at least 103% of the Repurchase Agreements’ maturity value; and
11. Prime Banker’s Acceptances.

E. Prudence
The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be the“prudent
person” standard and shall be applied in the context of managing an overall portfolio. Under the “prudent person” standard, investments shall be made with judgCITY OF DECATUR

B-17

ment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence,
discretion, and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not
for speculation but for investment, considering the probable safety of their capital
as well as the probable revenue to be gained.
The City Manager and all designees acting in accordance with 1) written procedures, 2) this investment policy, and 3) exercising due diligence shall be relieved
of personal responsibility for an individual security’s credit risk or market price
changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion
and appropriate action is taken to control adverse development

F. Diversification
The City of Decatur agrees with the premise that diversification is an important
component of portfolio security. Therefore, the City shall endeavor to maintain an
adequate level of diversification among its investments. The City shall not be over
invested in any one type of instrument or financial institution. No more than 25%
of the total investment portfolio shall be placed with a single issuer. This limitation
shall not apply to the Local Government Investment Pool or direct obligations of
the United States government.

G. Maturities
To achieve the aforementioned objective of adequate liquidity within City’s portfolio, the City shall attempt to match investment maturities with anticipated cash
flow requirements. Unless matched to a specific cash flow, the maximum maturity
of any instrument in the City’s portfolio may not exceed two years from the date of
acquisition by the City. In order to preserve liquidity and to lessen market risk, not
more then 25% of the total portfolio may mature more than one year beyond the
date of calculation. The maturity of non-negotiable time deposits may not exceed
one year.

H. Safekeeping and Custody
All investment securities purchased by the City of Decatur shall be delivered
against payment and shall be held in a third-party safekeeping account by the trust
department of a bank insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The
City Manager, or his/her designee, shall be responsible for the selection of a financial institution for this purpose, as well as the execution of a written safekeeping
agreement with the trustee.

I. Ethics and Conflicts of Interest
Officers and employees involved in the investment process will refrain from
personal business activity that would conflict with proper execution of the investment program, or which would impair their ability to make impartial investment
decisions. Employees and investment officials will disclose to the City Manager
any material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business with
the City, and they will further disclose any large personal financial/investment positions that would be related to the performance of the City’s portfolio. Employees
and investment officials will subordinate their personal investment transactions to
those of the City – particularly with regard to the time of purchases and sales.

J. Relationships with Banks and Brokers
The City of Decatur will select depositories through the City’s banking services
procurement process – including formal requests for proposals issued as needed.
In selecting depositories, objective business criteria will be used. To the extent
B-18

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

possible, preference will be given to depositories located within the City of Decatur. The creditworthiness of the institutions will be a fundamental consideration.

Appendix B
Financial Policies

K. Report on Deposits and Investments
Periodic investment reports will be submitted to the City Manager. Reports should
include the following: an average daily balance of investment in each investment category; a current portfolio yield for each investment type and for the
portfolio as a whole; an average daily balance of uninvested collected funds;
an average daily balance of uncollected funds; and a percent of available
funds invested. The report shall also provide a list of investments and accrued
interest as of the last day of the quarter.
L. Performance Evaluation
The City Manager, or his/her designees, will seek to achieve a market average
rate of return on the City’s portfolio. Given the special safety and liquidity
needs of the City, the basis used to determine whether market yields are being
achieved shall be the six-month Treasury Bill.

IX. Grants
A. Scope
The purpose of this policy is to provide direction in the application, acceptance
and administration of funds awarded through grants to the City from other local
governments, the state or federal government, non-profit agencies, philanthropic
organizations and the private sector.

B. Application and Acceptance of Grants.
1.

The City Manager is given authority to make application for and accept grants
that:
(a) are expected to be $200,000 or less on an annual basis with no required
City match; or,
(b) are expected to be $100,000 or less on an annual basis with a required
match of 20% or less; or,
(c) are expected to be $50,000 or less on an annual basis with a required
match of over 40%.

2.

The City Commission must approve the application of and acceptance of any
grants in excess of the limits established in Section 1 of this policy.

3.

The City will assess the merits of a particular program as if it were funded
with local tax dollars. Local tax dollars will not be used to make up for losses
of intergovernmental aid without first reviewing the program and its merits
as a budgetary increment. Therefore, no grant will be accepted that will incur
management and reporting costs greater than the grant amount.

C. Grant Administration.
1.

Each department must notify the City Clerk upon acceptance of any grant.
Prior to the receipt or expenditure of grant revenues, the City Clerk must be
provided with the following information prior to receiving grant revenues or
making purchases against the grant:
a.

Copy of grant application

b.

Notification of grant award

CITY OF DECATUR

B-19

2.

c.

Financial reporting and accounting requirements including separate account codes and/or bank accounts.

d.

Schedule of grant payments

Each department is responsible for the management of its grant funds and
periodic reporting.

X. Fixed Assets
A. Fixed Asset Criteria
A fixed asset is defined as a financial resource meeting all of the following criteria:
1.

It is tangible in nature.

2.

It has a useful life of greater than one year.

3.

It is not a repair part or supply item.

4.

It has a value equal to, or greater than, the capitalization threshold of $5,000
Keeping an accurate record of the City’s fixed assets is important for a myriad
of reasons. Some of the most important reasons that the City needs to keep a
good record of fixed assets are: for financial statement information, for insurable values, for control and accountability, for maintenance scheduling and
cost analysis, for estimating and accounting for depreciation, for preparation
of capital and operating budgets, and for debt management.

B. General Policy
1.

Each Department Head is ultimately responsible for the proper recording,
acquisition, transfer, and disposal of all assets within their Department. City
property may not be acquired, transferred, or disposed of without first providing proper documentation. A fixed asset information form must accompany
each step.

2.

Recording of Fixed Assets
Unless otherwise approved by the City Clerk, all recordable fixed assets must
be recorded within 30 calendar days after receipt and acceptance of the asset.
A fixed asset form must be attached to the purchase order before submitting
request for payment.
Assets will be capitalized at acquisition cost, including expenses incurred in
preparing the asset for use.
Donated assets shall be recorded at fair market value as determined by the
Department Head. Fair market value may be defined as, but is not limited
to, an average of documented prices for equivalent items from three separate
vendors.
The City will recognize acquisition costs based on extended pricing. For
example, in acquiring equipment, if three personal computers (PC) were
acquired simultaneously at $2,000 each, this would be an asset of $6,000
consisting of 3 PCs. It would not be 3 separate acquisitions of $2,000.
For equipment purchases, title is considered to pass at the date the equipment
is received. Similarly, for donated assets, title is considered to pass when the
asset is available for the agency’s use and when the agency assumes responsibility for maintaining the asset.

B-20

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Constructed assets are transferred from the construction in progress account

to the related building, improvements other than buildings, or equipment
accounts when they become operational. Constructed buildings, for example,
are assumed to be operational when an authorization to occupy the building is
issued, regardless of whether or not final payments have been made on all the
construction contracts.
3.

Appendix B
Financial Policies

Acquisition of Fixed Assets
There are various methods by which assets can be acquired. The asset acquisition method determines the basis for valuing the asset. Fixed assets may be
acquired in the following ways:
• New purchases
• Donations
• Transfers from other City departments
• City surplus
• Internal/external construction
• Lease purchases
• Trade-in
• Forfeiture or condemnation

4.

Lease Purchases
Assets may be lease-purchased through installment purchases (an agreement
in which title passes to the Department) or through lease financing arrangements (an agreement in which title may or may not pass).
Departments considering a lease purchase for greater than $10,000 and other
than from an established, City approved contract, must consult with the City
Manager.

5.

Transfer of Fixed Assets
An asset transfer between departments usually represents the sale of an item
by one department to another and may be treated as a new purchase. A transfer between related departments under the same control (Police and Fire, for
example) may, if desired, be treated as a transfer rather than sale. That is, the
asset is recorded under the new Department with original acquired date and
funding amount.
A fixed asset form must be sent to the finance office for all transfers.

6.

Sale of Fixed Assets, Non-Fixed Assets, and Confiscated Goods
The City is interested in full realization of the value of goods it purchases.
The City policy is aimed at making sure all surplus is disposed to the
economic advantage of the City.
Sale of fixed assets and other surplus goods by a department must be to the
highest, responsible bidder and must be conducted by sealed bid or by auction, including online auctions .
Central Supply is responsible for receiving, storing, and safeguarding all
auction materials before, during, and after the auction. Public Safety will be
responsible for the storage and safeguarding of all small, high value items,
such as jewelry.
Central Supply will also administer the sale of all surplus property including
Fixed Assets, Non-Fixed Assets, and Confiscated Goods under the supervision of the Public Works Director.

CITY OF DECATUR

B-21

Reporting
Central Supply will issue a request for surplus goods available for auction on
a quarterly basis to each department.
The department head will submit a description form for each auction item.
This form will include at minimum a description of the item, serial number,
fixed assets number, estimate of value, date of sale, and amount of sale. Large
quantities of similar items may be reported on one form, unless it is a Fixed
Asset.
Accounting will keep the original fixed asset form and the description form in
the same file after a fixed asset has been declared surplus.
Advertising
After each quarterly reporting period Central Supply will publish a list online
of surplus items that are available for use by city departments. Departments
will have ten (10) working days from the publication of the list online to
request a transfer of the item to their department. Items will be distributed
on a first-come, first-served basis. If the item is not claimed for departmental
transfer within ten working days it will be auctioned to the highest, responsible bidder.
The auction must be publicized in accordance with GA Code 36-37-6 and
other applicable state laws.
At the conclusion of an auction a list of unsold items will be published on the
city’s web site for donation to non-profit organizations on a first-come, firstserved basis.
Sale of the Item
Eligibility. Members of the general public may participate as buyers at public
sales, in sealed bids, and auctions. No employee whether full-time, part-time
or temporary, of the City of Decatur, member of the employee’s household
and/or the employee’s immediate family, or any person acting on the employee’s behalf may participate in public sales if the employee has had any
role in declaring the item surplus, processing the item or related paperwork, or
offering it for sale. City Commissioners are also excluded from participating
in city auctions.
The Central Supply manager will be responsible for managing the seller
account with Ebay and posting items for bid. He will determine the most efficient communication and listing procedures in conjunction with the Director
of Public Works. The costs associated with the auction will be paid from the
advertising account in Division 4910.
Department heads or their designees are responsible for providing an estimate
of the value of fixed assets and confiscated goods designated for auction.
Pricing of an item will be determined by reviewing the same or similar items
for sale on electric auction service. Vehicle estimates will be determined by
using Kelly’s Blue Book or a similar source. A reserve amount is required for
all vehicle sales and estimates over $500 dollars. Before listing an item for
auction the estimated value or reserve amount must be approved by Central
Supply and Accounting. The City is interested in realizing the highest possible
value for its surplus items.
B-22

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

The buyer is responsible for pick-up and all shipping costs incurred. Vehicles

will not be shipped, but require pick-up at Central Supply or Public Safety.
The City will accept cash, money orders, and cashier checks.

Appendix B
Financial Policies

The sale of certain Public Safety items requires a release form for public and/
or non-emergency use. The Central Supply officer is responsible for ensuring
the proper disposal according to state and federal laws regarding these items.
A signed release form from the buyer acknowledging proper use is required at
the time of pick-up. The release form will be kept with the description form.
The city may re-list an auction item up to two (2) times if it does not meet the
reserve price in a particular auction.
Recording of the sale
The date of sale, amount of sale, and signature of the buyer will be recorded
on the item description form.
The Accounting Department will have access to the seller account on Ebay.
The City Clerk or his designee will compare the submitted description forms
to the record of sale provided by electronic auction service. A quarterly report
will be prepared by the accounting office including at minimum the list of
items sold, the sale price, the buyer contact information, and listing fees paid.
Revenues from the sale of confiscated goods will be issued to the police
department. Revenues from the sale of all other goods will be issued to the
appropriate fund.
Central Supply will coordinate with the Finance Department to properly
record the sale of surplus items.
Procedures for the recording of the sale will be in accordance with GAAP.
7.

Disposal of Fixed Assets, Non-Fixed Assets, and Confiscated Goods
When an asset is disposed of, its value is removed from the financial balances
reported and from inventory reports; however, the asset record, including
disposal information, remains on file in hardcopy form for three years, in the
City Clerk’s Office, after which time it is purged from the system according
to general accepted accounting principles. This preserves an audit trail for disposed items, and facilitates departmental comparisons between actual or historical useful life information with useful life guidelines. Such comparisons
permit a more precise definition of an asset’s useful life than those provided
by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) or other guidelines initially used.
A disposal action is appropriate only when certain conditions occur resulting
in an asset no longer being in the possession of the agency. Assets no longer
in use, which remain in the possession of the department, are considered
surplus property and not a disposal.
Fixed assets may be disposed of in any one of seven ways:
a.

Sale or trade-in

b.

Abandonment/Retirement

c.

Lost or stolen

d.

Transfer

e.

Cannibalization (taking parts and employing them for like uses within the
department, such as is often the practice in computer or vehicle maintenance).

CITY OF DECATUR

B-23

f.

Casualty loss

g.

Donation to a 501 (c3) non-profit organization

The city should try to obtain the highest value out of the disposed item. If another city department does not need the item then it should be put up for auction or sealed bid. If the item is not suitable for sale or does not meet reserve
requirements then it can be donated to a non-profit organization.
Only when the asset is no longer in possession of the department, due to one
of the seven reasons listed above, is disposal action appropriate.
Assets are “abandoned” or “retired” when there is no longer any use for them
in the Department, they are of no use to any other City department, they cannot be repaired, transferred, cannibalized, sold, or traded-in. Thus meaning
that, there is no safe and appropriate use for the abandoned goods to the City
or for others.
Stolen items must be reported to Decatur Police and a police report filed. A
copy of this report must accompany the disposal record.
Casualty losses must be documented within 24 hours of loss and reported to
the City’s Administrative Services Director immediately for follow-up with
the City’s insurance carrier.
Cannibalized items are considered surplus and are disposed of by noting
cannibalization on the disposal record. Ideally, this method will allow departments to look at cannibalized items on the disposal report and assess what
surplus parts may be available. Departments will send documentation of items
cannibalized to the City Clerk’s Office, and all remaining costs and accumulated depreciation will be removed from appropriate asset accounts in the
general fixed asset fund.
All assets no longer in the possession of the department, due to one of these
six qualifying conditions and after submission of all appropriate documentation to the City Clerk’s Office, will be removed from the master departmental
asset file and considered disposed.
Department management is responsible for reviewing disposal reports, evaluating causes and trends leading to disposals, and implementing procedures to
more effectively manage and control disposals when the dispositions represent problems, inefficiencies, and/or the incurrence of unnecessary cost.
The Sanitation and Facilities Maintenance Department will not take City
property for disposal without the accompaniment of proper documentation.
Disposal of Items of De Minimus Value
In accordance with O.G.G.A. 36-37-6(b), the City may dispose of property
with an estimated value of $500 or less without advertisement or the acceptance of bids. The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to approve
the disposal of property with an individual value not exceeding $500 in such
manner as he/she judges appropriate. Such disposal may include recycling or
transfer to a waste collection site in addition to any of the options described in
section B (7) of this policy. In such cases, the department will document the
property to be disposed of through a physical log and photographs; and, when
practical, provide an estimated value of the property, either individually or as
a lot.
B-24

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

8.

Physical Inventory
An annual physical inventory of all fixed assets will be performed by the
City Clerk’s Office. The inventory will be conducted with the least amount
of interruption possible to the department’s daily operation. A full report of
the results of the inventory will be sent, within 30 days of completion, to all
departments for verification and acceptance.

Appendix B
Financial Policies

XI. Fund Balance Policy
A. Fund balance is the cumulative difference between revenues and expenditures
at the end of the City’s fiscal year. It is also understood to be the difference
between assets and liabilities on the balance sheet. The practice of conservative revenue estimates and carefully monitored expenditures may result in a
fund balance. The City intends to maintain an unreserved unassigned fund
balance in the general fund between twenty and thirty percent of the operating
budget or an amount equal to 3-4 months’ operating expenses. The City does
not budget for contingencies and therefore, must rely on the fund balance
for emergency expenditures. In some years, the City may budget to use fund
balance for one-time expenditures while remaining within the acceptable level
for fund balance. Fund balance may not be used to support long-term, recurring operating expenditures.
If fund balance is used to support one-time capital and one-time non-operating expenditures, the City Commission must appropriate the funds.
If, at the end of the fiscal year, the fund balance falls below the targeted range,
City staff will present a plan to the City Commission for aligning the fund
balance with the policy.
B. Fund Balance Classifications. In accordance with the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) Statement 54, the City recognizes the following
five classifications of fund balance for financial reporting purposes:
a.

Nonspendable – non-cash assets such as inventories or prepaid items.

b.

Restricted – funds legally restricted for specific purposes, such as grant
funds.

c.

Committed – amounts that can only be used for specific purposes pursuant to a formal vote of the City Commission.

d.

Assigned – amounts intended to be used for specific purposes. The City
Commission can choose to delegate this authority.

e.

Unassigned – residual spendable fund balance after subtracting all above
amounts and are available for any legal purpose.

C. Spending Prioritizations.
a)

When an expenditure is incurred that would qualify for payment with either restricted or unrestricted funds, it will be paid from restricted funds.

b) When an expenditure is incurred that qualifies for payment from either of
the three unrestricted fund balance categories, it will be applied in the following order: 1) Committed, 2) Assigned, and 3) Unassigned.

CITY OF DECATUR

B-25

D. Committed Fund Balance. The City Commission may commit fund balance
by a formal vote prior to the government’s fiscal year-end for that fiscal year.
Future modification or rescission of committed funds must likewise be accomplished by a formal vote of the City Commission prior to fiscal year-end.
E. Pursuant to the requirements of Accounting Statement 54 of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB), the City Commission hereby commits all of the revenue received by the following Special Revenue funds to be
used exclusively for each respective program’s operating expenditures:
Special Revenue Fund
Children & Youth Services
Economic Development
F.

B-26

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Committed Revenue Source|
Attendance and registration fees
Tree bank account fees

Assigned Fund Balance. The City Commission expressly delegates to the City
Manager the authority under this policy to assign funds for particular purposes.

Appendix C
Position
Classification Plan
Budget FY 2023-2024

ASSIGNMENT OF CLASSES TO SALARY RANGES
Effective July 3, 2023
SALARY
RANGE

ANNUAL
MINIMUM

ANNUAL
MAXIMUM

TITLE

36,005
58,968		 Crew Worker
1

Sanitation Equipment Operator I

2
37,814
61,963
Administrative Services Assistant

Building Maintenance Specialist

Equipment Operator

Recreation Coordinator

3
39,728
65,083
Communications Officer I

Sanitation Equipment Operator II

Support Services Technician

4
41,746
68,370
Accounting Specialist

Administrative Assistant

Automotive Mechanic
Communications Officer II

Court Clerk

Crew Leader
Revenue Officer

5
43,846
71,822
Communications Team Leader

6
46,072
75,442
Cemetery Specialist
Codes Enforcement Officer
Office Manager

Permit & Zoning Technician

7
48,402
79,269
Firefighter I

8
50,856
83,283
Firefighter II

Motor Maintenance Supervisor

Recreation Supervisor

Tennis Pro

9
53,435
87,506
Arborist

Building Inspector

Communications Coordinator

Engineering Inspector

Fire Apparatus Operator

HR Generalist
Police Officer
			 Planner

Security Planner & Procurement Administrator

Special Events Coordinator

Volunteer Coordinator

10
56,139
91,936
Fire Inspector
Master Police Officer

Police Investigator

11
58,968
96,595
Business Development Manager

Crew Superintendent

Motor Maintenance Superintendent

Energy & Sustainability Manager

Facilities Operations Manager

Lifelong Community Program Manager
continued

CITY OF DECATUR

C-3

SALARY
RANGE

C-4

ADOPTED BUDGET 2023-2024

ANNUAL
MINIMUM

ANNUAL
MAXIMUM

TITLE


Operations Analyst

Out-Of-School Time Manager

Project Manager

Recreation Center Operations Manager

Revenue Manager

Urban Naturalist

12
61,963
101,483
Fire Sergeant

Police Sergeant

13
65,083
106,621
Accreditation Manager/Police Open Records Custodian

Communications Manager/PIO

E911 Communications Manager

Project Civil Engineer

Tourism Manager

68,370
112,008
Community Education & Information Officer
14

Fire Lieutenant

Police Lieutenant

15
71,822
117,686
Accountant

Court Administrator

16
75,442
123,635
Asst. Parks & Recreation Director

Asst. Public Works Director
Building Official

Development Services Manager

Fire Captain

Planning & Zoning Manager

Police Captain

17
79,269
129,896
Asst. Fire Chief

Senior Engineer

Senior Transportation Engineer

18
83,283
136,469
Chief Of Staff (City Clerk)

Deputy Parks & Recreation Director

Deputy Public Works Director

Equity & Engagement Director

Innovation & Strategy Director

19
87,506
143,374
Deputy Fire Chief

Deputy Police Chief

20
91,936
150,634
Human Resources Director

Parks & Recreation Director

21
96,595
158,267
Finance Director

Planning & Economic Development Director

22
101,483
166,275
Fire Chief

Police Chief

23
106,621
174,699
Assistant City Manager

24
112,008
185,539

25
117,686
192,837
Deputy City Manager

CITY OF DECATUR

C-5

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

36,005
692.40
17.31
3,000

36,899
709.60
17.74
3,075

37,814
727.20
18.18
3,151

38,750
745.20
18.63
3,229

39,728
764.00
19.10
3,311

40,726
783.20
19.58
3,394

41,746
802.80
20.07
3,479

42,786
822.80
20.57
3,565

H

43,846
843.20
21.08
3,654

I

44,949
864.40
21.61
3,746

J

46,072
886.00
22.15
3,839

K

47,216
908.00
22.70
3,935

L

37,814
727.20
18.18
3,151

38,750
745.20
18.63
3,229

39,728
764.00
19.10
3,311

40,726
783.20
19.58
3,394

41,746
802.80
20.07
3,479

42,786
822.80
20.57
3,565

43,846
843.20
21.08
3,654

44,949
864.40
21.61
3,746

46,072
886.00
22.15
3,839

47,216
908.00
22.70
3,935

48,402
930.80
23.27
4,033

39,728
764.00
19.10
3,311

40,726
783.20
19.58
3,394

41,746
802.80
20.07
3,479

42,786
822.80
20.57
3,565

43,846
843.20
21.08
3,654

44,949
864.40
21.61
3,746

46,072
886.00
22.15
3,839

47,216
908.00
22.70
3,935

48,402
930.80
23.27
4,033

49,608
954.00
23.85
4,134

P

41,746
802.80
20.07
3,479

42,786
822.80
20.57
3,565

43,846
843.20
21.08
3,654

44,949
864.40
21.61
3,746

46,072
886.00
22.15
3,839

47,216
908.00
22.70
3,935

43,846
843.20
21.08
3,654

44,949
864.40
21.61
3,746

46,072
886.00
22.15
3,839

47,216
908.00
22.70
3,935

48,402
930.80
23.27
4,033

49,608
954.00
23.85
4,134

49,608
954.00
23.85
4,134

46,072
886.00
22.15
3,839

47,216
908.00
22.70
3,935

48,402
930.80
23.27
4,033

49,608
954.00
23.85
4,134

48,402
930.80
23.27
4,033

49,608
954.00
23.85
4,134

T

U

50,856
52,125 53,435
54,766
56,139
57,533
58,968 60,445 61,963
978.00 1,002.40 1,027.60 1,053.20 1,079.60 1,106.40 1,134.00 1,162.40 1,191.60
24.45
25.06
25.69
26.33
26.99
27.66
28.35
29.06
29.79
4,238
4,344
4,453
4,564
4,678
4,794
4,914
5,037
5,164

50,856
52,125
53,435
54,766 56,139
57,533 58,968
60,445
61,963
63,502
65,083 66,706 68,370
978.00 1,002.40 1,027.60 1,053.20 1,079.60 1,106.40 1,134.00 1,162.40 1,191.60 1,221.20 1,251.60 1,282.80 1,314.80
24.45
25.06
25.69
26.33
26.99
27.66
28.35
29.06
29.79
30.53
31.29
32.07
32.87
4,238
4,344
4,453
4,564
4,678
4,794
4,914
5,037
5,164
5,292
5,424
5,559
5,697

50,856 52,125
53,435
54,766
56,139
57,533 58,968
60,445
61,963
63,502 65,083
66,706 68,370
70,075
71,822
73,611
75,442 77,334 79,269
978.00 1,002.40 1,027.60 1,053.20 1,079.60 1,106.40 1,134.00 1,162.40 1,191.60 1,221.20 1,251.60 1,282.80 1,314.80 1,347.60 1,381.20 1,415.60 1,450.80 1,487.20 1,524.40
24.45
25.06
25.69
26.33
26.99
27.66
28.35
29.06
29.79
30.53
31.29
32.07
32.87
33.69
34.53
35.39
36.27
37.18
38.11
4,238
4,344
4,453
4,564
4,678
4,794
4,914
5,037
5,164
5,292
5,424
5,559
5,697
5,840
5,985
6,134
6,287
6,445
6,606

50,856
52,125
53,435 54,766
56,139
57,533
58,968
60,445 61,963
63,502
65,083
66,706 68,370
70,075 71,822
73,611
75,442
77,334
79,269 81,245 83,283
978.00 1,002.40 1,027.60 1,053.20 1,079.60 1,106.40 1,134.00 1,162.40 1,191.60 1,221.20 1,251.60 1,282.80 1,314.80 1,347.60 1,381.20 1,415.60 1,450.80 1,487.20 1,524.40 1,562.40 1,601.60
24.45
25.06
25.69
26.33
26.99
27.66
28.35
29.06
29.79
30.53
31.29
32.07
32.87
33.69
34.53
35.39
36.27
37.18
38.11
39.06
40.04
4,238
4,344
4,453
4,564
4,678
4,794
4,914
5,037
5,164
5,292
5,424
5,559
5,697
5,840
5,985
6,134
6,287
6,445
6,606
6,770
6,940

*Some positions in the Fire Department work 56 hours rather than 40 hours each week. The hourly rate for these positions is different; however, the annual rate remains the same.

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

S

50,856
52,125
53,435
54,766 56,139
57,533
58,968
60,445 61,963
63,502 65,083
66,706
68,370
70,075
71,822 73,611 75,442
978.00 1,002.40 1,027.60 1,053.20 1,079.60 1,106.40 1,134.00 1,162.40 1,191.60 1,221.20 1,251.60 1,282.80 1,314.80 1,347.60 1,381.20 1,415.60 1,450.80
24.45
25.06
25.69
26.33
26.99
27.66
28.35
29.06
29.79
30.53
31.29
32.07
32.87
33.69
34.53
35.39
36.27
4,238
4,344
4,453
4,564
4,678
4,794
4,914
5,037
5,164
5,292
5,424
5,559
5,697
5,840
5,985
6,134
6,287

RANGE: 08		Position Titles: Firefighter II*, Recreation Supervisor, Tennis Pro

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE: 07		Position Titles: Firefighter I*

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

R

50,856
52,125 53,435
54,766
56,139
57,533 58,968
60,445 61,963
63,502
65,083
66,706
68,370 70,075 71,822
978.00 1,002.40 1,027.60 1,053.20 1,079.60 1,106.40 1,134.00 1,162.40 1,191.60 1,221.20 1,251.60 1,282.80 1,314.80 1,347.60 1,381.20
24.45
25.06
25.69
26.33
26.99
27.66
28.35
29.06
29.79
30.53
31.29
32.07
32.87
33.69
34.53
4,238
4,344
4,453
4,564
4,678
4,794
4,914
5,037
5,164
5,292
5,424
5,559
5,697
5,840
5,985

48,402
930.80
23.27
4,033

RANGE: 06 		Position Titles: Cemetery Specialist, Codes Enforcement Officer, Office Manager, Permit & Zoning Tech

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE: 05		Position Titles: Communications Team Leader

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

Q

50,856
52,125
53,435
54,766
56,139 57,533 58,968
978.00 1,002.40 1,027.60 1,053.20 1,079.60 1,106.40 1,134.00
24.45
25.06
25.69
26.33
26.99
27.66
28.35
4,238
4,344
4,453
4,564
4,678
4,794
4,914

O

50,856
52,125 53,435
54,766 56,139
57,533
58,968
60,445
61,963 63,502 65,083
978.00 1,002.40 1,027.60 1,053.20 1,079.60 1,106.40 1,134.00 1,162.40 1,191.60 1,221.20 1,251.60
24.45
25.06
25.69
26.33
26.99
27.66
28.35
29.06
29.79
30.53
31.29
4,238
4,344
4,453
4,564
4,678
4,794
4,914
5,037
5,164
5,292
5,424

49,608
954.00
23.85
4,134

49,608
954.00
23.85
4,134

N

RANGE: 04		Position Titles: Accounting Specialist, Administrative Asst, Automotive Mechanic, Communications Officer II, Court Clerk, Crew Leader, Revenue Officer

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE: 03		Position Titles: Communications Officer I, Sanitation Equipment Operator II, Support Services Technician

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

M

48,402
930.80
23.27
4,033

RANGE: 02 		Position Titles: Admin. Services Asst., Building Maintenance Specialist, Equipment Operator, Recreation Coordinator

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE: 01		Position Titles: Crew Worker, Sanitation Equipment Operator I

STEP:

CITY OF DECATUR SALARY RATE TABLE Effective July 3, 2023

C-6

ADOPTED BUDGET 2023-2024

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

65,083
66,706
68,370 70,075
71,822
73,611
75,442
77,334 79,269
81,245
83,283
85,363 87,506
89,690 91,936
94,245
96,595
99,008 101,483 104,021 106,621
1,251.60 1,282.80 1,314.80 1,347.60 1,381.20 1,415.60 1,450.80 1,487.20 1,524.40 1,562.40 1,601.60 1,641.60 1,682.80 1,724.80 1,768.00 1,812.40 1,857.60 1,904.00 1,951.60 2,000.40 2,050.40
31.29
32.07
32.87
33.69
34.53
35.39
36.27
37.18
38.11
39.06
40.04
41.04
42.07
43.12
44.20
45.31
46.44
47.60
48.79
50.01
51.26
5,424
5,559
5,697
5,840
5,985
6,134
6,287
6,445
6,606
6,770
6,940
7,114
7,292
7,474
7,661
7,854
8,050
8,251
8,457
8,668
8,885

68,370
70,075
71,822 73,611
75,442
77,334
79,269
81,245 83,283
85,363
87,506
89,690 91,936
94,245 96,595
99,008 101,483 104,021 106,621 109,283 112,008
1,314.80 1,347.60 1,381.20 1,415.60 1,450.80 1,487.20 1,524.40 1,562.40 1,601.60 1,641.60 1,682.80 1,724.80 1,768.00 1,812.40 1,857.60 1,904.00 1,951.60 2,000.40 2,050.40 2,101.60 2,154.00
32.87
33.69
34.53
35.39
36.27
37.18
38.11
39.06
40.04
41.04
42.07
43.12
44.20
45.31
46.44
47.60
48.79
50.01
51.26
52.54
53.85
5,697
5,840
5,985
6,134
6,287
6,445
6,606
6,770
6,940
7,114
7,292
7,474
7,661
7,854
8,050
8,251
8,457
8,668
8,885
9,107
9,334

71,822
73,611
75,442 77,334
79,269
81,245
83,283
85,363 87,506
89,690
91,936
94,245 96,595
99,008 101,483 104,021 106,621 109,283 112,008 114,816 117,686
1,381.20 1,415.60 1,450.80 1,487.20 1,524.40 1,562.40 1,601.60 1,641.60 1,682.80 1,724.80 1,768.00 1,812.40 1,857.60 1,904.00 1,951.60 2,000.40 2,050.40 2,101.60 2,154.00 2,208.00 2,263.20
34.53
35.39
36.27
37.18
38.11
39.06
40.04
41.04
42.07
43.12
44.20
45.31
46.44
47.60
48.79
50.01
51.26
52.54
53.85
55.20
56.58
5,985
6,134
6,287
6,445
6,606
6,770
6,940
7,114
7,292
7,474
7,661
7,854
8,050
8,251
8,457
8,668
8,885
9,107
9,334
9,568
9,807

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

75,442
77,334
79,269 81,245
83,283
85,363
87,506
89,690 91,936
94,245
96,595
99,008 101,483 104,021 106,621 109,283 112,008 114,816 117,686 120,619 123,635
1,450.80 1,487.20 1,524.40 1,562.40 1,601.60 1,641.60 1,682.80 1,724.80 1,768.00 1,812.40 1,857.60 1,904.00 1,951.60 2,000.40 2,050.40 2,101.60 2,154.00 2,208.00 2,263.20 2,319.60 2,377.60
36.27
37.18
38.11
39.06
40.04
41.04
42.07
43.12
44.20
45.31
46.44
47.60
48.79
50.01
51.26
52.54
53.85
55.20
56.58
57.99
59.44
6,287
6,445
6,606
6,770
6,940
7,114
7,292
7,474
7,661
7,854
8,050
8,251
8,457
8,668
8,885
9,107
9,334
9,568
9,807 10,052 10,303

RANGE 16		Position Titles: Assistant Parks & Recreation Director, Assistant Public Works Director, Building Official, Development Services Manager, Fire Captain*, Planning & Zoning Manager, Police Captain

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE: 15		Position Titles: Accountant, Court Administrator

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE: 14		Position Titles: Community Education & Information Officer, Fire Lieutenant*, Police Lieutenant

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

U

61,963
63,502
65,083 66,706
68,370
70,075
71,822
73,611 75,442
77,334
79,269
81,245 83,283
85,363 87,506
89,690
91,936
94,245
96,595 99,008 101,483
1,191.60 1,221.20 1,251.60 1,282.80 1,314.80 1,347.60 1,381.20 1,415.60 1,450.80 1,487.20 1,524.40 1,562.40 1,601.60 1,641.60 1,682.80 1,724.80 1,768.00 1,812.40 1,857.60 1,904.00 1,951.60
29.79
30.53
31.29
32.07
32.87
33.69
34.53
35.39
36.27
37.18
38.11
39.06
40.04
41.04
42.07
43.12
44.20
45.31
46.44
47.60
48.79
5,164
5,292
5,424
5,559
5,697
5,840
5,985
6,134
6,287
6,445
6,606
6,770
6,940
7,114
7,292
7,474
7,661
7,854
8,050
8,251
8,457

RANGE: 13		Position Titles: Accreditation Manager, Communications Manager/PIO, E911 Communications Manager, Project Civil Engineer, Tourism Manager

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

T

58,968
60,445
61,963 63,502
65,083
66,706
68,370
70,075 71,822
73,611
75,442
77,334 79,269
81,245 83,283
85,363
87,506
89,690
91,936 94,245 96,595
1,134.00 1,162.40 1,191.60 1,221.20 1,251.60 1,282.80 1,314.80 1,347.60 1,381.20 1,415.60 1,450.80 1,487.20 1,524.40 1,562.40 1,601.60 1,641.60 1,682.80 1,724.80 1,768.00 1,812.40 1,857.60
28.35
29.06
29.79
30.53
31.29
32.07
32.87
33.69
34.53
35.39
36.27
37.18
38.11
39.06
40.04
41.04
42.07
43.12
44.20
45.31
46.44
4,914
5,037
5,164
5,292
5,424
5,559
5,697
5,840
5,985
6,134
6,287
6,445
6,606
6,770
6,940
7,114
7,292
7,474
7,661
7,854
8,050

RANGE: 12		Position Titles: Fire Sergeant*, Police Sergeant

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

S

56,139
57,533
58,968 60,445
61,963
63,502
65,083
66,706 68,370
70,075
71,822
73,611 75,442
77,334 79,269
81,245
83,283
85,363
87,506 89,690 91,936
1,079.60 1,106.40 1,134.00 1,162.40 1,191.60 1,221.20 1,251.60 1,282.80 1,314.80 1,347.60 1,381.20 1,415.60 1,450.80 1,487.20 1,524.40 1,562.40 1,601.60 1,641.60 1,682.80 1,724.80 1,768.00
26.99
27.66
28.35
29.06
29.79
30.53
31.29
32.07
32.87
33.69
34.53
35.39
36.27
37.18
38.11
39.06
40.04
41.04
42.07
43.12
44.20
4,678
4,794
4,914
5,037
5,164
5,292
5,424
5,559
5,697
5,840
5,985
6,134
6,287
6,445
6,606
6,770
6,940
7,114
7,292
7,474
7,661

RANGE: 11		Position Titles: Business Development Manager, Crew Superintendent, Energy & Sustainability Manager, Facilities Operations Manager, Lifelong Community Program Manager,
		Motor Maintenance Superintendent, Operations Analyst, Out-of-School Time Manager, Project Manager, Recreation Center Operations Manager, Revenue Manager, Urban Naturalist

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

R

53,435
54,766
56,139 57,533
58,968
60,445
61,963
63,502 65,083
66,706
68,370
70,075 71,822
73,611 75,442
77,334
79,269
81,245
83,283 85,363 87,506
1,027.60 1,053.20 1,079.60 1,106.40 1,134.00 1,162.40 1,191.60 1,221.20 1,251.60 1,282.80 1,314.80 1,347.60 1,381.20 1,415.60 1,450.80 1,487.20 1,524.40 1,562.40 1,601.60 1,641.60 1,682.80
25.69
26.33
26.99
27.66
28.35
29.06
29.79
30.53
31.29
32.07
32.87
33.69
34.53
35.39
36.27
37.18
38.11
39.06
40.04
41.04
42.07
4,453
4,564
4,678
4,794
4,914
5,037
5,164
5,292
5,424
5,559
5,697
5,840
5,985
6,134
6,287
6,445
6,606
6,770
6,940
7,114
7,292

RANGE: 10		Position Titles: Fire Inspector*, Master Police Officer, Police Investigator

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE: 9		Position Titles: Arborist, Building Inspector, Communications Coordinator, Engineering Inspector, Fire Apparatus Operator*, HR Generalist, Police Officer, Planner,
		Security Planner & Procurement Administrator, Special Events Coordinator, Volunteer Coordinator

STEP:

CITY OF DECATUR

C-7

79,269
81,245
83,283 85,363
87,506
89,690
91,936
94,245 96,595
99,008 101,483 104,021 106,621 109,283 112,008 114,816 117,686 120,619 123,635 126,734 129,896
1,524.40 1,562.40 1,601.60 1,641.60 1,682.80 1,724.80 1,768.00 1,812.40 1,857.60 1,904.00 1,951.60 2,000.40 2,050.40 2,101.60 2,154.00 2,208.00 2,263.20 2,319.60 2,377.60 2,437.20 2,498.00
38.11
39.06
40.04
41.04
42.07
43.12
44.20
45.31
46.44
47.60
48.79
50.01
51.26
52.54
53.85
55.20
56.58
57.99
59.44
60.93
62.45
6,606
6,770
6,940
7,114
7,292
7,474
7,661
7,854
8,050
8,251
8,457
8,668
8,885
9,107
9,334
9,568
9,807
10,052
10,303 10,561 10,825

83,283
85,363
87,506 89,690
91,936
94,245
96,595
99,008 101,483 104,021 106,621 109,283 112,008 114,816 117,686 120,619 123,635 126,734 129,896 133,141 136,469
1,601.60 1,641.60 1,682.80 1,724.80 1,768.00 1,812.40 1,857.60 1,904.00 1,951.60 2,000.40 2,050.40 2,101.60 2,154.00 2,208.00 2,263.20 2,319.60 2,377.60 2,437.20 2,498.00 2,560.40 2,624.40
40.04
41.04
42.07
43.12
44.20
45.31
46.44
47.60
48.79
50.01
51.26
52.54
53.85
55.20
56.58
57.99
59.44
60.93
62.45
64.01
65.61
6,940
7,114
7,292
7,474
7,661
7,854
8,050
8,251
8,457
8,668
8,885
9,107
9,334
9,568
9,807
10,052
10,303
10,561
10,825 11,095 11,372

87,506
89,690
91,936 94,245
96,595
99,008 101,483 104,021 106,621 109,283 112,008 114,816 117,686 120,619 123,635 126,734 129,896 133,141 136,469 139,880 143,374
1,682.80 1,724.80 1,768.00 1,812.40 1,857.60 1,904.00 1,951.60 2,000.40 2,050.40 2,101.60 2,154.00 2,208.00 2,263.20 2,319.60 2,377.60 2,437.20 2,498.00 2,560.40 2,624.40 2,690.00 2,757.20
42.07
43.12
44.20
45.31
46.44
47.60
48.79
50.01
51.26
52.54
53.85
55.20
56.58
57.99
59.44
60.93
62.45
64.01
65.61
67.25
68.93
7,292
7,474
7,661
7,854
8,050
8,251
8,457
8,668
8,885
9,107
9,334
9,568
9,807
10,052 10,303
10,561
10,825
11,095
11,372 11,657 11,948

91,936
94,245
96,595 99,008 101,483 104,021 106,621 109,283 112,008 114,816 117,686 120,619 123,635 126,734 129,896 133,141 136,469 139,880 143,374 146,952 150,634
1,768.00 1,812.40 1,857.60 1,904.00 1,951.60 2,000.40 2,050.40 2,101.60 2,154.00 2,208.00 2,263.20 2,319.60 2,377.60 2,437.20 2,498.00 2,560.40 2,624.40 2,690.00 2,757.20 2,826.00 2,896.80
44.20
45.31
46.44
47.60
48.79
50.01
51.26
52.54
53.85
55.20
56.58
57.99
59.44
60.93
62.45
64.01
65.61
67.25
68.93
70.65
72.42
7,661
7,854
8,050
8,251
8,457
8,668
8,885
9,107
9,334
9,568
9,807
10,052 10,303
10,561 10,825
11,095
11,372
11,657
11,948 12,246 12,553

96,595
99,008 101,483 104,021 106,621 109,283 112,008 114,816 117,686 120,619 123,635 126,734 129,896 133,141 136,469 139,880 143,374 146,952 150,634 154,398 158,267
1,857.60 1,904.00 1,951.60 2,000.40 2,050.40 2,101.60 2,154.00 2,208.00 2,263.20 2,319.60 2,377.60 2,437.20 2,498.00 2,560.40 2,624.40 2,690.00 2,757.20 2,826.00 2,896.80 2,969.20 3,043.60
46.44
47.60
48.79
50.01
51.26
52.54
53.85
55.20
56.58
57.99
59.44
60.93
62.45
64.01
65.61
67.25
68.93
70.65
72.42
74.23
76.09
8,050
8,251
8,457
8,668
8,885
9,107
9,334
9,568
9,807
10,052
10,303
10,561 10,825
11,095 11,372
11,657
11,948
12,246
12,553 12,867 13,189

101,483 104,021 106,621 109,283 112,008 114,816 117,686 120,619 123,635 126,734 129,896 133,141 136,469 139,880 143,374 146,952 150,634 154,398 158,267 162,219 166,275
1,951.60 2,000.40 2,050.40 2,101.60 2,154.00 2,208.00 2,263.20 2,319.60 2,377.60 2,437.20 2,498.00 2,560.40 2,624.40 2,690.00 2,757.20 2,826.00 2,896.80 2,969.20 3,043.60 3,119.60 3,197.60
48.79
50.01
51.26
52.54
53.85
55.20
56.58
57.99
59.44
60.93
62.45
64.01
65.61
67.25
68.93
70.65
72.42
74.23
76.09
77.99
79.94
8,457
8,668
8,885
9,107
9,334
9,568
9,807
10,052 10,303
10,561
10,825
11,095 11,372
11,657 11,948
12,246
12,553
12,867
13,189 13,518 13,856

106,621 109,283 112,008 114,816 117,686 120,619 123,635 126,734 129,896 133,141 136,469 139,880 143,374 146,952 150,634 154,398 158,267 162,219 166,275 170,435 174,699
2,050.40 2,101.60 2,154.00 2,208.00 2,263.20 2,319.60 2,377.60 2,437.20 2,498.00 2,560.40 2,624.40 2,690.00 2,757.20 2,826.00 2,896.80 2,969.20 3,043.60 3,119.60 3,197.60 3,277.60 3,359.60
51.26
52.54
53.85
55.20
56.58
57.99
59.44
60.93
62.45
64.01
65.61
67.25
68.93
70.65
72.42
74.23
76.09
77.99
79.94
81.94
83.99
8,885
9,107
9,334
9,568
9,807
10,052
10,303
10,561 10,825
11,095
11,372
11,657 11,948
12,246 12,553
12,867
13,189
13,518
13,856 14,203 14,558

112,008 114,816 117,686 120,619 123,635 126,734 129,896 133,141 136,469 139,880 143,374 146,952 150,634 154,398 158,267 162,219 166,275 170,435 174,699 179,067 183,539
2,154.00 2,208.00 2,263.20 2,319.60 2,377.60 2,437.20 2,498.00 2,560.40 2,624.40 2,690.00 2,757.20 2,826.00 2,896.80 2,969.20 3,043.60 3,119.60 3,197.60 3,277.60 3,359.60 3,443.60 3,529.60
53.85
55.20
56.58
57.99
59.44
60.93
62.45
64.01
65.61
67.25
68.93
70.65
72.42
74.23
76.09
77.99
79.94
81.94
83.99
86.09
88.24
9,334
9,568
9,807 10,052
10,303
10,561
10,825
11,095 11,372
11,657
11,948
12,246 12,553
12,867 13,189
13,518
13,856
14,203
14,558 14,922 15,295

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

117,686 120,619 123,635 126,734 129,896 133,141 136,469 139,880 143,374 146,952 150,634 154,398 158,267 162,219 166,275 170,435 174,699 179,067 183,539 188,136 192,837
2,263.20 2,319.60 2,377.60 2,437.20 2,498.00 2,560.40 2,624.40 2,690.00 2,757.20 2,826.00 2,896.80 2,969.20 3,043.60 3,119.60 3,197.60 3,277.60 3,359.60 3,443.60 3,529.60 3,618.00 3,708.40
56.58
57.99
59.44
60.93
62.45
64.01
65.61
67.25
68.93
70.65
72.42
74.23
76.09
77.99
79.94
81.94
83.99
86.09
88.24
90.45
92.71
9,807
10,052
10,303 10,561
10,825
11,095
11,372
11,657 11,948
12,246
12,553
12,867 13,189
13,518 13,856
14,203
14,558
14,922
15,295 15,678 16,070

RANGE 25		Position Titles: Deputy City Manager

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE 24		Position Titles: None

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE 23		Position Titles: Assistant City Manager

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE 22		Position Titles: Fire Chief, Police Chief

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE 21		Position Titles: Finance Director, Planning & Economic Development Director

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE 20		Position Titles: Human Resources Director, Parks & Recreation Director

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE 19 		Position Titles: Deputy Fire Chief, Deputy Police Chief

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE 18		Position Titles: Chief of Staff (City Clerk), Deputy Parks & Recreation Director, Deputy Public Works Director, Equity & Engagement Director, Innovation & Strategy Director

ANNUAL
WEEKLY
HRLY
MTHLY

RANGE 17		Position Titles: Assistant Fire Chief, Senior Engineer, Senior Transportation Engineer

AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL
CITY OF DECATUR 2023-2024 ADOPTED BUDGET



FY 21-22
Full-time Part-time

FY 22-23
FY 23-24
Full-time Part-time
Full-time

Part-time

GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL
1

1

1

Deputy City Manager

City Manager

1

1

1

Chief of Staff (City Clerk)

1

1

1

Office Manager
Operations Analyst

1

1

1

1

1

1

Energy & Sustainability Manager

-

-

1

Equity & Engagement Director

-

1

1

Communications Manager/PIO

-

1

1

Communications Coordinator

-

2

Digital Media Specialist
City Attorney

1

1

-

1

1

Capital Projects Manager

-

-

1

Graduate Intern/Local Government Management Fellow

1

1

1

Records Specialist		1		1		1
Content Editor/Writer
1


5

3

8

4

10

1

1

1

4

ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
Assistant City Manager
HR Director

1

1

1

HR Generalist

2

3

3

Administrative Assistant

1

1

1

-

-

1

1

1

1

Innovation & Strategy Director
Finance Director
Revenue Supervisor

1

1

1

3

3

3

Accountant

1

1

1

Accounting Specialist

2

2

2

Court Administrator

-

-

1

1

1

-

2

2

3

Revenue Officer

Chief Court Clerk
Court Clerk

Graduate Intern

1

1

1

Payroll Clerk		1		1		1
Customer Service Clerk

2

2

2

Intern		2		2		2
Chief Judge

1

1

1

Judge		4		4		4
Marshall 		1		1		1
C-8

ADOPTED BUDGET 2023-2024




FY 21-22
Full-time Part-time

FY 22-23
FY 23-24
Full-time Part-time
Full-time

Part-time

Bailiff 			1		1		1
Solicitor 			1		1		1
Public Defender

1

1

1



15

15

15

16

17

19


FIRE & RESCUE
1

1

1

Deputy Fire Chief

Fire Chief

1

1

1

Assistant Fire Chief

1

1

1

Administrative Captain

-

1

1

Station Captain

3

3

3

Fire Lieutenant

3

3

3

Fire Sergeant

3

3

3

Fire Inspector

3

3

3

Firefighter-Driver

12

12

12

Firefighter

12

15

12

15

12

15

39

15

40

15

40

15



COMMUNITY & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Assistant City Manager

1

1

1

Planning & Economic Development Director

1

1

1

Planning & Zoning Manager

-

-

1

Senior Planner

1

-

-

1

3

2

1

1

1

Planner
Lifelong Community Program Coordinator

-

-

1

Building Inspector

Building Official

-

-

1

Engineering Inspector

-

-

1

Arborist
Planning & Zoning Technician
Codes Enforcement Officer

-

-

2

-

-

1

-

-

1

Business Development Manager

-

1

1

Downtown Programs Manager

1

-

-

Tourism Manager

-

1

1

Community Information Services & Volunteer Coordinator

1

-

-

Special Events Coordinator

1

1

1

-

-

1

1

-

-

Volunteer Coordinator
Communications Manager/PIO
Digital Media Specialist

1

-

-

Operations Analyst

1

1

1

Administrative Assistant

-

-

2

1

1

-

-

-

-

Administrative Services Assistant
Parking Attendant

Special Events Coordinator

4

1

4

4

1
CITY OF DECATUR

C-9




FY 21-22
Full-time Part-time

FY 22-23
FY 23-24
Full-time Part-time
Full-time

Part-time

Digital Media Specialist

-

-			-

Content Writer

1

-			-

Planning Intern		1		1		1


12

7

11

6

20

5


PARKS & RECREATION*
Parks & Recreation Director

1

Parks & Recreation Deputy Director

1

Parks & Recreation Assistant Director

2

Facilities Operations Manager

1

Center Operations Manager

1

Out-of-School Time Manager

1

Recreation Supervisor

8

Recreation Coordinator

13

Tennis Pro

1

Administrative Assistant

2

Recreation Specialist						82
Tennis Instructors						10
Swim Team Coach						5


31

97

ACTIVE LIVING
Active Living Director

1

1

Assistant Active Living Director

1

1

Facilities Operations Manager

-

1

Program Supervisor

5

6

Program Assistant

3

3

Administrative Assistant

1

1

Aquatics Director

1

1

Program Leader

16

19

Specialized Instructor

40

38

Receptionist 		3		3
Front Desk Attendant


11

10

6

70

67

13


CHILDREN & YOUTH SERVICES
Children & Youth Services Director

1

1

Assistant CYS Director

1

1

Program Supervisor

2

2

Site Director

9

9

* The Parks & Recreation Department was established in FY23-24 by combining the Active Living Division and the Children & Youth Services Division.

C-10

ADOPTED BUDGET 2023-2024




Administrative Assistant

FY 21-22
Full-time Part-time

FY 22-23
FY 23-24
Full-time Part-time
Full-time

1

After-School Counselor

Part-time

1

49

43

Instructor		34		34
Junior Counselor

3

3

Lead Counselor

10

8

Summer Camp Counselor

22

22

Technology Support Staff

1

1

Technology Instructor

8

Technology Coordinator

-

1

14

128

14



111


PUBLIC WORKS
Assistant City Manager

1

1

1

Deputy Public Works Director

1

1

1

Assistant Public Works Director

-

-

2

Sanitation Services Superintendent

1

1

-

Facilities Maintenance Superintendent

1

1

-

Energy & Sustainability Manager

1

1

-

Urban Naturalist

-

1

1

Project Manager

1

1

1

Development Services Manager

1

1

1

Senior Engineer

1

1

1

Senior Transportation Engineer

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

-

Project Civil Engineer
Building Official
Building Inspector

1

1

-

Engineering Inspector

1

1

-

Arborist

2

2

-

1

1

-

1

1

-

Planning & Zoning Technician
Codes Enforcement Officer
Crew Superintendent

-

-

5

Crew Supervisor

5

5

-

Crew Leader

2

2

2

Crew Worker

19

20

21

Equipment Operator

7

7

6

Building Specialist

4

4

4

Motor Maintenance Supervisor
Automotive Mechanic
Office Manager
Administrative Assistant
Sanitation Equipment Operator II

1

1

1

2

2

2

1

1

1

1

1

-

5

5

5

CITY OF DECATUR

C-11



Sanitation Equipment Operator I
Facilities Security & Procurement Officer
Cemetery Specialist

FY 21-22
Full-time Part-time

FY 22-23
FY 23-24
Full-time Part-time
Full-time

11

11

12

1

1

1

1

1

1

Part-time

Plan Reviewer		1		1		1
Facility Monitor

2

2

2

Crew Worker

3

3

3

Seasonal Laborer


10

10

16

71

16

1

1

1

1

1

1

3

3

3

77

10
16

79

POLICE
Police Chief
Deputy Police Chief
Police Captain
Police Lieutenant

5

5

4

Police Sergeant

7

7

7

Police Investigator

4

4

4

Community Education & Information Manager

1

1

1

25

25

25

Accreditation Manager and Open Records Custodian

-

-

1

E911 Communications Manager

-

-

1

Communications Team Leader

2

2

2

Police Officer, MPO

9

10

10

Support Services Technician

Communications Officer

1

1

1

Administrative Assistant

1

1

1

Animal Control Officer

1

1

1

Technical Services Manager

-

-

1

Administrative Investigator/Permit Clerk

1

1

1

Fingerprint Examiner		1		1		1
Evidence Custodian

-

1

1

School Crossing Guard Manager

-

1

1

School Crossing Guard

40

40

44



60

43

61

45

62

50

TOTAL

234

297

243

279

254

202



C-12

ADOPTED BUDGET 2023-2024

Appendix D
2023 Compensation
Study Results
Budget FY 2023-2024

In January 2023, the City contracted with Slavin Management Consultants to conduct an analysis of the
current pay system to determine if it provided fair and equitable pay internally and was competitive externally. As part of the analysis, a compensation survey questionnaire was designed to solicit information
about salaries and pay practices and it was sent to 18 comparable jurisdictions in February 2023.

Appendix D
Salary Survey

The following data was collected during that process by Slavin Management Consultants.

Participant

Job Title

Marietta
Woodstock
Athens-Clarke
Stockbridge
Roswell
Alpharetta
Brookhaven
Suwanee
Sandy Springs
Johns Creek
Gainesville
Douglasville

Accountant
Accountant
Accountant
Accountant
Accountant
Accountant
Accountant
Accountant
Accountant
Accountant
Accountant
Accountant
Average Pay

Average Salary
$47,549
$50,092
$53,270
$55,000
$60,356
$61,562
$64,189
$68,134
$79,200
$89,780
$62,913

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Gainesville
Woodstock
Brookhaven
Suwanee
Sandy Springs
Johns Creek
Doraville
Douglasville

Accounting Specialist
Accounting Specialist
Accounting Specialist
Accounting Specialist
Accounting Specialist
Accounting Specialist
Accounting Specialist
Accounting Specialist
Average Pay

Average Salary
$44,748
$45,760
$47,882
$63,627
$65,452
$72,400
$56,645

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Woodstock
Brookhaven
Athens-Clarke
Chamblee
Suwanee
Alpharetta
Sandy Springs
Gainesville
Johns Creek
Douglasville

Assistant City Manager
Assistant City Manager
Assistant City Manager
Assistant City Manager
Assistant City Manager
Assistant City Manager
Assistant City Manager
Assistant City Manager
Assistant City Manager
Assistant City Manager
Average Pay

Average Salary
$123,215
$132,204
$134,242
$147,852
$149,468
$156,951
$168,000
$175,000
$187,910
$152,760

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Athens-Clarke
Stockbridge
Brookhaven
Woodstock
Suwanee
Sandy Springs
Johns Creek
Roswell
Alpharetta

Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant

Average Salary
$44,038
$47,000
$49,187
$51,147
$51,854
$52,504
$53,581
$54,549
$63,542

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$47,549
$48,591
$44,869
$52,288
$49,046
$51,780
$56,333
$50,822
$65,835
$67,031
$46,904
$61,531

$74,298
$76,263
$69,541
$81,046
$78,416
$90,098
$90,132
$93,918
$110,602
$89,780
$75,026
$98,467

$71,822
$67,912

$117,686
$111,301

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$39,333
$44,678
$44,102
$48,401
$42,438
$54,055
$42,640
$36,400

$60,944
$69,659
$70,564
$77,442
$67,900
$72,400
$64,480
$57,364

$41,746
$39,437

$68,370
$64,626

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$104,751
$109,781

$164,463
$175,650

$117,362
$114,387

$175,905
$183,020

$108,222
$146,566
$116,252

$178,485
$196,307
$191,802

$106,621
$100,838

$174,699
$165,235

Range
Minimum
$33,482
$39,820
$37,464
$41,600
$39,820
$44,560
$43,243
$38,938
$38,903

Range
Maximum
$60,072
$61,722
$59,942
$63,107
$63,712
$78,603
$57,907
$62,254
$68,081

CITY OF DECATUR

D-3

Gainesville
Johns Creek
Douglasville

Assistant City Manager
Assistant City Manager
Assistant City Manager
Average Pay

$175,000
$187,910
$152,760

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Athens-Clarke
Stockbridge
Brookhaven
Woodstock
Suwanee
Sandy Springs
Johns Creek
Roswell
Alpharetta
Dunwoody
Douglasville

Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant
Average Pay

Average Salary
$44,038
$47,000
$49,187
$51,147
$51,854
$52,504
$53,581
$54,549
$63,542
$74,256
$54,166

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Athens-Clarke
Gainesville
Roswell
Sandy Springs
Johns Creek
Alpharetta

Fire Captain
Fire Captain
Fire Captain
Fire Captain
Fire Captain
Fire Captain
Average Pay

Average Salary
$84,112
$85,561
$89,598
$110,440
$121,149
$120,710
$101,928

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Athens-Clarke
Woodstock
Roswell
Suwanee
Alpharetta
Lawrenceville
Gainesville
Sandy Springs
Johns Creek
Douglasville

Building Inspector
Building Inspector
Building Inspector
Building Inspector
Building Inspector
Building Inspector
Building Inspector
Building Inspector
Building Inspector
Building Inspector
Average Pay

Average Salary
$38,760
$48,173
$51,396
$53,372
$55,463
$57,826
$65,884
$76,891
$55,971

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

DeKalb
Woodstock
Suwanee
Gainesville
Athens-Clarke
Stockbridge
Chamblee
Sandy Springs
Johns Creek

Building Maintenance Specialist
Building Maintenance Specialist
Building Maintenance Specialist
Building Maintenance Specialist
Building Maintenance Specialist
Building Maintenance Specialist
Building Maintenance Specialist
Building Maintenance Specialist
Building Maintenance Specialist
Average Pay

Average Salary
$35,752
$44,075
$46,363
$46,717
$48,706
$50,000
$50,378
$55,779
$68,078
$49,539

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

D-4

Participant
ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024
Suwanee
Woodstock
Gainesville

Job Title
Building Official
Building Official
Building Official

Average Salary
$84,718
$86,666
$89,946

$108,222
$146,566
$116,252

$178,485
$196,307
$191,802

$106,621
$100,838

$174,699
$165,235

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$33,482
$39,820
$37,464
$41,600
$39,820
$44,560
$43,243
$38,938
$38,903
$47,312
$36,400

$60,072
$61,722
$59,942
$63,107
$63,712
$78,603
$57,907
$62,254
$68,081
$75,698
$57,364

$41,746
$39,437

$68,370
$64,626

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$68,091
$63,471
$66,706
$95,003
$90,452
$75,811

$92,123
$101,614
$106,725
$147,254
$121,149
$131,154

$75,442
$67,912

$123,635
$111,301

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$38,760
$46,925
$42,037
$50,822
$47,073

$66,229
$73,154
$67,246
$81,314
$81,436

$47,798
$59,714
$57,200
$48,149

$74,048
$100,320
$76,627
$77,033

$53,435
$50,482

$87,506
$82,763

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$35,752
$41,600
$43,902
$39,333
$40,697
$39,830
$46,765
$46,788
$65,894

$55,414
$64,896
$70,242
$60,944
$63,076
$50,779
$65,230
$82,533
$88,254

$37,814
$35,734

$61,693
$58,552

Range
Minimum
$71,026
$71,540
$57,013

Range
Maximum
$113,641
$112,342
$91,270

Chamblee
Sandy Springs
Johns Creek

Building Maintenance Specialist
Building Maintenance Specialist
Building Maintenance Specialist
Average Pay

$50,378
$55,779
$68,078
$49,539

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Suwanee
Woodstock
Gainesville
Alpharetta
DeKalb
Johns Creek
Sandy Springs
Roswell
Athens-Clarke
Douglasville

Building Official
Building Official
Building Official
Building Official
Building Official
Building Official
Building Official
Building Official
Building Official
Building Official
Average Pay

Average Salary
$84,718
$86,666
$89,946
$100,804
$103,976
$112,284
$115,000
$116,813
$142,141
$105,816

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Woodstock
Gainesville
Roswell
Brookhaven
Suwanee
Dunwoody
Chamblee
Lawrenceville
Johns Creek
Marietta
DeKalb
Alpharetta
Athens-Clarke
Doraville
Sandy Springs
Douglasville

Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Chief Court Clerk
Average Pay

Average Salary
$49,296
$55,648
$72,467
$73,290
$83,512
$90,372
$93,952
$100,901
$104,075
$111,841
$116,875
$131,758
$141,701
$152,250
$98,424

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Woodstock
Suwanee
Gainesville
Marietta
Alpharetta
Athens-Clarke
Stockbridge
Johns Creek
Lawrenceville
Chamblee
Roswell
Brookhaven
Sandy Springs
Dunwoody
DeKalb
Doraville
Douglasville

City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
City Clerk
Average Pay

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Average Salary
$82,735
$83,262
$86,948
$87,381
$90,346
$93,501
$100,000
$100,646
$103,381
$104,257
$107,994
$113,272
$136,500
$141,764

$102,285

$46,765
$46,788
$65,894

$65,230
$82,533
$88,254

$37,814
$35,734

$61,693
$58,552

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$71,026
$71,540
$57,013
$75,811
$81,551
$95,459
$103,740
$76,482
$97,943
$72,394

$113,641
$112,342
$91,270
$131,154
$126,407
$127,855
$165,984
$122,345
$151,799
$119,453

$75,442
$71,365

$123,635
$116,938

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$49,296
$46,904

$76,898
$75,026

$68,623
$58,699
$75,077
$75,826

$109,797
$93,918
$123,878
$112,078

$77,704
$91,853
$98,795

$104,075
$146,702
$159,060

$60,320

$92,560

$51,032

$81,656

$71,822
$53,040

$117,686
$86,944

Range
Minimum

Appendix D
Salary Survey

Range
Maximum

$78,712
$71,026
$54,309

$123,574
$113,641
$86,882

$73,087
$84,919
$83,675

$113,275
$131,624
$112,072

$83,695
$72,051
$73,290

$124,818
$115,232
$117,262

$87,570

$144,490

$71,760
$77,456

$110,240
$127,807

$83,283
$78,770

$136,469
$129,085

CITY OF DECATUR

D-5

Participant

Job Title

Woodstock
DeKalb
Stockbridge
Roswell
Lawrenceville
Alpharetta
Suwanee
Chamblee
Athens-Clarke
Gainesville
Sandy Springs
Johns Creek
Doraville
Douglasville

Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Code Enforcement Officer
Average Pay

Average Salary
$41,600
$44,722
$47,000
$52,790
$53,491
$55,106
$55,390
$56,451
$57,002
$59,847
$64,112
$65,853
$54,447

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Woodstock
Suwanee
Gainesville
Marietta
Brookhaven
Athens-Clarke
Johns Creek
Sandy Springs
Dunwoody
DeKalb
Douglasville

Communication Manager
Communication Manager
Communication Manager
Communication Manager
Communication Manager
Communication Manager
Communication Manager
Communication Manager
Communication Manager
Communication Manager
Communication Manager
Average Pay

Average Salary
$69,836
$85,342
$85,800
$91,998
$92,770
$98,223
$104,405
$129,641
$136,768
$161,299
$105,608

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Roswell
DeKalb
Suwanee
Athens-Clarke
Chamblee
Alpharetta
Doraville
Woodstock

Communications Officer I, II
Communications Officer I, II
Communications Officer I, II
Communications Officer I, II
Communications Officer I, II
Communications Officer I, II
Communications Officer I, II
Communications Officer I, II
Average Pay

Average Salary
$39,912
$42,241
$42,588
$43,150
$51,230
$56,206

D-6

Job Title

Sandy Springs
Dunwoody
Lawrenceville
Chamblee
Johns Creek
Suwanee
Stockbridge
Doraville
Douglasville

Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Average Pay

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024
Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Range
Maximum

$41,600
$41,140
$43,902
$45,406

$63,107
$63,767
$68,048
$72,613

$47,073
$48,401
$56,929
$40,697
$43,805
$49,127
$49,171
$39,520
$38,864

$81,436
$77,422
$79,910
$73,018
$67,954
$82,533
$65,853
$60,320
$60,249

$46,072
$43,534

$75,442
$71,365

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$58,411
$64,569
$98,363

$91,687
$103,310
$162,302

$64,222
$73,087
$83,180
$96,953
$102,142
$106,957
$61,531

$102,536
$113,275
$111,409
$155,126
$168,534
$172,200
$98,467

$65,083
$61,506

$106,621
$100,383

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$36,046
$41,140
$41,808
$38,760
$46,765
$42,794
$39,520

$57,658
$63,767
$66,898
$63,076
$65,230
$74,033
$60,320

$39,728
$37,544

$68,370
$64,626

$45,888

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Range
Minimum

Average Salary
$46,788
$53,851
$54,511
$54,725
$57,859
$61,443
$65,000
$56,311

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$46,788
$43,806

$74,860
$70,091

$54,607
$45,469
$48,401
$58,751
$34,320
$36,400

$74,681
$60,902
$77,422
$91,064
$54,080
$57,364

$41,746
$39,437

$68,370
$64,626

Alpharetta
Doraville
Woodstock

Communications Officer I, II
Communications Officer I, II
Communications Officer I, II
Average Pay

$56,206

Job Title

Sandy Springs
Dunwoody
Lawrenceville
Chamblee
Johns Creek
Suwanee
Stockbridge
Doraville
Douglasville

Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Court Clerk
Average Pay

Average Salary
$46,788
$53,851
$54,511
$54,725
$57,859
$61,443
$65,000
$56,311

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

DeKalb
Athens-Clarke
Roswell
Brookhaven
Suwanee
Woodstock
Stockbridge
Chamblee
Douglasville

Crew Worker
Crew Worker
Crew Worker
Crew Worker
Crew Worker
Crew Worker
Crew Worker
Crew Worker
Crew Worker
Average Pay

Average Salary
$35,717
$37,104
$38,474
$38,948
$40,218
$42,058
$45,000
$49,483
$40,875

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Gainesville
Athens-Clarke
Roswell
DeKalb
Johns Creek

Deputy Fire Chief
Deputy Fire Chief
Deputy Fire Chief
Deputy Fire Chief
Deputy Fire Chief
Average Pay

Average Salary
$94,500
$106,242
$109,366
$124,489
$128,276
$112,575

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Woodstock
Athens-Clarke
Gainesville
Chamblee
Roswell
Brookhaven
Dunwoody
DeKalb
Sandy Springs
Doraville
Douglasville

Deputy Police Chief
Deputy Police Chief
Deputy Police Chief
Deputy Police Chief
Deputy Police Chief
Deputy Police Chief
Deputy Police Chief
Deputy Police Chief
Deputy Police Chief
Deputy Police Chief
Deputy Police Chief
Average Pay

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

$74,033
$60,320

$39,728
$37,544

$68,370
$64,626

$45,888

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

$42,794
$39,520

Average Salary
$101,088
$108,197
$112,273
$116,500
$124,156
$127,000
$131,096
$136,751
$168,000
$125,007

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$46,788
$43,806

$74,860
$70,091

$54,607
$45,469
$48,401
$58,751
$34,320
$36,400

$74,681
$60,902
$77,422
$91,064
$54,080
$57,364

$41,746
$39,437

$68,370
$64,626

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$30,364
$32,448

$47,065
$51,893

$36,068
$36,118
$41,600
$41,811
$41,990
$36,400

$46,928
$57,789
$64,896
$64,808
$56,973
$57,364

$36,005
$32,365

$58,968
$53,040

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$71,427
$90,306

$117,853
$122,178

$121,084
$95,773

$194,945
$128,276

$87,506
$78,770

$143,374
$129,085

Range
Minimum

Appendix D
Salary Survey

Range
Maximum

$86,568
$104,114
$71,427
$87,078
$108,368
$101,920
$102,142
$121,084
$139,033
$93,600
$101,542

$135,931
$140,860
$117,853
$135,375
$176,093
$156,918
$168,534
$194,945
$225,929
$145,600
$167,534

$87,506
$78,770

$143,374
$129,085

CITY OF DECATUR

D-7

Participant

Job Title

Gainesville
DeKalb
Marietta
Athens-Clarke
Roswell
Woodstock
Chamblee
Doraville
Douglasville

Equipment Operator
Equipment Operator
Equipment Operator
Equipment Operator
Equipment Operator
Equipment Operator
Equipment Operator
Equipment Operator
Equipment Operator
Average Pay

Average Salary
$33,821
$36,383
$38,307
$43,084
$45,289
$45,635
$57,540
$42,866

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Woodstock
Sandy Springs
DeKalb
Gainesville
Athens-Clarke
Brookhaven
Suwanee

Facilities Operation Manager
Facilities Operation Manager
Facilities Operation Manager
Facilities Operation Manager
Facilities Operation Manager
Facilities Operation Manager
Facilities Operation Manager
Average Pay

Average Salary
$53,539
$54,162
$58,210
$63,233
$68,584
$77,868
$85,321
$65,845

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Gainesville
Athens-Clarke
DeKalb
Marietta
Sandy Springs
Alpharetta
Johns Creek
Woodstock

Fire Apparatus Operator
Fire Apparatus Operator
Fire Apparatus Operator
Fire Apparatus Operator
Fire Apparatus Operator
Fire Apparatus Operator
Fire Apparatus Operator
Fire Apparatus Operator
Average Pay

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

D-8

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Average Salary
$54,889
$61,117
$62,385
$65,283
$68,836
$69,350
$76,289
$101,974
$70,015

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$30,826
$32,158

$47,757
$49,848

$35,156

$60,072

$43,285
$44,457
$42,640
$40,817

$67,517
$60,693
$64,480
$65,288

$37,814
$35,734

$61,963
$58,552

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$49,691
$54,162
$52,815
$46,904
$54,539
$56,333
$64,569

$77,730
$86,660
$81,863
$75,026
$69,533
$90,132
$103,310

$58,968
$53,040

$96,595
$86,944

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$47,651
$49,475
$52,715
$56,479
$67,582
$47,073
$57,888
$71,540

$73,888
$66,937
$81,708
$88,107
$104,752
$81,436
$77,511
$112,342

$53,435
$48,048

$87,506
$78,770

Participant

Job Title

Chamblee
Woodstock
Athens-Clarke
Brookhaven
Gainesville
Roswell
Marietta
Dunwoody
Suwanee
Lawrenceville
Johns Creek
Sandy Springs
Alpharetta
DeKalb
Doraville
Douglasville

Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Finance Director
Average Pay

Average Salary
$122,074
$123,022
$128,801
$131,250
$136,500
$139,277
$142,854
$143,500
$152,318
$167,104
$184,678
$185,000
$215,046
$224,890
$156,880

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Gainesville
Athens-Clarke
DeKalb
Sandy Springs
Woodstock
Johns Creek
Marietta
Alpharetta

Fire Captain
Fire Captain
Fire Captain
Fire Captain
Fire Captain
Fire Captain
Fire Captain (LT)
Fire Captain (LT)
Average Pay

Average Salary
$70,708
$72,304
$75,118
$86,084
$88,408
$105,703
$84,950
$97,738
$85,127

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Stockbridge
Gainesville
Athens-Clarke
Woodstock
Marietta
Johns Creek
Roswell
DeKalb
Sandy Springs

Fire Chief
Fire Chief
Fire Chief
Fire Chief
Fire Chief
Fire Chief
Fire Chief
Fire Chief
Fire Chief
Average Pay

Average Salary
$92,000
$105,023
$128,911
$128,922
$142,002
$154,211
$154,378
$175,426
$197,431
$142,034

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Woodstock
Athens-Clarke
Johns Creek
DeKalb

Fire SGT
Fire SGT
Fire SGT
Fire SGT
Average Pay

Average Salary
$44,429
$67,286
$75,844

Job Title

Gainesville
Marietta

Firefighter I,II
Firefighter I,II

Range
Maximum

$97,416
$95,240
$107,982
$109,781
$98,363
$97,940

$146,731
$149,524
$167,359
$175,650
$162,302
$155,334

$119,138
$103,989

$196,578
$166,382

$146,566

$196,307

$147,779
$93,600
$94,891

$229,058
$145,600
$156,343

$96,595
$91,353

$158,267
$149,328

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$57,821
$59,847
$63,106
$83,600
$63,394
$79,834
$72,649
$62,654

$92,491
$80,971
$97,815
$129,580
$103,842
$106,902
$116,204
$109,018

$75,442
$67,912

$123,635
$111,301

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$97,224
$91,125
$106,575
$95,240

$150,697
$150,363
$156,729
$149,524

$128,607
$97,094
$146,845

$172,253
$155,334
$236,420

$101,483
$91,353

$166,275
$149,328

Range
Minimum

Appendix D
Salary Survey

Range
Maximum

$52,067
$53,114
$61,193

$83,196
$71,861
$81,978

$61,963
$55,723

$101,483
$91,354

$62,520

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Range
Minimum

Average Salary
$46,943
$48,752

Range
Minimum
$43,297
$45,020

Range
Maximum
$67,026
$70,425

CITY OF DECATUR

D-9

Athens-Clarke
Johns Creek
DeKalb

Fire SGT
Fire SGT
Fire SGT
Average Pay

$67,286
$75,844

Job Title

Gainesville
Marietta
DeKalb
Woodstock
Athens-Clarke
Alpharetta
Johns Creek
Sandy Springs

Firefighter I,II
Firefighter I,II
Firefighter I,II
Firefighter I,II
Firefighter I,II
Firefighter I,II
Firefighter I,II
Firefighter I,II
Average Pay

Average Salary
$46,943
$48,752
$48,919
$50,611
$51,698
$57,487
$61,083
$61,974
$53,433

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Stockbridge
Suwanee
Woodstock
Marietta
Chamblee
Roswell
Lawrenceville
Athens-Clarke
Alpharetta
Gainesville
Dunwoody
Brookhaven
Sandy Springs
Johns Creek
DeKalb
Doraville
Douglasville

HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
HR Director
Average Pay

Average Salary
$90,000
$96,740
$106,118
$115,523
$116,787
$118,019
$122,000
$131,590
$136,111
$141,750
$144,108
$146,002
$152,250
$152,453
$186,428
$130,392

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Woodstock
Gainesville
Stockbridge
Athens-Clarke
Suwanee
Brookhaven
Johns Creek
Sandy Springs
DeKalb
Lawrenceville
Dunwoody
Roswell
Douglasville

HR Generalist
HR Generalist
HR Generalist
HR Generalist
HR Generalist
HR Generalist
HR Generalist
HR Generalist
HR Generalist
HR Generalist
HR Generalist
HR Generalist
HR Generalist
Average Pay

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

D-10

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

$71,861
$81,978

$61,963
$55,723

$101,483
$91,354

$62,520

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

$53,114
$61,193

Average Salary
$45,760
$46,301
$53,000
$53,146
$57,075
$60,000
$64,965
$66,607
$67,496
$70,723
$75,712
$106,785
$63,964

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$43,297
$45,020
$45,161
$47,174
$46,028
$47,073
$43,118
$50,600

$67,026
$70,425
$69,998
$75,392
$62,273
$81,436
$66,821
$78,430

$48,402
$41,434

$83,283
$71,365

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$84,919
$71,026
$86,568
$91,853
$87,078
$91,458

$131,624
$113,641
$135,931
$146,702
$135,375
$146,328

$107,982

$167,359

$98,363
$102,142
$103,762

$162,302
$168,534
$166,021

$121,225
$139,613
$79,040
$94,891

$162,366
$224,778
$120,640
$156,343

$91,936
$82,762

$150,634
$135,616

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$39,333
$46,596
$47,112
$43,902
$44,102
$58,936
$59,714
$50,119

$60,944
$72,131
$73,018
$70,242
$70,564
$78,938
$77,628
$77,684

$51,096
$66,706
$48,149

$81,754
$106,725
$77,033

$53,435
$50,482

$87,506
$82,763

Participant

Job Title

DeKalb
Woodstock
Athens-Clarke
Stockbridge
Chamblee
Gainesville
Roswell
Alpharetta
Johns Creek
Suwanee
Sandy Springs
Doraville
Douglasville

Permit and Zoning Tech
Permit and Zoning Tech
Permit and Zoning Tech
Permit and Zoning Tech
Permit and Zoning Tech
Permit and Zoning Tech
Permit and Zoning Tech
Permit and Zoning Tech
Permit and Zoning Tech
Permit and Zoning Tech
Permit and Zoning Tech
Permit and Zoning Tech
Permit and Zoning Tech
Average Pay

Average Salary
$43,238
$43,680
$45,744
$49,000
$49,920
$51,626
$51,715
$52,047
$58,989
$62,358
$63,850
$52,015

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Woodstock
DeKalb
Suwanee
Stockbridge
Athens-Clarke
Gainesville
Brookhaven
Sandy Springs
Lawrenceville
Johns Creek
Chamblee
Doraville
Douglasville

Planner
Planner
Planner
Planner
Planner
Planner
Planner
Planner
Planner
Planner
Planner
Planner
Planner
Average Pay

Average Salary
$45,833
$48,323
$50,003
$53,000
$56,523
$60,236
$65,023
$66,607
$66,799
$74,901
$80,617
$60,715

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Stockbridge
Suwanee
Woodstock
Brookhaven
Lawrenceville
Johns Creek
Marietta
Roswell
Gainesville
Athens-Clarke
Dunwoody
Sandy Springs
DeKalb
Doraville
Douglasville

Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Average Pay

Average Salary
$85,000
$96,439
$106,566
$107,427
$110,789
$114,476
$119,704
$134,929
$137,258
$144,818
$152,405
$162,750

$122,713

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Stockbridge
Athens-Clarke
Gainesville
DeKalb
Suwanee
Lawrenceville

Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain

Average Salary
$90,000
$90,509
$91,152
$95,613
$95,669
$96,293

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$37,546
$41,600
$33,482
$46,536
$47,784
$41,288
$38,938
$42,794
$45,469
$41,811
$62,700
$39,520
$38,864

$58,200
$54,413
$54,488
$72,131
$67,716
$63,960
$42,254
$74,033
$60,902
$66,898
$100,320
$60,320
$60,249

$46,072
$43,534

$75,442
$71,365

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$45,833
$48,323
$48,401
$55,425
$44,869
$51,834
$51,922
$59,714

$71,960
$74,905
$77,442
$85,909
$80,502
$82,930
$83,070
$105,336

$58,936
$64,227
$49,920
$48,149

$89,780
$95,871
$76,960
$77,033

$53,435
$50,482

$84,506
$82,763

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$74,171
$58,699
$86,568
$103,762

$114,966
$151,256
$135,931
$166,021

$110,819
$102,835
$97,940
$98,363
$97,943
$102,142

$148,428
$164,217
$155,334
$162,302
$151,799
$168,534

$86,320
$94,891

$132,080
$156,343

$96,595
$91,353

$158,267
$149,328

Range
Minimum
$74,171
$77,579
$75,304
$78,218
$78,128

Appendix D
Salary Survey

Range
Maximum
$114,966
$104,961
$116,735
$121,237
$125,005

CITY OF DECATUR

D-11

DeKalb
Doraville
Douglasville

Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Planning And Economic Development Director
Average Pay

$122,713

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Stockbridge
Athens-Clarke
Gainesville
DeKalb
Suwanee
Lawrenceville
Woodstock
Chamblee
Brookhaven
Dunwoody
Alpharetta
Johns Creek
Sandy Springs
Doraville
Douglasville

Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Police Captain
Average Pay

Average Salary
$90,000
$90,509
$91,152
$95,613
$95,669
$96,293
$97,028
$109,247
$115,098
$119,579
$120,722
$123,778
$127,629
$105,563

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Gainesville
Athens-Clarke
Woodstock
Stockbridge
Suwanee
Brookhaven
Lawrenceville
Johns Creek
Roswell
Dunwoody
Sandy Springs
DeKalb
Chamblee
Doraville
Douglasville

Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Average Pay

Average Salary
$121,654
$128,915
$129,709
$140,000
$140,379
$142,418
$151,637
$161,736
$180,419
$192,372
$208,950
$249,950

$162,345

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

D-12

Participant

Job Title

Average Salary

Athens-Clarke
Gainesville
Marietta
Stockbridge
Lawrenceville
Brookhaven
DeKalb
Woodstock
Suwanee
Chamblee
Dunwoody
Alpharetta
Roswell
Johns Creek

Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT

$80,116
$80,324
$82,196
$85,000
$86,210
$87,363
$89,493
$89,552
$89,556
$95,179
$97,630
$101,455
$110,183
$110,925

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

$86,320
$94,891

$132,080
$156,343

$96,595
$91,353

$158,267
$149,328

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$74,171
$77,579
$75,304
$78,218
$78,128

$114,966
$104,961
$116,735
$121,237
$125,005

$62,493
$83,695
$87,121
$87,570
$75,811
$92,414
$109,873
$79,040
$77,456

$98,109
$124,818
$131,040
$144,490
$131,154
$123,778
$178,740
$120,640
$127,807

$75,442
$67,912

$123,635
$111,301

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$91,125
$106,575
$95,240
$111,311
$103,989
$103,762

$150,363
$156,729
$149,524
$172,533
$166,382
$166,021

$128,607
$143,021
$119,138

$172,253
$232,419
$196,578

$155,429
$117,362
$102,960
$108,648

$250,240
$175,905
$158,080
$179,249

$101,483
$91,353

$166,275
$149,328

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$69,116
$68,337
$67,896
$69,973

$93,510
$105,924
$108,599
$108,458

$72,598
$70,661
$70,345
$64,569
$72,308
$69,515
$62,654
$87,714
$86,600

$109,200
$109,526
$106,926
$103,310
$112,077
$114,702
$109,018
$142,542
$115,994

Chamblee
Doraville
Douglasville

Police Chief
Police Chief
Police Chief
Average Pay

$162,345

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Athens-Clarke
Gainesville
Marietta
Stockbridge
Lawrenceville
Brookhaven
DeKalb
Woodstock
Suwanee
Chamblee
Dunwoody
Alpharetta
Roswell
Johns Creek
Sandy Springs
Douglasville

Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Police LT
Average Pay

Average Salary
$80,116
$80,324
$82,196
$85,000
$86,210
$87,363
$89,493
$89,552
$89,556
$95,179
$97,630
$101,455
$110,183
$110,925
$117,595
$93,518

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23
Participant

Job Title

Marietta
Gainesville
Suwanee
Athens-Clarke
DeKalb
Stockbridge
Woodstock
Lawrenceville
Dunwoody
Johns Creek
Roswell
Chamblee
Brookhaven
Alpharetta
Sandy Springs

Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Police Officer
Average Pay

Average Salary
$48,157
$49,997
$50,799
$51,137
$52,739
$53,000
$56,548
$60,675
$60,685
$62,943
$63,554
$65,738
$65,920
$68,752
$74,268
$58,994

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Suwanee
Stockbridge
Marietta
Athens-Clarke
Lawrenceville
Gainesville
Woodstock
DeKalb
Dunwoody
Chamblee
Brookhaven
Alpharetta
Johns Creek
Roswell
Sandy Springs
Douglasville

Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Police SGT
Average Pay

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Average Salary
$64,497
$65,000
$67,345
$69,048
$71,515
$72,268
$74,526
$77,579
$79,080
$79,476
$82,409
$84,843
$90,964
$98,401
$100,815
$78,518

$117,362
$102,960
$108,648

$175,905
$158,080
$179,249

$101,483
$91,353

$166,275
$149,328

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$69,116
$68,337
$67,896
$69,973

$93,510
$105,924
$108,599
$108,458

$72,598
$70,661
$70,345
$64,569
$72,308
$69,515
$62,654
$87,714
$86,600
$96,494
$64,425

$109,200
$109,526
$106,926
$103,310
$112,077
$114,702
$109,018
$142,542
$115,994
$156,803
$103,086

$68,370
$61,506

$112,008
$100,838

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$45,011
$48,660
$48,401
$50,218
$47,048
$49,328
$52,591

$70,443
$75,479
$77,442
$53,172
$72,924
$76,459
$79,937

$51,096
$52,395
$55,765
$55,779
$50,440
$51,780
$61,341

$81,754
$70,151
$90,626
$79,910
$74,664
$90,098
$118,421

$53,435
$48,048

$91,936
$82,763

Range
Minimum

Appendix D
Salary Survey

Range
Maximum

$58,699
$66,012
$56,479
$59,434

$93,918
$102,319
$88,107
$80,411

$61,982
$64,419
$63,106
$64,367
$62,568
$63,519
$56,958
$74,046
$75,524
$83,070
$61,531

$96,052
$97,914
$97,815
$102,986
$91,489
$95,680
$99,107
$99,155
$122,720
$134,989
$98,467

$61,963
$55,723

$101,483
$91,354

CITY OF DECATUR

D-13

Participant

Job Title

Gainesville
DeKalb
Woodstock
Brookhaven
Athens-Clarke
Roswell
Chamblee
Sandy Springs
Douglasville

Program Supervisor
Program Supervisor
Program Supervisor
Program Supervisor
Program Supervisor
Program Supervisor
Program Supervisor
Program Supervisor
Program Supervisor
Average Pay

Average Salary
$40,955
$48,027
$54,766
$55,000
$55,256
$58,781
$64,503
$72,000
$56,161

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

DeKalb
Gainesville
Athens-Clarke
Woodstock
Roswell
Chamblee
Douglasville

Sanitation Equipment Operator 1
Sanitation Equipment Operator 1
Sanitation Equipment Operator 1
Sanitation Equipment Operator 1
Sanitation Equipment Operator 1
Sanitation Equipment Operator 1
Sanitation Equipment Operator 1
Average Pay

Average Salary
$39,755
$41,153
$41,356
$42,099
$43,141
$53,227
$43,455

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Athens-Clarke
DeKalb
Woodstock
Gainesville
Suwanee

Sr. Engineer
Sr. Engineer
Sr. Engineer
Sr. Engineer
Sr. Engineer
Average Pay

Average Salary
$74,037
$80,580
$84,813
$91,745
$93,017
$84,838

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

Participant

Job Title

Sandy Springs
DeKalb
Gainesville
Roswell
Athens-Clarke
Woodstock

Transportation Engineer
Transportation Engineer
Transportation Engineer
Transportation Engineer
Transportation Engineer
Transportation Engineer
Average Pay

Decatur FY23-24
Decatur FY22-23

D-14

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Average Salary
$74,970
$78,942
$79,952
$110,531
$126,033

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$40,955
$46,529
$49,296
$44,102
$47,112

$64,293
$72,119
$76,898
$70,564
$73,018

$58,524
$65,835
$51,032

$83,712
$105,336
$81,656

$50,856
$48,048

$83,283
$78,770

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$35,752
$33,946
$32,448
$41,600

$55,414
$52,666
$57,211
$64,896

$44,457
$40,817

$60,693
$65,288

$36,005
$32,365

$58,968
$53,040

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$73,087
$67,183
$78,712
$79,477
$64,569

$113,275
$104,133
$123,574
$119,226
$103,310

$79,269
$74,984

$129,896
$122,866

Range
Minimum

Range
Maximum

$69,126
$67,183
$75,670

$110,602
$104,133
$113,526

$113,381

$175,727

$79,269
$74,984

$129,896
$122,866

$94,086

Appendix E
Demographic
& Statistical
Information
Budget FY 2023-2024

FISCAL YEAR 2023-2024

Demographic
& Statistical
Information

T

Date of
Incorporation:
1823

he City of Decatur government is a commission-manager style of government
with a city manager. The Five City Commissioners are elected in nonpartisan
elections for overlapping four-year terms. Each January, Commissioners elect
two of their fellow members to serve as Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem. The City
Commissioners determine the policies of the City and enact the local laws necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. They provide leadership
in identifying community needs and developing programs to meet community objectives.
They oversee the delivery of services to citizens and are responsible for adoption of an annual budget and the levying of taxes necessary to finance local government operations.

Date First
Charter Adopted:
1909

City Commission meetings are held the first and third Mondays of a month in the City
Commission meeting room of the Decatur City Hall, 509 North McDonough Street. In
addition to the City Commission, various boards and commissions assist in carrying out
established policies.

Form of Government:
Commission-Manager

Date Present
Charter Adopted:
2001
Location:
6 miles east of Atlanta, Ga.

Active Living Advisory Board meets the 1st Tuesday of the month, 8 am
Better Together Advisory Board meets the 1st Tuesday of the month, 6:30 pm
Decatur Development Authorities meets the 2nd Friday of the month, 8 am
Decatur Youth Council meets the first Wednesday of the month, May-September, 4 pm
Environmental Sustainability Board meets the 4th Friday of the month, 9 am
Lifelong Community Advisory Board meets the 4th Monday of the month, 6:30 pm
Historic Preservation Commission meets the 3rd Tuesday of the month, 6:30 pm
Planning Commission meets the 2nd Tuesday of the month, 7 pm
Zoning Board of Appeals meets the 2nd Monday of the month, 7:30 pm

CITY OF DECATUR

E-3

From the 2020 Census and 2017-2021 American Community Survey
Total Estimated Population:

24,569


Population Composition:
White
69.4%

Area –
square miles:
4.7

Population by Age:

Number of
Registered Voters:
20,626

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

15.6%

Hispanic

6.9%

Other

8.1%

Under 19

8,438

20 to 24

775

25 to 34

1,844

35 to 54

7,622

55 to 64

2,869

65 & over

2,786

Median Age:

38.6

Educational Attainment:

High school graduate

9.1%

Some college, no degree

12.2%

Bachelor’s degree

31.5%

Graduate degree

43.1%

Median household income:

$123,617

Mean household income:

$170,591

Per capita income:

$63,021

Occupations:

Management

78%

Service

5%

Sales

14%

Construction & Maintenance

1%

Production & Transportation

2%

Housing:

E-4

Black

Total Number of Units

10,064

Occupied Units

8,906

Single-family houses

54.3%

Multi-family units

45.7%

Owner Occupied Units

67.2%

Renter Occupied Units

32.8%

Appendix E
Demographics

From the City’s Annual Comprehensive Financial Report
(FY Ended June 30, 2022)
2022 assessed valuation:

$2,743,113

Net Bonded Debt per capita:

$3,916

Ratio of Net Bonded Debt to Assessed Value:

4%

City Bond Rating:

Aa1/AA+

Major Employers

1. DeKalb County Government
2. City Schools of Decatur
3. Emory Healthcare
4. Agnes Scott College
5. KW Commercial
6. City of Decatur
7. US Postal Service
8. Task Force for Global Heath
9. Utility Associates
10. Pathways Transition Program

1,345
896
864
400
250
230
176
136
108
95

FROM CITY STAFF
Number of Full-Time Employees:

254

Fire Protection
Number of Stations

2

Number of Fire Apparatus

7

Number of FT Employees

40

ISO Classification

II

Police Protection
Number of Stations:

1

Number of FT Employees:

61

Number of Police Vehicles:

40

Municipal Sanitation Service
Number of Residential Consumers:

6,100

Number of Employees:

18

Number of Commercial Consumers:

222

Number of Vehicles:

11

Number of Parks & Playgrounds: 20

Number of Tennis Courts:

9

Acreage in Parks & Playgrounds: 193

Number of Athletic Fields:

8

Number of Swimming Pools:

Number of Recreation Buildings: 4

Active Living

5


Miles of Streets, Sidewalks
Streets paved:

69.6

Sidewalks paved:

82.4
CITY OF DECATUR

E-5

E-6

ADOPTED BUDGET • 2023-2024

Appendix F
CITIZEN
SURVEY
RESULTS
Budget FY 2023-2024

Decatur, GA
The National Community Survey
Report of Results
2022

Report by:

Visit us online!
www.polco.us

About The NCS™
The National Community Survey™ (The NCS™) report is about the
“livability” of Decatur. A livable community is a place that is not simply
habitable, but that is desirable. It is not only where people do live, but
where they want to live. The survey was developed by the experts from
National Research Center at Polco.
Great communities are partnerships of the government, private sector,
community-based organizations and residents, all geographically
connected. The NCS captures residents’ opinions considering ten central
facets of a community:
• Economy
• Mobility
• Community Design
• Utilities
• Safety
• Natural Environment
• Parks and Recreation
• Health and Wellness
• Education, Arts, and Culture
• Inclusivity and Engagement
The report provides the opinions of a representative sample of 573
residents of the City of Decatur collected from March 21, 2022 to May 9,
2022. The margin of error around any reported percentage is 4% for all
respondents and the response rate for the 2022 survey was 21%. Survey
results were weighted so that the demographic proﬁle of respondents was
representative of the demographic proﬁle of adults in Decatur.

How the results are reported
For the most part, the percentages presented in the following tabs represent the “percent positive.” Most commonly, the
percent positive is the combination of the top two most positive response options (i.e., excellent/good, very safe/somewhat safe,
etc.). On many of the questions in the survey respondents may answer “don’t know.” The proportion of respondents giving this
reply is shown in the full set of responses included in the tab “Complete data.” However, these responses have been removed
from the analyses presented in most of the tabs. In other words, the tables and graphs display the responses from respondents
who had an opinion about a speciﬁc item.

Comparisons to benchmarks
NRC’s database of comparative resident opinion is comprised of resident perspectives gathered in surveys from over 600
communities whose residents evaluated the same kinds of topics on The National Community Survey. The comparison
evaluations are from the most recent survey completed in each community in the last ﬁve years. NRC adds the latest results
quickly upon survey completion, keeping the benchmark data fresh and relevant. The communities in the database represent a
wide geographic and population range. In each tab, Decatur's results are noted as being “higher” than the benchmark, “lower”
than the benchmark, or “similar” to the benchmark, meaning that the average rating given by Decatur residents is statistically
similar to or diﬀerent (greater or lesser) than the benchmark. Being rated as “higher” or “lower” than the benchmark means that
Decatur's average rating for a particular item was more than 10 points diﬀerent than the benchmark. If a rating was “much
higher” or “much lower,” then Decatur's average rating was more than 20 points diﬀerent when compared to the benchmark.
The survey was administered during the COVID-19 pandemic, a time of challenge for many local governments. While we provide
comparisons to national benchmarks, it is important to note that much of the benchmark data was collected prior to the
pandemic. This may impact how your City's 2022 ratings compare to other communities’ ratings from the past ﬁve years.

Trends over time

1

Trend data for Decatur represent important comparison data and should be examined for improvements or declines*. Deviations
from stable trends over time represent opportunities for understanding how local policies, programs, or public information may

comparisons to national benchmarks, it is important to note that much of the benchmark data was collected prior to the
pandemic. This may impact how your City's 2022 ratings compare to other communities’ ratings from the past ﬁve years.

Trends over time
Trend data for Decatur represent important comparison data and should be examined for improvements or declines*. Deviations
from stable trends over time represent opportunities for understanding how local policies, programs, or public information may
have aﬀected residents' opinions. Changes between survey years have been noted with an arrow and the percent diﬀerence. If
the diﬀerence is greater than 6 percentage points between the 2020 and 2022 surveys, the change is statistically signiﬁcant.
* In 2020, The NCS survey was updated to include new and refreshed items. Consequently, some of the trends may be impacted
due to wording modiﬁcations that could have potentially altered the meaning of the item for the respondent.

2

Methods
Selecting survey recipients
All households within the City of Decatur were eligible to participate in the survey. A list of all households within the zip codes
serving Decatur was purchased from Go-Dog Direct based on updated listings from the United States Postal Service. Since some
of the zip codes that serve the City of Decatur households may also serve addresses that lie outside of the community, the exact
geographic location of each housing unit was compared to community boundaries using the most current municipal boundary
ﬁle. Addresses located outside of the City of Decatur boundaries were removed from the list of potential households to survey.
Each address identiﬁed as being within city boundaries was further identiﬁed as being within one of the two districts. From that
list, addresses were randomly selected as survey recipients, with multi-family housing units (deﬁned as those with a unit
number) sampled at a rate of 53 compared to single family housing units.
An individual within each household was selected using the birthday method. The birthday method selects a person within the
household by asking the “person whose birthday has most recently passed” to complete the questionnaire. The underlying
assumption in this method is that day of birth has no relationship to the way people respond to surveys. This instruction was
contained in the introduction of the survey.

Conducting the survey
The 2,800 randomly selected households received mailings beginning on March 21, 2021 and the survey remained open for 7
weeks. The ﬁrst mailing was a postcard inviting the household to participate in the survey. The next mailing contained a cover
letter with instructions, the survey questionnaire, and a postage-paid return envelope. All mailings included a web link to give
residents the opportunity to respond to the survey online. All follow-up mailings asked those who had not completed the survey
to do so and those who had already done so to refrain from completing the survey again.
About 3% of the 2800 mailed invitations or surveys were returned because the household address was vacant or the postal
service was unable to deliver the survey as addressed. Of the remaining 2721 households that received the invitations to
participate, 573 completed the survey, providing an overall response rate of 21%. The response rate was calculated using
AAPOR’s response rate #2* for mailed surveys of unnamed persons.
It is customary to describe the precision of estimates made from surveys by a “level of conﬁdence” and accompanying
“conﬁdence interval” (or margin of error). A traditional level of conﬁdence, and the one used here, is 95%. The 95% conﬁdence
interval can be any size and quantiﬁes the sampling error or imprecision of the survey results because some residents’ opinions
are relied on to estimate all residents’ opinions. The margin of error for the City of Decatur survey is no greater than plus or
minus 4 percentage points around any given percent reported for all respondents (573 completed surveys).
In addition to the randomly selected “probability sample” of households, a link to an online open participation survey was
publicized by the City of Decatur. The open participation survey was identical to the probability sample survey with two small
updates; it included a map at the beginning asking where the respondent lives and a question about where they heard about the
survey. The open participation survey was open to all city residents and became available on April 25, 2022. The survey remained
open for 2 weeks. The data presented in the following tabs exclude the open participation survey data, but a tab at the end
provides the complete frequency of responses to questions by the open participation respondents.

3

Analyzing the data
Responses from mailed surveys were entered into an electronic dataset using a “key and verify” method, where all responses are

Analyzing the data
Responses from mailed surveys were entered into an electronic dataset using a “key and verify” method, where all responses are
entered twice and compared to each other. Any discrepancies were resolved in comparison to the original survey form. Range
checks as well as other forms of quality control were also performed. Responses from surveys completed on Polco were
downloaded and merged with the mailed survey responses.
The demographics of the survey respondents were compared to those found in the 2010 Census and 2019 American Community
Survey estimates for adults in the City of Decatur. The primary objective of weighting survey data is to make the survey
respondents reﬂective of the larger population of the community. The characteristics used for weighting were age, sex, race,
Hispanic origin, housing type, housing tenure, and area. No adjustments were made for design eﬀects. Weights were calculated
using an iterative, multiplicative raking model known as the ANES Weighting Algorithm.* The results of the weighting scheme for
the probability sample are presented in the following table.
NRC aligns demographic labels with those used by the U.S. Census for reporting purposes, when possible. Some categories (e.g.,
age, race/Hispanic origin, housing type, and length of residency) are combined into smaller subgroups.

Age

Area
Hispanic origin

18-34

Unweighted
8%

Weighted
22%

Target*
22%

35-54

42%

46%

46%

55+

50%

32%

31%

District 1

64%

57%

57%

District 2

36%

43%

43%

No, not Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino

96%

96%

96%

Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino

4%

4%

4%

Own

83%

66%

66%

Rent

17%

34%

34%

Attached

38%

47%

47%

Detached

62%

53%

53%

Race & Hispanic
origin

Not white alone

21%

30%

30%

White alone, not Hispanic or Latino

79%

70%

70%

Sex

Female

61%

59%

59%

Male

39%

41%

41%

Female 18-34

5%

16%

16%

Female 35-54

26%

25%

25%

Female 55+

30%

18%

18%

Housing tenure
Housing type

Sex/age

Male 18-34

3%

6%

6%

Male 35-54

16%

21%

21%

Male 55+

20%

13%

13%

4
The survey datasets were analyzed using all or some of a combination of the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS),
R,
Python and Tableau. For the most part, the percentages presented in the reports represent the “percent positive.” The percent
positive is the combination of the top two most positive response options (i.e., excellent/good, very safe/somewhat safe,

The survey datasets were analyzed using all or some of a combination of the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS), R,
Python and Tableau. For the most part, the percentages presented in the reports represent the “percent positive.” The percent
positive is the combination of the top two most positive response options (i.e., excellent/good, very safe/somewhat safe,
essential/very important, etc.), or, in the case of resident behaviors/participation, the percent positive represents the proportion
of respondents indicating “yes” or participating in an activity at least once a month.
On many of the questions in the survey respondents may answer “don’t know.” The proportion of respondents giving this reply is
shown in the full set of responses included in the tab “Complete data”. However, these responses have been removed from the
analyses presented in the reports. In other words, the tables and graphs display the responses from respondents who had an
opinion about a speciﬁc item.

Contact
The City of Decatur funded this research. Please contact Meredith Roark of the City of Decatur at
Meredith.Roark@decaturga.com if you have any questions about the survey.

Survey Validity
See the Polco Knowledge Base article on survey validity at https://info.polco.us/knowledge/statistical-vali
* See AAPOR's Standard Deﬁnitions for more information at
https://www.aapor.org/Publications-Media/AAPOR-Journals/Standard-Deﬁnitions.aspx
* Pasek, J. (2010). ANES Weighting Algorithm. Retrieved from
https://web.stanford.edu/group/iriss/cgi-bin/anesrake/resources/RakingDescription.pdf
* Targets come from the 2010 Census and 2019 American Community Survey

5

Highlights
Decatur residents continue to experience a high quality of life.
All items relating to the quality of life in Decatur received high marks and were largely similar to the previous iteration of The
NCS. About 9 in 10 survey participants gave positive ratings to Decatur as a place to live, the overall quality of life in the city, and
the overall image or reputation of Decatur. These were all higher than the national comparisons. A strong majority of residents
reported that they would recommend living in Decatur to someone who asks (94% very or somewhat likely) and also planned to
remain in Decatur for the next ﬁve years (84%). Both of these were similar to ratings given in comparison communities
nationwide; however, the proportion of respondents who planned to remain in Decatur for the next ﬁve years declined slightly
since the previous survey, dropping from 93% to 84%.

Residents report widespread use of alternate forms of transportation, while other areas of mobility present
opportunities for growth.
Decatur residents show continued support and use of alternate forms of transportation in the city. This is highlighted by strong
evaluations of the ease of walking in Decatur, rated positively by 90% of residents, which was higher than the national
benchmark. About 6 in 10 gave excellent or good marks to the ease of travel by bicycle, on par with peer comparison
communities. A similarly high proportion approved of the ease of travel by public transportation (58%) and favorably reviewed
the city’s bus or transit services (70%), both of which exceeded the national averages. These positive ratings aligned with the
demonstrated use of these alternate modes of transportation. Nearly 9 in 10 residents indicated they had walked or biked
instead of driving in the past 12 months, and around 6 in 10 reported using public transportation. Each of these was much higher
than other communities across the nation. Additionally, about half of residents had also carpooled with others instead of driving
alone, which was also higher than the benchmark.
Other aspects of mobility in Decatur received mixed reviews. Nearly half of residents approved of the ease of travel by car, which
held steady from previous survey results but was lower than in comparison communities. Evaluations of traﬃc signal timing
(49% excellent or good) and traﬃc ﬂow on major streets (39%) both increased over the 2020 survey and were on par with
national benchmarks, while the ease of public parking also improved since 2020 but remained lower than the national average
(with 35% excellent or good ratings).

The economy in Decatur remains strong, despite challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The economy is a bright spot for Decatur, with a number of items in this facet receiving higher ratings than the national
benchmark comparisons. Residents gave above-average evaluations to Decatur as a place to work (82% excellent or good) and as
a place to visit (89%). The overall quality of business and service establishments (90%), the vibrancy of the city’s downtown and
commercial area (86%), and the variety of business and service establishments in Decatur (78%) also surpassed ratings given in
comparison communities across the nation. Two-thirds of residents approved of shopping opportunities in the city, and at least
half felt favorably about Decatur’s employment opportunities, both of which were on par with the benchmarks. Although the cost
of living remains a potential area of focus, with only 21% positive ratings, results indicate that residents were generally more
optimistic about the economy’s eﬀect on their own ﬁnances. When asked what impact the economy would likely have on their
family income in the next six months, 28% of respondents anticipated a very or somewhat positive impact this year, rebounding
from a brief but steep decline in 2020.

Residents raise concerns about community design and housing.
Survey items within the facet of community design received mixed results, with a few aspects declining since the 2020 survey
iteration. The highest-rated areas included residents’ evaluations of their neighborhood as a place to live (95% excellent or good,
higher than national benchmarks), the overall appearance of Decatur (85%, similar to comparison communities), and public
places where people want to spend time (82%, also higher than average). Aside from these, however, many other areas received
less support from respondents. Well-planned commercial growth, well-planned residential growth, and quality of new
development garnered positive scores from roughly half of residents, and ratings for both the quality of new development and
well-planned residential growth decreased since the previous survey results. Land use, planning and zoning, and code
enforcement also received similar ratings and experienced notable declines from the 2020 iteration of The NCS. Consistent with
resident views toward the cost of living, about 40% felt favorably about the variety of housing options in the city. In addition,
only 15% oﬀered excellent or good ratings for the availability of aﬀordable quality housing, which was lower than the national
average.

Decatur residents feel a strong sense of community.

6

Decatur received high marks on nearly all survey items related to community engagement, indicating that this is a strength for

Decatur residents feel a strong sense of community.
Decatur received high marks on nearly all survey items related to community engagement, indicating that this is a strength for
the city. Nearly 9 in 10 positively evaluated the sense of civic/community pride and opportunities to volunteer in Decatur. About
8 in 10 gave excellent or good ratings to the neighborliness of residents, opportunities to participate in social events and
activities, opportunities to participate in community matters, openness and acceptance of the community toward people of
diverse backgrounds, sense of community, and residents’ connection and engagement with their community. Although the sense
of community experienced a slight decline from 2020, this item was still reviewed favorably by a strong majority of residents
(79%). All of these aspects of community engagement were rated higher than the national benchmarks.

7

Facets of livability
Resident perceptions of quality and importance for each of the facets of community livability provide an overview of
community strengths and challenges that are useful for planning, budgeting and performance evaluation.
The charts below show the proportion of residents who rated the community facets positively for quality and the
priority (importance) placed on each. Also displayed is whether local ratings were lower, similar, or higher than
communities across the country (the national benchmark).
Please rate each of the following characteristics as they relate to Decatur as a whole.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020

85%

86%

87%

Overall economic health

Overall quality of the transportation system
75%
71%

67%

69%
Similar

74%

55%
Similar

88%

84%

85%

80%

78%

84%

Overall feeling of safety

87%

79%
Similar

80%
Similar

80%
Similar

Overall quality of parks and recreation opportunities

87%

83%

88%

86%

88%

87%

86%

85%

Overall health and wellness opportunities

Overall opportunities for education, culture, and the arts

85%

Residents' connection and engagement with their
community

Similar

Similar

69%

Overall quality of the utility infrastructure

Overall quality of natural environment

85%
(vs. benchmark*)

70%

Overall design or layout of residential and commercial
areas

2022

Similar

Higher

80%
Higher

Please rate how important, if at all, you think it is for the Decatur community to focus on each of the following in the
coming two years.

8

Please rate how important, if at all, you think it is for the Decatur community to focus on each of the following in the
coming two years.
(% essential or very important)
2016

2018

2020

89%

88%

93%

Overall economic health
89%

88%

84%

81%

92%

Similar

83%

80%
Similar

82%
Similar

Overall quality of the utility infrastructure

90%

89%

91%

88%

86%

87%

89%

86%

Overall feeling of safety

Overall quality of natural environment
88%

Similar

Similar

81%
Similar

Overall quality of parks and recreation opportunities

64%

Overall health and wellness opportunities

86%

Similar

Overall quality of the transportation system

Overall design or layout of residential and commercial
areas

2022

68%

63%
Similar

57%
78%

Overall opportunities for education, culture, and the arts

72%

70%

Residents' connection and engagement with their
community

83%

85%

74%
Similar

79%

76%
Similar

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

9

Balancing performance and importance

Balancing performance and importance
Every jurisdiction must balance limited resources while meeting resident needs and striving to optimize community livability. To
this end, it is helpful to know what aspects of the community are most important to residents and which they perceive as being
of higher or lower quality. It is especially helpful to know when a facet of livability is considered of high importance but rated as
lower quality, as this should be a top priority to address.
To help guide City staﬀ and oﬃcials with decisions on future resource allocation, resident ratings of the importance of services
were compared to their ratings of the quality of these services. To identify the services perceived by residents to have relatively
lower quality at the same time as relatively higher importance, all services were ranked from highest perceived quality to lowest
perceived quality and from highest perceived importance to lowest perceived importance. Some services were in the top half of
both lists (higher quality and higher importance); some were in the top half of one list but the bottom half of the other (higher
quality and lower importance or lower quality and higher importance); and some services were in the bottom half of both lists.
Services receiving quality ratings of excellent or good by 80% or more of respondents were considered of “higher quality” and
those with ratings lower than 80% were considered to be of “lower quality.” Services were classiﬁed as “more important” if they
were rated as essential or very important by 82% or more of respondents. Services were rated as “less important” if they
received a rating of less than 82%. This classiﬁcation uses the median ratings for quality and importance to divide the services in
half.
The quadrants in the ﬁgure below show which community facets were given higher or lower importance ratings (right-left) and
which had higher or lower quality ratings (up-down). Facets of livability falling closer to a diagonal line from the lower left to the
upper right are those where performance ratings are more commensurate with resident priorities. Facets scoring closest to the
lower right hand corner of the matrix ( higher in importance and lower in quality) are those that may warrant further
investigation to see if changes to their delivery are necessary to improve their performance. This is the key part of this chart on
which to focus. Facets falling in the top left hand corner of the chart (lower in importance but higher in quality) are areas where
performance may outscore resident priorities, and may be a consideration for lower resource allocation.
100%

90%

Economy

Health and wellness

80%

Median

Education, arts, and culture

Quality

Inclusivity and engagement

Natural environment

Parks and recreation

Safety

Community design

70%

Mobility

60%

Utilities
50%

Median

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

Importance

10

The overall quality of life in
Decatur, 2022

Fair Poor
6% 0%

Quality of life
Measuring community livability starts with assessing the
quality of life of those who live there, and ensuring that the
community is attractive, accessible, and welcoming to all.

Good
48%

Excellent
46%

Please rate each of the following aspects of quality of life in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020

97%

97%

96%

95%

94%

96%

95%

94%

2016

2018

2020

94%

96%

94%

94%

87%

90%

93%

84%

2016

2018

2020

94%

94%

93%

Decatur as a place to live

2022
Higher
vs.
benchmark*

Higher

The overall quality of life

Please indicate how likely or unlikely you are to do each of the following.
(% very or somewhat likely)

Recommend living in Decatur to someone who asks

Remain in Decatur for the next ﬁve years

2022
Similar

Similar

Please rate each of the following in the Decatur community.
(% excellent or good)

Overall image or reputation

2022

89%
Higher

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

11

Overall conﬁdence in Decatur
government, 2022

Governance
Fair
25%

Strong local governments produce results that meet the needs
of residents while making the best use of available resources,
and are responsive to the present and future needs of the
community as a whole.

Poor
9% Excellent
17%

Good
50%

Please rate the quality of each of the following services in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020

2022

82%

87%

86%

83%

87%

89%

89%

84%

2018

2020

70%

74%

Similar

Public information services

Overall customer service by Decatur employees

Similar
vs.
benchmark*

Please rate the following categories of Decatur government performance.
(% excellent or good)
2016

The value of services for the taxes paid to Decatur

66%

The overall direction that Decatur is taking

63%

The job Decatur government does at welcoming resident
involvement

79%

82%

70%

75%

72%

75%

72%

79%

Being honest

80%

77%
Higher

67%
Similar

74%

72%

62%
Similar

71%

Generally acting in the best interest of the community

63%
Similar

71%

Overall conﬁdence in Decatur government

2022

66%
Similar

76%

70%
Similar
12

Being honest

72%

80%

76%

72%

Similar

64%
Similar

Being open and transparent to the public

71%

Informing residents about issues facing the community
74%

Treating all residents fairly

70%

69%

72%

67%
Higher

70%
Similar

82%

77%
Similar

Treating residents with respect

Overall, how would you rate the quality of the services provided by each of the following?
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020

90%

91%

88%

The City of Decatur

The Federal Government

2022

81%
Similar

44%

41%
28%

27%

Similar

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

13

Overall economic health of
Decatur, 2022

Economy
Local governments work together with private and
nonproﬁt businesses, and with the community at
large, to foster sustainable growth, create jobs,
and promote a thriving local economy.

What impact, if any, do you think the economy
will have on your family income in the next 6
months? Do you think the impact will be:

Poor
Fair
2%
Excellent
14%
20%

Very positive

4%

Somewhat
positive

25%

Neutral
Good
64%

45%

Somewhat
negative

24%

Very negative 3%

Please rate each of the following characteristics as they relate to Decatur as a whole.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020

85%

86%

87%

2016

2018

2020

83%

80%

83%

88%

85%

86%

2016

2018

2020

83%

87%

93%

Overall economic health

2022

85%
Similar
vs.
benchmark*

Please rate each of the following aspects of quality of life in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)

Decatur as a place to work

Decatur as a place to visit

2022

82%
Higher

89%
Higher

Please rate each of the following in the Decatur community.
(% excellent or good)

Overall quality of business and service establishments

79%

Variety of business and service establishments

90%

Vibrancy of downtown/commercial area

94%

91%

2022

90%
Higher

78%
Higher

86%
Much
higher

14

Employment opportunities

Vibrancy of downtown/commercial area

59%

Employment opportunities

47%

Similar

46%
72%

Shopping opportunities

68%

65%

Cost of living

26%
27%

55%

26%

65%
Similar

21%
Lower

Please rate the quality of each of the following services in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)

Economic development

2016

2018

2020

73%

74%

75%

2022

72%
Similar

What impact, if any, do you think the economy will have on your family income in the next 6 months? Do you think the
impact will be:
(% very or somewhat positive)
2016

What impact, if any, do you think the economy will have on
your family income in the next 6 months? Do you think the
impact will be:

32%

2018

2020

2022

28%

35%

Similar
16%

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

15

Overall quality of the transportation
system in Decatur, 2022

Poor
5% Excellent

Mobility

18%

Fair
26%

The ease with which residents can move about their
communities, whether for commuting, leisure, or recreation,
plays a major role in the quality of life for all who live, work,
and play in the community.

Good
51%

Please rate each of the following characteristics as they relate to Decatur as a whole.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020
70%

2022

69%
Similar
vs.
benchmark*

Overall quality of the transportation system

Please also rate each of the following in the Decatur community.
(% excellent or good)
2016

Traﬃc ﬂow on major streets

2018

2020

39%

33%
35%

28%

Ease of public parking

44%

24%

27%

Lower

43%

48%
Lower

36%
58%

Ease of travel by public transportation

Ease of travel by bicycle

Similar

35%
25%

Ease of travel by car

2022

59%

53%

55%

83%

88%

58%
53%

Higher

64%

63%
Similar

92%

Ease of walking

90%
Higher

16

Please indicate whether or not you have done each of the following in the last 12 months.

Ease of walking

Please indicate whether or not you have done each of the following in the last 12 months.
(% yes)
2016

Used public transportation instead of driving

Carpooled with other adults or children instead of driving
alone

2018

2020

71%

71%

70%

58%
Much
higher

55%

55%

54%

89%

2022

52%
Higher

86%

86%

2016

2018

2020

66%

62%

66%

Walked or biked instead of driving

86%
Much
higher

Please rate the quality of each of the following services in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)

Traﬃc enforcement

Traﬃc signal timing

Street repair

42%

Street cleaning

Street lighting

Sidewalk maintenance

Bus or transit services

67%

Similar

42%

Similar

37%

35%
Similar

34%

59%

63%

49%

42%
40%

2022

65%

68%

67%

74%

75%

71%

50%

49%

42%

45%

67%

66%

Similar

Similar

Similar

63%

70%
Higher

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

17

Overall design or layout of
Decatur's residential and
commercial areas, 2022

Community design
Fair
22%

A well-designed community enhances the quality of life for its
residents by encouraging smart land use and zoning, ensuring
that aﬀordable housing is accessible to all, and providing
access to parks and other green spaces.

Poor
4%
Excellent
18%

Good
56%

Please rate each of the following characteristics as they relate to Decatur as a whole.
(% excellent or good)

Overall design or layout of residential and commercial
areas

2016

2018

2020

71%

69%

75%

2016

2018

2020

95%

96%

96%

2018

2020

2022

74%
Similar
vs.
benchmark*

Please rate each of the following aspects of quality of life in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)

Your neighborhood as a place to live

2022

95%
Higher

Please also rate each of the following in the Decatur community.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2022

45%

Well-planned residential growth

52%

Well-planned commercial growth

50%

51%

73%

68%

71%

69%

Similar

Well-designed neighborhoods

Preservation of the historical or cultural character of the
community

Similar

Similar

Similar

82%
Public places where people want to spend time

Higher

18

Preservation of the historical or cultural character of the
community

84%

88%

45%

40%

Public places where people want to spend time

Variety of housing options

83%

44%

Availability of aﬀordable quality housing

17%

40%

21%

15%
Lower

64%
67%

89%

Higher

Similar

23%

Overall quality of new development

82%

55%

93%

87%

2018

2020

53%

51%

Overall appearance

48%
Similar

85%
Similar

Please rate the quality of each of the following services in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)
2016

Land use, planning and zoning

49%

59%

2022

46%
Similar

60%

Code enforcement

64%

54%
Similar

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

19

Overall quality of the utility
infrastructure in Decatur, 2022

Poor Excellent
13%
9%

Utilities
Services such as water, gas, electricity, and internet access
play a vital role in ensuring the physical and economic health
and well-being of the communities they serve.

Fair
32%

Good
46%

Please rate each of the following characteristics as they relate to Decatur as a whole.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020
67%

2022

55%
Similar
vs.
benchmark*

Overall quality of the utility infrastructure

Please rate the quality of each of the following services in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020

2022

61%

Aﬀordable high-speed internet access

Similar

87%

92%

90%

Garbage collection

89%
Similar

87%
Higher

Drinking water

82%
Similar

Sewer services

64%

Storm water management

50%

65%

62%
Similar

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

20

Overall feeling of safety in
Decatur, 2022

Safety

Fair
17%

Public safety is often the most important task facing local
governments. All residents should feel safe and secure in their
neighborhoods and in the greater community, and providing
robust safety-related services is essential to residents' quality
of life.

Poor
4%
Excellent
21%

Good
58%

Please rate each of the following characteristics as they relate to Decatur as a whole.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020

88%

84%

85%

2016

2018

2020

97%

98%

99%

96%

97%

94%

94%

93%

Overall feeling of safety

2022

79%
Similar
vs.
benchmark*

Please rate how safe or unsafe you feel:
(% very or somewhat safe)

In your neighborhood during the day

In Decatur's downtown/commercial area during the day
80%

88%

89%

From ﬁre, ﬂood, or other natural disaster

Similar

Similar

74%
Similar

From property crime

From violent crime

2022

82%
Similar

87%
Similar

21

Please rate the quality of each of the following services in Decatur.

Please rate the quality of each of the following services in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020

90%

94%

92%

Police/Sheriﬀ services
83%

83%
80%

Crime prevention

Animal control

74%

76%

83%
Similar

75%
Similar

88%

91%

81%
Similar

92%
Similar

Ambulance or emergency medical services

97%

99%

96%

92%

90%

88%

79%

80%

82%

Fire services

Fire prevention and education

Emergency preparedness

2022

95%
Similar

90%
Similar

85%
Higher

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

22

Overall quality of natural
environment in Decatur, 2022

Natural environment

Fair
18%

The natural environment plays a vital role in the health and
well-being of residents. The natural spaces in which residents
live and experience their communities has a direct and
profound eﬀect on quality of life.

Poor
2%
Excellent
29%

Good
51%

Please rate each of the following characteristics as they relate to Decatur as a whole.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020

80%

78%

84%

2016

2018

2020

86%

89%

89%

75%

79%

81%

2018

2020

Overall quality of natural environment

2022

80%
Similar
vs.
benchmark*

Please also rate each of the following in the Decatur community.
(% excellent or good)

Cleanliness

Air quality

2022

83%
Similar

81%
Similar

Please rate the quality of each of the following services in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)
2016

70%

Preservation of natural areas

55%

59%

60%

63%
Similar

57%

68%

Decatur open space

2022

69%
Similar
23

Recycling

Decatur open space

86%

87%

82%

85%

91%

83%

Recycling

Yard waste pick-up

82%
Similar

87%
Higher

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

24

Overall quality of parks and
recreation opportunities, 2022

Parks and recreation

Fair
17%

"There are no communities that pride themselves on their
quality of life, promote themselves as a desirable location for
businesses to relocate, or maintain that they are
environmental stewards of their natural resources, without
such communities having a robust, active system of parks and
recreation programs for public use and enjoyment."
- National Recreation and Park Association

Poor
2%
Excellent
35%

Good
46%

Please rate each of the following characteristics as they relate to Decatur as a whole.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020
87%

2022

80%
Similar
vs.
benchmark*

Overall quality of parks and recreation opportunities

Please also rate each of the following in the Decatur community.
(% excellent or good)

Availability of paths and walking trails

Fitness opportunities

2016

2018

2020

63%

65%

78%

79%

80%

80%

80%

79%

2016

2018

2020

85%

91%

87%

86%

89%

89%

88%

85%

75%

Recreational opportunities

2022

76%
Similar

83%
Similar

84%
Similar

Please rate the quality of each of the following services in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)

City parks

Recreation programs or classes

2022
Similar

Higher

25

Recreation centers or facilities

Recreation programs or classes

88%

91%

Recreation centers or facilities

87%

85%
Higher

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

26

Overall health and wellness
opportunities in Decatur, 2022

Fair
13%

Health and wellness

Poor
1%
Excellent
31%

The characteristics of and amenities available in the
communities in which people live has a direct impact on the
health and wellness of residents, and thus, on their quality of
life overall.

Good
54%

Please rate each of the following characteristics as they relate to Decatur as a whole.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020

87%

83%

88%

2016

2018

2020

80%

81%

77%

74%

72%

74%

76%

73%

70%

66%

60%

59%

2018

2020

Overall health and wellness opportunities

2022

86%
Similar
vs.
benchmark*

Please also rate each of the following in the Decatur community.
(% excellent or good)

Availability of aﬀordable quality food

Availability of aﬀordable quality health care

Availability of preventive health services

Availability of aﬀordable quality mental health care

2022

69%
Similar

72%
Similar

77%
Similar

58%
Similar

Please rate the quality of each of the following services in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2022

82%
Health services

Similar

27

Please rate your overall health.

Health services

Please rate your overall health.
(% excellent or very good)

Please rate your overall health.

2016

2018

73%

73%

2020
81%

2022

80%
Higher

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

28

Overall opportunities for education,
culture and the arts, 2022

Poor
Fair
2%
13%

Education, arts, and culture

Excellent
37%

Participation in the arts, in educational opportunities, and in
cultural activities is linked to increased civic engagement,
greater social tolerance, and enhanced enjoyment of the local
community.

Good
48%

Please rate each of the following characteristics as they relate to Decatur as a whole.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020

88%

87%

86%

2016

2018

2020

85%

84%

84%

Overall opportunities for education, culture, and the arts

2022

85%
Higher
vs.
benchmark*

Please also rate each of the following in the Decatur community.
(% excellent or good)

Opportunities to attend cultural/arts/music activities

86%

62%
60%

59%

93%

93%

90%

74%

72%

74%

89%

Opportunities to attend special events and festivals

Much
higher

89%

49%
Similar

K-12 education

Adult educational opportunities

85%

Much
higher

Community support for the arts

Availability of aﬀordable quality childcare/preschool

2022

86%
Higher

68%
Similar

91%

92%

89%
Higher

29

Please rate the quality of each of the following services in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

88%

91%

Public library services

2020

2022

91%
Similar

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

30

Residents' connection and
engagement with their
community, 2022

Inclusivity and engagement
Inclusivity refers to a cultural and environmental feeling of
belonging; residents who feel invited to participate within their
communities feel more included, involved, and engaged than
those who do not.

Fair
16%

Poor
5%
Excellent
28%

Good
51%

Please rate each of the following characteristics as they relate to Decatur as a whole.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020
85%

2022

80%
Higher
vs.
benchmark*

Residents' connection and engagement with their
community

Please rate each of the following aspects of quality of life in Decatur.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020

97%

96%

96%

Decatur as a place to raise children

66%

Decatur as a place to retire

Sense of community

66%

64%

83%

86%

2022

92%
Higher

57%
Similar

90%

79%
Higher

Please rate the job you feel the Decatur community does at each of the following.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020
83%

Making all residents feel welcome

2022

79%
Similar

31

Attracting people from diverse backgrounds

Making all residents feel welcome

Attracting people from diverse backgrounds

58%

58%

75%

72%

Similar

Similar

Valuing/respecting residents from diverse backgrounds

58%

Taking care of vulnerable residents

53%
Similar

Please also rate each of the following in the Decatur community.
(% excellent or good)
2016

2018

2020
88%

87%
Higher

Sense of civic/community pride

81%

83%

85%

84%

90%

86%

90%

84%

90%

90%

87%

87%

85%

88%

83%

79%

77%

76%

Neighborliness of residents

Opportunities to participate in social events and activities

Opportunities to volunteer

Opportunities to participate in community matters

Openness and acceptance of the community toward people
of diverse backgrounds

2022

Higher

Higher

Higher

83%
Higher

75%
Higher

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

32

Residents' participation levels
Please indicate whether or not you have done each of the following in the last 12 months.
(% yes)
2016

2018

2020

2022

48%

55%

Contacted the City of Decatur for help or information

Contacted Decatur elected oﬃcials to express your opinion

Similar
vs.
benchmark*

52%

52%

24%

23%

19%

23%

Attended a local public meeting

35%

Similar

35%

33%

27%
Similar

Watched a local public meeting

23%

24%

21%

Similar

16%
47%

Volunteered your time to some group/activity

49%

44%

36%
Similar

42%

Campaigned or advocated for a local issue, cause, or candidate

25%

33%

26%

Similar

84%

81%

Similar

Voted in your most recent local election

In general, how many times do you:
(% a few times a week or more)
2016

2018

2020
94%

96%
Similar

Access the internet from your home
94%

Access the internet from your cell phone

2022

95%
Similar
33

94%

Similar

Access the internet from your cell phone

78%

79%

96%

96%

Visit social media sites

Similar

Similar

Use or check email

Share your opinions online

95%

32%

26%
Similar

Shop online

57%

63%
Similar

* Comparison to the national benchmark is shown. If no comparison is available, this is left blank.

34

Custom questions
Below are the results of each custom question on the survey. The percentage of positive responses (Strongly/Somewhat
support) is shown.
% positive

How much would you support or oppose the City of Decatur
updating the City's noise ordinance to limit usage of
gas-powered lawn equipment city wide?

69%

Creating a rebate program for homeowners of all income
levels implementing energy eﬃciency upgrades, including
To achieve the goals set in
insulation, installing high-eﬃciency LED lighting, and
Decatur's Clean Energy Plan, the
converting to all-electric appliances?
City will consider a number of
potential actions related to
Creating a rebate program for homeowners at or below a
energy eﬃciency and clean
certain income level implementing energy eﬃciency
energy generation and
upgrades, including insulation, installing high-eﬃciency
procurement. How much would
LED lighting, and converting to all-electric appliances?
you support or oppose Decatur

86%

84%

using City resources (budgets,
staﬀ time, etc.) for the following Creating a rebate program for commercial building owners,
including multi-family apartment buildings, implementing
actions?
energy eﬃciency upgrades, including replacing HVAC
systems, installing high-eﬃciency LED lighting, and
converting to all-electric appliances?

85%

Creating a rebate program for residents of all income levels
purchasing electric scooters, bikes, and/or vehicles

71%

Creating a rebate program for residents at or below a
certain income level purchasing electric scooters, bikes,
and/or vehicles

74%

Installing and operating public EV-charging stations across
the community, including in City parks and on City
rights-of-way?

93%

35
