Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

STATE OF OHIO
BEFORE THE STATE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS BOARD

In the Matter of Conciliation Between

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE/
OHIO LABOR COUNCIL, INC.

Case Nos. 2018-MED-09-0929
2018-MED-09-0930

Employee Organization
And
PERRY TOWNSHIP (STARK COUNTY), OHIO

Conciliator: Jerry B. Sellman
Date of Report: March 1, 2019

The Employer
______________________________________________________________________________
REPORT AND AWARD OF CONCILIATOR
______________________________________________________________________________
APPEARANCES:

FOR THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION:
Chuck Aliff - Staff Representative, FOP/OLC, Inc.
John Wellman - Union Associate
Matt Barker - Union Associate
Bill Watson - Union Associate
Daniel Dole - Union Associate
Mary Schultz – Consultant with Sargent & Associates
FOR THE EMPLOYER:
Charles D. Hall III – Attorney with the Hall Law Firm and Perry Township Law Director,
representing Perry Township (Stark County) Ohio, the Employer
Craig E. Chessler - Perry Township Trustee
Chief Michael T. Pomesky – Perry Township Chief of Police
Joe Schlegel – Financial Officer with Perry Township

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

Preliminary Information
This matter concerns unresolved issues between Perry Township (Stark County), Ohio
(hereinafter referred to as the “Employer” or the “Township”) and the Perry Township (Stark
County), Ohio Police Department Patrol Officers, Detectives, and Sergeants (hereinafter referred
to as the “FOP” or “Union”) under the terms of two successor Collective Bargaining Agreements
(the Patrol Officers and Detectives Agreement and the Sergeants Agreement).
Background on the Bargaining Unit
The Union is the exclusive bargaining representative of Patrol Officers, Detectives and
Sergeants of the Perry Township Police Department. The Patrol Officer and Detective
bargaining unit are parties to an Agreement with the Township and the bargaining unit is
comprised of twenty (20) members (currently there is one vacancy in the Patrol Officer unit).
The Sergeant bargaining unit is a party to an Agreement with the Township and the bargaining
unit is comprised of four (4) members. Both collective bargaining agreements are effective from
January 1, 2016 through December 31, 2018. There are two (2) other bargaining units within the
Township, a unit of firefighters represented by the IAFF and a unit of road and bridge workers
represented by AFSCME.
Background of the Township
Perry Township is one of the seventeen townships in Stark County, Ohio, located in
Northeast Ohio. It is an urban township with an estimated population of 28,338 residents in
2017. The Township is governed by a three-member Board of Trustees elected by popular vote.
The Township is funded almost exclusively by levies, voted and non-voted. There are two (2)
voted levies totaling 7.39 mils funding the Police Department. Those levies are up for renewal in
2019. Renewals of police levies have historically passed by wide margins. The Township also
2

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

receives funding through unvoted levies. Income from those levies is designated for the General
Fund (1.0 mils) and roads (1.5 mils). It is anticipated that renewal levies and an additional levy
will be placed on the ballot for the Police Department in 2019. It is expected that other levies
will be on the ballot in Stark County at the same time.
Financial Background of the Township
Perry Township is financed by property taxes, the Local Government Fund, cable franchise fees
and fees for services. Property Taxes are levied for the General Fund, Roads & Bridge Fund, and
the Police and Fire Department Funds. In 2018, property taxes comprised 5%, and the cable
franchise fee comprised 42% of the General Fund revenue. The Local Government Fund (LGF)
represented 26% of the General Fund revenue. The Township previously collected estate taxes,
which were eliminated in 2013.The Township Police department is financed entirely by the
Police District Fund.
Due to prudent fiscal management by the Township Trustees and the Township Financial
Officer, the Township’s General Fund is fiscally sound. Over the last several years, the
Townships General Fund has ended each year with a healthy Carryover. The Government
Finance Officers Association (GFOA) recommends that a public entity maintain a carryover
balance to cover at least two months of expenses, which is 16% of annual expenses. The
Township’s Carryovers have been in excess of 90% for several years. This indicates that the
Township is both conservative and prudent.
One of the reasons the General Fund is healthy is that the Township Police Department
costs are paid from the Police District Fund. The Police District Fund receives approximately
$3,450,000 from property tax levies. A 3.9 mill, 5-year Police levy was renewed in August 2014
by a 70% majority.
3

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

Unlike the General Fund, the Carryover balance of the Police District Fund is, as a
percentage, much smaller. Prior to year-end 2018, the Carryover Fund balance of the Police
District Fund was $41,000 in 2017 and $42,000 in 2016. At year-end 2018, the Carryover
balance was $132,000, which represented a 3.9% carryover (annual expenses were $3,406,000).
Since the Police District Fund is classified as a special revenue fund, and money in the Fund can
only be spent on the expenses of the Police Department, the fund is not held to the same GFOA
recommended percentage carryover as the General Fund.
Since the Police District Fund is funded from property taxes, revenues have generally not
been received in the first two months of the year prior to property tax distributions. As such, the
Township General Fund has advanced money to the Police District Fund to meet the first two
months expenses. All advances have been repaid. Since the Police District Fund Carryover was
significantly higher at the end of 2018, there were no advances to the Police District Fund
budgeted for 2019.
While the Township Trustees have the ability to transfer funds from the General Fund to
the Police District Fund, if needed, without revenues from the levies (past and proposed) the
General Fund Carryover Balance would not be sufficient to cover all the expenses of the Police
Department. With full funding from the levies, the General Fund could be used to subsidize the
Police District Fund, but such should be unnecessary if the new levies are supported by the
voters.
For 2018, a total of $1,672,526 was expended for Police Department wages. The total
includes the Police Chief, overtime, holiday pay, sick leave and any other wages. The total also
may include the wage costs of civilian employees, since the Township codes all Police
Department salaries to one account. Based upon current staffing levels, it is calculated that a one
4

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

percent (1%) increase in police officer wages will cost the Township a total of $16,726. The fullin cost (OPERS, Medicare, Workers Comp., etc.) would be $20,332.
Negotiating history of the Parties
Bargaining sessions were held on October 25, 2018 and on November 6, 2018, and the
parties were able to agree on language to be contained in most of the Articles in a new Collective
Bargaining Agreement. Unable to resolve all of the issues discussed, a Fact-finding hearing was
held on November 27, 2018 and Fact-Finder Gregory J. Lavelle, Esq., issued his Report and
Recommendation on December 11, 2018. The Union approved the Fact-finding report while the
Employer rejected the report pursuant to ORC 4117. l 4(C)(2) to (C)(6), and the unresolved
issues were submitted to the final offer settlement procedure in accordance with OAC 4117-9-06.
SERB ordered the parties to conciliation pursuant to OAC 4117-9-06(A) effective January 3,
2019. On February 21, 2019, a conciliation hearing was conducted.
An attempt at mediation was undertaken in good faith by the parties, and a couple of the
disputed issues were resolved. Not having resolved all of the issues, the following issues were
submitted to the Conciliator for resolution:
1.)
2.)
3.)
4.)

Overtime Pay and Court Time (Article 23, Section 23.6)
Vacation (Article 25, Section 25.1)
Compensation (Article 32, Patrol and Detectives Agreement)
Compensation (Article 32, Sergeants Agreement)

From between each of the party’s final settlement offers on each of the issues, a
Conciliator is required to select the offer of one party or the other without modification. The
selection between the final offers is based upon the criteria set forth in Section 4117.14(G)(7) of
the Ohio Revised Code. They are:
(a)

Past collectively bargained agreements, if any, between the parties;
5

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

(b)

Comparison of the issues submitted to final offer settlement relative to the
employees in the bargaining unit with those issues related to other public and
private employees doing comparable work, giving consideration to factors
peculiar to the area and classification involved;

(c)

The interest and welfare of the public, and the ability of the public employer to
finance and administer the issues proposed, and the effect of the adjustments on
the normal standard of public service;

(e)

The lawful authority of the public employer;

(f)

The stipulations of the parties;

(g)

Such other factors, not confined to those listed in this section, which are normally
or traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of issues submitted
to final offer settlement through voluntary collective bargaining, mediation, factfinding, or other impasse resolution procedures in the public service or in private
employment.
ISSUES

The following summarizes the positions of the parties, the evidence and arguments
offered in support of each party’s proposal, the Conciliator’s analysis, and the Conciliator’s
Award on the issue presented. In issuing an Award, the Conciliator considered all the proposals
of the parties collectively, the tentative agreements and other fringe benefits, as well as
compensation received by other Township employees.

ARTICLE 23
OVERTIME PAY AND COURT TIME

Final Offers on Overtime Pay and Court Time (Both Bargaining Unit Agreements)
The Union proposes to amend the current language in Section 23.6 of the Agreement by
eliminating the “twenty-four (24) hour” time period designation and adding additional clarifying
language. Currently Section 23.6 states:
“In no event shall compensatory time be utilized to accumulate overtime during
6

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

the same twenty-four (24) hour time period.”
The Union’s proposal would result in the following change:
“In no event shall compensatory time be utilized to accumulate overtime during
the same twenty-four (24) hour time period that an employee has taken
compensatory time off from work.”
The Township proposes maintaining current language.
The Position of the Union
The FOP contends that the current language in Section 23.6 is overreaching and
ambiguous and has from time to time unfairly penalized FOP members by not paying them
overtime when it is earned under the provisions of Section 23.1. There is no such similar
restriction pertaining to the use of compensatory time in the contracts of the Employer’s other
two bargaining units as set forth in Section 23.6. There have been instances where a person
might be denied overtime if compensatory time taken during a particular twenty-four (24) hour
period were not counted as time worked for the computation of overtime. An example was given
of a person using his approved compensatory time and then being subpoenaed for jury service on
the same day. A member who regularly works the afternoon turn (2 PM- 10 PM) and is approved
for eight (8) hours of compensatory time off for that regular duty day, is then ordered by court
subpoena to appear in court on the following day at 10:00 AM through 1 :00 PM, during his
normal off-duty time. That employee will then be unfairly denied overtime because of the
language in Section 23.6. Using the same scenario, if that same employee had taken time off
using paid vacation leave or paid sick leave and then reported to court the following day, that
employee would be paid, or accumulate, overtime. Essentially, the Employer ex post facto denies
the previously approved compensatory time off by the same number of hours worked outside of
his normal duty schedule but within, “the same twenty-four (24) hour time period.”
7

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

Since Article 23, Section 23 .1, provides that overtime be paid, “ ... for all hours worked
in excess of eight (8) hours per day or forty (40) hours per week.” It has been the Employer’s
past practice that all paid leave (including compensatory time off), count toward hours worked
for purposes of determining overtime for all township employees. The current language is
unusual and non-standard and is not found in any other Perry Township union contracts or in
other contracts of comparable employees external to this Employer. All township bargainingunit employees may earn, accrue and use compensatory time, but only employees of the
Township police department are subject to the aforementioned restriction.
Employees are not only denied overtime as entitled under Section 23.1, such a practice is
also a violation of the Fair Labor Standards Act, Title 29 U.S.C. 201, Section 7(o)(5)(B). The
Fair Labor Standard Act provides that “[a]n employee must be permitted to use compensatory
time on the date requested unless doing so would ‘unduly disrupt’ the operations of the agency.”
The FOP’s final offer clears up the ambiguity on the accumulation of overtime and the onerous
aspect of the current language, and yet does not lead to a situation that may be unduly disruptive
to the employer.
The Position of the Township
The Township argues that the Union’s proposal would result in stacking additional
overtime on top of the extra duty call -out pay. It argues that whenever an employee works more
than eight hours, the employee has, at the employee’s exclusive option, the right to either receive
overtime at 1.5 times the employee’s current hourly pay rate or to earn compensatory time off at
1.5 times the employee's current hourly pay rate. If an employee has scheduled a compensatory
time off day and then is subpoenaed into either court or before the grand jury, that employee
receives a three (3) hour call-out under Article 22.
8

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

Analysis
Even though the Union has re-crafted new, proposed language in Section 23.6 from its
proposal at Fact-finding to address this overtime issue, the proposed language is still unclear and
the Conciliator does not interpret the language proposed to clearly result in a solution to the
stated problem. It is unclear what “the same time period that an employee has taken
compensatory time off from work” means. Since it appears the only time the issue is raised is
when a police officer is called in to court after taking a compensatory day off, which is rare,
there is little merit to incorporate new proposed language that is, is the Conciliator’s opinion, still
ambiguous.
Further, while it has been alleged that the current language violates the provisions of the
Fair Labor Standards Act (the “Act”), which is deemed supportive of incorporating new
language in the collective bargaining agreement, the conciliation process is not the appropriate
forum to determine if the application of language in a current collective bargaining agreement
violates provisions of a Federal Statute. As such, the Conciliator cannot weigh in on the Union’s
argument that a current provision of its collective bargaining agreement needs revision to comply
with the Act.
Award
The Conciliator selects the final offer of the Township in regard to Overtime Pay and
Court Time, as follows:
ARTICLE 23
Overtime Pay and Court Time
Section 23.6. In no event shall compensatory time be utilized to accumulate overtime
during the same twenty-four (24) hour time period

9

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

ARTICLE 25
VACATION

Final Offers on Vacation
The Union proposes to add an additional week of vacation after fifteen (15) years of
service with the Police Department.
The Township proposes maintaining current language, which currently permits a
maximum of four (4) weeks’ vacation.
The Position of the Union
The Union seeks to add an additional week of vacation, which it considers a
“replacement,” because its members were previously entitled to more weeks of vacation under
prior Agreements. During negotiations that resulted in the 2007-2009 Agreement, vacation
benefit concessions were made by the bargaining unit that resulted in fewer weeks of vacation,
with the exception of three (3) employees who were grandfathered and allowed to take their fifth
week of vacation. Today, many employees are affected or will soon be affected, and they want to
receive the same benefits police officers in comparable jurisdictions are receiving. The rough
economic times that permeated negotiations twelve (12) years ago have long passed, and now it
is time to give back to the officers that which they gave up then.
Currently there are only seven bargaining-unit members who would immediately benefit
from an additional week of vacation. The parties’ practice of annually prescheduling of vacation
leave, approval being dependent on sufficient staffing and other considerations, lessens and
mitigates the cost impact associated with granting an additional week of vacation benefit.
Externally, Perry Twp. police officers receive much less vacation over the course of their
careers than other comparable police officers in Stark and adjacent counties. The average
10

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

maximum vacation accrual varies between five (5) and six (6) weeks earned after fifteen (15) to
twenty (20) years of service, as demonstrated by the table below:

The Position of the Township
The Township opposes the Union’s offer and proposes retaining current contract
language. The Township argues that in prior negotiations it bargained with the Union to reduce
the amount of paid vacation leave in exchange for other economic benefits. Having bargained the
current position on vacation leave, it is entitled to the benefit of its earlier bargain. Additionally,
granting the patrol officers, detectives, and sergeants an additional week of vacation would be
inconsistent with the amount of vacation given to other employees in the Township and would
cost the Police Department additional money, which it cannot prudently offer.
11

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

Analysis
The Union’s rationale for adding an additional week of vacation is based upon internal
and external comparisons. While the Union argued that the Firefighters in the Township have
more than the equivalent of five (5) weeks of vacation in terms of time off, the hours of work of
the Firefighters is so different than that of the Police Officers that an internal comparison with
them is not, in this case, logical. I understand the desire of the Township to keep the vacation
time of all employees in the Township on equal footing, but additional time off, within the norm
applied to police officers of comparable jurisdictions, is a benefit to the community because it
allows police officers extra time to recover from an extraordinary stressful job. Many other jobs
do not have the stressful situations encountered in law enforcement. The external comparisons do
indicate that police officers in surrounding and contiguous townships are receiving more weeks
of vacation. While the Township is correct that it is entitled to previously bargained positions,
economic times have changed over the last twelve years and consideration should be given to
those changes. In light of the bargaining history of the parties and what comparable police
officers are being paid in comparable jurisdictions, accepting the Union’s proposal and the
recommendation of the Fact-Finder is justified because it is affordable and in the best interest
and welfare of the public. As noted by the Fact-Finder in recommending a fifth week of vacation,
a salient point raised by the Union was that employees under their respective collective
bargaining agreements had been earning five (5) weeks of vacation before the national economic
disaster which occurred in 2008 and the subsequent drastic reduction of state funding to local
governments. This is more of a replacement than an add-on.
I would also agree with the Union that the granting of an additional vacation week should
have insignificant economic impact on the Township. The parties’ practice of annually
12

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

prescheduling of vacation leave, approval being dependent on sufficient staffing and other
considerations, lessens and mitigates the cost impact associated with an additional week of
vacation benefit.
Award
The Conciliator selects the Union’s final offer regarding adding an additional week of
vacation after fifteen (15) years of service, as set forth below:
ARTICLE 25
VACATION
Section 25.1 Each member of the bargaining unit who has completed one (1) year of service
shall be entitled to paid vacation in accordance with the following schedule:
LENGTH OF SERVICE
After one (1) year
After five (5) years
After ten (10) years
After fifteen (15) years

NUMBER OF WEEKS
Two (2) weeks
Three (3) weeks
Four (4) weeks
Five (5) weeks*

Accrual at the five-(5) week rate shall commence with the first pay period beginning on or
after January 11, 2019.

ARTICLE 32
COMPENSATION
Final Offers on Compensation
The Union proposes that Patrol Officers, Detectives, and Sergeants (Article 32.1 of both
Collective Agreements) receive salary increases of wages by 3% effective January 1, 2019, 2%

effective January 1, 2020, and 2% effective January 1, 2021.
The Township proposes a 2% wage increase effective January 1, 2019; a 2% wage
increase January 1, 2020, and a 3% wage increase effective January 1, 2021.
The Fact-Finder recommended a 3%, 2%, 2% wage increase commencing January 1,
13

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

2019 and each January 1 thereafter for the duration of the three-year Agreement, but further
recommended that the Township have the right to a wage re-opener if the proposed 2019 police
levies were not funded at the 2018 level, and the Union have the right to a wage re-opener if the
proposed police levies were funded above the 2018 level.
The Position of the Union
The Perry Township Patrol Officers, Detectives, and Sergeants, argue that they are
woefully underpaid in comparison to employees performing the same duties in other comparable
jurisdictions. Wage comparisons were made with Police Officers in nine other neighboring
townships or small municipalities: Alliance, Canal Fulton, Jackson Township, Lawrence
Township, Louisville, Massillon, North Canton, Orrville, and Wooster.
The FOP members are, primarily as a result of their current negotiated wage scale, paid
base rate increases for the first five years, and then base rate increases with further step increases
every five years thereafter until reaching the top wage step-scale at twenty (20) years of service.
The Union argues that the police officers in Perry Township are underpaid, not only at both the
entry level and at the top wage level in comparison to almost all of the other jurisdictions, they
earn significantly less over a twenty-year period of service. It argues that while the FOP’s
amended final offer (it had proposed a 4% increase for each year of the Agreement at Factfinding) does not nearly do enough to address this disparity, it at least will help in staving off
further wage lag behind its externally comparable employees.
In comparison to the cited comparable jurisdictions, Perry County Patrol Officers and
Detectives rank next to last in entry level wages paid, with Alliance being the lowest paid
comparator. At the top wage scale, the Patrol Officers and Detectives rank 8th, also near the
bottom. Police Officers and Detectives are paid a below-average wage at both the top and lower
14

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB
wage scales. Using the same comparators, the Sergeants’ wages rank 6th out of 9.
The overall wage increase is not only needed to keep up with other Police Officers, the
increases sought are in line with average wages increases reported by the State Employment
Relations Board (SERB) in other negotiated contracts over the next three years. SERB reports
indicate that average increases for 2019, 2020, and 2021 are 2.78%, 2.34%, and 2.8%. The threeyear 7% increase sought by the Union is in line with the 7.92% increases across the state.
The Perry Township Police Department operations is nearly entirely funded by two
property tax levies (3.49 mils and 3.9 mils), and both expire this year. Both levies have
sufficiently funded the police department operations. The community has supported these levies
in the past, and there is no reason to assume that they will not do so again. While these levies
will impact years 2020 and 2021 of the proposed Agreement, the 2019 year-end unencumbered
carry-over of the Police District Fund is sufficient to fund the increases sought in 2019 in the
FOP’s final offer wage proposal. The Employer is contemplating putting before the electorate in
2019 or 2020 an additional 2.5 mil levy to fund expanded police department operations, e.g.,
increased staffing and operational capabilities.
Financially, the Employer has the ability to finance the FOP’s wage proposal. The FOP
had requested that Mary Schultz of Sargent & Associates review and examine the Employer’s
financial condition from 2015 through 2019. The Perry Township 2018 General Fund ended
2018 with a balance of $1,035,000 which represents a 92% carryover balance of expenditures.
The Perry Township Police District Fund, which funds the police department, ended the 2018
fiscal year with a $132,000 carryover into 2019, which is easily more than enough to cover the
first year of the FOP’s final offer wage proposal cost of $60,992, estimated by Schultz, and is
only $20,333 more than the first year of the Employer’s last best offer. Schultz’ estimate covers
15

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

all police department employees, both union and non-union. Sine the Police Department has
funded its operations separate from the General Fund, with the exception for healthcare benefits,
which is determined by the township’s Insurance Committee, its Agreements contain a unique
wage step-structure that differs substantially from other township employees’ Agreements,
which demonstrate that the Township is not engaged in patterned bargaining.
The FOP’s final offer wage proposal of 3%/2%/2% and the Employer's last best offer of
2%/2%/3% differs only by one percent (1.0%) in the first year of the successor agreement. The
FOP has more accurately estimated the cost of its final offer for bargaining-unit members only,
while also accounting for movement of members through the steps of the wage table over the life
of the successor agreement. The FOP’s final offer cost to the Employer is roughly $88,366
compared to $72,428 cost for the Employer’s last best offer. The more accurate difference
between the FOP and the Employer amounts to only $15,938 in the first year and less than
$49,000 for the life of the Agreement.
The Employer has been conceptually planning on expanding the police department
operations and increasing staffing levels by five (5) additional full-time and three (3) part-time
officers supported by appropriations generated from the passage of an additional 2.5 mil property
tax levy. The FOP points out that in the Employer’s budget for five additional full-time officers,
the Employer uses the current top wage earned at twenty years of service and compounds the
total salary costs for the new officers by adding roll-ups on the top wage. The Employer’s
conservative budgetary approach ensures significant and sufficient buffer reserves to finance the
FOP’s final offer. Considering that the top wage at twenty-years of service ($28.10) is
$8.62/hour more than the first-year wage and adding roll-ups and factoring for five new hires,
the budget estimate is nearly $109,000 more than necessary in the first year alone. Conversely,
16

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

averaging the first three years wage steps equals $21.17 per hour and completing the same
exercise, the cost for five new hires over the life of the successor three-year Agreement is
roughly $262,810 less than the Employer has budgeted. Bottom line, the Employer has the
ability to finance the FOP’s final offer wage proposal.
The Position of the Township
The Employer argues that its proposal is prudent in light of the funding sources available
to fund the Police Department operations and the increases given to other union and non-union
employees in the Township. It is also reasonable in light of the other provisions in the
Agreement that give additional step seniority increases at years 2, 3 and 4 of employment and the
low contribution rate the employees pay for Health Insurance. The Police Officers only pay eight
percent (8%) of the monthly major medical and hospitalization costs, whereas similarly situated
bargaining units in other comparable jurisdictions pay at least fifteen per cent (15%) and some
much more of those costs. Further, the increase in cost to each bargaining-unit member for 2019
is zero per cent (0%), which is practically unheard of today. Because the Township is providing
this significant economic benefit to the Police Officers, the Police Officers should be willing to
accept the Township’s wage proposal as a prudent balance of resources. While other jurisdictions
may pay slightly higher wages, more or their wages must be used to pay for health insurance in
comparison with these bargaining units.
While the Police Department has had a carry-over from the police levies over the last few
years, in calendar years 2017 and 2016, the Board had to approve short-term loans from the
General Fund to the Police Fund to avoid unlawful deficit spending for payroll and expenses in
the first quarter of the year until the property taxes were collected and distributed. Since this can
be a repeated occurrence, the General Fund carry-over needs to be maintained for these
17

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

situations and not to directly fund the operations of the Police Department.
While the Township is confident that it can fund its proposed increases, the 2019 - 2021
budgets are extremely precarious with a bare minimum carry-over. Two levies are expiring in
2019, and there is a need for additional levy funding commencing in 2020 to support expanded
operations, which is needed to provide necessary law enforcement in the Township. The Board is
seeking a renewal of a 3.9 mill expired levy, a renewal of a 3.49 mill expired levy, with an
increase of 2.5 mills to constitute a 5.99 mill levy. These levies will be competing with a 5.0 mill
additional road levy, a school levy, a library levy and a Stark County Mental Health Board levy.
If the two separate police renewal and renewal and increase levies do not pass at the May 7
Primary Election, there remains only one more opportunity at the November 6, General Election
to attempt funding the police department. Failure of one or both will result in either massive cuts
and lay-offs and a real threat of no police protection for Perry Township. In light of this, wage
increases in addition to those proposed by the Township cannot be considered.
Perry Township residents have approved the Police levies in the past, but they are
informed voters. If the electorate perceives that the new levies will not result in more officers on
patrol and more efficient pooling of the money, but instead only go to increased wages, the levies
will, in all probability, not be voted on favorably.
Analysis
Fortunately for Perry Township, it is currently healthy financially. Through prudent
management by the Trustees, sacrifices by Township employees, and financial support by the
citizens of the Township in funding special levies, the Township has been able to make up for
lost revenues from the State and the downturn in the economy ten years ago. The issue on wages
is not focused upon whether or not to give any increases, to which both parties agree is needed,
18

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

but how much of a wage increase is appropriate in light of maintaining reduced employee health
insurance contributions, planned necessary (and promised) increases in police officers, and wage
increases given to other bargaining and non-bargaining employees.
The Township does have healthy carryovers in its General Fund, but the Police
Department has been funded through the Police District levies, which are about to expire. If the
levies are not renewed, the General Fund would struggle to support the full Police Department
operations, let alone the increase sought after 2019. It appears both the FOP and the Township
believe new levies will pass, which they have in the past, to support operations; otherwise the
Township would not be proposing any increases, and the FOP would have a difficult time in
supporting any increase.
The comparables provided by the Union support the need for an increase in the wage
package. I would agree with the Township that singling out one of the Townships, such as
Jefferson Township, skews the analysis because it is a community with more residents, higher
incomes, and higher median housing values. Nonetheless, the ranking of entry wage levels and
top wage levels to nine other jurisdictions, if not increased, will ultimately have a negative
impact on hiring and maintaining a police force in Perry Township. The financial health of Perry
Township is such that it can afford increases in 2019, and additional increases thereafter, if the
levies pass. Those increases are in the best interest of the public in order to maintain adequate
law enforcement coverage in the Township.
Recognizing the above factors, I must conclude that the wage proposal of the Union is
supported by the evidence. The Union provided financial projections, based upon data provided
by the Township, that the wage increases can be covered by anticipated revenues from the Police
levies. The difference in the total dollar amount of the wage package proposed by the Union and
19

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

the Township is insignificant overall, yet granting a three percent (3%) increase at the beginning
of the new Agreement, as opposed to the end, will help move the Police Officers up in the
comparative ranking. This will help maintain good morale in the police department and result in
optimum police performance. The Union’s argument that higher wages were necessary to keep
competitive with comparable communities was compelling, and the Conciliator believes that the
awarded wage increases will enable the bargaining-unit members to do that.
The Township recognized that increases were necessary, but desired to maintain internal
consistency in awarding wages. While the Conciliator generally agrees with this approach as
being in the best interest of the community, departures are often recommended in order to not
only adequately compensate safety forces, but to keep the wages competitive to attract new hires.
The proposed increase in wages will not bring parity with the pay of comparable police
departments, but the Police Officers will make major strides in that direction.
Award
The Conciliator selects the Union’s final offer of a wage increase of 3.0% effective January
1, 2019; 2.0% effective January 1, 2020; and 2% effective January 1, 2021, as follows:

20

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

PATROL OFFICERS AND DETECTIVES
ARTICLE 32
COMPENSATION

21

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

22

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

SERGEANTS
ARTICLE 32
COMPENSATION

23

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

24

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

Conclusion
After due consideration to the positions and arguments of the parties and the criteria
enumerated in ORC §4117.14(G)(1) and ORC §4117.14(G)(3) regarding the scope of the issues
before the Conciliator and ORC 4117.14(G)(7), the Conciliator awards the last best offer of each
respective Party as specifically set forth hereinabove. At the mutual request of the parties, the
Conciliator also awards all tentative agreements reached by them.
This concludes the Conciliator’s Report and Award.
March 1, 2019
Columbus, Ohio

________________________________
Jerry B. Sellman

25

Fri, 03/01/2019 03:10:23 PM SERB

CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
The undersigned certifies that a copy of his Conciliator’s Report and Award was sent via
email, receipt confirmed on March 1, 2019 to:
SERB
Mary E. Laurent
Administrative Assistant
65 E. State Street
Columbus, OH 43215
mary.laurent@serb.state.oh.us
Charles Hall, Esq., Law Director
Perry Township, Stark County
3111 Hilton Street, North West
Massillon, OH 44646
halllawfirm@neohio.twcbc.com
Chuck Aliff, Staff Representative

FOP/OLC Inc.
2721 Manchester Road
Akron, Ohio 44319-1020
califf@fopohio.org

____________________________________
Jerry B. Sellman

26
